CONTENTS 

1. Road of Skulls 
2. A Gift from the Culture 
3. Odd Attachment 
4. Descendant 
5. Cleaning Up 
6. Piece 
7. The State of the Art 
8. Scratch 

Road of Skulls 

The ride's a little bumpy on the famour Road of Skulls… 

'My God, what's happening!' Sammil Mc9 cried, waking up. 

The cart he and his companion had hitched a ride on was shaking violently. 

Mc9 put his grubby hands on the plank of rotten wood which formed one of the cart's 
sides and looked down at the legendary Road, wondering what had caused the cart's 
previously merely uncomfortable rattling to become a series of bone-jarring 
crashes.  He expected to discover that they had lost a wheel, or that the snooze-prone 
carter had let the vehicle wander right off the Road into a boulder-field, but he saw 
neither of these things.  He stared, goggle-eyed, at the Road surface for a moment, then 
collapsed back inside the cart. 

'Golly,' he said to himself, 'I didn't know the Empire ever had enemies with 
heads that big.  Retribution from beyond the grave, that's what this is.' He looked 
forward; the cart's senile driver was still asleep, despite the vehicle's frenzied 
bouncing.  Beyond him, the lop-eared old quadruped between the shafts was having 
some diffi೦culty finding its footing on the oversized skulls forming that part of the 
Road, which led… Mc9 let his eyes follow the thin white line into the distance… to the 
City. 

It lay on the horizon of the moor, a shimmering blur.  Most of the fabled megalopolis 
was still below the horizon, but its sharp, glittering towers were unmistak೦able, even 
through the blue and shifting haze.  Mc9 grinned as he saw it, then watched the silent, 
struggling horse-thing as it clopped and skidded its way along the Road; it was sweating 

heavily, and beset by a small cloud of flies buzzing around its ear-flapping head like 
bothersome electrons around some reluctant nucleus. 

The old carter woke up and lashed inaccurately at the nag between the shafts, then 
nodded back into his slumber.  Mc9 looked away and gazed out over the moor. 

Usually the moor was a cold and desolate place, wrapped in wind and rain, but today it 
was blisteringly hot; the air reeked of marsh gases and the heath was sprinkled with tiny 
bright flowers.  Mc9 sank back into the straw again, scratching and squirming as the 
cart bucked and heaved about him.  He tried shifting the bundles of straw and the heaps 
of dried dung into more comfortable configurations, but failed.  He was just thinking 
that the journey would seem very long, and be uncomfortable indeed if this outrageous 
juddering went on, when the crashes died away and the cart went back to its more 
normal rattling and squeaking. 'Thank goodness they didn't hold out too long,' Mc9 
muttered to himself, and lay down again, closing his eyes. 

… he was driving a haycart down a leafy lane.  Birds were chirping, the wine was cool, 
money weighed in his pocket… 

He wasn't quite asleep when his companion - whose name, despite their long 
association, Mc9 had never both೦ered to find out - surfaced from beneath the straw 
and dung beside him and said, 'Retribution?' 

'Eh?  What?' Mc9 said, startled. 

'What retribution?' 

'Oh,' Mc9 said, rubbing his face and grimacing as he squinted at the sun, high in the 
blue-green sky. 'The retribution inflicted upon us as Subjects of the Reign, by the 
deceased Enemies of the Beloved Empire.' 

The small companion, whose spectacular grubbiness was only partially obscured by a 
covering of debatably less filthy straw, blinked furiously and shook his head. 'No… me 
mean, what "retribution" mean?' 

'I just told you,' Mc9 complained. 'Getting back at somebody.' 

'Oh,' said the companion, and sat mulling this over while Mc9 drifted off to sleep again. 

… there were three young milkmaids walking ahead of his haycart; he drew level and 
they accepted a ride.  He reached down to… 

His companion dug him in the ribs. 'Like when me take too many bedclothes and you 
kick I out of bed, or me drink your wine and you make I drink three guts of laxative 
beer, or when you pregnanted that governor's daughter and him set the Strategic Debt 
Collectors on you, or someplace doesn't pay all its taxes and Its Majesty orders the first 
born of every family have their Birth Certificates endorsed, or…?' 

Mc9, who was well used to his companion employing the verbal equivalent of a 
Reconnaissance By Fire, held up one hand to stem this flood of examples.  His 
companion continued mumbling away despite the hand over his mouth.  Finally the 
mumbling stopped. 

'Yes,' Mc9 told him. 'That's right.' He took his hand away. 

'Or is it like when -?' 

'Hey,' Mc9 said brightly. 'How about I tell you a story?' 

'Oh, a story,' beamed his companion, clutching at Mc9's sleeve in anticipation. 'A story 
would be…' his grimy features contorted like a drying mudflat as he struggled to find a 
suitable adjective. '… Nice.' 

'OK.  Let go my sleeve and pass me the wine to wet my throat.' 

'Oh,' Mc9's companion said, and looked suddenly wary and doubtful.  He glanced over 
the front of the cart, past the snoring driver and the toiling beast pulling them, and saw 
the City, still just a distant shimmer at the end of the Road's bleached ribbon of bone. 
'OK,' he sighed. 

He handed the wineskin to Mc9, who guzzled about half of what was left before the 
squealing, protesting companion succeeded in tearing it from his grasp, spilling most of 
the remainder over the two of them and squirting a jet of the liquid spattering over the 
neck of the snoring driver, and on out as far as the head of the horse-like animal (which 
lapped appreciatively at the drops spilling down its sweat-matted face). 

The decrepit driver woke with a start and looked around wildly, rubbing his damp neck, 
waving his frayed whip and apparently fully expecting to have to repel robbers, cut-
throats and villains. 

Mc9 and his companion grinned sheepishly at him when he turned to look down at 
them.  He scowled, dried his neck with a rag, then turned round and relapsed into his 
slumber. 

'Thanks,' Mc9 told his companion.  He wiped his face and sucked at one of the fresh 
wine stains on his shirt. 

The companion took a careful, dainty sip of wine, then twisted the stopper firmly back 
into the gut and placed it behind his neck as he lay back.  Mc9 belched, yawned. 

'Yes,' his companion said earnestly. 'Tell I a story.  Me would love to hear a story.  Tell 
I a story of love and hate and death and tragedy and comedy and horror and joy and 
sarcasm, tell I about great deeds and tiny deeds and valiant people and hill people and 
huge giants and dwarfs, tell I about brave women and beautiful men and great 
sorcerorcerors… and about unenchanted swords and strange, archaic powers and 
horrible, sort of ghastly… things that, uhm… shouldn't be living, and… ahm, funny 
diseases and general mishaps.  Yeah, me like.  Tell I.  Me want.' 

Mc9 was falling asleep again, having had not the slightest intention of telling his 
companion a story in the first place.  The companion prodded him in the back. 

'Hey!' He prodded harder. 'Hey!  The story!  No go to sleep!  What about the story?' 

'Fornicate the story,' Mc9 said sleepily, not opening his eyes. 

'WAA!' the companion said.  The carter woke up, turned round and clipped him across 
the ear.  The companion went quiet and sat there, rubbing the side of his head.  He 
prodded Mc9 again and whispered, 'You said you'd tell me a story!' 

'Oh, read a book,' mumbled Mc9, snuggling into the straw. 

The small companion made a hissing noise and sat back, his lips tight and his little 
hands clenched under his armpits.  He glared at the Road stretching back to the 
wavering horizon. 

After a while, the companion shrugged, reached under the wineskin for his satchel and 
took out a small, fat black book.  He prodded Mc9 once more. 'All we've got is this 
Bible,' he told him. 'What bit should me read?' 

'Just open it at random,' Mc9 mumbled from his sleep. 

The companion opened the Bible at Random, Chapter Six, and read: 

'Yeah yeah yeah, verily I say unto you:  Forget not that there are two sides to every 
story: a right side and a wrong side.' 

The companion shook his head and threw the book over the side of the cart. 

The road went ever on.  The carter snuffled and snored, the sweating nag panted and 
struggled, while Mc9 smiled in his sleep and moaned a little.  His companion passed 
the time by squeezing blackheads from his nose, and then replacing them. 

… they had stopped at the ford through the shady brook, where the milkmaids were 
eventually persuaded to come for a swim, dressed only in their thin, clinging… 

She could also have told them that the City was moving away from them across the 
moor as fast as they moved towards it, trundling across the endless heath on its millions 
of giant wheels as the continuous supply of vanquished Enemies of the Empire provided 
more trophies to be cemented into place on the famous Road of Skulls… 

But that, like they say, is another story. 

A Gift from the Culture 

Money is a sign of poverty.  This is an old Culture saying I remember every now and 
again, espe೦cially when I'm being tempted to do something I know I shouldn't, and 
there's money involved (when is there not?). 

I looked at the gun, lying small and precise in Cruizell's broad, scarred hand, and the 
first thing I thought - after:  Where the hell did they get one of those? - was:  Money is 
a sign of poverty.  However appropriate the thought might have been, it wasn't much 
help. 

I was standing outside a no-credit gambling club in Vreccis Low City in the small hours 
of a wet weeknight, looking at a pretty, toy-like handgun while two large people I owed 
a lot of money to asked me to do something extremely dangerous and worse than 
illegal.  I was weighing up the relative attractions of trying to run away (they'd shoot 
me), refusing (they'd beat me up; probably I'd spend the next few weeks developing a 
serious medical bill), and doing what Kaddus and Cruizell asked me to do, knowing 
that while there was a chance I'd get away with it - uninjured, and solvent again - the 

most likely outcome was a messy and probably slow death while assisting the security 
services with their enquiries. 

Kaddus and Cruizell were offering me all my markers back, plus - once the thing was 
done - a tidy sum on top, just to show there were no hard feelings. 

I suspected they didn't anticipate having to pay the final instalment of the deal. 

So, I knew that logically what I ought to do was tell them where to shove their fancy 
designer pistol, and accept a theoretically painful but probably not terminal 
beating.  Hell, I could switch the pain off (having a Culture background does have some 
advantages), but what about that hospital bill? 

I was up to my scalp in debt already. 

'What's the matter, Wrobik?' Cruizell drawled, taking a step nearer, under the shelter of 
the club's dripping eaves.  Me with my back against the warm wall, the smell of wet 
pavements in my nose and a taste like metal in my mouth.  Kaddus and Cruizell's 
limousine idled at the kerb; I could see the driver inside, watching us through an open 
window.  Nobody passed on the street outside the narrow alley.  A police cruiser flew 
over, high up, lights flashing through the rain and illuminating the underside of the rain 
clouds over the city.  Kaddus looked up briefly, then ignored the passing craft.  Cruizell 
shoved the gun towards me.  I tried to shrink back. 

'Take the gun, Wrobik,' Kaddus said tiredly.  I licked my lips, stared down at the pistol. 

'I can't,' I said.  I stuck my hands in my coat pockets. 

'Sure you can,' Cruizell said.  Kaddus shook his head. 

'Wrobik, don't make things difficult for yourself; take the gun.  Just touch it first, see if 
our information is correct.  Go on; take it.' I stared, transfixed, at the small pistol. 'Take 
the gun, Wrobik.  Just remember to point it at the ground, not at us; the driver's got a 
laser on you and he might think you meant to use the gun on us… come on; take it, 
touch it.' 

I couldn't move, I couldn't think.  I just stood, hypno೦tized.  Kaddus took hold of my 
right wrist and pulled my hand from my pocket.  Cruizell held the gun up near my nose; 
Kaddus forced my hand onto the pistol.  My hand closed round the grip like something 
lifeless. 

'There, that wasn't difficult, now was it?' Kaddus said.  I held the gun and tried to 
imagine using it on the two men, but I knew I couldn't, whether the driver had me 
covered or not. 

'Kaddus,' I said, 'I can't do this.  Something else; I'll do anything else, but I'm not a hit-
man; I can't -' 

'You don't have to be an expert, Wrobik,' Kaddus said quietly. 'All you have to be is… 
whatever the hell you are.  After that, you just point and squirt: like you do with your 
boyfriend.' He grinned and winked at Cruizell, who bared some teeth.  I shook my head. 

'This is crazy, Kaddus.  Just because the thing switches on for me -' 

'Yeah; isn't that funny.' Kaddus turned to Cruizell, looking up to the taller man's face'and 
smiling. 'Isn't that funny, Wrobik here being an alien?  And him looking just like us.' 

'An alien and queer,' Cruizell rumbled, scowling. 'Shit.' 

'Look,' I said, staring at the pistol, 'it… this thing, it… it might not work,' I finished 
lamely.  Kaddus smiled. 

'It'll work.  A ship's a big target.  You won't miss.' He smiled again. 

'But I thought they had protection against -' 

'Lasers and kinetics they can deal with, Wrobik; this is something different.  I don't 
know the technical details; I just know our radical friends paid a lot of money for this 
thing.  That's enough for me.' 

Our radical friends.  This was funny, coming from Kaddus.  Probably he meant the 
Bright Path.  People he'd always considered bad for business, just terrorists.  I'd have 
imagined he'd sell them to the police on general principles, even if they did offer him 
lots of money.  Was he starting to hedge his bets, or just being greedy?  They have a 
saying here:  Crime whispers; money talks. 

'But there'll be people on the ship, not just -' 

'You won't be able to see them.  Anyway; they'll be some of the Guard, Naval brass, 
some Administration flunkeys, Secret Service agents… What do you care about them?' 
Kaddus patted my damp shoulder. 'You can do it.' 

I looked away from his tired grey eyes, down at the gun, quiet in my fist, small screen 
glowing faintly.  Betrayed by my own skin, my own touch.  I thought about that hospital 
bill again.  I felt like crying, but that wasn't the done thing amongst the men here, and 
what could I say? I was a woman.  I was Culture. But I had renounced these things, and 
now I am a man, and now I am here in the Free City of Vreccis, where nothing is free. 

'All right,' I said, a bitterness of my mouth, 'I'll do it.' 

Cruizell looked disappointed.  Kaddus nodded. 'Good.  The ship arrives Ninthday; you 
know what it looks like?' I nodded. 'So you won't have any problems,' Kaddus smiled 
thinly. 'You'll be able to see it from almost anywhere in the City.' He pulled out some 
cash and stuffed it into my coat pocket. 'Get yourself a taxi.  The underground's risky 
these days.' He patted me lightly on the cheek; his hand smelt of expensive scents. 'Hey, 
Wrobik; cheer up, yeah?  You're going to shoot down a fucking starship.  It'll be an 
experience.' Kaddus laughed, looking at me and then at Cruizell, who laughed too, 
duti೦fully. 

They went back to the car; it hummed into the night, tyres ripping at the rain-filled 
streets.  I was left to watch the puddles grow, the gun hanging in my hand like guilt. 

indefinite.  Maximum power on single-bolt: 3.1 X 810 joules, recycle time 14 
seconds.  Maximum rate of fire: 260 RPS.  Use limited to Culture genofixed individuals 
only through epidermal gene analysis.  To use with gloves or light armour, access 
"modes" store via command buttons.  Unauthorized use is both prohibited and 
punishable.  Skill requirement 12-75%C.  Full instruc೦tions follow; use command 
buttons and screen to replay, search, pause or stop… 

'Instructions, part one:  Introduction.  The LPP 91 is an operationally intricate general-
purpose "peace"-rated weapon not suitable for full battle use; its design and 
performance parameters are based on the recommend೦ations of-' 

The gun sat on the table, telling me all about itself in a high, tinny voice while I lay 
slumped in a lounger, staring out over a busy street in Vreccis Low City.  Underground 
freight trains shook the rickety apartment block every few minutes, traffic buzzed at 
street level, rich people and police moved through the skies in fliers and cruisers, and 
above them all the starships sailed. 

I felt trapped between these strata of purposeful move೦ments. 

Far in the distance over the city, I could just see the slender, shining tower of the city's 
Lev tube, rising straight towards and through the clouds, on its way to space.  Why 
couldn't the Admiral use the Lev instead of making a big show of returning from the 
stars in his own ship?  Maybe he thought a glorified elevator was too 
undignified.  Vainglorious bastards, all of them.  They deserved to die (if you wanted 
to take that attitude), but why did I have to be the one to kill them?  Goddamned phallic 
starships. 

Not that the Lev was any less prick-like, and anyway, no doubt if the Admiral had been 
coming down by the tube Kaddus and Cruizell would have told me to shoot it down; 
holy shit.  I shook my head. 

I was holding a long glass of jahl - Vreccis City's cheapest strong booze.  It was my 
second glass, but I wasn't enjoying it.  The gun chattered on, speaking to the sparsely 
furnished main room of our apartment.  I was waiting for Maust, missing him even more 
than usual.  I looked at the terminal on my wrist; according to the time display he should 
be back any moment now.  I looked out into the weak, watery light of dawn.  I hadn't 
slept yet. 

The gun talked on.  It used Marain, of course; the Culture's language.  I hadn't heard 
that spoken for nearly eight standard years, and hearing it now I felt sad and foolish.  My 
birthright; my people, my language.  Eight years away, eight years in the 
wilderness.  My great adventure, my renunciation of what seemed to me sterile and 
lifeless to plunge into a more vital society, my grand gesture… well, now it seemed like 
an empty gesture, now it looked like a stupid, petulant thing to have done. 

I drank some more of the sharp-tasting spirit.  The gun gibbered on, talking about beam-
spread diameters, gyro೦scopic weave patterns, gravity-contour mode, line-of-sight 
mode, curve shots, spatter and pierce settings… I thought about glanding something 
soothing and cool, but I didn't; I had vowed not to use those cunningly altered glands 
eight years ago, and I'd broken that vow only twice, both times when I was in severe 
pain.  Had I been courageous I'd have had the whole damn lot taken out, returned to 
their human-normal state, our original animal inheritance… but I am not courageous.  I 
dread pain, and cannot face it naked, as these people do.  I admire them, fear them, still 

cannot understand them.  Not even Maust.  In fact, least of all Maust.  Perhaps you 
cannot ever love what you completely understand. 

Eight years in exile, lost to the Culture, never hearing that silky, subtle, complexly 
simple language, and now when I do hear Marain, it's from a gun, telling me how to fire 
it so I can kill… what?  Hundreds of people?  Maybe thousands; it will depend on where 
the ship falls, whether it explodes (could primitive starships explode?  I had no idea; 
that was never my field).  I took another drink, shook my head.  I couldn't do it. 

I am Wrobik Sennkil, Vreccile citizen number… (I always forget; it's on my papers), 
male, prime race, aged thirty; part-time freelance journalist (between jobs at the 
moment), and full-time gambler (I tend to lose but I enjoy myself, or at least I did until 
last night).  But I am, also, still Bahlln-Euchersa Wrobich Vress Schennil dam Flaysse, 
citizen of the Culture, born female, species mix too complicated to remember, aged 
sixty-eight, standard, and one-time member of the Contact section. 

And a renegade; I chose to exercise the freedom the Culture is so proud of bestowing 
upon its inhabitants by leaving it altogether.  It let me go, even helped me, reluctant 
though I was (but could I have forged my own papers, made all the arrangements by 
myself?  No, but at least, after my education into the ways of the Vreccile Economic 
Community, and after the module rose, dark and silent, back into the night sky and the 
waiting ship, I have turned only twice to the Culture's legacy of altered biology, and not 
once to its artefacts.  Until now; the gun rambles on).  I abandoned a paradise I 
considered dull for a cruel and greedy system bubbling with life and incident; a place I 
thought I might find… what?  I don't know.  I didn't know when I left and I don't know 
yet, though at least here I found Maust, and when I am with him my searching no longer 
seems so lonely. 

Until last night that search still seemed worthwhile.  Now Utopia sends a tiny package 
of destruction, a casual, accidental message. 

they will only be needed where there must be a fair chance of losing them, so they must 
disappear now and again, be taken as prizes. 

That, of course, is why they're built with inhibiting circuits which only let the weapons 
work for Culture people (sensible, non-violent, non-acquisitive Culture people, who of 
course would only use a gun in self-defence, for example, if threatened by some 
comparative barbarian… oh the self-satisfied Culture: its imperialism of 
smugness).  And even this gun is antique; not obsoles೦cent (for that is not a concept 
the Culture really approves of - it builds to last), but outdated; hardly more intelli೦gent 
than a household pet, whereas modern Culture weaponry is sentient. 

The Culture probably doesn't even make handguns any more.  I've seen what it calls 
Personal Armed Escort Drones, and if, somehow, one of those fell into the hands of 
people like Kaddus and Cruizell, it would immediately signal for help, use its motive 
power to try and escape, shoot to injure or even kill anybody trying to use or trap it, 
attempt to bargain its way out, and destruct if it thought it was going to be taken apart 
or otherwise inter೦fered with. 

I drank some more jahl.  I looked at the time again; Maust was late.  The club always 
closed promptly, because of the police.  They weren't allowed to talk to the customers 
after work: he always came straight back… I felt the start of fear, but pushed it 
away.  Of course he'd be all right.  I had other things to think about.  I had to think this 
thing through.  More jahl. 

No, I couldn't do it.  I left the Culture because it bored me, but also because the 
evangelical, interventionist morality of Contact sometimes meant doing just the sort of 
thing we were supposed to prevent others doing; starting wars, assassinating… all of it, 
all the bad things… I was never involved with Special Circumstances directly, but I 
knew what went on (Special Circum೦stances; Dirty Tricks, in other words.  The 
Culture's tellingly unique euphemism).  I refused to live with such hypocrisy and chose 
instead this honestly selfish and avaricious society, which doesn't pretend to be good, 
just ambitious. 

But I have lived here as I lived there, trying not to hurt others, trying just to be myself; 
and I cannot be myself by destroying a ship full of people, even if they are some of the 
rulers of this cruel and callous society.  I can't use the gun; I can't let Kaddus and 
Cruizell find me.  And I will not go back, head bowed, to the Culture. 

I finished the glass of jahl. 

I had to get out.  There were other cities, other planets, besides Vreccis; I'd just had to 
run; run and hide.  Would Maust come with me though?  I looked at the time again; he 

was half an hour late.  Not like him.  Why was he late?  I went to the window, looking 
down to the street, searching for him. 

A police APC rumbled through the traffic.  Just a routine cruise; siren off, guns 
stowed.  It was heading for the Outworlder's Quarter, where the police had been making 
shows of strength recently.  No sign of Maust's svelte shape swinging through the 
crowds. 

Always the worry.  That he might be run over, that the police might arrest him at the 
club (indecency, corrupting public morals, and homosexuality; that great crime, even 
worse than not making your pay-off!), and, of course, the worry that he might meet 
somebody else. 

Maust.  Come home safely, come home to me. 

I remember feeling cheated when I discovered, towards the end of my regendering, that 
I still felt drawn to men.  That was long ago, when I was happy in the Culture, and like 
many people I had wondered what it would be like to love those of my own original 
sex; it seemed terribly unfair that my desires did not alter with my physiology.  It took 
Maust to make me feel I had not been cheated.  Maust made everything better.  Maust 
was my breath of life. 

Anyway, I would not be a woman in this society. 

I decided I needed a refill.  I walked past the table. 

'… will not affect the line-stability of the weapon, though recoil will be increased on 
power-priority, or power decreased -' 

'Shut up!' I shouted at the gun, and made a clumsy attempt to hit its Off button; my hand 
hit the pistol's stubby barrel.  The gun skidded across the table and fell to the floor. 

'Warning!' The gun shouted. 'There are no user-serviceable parts inside!  Irreversible 
deactivation will result if any attempt is made to dismantle or -' 

'Quiet, you little bastard,' I said (and it did go quiet).  I picked it up and put it in the 
pocket of a jacket hanging over a chair.  Damn the Culture; damn all guns.  I went to 
get more drink, a heaviness inside me as I looked at the time again.  Come home, please 
come home… and then come away, come away with me… 

I fell asleep in front of the screen, a knot of dull panic in my belly competing with the 
spinning sensation in my head as I watched the news and worried about Maust, trying 

not to think of too many things.  The news was full of executed terrorists and famous 
victories in small, distant wars against aliens, out-worlders, subhumans.  The last report 
I remember was about a riot in a city on another planet; there was no mention of civilian 
deaths, but I remember a shot of a broad street littered with crumpled shoes.  The item 
closed with an injured policeman being interviewed in hospital. 

I had my recurring nightmare, reliving the demon೦stration I was caught up in three 
years ago; looking, horrified, at a wall of drifting, sun-struck stun gas and seeing a line 
of police mounts come charging out of it, somehow more appalling than armoured cars 
or even tanks, not because of the visored riders with their long shock-batons, but 
because the tall animals were also armoured and gas-masked; monsters from a ready-
made, mass-produced dream; terrorizing. 

Maust found me there hours later, when he got back.  The club had been raided and he 
hadn't been allowed to contact me.  He held me as I cried, shushing me back to sleep. 

'I can't do what they're asking me to do.  I can't stay.  So I have to go; there's nothing 
else I can do.' My voice was dull.  Maust started to clear away the plates and containers, 
shaking his long, graceful head.  I hadn't eaten much; partly hangover, partly nerves.  It 
was a muggy, enervating mid-morning; the tenement's conditioning plant had broken 
down again. 

'Is what they're asking really so terrible?' Maust pulled his robe tighter, balancing plates 
expertly.  I watched his slim back as he moved to the kitchen. 'I mean, you won't even 
tell me.  Don't you trust me?' His voice echoed. 

What could I say?  That I didn't know if I did trust him?  That I loved him but: only he 
had known I was an outworlder.  That had been my secret, and I'd told only him.  So 
how did Kaddus and Cruizell know?  How did Bright Path know?  My sinuous, erotic, 
faithless dancer.  Did you think because I always remained silent that I didn't know of 
all the times you deceived me? 

'Maust, please; it's better that you don't know.' 

'Oh,' Maust laughed distantly; that aching, beautiful sound, tearing at me. 'How terribly 
dramatic.  You're protecting me.  How awfully gallant.' 

'Maust, this is serious.  These people want me to do something I just can't do.  If I don't 
do it they'll… they'll at least hurt me, badly.  I don't know what they'll do.  They… they 
might even try to hurt me through you.  That was why I was so worried when you were 
late; I thought maybe they'd taken you.' 

'My dear, poor Wrobbie,' Maust said, looking out from the kitchen, 'it has been a long 
day; I think I pulled a muscle during my last number, we may not get paid after the raid 
- Stelmer's sure to use that as an excuse even if the filth didn't swipe the takings - and 
my ass is still sore from having one of those queer-bashing pigs poking his finger around 
inside me.  Not as romantic as your dealings with gangsters and baddies, but important 
to me.  I've enough to worry about.  You're overreacting.  Take a pill or something; go 
back to sleep; it'll look better later.' He winked at me, disappeared.  I listened to him 
moving about in the kitchen.  A police siren moaned overhead.  Music filtered through 
from the apartment below. 

I went to the door of the kitchen.  Maust was drying his hands. 'They want me to shoot 
down the starship bringing the Admiral of the Fleet back on Ninthday,' I told 
him.  Maust looked blank for a second, then snig೦gered.  He came up to me, held me 
by the shoulders. 

'Really?  And then what?  Climb the outside of the Lev and fly to the sun on your magic 
bicycle?' He smiled toler೦antly, amused.  I put my hands on his and removed them 
slowly from my shoulders. 

'No.  I just have to shoot down the ship, that's all.  I have… they gave me a gun that can 
do it.' I took the gun from the jacket.  He frowned, shaking his head, looked puzzled 
from a second, then laughed again. 

'With that, my love?  I doubt you could stop a motor೦ized pogo-stick with that little -' 

'Maust, please; believe me.  This can do it.  My people made it and the ship… the state 
has no defence against something like this.' 

Maust snorted, then took the gun from me.  Its lights flicked off. 'How do you switch it 
on?' He turned it over in his hand. 

'By touching it; but only I can do it.  It reads the genetic make-up of my skin, knows I 
am Culture.  Don't look at me like that; it's true.  Look.' I showed him.  I had the gun 

recite the first part of its monologue and switched the tiny screen to holo.  Maust 
inspected the gun while I held it. 

'You know,' he said after a while, 'this might be rather valuable.' 

'No, it's worthless to anyone else.  It'll only work for me, and you can't get round its 
fidelities; it'll deactivate.' 

'How… faithful,' Maust said, sitting down and looking steadily at me. 'How neatly 
everything must be arranged in your "Culture".  I didn't really believe you when you 
told me that tale, did you know that, my love?  I thought you were just trying to impress 
me.  Now I think I believe you.' 

I crouched down in front of him, put the gun on the table and my hands on his lap.  'Then 
believe me that I can't do what they're asking, and that I am in danger; perhaps we both 
are.  We have to leave.  Now.  Today or tomorrow.  Before they think of another way 
to make me do this.' 

Maust smiled, ruffled my hair. 'So fearful, eh?  So desperately anxious.' He bent, kissed 
my forehead. 'Wrobbie, Wrobbie; I can't come with you.  Go if you feel you must, but 
I can't come with you.  Don't you know what this chance means to me?  All my life I've 
wanted this; I may not get another opportunity.  I have to stay, whatever.  You go; go 
for as long as you must and don't tell me where you've gone.  That way they can't use 
me, can they?  Get in touch through a friend, once the dust has settled.  Then we'll 
see.  Perhaps you can come back; perhaps I'll have missed my big chance anyway and 
I'll come to join you.  It'll be all right.  We'll work something out.' 

I let my head fall to his lap, wanting to cry. 'I can't leave you.' 

He hugged me, rocking me. 'Oh, you'll probably find you're glad of the change.  You'll 
be a hit wherever you go, my beauty; I'll probably have to kill some knife-fighter to win 
you back.' 

'Please, please come with me,' I sobbed into his gown. 

'I can't, my love, I just can't.  I'll come to wave you goodbye, but I can't come with you.' 

He held me while I cried; the gun lay silent and dull on the table at his side, surrounded 
by the debris of our meal. 

I was leaving.  Fire escape from the flat just before dawn, over two walls clutching my 
travelling bag, a taxi from General Thetropsis Avenue to Intercontinental Station… then 
I'd catch a Railtube train to Bryme and take the Lev there, hoping for a standby on 
almost anything heading Out, either trans or inter.  Maust had lent me some of his 
savings, and I still had a little high-rate credit left; I could make it.  I left my terminal 
in the apartment.  It would have been useful, but the rumours are true; the police can 
trace them, and I wouldn't put it past Kaddus and Cruizell to have a tame cop in the 
relevant depart೦ment. 

The station was crowded.  I felt fairly safe in the high, echoing halls, surrounded by 
people and business.  Maust was coming from the club to see me off; he'd promised to 
make sure he wasn't followed.  I had just enough time to leave the gun at Left 
Luggage.  I'd post the key to Kaddus, try to leave him a little less murderous. 

There was a long queue at Left Luggage; I stood, exas೦perated, behind some naval 
cadets.  They told me the delay was caused by the porters searching all bags and cases 
for bombs; a new security measure.  I left the queue to go and meet Maust; I'd have to 
get rid of the gun some೦where else.  Post the damn thing, or even just drop it in a waste 
bin. 

I waited in the bar, sipping at something innocuous.  I kept looking at my wrist, then 
feeling foolish.  The term೦inal was back at the apartment; use a public phone, look for 
a clock.  Maust was late. 

There was a screen in the bar, showing a news bulletin.  I shook off the absurd feeling 
that somehow I was already a wanted man, face liable to appear on the news 
broad೦cast, and watched today's lies to take my mind off the time. 

They mentioned the return of the Admiral of the Fleet, due in two days.  I looked at the 
screen, smiling nervously. Yeah, and you'll never know how close the bastard came to 
getting blown out of the skies. For a moment or two I felt important, almost heroic. 

Then the bombshell; just a mention - an aside, tacked on, the sort of thing they'd have 
cut had the programme been a few seconds over - that the Admiral would be bringing 
a guest with him; an ambassador from the Culture.  I choked on my drink. 

Was that who I'd really have been aiming at if I'd gone ahead? 

What was the Culture doing anyway?  An ambassador?  The Culture knew everything 
about the Vreccile Econ೦omic Community, and was watching, analyzing; content to 
leave ill enough alone for now.  The Vreccile people had little idea how advanced or 
widely spread the Culture was, though the court and Navy had a fairly good 

idea.  Enough to make them slightly (though had they known it, still not remotely 
sufficiently) paranoid.  What was an ambassador for? 

And who was really behind the attempt on the ship?  Bright Path would be indifferent 
to the fate of a single outworlder compared to the propaganda coup of pulling down a 
starship, but what if the gun hadn't come from them, but from a grouping in the court 
itself, or from the Navy?  The VEC had problems; social problems, political 
problems.  Maybe the President and his cronies were thinking about asking the Culture 
for aid.  The price might involve the sort of changes some of the more corrupt officials 
would find terminally threatening to their luxurious lifestyles. 

Shit, I didn't know; maybe the whole attempt to take out the ship was some loony in 
Security or the Navy trying to settle an old score, or just skip the next few rungs on the 
promotion ladder.  I was still thinking about this when they paged me. 

I sat still.  The station PA called for me, three times.  A phonecall.  I told myself it was 
just Maust, calling to say he had been delayed; he knew I was leaving the terminal at 
the apartment so he couldn't call me direct.  But would he announce my name all over 
a crowded station when he knew I was trying to leave quietly and unseen?  Did he still 
take it all so lightly?  I didn't want to answer that call.  I didn't even want to think about 
it. 

My train was leaving in ten minutes; I picked up my bag.  The PA asked for me again, 
this time mentioning Maust's name.  So I had no choice. 

I went to Information.  It was a viewcall. 

'Wrobik,' Kaddus sighed, shaking his head.  He was in some office; anonymous, 
bland.  Maust was standing, pale and frightened, just behind Kaddus' seat.  Cruizell 
stood right behind Maust, grinning over his slim shoulder.  Cruizell moved slightly, and 
Maust flinched.  I saw him bite his lip. 'Wrobik,' Kaddus said again. 'Were you going 
to leave so soon?  I thought we had a date, yes?' 

'Yes,' I said quietly, looking at Maust's eyes. 'Silly of me.  I'll… stick around for… a 
couple of days.  Maust, I -' The screen went grey. 

I turned round slowly in the booth and looked at my bag, where the gun was.  I picked 
the bag up.  I hadn't real೦ized how heavy it was. 

I stood in the park, surrounded by dripping trees and worn rocks.  Paths carved into the 
tired top-soil led in various directions.  The earth smelled warm and damp.  I looked 
down from the top of the gently sloped escarpment to where pleasure boats sailed in the 
dusk, lights reflecting on the still waters of the boating lake.  The duskward quarter of 
the city was a hazy platform of light in the distance.  I heard birds calling from the trees 
around me. 

The aircraft lights of the Lev rose like a rope of flashing red beads into the blue evening 
sky; the port at the Lev's summit shone, still uneclipsed, in sunlight a hundred 
kilometres overhead.  Lasers, ordinary search೦lights and chemical fireworks began to 
make the sky bright above the Parliament buildings and the Great Square of the Inner 
City; a display to greet the returning, victorious Admiral, and maybe the ambassador 
from the Culture, too.  I couldn't see the ship yet. 

I sat down on a tree stump, drawing my coat about me.  The gun was in my hand; on, 
ready, ranged, set.  I had tried to be thorough and professional, as though I knew what 
I was doing; I'd even left a hired motorbike in some bushes on the far side of the 
escarpment, down near the busy parkway.  I might actually get away with this.  So I 
told myself, anyway.  I looked at the gun. 

I considered using it to try and rescue Maust, or maybe using it to kill myself; I'd even 
considered taking it to the police (another, slower form of suicide).  I'd also 
consid೦ered calling Kaddus and telling him I'd lost it, it wasn't working, I couldn't kill 
a fellow Culture citizen… anything.  But in the end; nothing. 

If I wanted Maust back I had to do what I'd agreed to do. 

Something glinted in the skies above the city; a pattern of falling, golden lights.  The 
central light was brighter and larger than the others. 

I had thought I could feel no more, but there was a sharp taste in my mouth, and my 
hands were shaking.  Perhaps I would go berserk, once the ship was down, and attack 
the Lev too; bring the whole thing smashing down (or would part of it go spinning off 
into space?  Maybe I ought to do it just to see).  I could bombard half the city from here 
(hell, don't forget the curve shots; I could bombard the whole damn city from here); I 
could bring down the escort vessels and attacking planes and police cruisers; I could 
give the Vreccile the biggest shock they've ever had, before they got me… 

The ships were over the city.  Out of the sunlight, their laser-proof mirror hulls were 
duller now.  They were still falling; maybe five kilometres up.  I checked the gun again. 

Maybe it wouldn't work, I thought. 

Lasers shone in the dust and grime above the city, producing tight spots on high and 
wispy clouds.  Search೦light beams faded and spread in the same haze, while 
fire೦works burst and slowly fell, twinkling and sparkling.  The sleek ships dropped 
majestically to meet the welcoming lights.  I looked about the tree-lined ridge; alone.  A 
warm breeze brought the grumbling sound of the parkway traffic to me. 

I raised the gun and sighted.  The formation of ships appeared on the holo display, the 
scene noon-bright.  I adjusted the magnification, fingered a command stud; the gun 
locked onto the flagship, became rock-steady in my hand.  A flashing white point in the 
display marked the centre of the vessel. 

I looked round again, my heart hammering, my hand held by the field-anchored 
gun.  Still nobody came to stop me.  My eyes stung.  The ships hung a few hundred 
metres above the state buildings of the Inner City.  The outer vessels remained there; 
the centre craft, the flagship, stately and massive, a mirror held up to the glittering city, 
descended towards the Great Square.  The gun dipped in my hand, tracking it. 

Maybe the Culture ambassador wasn't aboard the damn ship anyway.  This whole thing 
might be a Special Circumstances set-up; perhaps the Culture was ready to interfere 
now and it amused the planning Minds to have me, a heretic, push things over the 
edge.  The Culture ambassador might have been a ruse, just in case I started to 
suspect… I didn't know.  I didn't know anything.  I was floating on a sea of possibilities, 
but parched of choices. 

I squeezed the trigger. 

The gun leapt backwards, light flared all around me.  A blinding line of brilliance 
flicked, seemingly instantan೦eously, from me to the starship ten kilometres 
away.  There was a sharp detonation of sound somewhere inside my head.  I was thrown 
off the tree stump. 

When I sat up again the ship had fallen.  The Great Square blazed with flames and 
smoke and strange, bristling tongues of some terrible lightning; the remaining lasers 
and fireworks were made dull.  I stood, shaking, ears ringing, and stared at what I'd 
done.  Late-reacting sprinterceptiles from the escorts criss-crossed the air above the 
wreck and slammed into the ground, auto೦matics fooled by the sheer velocity of the 
plasma bolt.  Their warheads burst brightly among the boulevards and buildings of the 
Inner City, a bruise upon a bruise. 

The noise of the first explosion smacked and rumbled over the park. 

The police and the escort ships themselves were starting to react.  I saw the lights of 
police cruisers rise strobing from the Inner City; the escort craft began to turn slowly 
above the fierce, flickering radiations of the wreck. 

I pocketed the gun and ran down the damp path towards the bike, away from the 
escarpment's lip.  Behind my eyes, burnt there, I could still see the line of light that had 
briefly joined me to the starship; bright path indeed, I thought, and nearly laughed.  A 
bright path in the soft darkness of the mind. 

I raced down to join all the other poor folk on the run. 

Odd Attachment 

Depressed and dejected, his unrequited love like a stony weight inside him, Fropome 
looked longingly at the sky, then shook his head slowly and stared disconsolately down 
at the meadow in front of him. 

A nearby grazer cub, eating its way across the grassy plain with the rest of the herd, 
started cuffing one of its siblings.  Normally their master would have watched the 
pretended fight with some amusement, but today he responded with a low creaking 
noise which ought to have warned the hot-blooded little animals.  One of the tumbling 
cubs looked up briefly at Fropome, but then resumed the tussle.  Fropome flicked out a 
vine-limb, slapping the two cubs across their rumps.  They squealed, untangled, and 
stumbled mewling and yelping to their mothers on the outskirts of the herd. 

Fropome watched them go, then - with a rustling noise very like a sigh - returned to 
looking at the bright orange sky.  He forgot about the grazers and the prairie and thought 
again about his love. 

His lady-love, his darling, the One for whom he would gladly climb any hillock, wade 
any lakelet; all that sort of thing.  His love; his cruel, cold, heartless, uncaring love. 

He felt crushed, dried-up inside whenever he thought of her.  She seemed so unfeeling, 
so unconcerned.  How could she be so dismissive?  Even if she didn't love him in return, 
you'd have thought at least she'd be flattered to have somebody express their undying 
love for her.  Was he so unattractive?  Did she actually feel insulted that he worshipped 
her?  If she did, why did she ignore him?  If his attentions were unwelcome, why didn't 
she say so? 

But she said nothing.  She acted as though all he'd said, everything he'd tried to express 
to her was just some embarrassing slip, a gaffe best ignored. 

He didn't understand it.  Did she think he would say such things lightly?  Did she 
imagine he hadn't worried over what to say and how to say it, and where and 
when?  He'd stopped eating!  He hadn't slept for nights!  He was starting to turn brown 
and curl up at the edges!  Food-birds were setting up roosts in his nestraps! 

A grazer cub nuzzled his side.  He picked the furry little animal up in a vine, lifted it up 
to his head, stared at it with his four front eyes, sprayed it with irritant and flung it 
whimpering into a nearby bush. 

The bush shook itself and made a grumbling noise.  Fropome apologized to it as the 
grazer cub disentangled itself and scuttled off, scratching furiously. 

Fropome would rather have been alone with his melan೦choly, but he had to watch over 
the grazer herd, keeping them out of acidcloys, pitplants and digastids, sheltering them 
from the foodbirds' stupespittle and keeping them away from the ponderously poised 
boulderbeasts. 

Everything was so predatory.  Couldn't love be different?  Fropome shook his withered 
foliage. 

Surely she must feel something. They'd been friends for seasons now; they got on well 
together, they found the same things amusing, they held similar opinions… if they were 
so alike in these respects, how could he feel such desperate, feverish passion for her and 
she feel nothing for him?  Could this most basic root of the soul be so different when 
everything else seemed so in accord? 

She must feel something for him.  It was absurd to think she could feel nothing.  She 
just didn't want to appear too forward.  Her reticence was only caution; understandable, 
even commendable.  She didn't want to commit herself too quickly… that was all.  She 
was innocent as an unopened bud, shy as a moonbloom, modest as a leaf-wrapped 
heart… 

… and pure as; a star in the sky, Fropome thought.  As pure, and as remote.  He gazed 
at a bright, new star in the sky, trying to convince himself she might return his love. 

The star moved. 

Fropome watched it. 

The star twinkled, moved slowly across the sky, gradu೦ally brightening.  Fropome 
made a wish on it: Be an omen, be the sign that she loves me!  Perhaps it was a lucky 

star.  He'd never been superstitious before, but love had strange effects on the vegetable 
heart. 

If only he could be sure of her, he thought, gazing at the slowly falling star.  He wasn't 
impatient; he would gladly wait for ever if he only knew she cared.  It was the 
uncertainty that tormented him and left his hopes and fears toing-and-froing in such an 
agonizing way. 

He looked almost affectionately at the grazers as they plodded their way around him, 
looking for a nice patch of uneaten grass or a yukscrub to defecate into. 

Poor, simple creatures.  And yet lucky, in a way; their life revolved around eating and 
sleeping, with no room in their low-browed little heads for anguish, no space in their 
furry chests for a ruptured capillary system. 

Ah, what it must be, to have a simple, muscle heart! 

He looked back to the sky.  The evening stars seemed cool and calm, like dispassionate 
eyes, watching him.  All except the falling star he'd wished on earlier. 

He reflected briefly on the wisdom of wishing on such a transitory thing as a falling 
star… even one falling as slowly as this one seemed to be. 

Oh, 
such 
disturbing, 
bud-like 
emotions!  Such 
sapling 
gullibility 
and 

nervousness!  Such cuttingish confusion and uncertainty! 

The star still fell.  It became brighter and brighter in the evening sky, lowering slowly 
and changing colour too; from sun-white to moon-yellow to sky-orange to sunset-
red.  Fropome could hear its noise now; a dull roaring, like a strong wind disturbing 
short-tempered tree tops.  The falling red star was no longer a single point of light; it 
had taken on a shape now, like a big seed pod. 

It occurred to Fropome that this might indeed be a sign.  Whatever it was had come 
from the stars, after all, and weren't stars the seeds of the Ancestors, shot so high they 
left the Earth and rooted in the celestial spheres of cold fire, all-seeing and all-
knowing?  Maybe the old stories were true after all, and the gods had come to tell him 
something momentous.  A thrill of excitement rose within him.  His limbs shook and 
his leaves beaded with moisture. 

The pod was close now.  It dipped and seemed to hesitate in the dark-orange sky.  The 
pod's colour con೦tinued to deepen all the time, and Fropome realized it was hot; he 
could feel its warmth even from half a dozen reaches away. 

It was an ellipsoid, a little smaller than he was.  It flexed glittering roots from its bottom 
end, and glided through the air to land on the meadow with a sort of tentative 
deliberation, a couple of reaches away. 

Fropome watched, thoroughly entranced.  He didn't dare move.  This might be 
important.  A sign. 

Everything was still; him, the grumbling bushes, the whispering grass, even the grazers 
looked puzzled. 

The pod moved.  Part of its casing fell back inside itself, producing a hole in the smooth 
exterior. 

And something came out. 

It was small and silver, and it walked on what might have been hind legs, or a pair of 
over-developed roots.  It crossed to one of the grazers and started making noises at 
it.  The grazer was so surprised it fell over.  It lay staring up at the strange silver 
creature, blinking.  Cubs ran, terri೦fied, for their mothers.  Other grazers looked at 
each other, or at Fropome, who still wasn't sure what to do. 

The silver seedlet moved to another grazer and made noises at it.  Confused, the grazer 
broke wind.  The seedlet went to the animal's rear end and started speaking loudly there. 

Fropome clapped a couple of vines together to request respectfully the silver creature's 
attention, and made to spread the same two leaf-palms on the ground before the seedlet, 
in a gesture of supplication. 

The creature leapt back, detached a bit of its middle with one of its stubby upper limbs, 
and pointed it at Fropome's vines.  There was a flash of light and Fropome felt pain as 
his leaf-palms crisped and smoked.  Instinc೦tively, he lashed out at the creature, 
knocking it to the ground.  The detached bit flew away across the meadow and hit a 
grazer cub on the flank. 

Fropome was shocked, then angry.  He held the struggling creature down with one 
undamaged vine while he inspected his injuries.  The leaves would probably fall off and 
take days to re-grow.  He used another limb to grasp the silver seedlet and bring it up 
to his eye cluster.  He shook it, then up-ended it and stuck its top down at the leaves it 
had burned, and shook it again. 

He brought it back up to inspect it more closely. 

Damn funny thing to have come out of a seed pod, he thought, twisting the object this 
way and that.  It looked a little like a grazer except it was thinner and silvery and the 
head was just a smooth reflective sphere.  Fropome could not work out how it stayed 
upright.  The over-large top made it look especially unbalanced.  Possibly it wasn't 
meant to totter around for long; those pointed leg-like parts were probably roots.  The 
thing wriggled in his grasp. 

He tore off a little of the silvery outer bark and tasted it in a nestrap.  He spat it out 
again.  Not animal or vege೦table; more like mineral.  Very odd. 

Root-pink tendrils squirmed at the end of the stubby upper limb, where Fropome had 
torn the outer covering off.  Fropome looked at them, and wondered. 

He took hold of one of the little pink filaments and pulled. 

It came off with a faint 'pop'.  Another, muffled-sounding noise came from the silvery 
top of the creature. 

She loves me… 

Fropome pulled off another tendril.  Pop.  Sap the colour of the setting sun dribbled out. 

She loves me not… 

Pop pop pop.  He completed that set of tendrils: 

She loves me… 

Excited, Fropome pulled the covering off the end of the other upper limb.  More 
tendrils…  She loves me not. 

A grazer cub came up and pulled at one of Fropome's lower branches.  In its mouth it 
held the silvery creature's burner device, which had hit it on the flank.  Fropome ignored 
it. 

She loves me… 

The grazer cub gave up pulling at Fropome's branch.  It squatted down on the meadow, 
dropping the burner on the grass and prodding inquisitively at it with one paw. 

The silvery seedlet was wriggling enthusiastically in Fropome's grip, thin red sap 
spraying everywhere. 

Fropome completed the tendrils on the second upper limb. 

Pop.  She loves me not. 

Oh no! 

The grazer cub licked the burner, tapped it with its paw.  One of the other cubs saw it 
playing with the bright toy and started ambling over towards it. 

On a hunch, Fropome tore the covering off the blunt roots at the base of the creature.  Ah 
ha! 

She loves me… 

The grazer cub at Fropome's side got bored with the shiny bauble; it was about to 
abandon the thing where it lay when it saw its sibling approaching, looking 
inquisi೦tive.  The first cub growled and started trying to pick the burner up with its 
mouth. 

Pop… She loves me not! 

Ah!  Death!  Shall my pollen never dust her perfectly formed ovaries?  Oh, wicked, 
balanced, so blandly symmetrical even universe! 

In his rage, Fropome ripped the silvery covering right off the lower half of the leaking, 
weakly struggling seedlet. 

Oh unfair life!  Oh trecherous stars! 

The growling grazer cub hefted the burner device into its mouth. 

Something clicked.  The cub's head exploded. 

Fropome didn't pay too much attention.  He was staring intently at the bark-stripped 
creature he held. 

… wait a moment… there was something left.  Up there, just where the roots met… 

Thank heavens; the thing was odd after all! 

Oh happy day!(pop) 

She loves me! 

Descendant 

I am down, fallen as far as I am going to.  Outwardly, I am just something on the 
surface, a body in a suit.  Inwardly… 

Everything is difficult.  I hurt. 

I think I had the idea then that I was being born.  A primitive, old-fashioned, almost 
animal birth; bloody and messy and dangerous.  I took part and watched at the same 
time; I was the born and the birthing, and when, suddenly, I felt I could move, I jerked 
upright, trying to sit up and wipe my eyes, but my gloved hands hit the visor, 
centimetres in front of my eyes, and I fell back, raising dust.  I blacked out. 

Now it is the third day, however, and the suit and I are in better shape, ready to move 
off, start travelling. 

I am sitting on a big rough rock in a boulderfield half೦way up a long, gently sloping 
escarpment.  I think it's a scarp.  It might be the swell towards the lip of the big crater, 
but I haven't spotted any obvious secondaries that might belong to a hole in the direction 
of the rise, and there's no evidence of strata overflip. 

Probably an escarpment then, and not too steep on the other side, I hope.  I prepare 
myself by thinking of the way ahead before I actually start walking.  I suck at the little 
tube near my chin and draw some thin, acidic stuff into my mouth.  I swallow with an 
effort. 

The sky here is bright pink.  It is mid-morning, and there are only two stars visible on 
normal sight.  With the external glasses tinted and polarized I can just see thin wispy 
clouds, high up.  The atmosphere is still, down at this level, and no dust moves.  I 
shiver, bumping inside the suit, as though the vacuous loneliness bruised me.  It was 
the same the first day, when I thought the suit was dead. 

'Are you ready to set off?' the suit says.  I sigh and get to my feet, dragging the weight 
of the suit up with me for a moment before it, tiredly, flexes too. 

'Yes.  Let's get moving.' 

We set off.  It is my turn to walk.  The suit is heavy, my side aches monotonously, my 
stomach feels empty.  The boulderfield stretches on into the edges of the distant sky. 

Whatever got us must have been very small or very far away, otherwise we wouldn't be 
here, still alive.  If the module had taken any standard-sized warhead full on there would 
be only radiation and atoms left; probably not an intact molecule.  Even a near miss 
would have left nothing recognizable to the unaided human eye.  Only something tiny 
- perhaps not a warhead at all but just something moving fast - or a more distant miss, 
would leave wreckage. 

I must remember that, hold on to that.  However bad I may feel, I am still alive, when 
there was every chance that I would never get this far, even as a cinder, let alone whole 
and thinking and still able to walk. 

But damaged.  Both of us damaged.  I am injured, but so is the suit, which is worse, in 
some ways. 

It is running mostly on external power, soaking up the weak sunlight as best it can, but 
so inefficiently that it has to rest at night, when both of us have to sleep.  Its 
com೦munications and AG are wrecked, and the recycle and medical units are badly 
damaged too.  All that and a tiny leak we can't find.  I'm frightened. 

It says I have internal bruising and I shouldn't be walking, but we talked it over and 
agreed that our only hope is to walk, to head in roughly the right direction and hope 
we're seen by the base we were heading for origin೦ally, in the module.  The base is a 
thousand kilometres south of the northern ice cap.  We came down north of the equator, 
but just how far north, we don't know.  It's going to be a long walk, for both of us. 

'How do you feel now?' 

'Fine,' the suit replies. 

'How far do you think we'll get today?' 

'Maybe twenty kilometres.' 

'That's not very much.' 

'You're not very well.  We'll do better once you heal.  You were quite ill.' 

Quite ill.  There are still some little bits of sickness and patches of dried blood within 
the helmet, where I can see them.  They don't smell any more, but they don't look very 
pleasant either.  I'll try cleaning them up again tonight. 

I am worried that, apart from anything else, the suit isn't being completely honest with 
me.  It says it thinks our chances are fifty-fifty, but I suspect it either doesn't have any 
idea at all, or knows things are worse than it's telling me.  This is what comes of having 
a smart suit.  But I asked for one; it was my choice, so I can't complain.  Besides, I 
might have died if the suit hadn't been as bright as it is.  It got the two of us down here, 
out of the wrecked module and down through the thin atmosphere while I was still 
unconscious from the explosion.  A standard suit might have done almost as well, but 
that probably wouldn't have been enough; it was a close run thing even as it was. 

My legs hurt.  The ground is fairly level, but occasion೦ally I have to negotiate small 
ridges and areas of corru೦gated ground.  My feet are sore too, but the pain in my legs 
worries me more.  I don't know if I'll be able to keep going all day, which is what the 
suit expects. 

'How far did we come yesterday?' 

'Thirty-five kilometres.' 

The suit walked all of that, carrying me like a dead weight.  It got up and walked, 
clasping me inside it so I wouldn't bump around, and marched off, the wispy remains 
of its crippled emergency photopanels dragging over the dusty ground behind it like the 
wings of some strange, damaged insect. 

Thirty-five klicks.  I haven't done a tenth of that yet. 

I'll just have to keep going.  I can't disappoint it.  I'd be letting the suit down.  It has 
done so well to get us here in one piece, and it walked all that long way yesterday, 
supporting me while I was still rolling my eyes and drooling, mumbling about walking 
in a dream and being the living dead… so I can't let it down.  If I fail I harm us both, 
lessening the suit's chances of survival, too. 

The slope goes on.  The ground is boringly uniform, always the same rusty brown.  It 
frightens me that there is so little variety, so little sign of life.  Sometimes we see a stain 
on a rock that might be plant life, but I can't tell, and the suit doesn't know because most 
of its external eyes and tactiles were burned out in the fall, and its analyzer is in no 
better condition than the AG or the transceiver.  The suit's briefing on the planet didn't 
include a comprehensive Ecology, so we don't even know in theory whether the 
discolourations could be plants.  Maybe we are the only life here, maybe there's nothing 
living or thinking for thousands and thousands of kilo೦metres.  The thought appals me. 

'What are you thinking about?' 

'Nothing,' I tell it. 

'Talk.  You should talk to me.' 

But what is there to say?  And why should I talk anyway? 

I suppose it wants to make me talk so I'll forget the steady march, the tramp-tramp of 
my feet a couple of centimetres away from the ochre soil of this barren place. 

I remember that when I was still in shock, and delir೦ious, on the first day, I thought I 
stood outside us both and saw the suit open itself, letting my precious, fouled air out 
into the thin atmosphere, and I watched me dying in the airless cold, then saw the suit 
slowly, tiredly haul me out of itself, stiff and naked, a reptile-skin reverse, a chrysalis 
negative.  It left me scrawny and nude and pathetic on the dusty ground and walked 
away, lightened and empty. 

And maybe I'm still afraid it will do that, because together we might both die, but the 
suit, I'm fairly sure, could make it by itself quite easily.  It could sacrifice me to save 
itself.  It's the sort of thing a lot of humans would do. 

'Mind if I sit down?' I say, and collapse onto a large boulder before the suit can reply. 

'What hurts?' it asks. 

'Everything.  Mostly my legs and my feet.' 

'It'll take a few days for your feet to harden and your muscles to tone up.  Rest when 
you feel like it.  There's no sense in pushing yourself too hard.' 

'Hmm,' I say.  I want it to argue.  I want it to tell me to stop whining and keep walking… 
but it doesn't want to play.  I look down at my dangling legs.  The suit's surface is 

blackened and covered in tiny pits and scars.  Some hair-fine filaments wave, tattered 
and charred.  My suit.  I've had the thing for over a century and I've hardly used it.  The 
brain's spent most of its time plugged into the main house unit back home, living at an 
added level of vicariousness.  Even on holidays, I've spent most of my time on board 
ship, rather than venture out into hostile environments. 

Well, we're sure as shit in a hostile environment now.  All we have to do is walk half-
way round an airless planet, overcome any and all obstacles in our way, and if the place 
we're heading for still exists, and if the suit's systems don't pack up completely, and if 
we don't get picked off by whatever destroyed the module, and if we aren't blown away 
by our own people, we're saved. 

'Do you feel like going on now?' 

'What?' 

'We'd better be on our way, don't you think?' 

'Oh.  Yes.  All right.' I lower myself to the desert floor.  My feet ache intensely for a 
while, but as I start to walk the pain ebbs.  The slope looks just the way it did 
kilo೦metres back.  I am already breathing deeply. 

I have a sudden and vivid image of the base as it might be, as it probably is: a vast, 
steaming crater, ripped out of the planet during the same attack that downed us.  But 
even if that is the reality, we agreed it still makes sense to head there; rescuers or 
reinforcements will go there first.  We have a better chance of being picked up there 
than anywhere else.  Anyway, there was no module wreckage to stay beside on the 
ground; it was travelling so fast it burned up, even in this thin atmosphere, the way we 
very nearly did. 

I still have a vague hope we'll be spotted from space, but I guess that's not likely 
now.  Anything left intact up there is probably looking outwards.  If we'd been noticed 
when we fell, or spotted on the surface, we'd have been picked up by now, probably 
only hours after we hit the dirt.  They can't know we're here, and we can't get in touch 
with them.  So all we can do is walk. 

The rock and stones are getting gradually smaller. 

I walk on. 

It's night.  I can't sleep. 

The stars are spectacular, but no solace.  I am cold, too, which doesn't help.  We are still 
on the slope; we travelled a little over sixteen kilometres today.  I hope we'll come to 
the lip of the escarpment tomorrow, or at least to some sort of change in the 
landscape.  Several times today, while I walked, I had the impression that for all my 
effort, we weren't moving anywhere.  Everything is so uniform. 

Damn my human-basic ancestry.  My side and belly are hurting badly.  My legs and 
feet held out better than I expected, but my injuries torment me.  My head hurts as 
well.  Normally, the suit would pump me full of painkiller, relaxants or a sleeping 
draught, and whatever it is helps your muscles to build up and your body to repair 
itself.  My body can't do those things for itself, the way most people's can, so I'm at the 
mercy of the suit. 

It says its recycler is holding out.  I don't like to tell it, but the thin gruel it's dispensing 
tastes disgusting.  The suit says it is still trying to track down the site of the leak; no 
progress so far. 

I have my arms and legs inside now.  I'm glad, because this lets me scratch.  The suit 
lies with its arms clipped in to the sides and opened into the torso section, the legs 
together and melded, and the chest expanded to give me room.  Meanwhile the carbon 
dioxide frosts outside and the stars shine steadily. 

I scratch and scratch.  Something else more altered humans wouldn't have to do.  I can't 
make itches go away just by thinking.  It isn't very comfortable in here.  Usually it is; 
warm and cosy and pleasant, every chemical whim of the encased body catered for; a 
little womb to curl up in and dream.  The inner lining can no longer alter the way it used 
to, so it stays quite hard, and feels - and smells - sweaty.  I can smell the sewage 
system.  I scratch my back೦side and turn over. 

Stars.  I stare at them, trying to match their unblinking gaze through the hazy, scratched 
surface of the helmet visor. 

I put my arm back into the suit's and unclip.  I reach round onto the top of the blown-
out chest and feel in the front pack's pocket, taking out my antique still camera. 

'What are you doing?' 

'Going to take a photograph.  Play me some music.  Anything.' 

'All right.' The suit plays me music from my youth while I point the camera at the 
stars.  I clip the arm back and pass the camera through the chest lock.  The camera is 
very cold; my breath mists on it.  The viewer half unrolls, then jams.  I tease it out with 
my nails, and it stays.  The rest of the mechanism is working; my star pictures are fine, 
and, switching to some of the older magazines from the stock, they come up bright and 
clear too.  I look at the pictures of my home and friends on the orbital, and feel - as I 
listen to the old, nostalgia-inducing music - a mixture of comfort and sadness.  My 
vision blurs. 

I drop the camera and its screen snaps shut; the camera rolls away underneath me.  I 
raise myself up painfully, retrieve it, unroll the screen again and go on looking back 
through old photographs until I fall asleep. 

The camera lies beside me, switched off.  The suit is quiet.  I can hear my heart beat. 

I drift back to sleep eventually. 

I unroll the camera screen, then think. 

'Suit?' 

'What?' it says quietly. 

The camera has a power unit.' 

'I thought of that.  It's very weak, and anyway the power systems are damaged beyond 
the junction point for another source of internal energy.  I can't think of a way of 
patching it in to the external radiation system, either.' 

'We can't use it?' 

'We can't use it.  Just look at your pictures.' 

I look at the pictures. 

There's no doubt about it; education or not, once you've been born and brought up on 
an O you never quite adjust to a planet.  You get agoraphobic; you feel you are about 
to be sent spinning off, flying away into space, picked up and sent screaming and 
bawling out to the naked stars.  You somehow sense that vast, wasteful bulk underneath 
you, warping space itself and self-compressing, soil-solid or still half-molten, quivering 
in its creaky, massy press, and you; stuck, perched here on the outside, half-terrified 
that despite all you know you'll lose your grip and go wheeling and whirling and wailing 
away. 

This is our birthplace though, this is what we deserted long ago.  This is where we used 
to live, on balls of dust and rock like this.  This is our home town from before we felt 
the itch of wanderlust, the sticks we inhabited before we ran away from home, the cradle 
where we were infected with the crazy breath of the place's vastness like a metal wind 
inside our love-struck heads; just stumbled on the scale of what's around and tripped 
out drunk on starlike possibilities… 

I find that I'm staring at the stars, my eyes wide and burning.  I shake myself, tear my 
sight away from the view outside, turn back to the camera. 

I look at a group photograph from the orbital.  People I knew; friends, lovers, relations, 
children; all standing in the sunlight of a late summer's day, outside the main 
building.  Recalled names and faces and voices, smells and touches.  Behind them, 
almost finished, is - as it was then - the new wing.  Some of the wood we used to build 
it still lies in the garden, white and dark brown on the green.  Smiles.  The smell of 
sawdust and the feel of pushing a plane; hardened skin on my hands and the sight and 
sound of the planed wood curling from the blade. 

Tears again.  How can I help but be sentimental?  I didn't expect all of this, back then.  I 
can't cope with the distance between us all now, that awful gap of slow years. 

I flick through other pictures; general views of the orbital, its fields and towns and seas 
and mountains.  Maybe everything can be seen as a symbol in the end; perhaps with our 

limited grasp we can't help but find similarities, talismans… but that inward facing plate 
of orbital looks false to me now, down here, so far away and lonely.  This globe of 
ordinary, soft, accidental planet seems the cutting edge and the flat knife of twinned 
adamantine thoroughness, our clever, efficient little orbitals, lacking that fundamental 
reality. 

I wish I could sleep.  I want to sleep and forget about everything, but I can't, tired though 
I still am.  The suit can't help me there, either.  I don't even remember dreaming, as 
though that facility, too, is damaged. 

Maybe I'm the artificial one, not the suit, which doesn't try to pretend.  People have said 
I'm cold, which hurt me; which still hurts me.  All I can do is feel what I can and tell 
myself it's all anyone can ask of me. 

I turn over painfully, face away from the treacherous stars.  I close my eyes and my 
mind to their remindful study, and try to sleep. 

I feel very sleepy, the rhythms all wrong, tired again. 

'Time to go; come on.' 

I come to, rubbing my eyes, breathing through my mouth to get rid of the stale taste in 
it.  The dawn looks cold and perfect, very thin and wide through this in೦hospitable 
covering of gas.  And the slope is still here, of course. 

It's the suit's turn to walk, so I can rest on.  We rede೦ploy the legs and arms again, the 
chest deflates.  The suit stands up and starts walking, gripping me round the calves and 
waist, taking the bulk of my weight off my throbbing feet. 

The suit walks faster than I do.  It reckons it is only twenty percent stronger than the 
average human.  Some೦thing of a come-down for it.  Even having to walk must be 
galling for it (if it feels galled). 

If only the AG worked.  We'd do the whole trip in a day.  One day. 

We stride out over the sloped plain, heading for the edge.  The stars disappear slowly, 
one by one, washed out of the wide skies by the sunlight.  The suit gains a little speed 

as the light falls harder on its trailed photopanels.  We stop and squat for a moment, 
inspecting a discoloured rock; it is just possible, if we find an oxide of some sort… but 
the stone holds no more trapped oxygen than the rest, and we move on. 

'When and if we get back, what will happen to you?' 

'Because I'm damaged?' the suit says. 'I imagine they'll just throw the body away, it's so 
badly damaged.' 

'You'll get a new one?' 

'Yes, of course.' 

'A better one?' 

'I expect so.' 

'What will they keep?  Just the brain?' 

'Plus about a metre of secondary column and a few subunits.' 

I want us to get there.  I want us to be found.  I want to live. 

I am suitably depressed. 

We sit on a rock and rest before making our way down.  The horizon is very clear and 
sharp.  There are mountains in the far distance, and many broad, shallow channels on 
the wide plain that lies between the mountains and us. 

I don't feel well.  My guts ache continually and breathing deeply hurts too, as though 
I've broken a rib.  I think it is just the taste of the recycler's soup that is putting me off 
eating, but I'm not certain.  There are a few stars in the sky. 

'We couldn't glide down, could we?' I ask the suit.  That's how we got through the 
atmosphere, after all.  The suit used the minuscule amount of AG it had left, and 
somehow got the tattered photopanel sheet to function as a parachute. 

'No.  The AG is almost certain to fail completely next time we try it, and the parachute 
trick… we'd need too much space, too much drop to ensure deployment.' 

'We have to climb?' 

'We have to climb.' 

'All right, we'll climb.' We get up, approach the edge. 

I don't know how much of this I can take.  This is going to go on for a hundred days or 
more, and even if the still undiscovered leak doesn't kill me I feel like I'm going to die 
of exhaustion.  If only they were looking for us.  Some೦body walking in a suit on a 
planet sounds hard to find, but shouldn't be really.  The place is barren, homogeneous, 
dead and motionless.  We must be the only movement, the only life, for hundreds of 
kilometres at least.  To our level of technology we ought to stand out like a boulder in 
the dust, but either they aren't looking or there's nobody left to look. 

But if the base still exists, they must see us eventually, mustn't they?  The sats can't 
spend all their time looking outwards, can they?  They must have some provision for 
spotting enemy landings.  Could we have just slipped through?  It doesn't seem 
possible. 

I look at my photographs again.  They appear a hundred at a time on the viewer.  I press 
one and it blooms to fill the little screen with its memories. 

I rub my head and wonder how long my hair will grow.  I have a silly but oddly 
frightening vision of my hair growing so long it chokes me, filling the helmet and the 
suit and cutting out the light, finally asphyxiating me.  I've heard that your hair goes on 
growing after you die, and your nails too.  I wonder that - despite one or two of the 
photographs, and their associated memories - I haven't felt sexually aroused yet. 

I curl up, foetal.  I am a little naked planet of my own, reduced to the primitive within 
my own stale envelope of gas.  A tiny moonlet of this place, on a very low, slow, erratic 
orbit. 

What am I doing here? 

It's as if I drifted into this situation.  I didn't ever think about fighting or doing anything 
risky at all, not until the war came along.  I agreed it was necessary, but that seemed 
obvious; everybody thought so, everybody I knew, anyway.  And volunteering, 
agreeing to take part; that too seemed… natural.  I knew I might die, but I was prepared 
to risk that; it was almost romantic.  Somehow it never occurred to me it might entail 
privation and suffering.  Am I as stupid as those throughout history - those I've always 
despised and pitied - who've marched off to war, heads full of noble notions and 
expectations of easy glory, only to die screaming and torn in the mud? 

I thought I was different.  I thought I knew what I was doing. 

'What are you thinking about?' the suit asks. 

'Nothing.' 

'Oh.' 

'Why are you here?' I ask it. 'Why did you agree to come with me?' 

The suit - officially as smart as me, and with similar rights - could have gone its own 
way if it wanted.  It didn't have to come to war. 

'Why shouldn't I come with you?' 

'But what's in it for you?' 

'What's in it for you?' 

'But I'm human; I can't help feeling like this.  I want to know what you think the 
machines' excuse is.' 

'Oh, come on; you're a machine too.  We're both systems, we're both matter with 
sentience.  What makes you think we have more choice than you in the way we 
think?  Or that you have so little?  We're all programmed.  We all have our 
inheritance.  You have rather more than us, and it's more chaotic, that's all.' 

There is a saying that we provide the machines with an end, and they provide us with 
the means.  I have a fleet೦ing impression the suit is about to trot out this hoary adage. 

'Do you really care what happens in the war?' I ask it. 

'Of course,' it says, with what could almost be a laugh in its voice.  I lie back and 
scratch.  I look at the camera. 

'I've got an idea,' I tell it. 'How about I find a very bright picture and wave it about now, 
in the dark?' 

'You can try it, if you want.' The suit doesn't sound very encouraging.  I try it anyway, 
then my arm gets tired waving the camera around.  I leave it propped up against a rock, 
shining into space.  It looks very lonely and strange, that picture of a sunny orbital day, 
sky and clouds and glittering water, bright hulls and tall sails, fluttering pennants and 
dashing spray, in this dead and dusty dark೦ness.  It isn't all that bright though; I suspect 
reflected star೦light isn't much weaker.  It would be easy to miss, and they don't seem 
to be looking anyway. 

'I wonder what happens to us all in the end,' I yawn, sleepy at last. 

'I don't know.  We'll just have to wait and see.' 

'Won't that be fun,' I murmur, and say no more. 

We are in the foothills on the far side of the mountains we saw in the distance from the 
escarpment.  I am still alive.  The pressure in the suit is reduced to slow down the loss 
rate from the leak, which the suit has decided is not a hole as such, but increased osmosis 
from several areas where too much of the outer layers ablated when we were falling.  I 
am breathing pure oxygen now, which lets us bring down the pressure significantly.  It 
might be coinci೦dence, but the food from the recycler tube tastes better since we 
switched to pure gas. 

There is a dull ache all the time from my belly, but I am learning to live with it.  I've 
stopped caring, I think.  I'll live or I'll die, but worrying and complaining won't improve 
my chances.  The suit isn't sure what to make of this.  It doesn't know whether I have 
given up hope or just become blasé about the whole thing.  I feel no guilt at keeping it 
guessing. 

I lost the camera. 

I was trying, eight days ago, to take a photograph of a strange, anthropomorphous rock 
formation in the high mountains, when the camera slipped from my fingers and fell into 
a crevice between two great boulders.  The suit seemed almost as unhappy as I was; 
normally it could have lifted either of those rocks into the air, but even together the two 
of us couldn't budge either of them. 

My feet are hard and calloused, now, which makes walking a lot easier.  I am becoming 
hardened generally.  I'll be a better person when I come out of this, I'm sure.  The suit 
makes dubious noises when I suggest this. 

I've seen some lovely sunsets recently.  They must have been there all the time, but I 
didn't notice them.  I make a point of watching them now, sitting up to observe the 
sweep and trace of trembling, planetary air and the high clouds wisping and curling, 
coming and going, levels and layers of the wrapping atmosphere shifting through its 
colours and turning like smooth, silent shells. 

There is a small moon I hadn't noticed either.  I put the external glasses on as high as 
they will go and sit looking at its grey face, when I can find it.  I rebuked the suit for 
not reminding me the planet had a moon.  It told me it hadn't thought it was important. 

The moon is pale and fragile looking, and pocked. 

I have taken to singing songs to myself.  This annoys the suit intensely, and sometimes 
I pretend that's one of the major rewards of such vocal self-indulgence.  Some೦times 
I think it really is, too.  They are very poor songs, because I am not very good at making 
them up, and I have a terrible memory for other people's.  The suit insists my voice is 
flat as well, but I think it's just being mean.  Once or twice it has retaliated by playing 
music very loudly through my headphones, but I just sing louder and it gives in.  I try 
to get it to sing along with me, but it sulks. 

'Oh 
once 
there 
was 
a 
space-man, 

And 
a 
happy 
man 
was 
he. 

Flew 
through 
the 
big 
G, 

And 
really 
saw 
it 
all, 
yes, 

But 
then 
one 
day, 
I'm 
afraid, 

He 
happened 
to 
trip 
up, 

Stumbled 
on 
a 
pla-anet 

And landed in the dirt. 

It 
wouldn't 
really 
have 
been 
so 
bad, 

But 
the 
worst 
was 
yet 
to 
come; 

His 
one 
and 
only 
companion 

Was 
a 
suit 
that 
da 
da 
dum. 

The 
suit 
it 
was 
a 
shit-bag 

And 
thought 
the 
man 
a 
lout, 

And 
what 
it 
really 
wanted 

Was to be inside-out. 

(chorus:) 
Inside-out, 
inside-out, 
inside 
inside-out, 

Inside-out, inside-out, inside inside-out!' 

And so on.  There are others, but they are mostly to do with sex, and so fairly boring; 
colourful but monotonous. 

My hair is growing.  I have a thin beard. 

I have started masturbating, though only every few days.  It is all recycled, of course.  I 
claim the suit as my lover.  It is not amused. 

I miss my comforts, but at least sex can be partially recreated, whereas all the rest seem 
unreal, no more than dreams.  I have started dreaming.  Usually it is the same dream; I 
am on a cruise of some sort, somewhere.  I don't know what form of transport I'm on, 
but somehow I know it's moving.  It might be a ship, or a seaship, or an airship, or a 
train… I don't know.  All that happens is that I walk down a fleecy corridor, passing 
plants and small pools.  Some sort of scenery is going by outside, when I can see 
outside, but I'm not paying very much attention.  It might be a planet seen from space, 
or moun೦tains, or desert, it might even be underwater; I don't care.  I wave to some 
people I know.  I am eating something savoury to tide me over to dinner, and I have a 
towel over my shoulder; I think I'm going for a swim.  The air is sweet and I hear some 
very soft and beautiful music which I almost recognize, coming from a 
cabin.  Wher೦ever, whatever it is I am in, it is travelling very smoothly and quietly, 
without sound or vibration or fuss; secure. 

I'll appreciate all that if I ever see it again.  I'll know then what it is to feel so safe, so 
pampered, so unafraid and confident. 

I never get anywhere in that dream.  I'm always simply walking, each and every time I 
have it.  It is always the same, always as sweet; I always start and finish in the same 
place, everything is always the same; predictable and comforting.  Everything is very 
sharp and clear.  I miss nothing. 

The lava tunnel curves away in the wrong direction.  I stand looking at it as it wiggles 
away into the distance, up a great slope to a distant, extinct shield volcano.  Wrong way, 
damn it. 

'Let's get down and head in the right direction, shall we?' the suit says. 

'Oh, all right,' I grumble.  I get down.  I'm sweating.  I wipe my head inside the helmet, 
rubbing it up and down, like an animal scratching. 'I'm sweating,' I tell it. 'Why are you 
letting me sweat?  I shouldn't be sweating.  You shouldn't be letting me sweat.  You 
must be letting your attention wander.  Come on; do your job.' 

'Sorry,' the suit says, in an unpleasant tone.  I think it should take my comfort a little 
more seriously.  That's what it's there for, after all. 

'If you want me to get out and walk, I will,' I tell it. 

'That won't be necessary.' 

I wish it would suggest a rest.  I feel weak and dizzy again, and I could feel the suit 
doing most of the work as we got down from the roof of the lava tunnel.  The pain in 
my guts is back.  We start walking over the rubble-covered plain once more.  I feel like 
talking. 

'Tell me, suit, don't you wonder if it's all worth it?' 

'If what's all worth what?' it says, and I can hear that condescending tone in its voice 
again. 

'You know; living.  Is it worth all the… bother?' 

'No.' 

'No?' 

'No, I don't ever wonder about it.' 

'Why not?' I'm keeping my questions short as we walk, conserving energy and breath. 

'I don't need to wonder about that.  It's not important.' 

'Not important?' 

'It's an irrelevant question.  We live; that's enough.' 

'Oh.  That easy, huh?' 

'Why not?' 

'Why?' 

The suit is silent after that.  I wait for it to say some೦thing, but it doesn't.  I laugh, wave 
both our arms about. 'I mean, what's it all about, suit?  What does it all mean?' 

'What colour is the wind?  How long is a piece of string?' 

I have to think about that. 'What's string?' I have to ask finally, suspecting I've missed 
something. 

'Never mind.  Keep walking.' 

Sometimes I wish I could see the suit.  It's weird, now that I think about it, not being 
able to see who I'm talking to.  Just this hollow voice, not unlike my own, sounding in 
the space between the inside of my helmet and the outside of my skull.  I would prefer 
a face to look at, or even just a single thing to fix my attention on. 

If I still had the camera I could take a photograph of us both.  If there was water here I 
could gaze at our reflec೦tion. 

The suit is my shape, extended, but its mind isn't mine; it's independent.  This perplexes 
me, though I suppose it must make sense.  But I'm glad I chose the full 1.0 
intelli೦gence version; the standard 0.1 type would have been no company at 
all.  Perhaps my sanity is measured by the placing of a decimal point. 

How am I?  Difficult to say.  My breathing has become laboured, and I'm sure I've 
become thinner.  My hair is long now and my beard quite respectable, if a little 
patchy.  Hairs fall out, and I have to squirm and pull to get an arm into the body of the 
suit to poke the hairs into the waste unit each night, or they itch.  I am woken up at night 
by the pain inside me.  It is like a little life itself, pawing and scraping to get out. 

Sometimes I dream a lot, sometimes not at all.  I have given up singing.  The land goes 
on.  I had forgotten planets were so big. This one's smaller than standard, and it still 
seems to go on and on without end.  I feel very cold, and the stars make me cry. 

I am tormented by erotic dreams, and can do nothing about them.  They are similar to 
the old dream, of walking on the ship or the seaship or whatever it is… only in this 
dream the people around me are naked, and caressing each other, and I am on my way 
to my lover… but when I wake up and try to masturbate, nothing happens.  I try and 
try, but I only exhaust myself.  Perhaps if the dream was more powerfully erotic, more 
imaginative… but it stays the same. 

I've been thinking about the war a lot recently, and I think I've decided it's wrong.  We 
are defeating ourselves in waging it, will destroy ourselves by winning it.  All our 
statistics and assumptions mean less the more they seem to tell.  We surrender, in our 
militance, not to one enemy but to all we've ever fought, within ourselves.  We should 
not be involved, we ought not to do a thing; we've gambled our fine irony for a 
mechanistic piety, and the faith we fight's our own. 

Get out, stay out, keep clear. 

Did I say that? 

I thought the suit said something there.  I'm not sure.  Sometimes I think it's talking to 
me all the time when I'm asleep.  It might even be talking to me all the time when I'm 
awake, too, but it's only occasionally that I hear it.  I think it's mimicking me, trying to 
sound the way I sound.  Perhaps it wants to drive me mad, I don't know. 

Sometimes I don't know which of us has said some೦thing. 

I shiver and try to turn over in the suit, but I can't. I wish I wasn't here.  I wish all this 
hadn't happened.  I wish it was all a dream, but like the colours of the earth and air, it's 
too consistent. 

I feel very cold, and the stars make me cry. 

'Inside-out, 
inside-out, 
inside 
inside-out, 

Inside-out, inside-out, inside inside-out!' 

'Shut up!' 

'Oh, you're talking to me at last.' 

'I said shut up!' 

'But I wasn't saying anything.' 

'You were singing!' 

'I don't sing.  You were singing.' 

'Don't lie!  Don't you dare lie to me!  You were singing!' 

'I assure you -' 

'You were!  I heard you!' 

'You're shouting.  Calm down.  We still have a long way to go.  We shan't get there if 
you -' 

'Don't you tell me to shut up!' 

'I didn't.  You told me to shut up.' 

'What?' 

'I said -' 

'What did you say?' 

'I-' 

'What?  What did - who is that?' 

'If you'll ju-' 

'Who are you?  Who are you? Oh no, please…' 

'Look, ca -' 

'No, please…' 

'What?' 

'… please…' 

' What?' 

'… please… please… please… please…' 

Sane now.  There never was any suit voice.  I made it all up; it was my own voice all 
the time.  Some state I must have been in to imagine all that, to be so unable to cope 
with being down here, all alone, that I created somebody else to talk to, like some lonely 
kid with a friend nobody else can see.  I believed in it when I thought I heard the voice, 
but I don't hear it any more.  Even at its most blandly credible it was just the flat calm 
of insanity.  Temporary, fortunately.  Everything is. 

I don't look at the stars any more, in case they start talking to me too. 

Maybe the base is at the core.  Maybe I am just walking round it and can never get any 
closer to it. 

My limbs move on their own now; automatic, programmed.  I hardly need to 
think.  Everything is as it should be. 

We don't need the machines, any more than they need us.  We just think we need 
them.  They don't matter.  Only they need themselves.  Of course a smart suit would 
have ditched me to save itself; we didn't build them to resemble ourselves, but that's the 
way it works out, in the end. 

We created something a little closer to perfection than ourselves; maybe that's the only 
way to progress.  Let them try to do the same.  I doubt they can, so they will always be 
less as well as more than us.  It's all just a sum, a whispered piece of figuring lost in the 
empty blizzards of white noise howling through the universe, brief oasis in an infinite 
desert, a freak bit of working-out in which we have transcended ourselves, and they are 
only the remainder. 

Going mad inside a space-suit, indeed. 

I think I passed the place where the base used to be some time ago, but there was nothing 
there.  I am still walking.  I'm not sure I know how to stop. 

I am a satellite; they, too, only stay up by forever falling forward. 

The suit is dead around me, burned and scarred and blackened and lifeless.  I don't know 
how I could have dreamed it was alive.  The very thought makes me shiver, inside here. 

The drone was there in a few minutes, taking a wide curve round the suspicious 
figure.  It shook other missiles free as it went, deploying them in a ring around the 
potential target. 

What to do?  The drone had to make up its own mind.  The base wasn't transmitting 
while whatever had hit the last incoming module was still hanging around.  It had been 
a long wait, but they'd survived so far, and the big guns should be arriving soon. 

The drone watched the figure as it skidded and slid down the scree beneath the ridge, 
leaving a hazy trail of dust behind it.  It got to the bottom, then started walking across 
the wide gravel basin, seemingly oblivious to all the attention it was attracting. 

The drone sent a knife missile closer to the object.  The missile floated up from behind, 
monitoring weak electro೦magnetic emissions, tried to communicate but received no 

reply, then darted round in front of the figure, and lasered its drone the view it had of 
the scarred suit front. 

The figure stopped, stood still.  It raised one hand, as though waving at the small missile 
hovering a few metres in front of it.  The drone came closer, high above, 
scanning.  Finally, satisfied, it swooped from the sky and stopped a metre in front of 
the figure, which pointed at the black mess of the communication unit on its 
chest.  Then it gestured to the side of its helmet and tapped at the visor.  The drone 
dipped once in a nod, then floated forward and pressed gently up against the visor of 
the helmet, vibrating the speech through 

'We know who you are.  What happened?' 

'He was alive when we got down, but I had no medics left.  Ablation caused a slow 
oxygen leak and eventually the recycler packed up.  There was nothing I could do.' 

'You walked all this way?' 

'From near the equator.' 

'When did he die?' 

'Thirty-four days ago.' 

'Why didn't you ditch the body?  You'd have been quicker.' 

The suit made a shrugging movement. 'Call it senti೦ment.' 

'Climb aboard.  I'll take you to an entrance.' 

'Thank you.' 

The drone lowered to waist height.  The suit pulled itself up onto the top of the drone 
and sat there. 

The body, bouncing slackly inside the suit, was still quite well preserved, though 
dehydration had stretched the skin and made it darker.  The teeth were displayed 
grinning knowingly at the barren world, and the skull was arched back on the locked 
upper vertebrae, upright and triumphant. 

'You all right up there?' The drone shouted through the fabric of the suit.  The suit 
nodded stiffly to the eye of an accompanying knife missile. 

'Yes.  Everything's a little difficult though.' It pointed at the scarred, burned surface of 
its body. 'I hurt.' 

Cleaning Up 

The first Gift fell onto a pig farm in New England.  It popped into existence five metres 
above a ramshackle outhouse, dropped through the roof, bounced off a cistern and 
demolished a wheel-less tractor driving a band saw. 

Bruce Losey came running out of the house clutching his sporting carbine and ready to 
blast any interloper to Kingdom Come.  All he found was what looked like a gigantic 
bundle of Peacock feathers on top of his tractor, which was lying on its side leaking 
fuel and looking like it would never work again.  Bruce looked up through the hole in 
the roof and spat into a pile of cut logs, 'God೦damned S.S.T.s.' 

He tried to shift the object that had bust up his tractor, smashed his roof and dented his 
cistern, but leapt away when it burned his hands.  He went back to the house watching 
the sky warily, and called the police. 

'What?' 

'Professor Feldman to see you, sir.' 

'Who?' 

'A Professor Feldman, sir.' 

'Oh yeah?' 

'Yes, sir.  He says he has the results of the preliminary development work on…', there 
was some talking Cesare didn't catch, '… on the Alternative Resources Project.' 

'The what?' 

'The Alternative Resources Project, sir.  It was set up last year, it seems.  The professor 
has been waiting for some time, sir.' 

'I'll see him later,' Cesare said, clicking the intercom off and going back to the Reader's 
Digest 

'I think it fell off an S.S.T.' 

The patrolman rubbed his chin.  The other cop was poking a stick at the bundle lying 
across the old tractor.  The thing was about three metres long and one in diameter, and 
whatever it was its colours kept shifting and changing, and whenever anything touched 
it, it got hot.  The tip of the stick smoked. 

'Who should we tell about this anyway?' said the cop with the stick.  He wanted to have 
this cleared up as quickly as possible and get away from the smell of pigs coming from 
the barn across the yard. 

'I guess… the F.A.A.,' said the other, 'or maybe the Air Force.  I dunno.' He took off his 
cap and fiddled with the badge, breathing on it and polishing it on his sleeve. 

'Well I'm claiming compensation, whoever it belongs to,' Bruce said as they went back 
to the house. 'That's a lot of damage that thing's done.  That'll cost a few bucks to set 
right.  That tractor was nearly new, you know.  I'm telling you; nowhere's safe now with 
those S.S.T.s.' 

'Hmm.' 

'Uh-huh.' 

'Hey,' Bruce said, stopping and looking at the two cops with a worried expression on 
his face, 'do you know if Liberia registers S.S.T.s?' 

The secretary, a clean-cut young man with an IBM 9000 desk terminal and a M.23 
submachine gun, had shrugged his shoulders sympathetically after he had at last been 
persuaded to call through to Cesare's office.  The professor said he would just have to 
wait, and went back to his seat.  There were seven other people waiting to see Cesare 
apart from himself.  Two of them were Air Force generals and one was the foreign 
minister of an important developing country.  They all looked nervous without their 
aides, who were kept in the outer-outer-outer office to avoid crowding.  According to 
the others, they had been waiting there, seven or eight hours each day, five days a week, 
for at least the last three weeks. 

This was the professor's first day. 

In the mess of the Third Clean-Up Squad, things were going badly for Matriapoll 
Trasnegatherstoleken-iffre-gienthickissle, jnr.  He had almost completed a full circuit 
of the room without touching the floor when a collapsible chair collapsed beneath him, 
and now he had to go back to the start and begin all over again with one paw tied behind 
his back.  The other members of the Squad were making bets on where he would fall 
and screaming insults. 

'7833 Matriapoll and Mates to briefing room fourteen!' blared the mess-room speaker. 

Normally Matriapoll would have welcomed this inter೦ruption, but he was on top of 
the speaker trying to grab hold of a light fixture at the time, and the shock of the speaker 
suddenly bursting into life beneath him made him lose his grip, and he thumped down 
onto the floor to the accompaniment of hoots and laughter. 

'Bastards,' he said. 

'Come on, Matty,' chuckled his Mates, Oney and Twoey, their tiny, dextrous hands 
quickly untying his arm and dusting him down.  They straightened his clothes and 
bustled out in front of him as Matriapoll paid what he owed to the others in the Squad 
and then left for the briefing room. 

The Air Force didn't know what it was either, but it wasn't anything of theirs, they were 
sure of that. They certainly weren't going to be paying any compensation.  But they 
decided to take the thing, just to see what it was. 

The Air Force came in a big truck that didn't quite make the turn off the road onto the 
farm track, and knocked down a metre or two of fencing.  Bruce said he'd sue. 

They took the bundle away wrapped in asbestos. 

At the Mercantsville Airbase they tried to find out what the object was, but apart from 
deducing that - from the way it felt - there was something inside the oddly-coloured 
outer covering, which now appeared like mother-of-pearl, they didn't make a great deal 
of progress. 

Somebody in I.M.C.C. got to hear about the object and the Company offered to open it, 
or at least make a further attempt, if the Air Force would let them have it. 

The Air Force thought about this.  The mysterious bundle was resisting all attempts to 
open it or even see inside.  They had tried metal tools, which melted; they tried oxy-
acetylene torches, which disappeared into the mother-of-pearl covering without 
producing any notice೦able effect; oxygen lances, which did no better; shaped-charge 
explosives, which shifted the whole thing across the floor of the hangar; and laser 
beams, which bounced off and frazzled the roof. 

A few days later a truck left the Mercantsville base and made its way to the nearest 
I.M.C.C. laboratory. 

The foreign minister wasn't very good at chess. 

The scoutship warped its way through space. 

Matriapoll picked what passed with his people for a nose and watched the show on the 
control-cabin screen.  The show was extremely boring; yet another quiz programme 
where people answered questions that were far too easy and got prizes that were far too 
expensive, but Matriapoll kept watching because the hostesses who showed the prizes 
to the audience were beautiful.  The green one in particular had the most superb trio 
of phnysthens he could recall seeing. 

The show cut out suddenly and was replaced by a picture of stars.  One star was ringed 
in red by the ship's computer. 

'Is that where we're going?' said a little voice behind him. 

'Yes,' said Matriapoll to Twoey.  The little animal curled its arm around his neck and 
peeped over his shoulder, rubbing its snout on his collar. 

'That's where the Transporter's focused?' 

'Right there, on the system's sun.' Matty frowned. 'Or at least that's where it's meant to 
be targeted.' 

Eventually they put the original bundle into a vacuum chamber.  That didn't work either 
until they heated one side and froze the other.  The thing peeled like a wrapper off 
candy, and for an instant the people outside the chamber were left gazing at something 
that looked like a cross between a suit of armour and a missile, before it blew up and 
caught fire. 

They were left with a very odd pile of junk, but the next time… 

'Okay, I'm a busy man; there are a lot of people waiting to see me.  What is it?' 

The phone made noises.  Cesare watched the Manhattan skyline, then he said, 'Oh 
yeah?' 

The phone made more noises.  Cesare nodded.  He inspected his fingernails and sighed. 

While he was doing that, a general swinging on the end of a length of rope tied around 
his waist passed in front of Cesare's office window waving plans for a new high-altitude 
bomber.  Cesare looked into the phone. 

'What?' 

The rope came back empty, and a sheaf of papers floated for a moment in front of the 
glass before the breeze caught them and took them away, drifting slowly down to the 
streets, eighty floors below. 

'And it's just floating there?  No engines?  No noise?  Nothing?' 

The rope was hanging just outside the window, the remains of a poorly tied knot at the 
end. 

'Anti-gravity?  Sure.' 

Cesare put the phone down without another word. I am surrounded by idiots, he 
thought. 

I.M.C.C had thirteen, eleven of them found in the USA and one each from South 
America and Africa.  They found out how to open them without damaging the contents, 
and what they found were some very odd things indeed. 

One kept trying to walk away on its five legs.  It looked a little like a spider.  Another 
just floated in mid-air without any apparent means of support.  It vaguely resem೦bled 
a typewriter with headlamps.  Another was the size of a sub-compact automobile and 
tried to talk to everybody with blond hair in a language which appeared to consist 
mostly of grunts and wind-breaking noises.  Yet another seemed to be a different size 

and shape every time you looked at it.  All were very difficult to take apart, and the 
analysis of any bits that they did eventually succeed in removing didn't make sense. 

'Checkmate,' Professor Feldman said, after eight moves. 

'Are you sure?' said the foreign minister, leaning closer to inspect the board.  Feldman 
was about to reply when the young secretary came over and tapped him on the shoulder. 

'Professor Feldman?' 

'Yes?' 

'Would you like to go in?  Mr Borges will see you now.' 

The young secretary went back to his seat.  The professor looked around at the others, 
aghast.  They were glaring at him with that special contempt reserved by the envious 
for the undeserving.  The remaining general sneered openly at him and glanced 
meaningfully down at the patchwork of ribbons that covered one side of his chest.  The 
professor gathered up his papers in total silence and gave his lunchbox and magazines 
to the policeman.  He pulled his tie straight and walked as steadily as he could to the 
door, still wondering why he had been summoned before people who had been waiting 
much longer than he had. 

Cesare Borges straightened his tie, put the edition of National Geographic away, and 
emptied the small box containing the names of the rest of the people sitting in the outer-
outer office into the waste-bin.  Professor Feldman's slip of paper was marking Cesare's 
place in the magazine. 

'Well?' he said when Professor Feldman walked into the room.  Cesare motioned him 
to sit in a seat in front of the massive desk.  Feldman sat down and cleared his throat.  He 
took some papers and spread them deferentially on Cesare's desk. 

'Well, sir, these are some of the projects we've been working on in this, the first phase 
of what I like to call -' 

'What's this?' snorted Cesare, holding up a piece of paper with a drawing on it. 

'That?  That's… ah… that's a new design of mud-press for constructing bricks in a low-
technology situ೦ation.' 

Cesare looked at him.  He picked up another bit of paper. 

'And this?' 

'That's a section through a new, low-cost, long-life toilet we've designed for when water 
is at a premium.' 

'You've spent two million of the firm's money designing a john?' Cesare said huskily. 

'Well, sir, it's very important.  It's just one component in a whole system of low-cost, 
high-use interdependent facilities which have been designed to be of facility in the Third 
World.  Of course, the development costs will probably be recouped in production, 
though it was agreed that it would be very good for the overall image of the company 
and the associated universities if there was no actual profit component included in the 
eventual selling price.' 

'It was?' said Cesare. 

The professor coughed nervously. 'So I believe, sir.  That was at the last shareholders' 
meeting.  The grant for the project as a whole dates from then, although the 
preli೦minary viability study was first -' 

'Just a minute,' Cesare said, holding up one hand and putting the other to the buzzing 
intercom. 'Yes?' 

'Call on line two, sir.' 

Cesare picked up the phone.  Feldman sat back and wondered what was going to 
happen.  Cesare said, 'Are you sure? And this could definitely be used?  This had better 
be right.  OK.  Hold everything; I'm coming out there.' He put down the phone and hit 
a button on the intercom set. 'Get the helicopter and have the jet ready.' 

'Ah… Mr Borges -' Professor Feldman began as Cesare opened a drawer in his desk 
and took out a travelling bag.  Cesare held up one hand. 

'Not now, doc; I got to move.  Just wait in the outer-outer office until I send for you.  I 
won't be long.  So long.' 

With that he was gone, into his private elevator and on up to the roof to his private 
helicopter which would fly him to an I.M.C.C. airstrip where his private jet would be 
waiting.  The young secretary came into the office and ushered Professor Feldman and 
his papers back out into the outer-outer office, where nobody talked to him and the 
foreign minister and the Police Chief were playing chequers on his chess board. 

'What's wrong, Matty?' said Oney.  The three of them were watching a complicated 
array of lights and screens in the control cabin.  The system and surrounding space was 
shown diagrammatically, and a little red light had just appeared next to the third planet, 
counting out from the star. 

'I'll tell you what's wrong,' said Matriapoll, clicking his brows with annoyance. 'That 
Transporter is out-of-order.' 

'It's not working, Matty?' 

'It's working, but it isn't working properly,' said Matri೦apoll. 'It's supposed to be 
depositing the stuff here,' he pointed to an orange area above the star's surface, 'but it 
isn't doing that.  It's putting it down here.' He pointed to another area of the screen; the 
third planet. 

'That's bad?' 

Matriapoll turned to look at the two Mates.  They sat on the back of his seat and looked 
back at him, tilting their heads to one side.  Twoey licked his face. 

'Don't you two phnysthens ever listen to the briefings?' 

'Yes, of course we do.' 

'Then you ought to know that world's inhabited.' 

'Oh… it's that one. We thought it was the one with the pretty rings.' 

'Good grief,' breathed Matriapoll, and took the scout-ship towards the offending planet. 

Somebody handed Cesare a pair of binoculars and told him where to watch.  All he 
could see was a white block೦house in the bright sun, shimmering, miles away. 

Then the plane appeared in one corner of his magnified vision.  A bolt of blinding light 
leapt from it, crossed to the blockhouse in no appreciable time, and demolished it in a 
cloud of dust. 

'Hmm,' Cesare said. 

'What do you think, sir?' said the local I.M.C.C. head, a young man called Fosse. 

'Depends.  Can we produce those things?' 

'We think we ought to be able to soon, sir.  One of the last machines we recovered seems 
to like taking the others apart.  We can start to find out exactly how they're put 
together.  Once we find that out we're half-way there.' 

'Okay, but where are these things coming from?' 

'Frankly, sir, we don't know.' They turned and looked back at the desert as the sound of 
the exploding block೦house rolled over the stand.  The aircraft was returning too, 
slowing for a vertical landing. 

'We're sure they aren't Commie?' 

'Oh, quite sure, sir.  If they could deliver things that size into our air-space without our 
radar spotting them they'd be sending H-bombs, not their latest technology.' 

'Yes, that makes sense,' Cesare said.  The generals were starting to file out of the 
stand.  A fleet of helicopters waited for the various dignitaries, military and civilian.  A 
handful of security men kept generals and other I.M.C.C. underlings from bothering 
Cesare as he chatted to Fosse. 

'I understand the President has given us the full go-ahead for joint development with 
the armed forces, sir.' 

'Who?  Oh, yeah.  The President.  Good.  Real good.  Get onto it then.  I'm interested in 
this, Fosse.  Think I'll stay over in California for a while.  Get some rest.  Keep an eye 
on all this.  Pressure of work back in the East, you know.' 

'Of course, sir.' 

'Not so good, eh?' said Oney. 

Matriapoll patted the hairy head of the little beast. 'Correct, little one.  Not good at 
all.  A positive disaster; we could have a cargo-cult or anything down there by 
now.  Warm up the ethergraph, I've got to get this back to the ship.' 

Cesare sat down to restrained applause. 

I.M.C.C.'s West Coast Headquarters Conference Room was packed with military and 
civilian personnel.  They had all listened intently to what the scientists and generals had 
to say, and for many of them a lot of what they heard was new.  The Company and the 
U.S.A.F., along with the Army and the Navy too, were launching a joint R&D 
programme on the New Technology (as they were calling it) and had every hope that 
they would soon have an unbeatable lead over the Soviets. 

Personally, Cesare thought the Gifts were from God, but he'd been dissuaded from 
saying so, and the speech writers seemed to think Helpful Aliens was the most likely 
explanation.  Cesare didn't think it mattered as long as they got the drop on the 
Commies. 

'Great speech, sir,' Fosse said afterwards. 

'Thanks,' Cesare said. 'You're right.  I think they all know what's going on now.  But we 
have to watch the security angle on this real carefully now.  Any leaks and the Ruskies 
might get windy and launch a pre-emptive.' 

'Well, I guess they'll find out eventually no matter how good our security is, sir.  You 
know what some of the scientists are like.' 

'Hmm.  And then they'll start a Third World War, the mad dogs.' 

'Yes.  We'll just have to hope that we can develop the New Technology quickly enough 
so that -' 

'Hmm.' 

Yours sincerely, 

7833 Matriapoll, C-U.S.3 

'You finished with that yet?' Cesare said. 

Fosse looked up from It Pays to Increase Your Prayer Power.  'Yes, sir.' 

'Hmm.' Cesare took the small magazine and slid a copy of a pamphlet called God is a 
Businessman across the desk to Fosse in exchange. 

There was a knocking sound at the window. 

The two men looked over in stunned surprise at a weird figure sitting on something that 
looked like a coffee table, floating in the air just outside the window.  Whoever or 
whatever it was, it was holding on to the coffee table with one hand, or paw, tapping 
the glass with another and with a third was playing absent-mindedly with the end of a 
bit of rope that was hanging in front of the window. 

'Jeeeeeesus.' Cesare gasped, reaching slowly for the drawer with the alarm on the 
outside and the Armalite on the inside. 

The creature on the coffee table pushed lightly at the window.  It collapsed, and the 
being came inside, rubbing bits of glass off its furry spacesuit.  Its face was a horrible 
bright red. 

'First person singular obtaining colloquial orgasm within a Caledonian sandwich,' it 
said, then looked annoyed, and spoke incoherently into a grille set in its belly, which 
replied.  It looked up and said, 'Sorry.  As I was saying:  I come in peace.' 

Cesare whipped out the Armalite and fired. 

The bullets bounced off an invisible force-field, and one ricochetted back to Cesare's 
desk, totally destroying a very expensive executive toy.  The creature on the coffee table 
looked upset. 

'You bastard!' it yelled, and took a large pistol of its own from a holster and fired it at 
Cesare.  A cloud of green glowing gas enveloped Cesare's face, which dropped.  He let 
the gun drop too. 

'My God,' he breathed, 'I've crapped my pants.' He stumbled waddling away from the 
desk and into his private toilet, doubled up and holding the seat of his trousers. 

The creature was looking into the muzzle of his pistol and scratching its head with one 
foot. 'That's funny,' it said, 'it's meant to make your eyes explode.' 

It floated over to Fosse, stopping at the desk to lick appreciatively at the blue glop that 
had flowed, slowly, from the smashed executive toy. 

Fosse, sweating, smiled ingratiatingly and said, 'I think we're going to get along just 
fine…' 

The professor watched phlegmatically.  Ever since the foreign minister had been 
informed that there'd been a coup back home and he would be placed under house arrest 
at the embassy if he left, the professor had resigned himself to whatever happened 
here.  He'd even let the general who had just been arrested make models of the planned 
bomber from the papers of the Alternative Resources Project. 

He didn't know why he bothered staying, but what the hell… 

'All such material is dumped onto the surface of a nearby star or, in the case of high 
heat-resistance articles, dumped somewhere inside it.  The material cannot be recycled 
economically because as a rule even the shoddy goods that we produce are very difficult 

to break up, and the Transmuters are tuned only to accept matter in comparatively small 
quanta.  In this case there seems to have been rather a serious leak.  The new machinery 
we've just installed has made a mistake in the relevant coordinates, and… well, you 
know the rest.' 

'You mean all this stuff is RUBBISH?' said Cesare from the bathroom. 

'Yes, I'm afraid so.  There shouldn't be any more after a little while.  I've already 
contacted the factory ship.  Please accept our sincere apologies.' 

'Wait a minute,' Fosse said as the alien turned to go. 'Have these things been arriving 
just anywhere? I mean is it a random thing?' 

'Yes.  The Transporter got that right, at least.  They've been distributed fairly evenly 
over the globe.  Most of them have sunk in the oceans of course, and quite a few are 
still undiscovered in rain forests and deserts and in the Antarctic and so on, but we'll 
locate those through their coverings and get rid of them once we get another new 
machine on-line.' It held up three paws as Fosse started to speak again. 'I know,' it said, 
'you'd like to keep the things, but I'm afraid that isn't possible.  We do have a 
responsibility, after all.  Now you must excuse me.  Goodbye.' 

The alien disappeared out of the window and went straight up into the sky, narrowly 
missing a passing S.S.T. 

Suddenly the alarm started sounding.  Five armed guards rushed into the room and 
began restraining Fosse.  Cesare succeeded in stopping them before Fosse had anything 
worse than severe bruising and a broken jaw.  He shooed the guards out and closed the 
door. 

'You realize what this means?' he said to Fosse. 'I'll tell you what it means; we're 
using junk; that's what it means!' 

'It'sh worsh than that, shir,' Fosse said. 'That shing shaid the Gi - rubbish wash appearing 
all over the surfashe of the Earth; that meansh the bigg - ow! - the bi'er the country the 
more of thoshe thingsh they're going to get; and rubbish or not they can probably all be 
ushed.' 

'So?' 

'Do you know what country hash the greatesht land-area in the whole world, shir?' 

Cesare nodded confidently. 'The good old U.S. of A.' 

'No, shir,' Fosse said shaking his head slowly. 

Cesare looked into Fosse's eyes.  His own eyes gradu೦ally widened and his upper lip 
trembled. 'Not…' 

'Yesh!' 

'Hot-damn!' 

They kept testing the equipment but if there was anything wrong with it they couldn't 
find out what it was.  The aliens must be really fussy. 

The very last Gift to arrive, as far as they knew, was the most interesting of all.  The 
New Technology Project was racing ahead, budget vastly increased now that it was 
known the Communists probably had the same stuff.  The spy satellites hadn't spotted 
anything, but then they'd managed to keep pretty tight security themselves, so that didn't 
prove anything. 

'OK.  But what does it do?' 

'It's a matter transmission machine,' said one scientist. 

'No, it isn't,' said another. 'Whatever it is it isn't that; it doesn't leave an original 
behind.  I think it uses continua to-' 

'Rubbish.  It's a true matter transmission machine, Mr Borges.  We can't hope to 
recreate this with our own tech೦nology, but we can certainly use it; shifting 
commodities, urgently needed drugs, disaster aid…' 

'There's nothing wrong with it?' 

'Wrong with it?  Why, this is the most perfect piece of machinery in existence on the 
planet.  We've already shifted two hundred brand-new Cadillacs from here to Tampa 
and back again just as a trial.  It did it without a murmur and right on target.' 

'Good.' 

'Now, as I was saying… we could use this thing to vastly step up the productive capacity 
of certain key industries, and make possible the rapid deployment of emergency 
supplies in a disaster/crisis situation -' 

Good, thought Cesare. We can use it to bomb the Ruskies. 

'It was an honest mistake,' said Matriapoll's foreman. 

'They'll use it!  They'll infest every nearby planet and system they can lay their 
coordinates on!' 

'It'll probably malfunction totally sooner or later; don't worry about it.  By the way, 
where's your other Mate?  I only see one.' 

'Don't talk to me about it,' Matriapoll said huffily. 'The idiot took a Flyer for a joy-ride 
and collided with an S.S.T.' 

'Sure it'll work,' Cesare said.  They were sitting with a whole load of I.M.C.C. people 
and military and political types in the underground command-post under the matter 
transmitter. 'We tested it by sending the same number of dummy warheads right round 
the world and back here.  They were all bang-on.  It'll be a clean sweep.  Nothing can 
go wrong.' 

'Anybody I know, sir?' 

Cesare looked up from the telephone, his eyes reflecting the embarrassing red splotches 
spread over the giant world map on the far side of the room. 'You remember 
Feldman?  Professor Feldman?' 

'No, sir; I don't think I've ever met the person.' 

'Doesn't matter; he's dead.  But I'm getting hold of his number two in Chicago; he's all 
right.  I've heard what it's like in the East.  It sounds terrible: famine, plague, 
canni೦balism, anarchy, flooding, drought; the works.  There's fantastic scope for a pet 
project of mine I've been nursing along for a few years now.  Called the Alternative 
Resources Project.  It's perfect for this situation.  We're ideally placed to take advantage 
of this.  It's a peach, believe me.  We could clean up.' 

Piece 

Hi kid.  Well, there I was about to do some reading but instead I'm writing to you.  I'll 
explain later, but first a little story (bear with me - this is partly to take my mind off 
things, including the book I was starting to read, but also to set up the first of a couple 
of coincidences.  Anyway.) 

It was… 1975, I think; have to check my diaries to be sure.  I'd finished at Uni that 
spring and gone off hitch೦hiking through Europe over the summer.  Paris, Bergen, 
Berlin, Venice, Rabat and Madrid defined the limits of this whirlwind tour.  Three 
months later I was on my way home, and after staying with Aunt Jess in Crawley, I'd 
used the last of my money to buy a bus ticket from London to Glasgow (hitching out of 

London was notor೦iously awful).  Night bus, and it took ages, staying off the 
motorways would you believe.  This was in the days before videos and minibars and 
hostesses and even toilets on buses.  The old coach groaned and whined through the 
rain-smeared darkness, stopping at breeze block and Formica transport cafes; cold 
islands of fluorescence in the night. 

Especially then, buses were for the not so well off.  I was the scruffy hitcher with long 
hair and jeans.  I was sitting beside an old guy wearing shiny trousers and a worn tweed 
jacket; thin limbs and thick glasses.  In front of us, an old lady reading People's Friend; 
behind, two lads with yesterday's Sun. The usual girning baby and harassed young 
mother, somewhere at the back.  I watched the sodium lights drift by in droplet lines of 
orange, and alternated sitting upright in the cramped seat, and sliding down into it, 
aching knees against the back of the seat in front.  And, for the first couple of hours or 
so, I was reading some SF novel (wish I could remember the name, but can't). 

Later I tried sleeping.  It wasn't easy; you swung fret೦fully in and out, never fully 
awake or completely asleep, always conscious of the growling gear changes and the 
creaky ache in folded knees.  Then the old guy started talking to me. 

I'm one of these anti-social types - well, as you know - who doesn't like to acknowledge 
the presence of other people when I'm travelling; plus I was quite shy back then (believe 
it or not), and I really didn't want to talk to some old geezer I imagined I had nothing in 
common with.  But he started the conversation and I couldn't be rude and just cut it 
off.  If I remember right, he pointed at the SF book, wedged between my leg and the 
arm rest. 

'You believe in all that stuff then, do you?' Scottish accent, not strong, maybe Borders 
or Edinburgh. 

I sighed.  Here we go, I thought. 'Sorry?  How do you mean?' 

'UFOs and all that' 

'Well, no.' I riffled the pages of the paperback, as though looking for clues. 'I just like 
science fiction.  Not much of it's about UFOs; this isn't.  I probably wouldn't read one 
about UFOs.' 

'Oh.' He looked at the book (I was getting embarrassed by its gaudy, irrelevant cover, 
and put it away). 'Are you a student?' 

'Yes.  Well, no; I was.  I graduated.' 

'Ah.  Science, was it, you were doing?' 

'English.' 

'Oh.  But you like science?' 

I'm sure that's the way he put it.  I jotted a lot of this down next day, and wrote a poem 
about it - 'Jack' - a couple of months later, and I'm sure if I had my notes with me they'd 
confirm that was how he put it: 'You like science?' 

So we got on to what he'd always wanted to talk about. 

He - yes, his name was Jack - couldn't understand how people thought they could tell 
something was so many million years old.  How could anyone tell what came when and 
where?  He couldn't understand; he was a Christian and the Bible seemed much more 
sensible. 

Ever felt your heart sink?  We'd been on the road two hours, we were barely past 
Northampton, and I was stuck - probably for the whole of the rest of the journey, judging 
from the guy's accent - beside some ancient geek who thought the universe was created 
about tea-time in 4004 BC.  Holy shit. 

Being young and stupid, I did actually try to explain (I watched 'Horizon'; I got New 
Scientist, sometimes). 

Let the poem take up the story (from memory, so make allowances): 

And 
Christ, 
dear 
reader, 
what 
could 
I 
do? 

Oh, 
I 
made 
the 
lame, 
half-hearted 
try; 

I 
told 
him 
all 
was 
linked, 
that 
those 
same 
laws 

Of 
physics, 
chemistry, 
and 
math 
that 
let 
him 
sit 
here, 

In 
this 
bus, 
with 
the 
engine, 
on 
that 
road, 

Dictated 
through 
the 
ages 
what 
was 
so. 

Carbon 
14 
I 
mentioned, 
its 
slow 
and 
sure 
decay, 

Even 
magnetic 
alignments, 
frozen 
in 
the 
rocks 

By 
the 
heat 
of 
ancient 
fires; 

The 
associated 
fossils, 
floating 
continents, 

Erosion, 
continuity 
and 
change… 

But 
from 
the 
first 
tired 
syllable, 
in 
fact 
before, 

I 
knew 
it 
was 
pointless. 

And 
somewhere 
back 

Of 
all 
that 
well-informed-layman 
stuff, 

Something 
a 
little 
more 
like 
the 
real 
me 
listened, 

And 
looked 
at 
the 
old 
man's 
glasses. 

- 
They 
were 
old, 
with 
thick 
frames, 
dark 
brown. 

The 
glass 
too 
was 
thick, 
and 
thick 
with 
dust. 

Dandruff, 
dead 
scales 
of 
old 
flesh, 
hairs 

Cemented 
there 
by 
grease 
and 
stale 
sweat, 

Obscured 
the 
views 
the 
scratches 
didn't. 

And 
even 
if 
the 
prescription 
wasn't 
years 
ago 
exceeded 

By 
his 
dying 
sight, 

The 
grime; 
that 
personal, 
impersonal 
dust, 

Sapped 
the 
bulky 
lenses 
of 
their 
use 

And, 
removed, 
inspected, 

How 
could 
those 
rheumy 
eyes 
unaided 
see 

This aggravation of their disability? 

(This was when I was into using rhyme only very spar೦ingly, like any other poetic 
effect.)  There was more, rather labouring the point about 'views' and cloudy thinking 
and so on, but passing swiftly on, we come to: 

He 
took 
in 
nothing. 

My 
throat 
got 
sore. 

The 
Borders 
came, 
and 
soon 
he 
left, 
met 
by 
his 
sister 

In some dismal little rain-soaked town. 

So I'd taken The Satanic Verses by Salman Rushdie out of the old daypack, hadn't 
I?  And Mo's sitting there like he expects the book to bubble and squirm and burst into 
flames right there in my hands. 

Now, I don't know how much you've heard about the kerfuffle surrounding this book - 
it hasn't exactly been front page news, and with any luck it won't be - but since it was 
published quite a few Muslims have been demanding it be banned, withdrawn or 
whatever because it contains - so they say - some sort of semi-blasphemous material in 
it relating to the Koran.  I'd talked about this general area of authorial freedom and 
religious censor೦ship with a couple of classes, but still hadn't read the novel, and it 
just hadn't occurred to me somebody like Mo - who hadn't been in either of those classes 
- might be on the side of the bad guys. 

'Mo; is there a problem?' 

'That is not a good book, Mr Munro,' he said, looking at it, not me. 'It is evil; 
blasphemous.' (Embarrassed silence from the others.) 

'Look, Mo, I'll put the book away if it offends you,' I told him (doing just that). 'But I 
think we have to talk about this.  All right; I haven't read the book myself yet, but I was 
talking to Doctor Metcalf the other day, and he said he had, and the passages some 
people found objec೦tionable were… a couple of pages at most, and he couldn't see 
what the fuss was about.  I mean, this is a novel, Mo.  It isn't a… religious tract; 
it means to be fiction.' 

'That isn't the point, Mr Munro,' Mo said.  He was looking at my little red rucksack as 
though there was a nuclear bomb inside it. 'Rushdie has insulted all Muslims.  He has 
spat in the face of every one of us.  It's as if he has called all our mothers whores.' 

'Mo,' I said, and couldn't help grinning as I put the rucksack down on the floor, 'it's only 
a story.' 

'The form is not important.  It is a work in which Allah is insulted,' Mo said. 'You can't 
understand, Mr Munro.  There is nothing you hold that sacred.' 

'Oh no?  How about freedom of speech?' 

'But when the National Front wanted to use the Students' Union, you were with us on 
the demonstration, weren't you?  What about their freedom of speech?' 

'They want to take it away from everybody else; come on, Mo.  You're not denying 
them freedom of speech, you're protecting the freedoms of the people they'd 
perse೦cute if they were allowed any power.' 

'But in the short term you are denying them the right to state their views in public, are 
you not?' 

'The way you'd deny somebody the freedom to put a gun to another person's head and 
pull the trigger, yes.' 

'So, clearly your belief in freedom generally can over೦ride any particular freedom; 
these freedoms are not abso೦lute.  Nothing is sacred to you, Mr Munro.  You base your 
beliefs on the products of human thought, so it could hardly be otherwise.  You might 
believe in certain things, but you do not have faith. That comes with submission to the 
force of divine revelation.' 

'So because I don't have what I think of as supersti೦tions, because I believe we just 
happen to exist, and believe in… science, evolution, whatever; I'm not as… worthy as 
somebody who has faith in an ancient book and a cruel, desert God?  I'm sorry, Mo, but 
for me, Christ and Muhammed were both just men; charismatic, gifted in various ways, 
but still just mortal human beings, and the scholars and monks and disciples and 
historians who wrote about them or recorded their thoughts and their lives were inspired 
all right, but not by God; by something from inside them, something every writer has… 
in fact something every human has.  Mo; definitions.  Faith is belief without proof.  I 
can't accept that.  Now, it doesn't bother me that you can, so why does it bother you so 
much that I think the way I do, or Salman Rushdie thinks the way he does?' 

'Clearly, your soul is your own concern, Mr Munro.  Rushdie's is his.  To think 
blasphemous thoughts is to restrict the sin to oneself, but to blaspheme in public is 
deliberately to assault those who do believe.  It is to rape our souls.' 

Can you believe this?  This guy's heading for a First; his father's an astro-physicist, for 
Christ's sake.  Mo's probably going to be a lecturer himself (he already puts 'clearly' at 
the start of his sentences; good grief, he's halfway there!).  It's very nearly 1989 but it's 
midnight in the dark ages just the thickness of a book away, the thick೦ness of a skull 
away; just the turn of a page away. 

So, an argument, while the leafless trees and the cold brown fields stream by beyond 
the carriage's double-glazing, and the inevitable wailing child howled some೦where in 
the distance. 

But what do you say?  I asked him about the kids who rode across the minefields on 
their Hondas, clearing the way for the Iranian Army, the hard way.  Insane, to me.  To 
Mo?  Maybe misguided, maybe used, but still glorious.  I told him that while I hadn't 
read The Satanic Verses, I had read the Koran, and found it almost as ludicrous and 
objectionable as the Bible… and after that I got a bit loud, while Mo went very quiet 
and forbidding and curt, and one of the others had verbally to separate us. 
(Co೦incidence; I read the Penguin edition of the Koran - edited by a Jew, Mo claims, 
and unholy too because it puts the passages in the wrong order - and Viking, who 
publish 'TSV, are part of the same group… fertile ground for a conspiracy theory?) 

Mo and I shook hands, later on, but it spoiled the day. 

Right.  The coincidences I was talking about.  I started reading The Satanic Verses in 
the departure lounge there, and how does it begin?  With two guys falling through the 
air after being blown up in a jumbo jet.  Great.  I mean not that I'm a nervous flier or 
anything, but this is not what one wishes to read before boarding a plane, correct?  So 
that's one.  Plus those other two instances; of travel, a conversation/argument started by 
a book (by two books), reason against faith both times, somehow seem to belong 
together with this journey; bus, train, plane, a travelling trinity of functioning 
technology to compare and contrast with the paranoid psychoses of religious belief. 

What do you do with these people? (Never mind what they might do to us, if they ever 
get the whip hand; what chance would I have to teach 'Reason and Compassion in 
Twentieth-Century Poetry' in Tehran?) Reason shapes the future, but superstition 
infects the present. 

And coincidence convinces the credulous.  Two things happen at the same time, or one 
after another, and we assume there must be a link; well, we sacrificed a virgin last year, 

and there was a good harvest.  Of course the ceremony to raise the sun works - it comes 
up every morning doesn't it?  I say my prayers each night and the world hasn't ended 
yet… 

Dung beetle thinking.  Life is too complicated for there not to be continual 
coincidences, and we just have to come to terms with the fact that they merely happen 
and aren't ordained, that some things occur for no real reason whatsoever, and that this 
is not a punishment and that is not a reward.  Good grief; the most copper-bottomed, 
platinum-card proof of divine intervention, of some holy master-plan, would be if there 
were no coincidences at all!  That really would look suspicious. 

I don't know.  Maybe I'm the one who's wrong.  I don't mean that either the Christians 
or the Muslims actually have the truth, that either the geriatric gibberings of Rome or 
the hysterical spurtings out of Qom contain anything remotely resembling the real 
bottom line about Where We Come From or What It's All About, but that both might 
represent the way humanity truly wants to be; perhaps they are its truest images.  Maybe 
reason is the aberration (thought perishes). 

A little girl - long curly blonde hair, enormous blue eyes, with one of those unspillable 
plastic cups held chubbily in both hands - has just appeared in the aisle beside me, 
expression very serious.  She's gazing at me with that disinterested intensity only little 
kids seem to be capable of.  Gone again. 

Absolutely gorgeous.  But how do I know her parents aren't Christian fundamentalists 
and she won't grow up sincerely believing Darwin was an agent of the devil and 
evolution a dangerous nonsense? 

I guess I don't. (Hey!  I used 'guess' instead of 'sup೦pose'!  I'm thinking like an 
American already!) I guess I don't, and it wouldn't matter if I did.  Let the crazies burn 
rock albums and hunt the Ark on Ararat; let them look stupid while we look to the 
future.  We just have to hope there are always more of us than there are of them, or at 
least that we are more influential, better placed.  What೦ever. 

Whatever indeed.  I smell food.  My semi-circular canals tell me - I think - that we are 
starting to level out, reaching our cruising altitude.  Dark outside the windows.  Last 
coincidence: 

I never did specify in the poem, but the wee daft town - dismal, rain-soaked - in 'Jack' 
was called Lockerbie (about the only time you might have seen or heard the name was 
when we were driving up to Scotland - it's just off the A74, not far over the 
border).  And - according to this handy route map in my very own complimentary Pan 
Am in-flight mag - we'll fly right over it.  I suspect old Jack kicked the bucket years 

ago, to go to whatever award he imagined might be his, but if he isn't dead, and he does 
look out of his window tonight (and he finally cleaned his glasses), I wonder if he 

(Piece PP/n.k.no. 29271, recovered grid ref. NY 241770, at 1435 on 24/12/88. A4 Refill 
Pad, part, torn.) 

The State of the Art 

CONTENTS 

1. Excuses And Accusations 
2. Stranger Here Myself 
  2.1: Well I Was In The Neighbourhood 
  2.2: A Ship With A View 
  2.3: Unwitting Accomplice 
3. Helpless In The Face Of Your Beauty 
  3.1: Synchronize Your Dogmas 
  3.2: Just Another Victim Of The Ambient Morality 
  3.2: Arrested Development 
4. Heresiarch 
  4.1: Minority Report 
  4.2: Happy Idiot Talk 
  4.3: Ablation 
  4.4: God Told Me To Do It 
  4.5: Credibility Problem 
5. You Would If You Really Loved Me 
  5.1: Sacrificial Victim 
  5.2: Not Wanted On Voyage 
6. Undesirable Alien 
  6.1: You'll Thank Me Later 
  6.2: The Precise Nature Of The Catastrophe 
  6.3: Halation Effect 
  6.4: Dramatic Exit, Or, Thank You And Goodnight 
7. Perfidy, Or, A Few Words From 'The Drone' 

The State of the Art 

1: Excuses And Accusations 

Parharengyisa 
Rasd-Codurersa 

Listach 
Diziet 

Ja'andeesih 
Embless 

Petrain 
Sma 

dam Kotosklo 
da'Marenhide 

(location as name) 
(c/o SC) 

  
2.288-93 

Dear Mr Petrain 

I do hope you will accept my apologies for keeping you waiting so long.  Included 
herewith - at last! - is the infor೦mation you asked me for all that time ago.  My personal 
well-being, after which you so kindly enquired, is all I could hope for.  As you will 
probably have been told, and doubtless observed from my location (or rather lack of it) 
above, I am no longer in Contact ordinaire, and my posi೦tion in Special 
Circumstances is such that I occasionally have to leave my present address for 
considerable periods of time, often with only a few hours notice during which to attend 
personally to any outstanding business.  Apart from these sporadic jaunts, my life is one 
of lazy luxury on a sophisticated stage three-four (uncontacted) where I enjoy all the 
benefits of an interestingly, if not exotically, foreign planet sufficiently developed to 
possess a reason೦ably civilized demeanour without suffering overmuch the global 
sameness which so often accompanies such progress. 

A pleasant life, then, and when I am called away it usually feels more like a holiday 
than an unwelcome interruption. 

In fact, the only grit in the eye is a rather self-important Offensive-model drone whose 
exaggerated concern for my physical safety, if not my peace of mind, frequently 
becomes more exasperating than it is comforting (my theory is that SC finds drones 
whose robust pugnacity has led them to some overly-violent act in the past and then 
tells these pathological devices to guard their human Special Circumstancer 
successfully, or be componented.  But that is by the bye). 

Anyway, what with the remoteness of my habitation and the fact I've been off-planet 
for the past hundred days or so (with drone, of course), and the delay while I consulted 
my notes and tried to dig from my memory what scraps of conversation and 
'atmosphere' I could, and then fretting over the best way to present the resulting data… 
well, all this has taken rather a long time, and to be honest the sedate mode of my present 
life has not helped me to be as brisk as I would have liked in the execution of this task. 

I am glad to hear that you are only one of many scholars specializing in Earth; I always 
did think the place well worth studying, and perhaps even learning from.  Thank೦fully, 

then, you will have all the information that could possibly qualify as background, and I 
apologize in advance if anything I include doubles on this; but while I have stuck as 
strictly as memory (machine and human) will allow to what actually happened those 
hundred and fifteen years ago, I have nevertheless tried to make the presentation of the 
following events and impressions as general and self-contained as possible, believing 
this to be the best way of attempting to conform with your request to describe what it 
really felt like to be there at the time.  I trust this combination of fact and sensation does 
not unduly affect the utility of either when you come to process the result in the course 
of your studies, but in the event that it does, and also if you have any other questions 
about Earth at that time which you think I might be able to help answer, please do not 
hesitate to get in touch with me; I am only too happy to shed what light I can on a place 
that affected everyone who was there both profoundly and - in the main, I suspect - 
permanently. 

What follows, then, is as much as I and my bank can remember.  The conversations I 
have had to reconstruct, as a rule; I did not then practise full-record, it being a minor 
piece of the ship's (frankly tediously) eccentric etiquette not to 'over-observe' (its words) 
life on board.  Some dialogue, mostly on-planet, was recorded, however, and I have 
placed these sections between the following two symbols: < >.  They have undergone 
a degree of tidying up - removing the usual 'umms' and 'ahs' and so on - but the original 
recordings are available to you from my bank without further authorization, should you 
feel you require them.  For the sake of brevity I have reduced all Full Names to one or 
two parts, and done my best to anglicize them.  All the times and dates are Earth-
relative/local (Christian calendar). 

Incidentally, I was most pleased to receive your news about the Arbitrary and its 
escapades over these last few decades; I confess to having been rather out of touch 
recently, and became quite nostalgic on hearing again of that misfit machine. 

But back to Earth, and back all those years ago, and by the way my English has suffered 
over the past century of neglect; the drone is translating all this, and any mistakes are 
bound to be its. 

Diziet Sma 

2: Stranger Here Myself 

2.1: Well I Was In The Neighborhood 

By the spring of the year 1977 AD, the General Contact Unit Arbitrary had been 
stationed above the planet Earth for the best part of six months.  The ship, of the 
Escarpment class, middle series, had arrived during the previous November after 

clipping the edge of the planet's expanding electro-magnetic emission shell while on 
what it claimed was a random search.  How random the search pattern was I don't know; 
the ship might well have had some information it wasn't telling us about, some scrap of 
rumour half remembered from somebody's long-discredited archives, multitudinously 
translated and re-transmitted, vague and uncertain after all that time and movement and 
change; just a mention that there was an intelligent human-ish species there, or at least 
the beginnings of one, or the possibility of one… You could ask the ship itself about 
this easily enough, but getting an answer might be another matter (you know what 
GCUs are like). 

Anyway, there we were over an almost classic sophis೦ticated stage three perfect 
enough to have come right out of the book, from a footnote if not a main chapter.  I 
think everybody, including the ship, was delighted.  We all knew the chances of 
stumbling across something like Earth were remote, even looking in the most likely 
places (which we weren't, officially), yet all we had to do was switch on the nearest 
screen or our own termi೦nals and see it hanging there, in real space, less than a 
microsecond away, shining blue and white (or black velvet scattered with light motes), 
its wide, innocent face ever changing.  I remember staring at it for hours at a time on 
occasion, watching the weather patterns' slow swirl if we were stationary relative to it, 
or gazing at its rolling curve of water, cloud and land mass if we were moving.  It looked 
at once serene and warm, implacable and vulnerable.  The contradictory nature of these 
impressions worried me for reasons I could not fully articulate, and contributed to a 
vague feeling of apprehension I already had that somehow the place was a little too 
close to some perfection, slightly too textbookish for its own good. 

It needed thinking about, of course.  Even while the Arbi೦trary was still turning and 
decelerating, and then running through the old radio waves on its way to their source, 
it was both pondering itself and signalling the General Systems Vehicle Bad For 
Business, which was tramping a thousand years core-ward, and which we had left after 
a rest and refit only a year before.  What else the Bad might have contacted to help it 
mull over the problem is probably on record somewhere, but I haven't considered it 
important enough to search out.  While the Arbitrary described graceful power-orbits 
around Earth and the great Minds were considering whether to contact or not, most of 
us in the Arbitrary were in a frenzy of preparation. 

For the first few months of its stay the ship acted like a gigantic sponge, soaking up 
every scrap, every bit of information it could find anywhere on the planet, scouring tape 
and card and file and disc and fiche and film and tablet and page and scroll, recording 
and filming and photographing, measuring and charting and mapping, sorting and 
collating and analyzing. 

A fraction of this avalanche of data (it felt like a lot but it was actually piffiingly small, 
the ship assured us) was stuffed into the heads of those of us sufficiently close in 
physique to pass for human on Earth, after a little alteration (I got a couple of extra toes, 
a joint removed from each finger and a rather generalized ear, nose and cheekbone 
job.  The ship insisted on teaching me to walk differently as well), and so by the start 
of '77 I was fluent in German and English and probably knew more about the history 
and current affairs of the place than the vast majority of its inhabitants. 

I knew Dervley Linter moderately well, but then one knows everybody on a ship of 
only three hundred people.  He had been on the Bad for Business at the same time as I, 
but we had only met after we both joined the Arbitrary.  Both of us had been in Contact 
for about half the standard stretch, so neither of us were exactly novices.  This, to me, 
makes his subsequent course of action doubly mystifying. 

I was based in London for January and February, spending the time tramping through 
museums (viewing exhibits the ship already had perfect 4D holos of, and not seeing the 
crated artefacts there wasn't room to show which were stored in basements or 
somewhere else entirely, which the ship also had perfect holos of), going to movies 
(which the ship of course had copies of compiled from the very best prints), and - more 
rele೦vantly, perhaps - attending concerts, plays, sports events and every sort and type 
of gathering and meeting the ship could discover.  I spent quite a lot of time just walking 
around and looking, getting people talking.  All very dutiful, but not always as easy or 
stress-free as it sounds; the bizarre sexual mores of the locals could make it surprisingly 
awkward for a woman simply to go up and start talking to a man.  I suspect if I hadn't 
been a good ten centimetres taller than the average male I'd have had more trouble than 
I did. 

My other problem was the ship itself.  It was always trying to get me to visit as many 
places as possible, do as much as I could, see all the people I was able to; look at this, 
listen to that, meet her, talk to him, watch that, wear this… it wasn't so much that we 
wanted to do different things - the ship rarely tried to get me to do anything I wouldn't 
want to do - simply that the thing wanted me to be doing something all the time. I was 
its envoy to the city, its one human tendril, a root through which it sucked with all its 
might, trying to feed the apparently bottomless pit it called its memory. 

I took holidays from the rush, in the remote, wild places; Ireland's Atlantic coast and 
the Scottish highlands and islands.  In County Kerry, in Galway and Mayo, in Wester 
Ross and Sutherland and Mull and Lewis I dallied while the ship tried to bring me back 
with threats and cajolings and promises of all the exciting work it had for me to do. 

But in early March I was finished in London, so I was sent to Germany and told to 
wander, asked to drift and travel round and given a few places and dates, things to do 
and see and think about. 

Now that I had stopped using English, as it were, I felt free to start reading works in 
that language for pleasure, and that was what I did in my spare time, what little of it 
there was. 

The year turned, gradually there was less snow, the air became warmer, and after 
thousands upon thousand of kilometres of roads and railway tracks and dozens of hotel 
rooms, I was called back in late April to the ship, to reel off my thoughts and feelings 
to it.  The ship was trying hard to get the mood of the planet, to form the sort of 
impression that only direct human interaction can provide the raw material for.  It was 
sorting and re೦arranging and randomizing and re-sorting its data, looking for patterns 
and themes, and trying to gauge and relate all the sensations its human agents had 
encountered, measuring them against whatever conclu೦sions of its own it had come to 
while swimming through the ocean of facts and figures it had already dredged from the 
world.  We were by no means finished, of course, and I and all the others who were 
down on-planet would be there for some months yet, but it was time to get some first 
impressions. 

2.2: A Ship With A View 

'So you think we should contact, do you?' 

I was lying, sleepy and contented and full after a large dinner, sprawled over a cushion 
couch in a rec area with the lights dimmed, my feet on the arm of the seat, my arms 
folded, my eyes closed.  A gentle, warm draught, vaguely Alpine in its fragrance, was 
displacing the smell of the food I and some of my friends had consumed.  They were 
off playing some game in another part of the ship, and I could just hear their voices over 
the Bach I had persuaded the ship to like, and which it was now playing for me. 

'Yes I do.  And as soon as possible, too.' 

'They'd be upset.' 

'Too bad.  It's for their own good.' I opened my eyes and flashed what was, I hoped, a 
palpably contrived smile at the ship's remote drone, which was sitting at a slightly 
drunken angle on the arm of the couch.  Then I closed my eyes again. 

'Probably it would be, but that isn't the point, really.' 

'What is the point then, really?' I knew the answer too well already, but kept hoping the 
ship would come up with a more convincing reason than the one I knew it was going to 
give.  Maybe one day. 

'How,' the ship said through the drone, 'can we be sure we're doing the right thing?  How 
do we know what is - or would be - for their own good, unless, over a very long period, 
we observe matched areas of interest - in this case planets - and compare the effects of 
contacting and not contacting?' 

'We ought to know well enough by now.  Why sacrifice this place to some experiment 
we already know the results of?' 

'Why sacrifice it to your own restless conscience?' 

I opened one eye and looked at the remote drone on the couch arm. 'A moment ago we 
agreed it would probably be for the best, for them, if we went in.  Don't try and cloud 
the issue.  We could do it, we should do it.  That's what I think.' 

'Yes,' said the ship, 'but even so there would be technical difficulties, given the volatility 
of the situation.  They're on a cusp; a highly heterogeneous but highly connected - and 
stressedly connected - civilization.  I'm not sure that one approach could encompass the 
needs of their different systems.  The particular stage of communi೦cation they're at, 
combining rapidity and selectivity, usually with something added to the signal and 
almost always with something missed out, means that what passes for truth often has to 
travel at the speed of failing memories, changing attitudes and new 
gener೦ations.  Even when this form of handicap is recognized all they ever try to do, 
as a rule, is codify it, manipulate it, tidy it up.  Their attempts to filter become part of 
the noise, and they seem unable to bring any more thought to bear on the matter than 
that which leads them to try and simplify what can only be understood by coming to 
terms with its complexity.' 

'Uh… right,' I said, still trying to work out exactly what the ship was talking about. 

'Hmm,' the ship said. 

When the ship says 'Hmm', it's stalling.  The beast takes no appreciable time to think, 
and if it pretends it does then it must be waiting for you to say something to it.  I out-
foxed it though; I said nothing. 

But, looking back at what we were talking about, and what we each said we thought, 
and trying to imagine what it was really about, I do believe that it was then it decided 
to use me as it did.  That 'Hmm' marked a de೦cision that meant I was involved the way 

I was in the Linter affair, and that was what the ship was really worried about; that 
which, all evening, during the meal and afterwards, slipping in the odd remark, the 
occa೦sional question, the ship was really asking me about.  But I didn't know that at 
the time.  I was just sleepy and full and contented and warm and lying there talking to 
thin air, while the remote drone sat on the arm of the couch and talked to me. 

'Yes,' sighed the ship at last, 'for all our data and sophis೦tication and analyses and 
statistically correct general೦izations, these things remain singular and uncertain.' 

'Aw,' I tutted, 'it's a hard life being a GCU.  Poor ship, poor Papageno.' 

'You may mock, my little chick,' the ship said with a sort of fakedly hurt sniffiness, 'but 
the final responsibility remains mine.' 

'Ah, you're an old fraud, machine.' I grinned over at the drone. 'You'll get no sympathy 
out of me.  You know what I think; I've told you.' 

'You don't think we'd spoil the place?  You seriously think they're ready for us?  For 
what we'd do to them even with the best of intentions?' 

'Ready for it?  What does that matter?  What does it even mean?  Of course they aren't 
ready for it, of course we'll spoil the place.  Are they any more ready for World War 
Three?  You seriously think we could mess the place up more than they're doing at the 
moment?  When they're not actually out slaughtering each other they're inventing 
ingenious new ways to massacre each other more efficiently in the future, and when 
they're not doing that they're committing speciescide, from the Amazon to Borneo… or 
filling the seas with shit, or the air, or the land.  They could hardly make a better job of 
vandalizing their own planet if we gave them lessons.' 

'But you still like them, I mean as people, the way they are.' 

'No, you like them the way they are,' I told the ship, pointing at the remote drone.  They 
appeal to your sense of untidiness.  You think I haven't been listening all the times 
you've gone on about how we're "infecting the whole galaxy with sterility"… isn't that 
the phrase?' 

'I may have used that form of words,' the ship agreed vaguely, 'but don't you think -' 

'Oh, I can't be bothered thinking now,' I said, levering myself off the couch.  I stood up, 
yawning and stretching. 'Where's the gang gone?' 

'Your companions are about to watch an amusing film I found on-planet.' 

'Fine,' I said. 'I'll watch it too.  Which way?' 

The remote drone floated up from the couch arm. 'Follow me.' I left the alcove where 
we'd eaten.  The drone turned round as it meandered through curtains and around chairs, 
tables and plants.  It looked back at me. 'You don't want to talk to me?  I only want to 
explain -' 

'Tell you what, ship.  You wait here and I'll hit dirt and find you a priest and you can 
unburden yourself to him.  The Arbitrary goes to confession.  Definitely an idea whose 
time has come.' I waved at some people I hadn't seen for a while, and kicked some 
cushions out of my way. 'You could tidy this place up a bit, too.' 

'Your wish…' the remote drone sighed and stopped to supervise the cushions, which 
were dutifully re೦arranging themselves.  I stepped down into a darkened, sound-
shrouded area where people were sitting or lying in front of a 2D screen.  The film was 
just starting.  It was science fiction, of all things; called Dark Star. Just before I stepped 
through the soundfield I heard the remote drone behind me sigh to itself again. 'Ah, it's 
true what they say; April is the cruellest month…' 

2.3:  Unwitting Accomplice 

It was about a week later, when I was due to go back on-planet, to Berlin, when the ship 
wanted to talk to me again.  Things were going on as usual; the Arbitrary spent its time 
making detailed maps of everything within sight and without, dodging American and 
Soviet satellites and manufacturing and then sending down to the planet hundreds upon 
thousands of bugs to watch printing works and magazine stalls and libraries, to scan 
museums, workshops, studios and shops, to look into windows, gardens and forests, 
and to track buses, trains, cars, seaships and planes.  Meanwhile its effec೦tors, and 
those on its main satellites, probed every computer, monitored every landline, tapped 
every microwave link, and listened to every radio trans೦mission on Earth. 

All Contact craft are natural raiders.  They're made to love to be busy, to enjoy sticking 
their big noses into other people's business, and the Arbitrary, for all its eccentricities, 
was no different.  I doubt if it was, or is, ever happier than when doing that vacuum-
cleaner act above a sophisticated planet.  By the time we were ready to leave the ship 
would have contained in its memory - and would have onward-transmitted to other 
vessels - every bit of data ever stored in the history of the planet that hadn't been 
subsequently obliterated.  Every 1 and 0, every letter, every pixel, every sound, every 
subtlety of line and texture ever fashioned.  It would know where every mineral deposit 
was buried, where all the treasure as yet undiscovered lay, where every sunken ship 
was, where every secret grave had been dug; and it would know the secrets of the 
Pentagon, the Kremlin, the Vatican… 

On Earth, of course, they were quite oblivious to the fact they had a million tonnes of 
highly inquisitive and outrageously powerful alien spaceship orbiting around them, and 
- sure enough - the locals were doing all the things they normally did; murdering and 
starving and dying and maiming and torturing and lying and so on.  Pretty much 
business as usual in fact, and it bothered the hell out of me, but I was still hoping we'd 
decide to interfere and stop most of that shit.  It was about this time two Boeing 747s 
collided on the ground in a Spanish island colony. 

I was reading Lear for the second time, sitting underneath a full-size palm tree.  The 
ship had found the tree in the Dominican Republic, marked to be bulldozed to make 
way for a new hotel.  Thinking it might be nice to have some plants about the place, 
the Arbitrary dug the palm up one night and brought it aboard, complete with its root 
system and several tens of cubic metres of sandy soil, and planted it in the centre of our 
accommodation section.  This required quite a lot of rearranging, and a few people 
who'd happened to be asleep while all this was going on woke to be confronted with a 
twenty-metre high tree when they opened their cabin doors, rising up in what had 
become a great central well in the acc section.  Contact people are used to putting up 
with this sort of thing from their ships, however, and so everybody took it in their 
stride.  Anyway, on any sensible calibrated scale of GCU eccentricity, such a harmless, 
even benign prank would scarcely register. 

I was sitting within sight of the door to Li'ndane's cabin.  He came out, chatting to Tel 
Ghemada.  Li was flicking Brazil nuts into the air and running forward or bending over 
backwards to catch them with his mouth, while trying to carry on his side of the 
conversation.  Tel was amused.  Li flicked one nut particularly far and had to dive and 
twist under its trajectory, crashing into the floor and sliding into the stool I had my feet 
up on (and yes, I do always loaf a lot onboard ships; no idea why).  Li rolled over on 
his back, making a show of looking around him for the Brazil nut.  He looked 
mystified.  Tel shook her head, smiling, then waved goodbye.  She was one of the 
unfortunates trying to get some sort of human grasp of Earth's economics, and deserved 
all the light relief she could get.  I recall that all through that year you could tell the 
economists by their distraught look and slightly glazed-looking eyes.  Li… well, Li was 
just a wierdo, and forever conducting a running battle with the finer sensibilities of the 
ship. 

'Thank you, Li,' I said, putting my feet back on the up೦ended stool.  Li lay breathing 
heavily on the floor and looking up at me, then his lips parted in a grin to reveal the nut 
caught between his teeth.  He swallowed, stood, pulled his pants half-way down, and 
proceeded to relieve himself against the trunk of the tree. 

'Good for the growth,' he said when he saw me frowning at him.' 

'Won't be any good for your growth if the ship catches you and sends a knife missile to 
sort you out.' 

'I can see what Mr 'ndane is doing and I wasn't going to dignify his actions with as much 
as a comment,' said a small drone, floating down from the foliage.  It was one of a few 
drones the ship had built to follow a couple of birds that had been in the palm when it 
was hoisted up to the ship; the birds had to be fed, and tidied up after (the ship was 
proud that so far every dropping had been neatly intercepted in mid-air). 'But I do admit 
I find his behaviour slightly worrying.  Perhaps he wants to tell us what he feels about 
Earth, or me, or worse still, perhaps he doesn't know himself.' 

'Simpler than that,' Li said, putting his dick away. 'I needed a piss.' He bent down and 
ruffled my hair before plonking himself down at my side.('Urinal in your room packed 
up, has it?' muttered the drone. 'Can't say I blame it…') 

'I hear you're off back to the wilderness again tomorrow,' Li said, crossing his arms and 
looking seriously at me. 'I'm free this evening; in fact I'm free now.  I could offer you a 
small token of my esteem if you like; your last night with the good guys before you go 
off to infiltrate the barbarians.' 

'Small?' I said. 

Li smiled, made an expansive gesture, with both hands. 'Well, modesty forbids…' 

'No, I do.' 

'You're making a dreadful mistake you know,' he said, jumping up and rubbing his belly 
absently while looking in the direction of the nearest dining area. 'I'm in really fine form 
at the moment, and I really ain't doing anything tonight.' 

'Too right you aren't.' 

He shrugged and blew me a kiss, then skipped off.  Li was one of those who just 
wouldn't have passed for Earthhuman without a vast amount of physical alteration 
(hairy, and the wrong shape; imagine Quasimodo crossed with an ape), but frankly I 
think you could have put him down looking as normal as an IBM salesman and he'd 
still have been in jail or a fight within the hour; he couldn't have accepted the 
limit೦ations on one's behaviour a place like Earth tends to insist on. 

Denied his chance to go amongst the people of Earth, Li gave informal briefings for the 
people who were going down to the surface; those who would listen anyway.  Li's 
briefings were short and to the point; he walked up, said, The fundamental thing to 

remember is this; most of what you encounter will be shit.' [*1*] And walked away 
again. 

'Ms Sma…' The small drone floated over and settled into the hollow left by Li's behind. 
'I was wondering if you would do me a small favour when you go back down tomorrow.' 

'What sort of favour?' I said, putting Regan and Goneril down. 

'Well, I'd be terribly grateful if you'd call in at Paris before you go to Berlin… if you 
wouldn't mind.' 

'I… don't mind,' I said.  I hadn't been to Paris yet. 

'Oh good.' 

'What's the problem?' 

'No problem.  I'd just like you to drop in on Dervley Linter.  I think you know 
him?  Well, just pop by for a chat, that's all.' 

'Uh-huh,' I said. 

I wondered what the ship was up to.  I did have an idea (wrong, as it turned 
out).  The Arbitrary, like every ship I've ever met in Contact, loved intrigues and 
plots.  The devices are forever using their spare time to cook up pranks and schemes; 
little secret plans, opportunities to use delicate artifices to get people to do things, say 
things, behave in a certain way, just for the fun of it. 

The Arbitrary was a notorious match-maker, perfectly convinced that it knew exactly 
who would be best for each other, always trying to fix the crew placements to set up as 
many potential couples or other suitable combinations as it could.  It occurred to me 
that it was up to something like this now, worried that I hadn't been sexually active 
recently, and perhaps also concerned that my last few partners had been female 
(the Arb always did have a distinctly heterosexual bent for some reason). 

'Yes, just a little talk; find out how things are going, you know.' 

The drone started to rise from the seat.  I reached out and grabbed it, set it down 
on Lear on my lap, fixed its sensing band with what I hoped was a steely glare of my 
own and said, 'What are you up to?' 

'Nothing!' the machine protested. 'I'd just like you to look in on Dervley and see what 
the two of you think about Earth, together; get a synthesis, you know.  You two haven't 

met since we arrived and I want to see what ideas you can come up with… exactly how 
we should go about contacting them if that's what we decide to do, or what else we can 
do if we decide not to.  That's all.  No skullduggery, dear Sma.' 

'Hmm,'I nodded. 'All right.' 

I let the drone go.  It floated up. 

'Honest,' the ship said, and the drone's aura field flashed rosy with bonhomie; 'no 
skullduggery.' It made a bobbing motion, indicating the book on my lap. 'You read 
your Lear, I'll jet off.' 

A bird flashed by, closely followed by another drone; the one I'd been talking to tore 
off in pursuit.  I shook my head.  Competing for bird shit, already. 

I watched the bird and the two machines dart down a corridor like the remains of some 
bizarre dogfight, then went back to… 

Scene IV.  The French camp.  A tent. 

Enter with drum and colours, Cordelia, Doctor, and soldiers. 

3: Helpless In The Face Of Your Beauty 

3.1:  Synchronize Your Dogmas 

Now, the Arbitrary wasn't actually insane; it did its job very well, and as far as I know 
none of its pranks ever actually hurt anybody, at least not physically.  But you have to 
be a bit wary of a ship that collects snowflakes. 

Put it down to its upbringing.  The Arb was a product of one of the manufacturies in the 
Yinang Orbitals in the Dahass-Khree.  I've checked, and those factories have produced 
a good percent of the million or so GCUs there are blatting about the place.  That's quite 
a few craft [*2*], and as far as I can see, they're all a bit crazy.  It must be the Minds 
there I suppose; they seem to like turning out eccentric ships.  Shall I name names?  See 
if you've heard of any of this lot and their little escap೦ades:  The… Cantankerous, 
Only Slightly Bent, I Thought He Was With You, Space Monster, A Series Of Unlikely 
Explanations, Big Sexy Beast, Never Talk To Strangers, It'll Be Over By 
Christmas [*3*], Funny, It Worked Last Time… Boo!, Ultimate Ship The Second … etc 
etc.  Need I say more? 

Anyway, true to form, the Arbitrary had a little surprise for me when I walked into the 
top hangar space the next morning. 

Dawn was sweeping like an unrolled carpet of light and shadow over the Northern 
European Plain and pinking the snowy peaks of the Alps while I walked along the main 
corridor to the Bay, yawning and checking my passport and other papers (at least partly 
to annoy the ship; I knew damn well it wouldn't have made any mistakes), and making 
sure the drone following me had all my luggage. 

I stepped into the hangar and was immediately confronted by a large red Volvo station 
wagon.  It sat gleaming in the midst of the collection of modules, drones and 
platforms.  I wasn't in the mood to argue, so I let the drone deposit my gear in the back 
and went so sit in the driver's seat, shaking my head.  There was nobody else about.  I 
waved goodbye to the drone as the automobile lifted gently into the air and made its 
way to the rear of the ship over the tops of the other devices in the Bay.  They glittered 
in the brightness of the hangar lights as the big estate, wheels sagging, was pushed 
above them to the doorfields, and then into space. 

The Bay door started to move back into place as we dropped beneath it and turned.  The 
door slid into place, cutting off the light from the Bay; I was in perfect darkness for a 
moment, then the ship switched on the auto's lights. 

'Ah, Sma?' the ship said from the stereo. 

'What?' 

'Seatbelt.' 

I remember sighing.  I think I shook my head again, too. 

We dropped in blackness, still inside the ship's inner field.  As we finished turning, the 
Volvo's headlights picked out the slab-sided length of the Arbitrary, showing a very 
dull white inside its darkfield.  Actually it was quite impressive, and oddly calming. 

The ship killed the lights as we left the outer field.  Suddenly I was in real space, the 
great gulf of spangled black before me, the planet like some vast droplet of water 
beneath, swirled with the pinpoint lights of Central and South America.  I could make 
out San José, Panama City, Bogotá and Quito.  I looked back, but even knowing the 
ship was there I could see no sign that the stars it showed on its field skin weren't real. 

I always did that, and always felt the same twinge of regret, even fear, knowing I was 
leaving our safe haven… but I soon settled, and enjoyed the trip down, riding through 
the atmosphere in my absurd motor car.  The ship switched on the stereo again, and 
played me 'Sere೦nade' by the Steve Miller Band.  Somewhere over the Atlantic, off 

Portugal I think, and just at the line, 'The sun comes up, and shines all around me…' 
guess what happened? 

All I can suggest is that you look again at some picture of it, half black with a billion 
scattered lights and streaks of dawning colour; I can't describe it further.  We fell 
quickly. 

The car landed in the middle of some old coal workings in the unlovely north of France, 
near Bethune.  By that time it was fully light.  The field around the car popped and the 
two small platforms under the auto appeared, white slivers in the misty morning.  They 
disappeared with their own 'pop's as the ship displaced them. 

I drove to Paris.  Living in Kensington I'd had a smaller car, a VW Golf, and the Volvo 
was like a tank after that.  The ship spoke through my terminal brooch telling me which 
route to take to Paris, and then guided me through the streets to Linter's place.  Even so 
it was a slightly traumatic experience because the whole city seemed snarled up with 
some cycle race, so when I eventually arrived in the courtyard just off the Boule೦vard 
St Germain, where Linter had an apartment, I was in no mood to find that he wasn't 
there. 

'Well where the hell is he?' I demanded, standing on the balcony outside the apartment, 
hands on hips, glaring at the locked door.  It was a sunny day, getting hot. 

'I don't know,' the ship said through the brooch. 

I looked down at the thing, for all the good that did. 'What?' 

'Dervley has taken to leaving his terminal in his apart೦ment when he goes out.' 

'He -' I stopped there, took a few deep breaths, and sat down on the steps.  I switched 
my terminal off. 

Something was going on.  Linter was still here in Paris, despite the fact that this was 
where he'd been sent orig೦inally; his stay here shouldn't have been any longer than 
mine in London.  Nobody on the ship had seen him since we'd first arrived; it looked 
like he hadn't been back to the ship at all.  All the rest of us had.  Why was he staying 
on here?  And what was he thinking of, going out without taking his terminal?  It was 
the act of a madman; what if something happened to him?  What if he got knocked 
down in the street? (This seemed quite likely, judging from the standard of Parisian 
driving I'd encountered.) Or beaten up in a fight?  And why was the ship treating all this 
so matter-of-factly?  Going out without your terminal was acceptable enough on some 
cosy Orbital, and positively common೦place in a Rock or onboard ship, but here? Like 

taking a stroll through a game park without a gun… and just because the natives did it 
all the time didn't make it any less crazy. 

I was quite certain now there was much more to this little jaunt to Paris than the ship 
had led me to believe.  I tried to get some more information out of the beast, but it stuck 
to its ignorant act and so I gave up and left the car in the courtyard while I went for a 
walk. 

I walked down the St Germain until I came to the St Michel, then headed for the 
Seine.  The weather was bright and warm, the shops busy, the people as cosmo೦politan 
as they were in London, if a little more stylishly dressed, on average.  I think I was 
disappointed at first; the place wasn't that different.  You saw the same products, the 
same signs; Mercedes-Benz, Westing-house, American Express, De Beers, and so on… 
but gradually a more animated flavour of the city came through.  A little more of 
Miller's Paris (I'd zipped through the Tropics the previous evening, as well as crossing 
them that morning), even if it was a little tamed with the passing of the years. 

It was a different mix, another blend of the same ingre೦dients; the traditional, the 
commercial, the nationalist… I rather liked the language.  I could just about make 
myself understood, at a fairly low level (my accent was formidable, the ship had assured 
me), and could more or less read all the signs and advertisements… but spoken at the 
standard rate I couldn't make out more than one word in ten.  So the language in the 
mouths of those Parisiens was like music, one unbroken flow of sound. 

On the other hand, the populace seemed very reluctant to use any other language save 
their own even when they were technically able to, and if anything there seemed to be 
even fewer people in Paris willing and able to speak English than there were Londoners 
likewise equipped to tackle French.  Post-Imperial snobbishness, perhaps. 

In the shadow of Notre Dame I stood, thinking hard as I looked at that dull froth of 
brown stone which is the façade (I didn't go in; I was fed up with cathedrals, and by that 
time even my interest in castles was flagging).  The ship wanted me to talk with Linter, 
for reasons I couldn't understand and it wasn't prepared to explain.  Nobody had seen 
the guy, nobody had been able to call him, and nobody had received a message from 
him all the time we'd been over Earth.  What had happened to him?  And what was I 
supposed to do about it? 

I walked along the banks of the Seine with all that clut೦tered, heavy architecture 
around me, and wondered. 

I remembered the smell of roasting coffee (coffee was soaring in price at the time; them 
and their Commodi೦ties!), and the light that struck off the cobbles as little men turned 

on taps inside the sidewalks to wash the streets.  They used old rags slung in front of 
the kerbs to divert the water this way and that. 

For all my fruitless pondering, it was still wonderful to be there; there was something 
different about the city, something that really did make you feel glad to be alive. 

Somehow I found my way to the upstream end of the Ile de Cité, although I'd meant to 
head towards the Pompidou Centre and then double back and cross by the Pont des 
Arts.  There was a little triangular park at the island end, like some green fore-castle on 
a seaship, prow-facing those big-city waters of the dirty old Seine. 

I walked into the park, hands in pockets, just wandering, and found some curiously 
narrow and austere - almost threatening - steps leading down between masses of rough-
surfaced white stone.  I hesitated, then went down, as though towards the river.  I found 
myself in an enclosed courtyard; the only other exit I could see was down a slope to the 
water, but that was barred by a jagged construction of black steel.  I felt uneasy.  There 
was something about the hard geometry of the place that induced a sense of threat, of 
smallness and vulner೦ability; those jutting weights of white stone somehow made you 
think of how delicately crushable human bones were.  I seemed to be alone.  I stepped, 
reluctantly inquisitive, into the dark, narrow doorway that led back underneath the sunlit 
park. 

It was the memorial to the Deportation. 

I remember a thousand tiny lights, in rows, down a grilled-off tunnel, a recreated cell, 
fine words embossed… but I was in a daze.  It's over a century ago now, but I still feel 
the cold of that place; I speak these words and a chill goes up my back; I edit them on 
screen and the skin on my arms, calves and flanks goes tight. 

The effect remains as sharp as it was at the time; the details were as hazy a few hours 
afterwards as they are now, and as they will be until the day I die. 

3.2:  Just Another Victim Of The Ambient Morality 

I came out stunned.  I was angry at them, then.  Angry at them for surprising me, 
touching me like that.  Of course I was angry at their stupidity, their manic barbarity, 
their unthinking, animal obedience, their appalling cruelty; everything that the 
memorial evoked… but what really hit me was that these people could create something 
that spoke so eloquently of their own ghastly actions; that they could fashion a work so 
humanly redolent of their own inhumanity.  I hadn't thought them capable of that, for 
all the things I'd read and seen, and I didn't like to be surprised. 

I left the island and walked along the right bank down towards the Louvre, and 
wandered through its galleries and halls, seeing but not seeing, just trying to calm down 
again.  I glanded a little softnow [*4*] to help the process along, and by the time I came 
to the Mona Lisa I was quite composed again.  The Giaconda was a disappointment; 
too small and brown and surrounded by people and cameras and security.  The lady 
smiled serenely from behind thick glass. 

I couldn't find a seat and my feet were getting sore, so I wandered out into the Tuileries, 
along broad and dusty avenues between small trees, and eventually found a bench by 
an octagonal pond where small boys and their pères sailed model yachts.  I watched 
them. 

Love.  Maybe it was love.  Could that be it?  Had Linter fallen for somebody, and was 
the ship therefore concerned he might not want to leave, if and when we had to?  Just 
because that was the start of a thousand sentimental stories didn't mean that it didn't 
actually happen. 

I sat by the octagonal pond, thinking about all this, and the same wind that ruffled my 
hair made the sails of the little yachts flutter and flap, and in that uncertain breeze they 
nosed through the choppy waters, and banged into the wall of the pond, or were caught 
by chubby hands and sent bobbing back out again across the waves. 

I circled back via the Invalides, with more predictable trophies of war; old Panther 
tanks, and rows of ancient cannons like bodies stacked against a wall.  I had lunch in a 
smoky little place near the St Sulpice Metro; you sat on high stools at a bar and they 
selected a piece of red meat for you and put it, dripping blood, on a grid over an open 
pit filled with burning charcoal.  The meat sizzled on the grille right in front of you 
while you had your aperitif, and you told them when you felt it was ready.  They kept 
going to take it off and serve it to me, and I kept saying, 'Non non; un pen plus… s'il 
vous plait' 

The man next to me ate his rare, with blood still oozing from the centre.  After a few 
years in Contact you get used to that sort of thing, but I was still surprised I could sit 
there and do that, especially after the memor೦ial.  I knew so many people who'd have 
been outraged at the very thought.  Come to think of it, there would have been millions 
of vegetarians on Earth who'd have been equally disgusted (would they have eaten our 
vat-grown meats?  I wonder). 

The black grill over the charcoal pit kept reminding me of the gratings in the memorial, 
but I just kept my head down and ate my meal, or most of it.  I had a couple of glasses 
of rough red wine too, which I let have some effect, and by the time I was finished I 
was feeling reasonably together again, and quite well disposed to the locals.  I even 

remembered to pay without being asked (I don't think you-ever quite get used 
to buying), and went out into the bright sunshine.  I walked back to Linter's, looking at 
shops and buildings and trying not to get knocked down in the street.  I bought a paper 
on the way back, to see what our unsuspecting hosts thought was newsworthy.  It was 
oil.  Jimmy Carter was trying to persuade Americans to use less petrol, and the 
Norwegians had a blow-out in the North Sea.  The ship had mentioned both items in its 
more recent synopses, but of course it knew Carter's measures weren't going to get 
through without drastic amendment, and that the drilling rig had had a piece of 
equipment fitted upside down.  I selected a magazine as well, so arrived back at Linter's 
clutching my copy of Stern and expecting to have to drive away.  I'd already made 
tentative plans; going to Berlin via the First World War graves and the old battle 
grounds, following the theme of war, death and memorials all the way to the riven 
capital of the Third Reich itself. 

But Linter's car was there in the courtyard, parked beside the Volvo.  His auto was a 
Rolls Royce Silver Cloud; the ship believed in indulging us.  Anyway, it claimed that 
making a show was better cover than trying to stay inconspicuous; Western capitalism 
in particular allowed the rich just about the right amount of behav೦ioural leeway to 
account for the oddities our alienness might produce. 

I went up the steps and pressed the bell.  I waited for a short while, hearing noises within 
the flat.  A small notice on the far side of the courtyard caught my atten೦tion, and 
brought a sour smile to my face. 

Linter appeared, unsmiling, at the door; he held it open for me, bowing a little. 

'Ms Sma.  The ship told me you'd be coming.' 

'Hello.' I entered. 

The apartment was much larger than I'd anticipated.  It smelled of leather and new 
wood; it was light and airy and well decorated and full of books and records, tapes and 
magazines, paintings and objets d'art, and it didn't look one little bit like the place I'd 
had in Kensington.  It felt lived in. 

Linter waved me towards a black leather chair at one end of a Persian carpet covering 
a teak floor and went over to a drinks cabinet, turning his back to me. 'Do you drink?' 

'Whisky,' I said, in English. 'With or without the "e".' I didn't sit down, but wandered 
around the room, looking. 

'I have Johnny Walker Black Label.' 

'Fine.' 

I watched him clamp one hand round the square bottle and pour.  Dervley Linter was 
taller than me, and quite muscular.  To an experienced eye there was something not 
quite right - in Earth human terms - about the set of his shoulders.  He leaned over the 
bottles and glasses like a threat, as though he wanted to bully the drink from one to the 
other. 

'Anything in it?' 

'No thanks.' 

He handed me the glass, bent to a small fridge, extracted a bottle and poured himself a 
Budweiser (the real stuff, from Czechoslovakia).  Finally, this little ceremony over, he 
sat down.  Bahaus chair, and it looked original. 

His face was calm, serious.  Each feature seemed to demand separate attention; the 
large, mobile mouth, the flared nose, the bright but deep-set eyes, the stage-villain 
brows and surprisingly lined forehead.  I tried to recall what he'd looked like before, but 
could only remember vaguely, so it was impossible to tell how much of the way he 
looked now had been carried over from what would be classed as his 'normal' 
appear೦ance.  He rolled the beer glass around in his large hands. 

'The ship seems to think we should talk,' he said.  He drank about half the beer in one 
gulp and placed the glass on a small table made of polished granite.  I adjusted my 
brooch.  'You don't think we should though, no?' 

He spread his hands wide, then folded them over his chest.  He was dressed in two 
pieces of an expensive looking black suit; trousers and waistcoat. 'I think it might be 
pointless.' 

'Well… I don't know… does there have to be a point to everything?  I thought… the 
ship suggested we might have a talk, that's -' 

'Did it?' 

'- all.  Yes.' I coughed. 'I don't… it didn't tell me what's going on.' 

Linter looked steadily at me, then down at his feet.  Black brogues.  I looked around the 
room as I sipped my whisky, looking for signs of female habitation, or for anything that 
might indicate there were two people living here.  I couldn't tell.  The room was 
crowded with stuff; prints and oils on the walls, most of the former either Breughels or 

Lowrys; Tiffany lampshades, a Bang and Olafsen Hifi unit, several antique clocks, what 
looked like a dozen or so Dresden figurines, a Chinese cabinet of black lacquer, a large 
four-fold screen with peacocks sewn onto it, the myriad feathers like displayed eyes… 

'What did it tell you?' Linter asked. 

I shrugged. 'What I said.  It said it wanted me to have a talk with you.' 

He smiled in an unimpressed sort of way as though the whole conversation was hardly 
worth the effort, then looked away, through the window.  He didn't seem to be going to 
say anything.  A flash of colour caught my eye, and I looked over at a large television, 
one of those with small doors that close over the screen and make it look like a cabinet 
when it isn't in use.  The doors weren't fully shut, and it was switched on behind them. 

'Do you want -?' Linter said. 

'No, it's -' I began, but he rose out of the seat, gripping its elegant arms, went to the set 
and spread its doors open with a dramatic gesture before resuming his seat. 

I didn't want to sit and watch television, but the sound was down so it wasn't especially 
intrusive.  The control unit's on the table,' Linter said, pointing. 

'I wish you - somebody - wish you'd tell me what's going on.' 

He looked at me as though this was an obvious lie rather than a genuine plea, and 
glanced over at the TV.  It must have been on one of the ship's own channels, because 
it was changing all the time, showing different shows and programmes from a variety 
of countries, using various transmission formats, and waiting for a channel to be 
selected.  A group in bright pink suits danced mechanically to an unheard song.  They 
were replaced with a picture of the Ekofisk platform, spouting a dirty brown fountain 
of oil and mud.  Then the screen changed again, to show the crowded cabin scene 
from A Night At The Opera. 

'So you don't know anything?' Linter lit a Sobranie.  This, like the ship's 'Hmm', had to 
be for effect (unless he liked the taste, which has never been a convincing line).  He 
didn't offer me one. 

'No, no, no I don't.  Look… I can see the ship wanted me here for more than this talk… 
but don't you play games too.  That crazy thing sent me down here in that Volvo; the 
whole way.  I half expected it not to have baffled it either; I was waiting for a pair of 
Mirages to come to intercept.  I've got a long drive to Berlin as well, you know?  So… 
just tell me, or tell me to go, all right?' 

He drew on the cigarette, studying me through the smoke.  He crossed his legs and 
brushed some imagin೦ary fluff off the trouser cuffs and stared at his shoes. 'I've told 
the ship that when it leaves, I'm staying here on Earth.  Regardless of what else might 
happen.' He shrugged. 'Whether we contact or not.' He looked at me, challenging. 

'Any… particular reason?' I tried to sound unfazed.  I still thought it must be a woman. 

'Yes.  I like the place.' He made a noise between a snort and a laugh. 'I feel alive for a 
change.  I want to stay.  I'm going to.  I'm going to live here.' 

'You want to die here?' 

He smiled, looked away from me, then back. 'Yes.' Quite positively.  This shut me up 
for a moment. 

I felt uncomfortable.  I got up and walked round the room, looking at the 
bookshelves.  He seemed to have read about the same amount as me.  I wondered if he'd 
crammed it all, or read any of it at normal speed:  Dostoevsky, Borges, Greene, Swift, 
Lucretius, Kafka, Austin, Grass, Bellow, Joyce, Confucius, Scott, Mailer, Camus, 
Hemingway, Dante. 'You probably will die here, then,' I said lightly. 'I suspect the ship 
wants to observe, not contact.  Of course -' 

'That'll suit me.  Fine.' 

'Hmm.  Well, it isn't… official yet, but I… that's the way it'll go, I suspect.' I turned 
away from the books. 'It does? You really want to die here?  Are you serious?  How -' 

He was sitting forward in the chair, combing his black hair with one hand, pushing the 
long, ringed fingers through his curls.  A silver stud decorated the lobe of his left ear. 

'Fine,' he repeated. 'It'll suit me perfectly.  We'll ruin this place if we interfere.' 

'They'll ruin it if we don't.' 

'Don't be trite, Sma.' He stubbed the cigarette out hard, breaking it in half, mostly 
unsmoked. 

'And if they blow the place up?' 

'Mmm.' 

'Well?' 

'Well what?' he demanded. 

A siren sounded on the St Germain, dopplering. 'Might be what they're heading 
for.  Want to see them moth themselves in front of their own -' 

'Ah, bullshit.' His face crinkled with annoyance. 

'Bullshit yourself,' I told him. 'Even the ship's worried.  The only reason they haven't 
made a final decision yet is because they know how bad it'll look short term if they do.' 

'Sma, I don't care.  I don't want to leave.  I don't want to have any more to do with the 
ship or the Culture or anything connected with it.' 

'You must be crazy.  As crazy as they are.  They'll kill you; you'll get crushed under a 
truck or mangled in a plane crash or… burned up in some fire or something…' 

'So I take my chances.' 

'Well… what about what they'd call the "security" aspect?  What if you're only injured 
and they take you to hospital?  You'll never get out again; they'll take one look at your 
guts or your blood and they'll know you're alien.  You'll have the military all over 
you.  They'll dissect you.' 

'Not very likely.  But if it happens, it happens.' 

I sat down again.  I was reacting just the way the ship had known I would.  I thought 
Linter was mad just the way the Arbitrary did, and it was using me to try and talk some 
sense into him.  Doubtless the ship had already tried, but equally obviously the nature 
of Linter's decision was such that the Arbitrary was the last thing that was going to have 
any influence.  Technologically and morally the ship represented the most finely 
articu೦lated statement the Culture was capable of producing, and that very 
sophistication had the beast hamstrung, here. 

I have to admit I felt a degree of admiration for Linter's stand, even though I still thought 
he was being stupid.  There might or might not be a local involved, but I was already 
getting the impression it was more complicated - and more difficult to handle - than 
that.  Maybe he had fallen in love, but not with anything as simple as a person.  Maybe 
he'd fallen in love with Earth itself; the whole fucking planet.  So much for Contact 
screening; they were supposed to keep people out who might fall like that.  If that was 
what had happened then the ship had problems indeed.  Falling in love with somebody, 
they say, is a little like getting a tune into your head and not being able to stop whistling 
it… except much more so, and - from what I'd heard - going native the way I suspected 

Linter might be was as far beyond loving another person as that was beyond getting a 
tune stuck in your head. 

I felt suddenly angry, at Linter and the ship. 

'I think you're taking a very selfish and stupid risk that's not just bad for you, and bad 
for the… for us; for the Culture, but also bad for these people.  If you do get caught, if 
you're discovered… they are going to get paranoid, and they might feel threatened and 
hostile in any contact they are involved, in or ex.  You could send them… make them 
crazy.  Insane.' 

'You said they were that already.' 

'And you do stand a less chance of living your full term.  Even if you don't; so you live 
for centuries.  How d'you explain that?' 

'They may have anti-geriatrics themselves by that time.  Besides, I can always move 
around.' 

'They won't have anti-geriatrics for fifty years or more; centuries if they relapse, even 
without a Holocaust.  Yeah; so move around, make yourself a fugitive, stay alien, stay 
apart.  You'll be as cut off from them as you will be from us.  Ah hell, you always will 
be anyway.' I was talking loudly by now.  I waved one arm at the bookshelves. 'Sure 
read the books and see the films and go to concerts and theatre and opera and all that 
shit; you can't become them.  You'll still have Culture eyes, Culture brain; you can't 
just… can't deny all that, pretend it never happened.' I stamped one foot on the floor. 
'God dammit, Linter, you're just being ungrateful!' 

'Listen, Sma,' he said, rising out of the seat, grabbing his beer and stalking about the 
room, gazing out of the windows. 'Neither of us owes the Culture anything.  You know 
that… Owing and being obliged and having duties and responsibilities and everything 
like that… that's what these people have to worry about.' He turned round to look at me. 
'But not me, not us.  You do what you want to do, the ship does what it wants to do.  I 
do what I want to do.  All's well.  Let's just leave each other alone, yes?' He looked back 
at the small courtyard, finishing his beer. 

'You want to be like them, but you don't want to have their responsibilities.' 

'I didn't say I wanted to be like them.  To… to whatever extent I do, I want to have the 
same sort of responsi೦bilities, and that doesn't include worrying about what a Culture 
starship thinks.  That isn't something any of them normally tend to worry about.' 

'What if Contact surprises us both, and does come in?' 

'I doubt that.' 

'Me too, very much; that's why I think it might happen.' 

'I don't think so.  Though it is we who need them, not the other way round.' Linter turned 
and stared at me, but I wasn't going to start arguing on a second front now. 'But,' he said 
after a pause, 'the Culture can do without me.' He inspected his drained glass. 'It's going 
to have to.' 

I was silent for a while, watching the television flip through channels. 'What about you 
though?' I asked eventually. 'Can you do without it?' 

'Easily,' Linter laughed. 'Listen, d'you think I haven't -' 

'No; you listen.  How long do you think this place is going to stay the way it is 
now?  Ten years?  Twenty?  Can't you see how much this place has to alter… in just 
the next century?  We're so used to things staying much the same, to society and 
technology - at least immediately available technology - hardly changing over our 
life೦times that… I don't know any of us could cope for long down here.  I think it'll 
affect you a lot more than the locals.  They're used to change, used to it all happening 
fast.  All right, you like the way it is now, but what happens later?  What if 2077 is as 
different from now as this is from 1877?  This might be the end of a Golden Age, world 
war or not.  What chance do you think the West has of keeping the status quo with the 
Third World?  I'm telling you; end of the century and you'll feel lonely and afraid and 
wonder why they've deserted you and you'll be the worst nostalgic they've got because 
you'll remember it better than they ever will and you won't remember anything else 
from before now.' 

He just stood looking at me.  The TV showed part of a ballet in black and white, then 
an interview; two white men who looked American somehow (and the fuzzy picture 
looked US standard), then a quiz show, then a puppet show, again in monochrome.  You 
could see the strings.  Linter put his glass down on the granite table and went over to 
the Hifi, turning on the tape deck.  I wondered what little bit of planetary 
accomplishment I was going to be treated to. 

The picture on the screen settled to one programme for a while.  It looked vaguely 
familiar; I was sure I'd seen it.  A play; last century… American writer, but… (Linter 
went back to his seat, while the music began; the Four Seasons.) 

Henry James, The Ambassadors.  It was a TV production I'd seen on the BBC while I 
was in London… or maybe the ship had repeated it.  I couldn't recall.  What I did recall 
was the plot and the setting, both of which seemed so apposite to my little scene with 
Linter that I started to wonder whether the beast upstairs was watching all 
this.  Probably was, come to think of it.  And not much point in looking for anything; 
the ship could produce bugs so small the main problem with camera stability was 
Brownian motion.  Was The Ambassadors a sign from it then?  Whatever; the play was 
replaced by a commercial for Odor-Eaters. 

'I've told you,' Linter brought me back from my musings, speaking quietly, 'I'm prepared 
to take my chances.  Do you think I haven't thought it all through before, many 
times?  This isn't sudden, Sma; I felt like this my first day here, but I waited for months 
before I said anything, so I'd be sure.  It's what I've been looking for all my life, what 
I've always wanted.  I always knew I'd know it when I found it, and I have.' He shook 
his head; sadly, I thought. 'I'm staying, Sma.' 

I shut up.  I suspected that despite what he'd just said he hadn't thought about how much 
the planet would change during his long likely lifetime, and there were still other things 
to be said, but I didn't want to press too hard too quickly.  I made myself relax on the 
couch and shrugged. 'Anyway, we don't know for sure what the ship's going to do; what 
they'll decide.' 

He nodded, picked up a paperweight from the granite table and turned it over and over 
in his hand.  The music shimmered through the room, like the sun on water reflected; 
points producing lines, dancing quietly. 'I know,' he said, still gazing at the heavy globe 
of twisted glass, 'this must seem like a mad idea… but I just… just want the place.' He 
looked at me - for the first time, I thought - without a challenging scowl or stern 
coolness. 

'I know what you mean,' I said. 'But I can't understand it perfectly… maybe I'm more 
suspicious than you are; it's just you tend to be more concerned for other people than 
for yourself sometimes… you assume they haven't thought things through the way you 
would have yourself.' I sighed, almost laughed. 'I guess I'm assuming you'll… hoping 
you'll change your mind.' 

Linter was silent for a while, still studying the hemisphere of coloured glass. 'Maybe I 
will.' He shrugged mass೦ively. 'Maybe I will,' he said, looking at me speculatively.  He 
coughed. 'Did the ship tell you I've been to India?' 

'India?  No; no, it didn't.' 

'I went there for a couple of weeks.  I didn't tell the Arbi೦trary I was going, though it 
found out, of course.' 

'Why?  I mean why did you want to go?' 

'I wanted to see the place,' Linter said, sitting forward in the seat, rubbing the 
paperweight, then replacing it on the granite table and rubbing his palms together. 'It 
was beautiful… beautiful.  If I'd had any second thoughts, they vanished there.' He 
looked at me, face suddenly open, intent, his hands outstretched, fingers wide. 'It's the 
contrast, the…' he looked away, appar೦ently made less articulate by the vividness of 
the impression. '… the highlights, the light and shade of it all.  The squalor and the 
muck, the cripples and the swollen bellies; the whole poverty of it makes the beauty 
stand out… a single pretty girl in the crowds of Calcutta seems like an impossibly 
fragile bloom, like a… I mean you can't believe that the filth and the poverty hasn't 
somehow contaminated her… it's like a miracle… a revelation.  Then you realize that 
she'll only be like that for a few years, that she'll only live a few decades, then 
she'll wear and have six kids and wither… The feeling, the realization, the 
stag೦gering…' his voice trailed off and he looked, slightly helplessly, almost 
vulnerably, at me.  It was just the point at which to make my most telling, cutting 
comment.  But also just the point at which I could do no such thing. 

So I sat still, saying nothing, and Linter said, 'I don't know how to explain it.  It's 
alive.  I'm alive.  If I did die tomorrow it would have been worth it just for these last 
few months.  I know I'm taking a risk in staying, but that's the whole point.  I know I 
might feel lonely and afraid.  I expect that's going to happen, now and again, but it'll be 
worth it.  The loneliness will make the rest worth it.  We expect everything to be set up 
just as we like it, but these people don't; they're used to having good and bad mixed in 
together.  And that gives them an interest in living, it makes them appreciate 
opportu೦nities… these people know what tragedy is, Sma.  They live it.  We're just an 
audience.' 

He sat there, looking away from me, while I stared at him.  The big-city noise grumbled 
beyond us, and the sunlight came and went in the room as shadows of clouds passed 
over us and I thought; you poor bastard, you poor schmuck, they've got you. 

Here we are with our fabulous GCU, our supreme machine; capable of outgeneraling 
their entire civil೦ization and taking in Proxima Centauri on a day trip; packed with 
technology compared to which their citybusters are squibs and their Grays are less than 
calculators; a vessel casually sublime in its impregnable power and inexhaustible 
knowledge… here we are with our ship and our modules and platforms, satellites and 
scooters and drones and bugs, sieving their planet for its most precious art, its most 

sensitive secrets, its finest thoughts and greatest achievements; plundering their 
civilization more comprehensively than all the invaders in their history put together, 
giving not a damn for their puny armaments, paying a hundred times more attention to 
their art and history and philosophy than to their eclipsed science, glancing at their 
religions and politics the way a doctor would at symptoms… and for all that, for all our 
power and our superiority in scale, science, technology, thought and behaviour, here 
was this poor sucker, besotted with them when they didn't even know he existed, 
spellbound with them, adoring them; and powerless.  An immoral victory for the 
barbarians. 

Not that I was in a much better position myself.  I may have wanted the exact opposite 
of Dervley Linter, but I very much doubted I was going to get my way, either.  I didn't 
want to leave, I didn't want to keep them safe from us and let them devour themselves; 
I wanted maximum interference; I wanted to hit the place with a programme Lev 
Davidovitch would have been proud of.  I wanted to see the junta generals fill their 
pants when they realized that the future is - in Earth terms - bright, bright red. 

Naturally the ship thought I was crazy too.  Perhaps it imagined Linter and I would 
cancel each other out somehow, and we'd both be restored to sanity. 

So Linter wanted nothing done to the place, and I wanted everything done to it.  The 
ship - along with whatever other Minds were helping it decide what to do - was probably 
going to come down closer to Linter's pos೦ition than mine, but that was the very reason 
the man couldn't stay.  He'd be a little randomly-set time bomb ticking away in the 
middle of the uncontaminated experiment that Earth was probably going to become; a 
parcel of radical contamination ready to Heisenberg the whole deal at any moment. 

There was nothing more I could do with Linter for the moment.  Let him think about 
what I'd said.  Perhaps just knowing it wasn't only the ship that thought he was being 
foolish and selfish would make some differ೦ence. 

I got him to show me around Paris in the Rolls, then we ate - magnificently - in 
Montmartre, and ended up on the Left Bank, wandering the maze of streets and 
sampling a profligate number of wines and spirits.  I had a room booked at the George, 
but stayed with Linter that night, just because it seemed the most natural thing to do - 
especially in that drunken state - and anyway it had been a while since I'd had somebody 
to hug during the night. 

Next morning, before I set off for Berlin, we both exhi೦bited just the right amount of 
embarrassment, and so parted friends. 

3.3:  Arrested Development 

There is something about the very idea of a city which is central to the understanding 
of a planet like Earth, and particularly the understanding of that part of the then-existing 
group-civilization [*5*] which called itself the West.  That idea, to my mind, met its 
materialist apotheosis in Berlin at the time of the Wall. 

Perhaps I go into some sort of shock when I experience something deeply; I'm not sure, 
even at this ripe middle-age, but I have to admit that what I recall of Berlin is not 
arranged in my memory in any normal, chronological sequence.  My only excuse is that 
Berlin itself was so abnormal - and yet so bizarrely representative - it was like 
something unreal; an occasionally macabre Disneyworld which was so much a part of 
the real world (and the realpolitik world), so much a crystallization of everything these 
people had managed to produce, wreck, reinstate, venerate, condemn and worship in 
their history that it defiantly transcended everything it exemplified, and took on a single 
- if multifariously faceted - meaning of its own; a sum, an answer, a statement no city 
in its right mind would want or be able to arrive at.  I said we were more inter೦ested 
in Earth's art than anything else; very well, Berlin was its masterpiece, an equivalent 
for the ship. 

I remember walking round the city, day and night, seeing buildings whose walls were 
still pocked with bullet holes from a war ended thirty-two years earlier.  Lit, crowded, 
otherwise ordinary office buildings looked as though they'd been sandblasted with 
grains the size of tennis balls; police stations, apartment blocks, churches, park walls, 
the very sidewalks themselves bore the same stigmata of ancient violence, the mark of 
metal on stone. 

I could read those walls; reconstruct from that wreckage the events of a day, or an 
afternoon, or an hour, or just a few minutes.  Here the machine-gun fire had sprayed, 
light ordinance like acid pitting, heavier guns leaving tracks like a succession of pickaxe 
blows on ice; here shaped-charge and kinetic weapons had pierced - the holes had been 
bricked up - and sprayed long rays of jagged holes across the stone; here a grenade had 
exploded, fragments blasting everywhere, shallow cratering the sidewalk and spraying 
the wall (or not; sometimes there was untouched stone in one direc೦tion, like a 
shrapnel shadow, where perhaps a soldier left his image on the city at the moment of 
his death). 

In one place all the marks, on a railway arch, were wildly slanted, cutting a swathe 
across one side of the arch, hitting the pavement, then slanting up on the other side of 
the alcove.  I stood and wondered at that, then realized that three decades before some 
Red Army soldier had probably crouched there, drawing fire from a building across the 
street… I turned, and could even see which window… 

I took the West-operated U-bahn under the wall, cutting across from one part of West 
Berlin to the other, from Hallesches Tor to Tegel.  At Friedrichstrasse you could quit 
the train and enter East Berlin, but the other stations under East were closed; guards 
with sub೦machine guns stood watching the train rush through the deserted stations; an 
eerie blue glow lit this film-set of a scene, and the train's passing sent ancient papers 
scattering, and lifted the torn corners of old posters still stuck to the wall.  I had to make 
that journey twice, to be sure I hadn't imagined it all; the other passengers had looked 
as bored and zombie-like as underground passengers usually do. 

There was something of that frightening, ghostly empti೦ness about the city itself at 
times.  Although so surely enclosed, West Berlin was big; full of parks and trees and 
lakes - more so than most cities - and that, combined with the fact that people were still 
leaving the city in their tens of thousands each year (despite all sorts of grants and tax 
concessions designed to per೦suade them to stay) meant that while there was the same 
quality of high capitalist presence I'd been immersed in in London and sensed in Paris, 
the density was much reduced; there simply wasn't the same pressure to develop and 
redevelop the land.  So the city was full of those shot-up buildings and wide open 
spaces; bomb sites with shattered ruins on the skyline, empty-windowed and roofless 
like great abandoned ships adrift on seas of weeds.  Alongside the elegance of the 
Kurfustendamm, this legacy of destruction and privation became just another vast art 
work, like the quaintly shattered steeple of the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church, set 
at the end of the K-damm like a folly at the end of an avenue of trees. 

Even the two rail systems contributed to the sense of unreality the city inspired, the 
sense of continually stepping from one continuum to another.  Instead of the West 
running everything on its side, and the East everything on its, the East ran the S-bahn 
(above ground) on both sides, the West the U-bahn (under೦ground) on both sides; the 
U-bahn served those ghostly stations under the East and the S-bahn had its own 
tumbledown, weed-strewn stations in the West.  Both ignored the wall, indeed, because 
the S-bahn went over the top of it.  And the S-bahn went underground in places.  And 
the U-bahn surfaced frequently.  Let me labour the point and say that even double-
decker buses and double-decker trains added to the sense of a multi-layered reality.  In 
a place like Berlin, wrapping the Reichstag up like a parcel wasn't even remotely as 
weird an idea as the city was itself. 

I went once via Friedrichstrasse and once through Check೦point Charlie, into the 
East.  Sure enough, there were places where time seemed to have stopped there too, and 
many of the buildings and signs looked as though a patina of dust had started settling 
over them thirty years ago, and never been disturbed since.  There were shops in the 
East where one could only spend foreign currency.  Somehow they just didn't look like 
real shops; it was as though some seedy entrepreneur from a degenerate semi-socialist 

future had tried to create a fairground display modelled on a late twentieth-century 
capitalist shop, and failed, through lack of imagination. 

It wasn't convincing.  I wasn't convinced.  I was a little shaken, too.  Was this farce, this 
gloomy sideshow trying to mimic the West - and not even doing that very well - the 
best job the locals could make of socialism?  Maybe there was something so basically 
wrong with them even the ship hadn't spotted it yet; some genetic flaw that meant they 
were never going to be able to live and work together without an external threat; never 
stop fighting, never stop making their awful, awesome, bloody messes.  Perhaps despite 
all our resources there was nothing we could do for them. 

The feeling passed.  There was nothing to prove this wasn't just a momentary, and - 
coming so early - understandable aberration.  Their history wasn't so far off the mean 
track, they were going through what a thousand other civilizations had gone through, 
and no doubt in the childhood of each of those there had been countless occasions when 
all any decent, well-balanced, reasonable and humanely concerned observer would have 
wanted to do was scream in despair. 

It was ironic that in this so-called Communist capital they were so interested in money; 
at least a dozen people came up to me in the East and asked me if I wanted to change 
some.  Would this represent a qualitative or quantitative change?  I asked (blank looks, 
mostly). 'Money implies poverty,' I quoted them.  Hell, they should engrave that in 
stone over the hangar door of every GCU. 

I stayed for a month, visiting all the tourist haunts, walking and driving and training and 
busing through the city, sailing on and swimming in the Havel, and riding through 
Grunewald and Spandau forests. 

I left by the Hamburg corridor, at the ship's suggestion.  The road went through villages 
stuck in the fifties.  The eighteen fifties, sometimes; chimney sweeps on bikes wore tall 
black hats and carried their black-caned brushes over their shoulders like huge sooty 
daisies stolen from a giant's garden.  I felt quite self-conscious and rich in my big red 
Volvo. 

I left the car on a track by the side of the Elbe that night.  A module sighed out of the 
darkness, dark on dark, and took me to the ship, which was over the Pacific at the time, 
tracking a school of sperm whales directly beneath and plundering their great barrel-
brains with its effectors while they sang. 

4: Heresiarch 

4.1:  Minority Report 

I should have known not to tell Li'ndane about Paris and Berlin, but I did.  I was floating 
in the AG space with a few other people after a dip in the ship's pool.  I'd actu೦ally 
been talking to my friends, Roghres Shasapt and Tagm Lokri, but Li was there, 
eavesdropping avidly. 

'Ah,' he said, floating over to wag one finger under my nose. 'That's it.' 

That's what?' 

'That monument.  I see it now.  Think about it.' 

'The memorial to the Deportation, in Paris, you mean.' 

'Cunt.  That's what I mean.' 

I shook my head. 'Li, I don't think I know what you're talking about.' 

'Ah, he's just lusting,' Roghres said. 'He pined when you left last time.' 

'Nonsense,' Li said, and flicked a blob of water at Roghres. 'What I'm talking about is 
this; most memor೦ials are like pricks; cenotaphs; columns.  That monu೦ment Sma 
saw is a cunt; it's even in a divide of the river; very pubic.  From this, and Sma's overall 
atti೦tude, it's obvious that Sma is sublimating her sexuality in all this Contact 
nonsense.' 

'Well I never knew that,' I said. 

'Basically, what you want, Diziet, is to be fucked by an entire civilization, an entire 
planet.  I suppose this makes you a good little Contact operative, if that's what you want 
to be -' 

'Li, of course, is only here for the different tan,' Tagm interrupted. 

'- but I would say,' Li continued, 'that it's better not to sublimate anything.  If what you 
want is a good screw -' (Li used the English word)'- then a good screw is what you ought 
to have, not a meaningful confrontation with a backwater rockball infested with 
slavering death-zealots on a terminal power trip.' 

'I still say it's you who wants the good screw,' Roghres said. 

'Exactly!' Li exclaimed, throwing his arms wide, scat೦tering more water drops, 
wobbling in the null G. 'But I don't deny it.' 

'Just Mr Natural,' Tagm nodded. 

'What's wrong with being natural?' demanded Li. 

'But I remember just the other day you were saying that the trouble with humans is that 
they were too natural, not civilized enough,' Tagm said, then turned to me. 'Mind you, 
that was then; Li can change his colours faster than a GCU going for a refit record.' 

'There's natural and natural,' Li said. 'I'm naturally civil೦ized and they're naturally 
barbarians, therefore I should be as natural as possible and they should do all they can 
not to be.  But this is getting off the subject.  What I say is that Sma has a definite 
psychological problem and I think that as I'm the only person on this machine interested 
in Freudian analysis, I should be the one to help her.' 

'That's unbelievably kind of you,' I told Li. 

'Not at all,' Li waved his hand.  He must have scattered most of his water drops towards 
us, because he was gradually floating away from us, towards the far end of the AG hall. 

'Freud!' snorted Roghres derisively, a little high on Jumble. 

'You heathen,' said Li, eyes narrowed. 'I suppose your heroes are Marx and Lenin.' 

'Hell no; I'm an Adam Smith man myself,' muttered Roghres.  She started to tumble 
head over heels in the air, doing slow foetal-spreadeagle exercises. 

'Rubbish,' Li spat (literally, but I saw it coming and doged). 

'Li, you really are the horniest [*6*] human on this ship,' Tagm told him. 'You're the 
one who needs the analyst.  This obsession with sex, it's just not -' 

'I'm obsessed with sex?' Li said, poking himself in the chest with a thumb, then throwing 
back his head. 'HA!' He laughed. 'Listen;' he arranged himself in what would have 
passed for a lotus position on Earth, had there been a floor to sit on, and put one hand 
on his hip while pointing the other vaguely to his right; 'they're the ones obsessed with 
sex.  Do you know how many words there are for "prick" in English?  Or 
"cunt"?  Hundreds; hundreds.  How many have we got?  One; one for each, for --
- [*7*] usage as well as for anato೦mical designation.  Neither of them swear-
words.  All I do is readily admit I want to put one in the other.  Ready, willing and 
interested.  What's wrong with that?' 

'Nothing as such,' I told him. 'But there's a point where interest becomes obsession, and 
I think most people regard obsession as a bad thing because it makes for less variety, 
less flexibility.' 

Li, still floating slowly away from us, nodded fiercely. 'I'll just say one thing; it's an 
obsession with flexibility and variety that makes this so-called Culture so boring.' 

'Li started a Boredom Society while you were away,' Tagm explained, smiling at me. 
'Nobody else joined though.' 

'It's going very well,' Li confirmed. 'I've changed the title to the Ennui League, by the 
way.  Yes, boredom is an underrated facet of existence in our pseudo-
civil೦ization.  While at first I thought it might be interesting, in a boring sense, for 
people to be together when they were extremely bored, I realize now that it is a 
profoundly moving and deeply average experience to do nothing whatsoever entirely 
and completely by yourself.' 

'You think Earth has a lot to teach us in this respect?' Tagm said, then turned and said 
to the nearest wall. 'Ship, put the air on medium, would you?' 

'Earth is a deeply boring planet,' Li said gravely, as one end of the hall began to waft 
the air towards us, and the other turned intake.  We began to drift in the breeze. 

'Earth?  Boring?' I said.  The water was drying on my skin. 

'What is the point of a planet where you can hardly set foot without tripping over 
somebody killing somebody else, or painting something or making music or pushing 
back the frontier of science or being tortured or killing themselves or dying in a car 
crash or hiding from the police or suffering from some absurd disease or -' 

We hit the soft, porous intake wall ('Hey, this wall sucks!' Roghres giggled), and the 
three of us bounced, and passed Li, a little behind us and travelling in the opposite 
direction, still heading for the wall.  Roghres watched him going by with the studied 
interest of a bar drunk watching a fly on the rim of a glass. 'Far out.' 

'Anyway,' I said, as we passed. 'How does all this make it boring?  Surely there's so 
much going on -' 

'That it's deeply boring.  An excess of boringness does not make a thing interesting 
except in the driest academic sense.  A place is not boring if you have to look really 
hard for something which is interesting.  If there is absolutely nothing interesting about 
any particular place, then that is a perfectly interesting and quint-essentially un-boring 

place.' Li hit the wall and bounced.  We had slowed, stopped, and reversed, so were 
coming back down again.  Roghres waved at Li as we passed him. 'But,' I said, 'Earth - 
let me get this right - Earth, where everything's happening, is so full of interesting things 
that it's boring.' I squinted at Li. 'Is that what you mean?' 

'Something like that.' 

'You're crazy.' 

'You're boring.' 

4.2:  Happy Idiot Talk 

I'd talked to the ship about Linter the day after I saw him in Paris, and a few times 
subsequently.  I don't think I was able to offer much hope that the man would change 
his mind; the ship used its Depressed voice when we talked about him. 

Of course if the ship wanted to it could have made the whole argument academic by 
just kidnapping Linter.  The more I thought about it, the more certain I became that the 
ship had bugs or microdrones or something trailing the man; at the first hint that he was 
thinking about staying the Arbitrary would have made sure that it couldn't lose him, 
even when he went out without his terminal.  For all I knew it watched all of us, though 
it protested that it didn't when I asked it (about Linter the ship was evasive, and there's 
nothing more slippery in the galaxy than a GCU being cagey, so a straight answer was 
out of the question. [*8*] But draw your own conclusions.) 

Nothing would have been easier, technically, for the ship to drug Linter, or have a drone 
stun him, and bundle him into a module.  I suppose it could even have displaced him; 
beamed him up like in Star Trek (which the ship thought was a great hoot). [*9*] But I 
couldn't see it doing anything like that. 

I have yet to meet a ship - and I don't think I'd like to meet a ship - that didn't take far 
more pride in its mental abilities than its physical power, and for the ship to kidnap 
Linter would be an admission that it hadn't had the wit to out-think the man.  No doubt 
it would make the best possible job of justifying such an act if it did do it, and it would 
certainly get away with it - no quorum of other Contact Minds would offer it the choice 
of exile or restructuring - but boy would it lose face.  GCUs can be bitchy as hell, and 
the Arbitrary would be the laughing-stock of the Contact fleet for months, minimum. 

'Would you even think about it?' 

'I think of everything,' the ship replied tartly. 'But no, I don't think I'd do it, even as a 
last resort.' 

A whole bunch of us had watched King Kong and now we were sitting by the ship's 
pool, snacking on kazu and sampling some French wines (all ship-grown, but 
statistically more authentic than the real thing, it assured us…  No, me neither).  I'd 
been thinking about Linter, and asked a remote drone what contingency plans had been 
made if it came to the worst. [*10*] 

'What is the last resort?' 

'I don't know; trail him perhaps, watch for a situation where the locals are about to find 
out he's not one of them - in a hospital, say - then micronuke the place.' 

'What?' 

'It'd make a great Mystery Explosion story.' 

'Be serious.' 

'I'm being serious.  What's one more meaningless act of violence on that zoo of a 
planet?  It would be appro೦priate.  When in Rome; burn it.' 

'You're not really being serious, are you?' 

'Sma!  Of course not!  Are you on something, or what?  Good grief, damn the morality 
of the thing: it would just be so inelegant. What do you take me for?  Really!' The drone 
left. 

I dangled my feet in the pool.  The ship was playing us thirties jazz, in untidied-up form; 
crackles and hisses left in.  It had gone on to that and Gregorian chants after a period - 
when I'd been to Berlin - of trying to make everybody listen to Stockhausen.  I wasn't 
sorry I'd missed that stage in the ship's constantly altering musical taste. 

Also while I'd been away, the ship had sent a request on a postcard to the BBC's World 
Service, asking for 'Mr David Bowie's "Space Oddity" for the good ship Arbi೦trary 
and all who sail in her.' (This from a machine that could have swamped Earth's entire 
electro-magnetic spectrum with whatever the hell it wanted from some೦where beyond 
Betelgeuse.) It didn't get the request played.  The ship thought this was hilarious. 

'Here's Dizzy; she'll know.' 

I turned round to see Roghres and Djibard Alsahil approaching.  They sat down at my 
side.  Djibard had been friendly with Linter in the year between leaving the Bad For 
Business and finding Earth. 

'Hello,' I said. 'Know what?' 

'What's happened to Dervley Linter?' Roghres said, trailing one hand in the pool. 'Djib's 
just back from Tokyo and wanted to see him, but the ship's being awkward; won't say 
where he is.' 

I looked at Djibard, who was sitting cross-legged, looking like a little gnome.  She was 
smiling broadly; she looked stoned. 

'What makes you think I know anything?' I said to Roghres. 

'I heard a rumour you'd seen him in Paris.' 

'Hmm. Well, yes, I did.' I watched the pretty light patterns the ship was making on the 
far wall; they were slowly appearing brighter as the main lights went rosy with the ship's 
evening (which it had gradually brought down to a 24-hour cycle). 

'So why hasn't he come back to the ship?' Roghres said. 'He went to Paris right at the 
start.  How come he's still there?  Isn't going native is he?' 

'I only saw him for a day; less, in fact.  I wouldn't like to comment on his mental state… 
he seemed happy enough.' 

'Don't answer then,' Djibard said, a little slurred. 

I looked at Djibard for a moment; she was still smiling.  I turned back to Roghres. 'Why 
not contact him your೦selves?' 

'Tried that,' Roghres said.  She nodded at the other woman. 'Djibard tried on- and off-
planet.  No reply.' 

Djibard's eyes were closed now.  I looked at Roghres. 'Then he probably doesn't want 
to talk.' 

'You know,' Djibard said, eyes still closed, 'I think it's because we don't mature the way 
they do.  I mean the females have periods, and the men have this machismo thing 
because they've got to do all the things they're supposed to do and so we don't; I mean 
we don't have things they do… what I mean is that there are all sorts of things that do 

things to them, and we don't have that.  Them.  We don't have them and so we don't 
get ground down the way they do.  I think that's the secret.  Pressures and knocks and 
disappointments.  I think that's what somebody said to me.  But I mean it's so unfair… 
but I don't know who for yet; I haven't worked that out, you know?' 

I looked at Roghres and she looked at me.  Some drugs do turn you into a blabbering 
moron for the duration. 

'I think you know something you're not telling us,' Roghres said. 'And I don't think I'm 
going to coax it out of you.' She smiled. 'I know; if you don't tell, I'll say to Li that you 
told me you're secretly in love with him and just playing hard to get.  How about that?' 
'I'll tell my mum, and she's bigger than yours.' Roghres laughed.  She took Djibard by 
the hand and they both stood.  They moved off, Roghres guiding Djibard, who as she 
moved away was saying, 'You know, I think it's because we don't mature the way they 
do.  I mean the females -' 

A drone carrying empty glasses passed by and muttered, 'Gibbering Djibard,' in 
English.  I smiled, and waggled my feet in the warm water. 

4.3:  Ablation 

I was in Auckland for a couple of weeks, then Edinburgh, then back in the ship 
again.  One or two people asked me about Linter, but obviously word got round that 
while I probably knew something, I wasn't going to tell anybody.  Still, nobody seemed 
any less friendly because of that. 

Meanwhile Li had embarked upon a campaign to get the ship to let him visit Earth 
without modification.  His plan was to go mountain descending; have himself dropped 
on a summit and then make his way down.  He told the ship that this would be perfectly 
safe security-wise, in the Himalayas at least, because if he was seen people would 
assume he was a Yeti.  The ship said it would think about it (which meant No). 

About the middle of June the ship suddenly asked me to go to Oslo for the day.  Linter 
had asked to see me. 

I didn't recognize him at first.  I usually recognize people from the way they walk, and 
Linter's gait had altered.  He looked thinner and more pale; not so physically imposing 
and immediate.  Same suit as in Paris, though it looked baggier on him now, and slightly 
shabby.  He stopped a metre away. 

'Hello.' I held out my hand.  He shook it, nodded. 

'It's good to see you again.  How are you keeping?' His voice was weaker sounding, less 
sure, somehow. 

I shook my head, smiling. 'Perfectly well, of course.' 

'Oh yes, of course.' He was avoiding my eyes. 

He made me feel a little awkward, just standing there, so I slid down off the parapet and 
stood in front of him.  He seemed to be smaller than I remembered.  He was rubbing his 
hands together as though it was cold, and looking up the broad avenue of bizarre 
Vigoland sculp೦tures into the northern blue-morning sky. 'Do you want to walk?' he 
asked. 

'Yes, let's.' We started across the bridge, towards the first flight of steps on the far side 
of the obelisk and foun೦tain. 

'Thank you for coming.' Linter looked at me, then quickly away. 

'That's all right.  Pleasant city.' I took off my leather jacket and slung it over my 
shoulder.  I was wearing jeans and boots, but it was a blouse and skirt day, really. 'So, 
how are you getting on?' 

'I'm still staying, if that's what you want to know.' Defensively. 

'I assumed you were.' 

He relaxed, coughed.  We walked across the broad, empty bridge.  It was still too early 
for most people to be up and about, and we seemed to be alone in the park.  The severe, 
square, stone-plinthed lights of the bridge went slowly by, counterpoints to the curves 
of the strange statues. 

'I… I wanted to give you this.' Linter stopped, felt inside his jacket and brought out 
what looked like a gold-plated Parker pen.  He twisted the top off; where the nib should 
have been there was a grey tube covered in tiny coloured symbols which belonged to 

no language on Earth.  A little red tell-tale winked lazily.  It looked insignificant, 
somehow.  He put the top back on the terminal. 'Will you take it?' he said, blinking. 

'Yes, if you're sure.' 

'I haven't used it for weeks.' 

'How did you ask the ship to see me?' 

'It sends down drones to talk to me.  I offered the terminal to them, but they wouldn't 
take it.  The ship won't take it.  I don't think it wants to be responsible.' 

'You want me to be?' 

'As a friend.  I'd like you to; please.  Please take it.' 

'Look, why not keep it but don't use it.  In case there's some emergency -' 

'No.  No; just take it, please.' Linter looked into my eyes for a moment. 'It's just a 
formality.' 

I felt a strange urge to laugh, the way he said that.  Instead I took the terminal from him 
and stuffed it into my bomber jacket.  Linter sighed.  We walked on. 

It was a lovely day.  The sky was cloudless, the air clear, and fragrant with mixtures of 
the sea and land.  I wasn't sure whether there really was something about that quality of 
light that made it northern; perhaps it only looked different because you knew there was 
just a thousand kilometres or so of as clear, still fresher, colder air between you and the 
Arctic sea, the great bergs and the millions of square kilometres of ice and snow.  It was 
like being on another planet. 

We walked up the steps, Linter seeming to study each one.  I was looking around, 
drinking in the sight and sound and smell of this place, reminding me of my holidays 
from London.  I looked at the man by my side. 

'You know you're not looking too well.' 

He didn't meet my gaze, but appeared to study some distant stonework at the end of the 
walk. 'Well… no, I guess you could say I've changed.' He smiled un೦certainly. 'I'm not 
the man I was.' 

Something about the way he said it made me shiver.  He was watching his feet again. 

'You staying here, in Oslo?' I asked him. 

'For the moment, yes.  I like it here.  It doesn't feel like a capital city; clean and compact, 
but -' he broke off, shook his head at something. 'I'll move on soon though, I think.' 

We went on, mounting the steps.  Some of the Vigoland sculptures made me feel 
distinctly uncomfortable.  A wave of something like revulsion swept over me, startling 
me; some planetary repugnance in this northern city.  In this world now, they were 
talking of abandoning the B1 bomber to go ahead with the cruise missile.  What had 
started out as the Neutron Bomb had euphemized into the Enhanced Radiation Warhead 
and finally into the Reduced Blast Device.  They're all sick and so's he, I thought 
suddenly.  Infected. 

No, that was stupid.  I was getting xenophobic.  The fault was within, not without. 

'Do you mind if I tell you something?' 

'What do you mean?' I said.  What a weird thing to say, I thought. 

'Well you might find it… distasteful; I don't know.' 

'Tell me anyway.  I have a strong constitution.' 

'I got… I asked the ship to ah… alter me.' He looked at me briefly.  I inspected him.  The 
slight stoop, the thin೦ness and paler skin wouldn't have required the services of the 
ship.  He saw me looking, shook his head. 'No, nothing outside; inside.' 

'Oh.  What?' 

'Well, I got it to… to give me a set of guts more like the locals.  And I had the drug 
glands taken out, and the uh -' he laughed nervously '- the loop system in my balls.' 

I kept walking.  I believed him, immediately.  I couldn't believe the ship had agreed to 
do it, but I believed Linter.  I didn't know what to say. 

'So, I uh, don't have any choice about going to the toilet every so often, and I… I had it 
work on my eyes, too.' He paused.  Now it was my turn to keep looking at my feet, 
clomping up the steps in my fancy Italian climbing boots.  I didn't think I wanted to 
hear this. 'Sort of re-wired so I see like them.  Bit fuzzier, sort of less… well, not fewer 
colours, but more sort of… squashed up.  Can't see much at night, either.  Same sort of 
thing on my ears and nose.  But it… well it almost enhances what you do experience, 
you know?  I'm still glad I had it done.' 

'Yeah.' I nodded, not looking at him. 

'My immune system isn't perfect anymore, either.  I can get colds, and… that sort of 
thing.  I didn't get the shape of my dick altered; decided it would pass.  Did you know 
there are considerable variations in genitalia here already?  The Bushmen of the 
Kalahari have a permanent erection, and the women have the Tablier Egyptien; a small 
fold of flesh covering their genitals.' He waved one hand. 'So I'm not that much of a 
freak.  I guess this isn't all that terrible really, is it?  I don't know why I thought you 
might be disgusted or anything.' 

'Hmm.' I was wondering what had possessed the ship to do all this to the man.  It had 
agreed to carry out these… I could only think of them as mutilations… and yet it 
wouldn't accept his terminal.  Why had it done this to him?  It said it wanted him to 
change his mind, but it changed his body instead, pandering to his lunatic desire to 
become more like the locals. 

'Can't change sex now, if I wanted to.  Things'll still regrow if they get cut off; ship 
couldn't alter that, not quickly; take time; intensive care, and it wouldn't alter my… 
umm… clockspeed, what-d'you-call-it.  So I'll still grow old slowly, and live longer 
than them… but I think it might relent later, when it knows I'm sincere.' 

All I could think of was that by converting Linter's physiology to a design closer to the 
planetary standard, the ship wanted to show the man what a nasty life they led.  Perhaps 
it thought rubbing his nose in the Human Condition would send the man running back 
to the manifold delights of the ship, content with his Cultural lot at last. 

'You don't mind, do you?' 

'Mind?  Why should I mind?' I said, and instantly felt foolish for sounding like 
something from a soap opera. 

'Yes, I can see you do,' Linter said. 'You think I'm crazy, don't you?' 

'All right.' I stopped half-way up a flight of steps, turned to him. 'I do, I think you're 
crazy to… to throw so much away.  It's… it's wrong-headed of you, it's stupid.  It's as 
if you're doing it just to annoy people, to test the ship.  Are you trying to get it mad at 
you, or what?' 

'Of course not, Sma.' He looked hurt. 'I don't care that much about the ship, but I was 
worried… I am concerned about what you might think.' He took my free hand in both 
of his.  They felt cold. 'You're a friend.  You matter to me.  I don't want to offend 
anybody; not you, not anybody.  But I have to do what feels right.  This is very 

important to me; more important than anything else I've ever done before.  I don't want 
to upset anybody, but… look, I'm sorry.' He let go my hand. 

'Yeah, I'm sorry too.  But it's like mutilation.  Like infec೦tion.' 

'Ah, we're the infection, Sma.' He turned and sat down on the steps, looking back 
towards the city and the sea. 'We're the ones who're different, we're the self-mutilated, 
the self-mutated.  This is the mainstream; we're just like very smart kids; infants with a 
brilliant construction kit.  They're real because they live the way they have to.  We aren't 
because we live the way we want to.' 

'Linter,' I said, sitting beside him. 'This is the fucking mental home; the land of the 
midnight brain.  This is the place that gave us Mutual Assured Destruction; they've 
thrown people into boiling water to cure diseases; they use Electro-Convulsive Therapy; 
a nation with a law against cruel and unusual punish೦ments electrocutes people to 
death -' 

'Go on; mention the death camps,' Linter said, blinking at the blue distance. 

'It was never Eden.  It isn't ever going to be, but it might progress.  You're turning your 
back on every advance we've made beyond where they are now, and you're insulting 
them as well as the Culture.' 

'Oh, pardon me.' He rocked forward on his haunches, hugging himself. 

'The only way they can go - and survive - is the same way we've come, and you're 
saying that's all shit.  That's refugee mentality, and they wouldn't thank you for what 
you're doing.  They would say you're crazy.' 

He shook his head, hands in his armpits, still staring away. 'Maybe they don't have to 
take the same route.  Maybe they don't need Minds, maybe they don't need more and 
more technology.  They might be able to do it by themselves, without wars and 
revolutions even… just by understanding, by some… belief.  By some೦thing more 
natural than we can understand.  Natural೦ness is something they still understand.' 

'Naturalness?' I said, loudly. 'This lot'll tell you anything is natural; they'll tell you greed 
and hate and jealousy and paranoia and unthinking religious awe and fear of God and 
hating anybody who's another colour or thinks different is natural.  Hating blacks or 
hating whites or hating women or hating men or hating gays; that's natural.  Dog-eat-
dog, looking out for number one, no lame ducks… Shit, they're so convinced about 
what's natural it's the more sophisticated ones that'll tell you suffering and evil are 
natural 
and 
necessary because otherwise you 
can't have pleasure 
and 

good೦ness.  They'll tell you any one of their rotten stupid systems is the natural and 
right one, the one true way; what's natural to them is whatever they can use to fight their 
own grimy corner and fuck everybody else.  They're no more natural than us than an 
amoeba is more natural than them just because it's cruder.' 

'But Sma, they're living according to their instincts, or trying to.  We're so proud of 
living according to our conscious belief, but we've lost the idea of shame.  And we need 
that too.  We need that even more than they do.' 

'What?' I shouted.  I whirled round, took him by the shoulders and shook him. 'We 
should be what? Ashamed of being conscious?  Are you crazy?  What's wrong with 
you?  How can you say something like that?' 

'Just listen!  I don't mean they're better; I don't mean we should try to live like them, I 
mean that they have an idea of… of light and shade that we don't have.  They're proud 
sometimes, too, but they're ashamed as well; they feel all-conquering and powerful but 
then they realize how powerless they really are.  They know the good in them, but they 
know the evil in them, too; they recognize both, they live with both.  We don't have that 
duality, that balance.  And… and can't you see it might be more fulfilling for one 
individual - me - who has a Culture background who is aware of all life's possibilities, 
to live in this society, not the Culture?' 

'So you find this… hellhole more fulfilling?' 

'Yes, of course I do.  Because there's - because it's just so… alive.  In the end, they're 
right Sma; it doesn't really matter that a lot of what's going on is what we - or even they 
- might call "bad"; it's happening, it's there, and that's what matters, that's what makes 
it worth೦while to be here and be part of it.' 

I took my hands off his shoulders. 'No.  I don't understand you.  Dammit Linter, you're 
more alien than they are.  At least they have an excuse.  God, you're the fucking 
mythical recent convert, aren't you?  The fanatic.  The zealot.  I'm sorry for you, man.' 

'Well… thank you.' He looked to the sky, blinking again. 

'I didn't want you to understand me too quickly, and -' he made a noise that was not 
quite a laugh '- I don't think you are, are you?' 

'Don't give me that pleading look.' I shook my head, but I couldn't stay angry with him 
looking like that.  Some೦thing subsided in me, and I saw a sort of shy smile steal over 
Linter's face. 'I am not,' I said, 'going to make this easy for you, Dervley.  You're making 
a mistake.  The biggest you'll ever make in your life.  You'd better realize you're on 

your own.  Don't think a few plumbing changes and a new set of bowel bacteria are 
going to make you any closer to homo sapiens either.' 

'You're a friend, Diziet.  I'm glad you're concerned… but I think I know what I'm doing.' 

It was time for me to shake my head again, so I did.  Linter held my hand while we 
walked back down to the bridge and then out of the park.  I felt sorry for him because 
he seemed to have realized his own loneliness.  We walked round the city for a while, 
then went to his apartment for lunch.  His place was in a modern block down towards 
the harbour, not far from the massiveness of the city hall; a bare flat with white walls 
and little furniture.  It hardly looked lived in at all save for a few late Lowry 
reproductions and sketches by Holbein. 

It had clouded over in late morning.  I left after lunch.  I think he expected me to stay, 
but I only wanted to get back to the ship. 

4.4:  God Told Me To Do It 

'Why did I do what?' 

'What you did to Linter.  Alter him.  Revert him.' 

'Because he asked me to do it,' the ship said.  I was standing in the top hangar deck.  I'd 
waited till I was back on the ship before I confronted it, via a remote drone. 

'And of course it had nothing to do with hoping he might dislike the feeling so much 
he'd come back into the fold.  Nothing to do with trying to shock him with the pain of 
being human when the locals have at least had the advantage of growing up with it and 
getting used to the idea.  Nothing to do with letting him inflict a physical and mental 
torture on himself so you could sit back and say "I told you so" after he came crying to 
you to take him back.' 

'Well as a matter of fact, no.  You obviously believe I altered Linter for my own 
ends.  That's not true.  I did what I did because Linter requested it.  Certainly I tried to 
talk him out of it, but when I was convinced that he meant what he said and he knew 
what he was doing and what it entailed - and when I couldn't reasonably decide he was 
mad - I did what he asked. 

'It did occur to me he might not enjoy the feeling of being something close to human-
basic, but I thought it was obvious from what he'd said when we were talking it over 
beforehand that he didn't expect to enjoy it.  He knew it would be unpleasant, but he 
regarded it as a form of birth, or rebirth.  I thought it unlikely he would be so unprepared 

for the experience, and so shocked by it, that he would want to be returned to his 
genofixed norm, and even less likely that he would go on from there to abandoning his 
idea of staying on Earth al೦together. 

'I'm a little disappointed in you, Sma.  I thought you would understand me.  One's object 
in trying to be scru೦pulously fair and even-handed is not to seek praise, I'm sure, but 
one would hope that having done something more honest than convenient, one's 
motives would not be questioned in such an overtly suspicious manner.  I could have 
refused Linter's request; I could have claimed that I found the idea unpleasant and didn't 
want to have anything to do with it.  I could have built a perfectly adequate defence on 
aesthetic distaste alone; but I didn't. 

'Three reasons:  One; I'd have been lying.  I don't find Linter any more repellent or 
disgusting than I did before.  What matters is his mind; his intellect and the state it's 
in.  Physiological details are largely irrelevant.  Certainly his body is less efficient than 
it was before; less sophisticated, less damage-resistant, less flexible over a given range 
of conditions than, say, yours… but he's living in the Twentieth Century West, and at a 
comparatively privileged economic level; he doesn't have to have brilliant reflexes or 
better night-sight than an owl.  So his integrity as a conscious entity is less affected by 
all the alterations I've carried out on him than it already was by the very decision to stay 
on Earth in the first place. 

Two; if anything is going to convince Linter we're the good guys, it's being fair and 
reasonable even when he might not be being so.  To turn on him because he's not doing 
just as I would like, or just as any of us might like, would be to force him further into 
the idea that Earth is his home, humanity his kin. 

'Three; - and this would be sufficient reason by itself -what are we supposed to be about, 
Sma?  What is the Culture?  What do we believe in, even if it hardly ever is expressed, 
even if we are embarrassed about talking about it?  Surely in freedom, more than 
anything else.  A relativistic, changing sort of freedom, unbounded by laws or laid-
down moral codes, but - in the end - just because it is so hard to pin down and express, 
a freedom of a far higher quality than anything to be found on any relevant scale on the 
planet beneath us at the moment. 

'The same technological expertise, the same productive surplus which, in pervading our 
society, first allows us to be here at all and after that allows us the degree of choice we 
have over what happens to Earth, long ago also allowed us to live exactly as we wish 
to live, limited only by being expected to respect the same principle applied to 
others.  And that's so basic that not only does every religion on Earth have some similar 
form of words in its literature, but almost every religion, philo೦sophy or other belief 
system ever discovered anywhere else contains the same concept.  It is the embedded 

achievement of that oft-expressed ideal that our society is - perversely - rather 
embarrassed about.  We live with, use, simply get on with our freedom as much as the 
good people of Earth talk about it; and we talk about it as often as genuine examples of 
this shy concept can be found down there. 

'Dervley Linter is as much a product of our society as I am, and as such, or at least until 
he can be proved to be in some real sense "mad", he's perfectly correct in expecting to 
have his wishes fulfilled.  Indeed the very fact he asked for such an alteration - and 
accepted it from me - may prove his thinking is still more Culture-than Earth-
influenced. 

'In short, even if I had thought that I had sound tactical reasons for refusing his request, 
I'd have had just as difficult a job justifying such an action as I would have had I just 
snapped the guy off-planet the instant I realized what he was thinking.  I can only be 
sure in myself that I am in the right in trying to get Linter to come back if I am positive 
that my own behaviour - as the most sophisticated entity involved - is beyond reproach, 
and in as close accord with the basic princi೦ples of our society as it is within my power 
to make it.' 

I looked at the drone's sensing band.  I'd stood stock still during all this, unreacting.  I 
sighed. 

'Well,' I said, 'I don't know; that sounds almost… noble.' I folded my arms. 'Only trouble 
is, ship, that I can never tell when you're on the level and when you're talking just for 
the sake of it.' 

The unit stayed where it was for a couple of seconds, then turned and glided off, without 
saying another word. 

4.5:  Credibility Problem 

The next time I saw Li, he was wearing a uniform just like Captain Kirk's in Star Trek. 

'Well, what on earth,' I laughed. 

'Don't mock, alien,' Li scowled. 

I was reading Faust in German and watching two of my friends playing snooker.  The 
gravity in the snooker room was a little less than standard, to make the balls roll 
right.  I'd asked the ship (when it was still talking to me) why it hadn't reduced its 
internal G to Earth's average, as it had done with its day-night cycle. 'Oh, it would have 

meant too much recalibration,' the ship had said. 'I couldn't be bothered.' How's that for 
God೦like omnipotence? 

'You won't have heard,' Li said, sitting beside me, 'having been on EVA, but I'm 
intending to become captain of this tub.' 

'Are you really?  Well that's fascinating.' I didn't ask him what or where the hell EVA 
was. 'And how exactly do you propose attaining this elevated, not to say unlikely 
position?' 

'I'm not sure yet,' Li admitted, 'but I think I have all the qualifications for the post.' 

'Consider the liminal cue given; I know you're going to -' 

'Bravery, resourcefulness, intelligence, the ability to handle men - women -; a razor 
sharp wit and light೦ning fast reactions.  Also loyalty and the ability to be ruthlessly 
objective when the safety of my ship and crew are at stake.  Except, of course, when 
the safety of the Universe as we know it is at stake, in which case I would reluctantly 
have to consider making a brave and noble sacrifice.  Naturally, should such a situation 
ever arise, I'd try to save the officers and crew who serve beneath me.  I'd go down with 
the ship, of course.' 

'Of course.  Well, that's-' 

'Wait; there's another quality I haven't mentioned yet.' 

'Are there any left?' 

'Certainly.  Ambition.' 

'Silly of me.  Of course.' 

'It will not have escaped your attention that until now nobody ever thought of wanting 
to become captain of the Arb.' 

'A perhaps understandable lapse.' Jhavins, one of my friends, brought off a fine cut on 
the black ball, and I applauded. 'Good shot.' 

Li prodded my shoulder. 'Listen properly.' 

'I'm listening, I'm listening.' 

'The point is that my wanting to become captain, I mean even thinking of the idea, 
means that I should be the captain, understand?' 

'Hmm.' Jhavins was lining up an unlikely cannon on a distant red. 

Li made an exasperated noise. 'You're humouring me; I thought you at least would 
argue.  You're just like everybody else.' 

'Ah,' I said.  Jhavins hit the red, but just left it hanging over the pocket.  I looked at Li. 
'An argument?  All right; you - anybody - taking command of the ship is like a flea 
taking over control of a human… maybe even like a bacteria in their saliva taking them 
over.' 

'But why should it command itself?  We made it; it didn't make us.' 

'So?  And anyway we didn't make it; other machines made it… and even they only 
started it off; it mostly made itself.  But anyway, you'd have to go back… I don't know 
how many thousand generations of its ancestors before you found the last computer or 
spaceship built directly by any of our ancestors.  Even if this mythical "we" had built it, 
it's still zillions of times smarter than we are.  Would you let an ant tell you what to do?' 

'Bacterium?  Flea?  Ant?  Make up your mind.' 

'Oh go away and de-scale a mountain or something, you silly man.' 

'But we started all this; if it hadn't been for us -' 

'And who started us?  Some glop of goo on another rockball?  A super-nova?  The big 
bang?  What's starting something got to do with it?' 

'You don't think I'm serious, do you?' 

'More terminal than serious.' 

'You wait,' Li said, standing up and wagging a finger at me. 'I'll be captain one day.  And 
you'll be sorry; I had you down tentatively as science officer, but now you'll be lucky 
to make nurse in the sickbay.' 

'Ah, away and piss on your dilithium crystals.' 

5. You Would If You Really Loved Me 

5.7: Sacrificial Victim 

I stayed on the ship for a few weeks after that.  It started talking to me again after a 
couple of days.  I forgot about Linter for a while; everybody on the Arbitrary seemed 
to be talking about new films or old films or books, or about what was happening in 
Kampuchea, or about Lanyares Sodel, who was off fighting with the 
Eritreans.  Lanyares used to live on a plate where he and some of his pals played games 
of soldiers using live kinetic ammunition.  I recalled hearing about this and being 
appalled; even with medical gear standing by and a full supply of drug glands it sounded 
slightly perverse, and when I'd found out they didn't have anything to protect their 
heads, I'd decided these guys were crazy.  You could have your brains splattered over 
the landscape!  You could die! 

But they enjoyed the fear, I suppose.  I'm told some people do. 

Anyway, Lanyares told the ship he wanted to take part in some real fighting.  The ship 
tried to talk him out of it, but failed, so sent him down to Ethiopia.  It tracked him by 
satellite and tailed him with scout missiles, ready to zap him back to the ship if he was 
badly wounded.  After some badgering, and having obtained Lanyares's permission, the 
ship put the view from the missiles trailing him onto an accessible channel, so anybody 
could watch.  I thought this was in even more dubious taste. 

It didn't last.  After about ten days Lanyares got fed up because there wasn't much 
happening and so he had himself taken back up to the ship.  He didn't mind the 
discomfort, he said, in fact it was almost pleasant in a masochistic sort of way, and 
certainly made shipboard life seem more attractive.  But the rest had been 
so boring. Having a good ring-ding battle on a plate land೦scape designed for the 
purpose was much more fun.  The ship told him he was silly and packed him back off 
to Rio de Janeiro to be a properly behaved culture-vulture again.  Anyway, it could have 
sent him to Kampuchea, I suppose; altered him to make him look Cambodian and 
thrown him into the middle of the butchery of Year Zero.  Somehow I don't think that 
was quite what Lanyares had been looking for though. 

I travelled around more of Britain, East Germany and Austria when I wasn't on 
the Arbitrary. The ship tried me in Pretoria for a few days, but I really couldn't take it; 
perhaps if it had sent me there first I'd have been all right, but after nine months of Earth 
maybe even my Cultured nerves were getting frayed, and the land of Separate 
Development was just too much for me.  I asked the ship about Linter a few times, but 
only received All-Purpose Non-Committal Reply Number 63a, or whatever, so after a 
bit I stopped asking. 

'What is beauty?' 

'Oh ship, really.' 

'No, I'm being serious.  We have a disagreement here.' 

I stood in Frankfurt am Main, on a suspension footbridge over the river, talking to the 
ship via my terminal.  One or two people looked at me as they walked by, but I wasn't 
in the mood to care. 'All right, then.  Beauty is something that disappears when you try 
to define it.' 

'I don't think you really believe that.  Be serious.' 

'Look ship, I already know what the disagreement is.  I believe that there is something, 
however difficult to define, which is shared by everything beautiful and cannot be 
signified by any other single word without obscuring more than is made clear.  You 
think that beauty lies in utility.' 

'Well, more or less.' 

'So where's Earth's utility?' 

'Its utility lies in being a living machine.  It forces people to act and react.  At that it is 
close to the theoretical limits of efficiency for a non-conscious system.' 

'You sound like Linter.  A living machine, indeed.' 

'Linter is not totally wrong, but he is like somebody who has found an injured bird and 
kept it past the time it is recovered, out of a protectiveness he would not like to admit 
is centred on himself, not the animal.  Well, there may be nothing more we can do for 
Earth, and it's time to let go… in this case it's we who have to fly away, but you see 
what I mean.' 

'But you agree with Linter there is something beautiful about Earth, something 
aesthetically positive no Culture environment could match?' 

'Yes, I do.  Few things are all gain.  All we have ever done is maximize what happens 
to be considered "good" at any particular time.  Despite what the locals may think, there 
is nothing intrinsically illogical or impossible about having a genuine, functioning 
Utopia, or removing badness without removing goodness, or pain without pleasure, or 
suffering without excitement… but on the other hand there is nothing to say that you 
can always fix things up just the way you want them without running up against the 

occasional problem.  We have removed almost all the bad in our environment, but we 
have not quite kept all the good.  Averaged out, we're still way ahead, but we do have 
to yield to humans in some fields, and in the end of course theirs is a more interesting 
environment.  Naturally so.' 

' "May you live in interesting times."' 

'Quite.' 

'I can't agree.  I can't see the utility or the beauty in that.  All I'll give you is that it might 
be a relevant stage to go through.' 

'Might be the same thing.  A slight time-problem perhaps.  You just happen to be here, 
now.' 

'As are they all.' 

I turned round and looked at a few of the people walking by.  The autumn sun was low 
in the sky, a vivid red disc, dusty and gaseous and the colour of blood, and rubbed into 
these well-fed Western faces in an image of a poison-price.  I looked them in the eyes, 
but they looked away; I felt like taking them by the collar and shaking them, screaming 
at them, telling them what they were doing wrong, telling them what was happening; 
the plotting militaries, the commercial frauds, the smooth corporate and governmental 
lies, the holocaust taking place in Kampuchea… and telling them too what was possible, 
how close they were, what they could do if they just got their planetary act together… 
but what was the point?  I stood and looked at them, and found myself - half 
involuntarily - glanding slow, so that suddenly they all seemed to be moving in slow-
motion, trailing past as though they were actors in a movie, and seen on a dodgy print 
that kept varying between darkness and graininess. 'What hope for these people, ship?' 
I heard myself murmur, voice slurred.  It must have sounded like a squawk to anybody 
else.  I turned away from them, looking down at the river. 

'Their children's children will die before you even look old, Diziet.  Their grandparents 
are younger than you are now… In your terms, there is no hope for them.  In theirs, 
every hope.' 

'And we're going to use the poor bastards as a control group.' 

'We're probably just going to watch, yes.' 

'Sit back and do nothing.' 

'Watching is a form of doing.  And, we aren't talking any೦thing away from them.  It'll 
be as if we were never here.' 

'Apart from Linter.' 

'Yes,' sighed the ship. 'Apart from Mr Problem.' 

'Oh ship, can't we at least stop them on the brink?  If they do press the button, couldn't 
we junk the missiles when they're in flight, once they've had their chance to do it their 
way and blown it… couldn't we come in then?  It would have served its purpose as a 
control by then.' 

'Diziet, you know that's not true.  We're talking about the next ten thousand years at 
least, not the lead time to the Third World War.  Being able to stop it isn't the point; it's 
whether in the very long result it is the right thing to do.' 

'Great,' I whispered to the swirling dark waters of the Main. 'So how many infants have 
to grow up under the shadow of the mushroom cloud, and just possibly die screaming 
inside the radioactive rubble, just for us to be sure we're doing the right thing?  How 
certain do we have to be?  How long must we wait?  How long must we 
make them wait?  Who elected us God?' 

'Diziet,' the ship said, its voice sorrowful, 'that question is being asked all the time, and 
put in as many different ways as we have the wit to devise… and that moral equation is 
being re-assessed every nano-second of every day of every year, and every time we find 
some place like Earth - no matter what way the decision goes - we come closer to 
knowing the truth.  But we can never be absolutely certain.  Absolute certainty isn't 
even a choice on the menu, most times.' There was a pause.  Footsteps came and went 
behind me on the bridge. 

'Sma' the ship said finally, with a hint of what might have been frustration in its voice, 
'I'm the smartest thing for a hundred light years radius, and by a factor of about a 
million… but even I can't predict where a snooker ball's going to end up after more than 
six collisions.' 

I snorted, could almost have laughed. 

'Well,' the ship said, 'I think you'd better be on your way now.' 

'Oh?' 

'Yes.  A passer-by has reported a woman on the bridge, talking to herself and looking 
at the water.  A policeman is now on his way to investigate, probably already wondering 
how cold the water is, and so I think you should turn to your left and walk smartly away 
before he arrives.' 

'Right you are,' I said.  I shook my head as I walked off in the dusk light. 'Funny old 
world, isn't it, ship?' I said, more to myself than to it. 

The ship said nothing.  The suspended bridge, big as it was, responded to my stepping 
feet, moving up and down at me like some monstrous and clumsy lover. 

5.2:  Not Wanted On Voyage 

Back on the ship. 

For a few hours the Arbitrary had left the world's snow-flakes unmolested, and gone 
collecting other samples at Li's request. 

The first time Li saw me on the ship he'd come up to me and whispered, 'Take him to 
see The Man Who Fell To Earth,' and slunk off.  The next time I saw him he claimed it 
was the first time and I must be halluci೦nating if I thought we'd met before.  A fine 
way to greet a friend and admirer, claiming he'd been going about whispering cryptic 
messages… 

So; one moonless, November night, darkside over the Tarim Basin… 

He was still trying to become captain of the Arbitrary, but he seemed to have his ideas 
about rank and democracy mixed up, because he thought the best way to become 
'skipper' was to get us all to vote for him.  So this was going to be a campaign dinner. 

We sat in the lower hangar space, surrounded by our hardware.  There were about two 
hundred people gath೦ered in the hangar; everybody still on the ship was present, and 
many had come back off-planet just for the occasion.  Li had us all sit ourselves round 
three giant tables, each two metres broad and at least ten times that in length.  He'd 
insisted they should be proper tables, and complete with chairs and place settings and 
all the rest, and the ship had reluctantly filched a small Sequoia and done all the carving 
and turning and whatever to produce the tables and every೦thing that went with 

them.  To compensate, it had planted several hundred oaks in its upper hangar, using its 
own stored biomass as a growing medium; it would plant the saplings on Earth before 
it left. 

When we were all seated, and had started talking amongst ourselves - I was sitting 
between Roghres and Ghemada - the lights around us dimmed, and a spot೦light picked 
out Li, walking out of the darkness.  We all sat back or craned forward, watching him. 

There was much laughter.  Li had greenish skin, pointed ears, and wore a 2001-style 
_spacesuit with a zig-zag silver flash added across the chest (held on by micro-rivets, 
he told me later).  He sported a long red cape which flowed out behind from his 
shoulders.  He held the suit helmet in the crook of his left arm.  In his right hand he 
gripped a Star Wars light sword.  Of course, the ship had made him a real one. 

Li walked purposefully to the head of the middle table, tramped on an empty seat at its 
head and strode onto the table top, clumping down the brightly polished surface 
between the glittering place settings (the cutlery had been borrowed from a locked and 
forgotten storeroom in a palace on a lake in India; it hadn't been used for fifty years, 
and would be returned, cleaned, the next day… as would the dinner service itself, 
borrowed for the night from the Sultan of Brunei - without his permission), past the 
starched white napkins (from the Titanic; they'd be cleaned too and put back on the 
floor of the Atlantic), in the midst of the glittering glassware (Edinburgh Crystal, 
removed for a few hours from packing cases stowed deep in the hold of a freighter in 
the South China Sea, bound for Yokohama) and the candelabra (from a cache of loot 
lying under a lake near Kiev, sunk there by retreating Nazis judging from the sacks; 
also due to be replaced after their bizarre orbital excursion) until he stood in the centre 
of the middle table, maybe two metres from where I, Roghres and Ghemada sat. 

'Ladies and gentlemen!' Li shouted, arms outstretched, helmet in one hand, sword 
humming brightly in the other.  'The food of Earth!  Eat!' 

He assumed a dramatic pose, pointing the sword back up the table, gazing heroically 
along its green glowing length, and leaning forward, one knee bending.  The ship either 
manipulated its gravity field or Li had an AG harness under the suit, because he rose 
silently from the table and drifted along above it (holding the pose) to the far end, where 
he dropped gracefully and sat in the seat he'd used earlier as a step.  There was scattered 
applause and some hooting. 

Meanwhile, dozens of drones and slaved trays had made their way out of the elevator 
shaft and approached the tables, bringing food. 

We ate.  It was all ethnic food, though not actually brought up from the planet; vat-
grown ship food, though not a gourmet on Earth could have spotted any difference 
between our stuff and the real thing.  From what I could see, Li had used the Guinness 
Book of Records as his wine list.  The ship's copies of the wines involved were so good 
- we were told - that the ship itself couldn't have told them apart from the real thing. 

We chomped and gurgled our way through an eclectic but relatively orthodox series of 
courses, chatting and fooling, and wondering whether Li had anything else planned; 
this all seemed disappointingly conventional.  Li came round, asking how we were 
enjoying the meal, refilling our glasses, suggesting we try different dishes, saying he 
hoped he could count on our vote on election day, and sidestepping awkward questions 
about the Prime Directive. 

Finally, much later, maybe a dozen courses later, when we were all sitting there bloated 
and content and mellow and sipping on our brandies and whiskies, we got Li's campaign 
speech… plus a dainty dish to set before the Culture. 

I was a little drowsy.  Li had come round with huge Havana cigars, and I'd taken one, 
and let the drug get to me.  I was sitting there, puffing determinedly on the fat drug-
stick, surrounded by a cloud of smoke, wondering what the natives saw in a tobacco 
high, but otherwise feeling just fine, when Li banged on the table with the pommel of 
the light sword and then climbed up and stood where his place setting had been (bang 
went one of the Sultan's plates, but I suspect the ship managed to repair it).  The lights 
went out, leaving one spot on Li. 

I used some snap to clear the sleepiness and stubbed the cigar out. 

[*11*]'Ladies and gentlemen,' Li said in a passable English, before continuing in 
Marain. 'I have gathered you here this evening to talk to you about Earth and what 
should be done with it.  It is my hope and wish that after you've heard what I have to 
say you will agree with me on the only possible course of action… but first of all, let 
me say a few words about myself.' There were jeers and cat-calls as Li bent and took 
up his glass of brandy.  He drained the glass and threw it over his shoulder.  A drone 
must have caught it in the shadows because I didn't hear it land. 

'First of all,' Li rubbed his chin, stroking the long hair.  'Who am I?' He ignored a variety 
of shouts telling him 'a total fucking idiot', and the like, and continued. 'I am Grice-
Thantapsa Li Erase 'ndane dam Sione; I am one hundred and seventeen years old, but 
wise beyond my years.  I have been in Contact only six years, but I have experienced 
much in that time, and so can speak with some authority on Contact matters.  I am the 
product of perhaps eight thousand years of progress beyond the stage of the planet that 
lies beneath our feet.' (Cries of 'Not much to show for it, huh?', etc.) 'I can track my 

ancestry back by name for at least that amount of time, and if you went back to the first 
dim glimmerings of sentience and you could end up going back -' ('last week?' 'your 
mother') '- through tens of thousands of generations. 

'My body is altered, of course; tuned to a high pitch of efficiency in terms of 
survivability and pleasure, -' ('don't worry, it doesn't show') '- and just as I in೦herited 
that alteration, so shall I pass it on to any children of my own.' ('please, Li; we've just 
eaten.') 'We have remade ourselves just as we have made our machines; we can fairly 
claim to be largely our own work. 

'However; in my head, literally inside my skull, in my brain, I am potentially as stupid 
as the most recently born babe in the most deprived area on Earth.' He paused, smiling, 
to let the cat-calls subside. 'We are who we are as much because of what we experience 
and are taught as we grow - the way we are brought up, in other words - as we are 
because we inherit the general appearance of pan-humanism, the more par೦ticular 
traits associated with the Culture meta-species, and the precise genetic mix contributed 
by our parents, including all those wonderful tinkered-with bits.' ('tinker with your own 
bits, laddy.') 

'So if I can claim to be morally superior to some denizen of those depths of atmosphere 
beneath us, it is because that is the way I was brought up.  We are truly raised; they are 
squashed, trimmed, trained, made into bonsai. Theirs is a civilization of deprivation; 
ours of finely balanced satisfaction ever teetering on the brink of excess.  The Culture 
could afford to let me be whatever it was within my personal potential to become; so, 
for good or ill, I am fulfilled. 

'Consider; I think I can truthfully claim to be a more-or-less average Culture person, as 
can all of us here.  Certainly, we're in Contact, so we might be a little more interested 
in travelling abroad and meeting people than the mean, but in general terms any one of 
us could be picked at random and represent the Culture quite adequately; the choice of 
who you would pick to represent Earth fairly I leave to your imagin೦ation. 

'But back to me; I am as rich and as poor as anybody in the Culture (I use these words 
because it's to Earth I want to compare our present position).  Rich; trapped as I am on 
board this uncaptained, leaderless tub, my wealth may not be very obvious, but it would 
seem immense to the average Earther.  At home I have the run of a charming and 
beautiful Orbital which would seem very clean and uncrowded to somebody from 
Earth; I have unlimited access to the free, fast, safe and totally dependable underplate 
transport system; I live in a wing of a family home of mansion proportions surrounded 
by hectares of gorgeous gardens.  I have an aircraft, a launch, the choice of mount from 
a large stable of aphores [*12*] even the use of what would be called a spaceship by 
these people, plus a wide choice of deep space cruisers.  As I say, I'm constrained at the 

moment by being in Contact, but of course I could leave at any moment, and within 
months be home, with another two hundred years or more of carefree life to look 
forward to; and all for nothing; I don't have to do anything for all this. 

'But, at the same time, I am poor.  I own nothing.  Just as every atom in my body was 
once part of something else, in fact part of many different things, and just as the 
elementary particles were themselves part of other patterns before they came together 
to form the atoms that make up the magnificent physical and mental specimen you see 
standing so impressively before you… yes, thank you… and just as one day every atom 
of my being will one day be part of something else - a star, initially, because that is the 
way we choose to bury our dead - again, so everything around me, from the food that I 
eat and the drink that I drink and the figur೦ine that I carve and the house I inhabit and 
the clothes I wear so elegantly… to the module I ride to the Plate that I stand on and the 
star that warms me is there when I am there rather than because I am.  These things may 
be arranged for me, but in that sense I only happen to be me, and they would be there 
for anybody else - should they desire them - too.  I do not, emphat೦ically not own 
them. 

'Now, on Earth things are not quite the same.  On Earth one of the things that a large 
proportion of the locals is most proud of is this wonderful economic system which, with 
a sureness and certainty so comprehensive one could almost imagine the process bears 
some relation to their limited and limiting notions of either thermodynamics or God, all 
food, comfort, energy, shelter, space, fuel and sustenance gravitates naturally and easily 
away from those who need it most and towards those who need it least.  Indeed, those 
on the receiving end of such largesse are often harmed unto death by its arrival, though 
the effects may take years and generations to manifest themselves. 

'To combat this insidious and disgusting travesty of sensible human relationships on a 
truly fundamental level was patently impossible on an infested dunghill like Earth, so 
deprived as it obviously was of meaning೦ful genetic choice at a fundamental level and 
therefore philosophical options on a more accessible scale, and it became obvious - 
through the perverse logic inherent in the species and the process they had entailed - 
that the only way to react to such a system that had any chance of making it worse, and 
conditions that much less bearable, was to accept it on its own terms; go into 
competition with it! 

'Now, quite apart from the fact that, from the point of view of the Earther, socialism 
suffers the devastating liability of only exhibiting internal contradictions when you are 
trying to use it as an adjunct to your own stupidity (unlike capitalism, which again, from 
the point of view of the Earther, happily has them built in from the start), it is the case 
that because Free Enter೦prise got there first and set up the house rules, it will always 

stay at least one kick ahead of its rivals.  Thus, while it takes Soviet Russia a vast 
amount of time and hard work to produce one inspired lunatic like Lysenko, the West 
can so arrange things that even the dullest farmer can see it makes more sense to burn 
his grain, melt his butter and wash way the remains of his pulped vegetables with his 
tanks of unused wine than it does to actually sell the stuff to be consumed. 

'And note that even if this mythical yokel did decide to sell the stuff, or even give it 
away - the Earthers have an even more devastating trick they can perform; they show 
you that those foods aren't even needed anyway!  They wouldn't feed the least 
productive, most un೦important untouchable from Pradesh, tribesperson from Darfur 
or peon from Rio Branco!  The Earth has more than enough to feed all its inhabitants 
every day already!  A truth so seemingly world-shattering one wonders that the 
oppressed of Earth don't rise up in flames and anger yesterday!  But they don't, because 
they are so infected with the myth of self-interested advancement, or the poison of 
religious acceptance, they either only want to make their own way up the pile so they 
can shit upon everybody else, or actually feel grateful for the attention when their so-
called betters shit on them! 

'It is my contention that this is either an example of the most formidable and blissfully 
arrogant use of power and existing advantage… or scarcely credible stupidity. 

'Now then.  Suppose we make ourselves known to this ghastly rabble; what happens?' 
Li stretched his arms out, and looked round us all just long enough to get a few people 
starting to answer him back, then roared on; 'I'll tell you what!  They won't believe 
us!  Oh, so we have moving maps of the galaxy accurate to a millimetre contained in 
something the size of a sugar cube, oh so we can make Orbitals and Rings and get across 
the galaxy in a year and make bombs too small to see that could tear their planet apart…' 
Li sneered, let one hand flap limp. 'Nothing.  These people expect time travel, telepathy, 
matter transmission.  Yes, we can say, "Well, we do have a very limited form of 
prescience through the use of anti-matter at the bound೦ary of the energy grid which 
lets us see nearly a milli೦second into…" or "Well, we usually train our minds in a way 
not entirely compatible with natural telepathic empathy, such as it is, but see this 
machine here…?  Well, if you ask it nicely…" or "Well, displacing isn't quite 
transmission of matter, but…" [*13*] They will laugh us out of the UN building; 
especially when they discover we haven't even got out of our home galaxy yet… unless 
you count the Clouds, but I doubt they would.  And anyway; what is the Culture as a 
society compared to what they expect?  They expect capitalists in space, or an 
empire.  A libertarian-anarchist Utopia?  Equality?  Liberty?  Fraternity?  This is not so 
much old-fashioned stuff as simply unfashionable stuff.  Their warped minds have 
taken them away on an evaporatingly stupid side track off the main sequence of social 
evolution, and we are probably more alien than they are capable of understanding. 

'So, the ship thinks we should just sit and watch this pack of genocidal buffoons for the 
next few millenia?' Li shook his head, wagged one finger. 'I think not.  I have a better 
idea, and I shall put it into effect as soon as I am elected captain.  But now, he raised 
his hands and clapped. 'The sweet course.' 

The drones and units reappeared, holding small steaming bowls of meat.  Li topped up 
a few of the glasses nearest him and urged everybody else to refill their own as the final 
course was distributed.  I'd just about filled myself up on the cheeses, but after Li's 
speech I seemed to have a bit more room.  Still, I was glad my bowl was small.  The 
aroma coming off the meat was quite pleasant, but I didn't think, somehow, it was an 
Earth dish. 

'Meat as a sweet dish?' Roghres said, sniffing the gently steaming bowl. 'Hmm; smells 
sweet, certainly.' 

'Shit,' Tel Ghemada said prodding at her own bowl, 'I know what this is…' 

'Ladies and gentlemen,' Li said, standing with a bowl in one hand and a silver fork in 
the other. 'A little taste of Earth… no; more than that: a chance for you to participate in 
the rough and tumble of living on a squalid backwater planet without actually having 
to leave your seat or get your feet dirty.' He stabbed a bit of the meat, put it in his mouth, 
chewed and swal೦lowed. 'Human flesh, ladies and gents; cooked muscle of hom. 
sap.… as I suspect few of you might have guessed.  A little on the sweet side for my 
palate, but quite acceptable.  Eat up.' 

I shook my head.  Roghres snorted.  Tel put her spoon down.  I sampled some of Li's 
unusual dish while he continued. 'I had the ship take a few cells from a variety of people 
on Earth.  Without their knowledge, of course.' He waved the sword vaguely at the table 
behind us. 'Most of you over there will be eating either Stewed Idi Amin or General 
Pinochet Chilli Con Carne; here in the centre we have a combination of General 
Stroessner Meat Balls and Richard Nixon Burgers.  The rest of you have Ferdinand 
Marcos Sauté and Shah of Iran Kebabs.  There are, in addition, scat೦tered bowls of 
Fricaséed Kim II Sung, Boiled General Videla, and Ian Smith in Black Bean Sauce… 
all done just right by the excellent - if leaderless - chef we have around us.  Eat up!  Eat 
up!' 

We ate up, most of us quite amused.  One or two thought the idea a little too outre, and 
some affected boredom because they thought Li needed discouragement not 
accomplices, while a few were just too full already.  But the majority laughed and ate, 
comparing tastes and textures. 

'If they could see us now,' Roghres giggled. 'Cannibals from outer space!' 

When we were mostly done, Li stood on the table again and clapped his hands above 
his head. 'Listen!  Listen!  Here's what I'll do if you make me captain!' The noise died 
away slowly, but there was still a fair amount of chattering and laughter.  Li raised his 
voice. 'Earth is a silly and boring planet.  If not, then it is too deeply unpleasant to be 
allowed to exist!  Dammit, there's something wrong with those people!  They are 
beyond redemption and hope!  They are not very bright, they are incredibly bigoted, 
and unbe-fucking-lievably cruel, both to their own kind and any other species that has 
the misfortune to stray within range, which of course these days means damn nearly 
every species; and they're slowly but determinedly fucking up the entire planet…' Li 
shrugged and looked momentarily defen೦sive. 'Not a particularly exciting or 
remarkable planet, for a life-sustainer type, true, but it's still a planet, it is quite pretty, 
and the principle remains.  Frighteningly dumb or majestically evil, I suggest there is 
only one way to deal with this incontestably neurotic and clinic೦ally insane species, 
and that is to destroy the planet!' 

Li looked round at this point, waiting to be interrupted, but nobody was rising to the 
bait.  Those of us not distracted by the drink, whatever drugs, or each other, just sat 
smiling indulgently and waited to see what Li's next crazy idea was.  He went on. 'Now, 
I know this might seem a little extreme to some of you -' (cries of 'no no', 'bit lenient if 
you ask me', 'wimp!' and 'yeah; nuke the fuckers')'- and more importantly very messy, 
but I have talked it over with the ship, and it informs me that the best method from my 
point of view is actu೦ally quite elegant, as well as extremely effective. 

'All we do is drop a micro black hole into the centre of the planet.  Simple as that; no 
untidy debris left floating about, no big, vulgar flash, and, if we do it right, no upsetting 
the rest of the solar system.  It takes longer than displacing a few tonnes of CAM into 
the core, but even that has the advantage of giving the humans time to reflect on their 
past follies, as their world is eaten away beneath them.  In the end, all you'd have left is 
something about the size of a large pea in the same orbit as the Earth, and a minor 
amount of X-ray pollu೦tion from meteoric material.  Even the moon could stay where 
it is.  A rather unusual planetary sub-system, but - in terms of scale as much as anything 
else - a fitting monument, or memorial -' (Here Li smiled at me.  I winked back.) '- to 
one of the more boringly inept rabbles marring the face of our fair galaxy. 

'Couldn't we just wipe the place clear with a virus, I hear you ask?  But no.  While it is 
true that the humans have still done relatively little damage to their planet so far - from 
a distance it still looks fine - it is still the case that the place has been 
contaminated.  Even if we wiped all human life off the rockball, people would still look 
down at the thing and shiver, recalling the pathetic but fiercely self-destructive monsters 
that once stalked its surface.  However… even memories find it difficult to haunt a 
singularity.' 

Li stuck the point of the light sword into the top of the table and made to lean on the 
pommel; the wood flared and burned, and the sword started to drill through the flaming 
redwood in a cloud of smoke.  Li pulled the sword out, shoved it in its scabbard and 
repeated the manoeuvre while somebody poured a small fortune in wine over the 
burning wood. ('Did they have scab೦bards?' Roghres asked, puzzled. 'I thought they 
just turned it off…') The resulting steam and fumes rose dramatically around Li as he 
leant on the pommel of the sword and looked seriously and sincerely at all of us. 'Ladies 
and gentlemen,' he nodded, grim-faced. 'This, I submit, is the only solution; a genocide 
to end all genocides.  We have to destroy the planet in order to save it.  Should you 
decide to do me the honour of electing me as your ruler, to serve you, I shall set about 
putting this plan into immediate effect, and shortly Earth, and all its problems, will 
cease to exist.  Thank you.' 

Li bowed, turned, stepped down and sat. 

Those of us who'd still been listening clapped, and event೦ually more or less everybody 
joined in.  There were a few fairly irrelevant questions about stuff like accretion disks, 
lunar tidal forces, and conservation of angular momentum, but after Li had done his 
best to answer those, Roghres, Tel, Djibard and I went to the head of the table, lifted Li 
up, carried him down the length of the table to the sound of cheers, took him into the 
lower accommodation level, and threw him in the pool.  Fused the light sabre, but I 
don't think the ship meant to leave Li with something that dangerous to wave around 
anyway. 

We finished the fun off on a remote beach in Western Australia in the very early 
morning, swimming off our heavy bellies and wine-fuddled heads in the slow rollers of 
the Indian Ocean, or basking in the sunlight. 

That's what I did; just lay there on the sand, listening to a still pool-damp Li tell me 
what a great idea it was to blow the entire planet away (or suck the entire planet away).  I 
listened to people splashing in the waves, and tried to ignore Li.  I dozed off, but I was 
woken up for a game of hide-and-seek in the rocks, and later we sat around and had a 
light picnic. 

Later, Li had us all play another game; guess the general೦ization.  We each had to 
think of one word to describe humanity; Man, the species.  Some people thought it was 
silly, just on principle, but the majority joined in.  There were suggestions like 
'precocious', 'doomed', 'murderous', 'inhuman', and 'frightening'.  Most of us who'd been 
on-planet must have been falling under the spell of humanity's own propaganda, 
because we tended to come up with words like 'inquisitive', 'ambi೦tious', 'aggressive', 
or 'quick'.  Li's own suggestion to describe humanity was 'MINE!', but then somebody 

thought to ask the ship.  It complained about being restricted to one word, then 
pretended to think for a long time, and finally came up with 'gullible'. 

'Gullible?' I said. 

'Yeah,' said the remote drone. 'Gullible… and bigoted.' 

'That's two words,' Li told it. 

'I'm a fucking starship; I'm allowed to cheat.' 

Well, it amused me.  I lay back.  The water sparkled, the sky seemed to ring with light, 
and way in the distance a black triangle or two carved the perimeter of the field the ship 
was laying down under the chopping blue sea. 

6: Undesirable Alien 

6.1:  You'll Thank Me Later 

December.  We were finishing off, tying up the loose ends.  There was an air of 
weariness about the ship.  People seemed quieter.  I don't think it was just tiredness.  I 
think it was more likely the effect of a realized objec೦tivity, a distancing; we had been 
there long enough to get over the initial buzz, the honeymoon of novelty and 
delight.  We were starting to see Earth as a whole, not just a job to be done and a 
playground to explore, and in looking at it that way, it became both less immediate and 
more impressive; part of the literature, something fixed by fact and reference, no longer 
ours; a droplet of knowledge already being absorbed within the swelling ocean of the 
Culture's experience. 

Even Li had quieted down.  He held his elections, but only a few people were indulgent 
enough to vote, and we just did it to humour him.  Disappointed, Li declared himself 
the ship's captain in exile (no, I never under೦stood that either), and left it at that.  He 
took to betting against the ship on horse races, ball games and football matches.  The 
ship must have been fixing the odds, because it ended up owing Li a ridiculous amount 
of money.  Li insisted on being paid so the ship fashioned him a flawless cut diamond 
the size of his fist.  It was his, the ship told him.  A gift; he could own it. (Li lost interest 
in it after that though, and tended to leave it lying around the social spaces; I stubbed a 
toe on it at least twice.  In the end he got the ship to leave the stone in orbit around 
Neptune on our way out of the system; a joke.) 

I spent a lot of time on the ship playing Tsartas music, though more to compose myself 
than anything else. [*14*] 

I had my Grand Tour, like most of the others on the ship, so spent a day or so in all the 
places I wanted to see; I saw sunrise from the top of Khufu and sunset from Ayers 
Rock.  I watched a pride of lions laze and play in Ngorongoro, and the tabular bergs 
calve from the Ross ice shelf; I watched condors in the Andes, musk ox on the tundra, 
polar bears on the Arctic ice and jaguars slinking through the jungle.  I skated on Lake 
Baykal, dived over the Great Barrier Reef, strolled along the Great Wall, rowed across 
Dal and Titicaca, climbed Mount Fuji, took a mule down the Grand Canyon, swam with 
the whales off Baja California, and hired a gondola to cruise round Venice, through the 
cold mists of winter under a sky that to me looked old and tired and worn. 

I know some people did go to the ruins at Angkor, safety guaranteed by the ship, its 
drones and knife missiles… but not I.  No more could I visit the Potala, however much 
I wanted to. 

We were due for a couple of months R&R on an Orbital in Trohoase cluster; standard 
procedure after immer೦sion in a place like Earth.  Certainly, I wasn't in the mood for 
any more exploring for a while; I was drained, sleeping five or six hours a night and 
dreaming heavily, as though the pressure of artifically crammed information I'd started 
out with as briefing - combined with everything I'd experienced personally - was too 
much for my poor head, and it was leaking out when my guard was down. 

I'd given up on the ship.  Earth was going to be a Control; I'd failed.  Even the fall-back 
position, of waiting until Armageddon, was disallowed.  I argued it out with the ship in 
a 
crew 
assembly, 
but 
couldn't 
even 
carry 
the 
human 
vote 
with 

me.  The Arbitrary copied to the Bad For Business and the rest, but I think it was just 
being kind; nothing I said made any difference.  So I made music, took my Grand Tour, 
and slept a lot.  I finished my Tour, and said goodbye to Earth, on the cliffs of a chilly, 
wind-swept Thira, looking out over the shattered caldera to where the ruby-red sun met 
the Mediterranean; a livid plasma island sinking in the wine-dark sea.  Cried. 

'But I don't want to.' 

'Well, that's all right, if you're quite sure.  I'm not asking you to do it for your own good, 
I must admit, but I did promise Linter I'd ask, and he did seem quite anxious to see you 
before we left.' 

'Oh… but why?  What does he want from me?' 

'He wouldn't say.  I didn't talk to him all that long.  I sent a drone down to tell him we 
were leaving soon, and he said he would only talk to you.  I told him I'd ask but I 
couldn't guarantee anything… he was adamant though; only you.  He won't talk to 
me.  Oh well.  Such is life.  Not to worry.  I'll tell him you won't -' the small unit started 
to drift away, but I pulled it back. 

'No; no, stop; I'll go.  God dammit, I'll go.  Where?  Where does he want to meet?' 

'New York City.' 

'Oh no,' I groaned. 

'Hey, it's an interesting place.  You might like it.' 

6.2:  The Precise Nature Of The Catastrophe 

A General Contact Unit is a machine.  In Contact you live inside one, or several, plus a 
variety of Systems Vehicles, for most of your average thirty-year stint.  I was just over 
half way through my spell and I'd been on three GCUs; the Arbitrary had been my home 
for only a year before we found Earth, but the craft before it had been an Escarpment 
class too.  So I was used to living in a device… nevertheless; I'd never felt so machine-
trapped, so tangled and caught and snarled up as I did after an hour in the Big Apple. 

I don't know if it was the traffic, the noise, the crowds, the soaring buildings or the 
starkly geometric expanses of streets and avenues (I mean, I've never even heard of a 
GSV which laid out its accommodation as regul೦arly as Manhattan), or just everything 
together, but whatever it was, I didn't like it.  So; a bitterly cold, windy Saturday night 
in the big city on the Eastern seaboard, only a couple of week's shopping left till 
Christmas, and me sitting in a little coffee shop on 42nd Street at eleven o'clock, waiting 
for the movies to end. 

What was Linter playing at?  Going to see Close Encoun೦ters for the seventh time, 
indeed.  I looked at my watch, drank my coffee, paid the check and left.  I tightened the 
heavy wool coat about me, pulled on gloves and a hat.  I wore needle-cords and knee-
length leather boots.  I looked around as I walked, a chill wind against my face. 

What really got to me was the predictability.  It was like a jungle.  Oslo a rock 
garden?  Paris a parterre, with its follies, shady areas and breeze-block garages 
inset?  London with that vaguely conservatory air, a badly kept museum haphazardly 
modernized?  Wien a too severe version of Paris, high starch collared, and Berlin a long 
garden party in the ruins of a baroque sepulchre?  Then New York a rain forest; an 
infested, towering, teeming jungle, full of great columns that scratched at the clouds but 

which stood with their feet in the rot, decay and swarming life beneath; steel on rock, 
glass blocking the sun; the ship's living machine incarnate. 

I walked through the streets, dazzled and frightened.  The Arbitrary was just a tap on 
my terminal away, ready to send help or bounce me up on an emergency displace, but 
I still felt scared.  I'd never been in such an intimi೦dating place.  I walked up 42nd 
Street and carefully crossed Sixth Avenue to walk along its far side towards the movie 
theatre. 

People streamed out, talking in twos and groups, putting up collars, walking off quickly 
with their arms round each other to find someplace warm, or standing looking for a 
cab.  Their breath misted the air in front of them, and from the lights of the mothership 
to the lights of the foyer to the lights of the snarling traffic they moved.  Linter was one 
of the last out, looking thinner and paler than he had in Oslo, but brighter, quicker.  He 
waved and came over to me.  He buttoned up a fawn-coloured coat, then put his lips to 
my cheek as he reached for his gloves. 

'Mmm.  Hello.  You're cold.  Eaten yet?  I'm hungry.  Want to eat?' 

'Hello.  I'm not cold.  I'm not hungry either, but I'll come and watch you.  How are you?' 

'Fine.  Fine,' he smiled. 

He didn't look fine.  He looked better than I remembered, but in big city terms, he was 
a bit scruffy and not very well-fed looking.  That fast, edgy, high-pressure urban life 
had infected him, I guess. 

He pulled on my arm. 'Come on; let's walk.  I want to talk.' 

'All right.' We started along the sidewalk.  Bustle-hustle, all their signs and lights and 
racket and smell, the white noise of their existence, a focus of all the world's 
busi೦ness.  How could they stand it?  The bag ladies; the obvious loonies, eyes staring; 
the grotesquely obese; the cold vomit in the alleys and the bloodstains on the kerb; and 
all their signs, those slogans and lights and pictures, flickering and bright, entreating 
and ordering, enticing and demanding in a grammar of glowing gas and incandenscing 
wire. 

This was the soul of the machine, the ethological epicentre, the planetary ground zero 
of their commer೦cial energy.  I could almost feel it, shivering down like bomb-blasted 
rivers of glass from these undreaming towers of dark and light invading the snow-dark 
sky. 

Peace in the Middle East? the papers asked.  Better celebrate Bokassa's coronation 
instead; better footage. 

'You got a terminal?' Linter said.  He sounded eager somehow. 

'Of course.' 

'Turn it off?' he said.  His eyebrows rose.  He looked like a child all of a sudden. 
'Please.  I don't want the ship to overhear.' 

I wanted to say something to the effect that the ship could have bugged every individual 
hair on his head, but didn't.  I turned the terminal brooch to standby. 

'You seen Close Encounters?' Linter said, leaning towards me.  We were heading in the 
direction of Broadway. 

I nodded. 'Ship showed us it being made.  We saw the final print before anybody.' 

'Oh yes, of course.' People bumped into us, swaddled in their heavy clothes, insulated. 
'The ship said you're leaving soon.  Are you glad to be going?' 

'Yes, I am.  I didn't think I'd be, but I am.  And you?  Are you glad to be staying?' 

'Pardon?' A police car charged past, then another, sirens whooping.  I repeated what I'd 
said.  Linter nodded and smiled at me.  I thought his breath smelled. 'Oh yes,' he 
nodded. 'Of course.' 

'I still think you're a fool, you know.  You'll be sorry.' 

'Oh no, I don't think so.' He sounded confident, not looking at me, head held high as we 
walked down the street. 'I don't think so at all.  I think I'm going to be very happy here.' 

Happy here.  In the grand, cold design and the fake warmth of the neon, while the 
drunks brown-bagged and the addicts begged and the deadbeats searched for warmer 
gratings and a thicker cardboard box.  It seemed worse here; you saw the same thing in 
Paris and London, but it seemed worse here.  Take a step from a shop you had to have 
an appointment for, swathed in loot across the sidewalk to the Roller, Merc or Caddy 
purring at the kerb, while some poor fucked-up husk of a human lay just a spit away, 
but you'd never notice them noticing… Or maybe I was just too sensitive, shell-
shocked; life really was a struggle on Earth, and the Culture's 100 percent non-com.  A 
year was as much as you could have expected any of us to handle, and I was near the 
end of my resistance. 

'It'll all work out, Sma.  I'm very confident.' 

Fall in the street here and they just walk around you… 

'Yes, yes.  I'm sure you're right.' 

'Look.' He stopped, turned me by the elbow so that we stood face to face. 'I'm going to 
have to tell you.  I know you probably won't like me for it, but it's important to me.' I 
watched his eyes, shifting to look at each of mine in turn.  His skin looked more mottled 
than I remembered; some pore-deep dirt. 

'What?' 

'I'm studying.  I'm going to enter the Roman Catholic Church.  I've found Jesus, Diziet; 
I'm saved.  Can you understand that?  Are you angry with me?  Does it upset you?' 

'No, I'm not angry,' I said flatly. 'That's great, Dervley.  If you're happy, I'm happy for 
you.  Congratulations.' 

'That's great!' He hugged me.  I was pressed against his chest; held; released.  We 
resumed our walk, walking faster.  He seemed pleased. 'Damn, I can't tell you Dizzy; 
it's just so good to be here, to be alive and know there are so many people, so much 
happening!  I wake up in the morning and I have to lie for a while just convincing 
myself I'm really here and it's all really happening to me; I really do.  I walk down the 
street and I look at the people; just look at them!  A woman was killed in the place I 
stay in last week; can you imagine that?  Nobody heard a thing.  I go out and I go on 
buses and I buy papers and watch old movies in the afternoon.  Yesterday I watched a 
man being talked down from the Queensboro bridge.  I think people were 
disappointed.  D'you know, when he came down he tried to claim he was a painter?' 
Linter shook his head, grinning. 'Hey, I read a terrible thing yesterday, you know?  I 
read that there are times when there's a really complicated birth and the baby's caught 
inside the mother and probably already dead, and the doctor has to reach up inside the 
woman and take the baby's skull in his hand and crush it so they can save the 
mother.  Isn't that terrible?  I don't think I could have condoned that even before I found 
Jesus.' 

'Why couldn't they have done a Caesarean?' 

'I don't know.  I don't know.  I wondered about that myself.  You know I was thinking 
about coming up to the ship?' He looked briefly at me, nodded. 'To see if anybody else 
might want to stay.  I thought others might want to follow my example, especially after 
I'd talked to them, had a chance to explain.  I thought they might see I was right.' 

'Why didn't you?' We stopped at another intersection.  All the people charged around 
us, hurrying through the smells of burning petrol and cooking and rotten food.  I smelled 
gas, and sometimes steam wrapped itself around us, damp and fragrant. 

'Why didn't I?' Linter mused, watching the DON'T WALK sign. 'I didn't think it would 
do any good.  And I was afraid the ship might find a way of keeping me on board.  Do 
you think I was foolish?' 

I looked at him, while the steam curled round us and the sign changed to WALK, but I 
didn't say anything.  An old guy came up to us on the far sidewalk and Linter gave him 
a quarter. 

'But I'll be fine by myself anyway.' We turned down Broadway, heading towards 
Madison Square, past shops and offices, theatres and hotels, bars and restaur೦ants and 
apartment blocks.  Linter put his arm round my waist, squeezed me. 'Come on, Dizzy, 
you aren't saying much.' 

'No, I'm not, am I?' 

'I guess you still think I'm being stupid.' 

'No more than the locals.' 

He smiled. 'They're really good people.  What you don't understand is you have to 
translate behaviour as well as language.  Once you do realize that you'll come to love 
these people the way I do.  Sometimes I think they've come to terms with their 
technology better than we have, you know that?' 

'No.' No I didn't know that, here in mincerville, meat-grinder city.  Come to terms with 
it; yeah sure… turn off the aiming computer, Luke; play the five tones; close your eyes 
and concentrate together, that's the way… nobody here but us Clears… hand me down 
that orgone box… 

'I'm not getting through to you, Dizzy, am I?  You're all closed up, not really 
here.  You're half-way out the system already, aren't you?' 

'I'm just tired,' I told him. 'Keep talking.' I felt like a helpless, twitching, pink-eyed rat 
caught in a maze in some shining alien laboratory; vast and glittering with some lethal, 
inhuman purpose. 

'They do so well, considering.  I know there's a lot of horrible things going on, but it 
only seems so terrible because we pay so much attention to it.  The vast majority of 

good stuff isn't newsworthy; we don't notice it.  We don't see what a good time most of 
these people are having.  I've met a lot of quite happy people, you know; I have 
friends.  I met them through my work.' 

'You work?' I was actually interested. 

'Ha ha.  I thought the ship might not have told you that.  Yes, I've had a job for the last 
couple of months; docu೦ment translator for a big firm of lawyers.' 

'Uh-huh.' 

'What was I saying?  Oh yeah; lots of people have a quite acceptable life; they're pretty 
comfortable in fact.  People can have neat apartments, cars, holidays… and people can 
have children. That's a good thing, you know; you see a lot more children on a planet 
like this.  I like children.  Don't you?' 

'Yes.  I thought everybody did.' 

'Ha, well… anyway… in some ways these people would consider us backward, you 
know that?  I know it might sound dumb, but it isn't.  Look at transport; the aircraft I 
had on my home plate was on its third or fourth generation, nearly a thousand years 
old!  These people change their automobiles every year!  They have throw-away 
containers and disposable clothes and fashions that mean changing your clothes every 
year, every season! -' 

'Dervley -' 

'Compared to them, the Culture moves at a snail's pace!' 

'Dervley, what was it you wanted to talk about?' 

'Huh?  Talk about?' Linter looked confused.  We turned left onto Fifth Avenue. 'Oh, 
nothing in particular, I guess.  I just thought it'd be nice to see you before you left; wish 
you bon voyage. I hope you don't mind.  You don't mind, do you?  The ship said you 
might not want to come, but you don't mind, do you?' 

'No, I don't mind.' 

'Good.  Good, I didn't think…' his voice trailed off.  We walked on in our own silence, 
in the midst of the city's continuous coughing and spitting and wheezing. 

I wanted to go.  I wanted to get out of this city and off this continent and up from this 
planet and onto the ship and out of this system… but something kept me walking with 
him, walking and stopping, stepping down and out, across and up, like another obedient 
part of the machine, designed to move, to function, to keep going regardless, to keep 
pressing on and plugging away, warming up or falling down but always always moving, 
down to the drug store or up to company president or just to stay a moving target, 
hugging the rails on a course you hardly needed to see so could stay blinkered on, 
missing the fallers and the lame around you and the trampled ones behind.  Perhaps he 
was right and any one of us could stay here with him, just vanish into the city-space and 
disappear forever and never be thought of again, never think again, just obey orders and 
ordinances and do what the place demands, start falling and never stop, never find any 
other purchase, and our twistings and turnings and writhings as we fall, exactly what 
the city expects, just what the doctor ordered… 

Linter stopped.  He was looking through an iron grille at a shop selling religious statues, 
holy water containers, Bibles and commentaries, crosses and rosaries and crib and 
manger scenes.  He stared down at it all, and I watched him.  He nodded at the window 
display. 'That's what we've lost, you know.  What you've lost; all of you.  A sense of 
wonder and awe and… sin.  These people know there are still things they don't know, 
things that can still go wrong, things they can still do wrong.  They still have the hope 
because the possibility is there.  Without the possibility of failure, you can't have 
hope.  They have hope.  The Culture has statistics.  We - it; the Culture - is too certain, 
too organized and stifled.  We've choked the life out of life; nothing's left to 
chance.  Take the chance of things going wrong out of life and it stops being life, don't 
you see?' His pinched, dark-browed face looked frustrated. 

'No, I don't see,' I told him. 

He ran one hand through his hair, shook his head. 'Look; let's eat, huh?  I'm really 
hungry.' 

'Okay; lead on.  Where?' 

'This way; somewhere really special.' We started off in the same direction again, came 
to the corner of 48th Street and turned up that.  A cold wind blew around us, scattering 
papers. 'What I mean is, you have to have that potential for wrongness there or you can't 
live… or you can but it doesn't mean anything.  You can't have the peak without the 
trough, or light without shade… it's not that you must have evil to have good, but you 
must have the possibility for evil.  That's what the Church teaches, you know.  That's 
the choice that Man has; he can choose to be good or evil; God doesn't force him to be 
evil any more than He forces him to be good.  The choice is left to Man now as it was 

to Adam.  Only in God is there any real chance of understanding and appreciating Free 
Will.' 

He pushed my elbow, steering me down an alley.  A white and red sign glowed at the 
far end.  I could smell food. 

'You have to see that.  The Culture gives us so much, but in fact it's only taking things 
away from us, lobotomizing everybody in it, taking away their choices, their potential 
for being really good or even slightly bad.  But God, who is in all of us; yes, in you too, 
Diziet… perhaps even in the ship for all I know… God, who sees and knows all, who 
is all-powerful, all-knowing, in a way that no ship, no mere Mind can ever 
be; infinitely knowing, still allows us; poor, pathetic, fallible humanity - and by 
extension, pan-humanity… allows even us; the, the -' 

It was dark in the alley, but I should still have seen them.  I wasn't even listening 
properly to Linter, I was just letting him witter on, not concentrating.  So I should have 
seen them, but I didn't, not until it was too late. 

They moved out from behind us, knocking over a dustcan, shouting, crashing into 
us.  Linter spun around, letting go of my elbow, I turned quickly.  Linter held up one 
hand and said - did not shout - something I didn't catch.  A figure rushed at me, half 
crouched.  Somehow, without seeing it, I knew there was a knife. 

It all remains so clear, so measured.  I suppose some secre೦tion had taken over the 
instant my midbrain realized what was happening.  It seemed very light in the alley, and 
everybody else was moving slowly, along lines like laser beams or cross-hairs, casting 
weighted shadows in front of them along those lines in the direction they were moving. 

I stepped to one side, letting the boy and the knife spin past.  A right-foot trip and a 
little pressure on his wrist as he went by and he had to let the knife go.  He stum೦bled 
and fell.  I had the knife, and threw it far away down the alley before turning back to 
Linter. 

Two of them had him on the ground, kicking and struggling.  I heard him cry out once 
as I moved towards them, but I recall no other sound.  Whether it was really as silent as 
I remember it, or whether I was simply concentrating on the sense that yielded the most 
information, I don't know.  I caught the heels of one of them, and pulled, heaving him 
out and up, cracking his face against one boot where I'd stuck it out to meet him.  I 
threw him out of the way.  The other one was already up.  Lines seemed to be bunching 
up at the side of my vision, and throbbing, making me think about how much time the 
first one had had to regain his balance if not his knife.  I realized I wasn't doing this the 
way you were meant to.  The one in front of me lunged.  I stepped out of the way, 

turning again.  I hit him on the head while I looked back at the first one, who was on 
his feet, coming forward, but hesitating at the side of the one I'd hit second, who was 
struggling up against the wall, holding his face; dark blood on pale skin. 

They ran, as one, like a school of fish turning. 

Linter was staggering, trying to stand.  I caught him and he clutched at me, gripping my 
arm tightly, breath wheezing.  He stumbled and sagged as we got to the red and white 
light outside the little restaurant.  A man with a napkin stuffed in the top of his vest 
opened the door and looked out at us. 

Linter fell at the doorstep.  It was only then I thought of the terminal, and realized that 
Linter was gripping the top of my coat, where the terminal brooch was.  The smells of 
cooking came out of the open door.  The man with the napkin looked cautiously up and 
down the alley.  I tried to prise Linter's fingers free. 

'No,' he said. 'No.' 

'Dervley, let go.  Let me get the ship.' 

'No.' He shook his head.  There was sweat on his brow, blood on his lips.  A huge dark 
stain was spreading over the fawn coat. 'Let me.' 

'What?' 

'Lady?' 

'No.  Don't.' 

'Lady?  Want me to call the cops?' 

'Linter?  Linter?' 

'Lady?' 

'Linter!' 

When his eyes closed his grip loosened. 

There were more people at the restaurant door.  Some೦body said, 'Jesus.' I stayed 
there, kneeling on the cold ground with Linter's face close to mine, thinking:  How 
many films? (The guns quieten, the battle stops.) How often do they do this, in their 
commercial dreams? (Look after Karen for me… that's an order, mister… you know I 

always loved you… Killing of Georgie… Ici resté un deporté inconnu…) What am I 
doing here?  Come on lady. 

'Come on lady.  Come on, lady…'Somebody tried to lift me. 

Then he was lying beside Linter looking hurt and surprised and somebody was 
screaming and people were backing off. 

I started running.  I jabbed the terminal brooch and shouted. 

I stopped at the far end of the alley, near the street, and rested against a wall, looking at 
the dark bricks opposite. 

A noise like a pop, and a drone sinking slowly down in front of me; a business-like 
black-body drone, the inky lengths of two knife missiles hovering on either side above 
eye level, twitchy for action. 

I took a deep breath. 'There's been a slight accident,' I said calmly. 

6.3:  Halation Effect 

I looked at Earth.  It was shown, in-holo'd, on one wall of my cabin; brilliant and blue, 
solid and white-whorled. 

'Then it was more like suicide,' Tagm said, stretching out on my bed. 'I didn't think 
Catholics -' 

'But I cooperated,' I said, still pacing up and down. 'I let him do it.  I could have called 
the ship.  After he lost consciousness there was time; we could still have saved him.' 

'But he'd been altered back, Dizzy, and they're dead when their heart stops, aren't they?' 

'No; there's two or three minutes after the heart stops.  It was enough time.  I had enough 
time.' 

'Well then so did the ship.  It must have been watching; it was bound to have had a 
missile on the case.' Tagm snorted. 'Linter was probably the most over-observed man 
on the planet.  The ship must have known too; it could have done something.  The ship 
had the control, it had the real-time grasp; it isn't your responsibility, Dizzy.' 

I wished I could accept Tagm's moral subtraction.  I sat down on the end of the bed, 
head in my hands, staring at the holo of the planet in the wall.  Tagm came over, hugged 

me, hands on my shoulders, head on mine. 'Dizzy; you have to stop thinking about 
it.  Let's go do something.  You can't sit watching that damn holo all day.' 

I stroked one of Tagm's hands, gazed again at the slowly revolving planet, my gaze 
flicking in one glance from pole to equator. 'You know, when I was in Paris, seeing 
Linter for the first time, I was standing at the top of some steps in the courtyard where 
Linter's place was, and I looked across it and there was a little notice on the wall saying 
it was forbidden to take photographs of the courtyard without the man's permission.' I 
turned to Tagm. 'They want to own the light!' 

6.4:  Dramatic Exit, Or, Thank You And Goodnight 

At five minutes and three seconds past three AM, GMT, on the morning of January the 
second, 1978, the General Contact Unit Arbitrary broke orbit above the planet Earth.  It 
left behind an octet of Main Observ೦ation Satellites - six of them in near-GS orbits - a 
scat೦tering of drones and minor missiles, and a small plantation of young oaks on a 
bluff near Elk Creek, California. 

The ship had brought Linter's body back up, displacing it from its freezer in a New York 
City morgue.  But when we left, Linter stayed, in a fashion.  I argued he ought to be 
buried on-planet, but the ship disagreed.  Linter's last instructions regarding the disposal 
of his remains had been issued fifteen years earlier, when he first joined Contact, and 
were quite conventional; his corpse was to be displaced into the centre of the nearest 
star.  So the sun gained a bodyweight, courtesy of Culture tradition, and in a million 
years, maybe, a little of the light from Linter's body would shine upon the planet he had 
loved. 

The Arbitrary held its darkfield for a few minutes, then dropped it just past Mars (so 
there was just a chance it left an image on an Earth telescope).  Meanwhile it was 
snapping all its various remote drones and sats away from the other planets in the 
system.  It stayed in real space right up till the last moment (making it possible that its 
rapidly increasing mass produced a blip on a terrestrial gravity-wave experiment, deep 
in some mountain-mine), then totalled as it dispatched Linter's body into the stellar core, 
sucked a last few drones of Pluto and a couple of outlying comets, and slung Li's 
diamond at Neptune (where it's probably still in orbit). 

charmed me into staying.  But it never did tell me whether it had been watching Linter 
and me that night in New York. 

So, did I really believe I was to blame, or was I kidding even myself?  I don't know.  I 
didn't know then, and I don't know now. 

There was guilt, I recall, but it was an odd sort of guilt.  What really annoyed me, what 
I did find hard to take, was my complicity not in what Linter was trying to do, and not 
in his own half-willed death, but in the gener೦ality of transferred myth those people 
accepted as reality. 

It strikes me that although we occasionally carp about Having To Suffer, and moan 
about never producing real Art, and become despondent or try too hard to compensate, 
we are indulging in our usual trick of synthesizing something to worry about, and should 
really be thanking ourselves that we live the life we do.  We may think ourselves 
parasites, complain about Mind-generated tales, and long for 'genuine' feelings, 'real' 
emotion, but we are missing the point, and indeed making a work of art ourselves in 
imagining such an uncomplicated existence is even possible.  We have the best of 
it.  The alternative is something like Earth, where as much as they suffer, for all that 
they burn with pain and confused, bewildered angst, they produce more dross than 
anything else; soap operas and quiz programmes, junk papers and pulp romances. 

Worse than that, there is an osmosis from fiction to reality, a constant contamination 
which distorts the truth behind both and fuzzes the telling distinctions in life itself, 
categorizing real situations and feelings by a set of rules largely culled from the most 
hoary fictional clichés, the most familiar and received nonsense.  Hence the soap 
operas, and those who try to live their lives as soap operas, while believing the stories 
to be true; hence the quizzes where the ideal is to think as close to the mean as possible, 
and the one who conforms utterly is the one who stands above the rest; the Winner… 

They always had too many stories, I believe; they were too free with their acclaim and 
their loyalty, too easily impressed by simple strength or a cunning word.  They 
worshipped at too many altars. 

Perhaps it's as well I haven't changed very much over the years; I doubt that it's much 
different from what I'd have written a year or a decade later, rather than a 
century. [*15*] 

It's funny the images that stay with you though.  Over the years one thing has haunted 
me, one dream recurred.  It really has nothing to do with me in a sense, because it was 
something I never saw… yet it stays there, nevertheless. 

I didn't want to be displaced, that night, nor did I want to travel out to somewhere remote 
enough for a module to pick me up without being seen.  I got the black-body drone to 
lift me from the city; right up, darkfielded, into the sky in the midst of Manhattan, rising 
above all that light and noise into the darkness, quiet as any falling feather.  I sat on the 
Drone's back, still in shock I suppose, and don't even remember transferring to the dark 
module a few kilometres above the grid of urban light.  I saw but didn't watch, and 
thought not of my own flight, but about the other drones the ship might be using on the 
planet at the time; where they might be, what doing. 

I mentioned the Arbitrary collected snowflakes.  Actually it was searching for a pair of 
identical ice crystals.  It had - has - a collection; not holes or figure break-downs, but 
actual samples of ice crystals from every part of the galaxy it has ever visited where it 
found frozen water. 

It only ever collects a few flakes each time, of course; a saturation pick-up would be… 
inelegant. 

I suppose it must still be looking.  What it will do if it ever does find two identical 
crystals, it has never said.  I don't know that it really wants to find them, anyway. 

But I thought of that, as I left the glittering, grumbling city beneath me.  I thought - and 
I still dream about this, maybe once or twice a year - of some drone, its flat back star-
dappled, quietly in the steppes or at the edge of a polynya off Antarctica, gently lifting 
a single flake of snow, teasing it away from the rest, and hesi೦tating perhaps, before 
going, displaced or rising, taking its tiny, perfect cargo to the orbiting starship, and 
leaving the frozen plains, or the waste of ice, once more at peace. 

7: Perfidy, Or, A Few Words From 'The Drone' 

Well, thank goodness that's over.  I don't mind telling you this has been an extremely 
difficult translation, not helped at all by Sma's intransigent and at times obstruc೦tive 
attitude.  She frequently used Marain expressions it would be impossible to render 
accurately into English without at least a three-dimensional diagram, and consist೦ently 
refused to redraft or revise the text to facilitate its translation.  I have done my best, but 
I can take no responsibility for any misunderstanding caused by any part of this 
communication. 

I suppose I had better note here that the chapter titles (including that for Sma's covering 
letter, and this) and sub-titles are my own additions.  Sma wrote the above as one 
continuous document (can you imagine?), but I thought it better to split the thing 
up.  The chapter titles and sub-titles are, incidentally, also all names of General Contact 
Units produced by the Infracaninophile manufactury in Yinang Orbital which Sma 
refers to (without naming) in Chapter Three. 

Another thing; you will notice that Sma has the gall to refer to me simply as 'The Drone' 
in her letter.  I have humoured her matronizing whim quite long enough, and now wish 
to make clear that my name is, in fact, Fohristi-whirl Skaffen-Amtiskaw Handrahen 
Dran Easpyou.  I am not self-important and it is irresponsible of Sma to suggest that my 
duties in Special Circumstances are some sort of atonement for past 
misdeeds. My conscience is clear. 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 
(Drone, Offensive) 

PS:  I have met the Arbitrary, and it is a much more pleasant and engaging machine 
than Sma would have you believe. 

Scratch 

OR: The Present and Future of Species HS (sic) Considered as The Contents of a 
Contemporary Popular Record (qv).  Report Abstract/Extract Version 4.2 Begins 
(after this break); 

No one likes to think about what No one likes to think No one likes to think about what 
might happen happen in the event of your Large Tax-Free Bonus Tax Free Bonus but 
have you provided for your family should your Tax Free Bonus Home Fire Alarm will 
protect your family Large Tax Free better than almost any competing product product 
Will not Better than almost any product Can you afford not to be without this 
inexpensive Easy Credit Terms Available Easy Easy Easy Credit Terms Available Will 
not damage carpets. 

I:  Irreversible Neu(t)ral Damage 

Absolutely not it's a good idea I told her I said dear these days you've got to look out 
for number one; go for it, honey.  Don't you take any shit about BMW Three Series with 
discreet spoilers and those bulky overweight mega-diaries with your whole Yuppie life 
inside those ribbed covers, choosing your Hyper Hyper jacket to go with the new 
leatherbound you just got Is that a Diver's Watch, do you dive?  No is that a Pilot's 

Briefcase can you fly?  Are you sure this is real Perrier?  A degree with cloister cred, 
designer tampons and open-plan toilets.  Don't know anybody with AIDS yet.  This the 
powder room?  Na it's a good smear done first, 'course - and sell the Gas shares; 
remortgage with my cousin he'll see you right and set it up if you want; show these 
fucking Grauniad reading wankers what you think of them; a Unit Trust investing only 
in South Africa, the nuclear and defence industries and tobacco related products 
products is a great idea.  At least you know where you are lets do lunch and talk about 
it.  By the way, is it true about Naomi and Gerald? 

II: The Base Of The Iceberg 

(smell) The crunched up packets of cheap cigarettes, black stencil writing on yellow 
covers they call them crush-proof in the US all crushdup.  The line of dripping washing 
nappies, socks, nappies, blouse - needs a couple of buttons - more nappies, trousers - 
from the Oxfam shop - nappies (Intrusion:  The economies of scale: stuff the big 
pinkwhite Pampers box and the E9000 gigasize economy/Family Family Family box of 
powder into the GTi Don't forget the Comfort.  Now then where were we Oh Yes), 
nappies (smell), tights, nappies, more tights more nappies drip drip drip onto the sheets 
of newspaper on the floor (the string runs from broken light fitting to the hook holding 
the faded notice about fire procedure and no guests after ten You are expected to vacate 
the room for six hours per day Prams must be taken up to rooms Do NOT leave prams 
in stair wells No cooking in room This door should be should not be wedged open kept 
locked at all times the building is occupied.  Fire proof).  The remains of Wimpy meals 
and McDonald's Complete Family meals and Kentucky Fried Chicken soup in a Basket 
and Brightly Coloured Shakes and Wendy meals and French Fries (smell) and more 
French Fries (smell) and a Doner Kebab (small); junk food funk food junk food fast 
food for those who queued seven hours at the DHSS today spent the time in the park 
second hand pair of a cup last two hours but a skin forms on the top and they chase you 
out if they're busy fast food lunch time if it's raining's the worst won't allow prams in 
anyway cold in the rain and the hood leaks keep the curtains drawn all day fast food 
(Iknowbut) 

Giro don't come til next Tuesday she's been there three days but they've lost the records 
sent from 

Glasgow what a state poor cow fast food said it's a respiratory complaint keep him dry 
I said that's a joke fast food the park station/ DHSS/ just walk the streets I 
suppose(Intrusion:  The 
dripped-on 
paper 
sez:  WANT 
A 
QUICK 
LOAN? 

(homeowners only)) fast fod 

(meanwhile christ rushed off our feet so busy oh fuck another three-bottle lunch!… Did 
I pay that with the company card?  Yeah a Vodaphone on the firm next month Oh dear 
late again… Let's share a taxi) 

[fst fwd] and the tins of beans the cider bottles cough medicine tampon packets (plus 
VAT) baby food jars If you dip the French Fries (plus VAT) in the baby food it makes 
it last longer won't stop crying feel like hitting her sometimes I know, she's sick again 
(smell) and 

I'm late again 

(sic) what a state 

fast forward 

III:  Beat Me Up, Scotty 

of course there's the spin-offs; Gemini gave us non-stick frying pans, or was it Chuck 
Yeager? fst fd Well anyway of course there'll be peaceful applications the solar-
powered television on my watch would run off the space-based lasers 

IV: Hocus, Focus, Mucus 

… that he did, on or about the date given above, wilfully, and while in full possession 
of his faculties, walk under a ladder without due care and attention, step on the cracks 
in the pavement (1,345,964 other offences to be taken into consideration), break a 
mirror (statutory penalty seven years), fail to finish his meat course at dinner (thus 
incurring a period of rain on the following day of unspeci೦fied duration; see attached 
forensic meteorological report), spill approximately 211 grains of household sodium 
chloride (common salt:  NaCl) without thereafter propelling said same household 
sodium chloride over and above left shoulder despite supplies of same being freely 
available, to the furtherance of the Devil's works, and, farther, did, in the presence of 
several God-fearing witnesses, good men and true, with malice aforethought open an 
umbrella within a household, as defined by the Household (Definition) Act of the Year 
of Our Lord… 

V: Now Wash Your Hands 

I was proceeding in a Westerly direction along Rhodes Street along with others of my 
gang when I observed the defendant emerging from the premises now known to me as 
"Singh Brothers Supermarket Halal Meats and Off License", carrying a cardboard 
container of household supplies and sporting a dark complexion, whereupon my 

colleagues and I gave chase.  The defendant thereupon dropped the said box of 
household supplies, what I kicked as I persued him.  The defendant was chased into 
what I now know is Crucial Brew Close, where I and others kicked im in the ghoulies, 
kidnies and head, causing him injury and distress; following which, we ran away.  And 
I would like to thank the Rascist Bastards Complaints Review Board for helping to keep 
this sort of thing on the streets (Intrusion:  No one asked them to come here I'd send 
them all back to where they came from (Bradford).  Well, before that (Bradford).  Well, 
originally (Shock Deport Report:  Royals Repatriated to Hunland/ Wopland; Entire So-
Called "English" Upper Class 'Rel೦ocated' to France in "1066 Effect":  East African 
camps being prepared for "Stand Off Zanzibar" Final Solution.  Message Ends). 

VI: Formula Writing 

Junk DNA Junk AND Junk NAD Junk DAN Junk AND nkju ADN unkj DNA unkj 
AND unkj NAD unkj DAN unkj ADN nkju DNA nkju AND nkju NAD nkju ADN kjun 
DNA kjun AND kjun NAD kjun DAN kjun ADN unjk DNA unjk AND unjk NAD unjk 
DAN (etc) 

(tee, cet, tec, cet) 

VII: Thesis, Antithesis, Dialysis 

cancel BUPA if you have to New Cancer Research Grant Safe in our hands New Cancer 
Research Grant Report concludes Safe in our waldos PRIVATE CANCER 
TREATMENT:  A GROWTH INDUSTRY Concludes the poor and unemployed are 
more susceptible to a wide range of Spending More Than More Than More Than 
Spending More Than Ever Before New Cancer Research Grant SPENDING MORE 
THAN EVER BEFORE research cut slashed in NEW CUTS IN round of spending cuts 
NEW CUTS IN after wide consultations NEW CUTS IN reduced demand NEW CUTS 
IN catch೦ment area NEW CUTS IN revised priorities NEW CUTS IN community care 
NEW CUTS IN susceptible to a wide range of NEW CUTS IN NEW CUTS IN CUTS 
IN SURGICAL… Research Grant will no longer be referred to as a 'lump sum' and this 
latest mark of kidney machine - the twelve-inch dance re-mix laser guided precision 
munition version - can scatter hundreds of these tiny kidney-stone size machinettes over 
an area the size of a squash courts cricket pitch golf course, breaking up breaking up an 
enemy kidney failure while it's still in Warsaw Pict territory (oops, sic) go for it honey. 

VIII: What Free World 

LOONY LEFT BLACK LESBIANS WITH AIDS BAN 

ENGLISH IN NURSERIES 

ANOTHER 

MAGGIE SLAMS "ENEMY WITHIN" 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH 

"SORRY KIDS, YOU'RE WHITE" 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR 

BASTARDS! 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR BRITAIN 

ANOTHER BLOW FOR LABOUR 

UNEMPLOYMENT DOWN AGAIN 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR BRITAIN 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH 

LABOUR PLANS SCROUNGERS' CHARTER 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR 

35,000 JOBS TO GO IF LABOUR WIN 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR 

CHEERS, MAGGIE! 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR 

(RECORD PROFITS) 

ANOTHER TRIUMPH FOR 

US 

GOTCHA! 

IX: Rapid Ear Movement 

out of ten children below the age of six regularly have nightmares about nuclear war 

I sed it provides jobs, dunnit, an he sez 

'So did Belsin and Outshwits; them cattle trux didn't drive themselves you no; 
somebody had ta bild the camps and put up the electric wire and keep the showers hosed 
down; tok to me about hard wurk once you've spent all day supervizing frowing bodies 
into furnaces' Iknow "Ow, ullo Fritz; wotcher doin theez daze?" "Well, Kurt, am on a 
Reich Retraining Scheme, ineye?; pulling gold teef outa ded Jooz." Iknowbutprovides 
jobz alright Six million?  Don't make me larf that's just one city Iknowbutwhat gas was 
quick compared to radiation sickness 

Iknowbutwhatcan There was this sick cunt made lightshades outer ther skin but at 
Hiroshima they woz just shadders on the wall 

Iknowbutwhatcanyou makes yer fink, dunnit?  Iknowbutwhatcanyoudo? course that 
labour lot would just let the Rushins march right in and you got ta defend yourself, 
intya? 

X: The History Of The Universe In Three Words (sic) 

THE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE 

CHAPTER ONE 

Bang! 

CHAPTER TWO 

sssss… 

CHAPTER THREE 

crunch. 

THE END 

XI: The Precise Nature Of The Catastrophe 

WELCUM TO THE FEWTCHIR makes yer makes yer fink makes yer course that 
labour lot would just makes yer fink makes yer na it's true I read it in the paper (sic) 
RED MENACE makes yer fink SPENDING na don't scratch it it'll never get better 
(sick) march right in march march march right in makes yer fink course there'll be spin-

offs KILL AN ARGIE AND WIN A METRO I sed go for it honey KILL A look after 
number one and KILL A you got ta defend yourself KILL A KILL A fst fd KILL KILL 
KILL A COMMIE AND it makes you kicked im in the kidnie machines ATTENTION: 
you got ta SPENDING MORE defend yourself got ta defend your CHALLENGER 
BOMBS CHERNOBYL WITH LASER GUIDED AIDS self, SEVENTY-THREE 
SECONDS OVER CAPE CANAVERAL TWELVE MINUTES OVER TRIPOLI ONE 
HUNDRED 
THOU೦SAND 
YEARS 
OVER 
NORTHERN 
EUROPE, 

intya?  ATTENTION: oh well scratch another power station scratch another planet fst 
fd I sed ARMING intya?  GROWTH without INDUSTRY without due GROWTH 
GROWTH GROWTH INDUSTRY without due care and SPENDING MORE THAN 
you got ta defend SPENDING MORE THAN EVER defend your Tax Free GROWTH 
INDUSTRY without due care and ATTEN೦ TION:  ARMING SEQUENCE ta defend 
yourself, intya? just let them Rushins ATTENTION:  ARMING SEQUENCE 
INITIATED fst fd Course fst fd you got ta defend yourself fst fd NO ONE LIKES TO 
THINK the curtains closed all day fst ds ATTENTION (homeowners only) NO ONE 
LIKES you got ta NO ONE LIKES TO (Intrusion:) you got ta ATTENTION:  Will not 
damage carpets ATTENTION:  I said ATTENTION: fst fd ATTENTION: fst fd 
ATTENTION:  NO ONE LIKES TO defend your SPENDING MORE THAN EVER 
BEFORE 
self, 
intya?  I 
sed 
go 
for 
it 

ATTENTION:  ATTENTION:  ATTENTION:  Message Ends defend defend defend 
yourself, intya? you got ta defend you - ullo, wot's that bright l-?  ATTENTION: 

[EMP] 

(sssss…) 

XII: The End 

THE END 

12: I thought the phonetic equivalent was better than something strained like 'horsoid'. 
- 'The Drone' 

