BIRTH OF A LOST NATION…

The young man was dressed only in walking shorts and soft bush

shoes. “Friends,” he said. “we are gathered here tonight to found a new
nation.”

He paused to let the Idea sink in. “You know our situation. We

fervently hope to be rescued. I will even go so far as to say that I think
we will be rescued…eventually.

“It might be tomorrow…it might be our descendants a thousand

years from now. But when the main body of our great race
reestablishes contact with us, it is up to us whether they find a civilized
society, or flea-bitten animals without language, without art—with the
light of reason grown dim. Or no survivors at all, nothing but bones
picked clean!”

“Heinlein has produced another ingenious piece of scientific
imagination.”

—Saturday Review

By Robert A. Heinlein
Published by Ballantine Books:

BETWEEN PLANETS
CITIZEN OF THE GALAXY
THE DOOR INTO SUMMER
DOUBLE STAR
FARMER IN THE SKY
FRIDAY
GRUMBLES FROM THE GRAVE
HAVE SPACE SUIT-WILL TRAVEL
JOB: A COMEDY OF JUSTICE
THE NUMBER OF THE BEAST
THE PUPPET MASTERS
RED PLANET
ROCKET SHIP GALILEO
THE ROLLING STONES
SPACE CADET
THE STAR BEAST
STARMAN JONES
TIME FOR THE STARS
TUNNEL IN THE SKY
WALDO & MAGIC, INC.

Sale of this book without a front cover may be unauthorized. If this book is coverless, it may have
been reported to the publisher as “unsold or destroyed” and neither the author nor the publisher may
have received payment for it.

A Del Rey® Book
Published by Ballantine Publishing Group
Copyright © 1955 by Robert A. Heinlein

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. Published in the
United States by Ballantine Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and
simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.

No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without the permission of Charles Scribner’s
Sons.

http://www.randomhouse.com

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 55-10142

ISBN 0-345-35373-O

This edition published by arrangement with Charles Scribner’s Sons

Printed in Canada

Cover art by Darrell K. Sweet

First Ballantine Books Edition: March 1977

30 29 28 27

For Jeannie and Bibs

Contents

2. The Fifth Way

3. Through the Tunnel

4. Savage

5. The Nova

6. “I Think He Is Dead”

7. “I Should Have Baked a Cake”

8. “Fish, or Cut Bait”

9. “A Joyful Omen”

10. “I So Move”

11. The Beach of Bones

12. “It Won’t Work, Rod”

13. Unkillable

14. Civilization

15. In Achilles’ Tent

16. The Endless Road

The Marching Hordes

THE BULLETIN BOARD OUTSIDE LECTURE HALL 1712-A of Patrick Henry High
School showed a flashing red light. Rod Walker pushed his way into a knot
of students and tried to see what the special notice had to say. He received
an elbow in the stomach, accompanied by: “Hey! Quit shoving!”

“Sorry. Take it easy, Jimmy.” Rod locked the elbow in a bone breaker

but put no pressure on, craned his neck to look over Jimmy Throxton’s
head. “What’s on the board?”

“No class today.”
“Why not?”
A voice near the board answered him. “Because tomorrow it’s ‘Hail,

Caesar, we who are about to die—’”

“So?” Rod felt his stomach tighten as it always did before an

examination. Someone moved aside and he managed to read the notice:

PATRICK HENRY HIGH SCHOOL

Department of Social Studies

SPECIAL NOTICE to all students Course 410 (elective senior seminar)

Advanced Survival, instr. Dr. Matson, 1712-A MWF

2. 
Twenty-Four Hour Notice is hereby given of final examination in
Solo Survival. Students will present themselves for physical
check at 0900 Saturday in the dispensary of Templeton Gate and
will start passing through the gate at 1000, using three-minute
intervals by lot.

3. 
TEST CONDITIONS:

1. 
ANY planet, ANY climate, ANY terrain;

2. 
NO rules, ALL weapons, ANY equipment;

3. 
TEAMING IS PERMITTED but teams will not be allowed to pass
through the gate in company;

4. 
TEST DURATION is not less than forty-eight hours, not more
than ten days.

4. 
Dr. Matson will be available for advice and consultation until
1700 Friday.

5. 
Test may be postponed Only on recommendation of examining
physician, but any student may withdraw from the course without
administrative penalty up until 1000 Saturday.

6. 
Good luck and long life to you all!

(s) B. P. Matson, Sc.D.

Approved:

J. R. ROERICH, for the Board

Rod Walker reread the notice slowly, while trying to quiet the quiver in

his nerves. He checked off the test conditions—why, those were not
“conditions” but a total lack of conditions, no limits of any sort! They could
dump you through the gate and the next instant you might be facing a polar
bear at forty below—or wrestling an Octopus deep in warm salt water.

Or, he added, faced up to some three-headed horror on a planet you

had never heard of.

He heard a soprano voice complaining, “‘Twenty-four hour notice!’

Why, it’s less than twenty hours now. That’s not fair.”

Another girl answered, “What’s the difference? I wish we were starting

this minute. I won’t get a wink of sleep tonight.”

“If we are supposed to have twenty-four hours to get ready, then we

ought to have them. Fair is fair.”

Another student, a tall, husky Zulu girl, chuckled softly. “Go on in.

Tell the Deacon that.”

Rod backed out of the press, taking Jimmy Throxton with him. He felt

that he knew what “Deacon” Matson would say…something about the
irrelevancy of fairness to survival. He chewed over the bait in paragraph
five; nobody would say boo if he dropped the course. After all, “Advanced
Survival” was properly a college course; he would graduate without it.

take the course later.

Jimmy said nervously, “What d’you think of it, Rod?”
“All right, I guess. But I’d like to know whether or not to wear my

long-handled underwear. Do you suppose the Deacon would give us a
hint?”

“Him? Not him! He thinks a broken leg is the height of humor. That

man would eat his own grandmother—without salt.”

“Oh, come now! He’d use salt. Say, Jim? You saw what it said about

teaming.”

“Yeah…what about it?” Jimmy’s eyes shifted away.
Rod felt a moment’s irritation. He was making a suggestion as delicate

as a proposal of marriage, an offer to put his own life in the same basket
with Jimmy’s. The greatest risk in a solo test was that a fellow just had to
sleep sometime…but a team could split it up and stand watch over each
other.

Jimmy must know that Rod was better than he was, with any weapon

or bare hands; the proposition was to his advantage. Yet here he was
hesitating as if he thought Rod might handicap him. “What’s the matter,
Jim?” Rod said bleakly. “Figure you’re safer going it alone?”

“Uh, no, not exactly.”
“You mean you’d rather not team with me?”
“No, no, I didn’t mean that!”
“Then what did you mean?”
“I meant—Look, Rod, I surely do thank you. I won’t forget it. But that

notice said something else, too.”

“What?”
“I said we could dump this durned course and still graduate. And I just

happened to remember that I don’t need it for the retail clothing business.”

“Huh? I thought you had ambitions to become a wide-angled lawyer?”
“So exotic jurisprudence loses its brightest jewel…so what do I care?

It will make my old man very happy to learn that I’ve decided to stick with
the family business.”

“You mean you’re scared.”
“Well, that’s one way of putting it. Aren’t you?”
Rod took a deep breath. “Yes. I’m scared.”

and stay alive by marching down to the Registrar’s office and bravely
signing our names to withdrawal slips.”

“Uh, no. You go ahead.”
“You mean you’re sticking?”
“I guess so.”
“Look, Rod, have you looked over the statistics on last year’s classes?”
“No. And I don’t want to. So long.” Rod turned sharply and headed for

the classroom door, leaving Jimmy to stare after him with a troubled look.

The lecture room was occupied by a dozen or so of the seminar’s

students. Doctor Matson, the “Deacon,” was squatting tailor-fashion on one
corner of his desk and holding forth informally. He was a small man and
spare, with a leathery face, a patch over one eye, and most of three fingers
missing from his left hand. On his chest were miniature ribbons, marking
service in three famous first expeditions; one carried a tiny diamond cluster
that showed him to be the last living member of that group.

Rod slipped into the second row. The Deacon’s eye flicked at him as

he went on talking. “I don’t understand the complaints,” he said jovially.
“The test conditions say ‘all weapons’ so you can protect yourself any way
you like…from a slingshot to a cobalt bomb. I think final examination
should be bare hands, not so much as a nail file. But the Board of Education
doesn’t agree, so we do it this sissy way instead.” He shrugged and grinned.

“Uh, Doctor, I take it then that the Board knows that we are going to

run into dangerous animals?”

“Eh? You surely will! The most dangerous animal known.”
“Doctor, if you mean that literally—”
“Oh, I do, I do!”
“Then I take it that we are either being sent to Mithra and will have to

watch out for snow apes, or we are going to stay on Terra and be dumped
where we can expect leopards. Am I right?”

The Deacon shook his head despairingly. “My boy, you had better

cancel and take this course over. Those dumb brutes aren’t dangerous.”

“But Jasper says, in Predators and Prey, that the two trickiest, most

dangerous—”

legged brute. Take a look around you!”

The instructor leaned forward. “I’ve said this nineteen dozen times but

you still don’t believe it. Man is the one animal that can’t be tamed. He
goes along for years as peaceful as a cow, when it suits him. Then when it
suits him not to be, he makes a leopard look like a tabby cat. Which goes
double for the female of the species. Take another look around you. All
friends. We’ve been on group-survival field tests together; we can depend
on each other. So? Read about the Donner Party, or the First Venus
Expedition. Anyhow, the test area will have several other classes in it, all
strangers to you.” Doctor Matson fixed his eye on Rod. “I hate to see some
of you take this test, I really do. Some of you are city dwellers by nature;
I’m afraid I have not managed to get it through your heads that there are no
policemen where you are going. Nor will I be around to give you a hand if
you make some silly mistake.”

His eye moved on; Rod wondered if the Deacon meant him.

Sometimes he felt that the Deacon took delight in rawhiding him. But Rod
knew that it was serious; the course was required for all the Outlands
professions for the good reason that the Outlands were places where you
were smart—or you were dead. Rod had chosen to take this course before
entering college because he hoped that it would help him to get a
scholarship—but that did not mean that he thought it was just a formality.

He looked around, wondering who would be willing to team with him

now that Jimmy had dropped out. There was a couple in front of him, Bob
Baxter and Carmen Garcia. He checked them off, as they undoubtedly
would team together; they planned to become medical missionaries and
intended to marry as soon as they could.

How about Johann Braun? He would make a real partner, all right—

strong, fast on his feet, and smart. But Rod did not trust him, nor did he
think that Braun would want him. He began to see that he might have made
a mistake in not cultivating other friends in the class besides Jimmy.

That big Zulu girl, Caroline something-unpronounceable. Strong as an

ox and absolutely fearless. But it would not do to team with a girl; girls
were likely to mistake a cold business deal for a romantic gambit. His eyes
moved on until at last he was forced to conclude that there was no one there
to whom he wished to suggest partnership.

lotion?”

Matson grinned and drawled, “Son, I’ll tell you every bit that I know.

This test area was picked by a teacher in Europe…and I picked one for his
class. But I don’t know what it is any more than you do. Send me a post
card.”

“But—” The boy who had spoken stopped. Then he suddenly stood up.

“Prof, this isn’t a fair test. I’m checking out.”

“What’s unfair about it? Not that we meant to make it fair.”
“Well, you could dump us any place—”
“That’s right.”
“—the back side of the Moon, in vacuum up to our chins. Or onto a

chlorine planet. Or the middle of an ocean. I don’t know whether to take a
space suit, or a canoe. So the deuce with it. Real life isn’t like that.”

“It isn’t, eh?” Matson said softly. “That’s what Jonah said when the

whale swallowed him.” He added, “But I will give you some hints. We
mean this test to be passed by anyone bright enough to deserve it. So we
won’t let you walk into a poisonous atmosphere, or a vacuum, without a
mask. If you are dumped into water, land won’t be too far to swim. And so
on. While I don’t know where you are going, I did see the list of test areas
for this year’s classes. A smart man can survive in any of them. You ought
to realize, son, that the Board of Education would have nothing to gain by
killing off all its candidates for the key professions.”

The student sat down again as suddenly as he had stood up. The

instructor said, “Change your mind again?”

“Uh, yes, sir. If it’s a fair test, I’ll take it.”
Matson shook his head. “You’ve already flunked it. You’re excused.

Don’t bother the Registrar; I’ll notify him.”

The boy started to protest; Matson inclined his head toward the door.

“Out!” There was an embarrassed silence while he left the room, then
Matson said briskly, “This is a class in applied philosophy and I am sole
judge of who is ready and who is not. Anybody who thinks of the world in
terms of what it ‘ought’ to be, rather than what it is, isn’t ready for final
examination. You’ve got to relax and roll with the punch…not get yourself
all worn out with adrenalin exhaustion at the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune. Any more questions?”

There were a few more but it became evident that Matson either

truthfully did not know the nature of the test area, or was guarding the
knowledge; his answers gained them nothing. He refused to advise as to
weapons, saying simply that the school armorer would be at the gate ready
to issue all usual weapons, while any unusual ones were up to the
individual. “Remember, though, your best weapon is between your ears and
under your scalp—provided it’s loaded.”

The group started to drift away; Rod got up to leave. Matson caught

his eye and said, “Walker, are you planning to take the test?”

“Why, yes, of course, sir.”
“Come here a moment.” He led him into his office, closed the door and

sat down. He looked up at Rod, fiddled with a paperweight on his desk and
said slowly, “Rod, you’re a good boy…but sometimes that isn’t enough.”

Rod said nothing.
“Tell me,” Matson continued, “why you want to take this test?”
“Sir?”
“‘Sir’ yourself,” Matson answered grumpily. “Answer my question.”
Rod stared, knowing that he had gone over this with Matson before he

was accepted for the course. But he explained again his ambition to study
for an Outlands profession. “So I have to qualify in survival. I couldn’t even
get a degree in colonial administration without it, much less any of the
planetography or planetology specialties.”

“Want to be an explorer, huh?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Like me.”
“Yes, Sir. Like you.”
“Hmm…would you believe me if I told you that it was the worst

mistake I ever made?”

“Huh? No, sir!”
“I didn’t think you would. Son, the cutest trick of all is how to know

then what you know now. No way to, of course. But I’m telling you
straight: I think you’ve been born into the wrong age.”

“Sir?”
“I think you are a romantic. Now this is a very romantic age, so there

is no room in it for romantics; it calls for practical men. A hundred years
ago you would have made a banker or lawyer or professor and you could

have worked out your romanticism by reading fanciful tales and dreaming
about what you might have been if you hadn’t had the misfortune to be born
into a humdrum period. But this happens to be a period when adventure and
romance are a part of daily existence. Naturally it takes very practical
people to cope with it.”

Rod was beginning to get annoyed. “What’s the matter with me?”
“Nothing. I like you. I don’t want to see you get hurt. But you are ’way

too emotional, too sentimental to be a real survivor type.”

Matson pushed a hand toward him. “Now keep your shirt on. I know

you can make fire by rubbing a couple of dry words together. I’m well
aware that you won merit badges in practically everything. I’m sure you can
devise a water filter with your bare hands and know which side of the tree
the moss grows on. But I’m not sure that you can beware of the Truce of the
Bear.”

“‘The Truce of the Bear?’”
“Never mind. Son, I think you ought to cancel this course. If you must,

you can repeat it in college.”

should.”

“But why, sir?”
“That’s the point. I couldn’t give a reason. On the record, you’re as

promising a student as I have ever had.” He stood up and put out his hand.
“Good luck. And remember—when it gets down to fundamentals, do what
you have to do and shed no tears.”

Rod should have gone straight home. His family lived in an out-county

of Greater New York City, located on the Grand Canyon plateau through
Hoboken Gate. But his commuting route required him to change at
Emigrants’ Gap and he found himself unable to resist stopping to
rubberneck.

When he stepped out of the tube from school he should have turned

right, taken the rotary lift to the level above, and stepped through to Arizona
Strip. But he was thinking about supplies, equipment, and weapons for
tomorrow’s examination; his steps automatically bore left, he got on the
slideway leading to the great hall of the planetary gates.

not be late for dinner. He picked his way through the crowd and entered the
great hall—not Onto the emigration floor itself, but onto the spectator’s
balcony facing the gates. This was the new gate house he was in, the one
opened for traffic in ’68; the original Emigrants’ Gap, now used for Terran
traffic and trade with Luna, stood on the Jersey Flats a few kilometers east
alongside the pile that powered it.

The balcony faced the six gates. It could seat eighty-six hundred

people but was half filled and crowded only in the center. It was here, of
course, that Rod wished to sit so that he might see through all six gates. He
wormed his way down the middle aisle, squatted by the railing, then spotted
someone leaving a front row seat. Rod grabbed it, earning a dirty look from
a man who had started for it from the other aisle.

Rod fed coins into the arm of the seat; it opened out, he sat down and

looked around. He was opposite the replica Statue of Liberty, twin to the
one that had stood for a century where now was Bedloe Crater. Her torch
reached to the distant ceiling; on both her right and her left three great gates
let emigrants into the outer worlds.

Rod did not glance at the statue; he looked at the gates. It was late

afternoon and heavily overcast at east coast North America, but gate one
was open to some planetary spot having glaring noonday sun; Rod could
catch glimpses through it of men dressed in shorts and sun hats and nothing
else. Gate number two had a pressure lock rigged over it; it carried a big
skull & crossbones sign and the symbol for chlorine. A red light burned
over it. While he watched, the red light flickered out and a blue light
replaced it; the door slowly opened and a traveling capsule for a chlorine-
breather crawled out. Waiting to meet it were eight humans in diplomatic
full dress. One carried a gold baton.

Rod considered spending another half pluton to find out who the

important visitor was, but his attention was diverted to An auxiliary gate
had been set up on the floor, facing gate five and almost under the balcony.
Two high steel fences joined the two gates, forming with them an alley as
wide as the gates and as long as the space between, about fifteen meters by
seventy-five. This pen was packed with humanity moving from the
temporary gate toward and through gate five—and onto some planet light-
years away. They poured out of nowhere, for the floor back of the auxiliary

gate was bare, hurried like cattle between the two fences, spilled through
gate five and were gone. A squad of brawny Mongol policemen, each
armed with a staff as tall as himself, was spread out along each fence. They
were using their staves to hurry the emigrants and they were not being
gentle. Almost underneath Rod one of them prodded an old coolie so hard
that he stumbled and fell. The man had been carrying his belongings, his
equipment for a new world, in two bundles supported from a pole balanced
on his right shoulder.

The old coolie fell to his skinny knees, tried to get up, fell flat. Rod

thought sure he would be trampled, but somehow he was on his feet again
—minus his baggage. He tried to hold his place in the torrent and recover
his possessions, but the guard prodded him again and he was forced to
move on barehanded. Rod lost sight of him before he had moved five
meters.

There were local police outside the fence but they did not interfere.

This narrow stretch between the two gates was, for the time, extraterritorial;
the local police had no jurisdiction. But one of them did seem annoyed at
the brutality shown the old man; he put his face to the steel mesh and called
out something in lingua terra. The Mongol cop answered savagely in the
same simple language, telling the North American what he could do about
it, then went back to shoving and shouting and prodding still more briskly.

The crowd streaming through the pen were Asiatics—Japanese,

Indonesians, Siamese, some East Indians, a few Eurasians, but
predominantly South Chinese. To Rod they all looked much alike—tiny
women with babies on hip or back, or often one on back and one in arms,
endless runny-nosed and shaven-headed children, fathers with household
goods ill enormous back packs or pushed ahead on barrows. There were a
few dispirited ponies dragging two-wheeled carts much too big for them but
most of the torrent had only that which they could carry.

Rod had heard an old story which asserted that if all the Chinese on

Terra were marched four abreast past a given point the column would never
pass that point, as more Chinese would be born fast enough to replace those
who had marched past. Rod had taken his slide rule and applied arithmetic
to check it—to find, of course, that the story was nonsense; even if one
ignored deaths, while counting all births, the last Chinese would pass the
reviewing stand in less than four years. Nevertheless, while watching this

mob being herded like brutes into a slaughterhouse, Rod felt that the old
canard was true even though its mathematics was faulty. There seemed to
be no end to them.

He decided to risk that half pluton to find out what was going on. He

slid the coin into a slot in the chair’s speaker; the voice of the commentator
reached his ears: “—the visiting minister. The prince royal was met by
officials of the Terran Corporation including the Director General himself
and now is being escorted to the locks of the Ratoonian enclave. After the
television reception tonight staff level conversations will start. A
spokesman close to the Director General has pointed out that, in view of the
impossibility of conflict of interest between oxygen types such as ourselves
and the Ratoonians, any outcome of the conference must be to our
advantage, the question being to what extent.

“If you will turn your attention again to gate five, we will repeat what

we said earlier: gate five is on forty-eight hour loan to the Australasian
Republic. The temporary gate you see erected below is hyperfolded to a
point in central Australia in the Arunta Desert, where this emigration has
been mounting in a great encampment for the past several weeks. His
Serene Majesty Chairman Fung Chee Mu of the Australasian Republic has
informed the Corporation that his government intends to move in excess of
two million people in forty-eight hours, a truly impressive figure, more than
forty thousand each hour. The target figure for this year for all planetary
emigration gates taken together—Emigrants’ Gap, Peter the Great, and
Witwatersrand Gates—is only seventy million emigrants or an average of
eight thousand per hour. This movement proposes a rate five times as great
using only one gate!”

The commentator continued: “Yet when we watch the speed,

efficiency and the, uh—forthrightness with which they are carrying out this
evolution it seems likely that they will achieve their goal. Our own figures
show them to be slightly ahead of quota for the first nine hours. During
those same nine hours there have been one hundred seven births and eighty-
two deaths among the emigrants, the high death rate, of course, being
incident to the temporary hazards of the emigration.

“The planet of destination, GO-8703-IV, to be called henceforth

‘Heavenly Mountains’ according to Chairman Fung, is classed as a bounty
planet and no attempt had been made to colonize it. The Corporation has

been assured that the colonists are volunteers.” It seemed to Rod that the
announcer’s tone was ironical. “This is understandable when one considers
the phenomenal population pressure of the Australasian Republic. A brief
historical rundown may be in order. After the removal of the remnants of
the former Australian population to New Zealand, pursuant to the Peiping
Peace Treaty, the first amazing effort of the new government was the
creation of the great inland sea of—”

care to hear school-book figures on how the Australian Desert had been
made to blossom like the rose…and nevertheless had been converted into a
slum with more people in it than all of North America. Something new was
happening at gate four—

Gate four had been occupied by a moving cargo belt when he had

come in; now the belt had crawled away and lost itself in the bowels of the
terminal and an emigration party was lining up to go through.

This was no poverty-stricken band of refugees chivvied along by

police; here each family had its own wagon…long, sweeping, boat-tight
Conestogas drawn by three-pair teams and housed in sturdy glass canvas…
square and businesslike Studebakers with steel bodies, high mudcutter
wheels, and pulled by one or two-pair teams. The draft animals were
Morgans and lordly Clydesdales and jug-headed Missouri mules with
strong shoulders and shrewd, suspicious eyes. Dogs trotted between wheels,
wagons were piled high with household goods and implements and
children, poultry protested the indignities of fate in cages tied on behind,
and a little Shetland pony, riderless but carrying his saddle and just a bit too
tall to run underneath with the dogs, stayed close to the tailgate of one
family’s rig.

Rod wondered at the absence of cattle and stepped up the speaker

again. But the announcer was still droning about the fertility of
Australasians; he muted it again and watched. Wagons had moved onto the
floor and taken up tight echelon position close to the gate, ready to move,
with the tail of the train somewhere out of sight below. The gate was not yet
ready and drivers were getting down and gathering at the Salvation Army
booth under the skirts of the Goddess of Liberty, for a cup of coffee and
some banter. It occurred to Rod that there probably was no coffee where
they were going and might not be for years, since Terra never exported food

—on the contrary, food and fissionable metals were almost the only
permissible imports; until an Outland colony produced a surplus of one or
the other it could expect precious little help from Terra.

It was extremely expensive in terms of uranium to keep an interstellar

gate open and the people in this wagon train could expect to be out of
commercial touch with Earth until such a time as they had developed
surpluses valuable enough in trade to warrant reopening the gate at regular
intervals. Until that time they were on their own and must make do with
what they could take with them…which made horses more practical than
helicopters, picks and shovels more useful than bulldozers. Machinery gets
out of order and requires a complex technology to keep it going—but good
old “hayburners” keep right on breeding, cropping grass, and pulling loads.

Deacon Matson had told the survival class that the real hardships of

primitive Outlands were not the lack of plumbing, heating, power, light, nor
weather conditioning, but the shortage of simple things like coffee and
tobacco.

imagine getting fretful over its absence. He scrunched down in his seat,
trying to see through the gate to guess the cause of the hold up. He could
not see well, as the arching canvas of a prairie schooner blocked his view,
but it did seem that the gate operator had a phase error; it looked as if the
sky was where the ground ought to be. The extradimensional distortions
necessary to match places on two planets many light-years apart were not
simply a matter of expenditure of enormous quantities of energy; they were
precision problems fussy beyond belief, involving high mathematics and
high art—the math was done by machine but the gate operator always had
to adjust the last couple of decimal places by prayer and intuition.

In addition to the dozen-odd proper motions of each of the planets

involved, motions which could usually be added and canceled out, there
was also the rotation of each planet. The problem was to make the last
hyperfold so that the two planets were internally tangent at the points
selected as gates, with their axes parallel and their rotations in the same
direction. Theoretically it was possible to match two points in contra-
rotation, twisting the insubstantial fabric of space-time in exact step with
“real” motions; practically such a solution was not only terribly wasteful of

energy but almost unworkable—the ground surface beyond the gate tended
to skid away like a slidewalk and tilt at odd angles.

Rod did not have the mathematics to appreciate the difficulties. Being

only about to finish high school his training had gone no farther than tensor
calculus, statistical mechanics, simple transfinities, generalized geometries
of six dimensions, and, on the practical side, analysis for electronics,
primary cybernetics and robotics, and basic design of analog computers; he
had had no advanced mathematics as yet. He was not aware of his
ignorance and simply concluded that the gate operator must be thumb-
fingered. He looked back at the emigrant party.

The drivers were still gathered at the booth, drinking coffee and

munching doughnuts. Most of the men were growing beards; Rod
concluded from the beavers that the party had been training for several
months. The captain of the party sported a little goatee, mustaches, and
rather long hair, but it seemed to Rod that he could not be many years older
than Rod himself. He was a professional, of course, required to hold a
degree 
in 
Outlands 
arts—hunting, 
scouting, 
jackleg 
mechanics,

gunsmithing, farming, first aid, group psychology, survival group tactics,
law, and a dozen other things the race has found indispensable when
stripped for action.

This captain’s mount was a Palomino mare, lovely as a sunrise, and the

captain was dressed as a California don of an earlier century—possibly as a
compliment to his horse. A warning light flashed at the gate’s annunciator
panel and he swung into saddle, still eating a doughnut, and cantered down
the wagons for a final inspection, riding toward Rod. His back was straight,
his seat deep and easy, his bearing confident. Carried low on a fancy belt he
wore two razor guns, each in a silver-chased holster that matched the ornate
silver of his bridle and saddle.

Rod held his breath until the captain passed out of sight under the

balcony, then sighed and considered studying to be like him, rather than for
one of the more intellectual Outlands professions. He did not know just
what he did want to be…except that he meant to get off Earth as soon as he
possibly could and get out there where things were going on!

Which reminded him that the first hurdle was tomorrow; in a few days

he would either be eligible to matriculate for whatever it was he decided on,
or he would be—but no use worrying about that. He remembered uneasily

that it was getting late and he had not even decided on equipment, nor
picked his weapons. This party captain carried razor guns; should he carry
one? No, this party would fight as a unit, if it had to fight. Its leader carried
that type of weapon to enforce his authority—not for solo survival. Well,
what should he take?

A siren sounded and the drivers returned to their wagons. The captain

came back at a brisk trot. “Reins up!” he called out. “Reeeeeeiiiins UP!” He
took station by the gate, facing the head of the train; the mare stood
quivering and tending to dance.

The Salvation Army lassie came out from behind her counter carrying

a baby girl. She called to the party captain but her voice did not carry to the
balcony.

The captain’s voice did carry. “Number four! Doyle! Come get your

child!” A red-headed man with a spade beard climbed down from the fourth
wagon and sheepishly reclaimed the youngster to a chorus of cheers and cat
calls. He passed the baby up to his wife, who upped its skirt and
commenced paddling its bottom. Doyle climbed to his seat and took his
reins.

“Call off!” the captain sang out.
“One.”
“Tuh!”
“Three!”
“Foah!”
“Five!”
The count passed under the balcony, passed down the chute out of

hearing. In a few moments it came back, running down this time, ending
with a shouted “ONE!” The captain held up his right arm and watched the
lights of the order panel.

A light turned green. He brought his arm down smartly with a shout of

“Roll ’em! Ho!” The Palomino took off like a race horse, cut under the nose
of the nigh lead horse of the first team, and shot through the gate.

Whips cracked. Rod could hear shouts of “Git, Molly! Git, Ned!” and

“No, no, you jugheads!” The train began to roll. By the time the last one on
the floor was through the gate and the much larger number which had been
in the chute below had begun to show it was rolling at a gallop, with the
drivers bracing their feet wide and their wives riding the brakes. Rod tried

to count them, made it possibly sixty-three wagons as the last one rumbled
through the gate…and was gone, already half a galaxy away.

sorrow. Then he stepped up the speaker volume: “—onto New Canaan, the
premium planet described by the great Langford as ‘The rose without
thorns.’ These colonists have paid a premium of sixteen thousand four
hundred per person—not counting exempt or co-opted members—for the
privilege of seeking their fortunes and protecting their posterity by moving
to New Canaan. The machines predict that the premium will increase for
another twenty-eight years; therefore, if you are considering giving your
children the priceless boon of citizenship on New Canaan, the time to act is
now. For a beautiful projection reel showing this planet send one pluton to
‘Information, Box One, Emigrants’ Gap, New Jersey County, Greater New
York.’ For a complete descriptive listing of all planets now open plus a
special list of those to be opened in the near future add another half pluton.
Those seeing this broadcast in person may obtain these items at the
information booth in the foyer outside the great hall.”

Rod did not listen. He had long since sent for every free item and most

of the non-free ones issued by the Commission for Emigration and Trade.
Just now he was wondering why the gate to New Canaan had not relaxed.

He found out at once. Stock barricades rose up out of the floor,

forming a fenced passage from gate four to the chute under him. Then a
herd of cattle filled the gate and came flooding toward him, bawling and
snorting. They were prime Hereford steers, destined to become tender
steaks and delicious roasts for a rich but slightly hungry Earth. After them
and among them rode New Canaan cowpunchers armed with long goads
with which they urged the beasts to greater speed—the undesirability of
running weight off the animals was offset by the extreme cost of keeping
the gate open, a cost which had to be charged against the cattle.

Rod discovered that the speaker had shut itself off; the half hour he

had paid for was finished. He sat up with sudden guilt, realizing that he
would have to hurry or he would be late for supper. He rushed out, stepping
on feet and mumbling apologies, and caught the slide-way to Hoboken
Gate.

This gate, being merely for Terra-surface commuting, was permanently

dilated and required no operator, since the two points brought into

coincidence were joined by a rigid frame, the solid Earth. Rod showed his
commuter’s ticket to the electronic monitor and stepped through to Arizona,
in company with a crowd of neighbors.

“The (almost) solid Earth—” The gate robot took into account tidal

distortions but could not anticipate minor seismic variables. As Rod stepped
through he felt his feet quiver as if to a small earthquake, then the terra was
again firma. But he was still in an airlock at sea-level pressure. The
radiation from massed bodies triggered the mechanism, the lock closed and
air pressure dropped. Rod yawned heavily to adjust to the pressure of Grand
Canyon plateau, North Rim, less than three quarters that of New Jersey. But
despite the fact that he made the change twice a day he found himself
rubbing his right ear to get rid of an ear ache.

The lock opened, he stepped out. Having come two thousand miles in

a split second he now had ten minutes by slide tube and a fifteen minute
walk to get home. He decided to dogtrot and be on time after all. He might
have made it if there had not been several thousand other people trying to
use the same facilities.

The Fifth Way

ROCKET SHIPS DID NOT CONQUER SPACE; THEY MERELY challenged it. A rocket
leaving Earth at seven miles per second is terribly slow for the vast reaches
beyond. Only the Moon is reasonably near—four days, more or less. Mars
is thirty-seven weeks away, Saturn a dreary six years, Pluto an impossible
half century, by the elliptical orbits possible to rockets.

Ortega’s torch ships brought the Solar System within reach. Based on

mass conversion, Einstein’s deathless e  =  Mc², they could boost for the
entire trip at any acceleration the pilot could stand. At an easy one gravity
the inner planets were only hours from Earth, far Pluto only eighteen days.
It was a change like that from horseback to jet plane.

The shortcoming of this brave new toy was that there was not much

anywhere to go. The Solar system, from a human standpoint, is made up of
remarkably unattractive real estate—save for lovely Terra herself, lush and
green and beautiful. The steel-limbed Jovians enjoy gravity 2.5 times ours
and their poisonous air at inhuman pressure keeps them in health. Martians
prosper in near vacuum, the rock lizards of Luna do not breathe at all. But
these planets are not for men.

Men prosper on an oxygen planet close enough to a G-type star for the

weather to cycle around the freezing point of water…that is to say, on
Earth.

When you are already there why go anywhere? The reason was babies,

too many babies. Malthus pointed it out long ago; food increases by
arithmetical progression, people increase by geometrical progression. By
World War I half the world lived on the edge of starvation; by World War II
Earth’s population was increasing by 55,000 people every day; before
World War III, as early as 1954, the increase had jumped to 100,000 mouths
and stomachs per day, 35,000,000 additional people each year…and the
population of Terra had climbed well beyond that which its farm lands
could support.

truly political. The true meaning was more that of beggars fighting over a
crust of bread.

The author of Gulliver’s Travels sardonically proposed that Irish

babies be fattened for English tables; other students urged less drastic ways
of curbing population—none of which made the slightest difference. Life,
all life, has the twin drives to survive and to reproduce. Intelligence is an
aimless byproduct except as it serves these basic drives.

But intelligence can made to serve the mindless demands of life. Our

Galaxy contains in excess of one hundred thousand Earth-type planets, each
as warm and motherly to men as sweet Terra. Ortega’s torch ships could
reach the stars. Mankind could colonize, even as the hungry millions of
Europe had crossed the Atlantic and raised more babies in the New World.

Some did…hundreds of thousands. But the entire race, working as a

team, cannot build and launch a hundred ships a day, each fit for a thousand
colonists, and keep it up day after day, year after year, time without end.
Even with the hands and the will (which the race never had) there is not that
much steel, aluminum, and uranium in Earth’s crust. There is not one
hundredth of the necessary amount.

But intelligence can find solutions where there are none. Psychologists

once locked an ape in a room, for which they had arranged only four ways
of escaping. Then they spied on him to see which of the four he would find.

The ape escaped a fifth way.

Dr. Jesse Evelyn Ramsbotham had not been trying to solve the baby

problem; he had been trying to build a time machine. He had two reasons:
first, because time machines are an impossibility; second, because his hands
would sweat and he would stammer whenever in the presence of a nubile
female. He was not aware that the first reason was compensation for the
second, in fact he was not aware of the second reason—it was a subject his
conscious mind avoided.

It is useless to speculate as to the course of history had Jesse Evelyn

Ramsbotham’s parents had the good sense to name their son Bill instead of
loading him with two girlish names. He might have become an All-
American halfback and ended up selling bonds and adding his quota of

babies to a sum already disastrous. Instead he became a mathematical
physicist.

the impossible. Any nineteenth century physicist could have given
unassailable reasons why atom bombs were impossible if his reason were
not affronted at the question; any twentieth century physicist could explain
why time travel was incompatible with the real world of space-time. But
Ramsbotham began fiddling with the three greatest Einsteinian equations,
the two relativity equations for distance and duration and the mass-
conversion equation; each contained the velocity of light. “Velocity” is first
derivative, the differential of distance with respect to time; he converted
those equations into differential equations, then played games with them.
He would feed the results to the Rakitiac computer, remote successor to
Univac, Eniac and Maniac. While he was doing these things his hands
never sweated nor did he stammer, except when he was forced to deal with
the young lady who was chief programmer for the giant computer.

than a football—but a lighted cigarette placed inside with full power setting
was still burning a week later. Ramsbotham picked up the cigarette,
resumed smoking and thought about it.

Next he tried a day-old chick, with colleagues to witness. Three

months later the chick was unaged and no hungrier than chicks usually are.
He reversed the phase relation and cut in power for the shortest time he
could manage with his bread-boarded hook-up.

In less than a second the newly-hatched chick was long dead, starved

and decayed.

was convinced that he was on the track of true time travel. He never did
find it, although once he thought that he had—he repeated by request his
demonstration with a chick for some of his colleagues; that night two of
them picked the lock on his lab, let the little thing out and replaced it with
an egg. Ramsbotham might have been permanently convinced that he had
found time travel and then spent the rest of his life in a blind alley had they
not cracked the egg and showed him that it was hard-boiled.

dilation, or anomaly (he did not call it a “Gate”) which would let him get in

and out of the field himself.

When he threw on power, the space between the curving magnetodes

of his rig no longer showed the wall beyond, but a steaming jungle. He
jumped to the conclusion that this must be a forest of the Carboniferous
Period. It had often occurred to him that the difference between space and
time might simply be human prejudice, but this was not one of the times; he
believed what he wanted to believe.

between the magnetodes.

Ten minutes later he was arrested for waving firearms around in Rio de

Janeiro’s civic botanical gardens. A lack of the Portuguese language
increased both his difficulties and the length of time he spent in a tropical
pokey, but three days later through the help of the North American consul
he was on his way home. He thought and filled notebooks with equations
and question marks on the whole trip.

The short cut to the stars had been found.

Ramsbotham’s discoveries eliminated the basic cause of war and

solved the problem of what to do with all those dimpled babies. A hundred
thousand planets were no farther away than the other side of the street.
Virgin continents, raw wildernesses, fecund jungles, killing deserts, frozen
tundras, and implacable mountains lay just beyond the city gates, and the
human race was again going out where the street lights do not shine, out
where there was no friendly cop on the corner nor indeed a corner, out
where there were no well-hung, tender steaks, no boneless hams, no
packaged, processed foods suitable for delicate minds and pampered bodies.
The biped omnivore again had need of his biting, tearing, animal teeth, for
the race was spilling out (as it had so often before) to kill or be killed, eat or
be eaten.

But the human race’s one great talent is survival. The race, as always,

adjusted to conditions, and the most urbanized, mechanized, and civilized,
most upholstered and luxurious culture in all history trained its best
children, its potential leaders, in primitive pioneer survival—man naked
against nature.

Einstein, Newton, and Columbus, but he thought about Ramsbotham no
oftener than he thought about Columbus. These were figures in books, each
larger than life and stuffed with straw, not real. He used the Ramsbotham
Gate between Jersey and the Arizona Strip without thinking of its inventor
the same way his ancestors used elevators without thinking of the name
“Otis.” If he thought about the miracle at all, it was a half-formed irritation
that the Arizona side of Hoboken Gate was so far from his parents’ home. It
was known as Kaibab Gate on this side and was seven miles north of the
Walker residence.

limit of tube delivery and other city utilities. Being an old house, its living
room was above ground, with only bedrooms, pantry, and bombproof
buried. The living room had formerly stuck nakedly above ground, an
ellipsoid monocoque shell, but, as Greater New York spread, the
neighborhood had been zoned for underground apartments and construction
above ground which would interfere with semblance of virgin forest had
been forbidden.

The Walkers had gone along to the extent of covering the living room

with soil and planting it with casual native foliage, but they had refused to
cover up their view window. It was the chief charm of the house, as it
looked out at the great canyon. The community corporation had tried to
coerce them into covering it up and had offered to replace it with a
simulacrum window such as the underground apartments used, with a
relayed view of the canyon. But Rod’s father was a stubborn man and
maintained that with weather, women, and wine there was nothing “just as
good.” His window was still intact.

Rod found the family sitting in front of the window, watching a storm

work its way up the canyon—his mother, his father, and, to his great
surprise, his sister. Helen was ten years older than he and an assault captain
in the Amazons; she was seldom home.

her arrival would probably cause his own lateness to pass with little
comment. “Sis! Hey, this is swell—I thought you were on Thule.”

“I was…until a few hours ago.” Rod tried to shake hands; his sister

gathered him in a bear hug and bussed him on the mouth, squeezing him

against the raised ornaments of her chrome corselet. She was still in
uniform, a fact that caused him to think that she had just arrived—on her
rare visits home she usually went slopping around in an old bathrobe and
go-ahead slippers, her hair caught up in a knot. Now she was still in dress
armor and kilt and had dumped her side arms, gauntlets, and plumed helmet
on the floor.

She looked him over proudly. “My, but you’ve grown! You’re almost

as tall as I am.”

“I’m taller.”
“Want to bet? No, don’t try to wiggle away from me; I’ll twist your

arm. Slip off your shoes and stand back to back.”

late?”

“Uh…” He had worked out a diversion involving telling about the

examination coming up, but he did not use it as his sister intervened.

“Don’t heckle him, Pater. Ask for excuses and you’ll get them. I

learned that when I was a sublieutenant.”

“Quiet, daughter. I can raise him without your help.”
Rod was surprised by his father’s edgy answer, was more surprised by

Helen’s answer: “So? Really?” Her tone was odd.

Rod saw his mother raise a hand, seem about to speak, then close her

mouth. She looked upset. His sister and father looked at each other; neither
spoke. Rod looked from one to the other, said slowly, “Say, what’s all this?”

His father glanced at him. “Nothing. We’ll say no more about it.

Dinner is waiting. Coming, dear?” He turned to his wife, handed her up
from her chair, offered her his arm.

“Just a minute,” Rod said insistently. “I was late because I was

hanging around the Gap.”

“Very well. You know better, but I said we would say no more about

it.” He turned toward the lift.

next week or so.”

“Very well—eh? What did you say?”
“I’ll be away for a while, sir. Maybe ten days or a bit longer.”
His father looked perplexed, then shook his head. “Whatever your

time.”

“But, Dad—”
“I’m sorry, but that is definite.”
“But, Dad, I have to!”
“No.”
Rod looked frustrated. His sister said suddenly, “Pater, wouldn’t it be

well to find out why he wants to be away?”

“Now, daughter—”
“Dad, I’m taking my solo survival, starting tomorrow morning!”
Mrs. Walker gasped, then began to weep. Her husband said, “There,

there, my dear!” then turned to his son and said harshly, “You’ve upset your
mother.”

give a hoot about his end of it. After all, he was the one who was going to
have to sink or swim. A lot they knew or—

“You see, Pater,” his sister was saying. “He does have to be away. He

has no choice, because—”

“I see nothing of the sort! Rod, I meant to speak about this earlier, but I

had not realized that your test would take place so soon. When I signed
permission for you to take that course, I had, I must admit, a mental
reservation. I felt that the experience would be valuable later…when and if
you took the course in college. But I never intended to let you come up
against the final test while still in high school. You are too young.”

Rod was shocked speechless. But his sister again spoke for him.

“Fiddlesticks!”

“Eh? Now, daughter, please remember that—”
“Repeat fiddlesticks! Any girl in my company has been up against

things as rough and many of them are not much older than Buddy. What are
you trying to do, Pater? Break his nerve?”

“You have no reason to… I think we had best discuss this later.”
“I think that is a good idea.” Captain Walker took her brother’s arm

and they followed their parents down to the refectory. Dinner was on the
table, still warm in its delivery containers; they took their places, standing,
and Mr. Walker solemnly lighted the Peace Lamp. The family was
evangelical Monist by inheritance, each of Rod’s grandfathers having been
converted in the second great wave of proselyting that swept out of Persia

in the last decade of the previous century, and Rod’s father took seriously
his duties as family priest.

mind on this new problem. His sister chimed in heartily but his mother’s
answers could hardly be heard.

Nevertheless the warm symbolism had its effect; Rod felt himself

calming down. By the time his father intoned the last “—one Principle, one
family, one flesh!” he felt like eating. He sat down and took the cover off
his plate.

A yeast cutlet, molded to look like a chop and stripped with real bacon,

a big baked potato, and a grilled green lobia garnished with baby’s
buttons… Rod’s mouth watered as he reached for the catsup.

Dad was not eating much either but Dad often just picked at his food…he
became aware with sudden warm pity that Dad was thinner and grayer than
ever. How old was Dad?

His attention was diverted by a story his sister was telling: “—and so

the Commandant told me I would have to clamp down. And I said to her,
‘Ma’am, girls will be girls. It I have to bust a petty officer everytime one of
them does something like that, pretty soon I won’t have anything but
privates. And Sergeant Dvorak is the best gunner I have.’”

“Just a second,” her father interrupted. “I thought you said ‘Kelly,’ not

‘Dvorak.’”

“I did and she did. Pretending to misunderstand which sergeant she

meant was my secret weapon—for I had Dvorak cold for the same offense,
and Tiny Dvorak (she’s bigger than I am) is the Squadron’s white hope for
the annual corps-wide competition for best trooper. Of course, losing her
stripes would put her, and us, out of the running.

“So I straightened out the ‘mix up’ in my best wide-eyed, thick-headed

manner, let the old gal sit for a moment trying not to bite her nails, then told
her that I had both women confined to barracks until that gang of college
boys was through installing the new ’scope, and sang her a song about how
the quality of mercy is not strained, it droppeth as the gentle rain from
heaven, and made myself responsible for seeing to it that she was not again
embarrassed by scandalous—her word, not mine—scandalous incidents…
especially when she was showing quadrant commanders around.

“So she grumpily allowed as how the company commander was

responsible for her company and she would hold me to it and now would I
get out and let her work on the quarterly training report in peace? So I threw
her my best parade ground salute and got out so fast I left a hole in the air.”

“I wonder,” Mr. Walker said judicially, “if you should oppose your

commanding officer in such matters? After all, she is older and presumably
wiser than you are.”

Helen made a little pile of the last of her baby’s buttons, scooped them

up and swallowed them. “Fiddlesticks squared and cubed. Pardon me, Pater,
but if you had any military service you would know better. I am as tough as
blazes to my girls myself…and it just makes them boast about how they’ve
got the worst fire-eater in twenty planets. But if they’re in trouble higher up,
I’ve got to take care of my kids. There always comes a day when there is
something sticky up ahead and I have to stand up and walk toward it. And it
will be all right because I’ll have Kelly on my right flank and Dvorak on
my left and each of them trying to take care of Maw Walker all by her
ownself. I know what I’m doing. ‘Walker’s Werewolves’ are a team.”

up a calling so…well, so dangerous.”

one person, one death, sooner or later. What would you want, Mum? With
eighteen million more women than men on this continent did you want me
to sit and knit until my knight comes riding? Out where I operate, there are
more men than women; I’ll wing one yet, old and ugly as I am.”

Rod asked curiously, “Sis, would you really give up your commission

to get married?”

“Would I! I won’t even count his arms and legs. If he is still warm and

can nod his head, he’s had it. My target is six babies and a farm.”

pretty even if your ankles are thick.”

“Thanks, pardner. Thank you too much. What’s for dessert, Mum?”
“I didn’t look. Will you open it, dear?”
Dessert turned out to be iced mangorines, which pleased Rod. His

sister went on talking. “The Service isn’t a bad shake, on active duty. It’s
garrison duty that wears. My kids get fat and sloppy and restless and start
fighting with each other from sheer boredom. For my choice, barracks

casualties are more to be dreaded than combat. I’m hoping that our
squadron will be tagged to take part in the pacification of Byer’s Planet.”

your mother again, my dear. Quite a bit of this talk has hardly been
appropriate under the Light of Peace.”

“I was asked questions, I answered.”
“Well, perhaps so.”
Helen glanced up. “Isn’t it time to turn it out, anyway? We all seem to

have finished eating.”

“Why, if you like. Though it is hardly reverent to hurry.”
“The Principle knows we haven’t all eternity.” She turned to Rod.

“How about making yourself scarce, mate? I want to make palaver with the
folks.”

“Gee, Sis, you act as if I was—”
“Get lost, Buddy. I’ll see you later.”
Rod left, feeling affronted. He saw Helen blow out the pax lamp as he

did so.

He was still making lists when his sister came to his room. “Hi, kid.”
“Oh. Hello, Sis.”
“What are you doing? Figuring what to take on your solo?”
“Sort of.”
“Mind if I get comfortable?” She brushed articles from his bed and

sprawled on it. “We’ll go into that later.”

Rod thought it over. “Does that mean Dad won’t object?”
“Yes. I pounded his head until he saw the light. But, as I said, well go

into that later. I’ve got something to tell you, youngster.”

“Such as?”
“The first thing is this. Our parents are not as stupid as you probably

think they are. Fact is, they are pretty bright.”

“I never said they were stupid!” Rod answered, comfortably aware of

what his thoughts had been.

“No. But I heard what went on before dinner and so did you. Dad was

throwing his weight around and not listening. But, Buddy, it has probably
never occurred to you that it is hard work to be a parent, maybe the hardest
job of all—particularly when you have no talent for it, which Dad hasn’t.

He knows it and works hard at it and is conscientious. Mostly he does
mighty well. Sometimes he slips, like tonight. But, what you did not know
is this: Dad is going to die.”

“What?” Rod looked stricken. “I didn’t know he was ill!”
“You weren’t meant to know. Now climb down off the ceiling; there is

a way out. Dad is terribly ill, and he would die in a few weeks at the most—
unless something drastic is done. But something is going to be. So relax.”

degenerative disease under which he was slowly starving to death. His
condition was incurable by current medical art; he might linger on, growing
weaker each day, for weeks or months—but he would certainly die soon.

and he hadn’t even noticed. They had kept it from him, like a baby, and he
had been too stupid to see it.

His sister touched his shoulder. “Cut it out. If there is anything stupider

than flogging yourself over something you can’t help, I’ve yet to meet it.
Anyhow, we are doing something about it.”

“What? I thought you said nothing could be done?”
“Shut up and let your mind coast. The folks are going to make a

Ramsbotham jump, five hundred to one, twenty years for two weeks.
They’ve already signed a contract with Entropy, Incorporated. Dad has
resigned from General Synthetics and is closing up his affairs; they’ll kiss
the world good-by this coming Wednesday—which is why he was being
stern about your plans to be away at that time. You’re the apple of his eye—
Heaven knows why.”

Rod tried to sort out too many new ideas at once. A time jump…of

course! It would let Dad stay alive another twenty years. But—“Say, Sis,
this doesn’t get them anything! Sure, it’s twenty years but it will be just two
weeks to them…and Dad will be as sick as ever. I know what I’m talking
about; they did the same thing for Hank Robbin’s great grandfather and he
died anyhow, right after they took him out of the stasis. Hank told me.”

Dad’s specialist, Dr. Hensley, says that he is morally certain that Dad’s case
is not hopeless…twenty years from now. I don’t know anything about
metabolic medicine, but Hensley says that they are on the verge and that

twenty years from now they ought to be able to patch Dad up as easily they
can graft on a new leg today.”

“You really think so?”
“How should I know? In things like this you hire the best expert you

can, then follow his advice. The point is, if we don’t do it, Dad is finished.
So we do it.”

“Yeah. Sure, sure, we’ve got to.”
She eyed him closely and added, “All right. Now do you want to talk

with them about it?”

“Huh?” He was startled by the shift. “Why? Are they waiting for me?”
“No. I persuaded them that it was best to keep it from you until it

happened. Then I came straight in and told you. Now you can do as you
please—pretend you don’t know, or go have Mum cry over you, and listen
to a lot of last-minute, man-to-man advice from Dad that you will never
take. About midnight, with your nerves frazzled, you can get back to your
preparations for your survival test. Play it your own way—but I’ve rigged it
so you can avoid that, if you want to. Easier on everybody. Myself, I like a
cat’s way of saying good-by.”

Rod’s mind was in a turmoil. Not to say good-by seemed unnatural,

ungrateful, untrue to family sentiment—but the prospect of saying good-by
seemed almost unbearably embarrassing. “What’s that about a cat?”

“When a cat greets you, he makes a big operation of it, humping,

stropping your legs, buzzing like mischief. But when he leaves, he just
walks off and never looks back. Cats are smart.”

“Well…”
“I suggest,” she added, “that you remember that they are doing this for

their convenience, not yours.”

“But Dad has to—”
“Surely, Dad must, if he is to get well.” She considered pointing out

that the enormous expense of the time jump would leave Rod practically
penniless; she decided that this was better left undiscussed. “But Mum does
not have to.”

“But she has to go with Dad!”
“So? Use arithmetic. She prefers leaving you alone for twenty years in

order to be with Dad for two weeks. Or turn it around: she prefers having
you orphaned to having herself widowed for the same length of time.”

“I don’t think that’s quite fair to Mum,” Rod answered slowly.
“I wasn’t criticizing. She’s making the right decision. Nevertheless,

they both have a strong feeling of guilt about you and—”

“About me?”
“About you. I don’t figure into it. If you insist on saying good-by, their

guilt will come out as self-justification and self-righteousness and they will
find ways to take it out on you and everybody will have a bad time. I don’t
want that. You are all my family.”

“Uh, maybe you know best.”
“I didn’t get straight A’s in emotional logic and military leadership for

nothing. Man is not a rational animal; he is a rationalizing animal. Now let’s
see what you plan to take with you.”

She looked over his lists and equipment, then whistled softly. “Whew!

Rod, I never saw so much plunder. You won’t be able to move. Who are
you? Tweedledum preparing for battle, or the White Knight?”

“Well, I was going to thin it down,” he answered uncomfortably.
“I should think so!”
“Uh, Sis, what sort of gun should I carry?”
“Huh? Why the deuce do you want a gun?”
“Why, for what I might run into, of course. Wild animals and things.

Deacon Matson practically said that we could expect dangerous animals.”

Matson is a practical man. See here, infant, on this tour you are the rabbit,
trying to escape the fox. You aren’t the fox.”

“What do you mean?”
“Your only purpose is to stay alive. Not to be brave, not to fight, not to

dominate the wilds—but just stay breathing. One time in a hundred a gun
might save your life; the other ninety-nine it will just tempt you into folly.
Oh, no doubt Matson would take one, and I would, too. But we are salted;
we know when not to use one. But consider this. That test area is going to
be crawling with trigger-happy young squirts. If one shoots you, it won’t
matter that you have a gun, too—because you will be dead. But if you carry
a gun, it makes you feel cocky; you won’t take proper cover. If you don’t
have one, then you’ll know that you are the rabbit. You’ll be careful.”

“Did you take a gun on your solo test?”
“I did. And I lost it the first day. Which saved my life.”

“How?”
“Because when I was caught without one I ran away from a Bessmer’s

griffin instead of trying to shoot it. You savvy Bessmer’s griffin?”

“Uh, Spica V?”
“Spica IV. I don’t know how much outer zoology they are teaching

you kids these days—from the ignoramuses we get for recruits I’ve reached
the conclusion that this new-fangled ‘functional education’ has abolished
studying in favor of developing their cute little personalities. Why I had one
girl who wanted to—never mind; the thing about the griffin is that it does
not really have vital organs. Its nervous system is decentralized, even its
assimilation system. To kill it quickly you would have to grind it into
hamburger. Shooting merely tickles it. But not know that; if I had had my
gun I would have found out the hard way. As it was, it treed me for three
days, which did my figure good and gave me time to think over the
philosophy, ethics, and pragmatics of self-preservation.”

Rod did not argue, but he still had a conviction that a gun was a handy

thing to have around. It made him feel good, taller, stronger and more
confident, to have one slapping against his thigh. He didn’t have to use it—
not unless he just had to. And he knew enough to take cover; nobody in the
class could do a silent sneak the way he could. While Sis was a good
soldier, still she didn’t know everything and—

But Sis was still talking. “I know how good a gun feels. It makes you

bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, three meters tall and covered with hair.
You’re ready for anything and kind of hoping you’ll find it. Which is
exactly what is dangerous about it—because you aren’t anything of the sort.
You are a feeble, hairless embryo, remarkably easy to kill. You could carry
an assault gun with two thousand meters precision range and isotope
charges that will blow up a hill, but you still would not have eyes in the
back of your head like a janus bird, nor be able to see in the dark like the
Thetis pygmies. Death can cuddle up behind you while you are drawing a
bead on something in front.”

“But, Sis, your own company carries guns.”
“Guns, radar, bombs, black scopes, gas, warpers, and some things

which we light-heartedly hope are secret. What of it? You aren’t going to
storm a city. Buddy, sometimes I send a girl out on an infiltration patrol,

object: information—go out, find out, come back alive. How do you
suppose I equip her?”

“Uh—”
“Never mind. In the first place I don’t pick an eager young recruit; I

send some unkillable old-timer. She peels down to her underwear, darkens
her skin if it is not dark, and goes out bare-handed and bare-footed, without
so much as a fly swatter. I have yet to lose a scout that way. Helpless and
unprotected you do grow eye’s in the back of your head, and your nerve
ends reach out and feel everything around you. I learned that when I was a
brash young j.o., from a salty trooper old enough to be my mother.”

Impressed, Rod said slowly, “Deacon Matson told us he would make

us take this test bare-handed, if he could.”

“Dr. Matson is a man of sense.”
“Well, what would you take?”
“Test conditions again?”
Rod stated them. Captain Walker frowned. “Mmm…not much to go

on. Two to ten days probably means about five. The climate won’t be
hopelessly extreme. I suppose you own a Baby Bunting?”

“No, but I’ve got a combat parka suit. I thought I would carry it, then

if the test area turned out not to be cold, I’d leave it at the gate. I’d hate to
lose it; it weighs only half a kilo and cost quite a bit.”

ghost in Limbo. Okay, besides your parka I would make it four kilos of
rations, five of water, two kilos of sundries like pills and matches, all in a
vest pack…and a knife.”

“That isn’t much for five days, much less ten.”
“It is all you can carry and still be light on your feet. Let’s see your

knife, dear.”

Rod had several knives, but one was “his” knife, a lovely all-purpose

one with a 21-cm. molysteel blade and a fine balance. He handed it to his
sister, who cradled it lightly. “Nice!” she said, and glanced around the
room.

“Over there by the outflow.”
“I see.” She whipped it past her ear, let fly, and the blade sank into the

target, sung and quivered. She reached down and drew another from her

boot top. “This is a good one, too.” She threw and it bit into the target a
blade’s width from the first.

She retrieved both knives, stood balancing them, one on each hand.

She flipped her own so that the grip was toward Rod. “This is my pet,
‘Lady Macbeth.’ I carried her on my own solo, Buddy. I want you to carry
her on yours.”

“You want to trade knives? All right.” Rod felt a sharp twinge at

parting with “Colonel Bowie” and a feeling of dismay that some other knife
might let him down. But it was not an offer that he could refuse, not from
Sis.

solo. I want you to carry both, Buddy. You won’t starve nor die of thirst, but
a spare knife may be worth its weight in thorium.”

expecting active duty. I can carry a spare of my own.”

“I won’t need it. My girls haven’t let me use a knife in years. I want

you to have Lady Macbeth on your test.” She removed the scabbard from
her boot top, sheathed the blade; and handed it to him. “Wear it in good
health, brother.”

Through the Tunnel

ROD ARRIVED AT TEMPLETON GATE THE NEXT MORNING feeling not his best.
He had intended to get a good night’s sleep in preparation for his ordeal, but
his sister’s arrival in conjunction with overwhelming changes in his family
had defeated his intention. As with most children Rod had taken his family
and home for granted; he had not thought about them much, nor placed a
conscious value on them, any more than a fish treasures water. They simply
were.

Now suddenly they were not.
Helen and he had talked late. She had begun to have strong misgivings

about her decision to let him know of the change on the eve of his test. She
had weighed it, decided that it was the “right” thing to do, then had learned
the ages-old sour truth that right and wrong can sometimes be determined
only through hindsight. It had not been fair, she later concluded, to load
anything else on his mind just before his test; But it had not seemed fair,
either, to let him leave without knowing…to return to an empty house.

The decision was necessarily hers; she had been his guardian since

earlier that same day. The papers had been signed and sealed; the court had
given approval. Now she found with a sigh that being a “parent” was not
unalloyed pleasure; it was more like the soul-searching that had gone into
her first duty as member of a court martial.

When she saw that her “baby” was not quieting, she had insisted that

he go to bed anyhow, then had given him a long back rub, combining it with
hypnotic instructions to sleep, then had gone quietly away when he seemed
asleep.

But Rod had not been asleep; he had simply wanted to be alone. His

mind raced like an engine with no load for the best part of an hour, niggling
uselessly at the matter of his father’s illness, wondering what it was going
to be like to greet them again after twenty years—why, he would be almost

as old as Mum!—switching over to useless mental preparations for
unknown test conditions.

At last he realized that he had to sleep—forced himself to run through

mental relaxing exercises, emptying his mind and hypnotizing himself. It
took longer than ever before but finally he entered a great, golden, warm
cloud and was asleep.

His bed mechanism had to call him twice. He woke bleary-eyed and

was still so after a needle shower. He looked in a mirror, decided that
shaving did not matter where he was going and anyhow he was late—then
decided to shave after all…being painfully shy about his sparse young
growth.

Mum was not up, but she hardly ever got up as early as that. Dad

rarely ate breakfast these days… Rod recalled why with a twinge. But he
had expected Sis to show up. Glumly he opened his tray and discovered that
Mum had forgotten to dial an order, something that had not happened twice
in his memory. He placed his order and waited for service—another ten
minutes lost.

Helen showed up as he was leaving, dressed surprisingly in a dress.

“Good morning.”

“Hi, Sis. Say, you’ll have to order your own tucker. Mother didn’t and

I didn’t know what you wanted.”

“Oh, I had breakfast hours ago. I was waiting to see you off.”
“Oh. Well, so long. I’ve got to run, I’m late.”
“I won’t hold you up.” She came over and embraced him. “Take it

easy, mate. That’s the important thing. More people have died from worry
than ever bled to death. And if you do have to strike, strike low.”

“Uh, I’ll remember.”
“See that you do. I’m going to get my leave extended today so that I’ll

be here when you come back.” She kissed him. “Now run.”

Dr. Matson was sitting at a desk outside the dispensary at Templeton

Gate, checking names on his roll. He looked up as Rod arrived. “Why,
hello, Walker. I thought maybe you had decided to be smart.”

“I’m sorry I’m late, sir. Things happened.”
“Don’t fret about it. Knew a man once who didn’t get shot at sunrise

because he overslept the appointment.”

“Really? Who was he?”
“Young fellow I used to know. Myself.”
“Hunh? You really did, sir? You mean you were—”
“Not a word of truth in it. Good stories are rarely true. Get on in there

and take your physical, before you get the docs irritated.”

They thumped him and x-rayed him and made a wavy pattern from his

brain and did all the indignities that examining physicians do. The senior
examiner listened to his heart and felt his moist hand. “Scared, son?”

“Of course I am!” Rod blurted.
“Of course you are. If you weren’t, I wouldn’t pass you. What’s that

bandage on your leg?”

“Uh—” The bandage concealed Helen’s knife “Lady Macbeth.” Rod

sheepishly admitted the fact.

“Take it off.”
“Sir?”
“I’ve known candidates to pull dodges like that to cover up a

disqualification. So let’s have a look.”

sure that it was a cache for a weapon and not a wound dressing. “Get your
clothes on. Report to your instructor.”

Rod put on his vest pack of rations and sundries, fastened his canteen

under it. It was a belt canteen of flexible synthetic divided into half-litre
pockets. The weight was taken by shoulder straps and a tube ran up the left
suspender, ending in a nipple near his mouth, so that he might drink wit out
taking it off. He planned, if possible, to stretch his meager supply through
the whole test, avoiding the hazards of contaminated water and the greater
hazards of the water hole—assuming that fresh water could be found at all.

He wrapped twenty meters of line, light, strong, and thin, around his

waist. Shorts, overshirt, trousers, and boot moccasins completed his
costume; he belted “Colonel Bowie” on outside. Dressed, he looked fleshier
than he was; only his knife showed. He carried his parka suit over his left
arm. It was an efficient garment, hooded, with built-in boots and gloves,
and with pressure seams to let him use bare hands when necessary, but it
was much too warm to wear until he needed it. Rod had learned early in the
game that Eskimos don’t dare to sweat.

commented, then glanced at the bulkiness of Rod’s torso. “Body armor,
son?”

“No, sir. Just a vest pack.”
“How much penalty you carrying?”
“Eleven kilograms. Mostly water and rations.”
“Mmm…well, it will get heavier before it gets lighter. No Handy-

Dandy Young Pioneer’s Kit? No collapsible patent wigwam?”

Rod blushed. “No, sir.”
“You can leave that snow suit. I’ll mail it to your home.”
“Uh, thank you, sir.” Rod passed it over, adding, “I wasn’t sure I’d

need it, but I brought it along, just in case.”

“You did need it.”
“Sir?”
“I’ve already flunked five for showing up without their snuggies…and

four for showing up with vacuum suits. Both ways for being stupid. They
ought to know that the Board would not dump them into vacuum or
chlorine or such without specifying space suits in the test notice. We’re
looking for graduates, not casualties. On the other hand, cold weather is
within the limits of useful test conditions.”

Rod glanced at the suit he had passed over. “You’re sure I won’t need

it, sir?”

“Quite. Except that you would have flunked if you hadn’t fetched it.

Now bear a hand and draw whatever pig shooter you favor; the armorer is
anxious to close up shop. What gun have you picked?”

Rod gulped. “Uh, I was thinking about not taking one, Deacon—I

mean ‘Doctor.’”

“You can call me ‘Deacon’ to my face—ten days from now. But this

notion of yours interests me. How did you reach that conclusion?”

“Uh, why, you see, sir…well, my sister suggested it.”
“So? I must meet your sister. What’s her name?”
“Assault Captain Helen Walker,” Rod said proudly, “Corps of

Amazons.”

Matson wrote it down. “Get on in there. They are ready for the

drawing.”

gun, what sort would you advise?”

kids with stuff I learned the hard way. Comes examination and you ask me
to slip you the answers. I can no more answer that than I would have been
justified yesterday in telling you to bring a snow suit.”

“Sorry, sir.”
“No reason why you shouldn’t ask; it’s just that I won’t answer. Let’s

change the subject. This sister of yours she must be quite a girl.”

“Oh, she is, sir.”
“Mmm…maybe if I had met a girl like that I wouldn’t be a cranky old

bachelor now. Get in there and draw your number. Number one goes
through in six minutes.”

“Yes, Doctor.” His way led him past the school armorer, who had set

up a booth outside the door. The old chap was wiping off a noiseless
Summerfield. Rod caught his eye. “Howdy, Guns.”

“Hi, Jack. Kind of late, aren’t you? What’ll it be?”
Rod’s eye ran over the rows of beautiful weapons. Maybe just a little

needle gun with poisoned pellets… He wouldn’t have to use it…

very broad hint. “Uh, I’m already heeled, Guns. Thanks.”

“Okay. Well, good luck, and hurry back.”
“Thanks a lot.” He went into the gate room.
The seminar had numbered more than fifty students; there were about

twenty waiting to take the examination. He started to look around, was
stopped by a gate attendant who called out, “Over here! Draw your
number.”

The lots were capsules in a bowl. Rod reached in, drew one out, and

broke it open. “Number seven.”

“Lucky seven! Congratulations. Your name, please.”
Rod gave his name and turned away, looking for a seat, since it

appeared that he had twenty minutes or so to wait. He walked back, staring
with interest at what his schoolmates deemed appropriate for survival, any
and all conditions.

Johann Braun was seated with empty seats on each side of him. The

reason for the empty seats crouched at his feet—a big, lean, heavily-

muscled boxer dog with unfriendly eyes. Slung over Braun’s shoulder was a
General Electric Thunderbolt, a shoulder model with telescopic sights and
cone-of-fire control; its power pack Braun wore as a back pack. At his belt
were binoculars, knife, first aid kit, and three pouches.

Rod stopped and admired the gun, wondering how much the lovely

thing had cost. The dog raised his head and growled.

Braun put a hand on the dog’s head. “Keep your distance,” he warned.

“Thor is a one-man dog.”

Rod gave back a pace. “Yo, you are certainly equipped.”
The big blond youth gave a satisfied smile. “Thor and I are going to

live off the country.”

“You don’t need him, with that cannon.”
“Oh, yes, I do. Thor’s my burglar alarm. With him at my side I can

sleep sound. You’d be surprised at the things he can do. Thor’s smarter than
most people.”

“Shouldn’t wonder.”
“The Deacon gave me some guff that the two of us made a team and

should go through separately. I explained to him that Thor would tear the
joint apart if they tried to separate us.” Braun caressed the dog’s ears. “I’d
rather team with Thor than with a platoon of Combat Pioneers.”

“Say, Yo, how about letting me try that stinger? After we come out, I

mean.”

“I don’t mind. It really is a honey. You can pick off a sparrow in the air

as easily as you can drop a moose at a thousand meters. Say, you’re making
Thor nervous. See you later.”

Rod took the hint, moved on and sat down. He looked around, having

in mind that he might still arrange a survival team. Near the shuttered arch
of the gateway there was a priest with a boy kneeling in front of him, with
four others waiting.

The boy who had been receiving the blessing stood up—and Rod stood

up hastily. “Hey! Jimmy!”

Jimmy Throxton looked around, caught his eye and grinned, hurried

over. “Rod!” he said, “I thought you had ducked out on me. Look, you
haven’t teamed?”

“No.”
“Still want to?”

“Huh? Sure.”
“Swell! I can declare the team as I go through as long as you don’t

have number two. You don’t, do you?”

“No.”
“Good! Because I’m—”
“NUMBER ONE!” the gate attendant called out. “‘Throxton, James.’”
Jimmy Throxton looked startled. “Oh, gee!” He hitched at his gun belt

and turned quickly away, then called over his shoulder, “See you on the
other side!” He trotted toward the gate, now unshuttered.

Rod called out, “Hey, Jimmy! How are we going to find—” But it was

too late. Well, if Jimmy had sense enough to drive nails, he would keep an
eye on the exit.

who had occurred to Rod as a possible team mate got up and headed for the
gate. She was dressed simply in shirt and shorts, with her feet and legs and
hands bare. She did not appear to be armed but she was carrying an
overnight bag.

Someone called out, “Hey, Carol! What you got in the trunk?”
She threw him a grin. “Rocks.”
“Ham sandwiches, I’ll bet. Save me one.”
“I’ll save you a rock, sweetheart.”
Too soon the attendant called out, “Number seven—Walker, Roderick

L.”

Rod went quickly to the gate. The attendant shoved a paper into his

hand, then shook hands. “Good luck, kid. Keep your eyes open.” He gave
Rod a slap on the back that urged him through the opening, dilated to man
size.

Rod found himself on the other side and, to his surprise, still indoors.

But that shock was not as great as immediate unsteadiness and nausea; the
gravity acceleration was much less than earth-normal.

He fought to keep from throwing up and tried to figure things out.

Where was he? On Luna? On one of Jupiter’s moons? Or somewhere ’way
out there?

The Moon, most likely—Luna. Many of the longer jumps were relayed

through Luna because of the danger of mixing with a primary, particularly

with binaries. But surely they weren’t going to leave him here; Matson had
promised them no airless test areas.

the one Caroline had been carrying. At last he remembered to look at the
paper he had been handed.

It read:

SOLO SURVIVAL TEST-Recall Instructions

2. 
Recall will be by standard visual and sound signals. You are
warned that the area remains hazardous even after recall is
sounded.

3. 
The exit gate will not be the entrance gate. Exit may be as much
as twenty kilometers in the direction of sunrise.

4. 
There is no truce zone outside the gate. Test starts at once. Watch
out for stobor. Good luck!

—B. P. M.

Rod was still gulping at low gravity and staring at the paper when a

door opened at the far end of the long, narrow room he was in. A man
shouted, “Hurry up! You’ll lose your place.”

fell. He had experienced low gravity on field trips and his family had once
vacationed on Luna, but he was not used to it; with difficulty he managed to
skate toward the far door.

Beyond the door was another gate room. The attendant glanced at the

timer over the gate and said, “Twenty seconds. Give me that instruction
sheet.”

Rod hung onto it. “I’ll use the twenty seconds.”—as much as twenty

kilometers in the direction of sunrise. A nominal eastward direction—call it
“east.” But what the deuce was, or were, “stobor”?

rolled back, and Rod was shoved through a dilated gate.

He fell to his hands and knees; the gravity beyond was something

close to earth-normal and the change had caught him unprepared. But he
stayed down, held perfectly still and made no sound while he quickly
looked around him. He was in a wide clearing covered with high grass and
containing scattered trees and bushes; beyond was dense forest.

He twisted his neck in a hasty survey. Earth-type planet, near normal

acceleration, probably a G-type sun in the sky…heavy vegetation, no fauna
in sight—but that didn’t mean anything; there might be hundreds within
hearing. Even a stobor, whatever that was.

The gate was behind him, tall dark-green shutters which were in reality

a long way off. They stood unsupported in the tall grass, an anomalism
unrelated to the primitive scene. Rod considered wriggling around behind
the gate, knowing that the tangency was one-sided and that he would be
able to see through the locus from the other side, see anyone who came out
without himself being seen.

Which reminded him that he himself could be seen from that

exceptional point; he decided to move.

Where was Jimmy? Jimmy ought to be behind the gate, watching for

him to come out…or watching from some other spy point. The only certain
method of rendezvous was for Jimmy to have waited for Rod’s appearance;
Rod had no way to find him now.

Rod looked around more slowly and tried to spot anything that might

give a hint as to Jimmy’s whereabouts. Nothing…but when his scanning
came back to the gate, the gate was no longer there.

Rod felt cold ripple of adrenalin shock trickle down his back and out

his finger tips. He forced himself to quiet down and told himself that it was
better this way. He had a theory to account for the disappearance of the
gate; they were, he decided, refocusing it between each pair of students,
scattering them possibly kilometers apart.

No, that could not be true—“twenty kilometers toward sunrise” had to

relate to a small area.

Or did it? He reminded himself that the orientation given in the sheet

handed him might not be that which appeared in some other student’s

instruction sheet. He relaxed to the fact that he did not really know
anything…he did not know where he was, nor where Jimmy was, nor any
other member of the class, he did not know what he might find here, save
that it was a place where a man might stay alive if he were smart—and
lucky.

Just now his business was to stay alive, for a period that he might as

well figure as ten Earth days. He wiped Jimmy Throxton out of his mind,
wiped out everything but the necessity of remaining unceasingly alert to all
of his surroundings. He noted wind direction as shown by grass plumes and
started crawling cautiously down wind.

The decision to go down wind had been difficult. To go up wind had

been his first thought, that being the natural direction for a stalk. But his
sister’s advice had already paid off; he felt naked and helpless without a
gun and it had reminded him that he was not the hunter. His scent would
carry in any case; if he went down wind he stood a chance of seeing what
might be stalking him, while his unguarded rear would be comparatively
safe.

Something ahead in the grass!
He froze and watched. It had been the tiniest movement; he waited.

There it was again, moving slowly from right to left across his front. It
looked like a dark spike with a tuft of hair on the tip, a tail possibly, carried
aloft.

He never saw what manner of creature owned the tail, if it was a tail. It

stopped suddenly at a point Rod judged to be directly down wind, then
moved off rapidly and he lost Sight of it. He waited a few minutes, then
resumed crawling.

It was extremely hot work and sweat poured down him and soaked his

overshirt and trousers. He began to want a drink very badly but reminded
himself that five liters of water would not last long if he started drinking the
first hour of the test. The sky was overcast with high cirrus haze, but the
primary or “sun”—he decided to call it the Sun—seemed to burn through
fiercely. It was low in the sky behind him; he wondered what it would be
like overhead? Kill a man, maybe. Oh, well, it would be cooler in that forest
ahead, or at least not be the same chance of sunstroke.

There was lower ground ahead of him and hawklike birds were

circling above the spot, round and round. He held still and watched.

Brothers, he said softly, if you are behaving like vultures back home, there
is something dead ahead of me and you are waiting to make sure it stays
dead before you drop in for lunch. If so, I had better swing wide, for it is
bound to attract other things…some of which I might not want to meet.

He started easing to the right, quartering the light breeze. It took him

onto higher ground and close to a rock outcropping. Rod decided to spy out
what was in the lower place below, making use of cover to let him reach an
overhanging rock.

It looked mightily like a man on the ground and a child near him. Rod

reached, fumbled in his vest pack, got out a tiny 8-power monocular, took a
better look. The man was Johann Braun, the “child” was his boxer dog.
There was no doubt but that they were dead, for Braun was lying like a
tossed rag doll, with his head twisted around and one leg bent under. His
throat and the side of his head were a dark red stain.

While Rod watched, a doglike creature trotted out, sniffed at the boxer,

and began tearing at it…then the first of the buzzard creatures landed to join
the feast. Rod took the glass from his eye, feeling queasy. Old Yo had not
lasted long—jumped by a “stobor” maybe—and his smart dog had not
saved him. Too bad! But it did prove that there were carnivores around and
it behooved him to be careful if he did not want to have jackals and vultures
arguing over the leavings!

He remembered something and put the glass back to his eye. Yo’s

proud Thunderbolt gun was nowhere in sight and the corpse was not
wearing the power pack that energized it. Rod gave a low whistle in his
mind and thought. The only animal who would bother to steal a gun ran
around on two legs. Rod reminded himself that a Thunderbolt could kill at
almost any line-of-sight range—and now somebody had it who obviously
took advantage of the absence of law and order in a survival test area.

Well, the only thing to do was not to be in line of sight. He backed off

the rock and slid into the bushes.

The forest had appeared to be two kilometers away, or less, when he

had started. He was close to it when he became uncomfortably aware that
sunset was almost upon him. He became less cautious, more hurried, as he
planned to spend the night in a tree. This called for light to climb by, since
he relished a night on the ground inside the forest still less than he liked the
idea of crouching helpless in the grass.

It had not taken all day to crawl this far. Although it had been morning

when he had left Templeton Gate the time of day there had nothing to do
with the time of day here. He had been shoved through into late afternoon;
it was dusk when he reached the tall trees.

So dusky that he decided that he must accept a calculated risk for what

he must do. He stopped at the edge of the forest, still in the high grass, and
dug into his pack for his climbers. His sister had caused him to leave behind
most of the gadgets, gimmicks, and special-purpose devices that he had
considered bringing; she had not argued at these. They were climbing
spikes of a style basically old, but refined, made small and light—the pair
weighed less than a tenth of a kilogram—and made foldable and compact,
from a titanium alloy, hard and strong.

He unfolded them, snapped them under his arches and around his

shins, and locked them in place. Then he eyed the tree he had picked, a tall
giant deep enough in the mass to allow the possibility of crossing to another
tree if the odds made a back-door departure safer and having a trunk which,
in spite of its height, he felt sure he could get his arms around.

Having picked his route, he straightened up and at a fast dogtrot

headed for the nearest tree. He went past it, cut left for another tree, passed
it and cut right toward the tree he wanted. He was about fifteen meters from
it when something charged him.

He closed the gap with instantaneous apportation which would have

done credit to a Ramsbotham hyperfold. He reached the first branch, ten
meters above ground, in what amounted to levitation. From there on he
climbed more conventionally, digging the spurs into the tree’s smooth bark
and setting his feet more comfortably on branches when they began to be
close enough together to form a ladder.

About twenty meters above ground he stopped and looked down. The

branches interfered and it was darker under the trees than it had been out in
the open; nevertheless he could see, prowling around the tree, the denizen
that had favored him with attention.

Rod tried to get a better view, but the light was failing rapidly. But it

looked like…well, if he had not been certain that he was on some
uncolonized planet ’way out behind and beyond, he would have said that it
was a lion.

Except that it looked eight times as big as any lion ought to look.

fretting, Rod!—if it had been able to climb you would have been lunch
meat five minutes ago. Get busy and rig a place to sleep before it gets pitch
dark. He moved up the tree, keeping an eye out for the spot he needed.

He found it presently, just as he was beginning to think that he would

have to go farther down. He needed two stout branches far enough apart
and near enough the same level to let him stretch a hammock. Having found
such, he worked quickly to beat the failing light. From a pocket of his vest
pack he took out his hammock, a web strong as spider silk and almost as
thin and light. Using the line around his waist he stretched it, made sure his
lashings would hold and then started to get into it.

A double-jointed acrobat with prehensile toes might have found it

easy; a slack-wire artist would simply have walked into it and sat down. But
Rod found that he needed sky hooks. He almost fell out of the tree.

The hammock was a practical piece of equipment and Rod had slept in

it before. His sister had approved it, remarking that it was a better model
than the field hammock they gave her girls. “Just don’t sit up in your sleep.”

belt.”

But he had never slung it in this fashion. There was nothing to stand on

under the hammock, no tree limb above it close enough to let him chin
himself into it. After several awkward and breath-catching attempts he
began to wonder whether he should perch like a bird the rest of the night, or
drape himself in the notch of a limb. He did not consider spending the night
on the ground—not with that thing prowling around.

There was another limb higher up almost directly over the hammock.

Maybe if he tossed the end of his line over it and used it to steady himself…

He tried it. But it was almost pitch dark now; the only reason he did

not lose his line was that one end was bent to the hammock. At last he gave
up and made one more attempt to crawl into the hammock by main force
and extreme care. Bracing both hands wide on each side of the head rope he
scooted his feet out slowly and cautiously. Presently he had his legs inside
the hammock, then his buttocks. From there on it was a matter of keeping
his center of gravity low and making no sudden moves while he insinuated
his body farther down into the cocoon.

deep breath, sighed, and let himself relax. It was the first time he had felt
either safe or comfortable since passing through the gate.

After a few minutes of delicious rest Rod located the nipple of his

canteen and allowed himself two swallows of water, after which he
prepared supper. This consisted in digging out a quarter-kilo brick of field
ration, eleven hundred calories of yeast protein, fat, starch, and glucose,
plus trace requirements. The label on it, invisible in the dark, certified that it
was “tasty, tempting and pleasing in texture,” whereas chewing an old shoe
would have attracted a gourmet quite as much.

But real hunger gave Rod the best of sauces. He did not let any crumb

escape and ended by licking the wrapper. He thought about opening another
one, quelled the longing, allowed himself one more mouthful of water, then
pulled the insect hood of the hammock down over his face and fastened it
under the chest belt. He was immune to most insect-carried Terran diseases
and was comfortably aware that humans were not subject to most Outlands
diseases, but he did not want the night fliers to use his face as a drinking
fountain, nor even as a parade ground.

He was too hot even in his light clothing. He considered shucking

down to his shorts; this planet, or this part of this planet, seemed quite
tropical. But it was awkward; tonight he must stay as he was, even if it
meant wasting a day’s ration of water in sweat. He wondered what planet
this was, then tried to peer through the roof of the forest to see if he could
recognize stars. But either the trees were impenetrable or the sky was
overcast; he could see nothing. He attempted to draw everything out of his
mind and sleep.

Ten minutes later he was wider awake than ever. Busy with his

hammock, busy with his dinner, he had not paid attention to distant sounds;
now he became aware of all the voices of the night. Insects buzzed and sang
and strummed, foliage rustled and whispered, something coughed below
him. The cough was answered by insane laughter that ran raggedly up, then
down, and died in asthmatic choking.

Rod hoped that it was a bird.
He found himself straining to hear every sound, near and far, holding

his breath. He told himself angrily to stop it; he was safe from at least nine-
tenths of potential enemies. Even a snake, if this place ran to such, would be

unlikely to crawl out to the hammock, still less likely to attack—if he held
still. Snakes, button-brained as they were, showed little interest in anything
too big to swallow. The chances of anything big enough to hurt him—and
interested in hurting him—being in this treetop were slim. So forget those
funny noises, pal, and go to sleep. After all, they’re no more important than
traffic noises in a city.

He reminded himself of the Deacon’s lecture on alarm reaction, the

thesis that most forms of death could be traced to the body’s coming too
urgently to battle stations, remaining too long at full alert. Or, as his sister
had put it, more people worry themselves to death than bleed to death. He
set himself conscientiously to running through the mental routines intended
to produce sleep.

came from far away; involuntarily he roused himself to hear it. It sounded
almost human…no, it was human—the terrible sound of a grown man
crying with heartbreak, the deep, retching, bass sobs that tear the chest.

Rod wondered what he ought to do. It was none of his business and

everyone there was on his own—but it went against the grain to hear such
agony from a fellow human and ignore it. Should he climb down and feel
his way through the dark to wherever the poor wretch was? Stumbling into
tree roots, he reminded himself, and falling into holes and maybe walking
straight into the jaws of something hungry and big.

Well, should he? Did he have any right not to?
It was solved for him by the sobs being answered by more sobs, this

time closer and much louder. This new voice did not sound human, much as
it was like the first, and it scared him almost out of his hammock. The chest
strap saved him.

The second voice was joined by a third, farther away. In a few

moments the peace of the night had changed to sobbing, howling ululation
of mass fear and agony and defeat unbearable. Rod knew now that this was
nothing human, nor anything he had ever heard, or heard of, before. He
suddenly had a deep conviction that these were the stobor he had been
warned to avoid.

But what were they? How was he to avoid them? The one closest

seemed to be higher up than he was and no farther than the next tree…good
grief, it might even be this tree!

Or ask it to waltz?

One thing was certain: anything that made that much noise in the

jungle was not afraid of anything; therefore it behooved him to be afraid of
it. But, there being nothing he could do, Rod lay quiet, his fear evidenced
only by tense muscles, gooseflesh, and cold sweat. The hellish concert
continued with the “stobor” closest to him sounding almost in his pocket. It
seemed to have moved closer.

With just a bit more prodding Rod would have been ready to sprout

wings and fly. Only at home on the North American continent of Terra had
he ever spent a night alone in the wilderness. There the hazards were known
and minor…a few predictable bears, an occasional lazy rattlesnake, dangers
easily avoided.

But how could he guard against the utterly unknown? That stobor—he

decided that he might as well call it that—that stobor might be moving
toward him now, sizing him up with night eyes, deciding whether to drag
him home, or eat him where it killed him.

Or should he wait, helpless, for the stobor to pounce? It was possible that
the stobor could not attack him in the tree. But it was equally possible that
stobor were completely arboreal and his one chance lay in climbing down
quickly and spending the night on the ground.

What was a stobor? How did it fight? Where and when was it

dangerous? The Deacon evidently expected the class to know what to do
about them. Maybe they had studied the stobor those days he was out of
school right after New Year’s? Or maybe he had just plain forgotten…and
would pay for it with his skin. Rod was good at Outlands zoology—but
there was just too much to learn it all. Why, the zoology of Terra alone used
to give oldstyle zoologists more than they could handle; how could they
expect him to soak up all there was to learn about dozens of planets?

It wasn’t fair!
When Rod heard himself think that ancient and useless protest he had

a sudden vision of the Deacon’s kindly, cynical smile. He heard his dry
drawl: Fair? You expected this to be fair, son? This is not a game. I tried to
tell you that you were a city boy, too soft and stupid for this. You would not
listen.

He felt a gust of anger at his instructor; it drove fear out of his mind.

Jimmy was right; the Deacon would eat his own grandmother! A cold,
heartless fish!

All right, what would the Deacon do?
Again he heard his teacher’s voice inside his head, an answer Matson

had once given to a question put by another classmate: “There wasn’t
anything I could do, so I took a nap.”

take a nap. The unholy chorus made it almost impossible, but he did decide
that the stobor in his tree—or was it the next tree?—did not seem to be
coming closer. Not that it could come much closer without breathing on his
neck, but at least it did not seem disposed to attack.

improvement, for he dreamed that he had a ring of sobbing, ululating stobor
around him, staring at him, waiting for him to move. But he was trussed up
tight and could not move.

The worst of it was that every time he turned his head to see what a

stobor looked like it would fade back into the dark, giving him just a hint of
red eyes, long teeth.

He woke with an icy shock, tried to sit up, found himself restrained by

his chest strap, forced himself to lie back. What was it? What had
happened?

In his suddenly-awakened state it took time to realize what had

happened: the noise had stopped. He could not hear the cry of a single
stobor, near or far. Rod found it more disturbing than their clamor, since a
noisy stobor advertised its location whereas a silent one could be anywhere
—why, the nearest one could now be sitting on the branch behind his head.
He twisted his head around, pulled the insect netting off his face to see
better. But it was too dark; stobor might be queued up three abreast for all
he could tell.

Nevertheless the silence was a great relief. Rod felt himself relax as he

listened to the other night sounds, noises that seemed almost friendly after
that devils’ choir. He decided that it must be almost morning and that he
would do well to stay awake.

Presently he was asleep.

he realized where he was and that it was still dark, he decided that it was a
dream. He stirred, looked around, and tried to go back to sleep.

Something was looking at him!
His eyes, made sensitive by darkness, saw the thing as a vague shape

on the branch at his foot. Black on black, he could not make out its outline
—but two faintly luminous eyes stared unwinkingly back into his.

“—nothing I could do, so I took a nap.” Rod did not take a nap. For a

time measured in eons he and the thing in the tree locked eyes. Rod
tightened his grip on his knife and held still, tried to quell the noise of his
pounding heart, tried to figure out how he could fight back from a
hammock. The beast did not move, made no sound; it simply stared and
seemed prepared to do it all night.

to shout and get it over, the creature moved with light scratching sounds
toward the trunk and was gone. Rod could feel the branch shift; he judged
that the beast must weigh as much as he did.

Again he resolved to stay awake. Wasn’t it getting less dark? He tried

to tell himself so, but he still could not see his own fingers. He decided to
count to ten thousand and bring on the dawn.

another, and still a third. They did not stop at Rod’s bedroom but went
straight down the trunk. Rod put his knife back and muttered, “Noisy
neighbors! You’d think this was Emigrants’ Gap.” He waited but the frantic
procession never came back.

He was awakened by sunlight in his face. It made him sneeze; he tried

to sit up, was caught by his safety belt, became wide awake and regretted it.
His nose was stopped up, his eyes burned, his mouth tasted like a ditch, his
teeth were slimy, and his back ached. When he moved to ease it he found
that his legs ached, too—and his arms—and his head. His neck refused to
turn to the right.

Nevertheless he felt happy that the long night was gone. His

surroundings were no longer terrifying, but almost idyllic. So high up that
he could not see the ground he was still well below the roof of the jungle

and could not see sky; he floated in a leafy cloud. The morning ray that
brushed his face was alone, so thoroughly did trees shut out the sky.

This reminded him that he had to mark the direction of sunrise.

Hmm…not too simple. Would he be able to see the sun from the floor of the
jungle? Maybe he should climb down quickly, get out in the open, and mark
the direction while the sun was still low. But he noticed that the shaft which
had wakened him was framed by a limb notch of another forest giant about
fifteen meters away. Very well, that tree was “east” of his tree; he could line
them up again when he reached the ground.

Getting out of his hammock was almost as hard as getting in; sore

muscles resented the effort. At last he was balanced precariously on one
limb. He crawled to the trunk, pulled himself painfully erect and, steadied
by the trunk, took half-hearted setting-up exercises to work the knots out.
Everything loosened up but his neck, which still had a crick like a
toothache.

He ate and drank sitting on the limb with his back to the trunk. He kept

no special lookout, rationalizing that night feeders would be bedded down
and day feeders would hardly be prowling the tree tops—not big ones,
anyway; they would be on the ground, stalking herbivores. The truth was
that his green hide-away looked too peaceful to be dangerous.

He continued to sit after he finished eating, considered drinking more

of his precious water, even considered crawling back into his hammock.
Despite the longest night he had ever had he was bone tired and the day was
already hot and sleepy and humid; why not stretch out? His only purpose
was to survive; how better than by sleeping and thereby saving food and
water?

He might have done so had he known what time it was. His watch told

him that it was five minutes before twelve, but he could not make up his
mind whether that was noon on Sunday or midnight coming into Monday.
He was sure that this planet spun much more slowly than did Mother Earth;
the night before had been at least as long as a full Earth day.

Therefore the test had been going on at least twenty six hours and

possibly thirty-eight—and recall could be any time after forty-eight hours.
Why, it might be today, before sunset, and here he was in fine shape, still
alive, still with food and water he could trust.

more of and better? Aside from a loud voice, he added.

where he had come in; therefore it behooved him to reach quickly a point
ten kilometers east of where he had come in; he would lay money that that
would land him within a kilometer or two of the exit. Move along, hole up,
and wait—why, he might sleep at home tonight, after a hot bath!

He started unlashing his hammock while reminding himself that he

must keep track of hours between sunrise and sunset today in order to
estimate the length of the local day. Then he thought no more about it as he
had trouble folding the hammock. It had to be packed carefully to fit into a
pocket of his vest pack. The filmy stuff should have been spread on a table,
but where he was the largest, flattest area was the palm of his hand.

the lowest branch, looked around. The oversized and hungry thing that had
chased him up the tree did not seem to be around, but the undergrowth was
too dense for him to be sure. He made a note that he must, all day long and
every day, keep a climbable tree in mind not too far away; a few seconds
woolgathering might use up his luck.

Okay, now for orientation—Let’s see, there was the tree he had used to

mark “east.” Or was it? Could it be that one over there? He realized that he
did not know and swore at himself for not checking it by compass. The
truth was that he had forgotten that he was carrying a compass. He got it out
now, but it told him nothing, since east by compass bore no necessary
relation to direction of sunrise on this planet. The rays of the primary did
not penetrate where he was; the forest was bathed by a dim religious light
unmarked by shadows.

Well, the clearing could not be far away. He would just have to check.

He descended by climbing spurs, dropped to spongy ground, and headed the
way it should be. He counted his paces while keeping an eye peeled for
hostiles.

One hundred paces later he turned back, retracing his own spoor. He

found “his” tree; this time he examined it. There was where he had come
down; he could see his prints. Which side had he gone up? There should be
spur marks.

his head. “I must have hit that trunk like a cat!” But it showed the direction
from which he had come; five minutes later he was at the edge of the open
country he had crossed the day before.

The sun made shadows here, which straightened him out and he

checked by compass. By luck, east was “east” and he need only follow his
compass. It took him back into the forest.

He traveled standing up. The belly sneak which he had used the day

before was not needed here; he depended on moving noiselessly, using
cover, and keeping an eye out behind as well as in front. He zigzagged in
order to stay close to trees neither too big nor too small but corrected his
course frequently by compass.

One part of his mind counted paces. At fifteen hundred broken-country

steps to a kilometer Rod figured that fifteen thousand should bring him to
his best-guess location for the exit gate, where he planned to set up
housekeeping until recall.

But, even with part of his mind counting paces and watching a

compass and a much larger part watching for carnivores, snakes, and other
hazards, Rod still could enjoy the day and place. He was over his jitters of
the night before, feeling good and rather cocky. Even though he tried to be
fully alert, the place did not feel dangerous now—stobor or no stobor.

It was, he decided, jungle of semi-rainforest type, not dense enough to

require chopping one’s way. It was interlaced with game paths but he
avoided these on the assumption that carnivores might lie waiting for lunch
to come down the path—Rod had no wish to volunteer.

The place seemed thick with game, mostly of antelope type in many

sizes and shapes. They were hard to spot; they faded into the bush with
natural camouflage, but the glimpses he got convinced him that they were
plentiful. He avoided them as he was not hunting and was aware that even a
vegetarian could be dangerous with hooves and horns in self or herd
defense.

The world above was inhabited, too, with birds and climbers. He

spotted families of what looked like monkeys and speculated that this world
would probably have developed its own race of humanoids. He wondered
again what planet it was? Terrestrial to several decimal places it certainly
seemed to be—except for the inconveniently long day—and probably one

just opened, or it would be swarming with colonists. It would be a premium
planet certainly; that clearing he had come through yesterday would make
good farm land once it was burned off. Maybe he would come back some
day and help clean out the stobor.

In the meantime he watched where he put his hands and feet, never

walked under a low branch without checking it, and tried to make his eyes
and ears as efficient as a rabbit’s. He understood now what his sister had
meant about how being unarmed makes a person careful, and realized also
how little chance he would have to use a gun if he let himself be surprised.

It was this hyperacuteness that made him decide that he was being

stalked.

At first it was just uneasiness, then it became a conviction. Several

times he waited by a tree, stood frozen and listened; twice he did a sneak
through bushes and doubled back on his tracks. But whatever it was seemed
as good as he was at silent movement and taking cover and (he had to
admit) a notch better.

He thought about taking to the trees and outwaiting it. But his wish to

reach his objective outweighed his caution; he convinced himself that he
would be safer if he pushed on. He continued to pay special attention to his
rear, but after a while he decided that he was no longer being followed.

When he had covered, by his estimate, four kilometers, he began to

smell water. He came to a ravine which sliced across his route. Game tracks
led him to think it might lead down to a watering place, just the sort of
danger area he wished to avoid, so Rod crossed quickly and went down the
shoulder of the ravine instead. It led to a bank overlooking water; he could
hear the stream before he reached it.

He took to the bushes and moved on his belly to a point where he

could peer out from cover. He was about ten meters higher than the water.
The ground dropped off on his right as well as in front; there the ravine
joined the stream and an eddy pool formed the watering place he had
expected. No animals were in sight but there was plenty of sign; a mud flat
was chewed with hoof marks.

easy to die there. What troubled him was that he must cross the stream to
reach the probable recall area. It was a small river or wide brook, not too
wide to swim, probably not too deep to wade if he picked his spot. But he

would not do either one unless forced—and not then without testing the
water by chucking a lure into it…a freshly killed animal. The streams near
his home were safe, but a tropical stream must be assumed to have local
versions of alligator, piranha, or even worse.

The stream was too wide to cross through the tree tops. He lay still and

considered the problem, then decided that he would work his way upstream
and hope that it would narrow, or split into two smaller streams which he
could tackle one at a time.

It was the last thing he thought about for some time.

When Rod regained consciousness it was quickly; a jackal-like

creature was sniffing at him. Rod lashed out with one hand and reached for
his knife with the other. The dog brute backed away, snarling, then
disappeared in the leaves.

His knife was gone! The realization brought him groggily alert; he sat

up. It made his head swim and hurt. He felt it and his fingers came away
bloody. Further gingerly investigation showed a big and very tender
swelling on the back of his skull, hair matted with blood, and failed to tell
him whether or not his skull was fractured. He gave no thanks that he had
been left alive; he was sure that the blow had been intended to kill.

But not only his knife was gone. He was naked, save for his shorts.

Gone were his precious water, his vest pack with rations and a dozen other
invaluable articles—his antibiotics, his salt, his compass, his climbers, his
matches, his hammock…everything.

His first feeling of sick dismay was replaced by anger. Losing food and

gear was no more than to be expected, since he had been such a fool as to
forget his rear while he looked at the stream—but taking the watch his
father had given him, that was stealing; he would make somebody pay for
that!

His anger made him feel better. It was not until then that he noticed

that the bandage on his left shin was undisturbed.

He felt it. Sure enough! Whoever it was who had hijacked him had not

considered a bandage worth stealing; Rod unwrapped it and cradled Lady
Macbeth in his hand.

Somebody was going to be sorry.

Savage

ROD WALKER WAS CROUCHING ON A TREE LIMB. He had not moved for two
hours, he might not move for as long a time. In a clearing near him a small
herd of yearling bachelor buck were cropping grass; if one came close
enough Rod intended to dine on buck. He was very hungry.

He was thirsty, too, not having drunk that day. Besides that, he was

slightly feverish. Three long, imperfectly healed scratches on his left arm
accounted for the fever, but Rod paid fever and scratches no attention—he
was alive; he planned to stay alive.

A buck moved closer to him; Rod became quiveringly alert. But the

little buck tossed his head, looked at the branch, and moved away. He did
not appear to see Rod; perhaps his mother had taught him to be careful of
overhanging branches—or perhaps a hundred thousand generations of harsh
survival had printed it in his genes.

Rod swore under his breath and lay still. One of them was bound to

make a mistake eventually; then he would eat. It had been days since he had
thought about anything but food…food and how to keep his skin intact,
how to drink without laying himself open to ambush, how to sleep without
waking up in a fellow-denizen’s belly.

The healing wounds on his arm marked how expensive his tuition had

been. He had let himself get too far from a tree once too often, had not even
had time to draw his knife. Instead he had made an impossible leap and had
chinned himself with the wounded arm. The thing that had clawed him he
believed to be the same sort as the creature that had treed him the day of his
arrival; furthermore he believed it to be a lion. He had a theory about that,
but had not yet been able to act on it.

He was gaunt almost to emaciation and had lost track of time. He

realized that the time limit of the survival test had probably—almost
certainly—passed, but he did not know how long he had lain in the crotch
of a tree, waiting for his arm to heal, nor exactly how long it had been since

he had come down, forced by thirst and hunger. He supposed that the recall
signal had probably been given during one of his unconscious periods, but
he did not worry nor even think about it. He was no longer interested in
survival tests; he was interested in survival.

Despite his weakened condition his chances were better now than

when he had arrived. He was becoming sophisticated, no longer afraid of
things he had been afraid of, most acutely wary of others which had seemed
harmless. The creatures with the ungodly voices which he had dubbed
“stobor” no longer fretted him; he had seen one, had disturbed it by
accident in daylight and it had given voice. It was not as big as his hand,
and reminded him of a horned lizard except that it had the habits of a tree
toad. Its one talent was its voice; it could blow up a bladder at its neck to
three times its own size, then give out with that amazing, frightening sob.

But that was all it could do.
Rod had guessed that it was a love call, then had filed the matter. He

still called them “stobor.”

leaves carried a sting worse than that of a nettle, toxic and producing
numbness. Another vine had large grape-like fruits, deliciously tempting
and pleasant to the palate; Rod had learned the hard way that they were a
powerful purgative.

on the ground, that there were carnivores around even though he had never
had a good look at one. So far as he knew there were no carnivorous tree-
climbers large enough to tackle a man, but he could not be certain; he slept
with one eye open.

The behavior of this herd caused him to suspect that there must be

carnivores that hunted as he was now hunting, even though he had had the
good fortune not to tangle with one. The little buck had wandered all over
the clearing, passed close by lesser trees, yet no one of them had grazed
under the tree Rod was in.

Steady, boy…here comes one. Rod felt the grip of “Lady Macbeth,” got

ready to drop onto the graceful little creature as it passed under. But five
meters away it hesitated, seemed to realize that it was straying from its
mates, and started to turn.

Rod let fly.

the hilt firm against the shoulder of the buck. He dropped to the ground, hit
running and moved in to finish the kill.

The buck whipped its head up, turned and fled. Rod dived, did not

touch it. When he rolled to his feet the clearing was empty. His mind was
filled with bitter thoughts; he had promised himself never to throw his knife
when there was any possibility of not being able to recover it, but he did not
let regrets slow him; he got to work on the tracking problem.

Rod had been taught the first law of hunting sportsmanship, that a

wounded animal must always be tracked down and finished, not left to
suffer and die slowly. But there was no trace of “sportsmanship” in his
present conduct; he undertook to track the buck because he intended to eat
it, and—much more urgently—because he had to recover that knife in order
to stay alive.

The buck had not bled at once and its tracks were mixed up with

hundreds of other tracks. Rod returned three times to the clearing and
started over before he picked up the first blood spoor. After that it was
easier but he was far behind now and the stampeded buck moved much
faster than he could track. His quarry stayed with the herd until it stopped in
a new pasture a half kilometer away. Rod stopped still in cover and looked
them over. His quarry did not seem to be among them.

again. He had trouble picking it up; when he did he found that it led into
brush instead of following the herd. This made it easier and harder—easier
because he no longer had to sort one spoor from many, harder because
pushing through the brush was hard in itself and much more dangerous,
since he must never forget that he himself was hunted as well as hunter, and
lastly because the signs were so much harder to spot there. But it cheered
him up, knowing that only a weakened animal would leave the herd and try
to hide. He expected to find it down before long.

But the beast did not drop; it seemed to have a will to live as strong as

his own. He followed it endlessly and was beginning to wonder what he
would do if it grew dark before the buck gave up. He had to have that knife.

He suddenly saw that there were two spoors.
Something had stepped beside a fresh, split-hooved track of the little

antelope; something had stepped on a drop of blood. Quivering, his

subconscious “bush radar” at full power, Rod moved silently forward. He
found new marks again…a man!

The print of a shod human foot—and so wild had he become that it

gave him no feeling of relief; it made him more wary than ever.

Twenty minutes later he found them, the human and the buck. The

buck was down, having died or perhaps been finished off by the second
stalker. The human, whom Rod judged to be a boy somewhat younger and
smaller than himself, was kneeling over it, slicing its belly open. Rod faded
back into the bush. From there he watched and thought. The other hunter
seemed much preoccupied with the kill…and that tree hung over the place
where the butchering was going on—

with a long thorn held in his teeth. He looked down, saw that his rival was
almost under him, and transferred the thorn to his right hand. Then he
waited.

The hunter below him laid the knife aside and bent to turn the carcass.

Rod dropped.

Instantly he transferred his attention to the bare neck, pushing the thorn
firmly against vertebrae. “Hold still or you’ve had it!”

The body under him suddenly quit struggling.
“That’s better,” Rod said approvingly. “Cry pax?”
No answer. Rod jabbed the thorn again. “I’m not playing games,” he

said harshly. “I’m giving you one chance stay alive. Cry pax and mean it,
and well both eat. Give me any trouble and you’ll never eat again. It doesn’t
make the least difference.”

There was a moments hesitation, then a muffled voice said, “Pax.”
Keeping the thorn pressed against his prisoner’s neck, Rod reached out

for the knife which had been used to gut the buck. It was, he saw, his own
Lady Macbeth. He sheathed it, felt around under the body he rested on,
found another where he expected it, pulled it and kept in his hand. He
chucked away the thorn and stood up. “You can get up.”

The youngster got up and faced him sullenly. “Give me my knife.”
“Later…if you are a good boy.”
“I said ‘Pax.’”

you.”

“I left—I’ve nothing but my knife. Give it to me.”
“Left it where?”
The kid did not answer. Rod said, “Okay, turn around,” and threatened

with the borrowed knife. He was obeyed. Rod quickly patted all the likely
hiding places, confirmed that the youngster was wearing armor under
clothes and over the entire torso. Rod himself was dressed only in tan,
scratches, torn and filthy shorts, and a few scars. “Don’t you find that junk
pretty hot this weather?” he asked cheerfully. “Okay, you can turn around.
Keep your distance.”

The youngster turned around, still with a very sour expression.

“What’s your name, bud?”

“Uh, Jack.”
“Jack what? Mine’s Rod Walker.”
“Jack Daudet.”
“What school, Jack?”
“Ponce de Leon Institute.”
“Mine’s Patrick Henry High School.”
“Matson’s class?”
“The Deacon himself.”
“I’ve heard of him.” Jack seemed impressed.
“Who hasn’t? Look, let’s quit jawing; we’ll have the whole county

around our ears. Let’s eat. You keep watch that way; I’ll keep watch behind
you.”

“Then give me my knife. I need it to eat.”
“Not so fast. I’ll cut you off a hunk or two. Special Waldorf service.”
Rod continued the incision Jack had started, carried it on up and laid

the hide back from the right shoulder, hacked off a couple of large chunks
of lean. He tossed one to Jack, hunkered down and gnawed his own piece
while keeping sharp lookout. “You keeping your eyes peeled?” he asked.

“Sure.”
Rod tore off a rubbery mouthful of warm meat. “Jack, how did they let

a runt like you take the test? You aren’t old enough.”

“I’ll bet I’m as old as you are!”
“I doubt it.”

“Well… I’m qualified.”
“You don’t look it.”
“I’m here, I’m alive.”
Rod grinned. “You’ve made your point. I’ll shut up.” Once his portion

was resting comfortably inside, Rod got up, split the skull and dug out the
brains. “Want a handful?”

“Sure.”
Rod passed over a fair division of the dessert. Jack accepted it,

hesitated, then blurted out, “Want some salt?”

“Salt! You’ve got salt?”
Jack appeared to regret the indiscretion. “Some. Go easy on it.”
Rod held out his handful. “Put some on. Whatever you can spare.”
Jack produced a pocket shaker from between shirt and armor, sprinkled

a little on Rod’s portion, then shrugged and made it liberal. “Didn’t you
bring salt along?”

“Oh, sure! But—Well, I had an accident.” He decided that there was no use
admitting that he had been caught off guard.

Jack put the shaker firmly out of sight. They munched quietly, each

watching half their surroundings. After a while Rod said softly, “Jackal
behind you, Jack.”

“Nothing else?”
“No. But it’s time we whacked up the meat and got out of here; we’re

attracting attention. How much can you use?”

“Uh, a haunch and a chunk of liver. I can’t carry any more.”
“And you can’t eat more before it spoils, anyway.” Rod started

butchering the hind quarters. He cut a slice of hide from the belly, used it to
sling his share around his neck. “Well, so long, kid. Here’s your knife.
Thanks for the salt.”

“Oh, that’s all right.”
“Tasted mighty good. Well, keep your eyes open.”
“Same to you. Good luck.”
Rod stood still. Then he said almost reluctantly, “Uh, Jack, you

wouldn’t want to team up, would you?” He regretted it as soon as he said it,
remembering how easily he had surprised the kid.

Jack chewed a lip. “Well… I don’t know.”

see that Rod was doing him a favor?

“Oh, no! You’re all right, I guess.”
Rod had an unpleasant suspicion. “You think I’m trying to get a share

of your salt, don’t you?”

“Huh? Not at all. Look, I’ll divvy some salt with you.”
“I wouldn’t touch it! I just thought—” Rod stopped. He had been

thinking that they had both missed recall; it looked like a long pull.

“I didn’t mean to make you mad, Rod. You’re right. We ought to

team.”

“Don’t put yourself out! I can get along.”
“I’ll bet you can. But let’s team up. Is it a deal?”
“Well… Shake.”
Once the contract was made Rod assumed leadership. There was no

discussion; he simply did so and Jack let it stand. “You lead off,” Rod
ordered, “and I’ll cover our rear.”

“Okay. Where are we heading?”
“That high ground downstream. There are good trees there, better for

all night than around here. I want us to have time to settle in before dark—
so a quick sneak and no talking.”

Jack hesitated. “Okay. Are you dead set on spending the night in a

tree?”

Rod curled his lip. “Want to spend it on the ground? How did you stay

alive this long?”

“I spent a couple of nights in trees,” Jack answered mildly. “But I’ve

got a better place now, maybe.”

“Huh? What sort?”
“A sort of a cave.”
Rod thought about it. Caves could be death traps. But the prospect of

being able to stretch out swayed him. “Won’t hurt to look, if it’s not too
far.”

“It’s not far.”

The Nova

JACK’S HIDEAWAY WAS IN A BLUFF OVERLOOKING THE STREAM by which Rod
had been robbed. At this point the bluffs walled a pocket valley and the
stream meandered between low banks cut in an alluvial field between the
bluffs. The cave was formed by an overhang of limestone which roofed a
room water-carved from shale in one bluff. The wall below it was too sheer
to climb; the overhanging limestone protected it above and the stream
curved in sharply almost to the foot of the bluff. The only way to reach it
was to descend the bluff farther upstream to the field edging the creek, then
make a climbing traverse of the shale bank where it was somewhat less
steep just upstream of the cave.

They slanted cautiously up the shale, squeezed under an overhang at

the top, and stepped out on a hard slaty floor. The room was open on one
side and fairly long and deep, but it squeezed in to a waist-high crawl space;
only at the edge was there room to stand up. Jack grabbed some gravel,
threw it into the dark hole, waited with knife ready. “Nobody home, I
guess.” They dropped to hands and knees, crawled inside. “How do you like
it?”

“It’s swell…provided we stand watches. Something could come up the

way we did. You’ve been lucky.”

“Maybe.” Jack felt around in the gloom, dragged out dry branches of

thorn bush, blocked the pathway, jamming them under the overhang.
“That’s my alarm.”

“It wouldn’t stop anything that got a whiff of you and really wanted to

come in.”

“No. But I would wake up and let it have some rocks in the face. I

keep a stack over there. I’ve got a couple of scare-flares, too.”

“I thought—Didn’t you say you had a gun?”
“I didn’t say, but I do. But I don’t believe in shooting when you can’t

see.”

“It looks all right. In fact it looks good, I guess I did myself a favor

when I teamed with you.” Rod looked around. “You’ve had a fire!”

meat.”

Rod sighed deeply. “I know. Say, do you suppose?”
“It’s almost dark. I’ve never lighted one when it could show. How

about roast liver for breakfast, instead? With salt?”

Rod’s mouth watered. “You’re right, Jack. I do want to get a drink

before it is too dark, though. How about coming along and we cover each
other?”

“No need. There’s a skin back there. Help yourself.”
Rod congratulated himself on having teamed with a perfect

housekeeper. The skin was of a small animal, not identifiable when
distended with water. Jack had scraped the hide but it was uncured and
decidedly unsavory. Rod was not aware that the water tasted bad; he drank
deeply, wiped his mouth with his hand and felt at peace.

They did not sleep at once, but sat in the dark and compared notes.

Jack’s class had come through one day earlier, but with the same
instructions. Jack agreed that recall was long overdue.

don’t know how long I was foggy… I guess I didn’t miss dying by much.”

“That’s not it, Rod.”
“Why not?”
“I’ve been okay and keeping track of the time. There never was any

recall.”

“You’re sure?”
“How could I miss? The siren can be heard for twenty kilometers, they

use a smoke flare by day and a searchlight at night, and the law says they
have to keep it up at least a week unless everybody returns…which
certainly did not happen this time.”

“Maybe we are out of range. Matter of fact—well, I don’t know about

you, but I’m lost. I admit it.”

“I’m not. I’m about four kilometers from where they let my class

through; I could show you the spot. Rod, let’s face it; something has gone
wrong. There is no way of telling how long we are going to be here.” Jack
added quietly, “That’s why I thought it was a good idea to team.”

too.”

“Yes. Solo is actually safer, for a few days. But if we are stuck here

indefinitely, then—”

“Not what I meant, Jack.”
“Huh?”
“Do you know what planet this is?”
“No. I’ve thought about it, of course. It has to be one of the new list

and it is compatible with—”

“I know what one it is.”
“Huh? Which one?”
“It’s Earth. Terra herself.”

There was a long silence. At last Jack said, “Rod, are you all right?

Are you still feverish?”

“I’m fine, now that I’ve got a full belly and a big drink of water. Look,

Jack, I know it sounds silly, but you just listen and I’ll add it up. We’re on
Earth and I think I know about where, too. I don’t think they meant to
sound recall; they meant us to figure out where we are…and walk out. It’s a
twist Deacon Matson would love.”

“But—”
“Keep quiet, can’t you? Yapping like a girl. Terrestrial planet, right?”
“Yes, but—”
“Stow it and let me talk. G-type star. Planetary rotation same as Earth.”
“But it’s not!”
“I made the same mistake. The first night I thought was a week long.

But the truth was I was scared out of my skin and that made it seem endless.
Now I know better. The rotation matches.”

“No, it doesn’t. My watch shows it to be about twenty-six hours.”
“You had better have your watch fixed when we get back. You banged

it against a tree or something.”

“But—Oh, go ahead. Keep talking; it’s your tape.”
“You’ll see. Flora compatible. Fauna compatible. I know how they did

it and why and where they put us. It’s an economy measure.”

“A what?”

high. Of course, keeping an interstellar gate open is expensive and uranium
doesn’t grow on trees. I see their point. But Deacon Matson says it is false
economy. He says, sure, it’s expensive—but that the only thing more
expensive than a properly trained explorer or pioneer leader is an
improperly trained dead one.

“He told us after class one day,” Rod went on, “that the penny-

pinchers wanted to run the practices and tests in selected areas on Earth, but
the Deacon claims that the essence of survival in the Outlands is the skill to
cope with the unknown. He said that if tests were held on Earth, the
candidates would just study up on terrestrial environments. He said any Boy
Scout could learn the six basic Earth environments and how to beat them
out of books…but that it was criminal to call that survival training and then
dump a man in an un-Earthly environment on his first professional
assignment. He said that it was as ridiculous as just teaching a kid to play
chess and then send him out to fight a duel.”

“He’s right,” Jack answered. “Commander Benboe talks the same

way.”

“Sure he’s right. He swore that if they went ahead with this policy this

would be the last year he would teach. But they pulled a gimmick on him.”

“How?”
“It’s a good one. What the Deacon forgot is that any environment is as

unknown as any other if you don’t have the slightest idea where you are. So
they rigged it so that we could not know. First they shot us to Luna; the
Moon gates are always open and that doesn’t cost anything extra. Of course
that made us think we were in for a long jump. Besides, it confused us; we
wouldn’t know we were being dumped back into the gravity field we had
left—for that was what they did next; they shoved us back on Earth.
Where? Africa, I’d say. I think they used the Luna Link to jump us to
Witwatersrand Gate outside Johannesburg and there they were all set with a
matched-in temporary link to drop us into the bush. Tshaka Memorial Park
or some other primitive preserve, on a guess. Everything matches. A wide
variety of antelope-type game, carnivores to feed on them—I’ve seen a
couple of lions and—”

“You have?”

“Well, they will do for lions until I get a chance to skin one. But they

threw in other dodges to confuse us, too. The sky would give the show
away, particularly if we got a look at Luna. So they’ve hung an overcast
over us. You can bet there are cloud generators not far away. Then they
threw us one more curve. Were you warned against ‘stobor’?”

“Yes.”
“See any?”
“Well, I’m not sure what stobor are.”
“Neither am I. Nor any of us, I’ll bet. ‘Stobor’ is the bogeyman,

chucked in to keep our pretty little heads busy. There aren’t any ‘stobor’ on
Terra so naturally we must be somewhere else. Even a suspicious character
like me would be misled by that. In fact, I was. I even picked out something
I didn’t recognize and called it that, just as they meant me to do.”

“You make it sound logical, Rod.”
“Because it is logical. Once you realize that this is Earth—” He patted

the floor of the cave. “—but that they have been trying to keep us from
knowing it, everything falls into place. Now here is what we do. I was
going to tackle it alone, as soon as I could—I haven’t been able to move
around much on account of this bad arm—but I decided to take you along,
before you got hurt. Here’s my plan. I think this is Africa, but it might be
South America, or anywhere in the tropics. It does not matter, because we
simply follow this creek downstream, keeping our eyes open because there
really are hazards; you can get just as dead here as in the Outlands. It may
take a week, or a month, but one day well come to a bridge. We’ll follow
the road it serves until somebody happens along. Once in town we’ll check
in with the authorities and get them to flip us home…and we get our solo
test certificates. Simple.”

“You make it sound too simple,” Jack said slowly.
“Oh, we’ll have our troubles. But we can do it, now that we know what

to do. I didn’t want to bring this up before, but do you have salt enough to
cure a few kilos of meat? If we did not have to hunt every day, we could
travel faster. Or maybe you brought some Kwik-Kure?”

“I did, but—”
“Good!”
“Wait a minute, Rod. That won’t do.”
“Huh? We’re a team, aren’t we?”

“Take it easy. Look, Rod, everything you said is logical, but—”
“No ‘buts’ about it.”
“It’s logical…but it’s all wrong!”
“Huh? Now, listen, Jack—”
“You listen. You’ve done all the talking so far.”
“But—Well, all right, say your say.”
“You said that the sky would give it away, so they threw an overcast

over the area.”

“Yes. That’s what they must have done, nights at least. They wouldn’t

risk natural weather; it might give the show away.”

“What I’m trying to tell you is that it did give the show away. It hasn’t

been overcast every night, though maybe you were in deep forest and
missed the few times it has been clear. But I’ve seen the night sky, Rod.
I’ve seen stars.”

“So? Well?”
“They aren’t our stars, Rod. I’m sorry.”
Rod chewed his lip. “You probably don’t know southern constellations

very well?” he suggested.

“I knew the Southern Cross before I could read. These aren’t our stars,

Rod; I know. There is a pentagon of bright stars above where the sun sets;
there is nothing like that to be seen from Earth. And besides, anybody
would recognize Luna, if it was there.”

Rod tried to remember what phase the Moon should be in. He gave up,

as he had only a vague notion of elapsed time. “Maybe the Moon was
down?”

“Not a chance. I didn’t see our Moon, Rod, but I saw moons…two of

them, little ones and moving fast, like the moons of Mars.”

“You don’t mean this is Mars?” Rod said scornfully.
“Think I’m crazy? Anyhow, the stars from Mars are exactly like the

stars from Earth. Rod, what are we jawing about? It was beginning to clear
when the sun went down; let’s crawl out and have a look. Maybe you’ll
believe your eyes.”

Rod shut up and followed Jack. From inside nothing was visible but

dark trees across the stream, but from the edge of the shelf part of the sky
could be seen. Rod looked up and blinked.

“Mind the edge,” Jack warned softly.

across the stream was a pattern of six stars, a lopsided pentagon with a star
in its center. The six stars were as bright and unmistakable as the seven stars
of Earth’s Big Dipper…nor did it take a degree in astrography to know that
this constellation had never been seen from Terra.

Rod stared while the hard convictions he had formed fell in ruins. He

felt lost and alone. The trees across the way seemed frightening. He turned
to Jack, his cocky sophistication gone. “You’ve convinced me,” he said
dully. “What do we do now?”

Jack did not answer.
“Well?” Rod insisted. “No good standing here.”
“Rod,” Jack answered, “that star in the middle of the Pentagon—it

wasn’t there before.”

“Huh? You probably don’t remember.”
“No, no, I’m sure! Rod, you know what? We’re seeing a nova.”
Rod was unable to arouse the pure joy of scientific discovery; his mind

was muddled with reorganizing his personal universe. A mere stellar
explosion meant nothing. “Probably one of your moonlets.”

“Not a chance. The moons are big enough to show disks. It’s a nova; it

has to be. What amazing luck to see one!”

“I don’t see anything lucky about it,” Rod answered moodily. “It

doesn’t mean anything to us. It’s probably a hundred light-years away,
maybe more.”

“Yes, but doesn’t it thrill you?”
“No.” He stooped down and went inside. Jack took another look, then

followed.

There was silence, moody on Rod’s part. At last Jack said, “Think I’ll

turn in.”

wrong. It was a logical certainty.”

“Forget it,” Jack advised. “My analytics instructor says that all logic is

mere tautology. She says it is impossible to learn anything through logic
that you did not already know.”

“Then what use is logic?” Rod demanded.
“Ask me an easy one. Look, partner, I’m dead for sleep; I want to turn

in.”

“All right. But, Jack, if this isn’t Africa—and I’ve got to admit it isn’t

—what do we do? They’ve gone off and left us.”

listed planet; if we just keep breathing, someday somebody will show up. It
might be just a power breakdown; they may pick us tomorrow.”

“In that case, then—”
“In that case, let’s shut up and go to sleep.”

“I Think He Is Dead”

ROD WAS AWAKENED BY HEAVENLY ODORS. He rolled over, blinked at light
streaming under the overhang, managed by great effort to put himself back
into the matrix of the day before. Jack, he saw, was squatting by a tiny fire
on the edge of the shelf; the wonderful fragrance came from toasting liver.

Rod got to his knees, discovering that he was slightly stiff from having

fought dream stobor in his sleep. These nightmare stobor were bug-eyed
monsters fit for a planet suddenly strange and threatening. Nevertheless he
had had a fine night’s sleep and his spirits could not be daunted in the
presence of the tantalizing aroma drifting in.

Jack looked up. “I thought you were going to sleep all day. Brush your

teeth, comb your hair, take a quick shower, and get on out here. Breakfast is
ready.” Jack looked him over again. “Better shave, too.”

Rod grinned and ran his hand over his chin. “You’re jealous of my

manly beard, youngster. Wait a year or two and you’ll find out what a
nuisance it is. Shaving, the common cold, and taxes…my old man says
those are the three eternal problems the race is never going to lick.” Rod felt
a twinge at the thought of his parents, a stirring of conscience that he had
not thought of them in he could not remember how long. “Can I help, pal?”

“Sit down and grab the salt. This piece is for you.”
“Let’s split it.”
“Eat and don’t argue. I’ll fix me some.” Rod accepted the charred and

smoky chunk, tossed it in his hands and blew on it. He looked around for
salt. Jack Was slicing a second piece; Rod’s eyes passed over the operation
—then whipped back.

The knife Jack was using was “Colonel Bowie.”
The realization was accompanied by action; Rod’s hand darted out and

caught Jack’s wrist in an anger-hard grip. “You stole my knife!”

Jack did not move. “Rod…have you gone crazy?”
“You slugged me and stole my knife.”

yet, Rod. Your knife is on your belt. This is another knife…mine.”

Rod did not bother to look down. “The one I’m wearing is Lady

Macbeth. I mean the knife you’re using, Colonel Bowie—my knife.”

“Let go my wrist.”
“Drop it!”
“Rod…you can probably make me drop this knife. You’re bigger and

you’ve got the jump on me. But yesterday you teamed with me. You’re
busting that team right now. If you don’t let go right away, the team is
broken. Then you’ll have to kill me…because if you don’t, I’ll trail you. I’ll
keep on trailing you until I find you asleep. Then you’ve had it.”

They faced each other across the little fire, eyes locked. Rod breathed

hard and tried to think. The evidence was against Jack. But had this little
runt tracked him, slugged him, stolen everything he had? It looked like it.

Yet it did not feel like it. He told himself that he could handle the kid if

his story did not ring true. He let go Jack’s wrist. “All right,” he said
angrily, “tell me how you got my knife.”

Jack went on slicing liver. “It’s not much of a story…and I don’t know

that it is your knife. But it was not mine to start with—you’ve seen mine. I
use this one as a kitchen knife. Its balance is wrong.”

“Colonel Bowie! Balanced wrong? That’s the best throwing knife you

ever saw!”

“Do you want to hear this? I ran across this hombre in the bush, just as

the jackals were getting to him. I don’t know what got him—stobor, maybe;
he was pretty well clawed and half eaten. He wasn’t one of my class, for his
face wasn’t marked and I could tell. He was carrying a Thunderbolt and—”

“Wait a minute. A Thunderbolt gun?”
“I said so, didn’t I? I guess he tried to use it and had no luck. Anyhow,

I took what I could use—this knife and a couple of other things; I’ll show
you. I left the Thunderbolt; the power pack was exhausted and it was junk.”

“Jack, look at me. You’re not lying?”
Jack shrugged. “I can take you to the spot. There might not be

anything left of him, but the Thunderbolt ought to be there.”

Rod stuck out his hand. “I’m sorry. I jumped to conclusions.”
Jack looked at his hand, did not shake it. “I don’t think you are much

of a team mate. We had better call it quits.” The knife flipped over, landed

at Rod’s toes. “Take your toadsticker and be on your way.”

Rod did not pick up the knife. “Don’t get sore, Jack. I made an honest

mistake.”

“It was a mistake, all right. You didn’t trust me and I’m not likely to

trust you again. You can’t build a team on that.” Jack hesitated. “Finish
your breakfast and shove off. It’s better that way.”

“Jack, I truly am sorry. I apologize. But it was a mistake anybody

could make—you haven’t heard my side of the story.”

“You didn’t wait to hear my story!”
“So I was wrong, I said I was wrong.” Rod hurriedly told how he had

been stripped of his survival gear. “—so naturally, when I saw Colonel
Bowie, I assumed that you must have jumped me. That’s logical, isn’t it?”
Jack did not answer; Rod persisted: “Well? Isn’t it?”

Jack said slowly, “You used ‘logic’ again. What you call ‘logic.’ Rod,

you use the stuff the way some people use dope. Why don’t you use your
head, instead?”

Rod flushed and kept still. Jack went on, “If I had swiped your knife,

would I have let you see it? For that matter, would I have teamed with
you?”

“No, I guess not. Jack, I jumped at a conclusion and lost my temper.”
“Commander Benboe says,” Jack answered bleakly, “that losing your

temper and jumping at conclusions is a one-way ticket to the cemetery.”

Rod looked sheepish. “Deacon Matson talks the same way.”
“Maybe they’re right. So let’s not do it again, huh? Every dog gets one

bite, but only one.”

Rod looked up, saw Jack’s dirty paw stuck out at him. “You mean

we’re partners again?”

“Shake. I think we had better be; we don’t have much choice.” They

solemnly shook hands. Then Rod picked up Colonel Bowie, looked at it
longingly, and handed it hilt first to Jack.

“I guess it’s yours, after all.”
“Huh? Oh, no. I’m glad you’ve got it back.”
“No,” Rod insisted. “You came by it fair and square.”
“Don’t be silly, Rod. I’ve got ‘Bluebeard’; that’s the knife for me.”
“It’s yours. I’ve got Lady Macbeth.”
Jack frowned. “We’re partners, right?”

“Huh? Sure.”
“So. We share everything. Bluebeard belongs just as much to you as to

me. And Colonel Bowie belongs to both of us. But you are used to it, so it’s
best for the team for you to wear it. Does that appeal to your lopsided sense
of logic?”

“Well…”
“So shut up and eat your breakfast. Shall I toast you another slice?

That one is cold.”

Rod picked up the scorched chunk of liver, brushed dirt and ashes from

it. “This is all right.”

“Throw it in the stream and have a hot piece. Liver won’t keep

anyhow.”

Comfortably stuffed, and warmed by companionship, Rod stretched

out on the shelf after breakfast and stared at the sky. Jack put out the fire
and tossed the remnants of their meal downstream. Something broke water
and snapped at the liver even as it struck. Jack turned to Rod. “Well, what
do we do today?”

“Mmm…what we’ve got on hand ought to be fit to eat tomorrow

morning. We don’t need to make a kill today.”

“I hunt every second day, usually, since I found this place. Second-day

meat is better than first, but by the third…phewy!”

“Sure. Well, what do you want to do?”
“Well, let’s see. First I’d like to buy a tall, thick chocolate malted milk

—or maybe a fruit salad. Both. I’d eat those—”

“Stop it, you’re breaking my heart!”
“Then I’d have a hot bath and get all dressed up and flip out to

Hollywood and see a couple of good shows. That superspectacle that Dirk
Manleigh is starring in and then a good adventure show. After that I’d have
another malted milk…strawberry, this time, and then—”

“Shut up!”
“You asked me what I wanted to do.”
“Yes, but I expected you to stick to possibilities.”
“Then why didn’t you say so? Is that ‘logical’? I thought you always

used logic?”

“Say, lay off, will you? I apologized.”

I haven’t used up yet.”

“Well! Are you the sort of pal who keeps raking up the past?”
“Only when you least expect it. Seriously, Rod, I think we ought to

hunt today.”

“But you agreed we didn’t need to. It’s wrong, and dangerous besides,

to make a kill you don’t need.”

“I think we ought to hunt people.”
Rod pulled his ear. “Say that again.”
“We ought to spend the day hunting people.”
“Huh? Well, anything for fun I always say. What do we do when we

find them? Scalp them, or just shout ‘Beaver!’?”

“Scalping is more definite. Rod, how long will we be here?”
“Huh? All we know is that something has gone seriously cockeyed

with the recall schedule. You say we’ve been here three weeks. I would say
it was longer but you have kept a notch calendar and I haven’t.
Therefore…” He stopped.

“Therefore what?”
“Therefore nothing. They might have had some technical trouble,

which they may clear up and recall us this morning. Deacon Matson and his
fun-loving colleagues might have thought it was cute to double the period
and not mention it. The Dalai Lama might have bombed the whiskers off
the rest of the World and the Gates may be radioactive ruins. Or maybe the
three-headed serpent men of the Lesser Magellanic Cloud have landed and
have the situation well in hand—for them. When you haven’t data, guessing
is illogical. We might be here forever.”

Jack nodded. “That’s my point.”
“Which point? We know we may be marooned; that’s obvious.”
“Rod, a two-man team is just right for a few weeks. But suppose this

runs into months? Suppose one of us breaks a leg? Or even if we don’t, how
long is that thorn-bush alarm going to work? We ought to wall off that path
and make this spot accessible only by rope ladder, With somebody here all
the time to let the ladder down. We ought to locate a salt lick and think
about curing hides and things like that—that water skin I made is getting
high already. For a long pull we ought to have at least four people.”

last night, after you jerked the rug out from under my optimistic theory. But
I was waiting for you to bring it up.”

“Why?”
“This is your cave. You’ve got all the fancy equipment, a gun and pills

and other stuff I haven’t seen. You’ve got salt. All I’ve got is a knife—two
knives now, thanks to you. I’d look sweet suggesting that you share four
ways.”

“We’re a team, Rod.”
“Mmm…yes. And we both figure the team would be strengthened with

a couple of recruits. Well, how many people are there out there?” He
gestured at the wall of green across the creek.

Benboe told us there would be four classes in the same test area.”

“That’s more than the Deacon bothered to tell us. However, my class

put through about twenty.”

Jack looked thoughtful. “Around a hundred people, probably.”
“Not counting casualties.”
“Not counting casualties. Maybe two-thirds boys, one-third girls.

Plenty of choice, if we can find them.”

“No girls on this team, Jack.”
“What have you got against girls?”
“Me? Nothing at all. Girls are swell on picnics, they are just right on

long winter evenings. I’m one of the most enthusiastic supporters of the
female race. But for a hitch like this, they are pure poison.”

Jack did not say anything. Rod went on, “Use your head, brother. You

get some pretty little darling on this team and we’ll have more grief inside
than stobor, or such, can give us from outside. Quarrels and petty jealousies
and maybe a couple of boys knifing each other. It will be tough enough
without that trouble.”

“Well,” Jack answered thoughtfully, “suppose the first one we locate is

a girl? What are you going to do? Tip your hat and say, ‘It’s a fine day,
ma’am. Now drop dead and don’t bother me.’?”

Rod drew a pentagon in the ashes, put a star in the middle, then rubbed

it out. “I don’t know,” he said slowly. “Let’s hope we get our team working
before we meet any. And let’s hope they set up their own teams.”

“I think we ought to have a policy.”
“I’m clean out of policies. You would just accuse me of trying to be

logical. Got any ideas about how to find anybody?”

“Maybe. Somebody has been hunting upstream from here.”
“So? Know who it is?”
“I’ve seen him only at a distance. Nobody from my class. Half a head

shorter than you are, light hair, pink skin—and a bad sunburn. Sound
familiar?”

“Could be anybody,” Rod answered, thinking fretfully that the

description did sound familiar. “Shall we see if we can pick up some sign of
him?”

“I can put him in your lap. But I’m not sure we want him.”
“Why not? If he’s lasted this long, he must be competent.”
“Frankly, I don’t see how he has. He’s noisy when he moves and he

has been living in one tree for the past week.”

“Not necessarily bad technique.”
“It is when you drop your bones and leavings out of the tree. It was

jackals sniffing around that tipped me off to where he was living.”

“Hmm…well, if we don’t like him, we don’t have to invite him.”
“True.”
Before they set out Jack dug around in the gloomy cave and produced

a climbing line. “Rod, could this be yours?”

Rod looked it over. “It’s just like the one I had. Why?”
“I got it the way I got Colonel Bowie, off the casualty. If it is not

yours, at least it is a replacement.” Jack got another, wrapped it around and
over body armor. Rod suspected that Jack had slept in the armor, but he said
nothing. If Jack considered such marginal protection more important than
agility, that was Jack’s business—each to his own methods, as the Deacon
would say.

The tree stood in a semi-clearing but Jack brought Rod to it through

bushes which came close to the trunk and made the final approach as a
belly sneak. Jack pulled Rod’s head over and whispered in his ear, “If we lie
still for three or four hours, I’m betting that he will either come down or go
up.”

“Okay. You watch our rear.”

seemed to be all bite. Silently he shifted position to ward off stiffness and
once had to kill a sneeze. At last he said, “Pssst!”

“Yeah, Rod?”
“Where those two big branches meet the trunk, could that be his nest?”
“Maybe.”
“You see a hand sticking out?”
“Where? Uh, I think I see what you see. It might just be leaves.”
“I think it’s a hand and I think he is dead; it hasn’t moved since we got

here.”

“Asleep?”
“Person asleep ordinarily doesn’t hold still that long. I’m going up.

Cover me. If that hand moves, yell.”

“You ought not to risk it, Rod.”
“You keep your eyes peeled.” He crept forward.

The owner of the hand was Jimmy Throxton, as Rod had suspected

since hearing the description. Jimmy was not dead, but he was unconscious
and Rod could not rouse him.

Jim lay in an aerie half natural, half artificial; Rod could see that Jim

had cut small branches and improved the triple crotch formed by two limbs
and trunk. He lay cradled in this eagle’s nest, one hand trailing out.

Getting him down was awkward; he weighed as much as Rod did. Rod

put a sling under Jim’s armpits and took a turn around a branch, checking
the line by friction to lower him—but the hard part was getting Jim out of
his musty bed without dropping him.

Halfway down the burden fouled and Jack had to climb and free it. But

with much sweat all three reached the ground and Jim was still breathing.

Rod had to carry him. Jack offered to take turns but the disparity in

sizes was obvious; Rod said angrily for Jack to cover them, front, rear, all
sides; Rod would be helpless if they had the luck to be surprised by one of
the pseudo-lions.

The worst part was the climbing traverse over loose shale up to the

cave. Rod was fagged from carrying the limp and heavy load more than a
kilometer over rough ground; he had to rest before he could tackle it. When

he did, Jack said anxiously, “Don’t drop him in the drink! It won’t be
worthwhile fishing him out—I know.”

“So do I. Don’t give silly advice.”
“Sorry.”
Rod started up, as much worried for his own hide as for Jim’s. He did

not know what it was that lived in that stream; he did know that it was
hungry. There was a bad time when he reached the spot where the jutting
limestone made it necessary to stoop to reach the shelf. He got down as low
as possible, attempted it, felt the burden on his back catch on the rock,
started to slip.

Jack’s hand steadied him and shoved him from behind. Then they were

sprawled safe on the shelf and Rod gasped and tried to stop the trembling of
his abused muscles.

don’t think he’s going to make it.”

“What medicines do you have?”
“Two of the neosulfas and verdomycin. But I don’t know what to give

him.”

“Give him all three and pray.”
“He might be allergic to one of them.”
“He’ll be more allergic to dying. I’ll bet he’s running six degrees of

fever. Come on.”

Rod supported Jim’s shoulders, pinched his ear lobe, brought him

partly out of coma. Between them they managed to get the capsules into
Jim’s mouth, got him to drink and wash them down. After that there was
nothing they could do but let him rest.

broke, he roused and asked for water. Rod held him while Jack handled the
waterskin. Jim drank deeply, then went back to sleep.

They never left him alone. Jack did the nursing and Rod hunted each

day, trying to find items young and tender and suited to an invalid’s palate.
By the second day Jim, although weak and helpless, was able to talk
without drifting off to sleep in the middle. Rod returned in the afternoon
with the carcass of a small animal which seemed to be a clumsy cross

between a cat and a rabbit. He encountered Jack heading down to fill the
water skin. “Hi.”

“Hi. I see you had luck. Say, Rod, go easy when you skin it. We need a

new water bag. Is it cut much?”

“Not at all. I knocked it over with a rock.”
“Good!”
“How’s the patient?”
“Healthier by the minute. I’ll be up shortly.”
“Want me to cover you while you fill the skin?”
“I’ll be careful. Go up to Jim.”
Rod went up, laid his kill on the shelf, crawled inside. “Feeling

better?”

“Swell. I’ll wrestle you two falls out of three.”
“Next week. Jack taking good care of you?”
“You bet. Say, Rod, I don’t know how to thank you two. If it hadn’t

been for—”

“Then don’t try. You don’t owe me anything, ever. And Jack’s my

partner, so it’s right with Jack.”

“Jack is swell.”
“Jack is a good boy. They don’t come better. He and I really hit it off.”
Jim looked surprised, opened his mouth, closed it suddenly. “What’s

the matter?” Rod asked. “Something bite you? Or are you feeling bad
again?”

“What,” Jim said slowly, “did you say about Jack?”
“Huh? I said they don’t come any better. He and I team up like bacon

and eggs. A number-one kid, that boy.”

Jimmy Throxton looked at him. “Rod…were you born that stupid? Or

did you have to study?”

“Huh?”
“Jack is a girl.”

“I Should Have Baked a Cake”

THERE FOLLOWED A LONG SILENCE. “Well,” said Jim, “close your mouth
before something flies in.”

“Jimmy, you’re still out of your head.”
“I may be out of my head, but not so I can’t tell a girl from a boy.

When that day comes, I won’t be sick; I’ll be dead.”

“But…”
Jim shrugged. “Ask her.”
A shadow fell across the opening; Rod turned and saw Jack scrambling

up to the shelf. “Fresh water, Jimmy!”

“Thanks, kid.” Jim added to Rod, “Go on, dopy!”
Jack looked from one to the other. “Why the tableau? What are you

staring for, Rod?”

“Jack,” he said slowly, “what is your name?”
“Huh? Jack Daudet. I told you that.”
“No, no! What’s your full name, your legal name?”
Jack looked from Rod to Jimmy’s grinning face and back again. “My

full name is… Jacqueline Marie Daudet—if it’s any business of yours. Want
to make something of it?”

Rod took a deep breath. “Jacqueline,” he said carefully, “I didn’t know.

I—”

“You weren’t supposed to.”
“I—Look, if I’ve said anything to offend you, I surely didn’t mean to.”
“You haven’t said anything to offend me, you big stupid dear. Except

about your knife.”

“I didn’t mean that.”
“You mean about girls being poison? Well, did it ever occur to you that

maybe boys are pure poison, too? Under these circumstances? No, of course
it didn’t. But I don’t mind your knowing now…now that there are three of
us.”

“But, Jacqueline—”
“Call me ‘Jack,’ please.” She twisted her shoulders uncomfortably.

“Now that you know, I won’t have to wear this beetle case any longer. Turn
your backs, both of you.”

“Uh…” Rod turned his back. Jimmy rolled over, eyes to the wall.
In a few moments Jacqueline said, “Okay.” Rod turned around. In shirt

and trousers, without torso armor, her shoulders seemed narrower and she
herself was slender now and pleasantly curved. She was scratching her ribs.
“I haven’t been able to scratch properly since I met you, Rod Walker,” she
said accusingly. “Sometimes I almost died.”

“I didn’t make you wear it.”
“Suppose I hadn’t? Would you have teamed with me?”
“Uh…well, it’s like this. I…” He stopped.
“You see?” She suddenly looked worried. “We’re still partners?”
“Huh? Oh, sure, sure!”
“Then shake on it again. This time we shake with Jimmy, too. Right,

Jim?”

“You bet, Jack.”
They made a three-cornered handshake. Jack pressed her left hand

over the combined fists and said solemnly, “All for one!”

Rod drew Colonel Bowie with his left hand, laid the flat of the blade

on the stacked hands. “And one for all!”

“Plus sales tax,” Jimmy added. “Do we get it notarized?”
Jacqueline’s eyes were swimming with tears. “Jimmy Throxton,” she

said fiercely, “someday I am going to make you take life seriously!”

“I take life seriously,” he objected. “I just don’t want life to take me

seriously. When you’re on borrowed time, you can’t afford not to laugh.”

“We’re all on borrowed time,” Rod answered him. “Shut up, Jimmy.

You talk too much.”

“Look who’s preaching! The Decibel Kid himself.”
“Well…you ought not to make fun of Jacqueline. She’s done a lot for

you.”

“She has indeed!”
“Then—”
“‘Then’ nothing!” Jacqueline said sharply. “My name is ‘Jack.’ Rod.

Forget ‘Jacqueline.’ If either of you starts treating me with gallantry we’ll

have all those troubles you warned me about. ‘Pure poison’ was the
expression you used, as I recall.”

“But you can reasonably expect—”
“Are you going to be ‘logical’ again? Let’s be practical instead. Help

me skin this beast and make a new water bag.”

The following day Jimmy took over housekeeping and Jack and Rod

started hunting together. Jim wanted to come along; he ran into a double
veto. There was little advantage in hunting as a threesome whereas Jack and
Rod paired off so well that a hunt was never hours of waiting, but merely a
matter of finding game. Jack would drive and Rod would kill; they would
pick their quarry from the fringe of a herd, Jack would sneak around and
panic the animals, usually driving one into Rod’s arms.

choice for primitive survival, being an air gun that threw poisoned darts.
Since the darts could be recovered and re-envenomed, it was a gun which
would last almost indefinitely; she had chosen it for this reason over
cartridge or energy guns.

pressure might bleed off and let you down.”

“It never has. And you can pump it up again awfully fast.”
“Mmm…yes. But if we use it, someday the last dart will be lost no

matter how careful we are…and that might be the day we would need it
bad. We may be here a long time, what do you say we save it?”

“You’re the boss, Rod.”
“No, I’m not. We all have equal say.”
“Yes, you are. Jimmy and I agreed on that. Somebody has to boss.”
Hunting took an hour or so every second day; they spent most of

daylight hours searching for another team mate, quartering the area and
doing it systematically. Once they drove scavengers from a kill which
seemed to have been butchered by knife; they followed a spoor from that
and determined that it was a human spoor, but were forced by darkness to
return to the cave. They tried to pick it up the next day, but it had rained
hard in the night; they never found it.

Another time they found ashes of a fire, but Rod judged them to be at

least two weeks old.

Jimmy looked up from the fire he had started. “How goes the census?”

for dinner?”

“Raw buck, roast buck, and burned buck. I tried baking some of it in

wet clay. It didn’t work out too well, but I’ve got some awfully good baked
clay for dessert.”

“Thanks. If that is the word.”
“Jim,” Jack said, “we ought to try to bake pots with that clay.”
“I did. Big crack in my first effort. But I’ll get the hang of it. Look,

children,” he went on, “has it ever occurred to your bright little minds that
you might be going about this the wrong way?”

“What’s wrong with it?” Rod demanded.
“Nothing…if it is exercise you are after. You are and scurrying over

the countryside, getting in and nowhere else. Maybe it would be better to sit
back and let them come to you.”

“How?”
“Send up a smoke signal.”
“We’ve discussed that We don’t want just anybody and we don’t want

to advertise where we live. We want people who will strengthen the team.”

“That is what the engineers call a self-defeating criterion. The superior

woodsman you want is just the laddy you will never find by hunting for
him. He may find you, as you go tramping noisily through the brush,
kicking rocks and stepping on twigs and scaring the birds. He may shadow
you to see what you are up to. But you won’t find him.”

“Rod, there is something to that,” Jack said.
“We found you easily enough,” Rod said to Jim. “Maybe you aren’t the

high type we need.”

“I wasn’t myself at the time,” Jimmy answered blandly. “Wait till I get

my strength back and my true nature will show. Ugh-Ugh, the ape man,
that’s me. Half Neanderthal and half sleek black leopard.” He beat his chest
and coughed.

“Are those the proportions? The Neanderthal strain seems dominant.”
“Don’t be disrespectful. Remember, you are my debtor.”
“I think you read the backs of those cards. They are getting to be like

waffles.” When rescued, Jimmy had had on him a pack of playing cards,

and had later explained that they were survival equipment.

“In the first place,” he had said, “if I got lost I could sit down and play

solitaire. Pretty soon somebody would come along and—”

“Tell you to play the black ten on the red jack. We’ve heard that one.”
“Quiet, Rod. In the second place, Jack, I expected to team with old

Stoneface here. I can always beat him at cribbage but he doesn’t believe it. I
figured that during the test I could win all his next year’s allowance.
Survival tactics.”

Whatever his reasoning, Jimmy had had the cards. The three played a

family game each evening at a million plutons a point. Jacqueline stayed
more or less even but Rod owed Jimmy several hundred millions. They
continued the discussion that evening over their game. Rod was still wary
of advertising their hide-out.

“We might burn a smoke signal somewhere, though,” he said

thoughtfully. “Then keep watch from a safe spot. Cut ’em, Jim.”

“Consider the relative risks—a five, just what I needed! If you put the

fire far enough away to keep this place secret, then it means a trek back and
forth at least twice a day. With all that running around you’ll use up your
luck; one day you won’t come back. It’s not that I’m fond you, but it would
bust up the game.”

“Whose crib?”
“Jack’s. But if we burn it close by and in sight, then we sit up here safe

and snug. I’ll have my back to the wall facing the path, with Jack’s phht gun
in my lap. If an unfriendly face sticks up—blooie! Long pig for dinner. But
if we like them, we cut them into the game.”

“Your count.”
“Fifteen-six, fifteen-twelve, a pair, six for jacks and the right jack.

That’s going to cost you another million, my friend.”

“One of those jacks is a queen,” Rod said darkly.
“Sure enough? You know, it’s getting too dark to play. Want to

concede?”

They adopted Jim’s scheme. It gave more time for cribbage and ran

Rod’s debt up into billions. The signal fire was kept burning on the shelf at
the downstream end, the prevailing wind being such that smoke usually did
not blow back into the cave—when the wind did shift was unbearable; they
were forced to flee, eyes streaming.

no customers and they were all getting tired of dragging up dead wood for
fuel and green branches for smoke. The third time they fled from smoke
Jimmy said, “Rod, I give up. You win. This is not the way to do it.”

“No!”
“Huh? Have a heart, chum. I can’t live on smoke—no vitamins. Let’s

run up a flag instead. I’ll contribute my shirt.”

Rod thought about it. “We’ll do that.”
“Hey, wait a minute. I was speaking rhetorically. I’m the delicate type.

I sunburn easily.”

“You can take it easy and work up a tan. We’ll use your shirt as a

signal flag. But we’ll keep the fire going, too. Not up on the shelf, but down
there—on that mud flat, maybe.”

“And have the smoke blow right back into our summer cottage.”
“Well, farther downstream. We’ll make a bigger fire and a column of

smoke that can be seen a long way. The flag we will put up right over the
cave.”

with no feeling for property rights.”

“We took that chance when we decided to use a smoke signal. Let’s get

busy.”

Rod picked a tall tree on the bluff above. He climbed to where the

trunk had thinned down so much that it would hardly take his weight, then
spent a tedious hour topping it with his knife. He tied the sleeves of Jim’s
shirt to it, then worked down, cutting foliage away as he went. Presently the
branches became too large to handle with his knife, but the stripped main
stem stuck up for several meters; the shirt could be seen for a long distance
up and down stream. The shirt caught the wind and billowed; Rod eyed it,
tired but satisfied—it was unquestionably a signal flag.

Jimmy and Jacqueline had built a new smudge farther downstream,

carrying fire from the shelf for the purpose. Jacqueline still had a few
matches and Jim had a pocket torch almost fully charged but the realization
that they were marooned caused them to be miserly. Rod went down and
joined them. The smoke was enormously greater now that they were not
limited in space, and fuel was easier to fetch.

start with, was now black with smoke, while Jimmy’s pink skin showed the
soot even more. “A couple of pyromaniacs.”

“You ordered smoke,” Jimmy told him. “I plan to make the burning of

Rome look like a bonfire. Fetch me a violin and a toga.”

“Violins weren’t invented then. Nero played a lyre.”
“Let’s not be small. We’re getting a nice mushroom cloud effect, don’t

you think?”

“Come on, Rod,” Jacqueline urged, Wiping her face without

improving it. “It’s fun!” She dipped a green branch in the stream, threw it
on the pyre. A thick cloud of smoke and steam concealed her. “More dry
wood, Jimmy.”

“Coming!”
Rod joined in, soon was as dirty and scorched as the other two and

having more fun than he had had since the test started. When the sun
dropped below the tree tops they at last quit trying to make the fire bigger
and better and smokier and reluctantly headed up to their cave. Only then
did Rod realize that he had forgotten to remain alert.

Oh well, he assured himself, dangerous animals would avoid a fire.
While they ate they could see the dying fire still sending up smoke.

After dinner Jimmy got out his cards, tried to riffle the limp mass. “Anyone
interested in a friendly game? The customary small stakes.”

“I’m too tired,” Rod answered. “Just chalk up my usual losses.”
“That’s not a sporting attitude. Why, you won a game just last week.

How about you, Jack?”

Jacqueline started to answer; Rod suddenly motioned for silence.

“Sssh! I heard something.”

The other two froze and silently got out their knives. Rod put Colonel

Bowie in his teeth and crawled out to the edge. The pathway was clear and
the thorn barricade was undisturbed. He leaned out and looked around,
trying to locate the sound.

He glanced back, saw Jimmy moving diagonally over to cover the pathway.
Jacqueline had her dart gun and was hurriedly pumping it up.

Rod answered, “Who’s there?”

Carmen Garcia. Who are you?”

not our class… Jack Daudet.”

Baxter seemed to think this over. “Uh, can we join you? For tonight, at

least?”

“Sure!”
“How can we get down there? Carmen can’t climb very well; she’s got

a bad foot.”

“You’re right above us?”
“I think so. I can’t see you.”
“Stay there. I’ll come up.” Rod turned, grinned at the others.

“Company for dinner! Get a fire going, Jim.”

have baked a cake.”

By the time they returned Jimmy had roast meat waiting. Carmen’s

semi-crippled condition had delayed them. It was just a sprained ankle but it
caused her to crawl up the traverse on her hands, and progress to that point
had been slow and painful.

she burst into tears. Jackie glared at the males, for no cause that Rod could
see, then led her into the remote corner of the cave where she herself slept.
There they whispered while Bob Baxter compared notes with Rod and Jim.

Bob and Carmen had had no unusual trouble until Carmen had hurt her

ankle two days earlier…except for the obvious fact that something had gone
wrong and they were stranded. “I lost my grip,” he admitted, “when I
realized that they weren’t picking us up. But Carmen snapped me out of it.
Carmen is a very practical kid.”

“Girls are always the practical ones,” Jimmy agreed. “Now take me—

I’m the poetical type.”

“Blank verse, I’d say,” Rod suggested.
“Jealousy ill becomes you, Rod. Bob, old bean, can I interest you in

another slice? Rare, or well carbonized?”

“Either way. We haven’t had much to eat the last couple of days. Boy,

does this taste good!”

“My own sauce,” Jimmy said modestly. “I raise my own herbs, you

know. First you melt a lump of butter slowly in a pan, then you—”

“Shut up, Jimmy. Bob, do you and Carmen want to team with us? As I

see it, we can’t count on ever getting back. Therefore we ought to make
plans for the future.”

“I think you are right.”
“Rod is always right,” Jimmy agreed. “‘Plans for the future—’ Hmm,

yes… Bob, do you and Carmen play cribbage?”

“No.”
“Never mind. I’ll teach you.”

“Fish, or Cut Bait”

THE DECISION TO KEEP ON BURNING THE SMOKE SIGNAL and thereby to call in
as many recruits as possible was never voted on; it formed itself. The next
morning Rod intended to bring the matter up but Jimmy and Bob rebuilt the
smoke fire from its embers while down to fetch fresh water. Rod let the
accomplished fact stand; two girls drifted in separately that day.

Nor was there any formal contract to team nor any selection of a team

captain; Rod continued to direct operations and Bob Baxter accepted the
arrangement. Rod did not think about it as he was too busy. The problems
of food, shelter, and safety for their growing population left him no time to
worry about it.

The arrival of Bob and Carmen cleaned out the larder; it was necessary

to hunt the next day. Bob Baxter offered to go, but Rod decided to take
Jackie as usual. “You rest today. Don’t let Carmen put her weight on that
bad ankle and don’t let Jimmy go down alone to tend the fire. He thinks he
is well again but he is not.”

“I see that.”
Jack and Rod went out, made their kill quickly. But Rod failed to kill

clean and when Jacqueline moved in to help finish the thrashing, wounded
buck she was kicked in the ribs. She insisted that she was not hurt;
nevertheless her side was sore the following morning and Bob Baxter
expressed the opinion that she had cracked a rib.

In the meantime two new mouths to feed had been added, just as Rod

found himself with three on the sick list. But one of the new mouths was a
big, grinning one belonging to Caroline Mshiyeni; Rod picked her as his
hunting partner.

Jackie looked sour. She got Rod aside and whispered, “You haven’t

any reason to do this to me. I can hunt. My side is all right, just a little
stiff.”

Jack.”

said urgently, “Jack, remember what I said about petty jealousies? So help
me, you make trouble and I’ll paddle you.”

“You aren’t big enough!”
“I’ll get help. Now, look—are we partners?”
“Well, I thought so.”
“Then be one and don’t cause trouble.”
She shrugged. “All right. Don’t rub it in—I’ll stay home.”
“I want you to do more than that. Take that old bandage of mine—it’s

around somewhere—and let Bob Baxter strap your ribs.”

“No!”
“Then let Carmen do it. They’re both quack doctors, sort of.” He

raised his voice. “Ready, Carol?”

“Quiverin’ and bristlin’.”
Rod told Caroline how he and Jacqueline hunted, explained what he

expected of her. They located, and avoided, two family herds; old bulls
were tough and poor eating and attempting to kill anything but the bull was
foolishly dangerous. About noon they found a yearling herd upwind; they
split and placed themselves cross wind for the kill. Rod waited for Caroline
to flush the game, drive it to him.

He continued to wait. He was getting fidgets when Caroline showed

up, moving silently. She motioned for him to follow. He did so, hard put to
keep up with her and still move quietly. Presently she stopped; he caught up
and saw that she had already made a kill. He looked at it and fought down
the anger he felt.

Caroline spoke. “Nice tender one, I think. Suit you, Rod?”
He nodded. “Couldn’t be better. A clean kill, too. Carol?”
“Huh?”
“I think you are better at this than I am.”
“Oh, shucks, it was just luck.” She grinned and looked sheepish.
“I don’t believe in luck. Any time you want to lead the hunt, let me

know. But be darn sure you let me know.”

bawling me out?”

hunt, you tell me. Don’t switch in the middle. Don’t ever. I mean it.”

because I got there first—that’s silly!”

Rod sighed. “Maybe that’s it. Or maybe I don’t like having a girl take

the kill away from me. But I’m dead sure about one thing: I don’t like
having a partner on a hunt who can’t be depended on. Too many ways to get
hurt. I’d rather hunt alone.”

“Maybe I’d rather hunt alone! I don’t need any help.”
“I’m sure you don’t. Let’s forget it, huh, and get this carcass back to

camp.”

Caroline did not say anything while they butchered. When they had the

waste trimmed away and were ready to pack as much as possible back to
the others Rod said, “You lead off. I’ll watch behind.”

“Rod?”
“Huh?”
“I’m sorry.”
“What? Oh, forget it.”
“I won’t ever do it again. Look, I’ll tell everybody you made the kill.”
He stopped and put a hand on her arm. “Why tell anybody anything?

It’s nobody’s business how we organize our hunt as long as we bring home
the meat.”

“You’re still angry with me.”
“I never was angry,” he lied. “I just don’t want us to get each other

crossed up.”

“Roddie, I’ll never cross you up again! Promise.”

Girls stayed in the majority to the end of the week. The cave,

comfortable for three, adequate for twice that number, was crowded for the
number that was daily accumulating. Rod decided to make it a girls’
dormitory and moved the males out into the open on the field at the foot of
the path up the shale. The spot was unprotected against weather and animals
but it did guard the only access to the cave. Weather was no problem;
protection against animals was set up as well as could be managed by
organizing a night watch whose duty it was to keep fires burning between

the bluff and the creek on the upstream side and in the bottleneck
downstream.

at the time. He sent Bob Baxter and Roy Kilroy downstream to scout for
caves and Caroline and Margery Chung upstream for the same purpose.
Neither party was successful in the one-day limit he had imposed; the two
girls brought back another straggler.

A group of four boys came in a week after Jim’s shirt had been

requisitioned; it brought the number up to twenty-five and shifted the
balance to more boys than girls. The four newcomers could have been
classed as men rather than boys, since they were two or three years older
than the average. Three of the four classes in this survival-test area had
been about to graduate from secondary schools; the fourth class, which
included these four, came from Outlands Arts College of Teller University.

“Adult” is a slippery term. Some cultures have placed adult age as low

as eleven years, others as high as thirty-five—and some have not
recognized any such age as long as an ancestor remained alive. Rod did not
think of these new arrivals as senior to him. There were already a few from
Teller U. in the group, but Rod was only vaguely aware which ones they
were—they fitted in. He was too busy with the snowballing problems of his
growing colony to worry about their backgrounds on remote Terra.

The four were Jock McGowan, a brawny youth who seemed all hands

and feet, his younger brother Bruce, and Chad Ames and Dick Burke. They
had arrived late in the day and Rod had not had time to get acquainted, nor
was there time the following morning, as a group of four girls and five boys
poured in on them unexpectedly. This had increased his administrative
problems almost to the breaking point; the cave would hardly sleep four
more females. It was necessary to find, or build, more shelter.

Rod went over to the four young men lounging near the cooking fire.

He squatted on his heels and asked, “Any of you know anything about
building?”

He addressed them all, but the others waited for Jock McGowan to

speak. “Some,” Jock admitted. “I reckon I could build anything I wanted
to.”

“Nothing hard,” Rod explained. “Just stone walls. Ever tried your hand

at masonry?”

“Sure. What of it?”
“Well, here’s the idea. We’ve got to have better living arrangements

right away—we’ve got people pouring out of our ears. The first thing we
are going to do is to throw a wall from the bluff to the creek across this flat
area. After that we will build huts, but the first thing is a kraal to stop
dangerous animals.”

McGowan laughed. “That will be some wall. Have you seen this

dingus that looks like an elongated cougar? One of those babies would go
over your wall before you could say ‘scat.’”

“I know about them,” Rod admitted, “and I don’t like them.” He

rubbed the long white scars on his left arm. “They probably could go over
any wall we could build. So we’ll rig a surprise for them.” He picked up a
twig and started drawing in the dirt. “We build the wall…and bring it
around to here. Then, inside for about six meters, we set up sharpened
poles. Anything comes over the wall splits its gut on the poles.”

Jock McGowan looked at the diagram. “Futile.”
“Silly,” agreed his brother.
Rod flushed but answered, “Got a better idea?”
“That’s beside the point.”
“Well,” Rod answered slowly, “unless somebody comes down with a

better scheme, or unless we find really good caves, we’ve got to fortify this
spot the best we can…so we’ll do this. I’m going to set the girls to cutting
and sharpening stakes. The rest of us will start on the wall. If we tear into it
we ought to have a lot of it built before dark. Do you four want to work
together? There will be one party collecting rock and another digging clay
and making clay mortar. Take your choice.”

Again three of them waited. Jock McGowan lay back and laced his

hands under his head. “Sorry. I’ve got a date to hunt today.”

Rod felt himself turning red. “We don’t need a kill today,” he said

carefully.

“Nobody asked you, youngster.”
Rod felt the cold tenseness he always felt in a hunt He was

uncomfortably aware that an audience had gathered. He tried to keep his
voice steady and said, “Maybe I’ve made a mistake. I—”

“You have.”
“I thought you four had teamed with the rest of us. Well?”

“Maybe. Maybe not.”
“You’ll have to fish or cut bait. If you join, you work like anybody

else. If not—well, you’re welcome to breakfast and stop in again some
time. But be on your way. I won’t have you lounging around while
everybody else is working.”

Jock McGowan sucked his teeth, dug at a crevice with his tongue. His

hands were still locked back of his head. “What you don’t understand,
sonny boy, is that nobody gives the McGowans orders. Nobody. Right,
Bruce?”

“Right, Jock.”
“Right, Chad? Dick?”
The other two grunted approval. McGowan continued to stare up at the

sky. “So,” he said softly, “I go where I want to go and stay as long as I like.
The question is not whether we are going to join up with you, but what ones
am going to let team with us. But not you, sonny boy; you are still wet
behind your ears.”

Colonel Bowie, as always, but he did not reach for it. He began to
straighten up from squatting.

Jock McGowan’s eyes flicked toward his brother. Rod was hit low…

and found himself flat on his face with his breath knocked out. He felt the
sharp kiss of a knife against his ribs; he held still. Bruce called out, “How
about it, Jock?”

Rod could not see Jock McGowan. But he heard him answer, “Just

keep him there.”

“Right, Jock.”
Jock McGowan was wearing both gun and knife. Rod now heard him

say, “Anybody want to dance? Any trouble out of the rest of you lugs?”

startled expressions of a dozen others that McGowan must have rolled to
his feet and covered them with his gun. Everybody in camp carried knives;
most had guns as well and Rod could see that Roy Kilroy was wearing his
—although most guns were kept when not in use in the cave in a little
arsenal which Carmen superintended.

But neither guns nor knives were of use; it had happened too fast,

none of his special friends from where he was; those whom he could see did
not seem disposed to risk death to rescue him.

Jock McGowan said briskly, “Chad—Dick—got ’em all covered?”
“Right, Skipper.”
“Keep ’em that way while I take care of this cholo.” His hairy legs

appeared in front of Rod’s face. “Pulled his teeth, Bruce?”

“Not yet.”
“I’ll do it. Roll over, sonny boy, and let me at your knife. Let him turn

over, Bruce.”

Bruce McGowan eased up on Rod and Jock bent down. As he reached

for Rod’s knife a tiny steel flower blossomed in Jock’s side below his ribs.
Rod heard nothing, not even the small sound it must have made when it
struck. Jock straightened up with a shriek, clutched at his side.

Bruce yelled, “Jock! What’s the matter?”
“They got me.” He crumpled to the ground like loose clothing.
Rod still had a man with a knife on his back but the moment was

enough; he rolled and grabbed in one violent movement and the situation
was reversed, with Bruce’s right wrist locked in Rod’s fist, with Colonel
Bowie threatening Bruce’s face.

A loud contralto voice sang out, “Take it easy down there! We got you

covered.”

Rod glanced up. Caroline stood on the shelf at the top of the path to

the cave, with a rifle at her shoulder. At the downstream end of the shelf
Jacqueline sat with her little dart gun in her lap; she was frantically
pumping up again. She raised it, drew a bead on some one past Rod’s
shoulder.

Rod called out, “Don’t shoot!” He looked around. “Drop it, you two!”
Chad Ames and Dick Burke dropped their guns. Rod added, “Roy!

Grant Cowper! Gather up their toys. Get their knives, too.” He turned back
to Bruce McGowan, pricked him under the chin. “Let’s have your knife.”
Bruce turned it loose; Rod took it and got to his feet.

Everyone who had been up in the cave was swarming down, Caroline

in the lead. Jock McGowan was writhing on the ground, face turned blue
and gasping in the sort of paralysis induced by the poison used on darts.
Bob Baxter hurried up, glanced at him, then said to Rod, “I’ll take care of
that cut in your ribs in a moment.” He bent over Jock McGowan.

Caroline said indignantly, “You aren’t going to try to save him?”
“Of course.”
“Why? Let’s chuck him in the stream.”
Baxter glanced at Rod. Rod felt a strong urge to order Caroline’s

suggestion carried out. But he answered, “Do what you can for him, Bob.
Where’s Jack? Jack—you’ve got antidote for your darts, haven’t you? Get
it.”

He’s not hurt.”

“Huh?”
“Just a pin prick. A practice dart—that’s all I keep in Betsey. My

hunting darts are put away so that nobody can hurt themselves—and I
didn’t have time to get them.” She prodded Jock with a toe. “He’s not
poisoned. He’s scaring himself to death.”

Caroline chortled and waved the rifle she carried. “And this one is

empty. Not even a good club.”

Baxter said to Jackie, “Are you sure? The reactions look typical.”
“Sure I’m sure! See the mark on the end sticking out? A target dart.”
Baxter leaned over his patient, started slapping his face. “Snap out of

it, McGowan! Stand up. I want to get that dart out of you.”

McGowan groaned and managed to stand. Baxter took the dart

between thumb and forefinger, jerked it free; Jock yelled. Baxter slapped
him again. “Don’t you faint on me,” he growled. “you’re lucky. Let it drain
and you’ll be all right.” He turned to Rod. “You’re next.”

“Huh? There’s nothing the matter with me.”
“That stuff on your ribs is paint, I suppose.” He looked around.

“Carmen, get my kit.”

“I brought it down.”
“Good. Rod, sit down and lean forward. This is going to hurt a little.”
It did hurt. Rod tried to chat to avoid showing that he minded it.

“Carol,” he asked, “I don’t see how you and Jackie worked out a plan so
fast. That was smooth.”

did it fast.” She turned to Jacqueline and gave her a clap on the shoulder
that nearly knocked her over. “This kid is solid, Roddie, solid!”

Carol!”

“Anyway I thank you both.”
“A pleasure. I wish that pea shooter had been loaded. Rod, what are

you going to do with them?”

“Well…ummph!”
“Whoops!” said Baxter, behind him. “I said it was going to hurt. I had

better put one more clip in. I’d like to put a dressing on that, but we can’t,
so you lay off heavy work for a while and sleep on your stomach.”

“Unh!” said Rod.
“That’s the last. You can get up now. Take it easy and give it a chance

to scab.”

“I still think,” Caroline insisted, “that we ought to make them swim the

creek. We could make bets on whether or not any of ’em make it across.”

“Carol, you’re uncivilized.”
“I never claimed to be civilized. But I know which end wags and

which end bites.”

Rod ignored her and went to look at the prisoners. Roy Kilroy had

caused them to lie down one on top of the other; it rendered them
undignified and helpless. “Let them sit up.”

heard the Captain. Sit up.” They unsnarled and sat up, looking glum.

Rod looked at Jock McGowan. “What do you think we ought to do

with you?”

McGowan said nothing. The puncture in his side was oozing blood and

he was pale. Rod said slowly, “Some think we ought to chuck you in the
stream. That’s the same as condemning you to death—but if we are going
to, we ought to shoot you or hang you. I don’t favor letting anybody be
eaten alive. Should we hang you?”

Bruce McGowan blurted out, “We haven’t done anything.”
“No. But you sure tried. You aren’t safe to have around other people.”
Somebody called out, “Oh, let’s shoot them and get it over with!” Rod

ignored it. Grant Cowper came close to Rod and said, “We ought to vote on
this. They ought to have a trial.”

punishing you—this is personal. But we can’t risk having you around

either.” He turned to Cowper. “Give them their knives.”

“Rod? You’re not going to fight them?”
“Of course not.” He turned back. “You can have your knives; we’re

keeping your guns. When we turn you loose, head downstream and keep
going. Keep going for at least a week. If you ever show your faces again,
you won’t get a chance to explain. Understand me?”

Jock McGowan nodded. Dick Burke gulped and said, “But turning us

out with just knives is the same as killing us.”

“Nonsense! No guns. And remember, if you turn back this way, even

to hunt, it’s once too many. There may be somebody trailing you—with a
gun.”

Can I? Please?”

“Shut up, Carol. Roy, you and Grant start them on their way.”
As exiles and guards, plus sightseers, moved off they ran into Jimmy

Throxton coming back into camp. He stopped and stared. “What’s the
procession? Rod…what have you done to your ribs, boy? Scratching
yourself again?”

Several people tried to tell him at once. He got the gist of it and shook

his head mournfully. “And there I was, good as gold, looking for pretty
rocks for our garden wall. Every time there’s a party people forget to ask
me. Discrimination.”

“Stow it, Jim. It’s not funny.”
“That’s what I said. It’s discrimination.”
Rod got the group started on the wall with an hour or more of daylight

wasted. He tried to work on the wall despite Bob Baxter’s medical orders,
but found that he was not up to it; not only was his wound painful but also
he felt shaky with reaction.

talk with you? Privately?”

Rod moved aside with him. “What’s on your mind?”
“Mmm… Rod, you were lucky this morning. You know that, don’t

you? No offense intended.”

“Sure, I know. What about it?”
“Uh, do you know why you had trouble?”

“What? Of course I know—now. I trusted somebody when I should

not have.”

Cowper shook his head. “Not at all. Rod, what do you know about

theory of government?”

Rod looked surprised. “I’ve had the usual civics courses. Why?”
“I doubt if I’ve mentioned it, but the course I’m majoring in at Teller

U. is colonial administration. One thing we study is how authority comes
about in human society and how it is maintained. I’m not criticizing but to
be blunt, you almost lost your life because you’ve never studied such
things.”

Rod felt annoyed. “What are you driving at?”
“Take it easy. But the fact remains that you didn’t have any authority.

McGowan knew it and wouldn’t take orders. Everybody else knew it, too.
When it came to a showdown, nobody knew whether to back you up or not.
Because you don’t have a milligram of real authority.”

“Just a moment! Are you saying I’m not leader of this team?”
“You are de facto leader, no doubt about it. But you’ve never been

elected to the job. That’s your weakness.”

Rod chewed this over. “I know,” he said slowly. “It’s just that we have

been so confounded busy.”

“Sure, I know. I’d be the last person to criticize. But a captain ought to

be properly elected.”

Rod sighed. “I meant to hold an election but I thought getting the wall

built was more urgent. All right, let’s call them together.”

“Oh, you don’t need to do it this minute.”
“Why not? The sooner the better, apparently.”
“Tonight, when it’s too dark to work, is soon enough.”
“Well…okay.”
When they stopped for supper Rod announced that there would be an

organization and planning meeting. No one seemed surprised, although he
himself had mentioned it to no one. He felt annoyed and had to remind
himself that there was nothing secret about it; Grant had been under no
obligation to keep it quiet. He set guards and fire tenders, then came back
into the circle of firelight and called out, “Quiet, everybody! Let’s get
started. If you guys on watch can’t hear, be sure to speak up” He hesitated.
“We’re going to hold an election. Somebody pointed out that I never have

been elected captain of this survival team. Well, if any of you have your
noses out of joint, I’m sorry. I was doing the best I could. But you are
entitled to elect a captain. All right, any nominations?”

Jimmy Throxton shouted, “I nominate Rod Walker!”
Caroline’s voice answered, “I second it! Move the nominations be

closed.”

Rod said hastily, “Carol, your motion is out of order.”
“Why?”
Before he could answer Roy Kilroy spoke up. “Rod, can I have the

floor a moment? Privileged question.”

Rod turned, saw that Roy was squatting beside Grant Cowper. “Sure.

State your question.”

“Matter of procedure. The first thing is to elect a temporary chairman.”
Rod thought quickly. “I guess you’re right. Jimmy, your nomination is

thrown out. Nominations for temporary chairman are in order.”

“Rod Walker for temporary chairman!”
“Oh, shut up, Jimmy! I don’t want to be temporary chairman.”
Roy Kilroy was elected. He took the imaginary gavel and announced,

“The chair recognizes Brother Cowper for a statement of aims and purposes
of this meeting.”

Jimmy Throxton called out, “What do we want any speeches for? Let’s

elect Rod and go to bed. I’m tired—and I’ve got a two-hour watch coming
up.”

“Out of order. The chair recognizes Grant Cowper.”
Cowper stood up. The firelight caught his handsome features and

curly, short beard. Rod rubbed the scraggly growth on his own chin and
wished that he looked like Cowper. The young man was dressed only in
walking shorts and soft bush shoes but he carried himself with the easy
dignity of a distinguished speaker before some important body. “Friends,”
he said, “brothers and sisters, we are gathered here tonight not to elect a
survival-team captain, but to found a new nation.”

We fervently hope to be rescued, none more so than I. I will even go so far
as to say that I think we will be rescued…eventually. But we have no way
of knowing, we have no data on which to base an intelligent guess, as to
when we will be rescued.

from now.” He said the last very solemnly.

us, it is up to us, this little group here tonight, whether they find a civilized
society…or flea-bitten animals without language, without arts, with the
light of reason grown dim…or no survivors at all, nothing but bones picked
clean.”

“Not mine!” called out Caroline. Kilroy gave her a dirty look and

called for order.

“Not yours, Caroline,” Cowper agreed gravely. “Nor mine. Not any of

us. Because tonight we will take the step that will keep this colony alive.
We are poor in things; we will make what we need. We are rich in
knowledge; among us we hold the basic knowledge of our great race. We
must preserve it…we will!”

Caroline cut through Cowper’s dramatic pause with a stage whisper.

“Talks pretty, doesn’t he? Maybe I’ll marry him.”

He did not try to fit this heckling into his speech. “What is the prime

knowledge acquired by our race? That without which the rest is useless?
What flame must we guard like vestal virgins?”

Some one called out, “Fire.” Cowper shook his head.
“Writing!”
“The decimal system.”
“Atomics!”
“The wheel, of course.”
“No, none of those. They are all important, but they are not the

keystone. The greatest invention of mankind is government. It is also the
hardest of all. More individualistic than cats, nevertheless we have learned
to cooperate more efficiently than ants or bees or termites. Wilder, bloodier,
and more deadly than sharks, we have learned to live together as peacefully
as lambs. But these things are not easy. That is why that which we do
tonight will decide our future…and perhaps the future of our children, our
children’s children, our descendants far into the womb of time. We are not
picking a temporary survival leader; we are setting up a government. We
must do it with care. We must pick a chief executive for our new nation, a
mayor of our city-state. But we must draw up a constitution, sign articles
binding us together. We must organize and plan.”

“Hear, hear!”
“Bravo!”
“We must establish law, appoint judges, arrange for orderly

administration of our code. Take for example, this morning—” Cowper
turned to Rod and gave him a friendly smile. “Nothing personal, Rod, you
understand that. I think you acted with wisdom and I was happy that you
tempered justice with mercy. Yet no one could have criticized if you had
yielded to your impulse and killed all four of those, uh…anti-social
individuals. But justice should not be subject to the whims of a dictator. We
can’t stake our lives on your temper…good or bad. You see that, don’t
you?”

Rod did not answer He felt that he was being accused of bad temper, of

being a tyrant and dictator, of being a danger to the group. But he could not
put his finger on it. Grant Cowper’s remarks had been friendly…yet they
felt intensely personal and critical.

Cowper insisted on an answer. “You do see that, Rod? Don’t you? You

don’t want to continue to have absolute power over the lives and persons of
our community? You don’t want that? Do you?” He waited.

“Huh? Oh, yeah, sure! I mean, I agree with you.”
“Good! I was sure you would understand. And I must ay that I think

you have done a very good job in getting us together. I don’t agree with any
who have criticized you. You were doing your best and we should let
bygones be bygones.” Cowper grinned that friendly grin and Rod felt as if
he were being smothered with kisses.

Cowper turned to Kilroy. “That’s all I have to say, Mr. Chairman.” He

flashed his grin and added as he sat down, “Sorry I talked so long, folks. I
had to get it off my chest.”

Kilroy clapped his hands once. “The chair will entertain nominations

for—Hey, Grant, if we don’t call it ‘captain,’ then what should we call it?”

“Mmm…” Cowper said judicially. “‘President’ seems a little

pompous. I think ‘mayor’ would be about right—mayor of our city-state,
our village.”

“The chair will entertain nominations for mayor.”
“Hey!” demanded Jimmy Throxton. “Doesn’t anybody else get to

shoot off his face?”

“Out of order.”

order, Roy. Anyone who has something to contribute should be encouraged
to speak. We mustn’t act hastily.”

“Okay, Throxton, speak your piece.”
“Oh, I didn’t want to sound off. I just didn’t like the squeeze play.”
“All right, the chair stands corrected. Anybody else? If not, we will

entertain—”

“One moment, Mr. Chairman!”
Rod saw that it was Arthur Nielsen, one of the Teller University group.

He managed to look neat even in these circumstances but he had strayed
into camp bereft of all equipment, without even a knife. He had been quite
hungry.

Kilroy looked at him. “You want to talk, Waxie?”
“Nielsen is the name. Or Arthur. As you know. Yes.”
“Okay. Keep it short.”
“I shall keep it as short as circumstances permit. Fellow associates, we

have here a unique opportunity, probably one which has not occurred before
in history. As Cowper pointed out, we must proceed with care. But, already
we have set out on the wrong foot. Our object should be to found the first
truly scientific community. Yet what do I find? You are proposing to select
an executive by counting noses! Leaders should not be chosen by popular
whim; they should be determined by rigorous scientific criteria. Once
selected, those leaders must have full scientific freedom to direct the bio-
group in accordance with natural law, unhampered by such artificial
anachronisms as statutes, constitutions, and courts of law. We have here an
adequate supply of healthy females; we have the means to breed
scientifically a new race, a super race, a race which, if I may say so—”

A handful of mud struck Nielsen in the chest; he stopped suddenly. “I

saw who did that!” he said angrily. “Just the sort of nincompoop who
always—”

squad of sergeants-at-arms. Are you through, Waxie?”

“I was just getting started.”
“Just a moment,” put in Cowper. “Point of order Mr. Chairman. Arthur

has a right to be heard. But I think he speaking before the wrong body.
We’re going to have a constitutional committee, I’m sure. He should

present his arguments to them. Then, if we like them, we can adopt his
ideas.”

“You’re right, Grant. Sit down, Waxie.”
“Huh? I appeal!”
Roy Kilroy said briskly, “The chair has ruled this out of order at this

time and the speaker has appealed to the house, a priority motion not
debatable. All in favor of supporting the chair’s ruling, which is for Waxie
to shut up, make it known by saying ‘Aye.’”

There was a shouted chorus of assent. “Opposed: ‘No.’ Sit down,

Waxie.”

Kilroy looked around. “Anybody else?”
“Yes.”
“I can’t see. Who is it?”
“Bill Kennedy, Ponce de Leon class. I don’t agree with Nielsen except

on one point: we are fiddling around with the wrong things. Sure, we need a
group captain but, aside from whatever it takes to eat, we shouldn’t think
about anything but how to get back. I don’t want a scientific society; I’d
settle for a hot bath and decent food.”

There was scattered applause. The chairman said, “I’d like a bath,

too…and I’d fight anybody for a dish of cornflakes. But, Bill, how do you
suggest that we go about it?”

works on it.”

There was silence, then several talked at once: “Crazy! No

uranium.”—“We might find uranium.”—“Where do we get the tools?
Shucks, I don’t even have a screwdriver.”—“But where are we?”—“It is
just a matter of—”

“Quiet!” yelled Kilroy. “Bill, do you know how to build a gate?”
“No.”
“I doubt if anybody does.”
“That’s a defeatist attitude. Surely some of you educated blokes from

Teller have studied the subject. You should get together, pool what you
know, and put us to work. Sure, it may take a long time. But that’s what we
ought to do.”

every idea should be explored. We’re bound to set up a planning committee.

Maybe we had better elect a mayor, or a captain, or whatever you want to
call him—and then dig into your scheme when we can discuss it in detail. I
think it has merit and should be discussed at length. What do you think?”

“Why, sure, Grant. Let’s get on with the election. I just didn’t want that

silly stuff about breeding a superman to be the last word.”

“Mr. Chairman! I protest—”
“Shut up, Waxie. Are you ready with nominations for mayor? If there

is no objection, the chair rules debate closed and will entertain
nominations.”

“I nominate Grant Cowper!”
“Second!”
“I second the nomination.”
“Okay, I third it!”
“Let’s make it unanimous! Question, question!”
Jimmy Throxton’s voice cut through the shouting, “I NOMINATE

ROD WALKER!”

Bob Baxter stood up. “Mr. Chairman?”
“Quiet, everybody. Mr. Baxter.”
“I second Rod Walker.”
“Okay. Two nominations, Grant Cowper and Rod Walker. Are there

any more?”

He found that his voice was trembling and he took two deep breaths before
he went on. “I don’t want it. I’ve had all the grief I want for a while and I’d
like a rest. Thanks anyhow, Bob. Thanks, Jimmy.”

“Any further nominations?”
“Just a sec, Roy…point of personal privilege.” Grant Cowper stood up.

“Rod, I know how you feel. Nobody in his right mind seeks public office…
except as a duty, willingness to serve. If you withdraw, I’m going to
exercise the same privilege; I don’t want the headaches any more than you
do.”

“Now wait a minute, Grant. You—”
“You wait a minute. I don’t think either one of us should withdraw; we

ought to perform any duty that is handed to us, just as we stand a night
watch when it’s our turn. But I think we ought to have more nominations.”
He looked around. “Since that mix-up this morning we have as many girls

as men…yet both of the candidates are male. That’s not right. Uh, Mr.
Chairman, I nominate Caroline Mshiyeni.”

wouldn’t I? Anyhow, I’m for Roddie.”

“That’s your privilege, Caroline. But you ought to let yourself be

placed before the body, just like Rod and myself.”

“Nobody’s going to vote for me!”
“That’s where you’re wrong. I’m going to vote for you. But we still

ought to have more candidates.”

“Three nominations before the house,” Kilroy announced. “Any more?

If not, I declare the—”

“Mr. Chairman!”
“Huh? Okay, Waxie, you want to nominate somebody?”
“Yes.”
“Who?”
“Me.”
“You want to nominate yourself?”
“I certainly do. What’s funny about that? I am running on a platform of

strict scientific government. I want the rational minds in this group to have
someone to vote for.”

Kilroy looked puzzled. “I’m not sure that is correct parliamentary

procedure. I’m afraid I’ll have to over—”

“Never mind, never mind!” Caroline chortled. “I nominate him. But

I’m going to vote for Roddie,” she added.

Kilroy sighed. “Okay, four candidates. I guess we’ll have to have a

show of hands. We don’t have anything for ballots.”

Bob Baxter stood up. “Objection, Mr. Chairman. I call for a secret

ballot. We can find some way to do it.”

A way was found. Pebbles would signify Rod, a bare twig was a note

for Cowper, a green leaf meant Caroline, while one of Jimmy’s ceramic
attempts was offered as a ballot box. “How about Nielsen?” Kilroy asked.

Jimmy spoke up. “Uh, maybe this would do: I made another pot the

same time I made this one, only it busted. I’ll get chunks of it and all the
crackpots are votes for Waxie.”

“Mr. Chairman, I resent the insinua—”

twigs for Grant, leaves for Carol. Get your votes, folks, then file past and
drop them in the ballot box. Shorty, you and Margery act as tellers.”

The tellers solemnly counted the ballots by firelight. There were five

votes for Rod, one for Nielsen, none for Caroline, and twenty-two for
Cowper. Rod shook hands with Cowper and faded back into the darkness so
that no one would see his face. Caroline looked at the results and said,
“Hey, Grant! You promised to vote for me. What happened? Did you vote
for yourself? Huh? How about that?”

Rod said nothing. He had voted for Cowper and was certain that the

new mayor had not returned the compliment…he was sure who his five
friends were. Dog take it!—he had seen it coming; why hadn’t Grant let
him bow out?

Grant ignored Caroline’s comment. He briskly assumed the chair and

said, “Thank you. Thank you all. I know you want to get to sleep, so I will
limit myself tonight to appointing a few committees—”

Rod did not get to sleep at once. He told himself that there was no

disgrace in losing an election—shucks, hadn’t his old man lost the time he
had run for community corporation board? He told himself, too, that trying
to ride herd on those apes was enough to drive a man crazy and he was well
out of it—he had never wanted the job! Nevertheless there was a lump in
his middle and a deep sense of personal failure.

It seemed that he had just gone to sleep…his father was looking at him

saying, “You know we are proud of you, son. Still, if you had had the
foresight to—” when someone touched his arm.

He was awake, alert, and had Colonel Bowie out at once.
“Put away that toothpick,” Jimmy whispered, “before you hurt

somebody. Me, I mean.”

“What’s up?”
“I’m up, I’ve got the fire watch. You’re about to be, because we are

holding a session of the inner sanctum.”

“Huh?”
“Shut up and come along. Keep quiet, people are asleep.”
The inner sanctum turned out to be Jimmy, Caroline, Jacqueline, Bob

Baxter, and Carmen Garcia. They gathered inside the ring of fire but as far

from the sleepers as possible. Rod looked around at his friends. “What’s
this all about?”

like that election as much as I like a crooked deck of cards.”

“That’s right,” agreed Caroline. “All that fancy talk!”
“Huh? Everybody got to talk. Everybody got to vote.”
“Yes,” agreed Baxter. “Yes…and no.”
“It was all proper. I have no kick.”
“I didn’t expect you to kick, Rod. Nevertheless…well, I don’t know

how much politicking you’ve seen, Rod. I haven’t seen much myself,
except in church matters and we Quakers don’t do things that way; we wait
until the Spirit moves. But, despite all the rigamarole, that was a slick piece
of railroading. This morning you would have been elected overwhelmingly;
tonight you did not stand a chance.”

“The point is,” Jimmy put in, “do we stand for it?”
“What can we do?”
“What can we do? We don’t have to stay here. We’ve still got our own

group; we can walk out and find another place…a bigger cave maybe.”

“Yes, sir!” agreed Caroline. “Right tonight.”
Rod thought about it. The idea was tempting; they didn’t need the

others…guys like Nielsen—and Cowper. The discovery that his friends
were loyal to him, loyal to the extent that they would consider exile rather
than let him down choked him up. He turned to Jacqueline. “How about
you, Jackie?”

“We’re partners, Rod. Always.”
“Bob—do you want to do this? You and Carmen?”
“Yes. Well…”
“‘Well’ what?”
“Rod, we’re sticking with you. This election is all very well—but you

took us in when we needed it and teamed with us. We’ll never forget it.
Furthermore I think that you make a sounder team captain than Cowper is
likely to make. But there is one thing.”

“Yes.”
“If you decide that we leave, Carmen and I will appreciate it if you put

it off a day.”

“Why?” demanded Caroline. “Now is the time.”

Everybody knows that a regularly elected mayor can perform weddings.”

“Oh!” said Caroline. “Pardon my big mouth.”
“Carmen and I can take care of the religious end—it’s not very

complicated in our church. But, just in case we ever are rescued, we would
like it better and our folks would like it if the civil requirements were all
perfectly regular and legal. You see?”

Rod nodded. “I see.”
“But if you say to leave tonight…”
“I don’t,” Rod answered with sudden decision. “We’ll stay and get you

two properly married. Then—”

“Then we all shove off in a shower of rice,” Caroline finished.
“Then we’ll see. Cowper may turn out to be a good mayor. We won’t

leave just because I lost an election.” He looked around at their faces.
“But…but I certainly do thank you. I—”

“Goodnight, Rod. Thanks.”

“A Joyful Omen”

MAYOR COWPER GOT OFF TO A GOOD START. He approved, took over, and
embellished a suggestion that Carmen and Bob should have their own
quarters. He suspended work on the wall and set the whole village to
constructing a honeymoon cottage. Not until his deputy, Roy Kilroy,
reminded him did he send out hunting parties.

He worked hard himself, having set the wedding for that evening and

having decreed that the building must be finished by sundown. Finished it
was by vandalizing part of the wall to supply building stone when the
supply ran short Construction was necessarily simple since they had no
tools, no mortar but clay mud, no way to cut timbers. It was a stone box as
tall as a man and a couple of meters square, with a hole for a door. The roof
was laid up from the heaviest poles that could be cut from a growth
upstream of giant grass much like bamboo—the colonists simply called it
“bamboo.” This was thatched and plastered with mud; it sagged badly.

But it was a house and even had a door which could be closed—a

woven grass mat stiffened with bamboo. It neither hinged nor locked but it
filled the hole and could be held in place with a stone and a pole. The floor
was clean sand covered with fresh broad leaves.

As a doghouse for a St. Bernard it would have been about right; as a

dwelling for humans it was not much. But it was better than that which
most human beings had enjoyed through the history and prehistory of the
race. Bob and Carmen did not look at it critically.

When work was knocked off for lunch Rod self-consciously sat down

near a group around Cowper. He had wrestled with his conscience for a
long time in the night and had decided that the only thing to do was to eat
sour grapes and pretend to like them. He could start by not avoiding
Cowper.

Margery Chung was cook for the day; she cut Rod a chunk of scorched

meat. He thanked her and started to gnaw it. Cowper was talking. Rod was

not trying to overhear but there seemed to be no reason not to listen.

“—which is the only way we will get the necessary discipline into the

group. I’m sure you agree.” Cowper glanced up, caught Rod’s eye, looked
annoyed, then grinned. “Hello, Rod.”

“Hi, Grant.”
“Look, old man, we’re having an executive committee meeting. Would

you mind finding somewhere else to eat lunch?”

Rod stood up blushing. “Oh! Sure.”
Cowper seemed to consider it. “Nothing private, of course—just

getting things done. On second thought maybe you should sit in and give us
your advice.”

move away.

Cowper did not insist. “Got to keep working, lots to do. See you later,

then. Any time.” He grinned and turned away.

turned gratefully, joined Jimmy Throxton. “Come outside the wall,” Jimmy
said quietly. “The Secret Six are having a picnic. Seen the happy couple?”

“You mean Carmen and Bob?”
“Know any other happy couples? Oh, there they are—staring hungrily

at their future mansion. See you outside.”

the water and eating. From habit he glanced around, sizing up possible
cover for carnivores and figuring escape routes back into the kraal, but his
alertness was not conscious as there seemed no danger in the open so near
other people. He joined the girls and sat down on a rock. “Hi, kids.”

“Hello, Rod.”
“H’lo, Roddie,” Caroline seconded. “What news on the Rialto?”
“None, I guess. Say, did Grant appoint an executive committee last

night?”

“He appointed about a thousand committees but no executive

committee unless he did it after we adjourned. Why an executive
committee? This gang needs one the way I need a bicycle.”

“Who is on it, Rod?” asked Jacqueline.
Rod thought back and named the faces he had seen around Cowper.

She looked thoughtful. “Those are his own special buddies from Teller U.”

“Yes, I guess so.”
“I don’t like it,” she answered.
“What’s the harm?”
“Maybe none…maybe. It is about what we could expect. But I’d feel

better if all the classes were on it, not just that older bunch. You know.”

“Shucks, Jack, you’ve got to give him some leeway.”
“I don’t see why,” put in Caroline. “That bunch you named are the

same ones Hizzonor appointed as chairmen of the other committees. It’s a
tight little clique. You notice none of us unsavory characters got named to
any important committee—I’m on waste disposal and camp sanitation,
Jackie is on food preparation, and you aren’t on any. You should have been
on the constitution, codification, and organization committee, but he made
himself chairman and left you out. Add it up.”

Rod did not answer. Caroline went on, “I’ll add it if you won’t. First

thing you know there will be a nominating committee. Then we’ll find that
only those of a certain age, say twenty-one, can hold office. Pretty soon that
executive committee will turn into a senate (called something else,
probably) with a veto that can be upset only by a three-quarters majority
that we will never get. That’s the way my Uncle Phil would have rigged it.”

“Your Uncle Phil?”
“Boy, there was a politician! I never liked him—he had kissed so many

babies his lips were puckered. I used to hide when he came into our house.
But I’d like to put him up against Hizzonor. It’ud be a battle of dinosaurs.
Look, Rod, they’ve got us roped and tied; I say we should fade out right
after the wedding.” She turned to Jacqueline. “Right…pardner?”

“Sure…if Rod says so.”
“Well, I don’t say so. Look, Carol, I don’t like the situation. To tell the

truth…well, I was pretty sour at being kicked out of the captaincy. But I
can’t let the rest of you pull out on that account. There aren’t enough of us
to form another colony, not safely.”

trees as there are here in camp. This time we’ll build up slowly and be
choosy about whom we take. Six is a good start. We’ll get by.”

“Not six, Carol. Four.”
“Huh? Six! We shook on it last night before Jimmy woke you.”

Rod shook his head. “Carol, how can we expect Bob and Carmen to

walk out…right after the rest have made them a wedding present of a house
of their own?”

“Well…darn it, we’d build them another house!”
“They would go with us, Carol—but it’s too much to ask.”
“I think,” Jacqueline said grudgingly, “that Rod has something, Carol.”
The argument was ended by the appearance of Bob, Carmen, and

Jimmy. They had been delayed, explained Jimmy, by the necessity of
inspecting the house. “As if I didn’t know every rock in it. Oh, my back!”

“I appreciate it, Jim,” Carmen said softly. “I’ll rub your back.”
“Sold!” Jimmy lay face down.
“Hey!” protested Caroline. “I carried more rocks than he did. Mostly

he stood around and bossed.”

“Supervisory work is exceptionally tiring,” Jimmy said smugly. “You

get Bob to rub your back.”

“Hey! You down there—lunch hour is over. Let’s get back to work.”

“Sorry, Jimmy. Later.” Carmen turned away.
Jimmy scrambled to his feet. “Bob, Carmen—don’t go ’way yet. I

want to say something.”

They stopped. Rod waved to Kilroy. “With you in a moment!” He

turned back to the others.

Jimmy seemed to have difficulty in choosing words. “Uh, Carmen…

Bob. The future Baxters. You know we think a lot of you. We think it’s
swell that you are going to get married—every family ought to have a
marriage. But…well, shopping isn’t what it might be around here and we
didn’t know what to get you. So we talked it over and decided to give you
this. It’s from all of us. A wedding present.” Jimmy jammed a hand in his
pocket, hauled out his dirty, dog-eared playing cards and handed them to
Carmen.

Bob Baxter looked startled. “Gosh, Jimmy, we can’t take your cards—

your only cards.”

“I—we want you to have them.”
“But—”
“Be quiet, Bob!” Carmen said and took the cards. “Thank you, Jimmy.

Thank you very much. Thank you all.” She looked around. “Our getting

married isn’t going to make any difference, you know. It’s still one family.
We’ll expect you all…to come play cards…at our house just as—” She
stopped suddenly and started to cry, buried her head on Bob’s shoulder. He
patted it. Jimmy looked as if he wanted to cry and Rod felt nakedly
embarrassed.

They started back, Carmen with an arm around Jimmy and the other

around her betrothed. Rod hung back with the other two. “Did Jimmy,” he
whispered, “say anything to either of you about this?”

“No,” Jacqueline answered.
“Not me,” Caroline agreed. “I was going to give ’em my stew pan, but

now I’ll wait a day or two.” Caroline’s “bag of rocks” had turned out to
contain an odd assortment for survival—among other things, a thin-page
diary, a tiny mouth organ, and a half-litre sauce pan. She produced other
unlikely but useful items from time to time. Why she had picked them and
how she had managed to hang on to them after she discarded the bag were
minor mysteries, but, as Deacon Matson had often told the class: “Each to
his own methods. Survival is an art, not a science.” It was undeniable that
she had appeared at the cave healthy, well fed, and with her clothing
surprisingly neat and clean in view of the month she had been on the land.

“They won’t expect you to give up your stew pan, Caroline.”
“I can’t use it now that the crowd is so big, and they can set up

housekeeping with it. Anyhow, I want to.”

“I’m going to give her two needles and some thread. Bob made her

leave her sewing kit behind in favor of medical supplies. But I’ll wait a
while, too.”

“I haven’t anything I can give them,” Rod said miserably.
Jacqueline turned gentle eyes on him. “You can make them a water

skin for their house, Rod,” she said softly. “They would like that. We can
use some of my Kwik-Kure so that it will last.”

Rod cheered up at once. “Say, that’s a swell idea!”

“We are gathered here,” Grant Cowper said cheerfully, “to join these

two people in the holy bonds of matrimony. I won’t give the usual warning
because we all know that no impediment exists to this union. In fact it is the
finest thing that could happen to our little community, a joyful omen of
things to come, a promise for the future, a guarantee that we are firmly

resolved to keep the torch of civilization, now freshly lighted on this planet,
forever burning in the future. It means that—”

man. His duties had not been onerous but now he found that he had an
overwhelming desire to sneeze. He worked his features around, then in
desperation rubbed his upper lip violently and overcame it. He sighed
silently and was glad for the first time that Grant Cowper had this
responsibility. Grant seemed to know the right words and he did not.

The bride was attended by Caroline Mshiyeni. Both girls carried

bouquets of a flame-colored wild bloom. Caroline was in shorts and shirt as
usual and the bride was dressed in the conventional blue denim trousers and
overshirt. Her hair was arranged en brosse; her scrubbed face shone in the
firelight and she was radiantly beautiful.

“Who giveth this woman?”
Jimmy Throxton stepped forward and said hoarsely, “I do!”
“The ring, please.”
Rod had it on his little finger; with considerable fumbling he got it off.

It was a Ponce de Leon senior-class ring, borrowed from Bill Kennedy. He
handed it to Cowper.

“Carmen Eleanora, do you take this man to be your lawfully wedded

husband, to have and to hold, for better and for worse, in sickness and in
health, till death do you part?”

“I do.”
“Robert Edward, do you take this woman to be your lawfully wedded

wife? Will you keep her and cherish her, cleaving unto her only, until death
do you part?”

“I do. I mean, I will. Both.”
“Take her hand in yours. Place the ring on her finger. Repeat after me

—”

Rod’s sneeze was coming back again; he missed part of it.
“—so, by authority vested in me as duly elected Chief Magistrate of

this sovereign community, I pronounce you man and wife! Kiss her, chum,
before I beat you to it.”

Carol and Jackie both were crying; Rod wondered what had gone

wrong. He missed his turn at kissing the bride, but she turned to him
presently, put an arm around his neck and kissed him. He found himself

shaking hands with Bob very solemnly. “Well, I guess that does it. Don’t
forget you are supposed to carry her through the door.”

“I won’t forget.”
“Well, you told me to remind you. Uh, may the Principle bless you

both.”

“I So Move”

THERE WAS NO MORE TALK OF LEAVING. Even Caroline dropped the subject.

But on other subjects talk was endless. Cowper held a town meeting

every evening. These started with committee reports—the committee on
food resources and natural conservation, the committees on artifacts and
inventory, on waste disposal and camp sanitation, on exterior security, on
human resources and labor allotment, on recruitment and immigration, on
conservation of arts and sciences, on constitution, codification, and justice,
on food preparation, on housing and city planning—

Cowper seemed to enjoy the endless talk and Rod was forced to admit

that the others appeared to have a good time, too—he surprised himself by
discovering that he too looked forward to the evenings. It was the village’s
social life, the only recreation. Each session produced wordy battles,
personal remarks and caustic criticisms; what was lacking in the
gentlemanly formality found in older congresses was made up in spice. Rod
liked to sprawl on the ground with his ear near Jimmy Throxton and listen
to Jimmy’s slanderous asides about the intelligence, motives, and ancestry
of each speaker. He waited for Caroline’s disorderly heckling.

But Caroline was less inclined to heckle now; Cowper had appointed

her Historian on discovering that she owned a diary and could take
shorthand. “It is extremely important,” he informed her in the presence of
the village, “that we have a full record of these pioneer days for posterity.
You’ve been writing in your diary every day?”

“Sure. That’s what it’s for.”
“Good! From here on it will be an official account. I want you to

record the important events of each day.”

“All right. It doesn’t make the tiniest bit of difference, I do anyhow.”
“Yes, yes, but in greater detail. I want you to record our proceedings,

too. Historians will treasure this document, Carol.”

“I’ll bet!”

diary?”

“Couple of hundred, maybe.”
“Good! That solves a problem I had been wondering about. Uh, we

will have to requisition half of that supply for official use—public notices,
committee transactions, and the like. You know.”

Caroline looked wide-eyed. “That’s a lot of paper, isn’t it? You had

better send two or three big husky boys to carry it.”

Cowper looked puzzled. “You’re joking.”
“Better make it four big huskies. I could probably manage three…and

somebody is likely to get hurt.”

“Now, see here, Caroline, it is just a temporary requisition, in the

public interest. Long before you need all of your diary we will devise other
writing materials.”

“Go ahead and devise! That’s my diary.”
Caroline sat near Cowper, diary in her lap and style in her hand, taking

notes. Each evening she opened proceedings by reading the minutes of the
previous meeting. Rod asked her if she took down the endless debates.

“Goodness no!”
“I wondered. It seemed to me that you would run out of paper. Your

minutes are certainly complete.”

She chuckled. “Roddie, want to know what I really write down?

Promise not to tell.”

“Of course I won’t.”
“When I ‘read the minutes’ I just reach back in my mind and recall

what the gabble was the night before—I’ve got an awfully good memory.
But what I actually dirty the paper with…well, here—” She took her diary
from a pocket. “Here’s last night: ‘Hizzoner called us to disorder at half-
past burping time. The committee on cats and dogs reported. No cats, no
dogs. The shortage was discussed. We adjourned and went to sleep, those
who weren’t already.’”

Rod grinned. “A good thing Grant doesn’t know shorthand.”
“Of course, if anything real happens, I put it down. But not the talk,

talk, talk.”

Caroline was not adamant about not sharing her supply of paper when

needed. A marriage certificate, drawn up in officialese by Howard

Goldstein, a Teller law student, was prepared for the Baxters and signed by
Cowper, the couple themselves, and Rod and Caroline as witnesses.
Caroline decorated it with flowers and turtle doves before delivering it.

There were others who seemed to feel that the new government was

long on talk and short on results. Among them was Bob Baxter, but the
Quaker couple did not attend most of the meetings. But when Cowper had
been in office a week, Shorty Dumont took the floor after the endless
committee reports:

“Mr. Chairman!”
“Can you hold it, Shorty? I have announcements to make before we

get on to new business.”

our constitution report?”

“Why, I made the report myself.”
“You said that a revised draft was being prepared and the report would

be delayed. That’s no report. What I want to know is: when do we get a
permanent set-up? When do we stop floating in air, getting along from day
to day on ‘temporary executive notices’?”

Cowper flushed. “Do you object to my executive decisions?”
“Won’t say that I do, won’t say that I don’t. But Rod was let out and

you were put in on the argument that we needed constitutional government,
not a dictatorship. That’s why I voted for you. All right, where’s our laws?
When do we vote on them?”

“You must understand,” Cowper answered carefully, “that drawing up

a constitution is not done overnight. Many considerations are involved.”

“Sure, sure—but it’s time we had some notion of what sort of a

constitution you are cooking up. How about a bill of rights? Have you
drawn up one?”

“All in due time.”
“Why wait? For a starter let’s adopt the Virginia Bill of Rights as

article one. I so move.”

“You’re out of order. Anyhow we don’t even have a copy of it.”
“Don’t let that bother you; I know it by heart. You ready, Carol? Take

this down…”

“Never mind,” Caroline answered. “I know it, too. I’m writing it.”

quote it. So let’s quit stalling.”

motion.”

Cowper shouted for order. He went on, “This is not the time nor the

place. When the committee reports, you will find that all proper democratic
freedoms and safeguards have been included—modified only by the stern
necessities of our hazardous position.” He flashed his smile. “Now let’s get
on with business. I have an announcement about hunting parties. Hereafter
each hunting party will be expected to—”

Dumont was still standing. “I said no more stalling, Grant. You argued

that what we needed was laws, not a captain’s whim. You’ve been throwing
your weight around quite a while now and I don’t see any laws. What are
your duties? How much authority do you have? Are you both the high and
the low justice? Or do the rest of us have rights?”

“Shut up and sit down!”
“How long is your term of office?”
Cowper made an effort to control himself. “Shorty, if you have

suggestions or, such things, you must take them up with the committee.”

“Oh, slush! Give me a straight answer.”
“You are out of order.”
“I am not out of order. I’m insisting that the committee on drawing up

a constitution tell us what they are doing. I won’t surrender the floor until I
get an answer. This is a town meeting and I have as much right to talk as
anybody.”

Cowper turned red. “I wouldn’t be too sure,” he said ominously. “Just

how old are you, Shorty?”

Dumont stared at him. “Oh, so that’s it? And the cat is out of the bag!”

He glanced around. “I see quite a few here who are younger than I am. See
what he’s driving at, folks? Second-class citizens. He’s going to stick an age
limit in that so-called constitution. Aren’t you, Grant? Look me in the eye
and deny it.”

“Roy! Dave! Grab him and bring him to order.”
Rod had been listening closely; the show was better than usual. Jimmy

had been adding his usual flippant commentary. Now Jimmy whispered,

“That tears it. Do we choose up sides or do we fade back and watch the
fun?”

Before he could answer Shorty made it clear that he needed no

immediate help. He set his feet wide and snapped, “Touch me and
somebody gets hurt!” He did not reach for any weapon but his attitude
showed that he was willing to fight.

He went on, “Grant, I’ve got one thing to say, then I’ll shut up.” He

turned and spoke to all. “You can see that we don’t have any rights and we
don’t know where we stand—but we are already organized like a
straitjacket. Committees for this, committees for that—and what good has it
done? Are we better off than we were before all these half-baked
committees were appointed? The wall is still unfinished, the camp is dirtier
than ever, and nobody knows what he is supposed to do. Why, we even let
the signal fire go out yesterday. When a roof leaks, you don’t appoint a
committee; you fix the leak. I say give the job back to Rod, get rid of these
silly committees, and get on with fixing the leaks. Anybody with me? Make
some noise!”

half but Cowper could see that he was losing his grip on them. Roy Kilroy
dropped behind Shorty Dumont and looked questioningly at Cowper;
Jimmy jabbed Rod in the ribs and whispered, “Get set, boy.”

But Cowper shook his head at Roy. “Shorty,” he said quietly, “are you

through making your speech?”

“That wasn’t a speech, that was a motion. And you had better not tell

me it’s out of order.”

“I did not understand your motion. State it.”
“You understood it. I’m moving that we get rid of you and put Rod

back in.”

Kilroy interrupted. “Hey, Grant, he can’t do that. That’s not according

to—”

“Hold it, Roy. Shorty, your motion is not in order.”
“I thought you would say that!”
“And it is really two motions. But I in not going to bother with trifles.

You say people don’t like the way I’m doing things, so we’ll find out.” He
went on briskly, “Is there a second to the motion?”

“Second!”

“I second it.”
“Moved and seconded. The motion is to recall me and put Rod in

office. Any remarks?”

A dozen people tried to speak. Rod got the floor by outshouting the

others. “Mr. Chairman, Mr. Chairman! Privileged question!”

“The chair recognizes Rod Walker.”
“Point of personal privilege. I have a statement to make.”
“Well? Go ahead.”
“Look, Grant, I didn’t know Shorty planned to do this. Tell him,

Shorty.”

“That’s right.”
“Okay, okay,” Cowper said sourly. “Any other remarks? Don’t yell,

just stick up your hands.”

“I’m not through,” insisted Rod.
“Well?”
“I not only did not know, I’m not for it. Shorty, I want you to withdraw

your motion.”

“No!”
“I think you should. Grant has only had a week; you can’t expect

miracles in that time—I know; I’ve had grief enough with this bunch of
wild men. You may not like the things he’s done—I don’t myself, a lot of
them. That’s to be expected. But if you let that be an excuse to run him out
of office, then sure as daylight this gang will break up.”

“I’m not busting it up—he is! He may be older than I am but if he

thinks that makes the least difference when it comes to having a say—
well…he’d better think twice. I’m warning him. You hear that, Grant?”

“I heard it. You misunderstood me.”
“Like fun I did!”
“Shorty,” Rod persisted, “will you drop this idea? I’m asking you

please.”

Shorty Dumont looked stubborn. Rod looked helplessly at Cowper,

shrugged and sat down. Cowper turned away and growled, “Any more
debate? You back there… Agnes? You’ve got the floor.”

Jimmy whispered, “Why did you pull a stunt like that, Rod? Nobility

doesn’t suit you.”

tones.

“You messed up your chances to be re-elected.”
“Stow it.” Rod listened; it appeared that Agnes Fries had more than

one grievance. “Jim?”

“Huh?”
“Jump to your feet and move to adjourn.”
“What? Ruin this when it’s getting good? There is going to be some

hair pulled… I hope.”

“Don’t argue; do it!—or I’ll bang your heads together.”
“Oh, all right. Spoilsport.” Jimmy got reluctantly to his feet, took a

breath and shouted, “I move we adjourn!”

Rod bounced to his feet. “SECOND THE MOTION!”
Cowper barely glanced at them. “Out of order. Sit down.”
“It is not out of order,” Rod said loudly. “A motion to adjourn is

always in order, it takes precedence, and it cannot be debated. I call for the
question.”

“I never recognized you. This recall motion is going to be voted on if it

is the last thing I do.” Cowper’s face was tense with anger. “Are you
through, Agnes? Or do you want to discuss my table manners, too?”

“You can’t refuse a motion to adjourn,” Rod insisted. “Question! Put

the question.”

Several took up the shout, drowning out Agnes Fries, preventing

Cowper from recognizing another speaker. Boos and catcalls rounded out
the tumult.

Cowper held up both hands for silence, then called out, “It has been

moved and seconded that we adjourn. Those in favor say, ‘Aye.’”

“AYE!!”
“Opposed?”
“No,” said Jimmy.
“The meeting is adjourned.” Cowper strode out of the circle of

firelight.

up. “A fine sort of a pal you turned out to be!” He spat on the ground and
stomped off.

you on your head? That noble stuff in the right doses might have put us
back in business. But you didn’t know when to stop.”

Jacqueline had approached while Jimmy was speaking. “I wasn’t

pulling any tricks,” Rod insisted. “I meant what I said. Kick a captain out
when he’s had only a few days to show himself and you’ll bust us up into a
dozen little groups. I wouldn’t be able to hold them together. Nobody
could.”

“Bosh! Jackie, tell the man.”
She frowned. “Jimmy, you’re sweet, but you’re not bright.”
“Et tu, Jackie?”
“Never mind, Jackie will take care of you. A good job, Rod. By

tomorrow everybody will realize it. Some of them are a little stirred up
tonight.”

“What I don’t see,” Rod said thoughtfully, “is what got Shorty stirred

up in the first place?”

“Hadn’t you heard? Maybe it was while you were out hunting. I didn’t

see it, but he got into a row with Roy, then Grant bawled him out in front of
everybody. I think Shorty is self-conscious about his height,” she said
seriously. “He doesn’t like to take orders.”

“Does anybody?”

The next day Grant Cowper acted as if nothing had happened. But his

manner had more of King Log and less of King Stork. Late in the afternoon
he looked up Rod. “Walker? Can you spare me a few minutes?”

“Why not?”
“Let’s go where we can talk.” Grant led him to a spot out of earshot.

They sat on the ground and Rod waited. Cowper seemed to have difficulty
in finding words.

Finally he said, “Rod, I think I can depend on you.” He threw in his

grin, but it looked forced.

“Why?” asked Rod.
“Well…the way you behaved last night.”
“So? Don’t bank on it, I didn’t do it for you.” Rod paused, then added,

“Let’s get this straight. I don’t like you.”

a little bit. But we’ve got to get along…and I think I can trust you.”

“Maybe.”
“I’ll risk it.”
“I agree with every one of Shorty’s gripes. I just didn’t agree with his

solution.”

Cowper gave a wry smile unlike his usual expression. For an instant

Rod found himself almost liking him. “The sad part is that I agree with his
gripes myself.”

“Huh?”
“Rod, you probably think I’m a stupid jerk but the fact is I do know

quite a bit about theory of government. The hard part is to apply it in a…a
transitional period like this. We’ve got fifty people here and not a one with
any practical experience in government—not even myself. But every single
one considers himself an expert. Take that bill-of-rights motion; I couldn’t
let that stand. I know enough about such things to know that the rights and
duties needed for a co-operative colony like this can’t be taken over word
for word from an agrarian democracy, and they are still different from those
necessary for an industrial republic.” He looked worried. “It is true that we
had considered limiting the franchise.”

“You do and they’ll toss you in the creek!”
“I know. That’s one reason why the law committee hasn’t made a

report. Another reason is—well, confound it, how can you work out things
like a constitution when you practically haven’t any writing paper? It’s
exasperating. But about the franchise: the oldest one of us is around twenty-
two and the youngest is about sixteen. The worst of it is that the youngest
are the most precocious, geniuses or near-geniuses.” Cowper looked up. “I
don’t mean you.”

“Oh, no,” Rod said hastily. “I’m no genius!”
“You’re not sixteen, either. These brilliant brats worry me. ‘Bush

lawyers,’ every blessed one, with always a smart answer and no sense. We
thought with an age limit—a reasonable one—the older heads could act as
ballast while they grow up. But it won’t work.”

“No. It won’t.”
“But what am I to do? That order about hunting teams not being mixed

—that wasn’t aimed at teams like you and Carol, but she thought it was and

gave me the very deuce. I was just trying to take care of these kids.
Confound it, I wish they were all old enough to marry and settle down—the
Baxters don’t give me trouble.”

“I wouldn’t worry. In a year or so ninety per cent of the colony will be

married.”

“I hope so! Say…are you thinking about it?”
“Me?” Rod was startled. “Farthest thing from my mind.”
“Um? I thought—Never mind; I didn’t get you out here to ask about

your private affairs. What Shorty had to say was hard to swallow—but I’m
going to make some changes. I’m abolishing most of the committees.”

“So?”
“Yes. Blast them, they don’t do anything; they just produce reports.

I’m going to make one girl boss cook—and one man boss hunter. I want
you to be chief of police.”

“Huh? Why in Ned do you want a chief of police?”
“Well…somebody has to see that orders are carried out. You know,

camp sanitation and such. Somebody has to keep the signal smoking—we
haven’t accounted for thirty-seven people, aside from known dead.
Somebody has to assign the night watch and check on it. The kids run hog
wild if you don’t watch them. You are the one to do it.”

“Why?”
“Well…let’s be practical, Rod. I’ve got a following and so have you.

We’ll have less trouble if everybody sees that we two stand together. It’s for
the good of the community.”

Rod realized, as clearly as Grant did, that the group had to pull

together. But Cowper was asking him to shore up his shaky administration,
and Rod not only resented him but thought that Cowper was all talk and no
results.

It was not just the unfinished wall, he told himself, but a dozen things.

Somebody ought to search for a salt lick, every day. There ought to be a
steady hunt for edible roots and berries and things, too—he, for one, was
tired of an all-meat diet. Sure, you could stay healthy if you didn’t stick just
to lean meat, but who wanted to eat nothing but meat, maybe for a life
time? And there were those stinking hides… Grant had ordered every kill
skinned, brought back for use.

“What are you going to do with those green hides?” he asked suddenly.

“Huh? Why?”
“They stink. If you put me in charge, I’m going to chuck them in the

creek.”

“But we’re going to need them. Half of us are in rags now.”
“But we’re not short on hides; tanning is what we need. Those hides

won’t sun-cure this weather.”

“We haven’t got tannin. Don’t be silly, Rod.”
“Then send somebody out to chew bark till they find some. You can’t

mistake the puckery taste. And get rid of those hides!”

“If I do, will you take the job?”
“Maybe. You said, ‘See that orders are carried out.’ Whose orders?

Yours? Or Kilroy’s?”

“Well, both. Roy is my deputy.”
Rod shook his head. “No, thanks. You’ve got him, so you don’t need

me. Too many generals, not enough privates.”

“But, Rod, I do need you. Roy doesn’t get along with the younger kids.

He rubs them the wrong way.”

don’t like the title anyhow. It’s silly.”

“Pick your own. Captain of the Guard… City Manager. I don’t care

what you call it; I want you to take over the night guard and see that things
run smoothly around camp—and keep an eye on the younger kids. You can
do it and it’s your duty.”

“What will you be doing?”
“I’ve got to whip this code of laws into shape. I’ve got to think about

long-range planning. Heavens, Rod, I’ve got a thousand things on my mind.
I can’t stop to settle a quarrel just because some kid has been teasing the
cook. Shorty was right; we can’t wait. When I give an order I want a law to
back it and not have to take lip from some young snotty. But I can’t do it
all, I need help.”

Cowper put it on grounds impossible to refuse, nevertheless…“What

about Kilroy?”

“Eh? Confound it, Rod, you can’t ask me to kick out somebody else to

make room for you.”

was a matter of stubborn pride to him to back up the man who had beaten

him, it was that more than any public-spiritedness. He could not phrase it,
but he did know that Cowper and Kilroy were not the same case.

“I won’t pull Kilroy’s chestnuts out of the fire. Grant, I’ll stooge for

you; you were elected. But I won’t stooge for a stooge.”

“Rod, be reasonable! If you got an order from Roy, it would be my

order. He would simply be carrying it out.”

Rod stood up. “No deal.”
Cowper got angrily to his feet and strode away.

There was no meeting that night, for the first time. Rod was about to

visit the Baxters when Cowper called him aside. “You win. I’ve made Roy
chief hunter.”

“Huh?”
“You take over as City Manager, or Queen of the May, or whatever

you like. Nobody has set the night watch. So get busy.”

“Wait a minute! I never said I would take the job.”
“You made it plain that the only thing in your way was Roy. Okay, you

get your orders directly from me.”

Rod hesitated. Cowper looked at him scornfully and said, “So you

can’t co-operate even when you have it all your own way?”

“Not that, but—”
“No ‘buts.’ Do you take the job? A straight answer: yes, or no.”
“Uh…yes.”
“Okay.” Cowper frowned and added, “I almost wish you had turned it

down.”

“That makes two of us.”
Rod started to set the guard and found that every boy he approached

was convinced that he had had more than his share of watches. Since the
exterior security committee had kept no records—indeed, had had no way
to—it was impossible to find out who was right and who was shirking.
“Stow it!” he told one. “Starting tomorrow we’ll have an alphabetical list,
straight rotation. I’ll post it even if we have to scratch it on a rock.” He
began to realize that there was truth in what Grant had said about the
difficulty of getting along without writing paper.

“Why don’t you put your pal Baxter on watch?”

“Because the Mayor gave him two weeks honeymoon, as you know.

Shut up the guff. Charlie will be your relief; make sure you know where he
sleeps.”

“I think I’ll get married. I could use two weeks of loafing.”
“I’ll give you five to one you can’t find a girl that far out of her mind.

You’re on from midnight to two.”

Most of them accepted the inevitable once they were assured of a

square deal in the future, but Peewee Schneider, barely sixteen and
youngest in the community, stood on his “rights”—he had stood a watch the
night before, he did not rate another for at least three nights, and nobody
could most colorfully make him.

slap his ears loose—and then he would still stand his watch. To which he
added that if he heard Peewee use that sort of language around camp again
he would wash Peewee’s mouth out with soap.

Schneider shifted the argument. “Yah! Where are you going to find

soap?”

“Until we get some, I’ll use sand. You spread that word, Peewee: no

more rough language around camp. We’re going to be civilized if it kills us.
Four to six, then, and show Kenny where you sleep.” As he left Rod made a
mental note that they should collect wood ashes and fat; while he had only a
vague idea of how to make soap probably someone knew how…and soap
was needed for other purposes than curbing foul-mouthed pip squeaks. He
had felt a yearning lately to be able to stand upwind of himself…he had
long ago thrown away his socks.

Rod got little sleep. Everytime he woke he got up and inspected the

guard, and twice he was awakened by watchmen who thought they saw
something prowling outside the circle of firelight. Rod was not sure,
although it did seem once that he could make out a large, long shape
drifting past in the darkness. He stayed up a while each time, another gun in
case the prowler risked the wall or the fires in the gap. He felt great
temptation to shoot at the prowling shadows, but suppressed it. To carry the
attack to the enemy would be to squander their scanty ammunition without
making a dent in the dangerous beasts around them. There were prowlers
every night; they had to live with it.

after breakfast and grab a nap in the cave. He had not slept after four in the
morning, but had checked on Peewee Schneider at frequent intervals. But
there was too much to do; he promised himself a nap later and sought out
Cowper instead. “Two or three things on my mind, Grant.”

“Spill it.”
“Any reason not to put girls on watch?”
“Eh? I don’t think it’s a good idea.”
“Why not? These girls don’t scream at a mouse. Everyone of them

stayed alive by her own efforts at least a month before she joined up here.
Ever seen Caroline in action?”

“Mmm…no.”
“You should. It’s a treat. Sudden death in both hands, and eyes in the

back of her head. If she were on watch, I would sleep easy. How many men
do we have now?”

“Uh, twenty-seven, with the three that came in yesterday.”
“All right, out of twenty-seven who doesn’t stand watch?”
“Why, everybody takes his turn.”
“You?”
“Eh? Isn’t that carrying it pretty far? I don’t expect you to take a

watch; you run it and check on the others.”

“That’s two off. Roy Kilroy?”
“Uh, look, Rod, you had better figure that he is a department head as

chief hunter and therefore exempt. You know why—no use looking for
trouble.”

“I know, all right. Bob Baxter is off duty, too.”
“Until next week.”
“But this is this week. The committee cut the watch down to one at a

time; I’m going to boost it to two again. Besides that I want a sergeant of
the guard each night. He will be on all night and sleep all next day…then I
don’t want to put him on for a couple of days. You see where that leaves
me? I need twelve watchstanders every night; I have less than twenty to
draw from.”

Cowper looked worried. “The committee didn’t think we had to have

more than one guard at a time.”

shapes in the dark. “Do you want me to run this the way I think it has to be
run? Or shall I just go through the motions?”

“Well…”
“One man alone either gets jittery and starts seeing shadows—or he

dopes off and is useless. I had to wake one last night—I won’t tell you who;
I scared him out of his pants; he won’t do it again. I say we need a real
guard, strong enough in case of trouble to handle things while the camp has
time to wake up. But if you want it your way, why not relieve me and put
somebody else in?”

“No, no, you keep it. Do what you think necessary.”
“Okay, I’m putting the girls on. Bob and Carmen, too, And you.”
“Huh?”
“And me. And Roy Kilroy. Everybody. That’s the only way you will

get people to serve without griping; that way you will convince them that it
is serious, a first obligation, even ahead of hunting.”

Cowper picked at a hangnail, “Do you honestly think I should stand

watch? And you?”

“I do. It would boost morale seven hundred percent. Besides that, it

would be a good thing, uh, politically.”

Cowper glanced up, did not smile. “You’ve convinced me. Let me

know when it’s my turn.”

“Another thing. Last night there was barely wood to keep two fires

going.”

“Your problem. Use anybody not on the day’s hunting or cooking

details.”

come to the major one. Last night I took a fresh look at this spot. I don’t
like it, not as a permanent camp. We’ve been lucky.”

“Eh? Why?”
“This place is almost undefendable. We’ve got a stretch over fifty

meters long between shale and water on the upstream side. Downstream
isn’t bad, because we build a fire in the bottleneck. But upstream we have
walled off less than half and we need a lot more stakes behind the wall.
Look,” Rod added, pointing, “you could drive an army through there—and
last night I had only two little bitty fires. We ought to finish that wall.”

“We will.”
“But we ought to make a real drive to find a better place. This is

makeshift at best. Before you took over I as trying to find more caves—but
I didn’t have time to explore very far. Ever been to Mesa Verde?”

“In Colorado? No.”
“Cliff dwellings, you’ve seen pictures. Maybe somewhere up or down

stream—more likely down—we will find pockets like those at Mesa Verde
where we can build homes for the whole colony. You ought to send a team
out for two weeks or more, searching. I volunteer for it.”

“Maybe. But you can’t go; I need you.”
“In a week I’ll have this guard duty lined up so that it will run itself.

Bob Baxter can relieve me; they respect him. Uh…” He thought for a
moment. Jackie? Jimmy? “I’ll team with Carol.”

“Rod, I told you I want you here. But are you and Caroline planning to

marry?”

“Huh? What gave you that notion?”
“Then you can’t team with her in any case. We are trying to re-

introduce amenities around here.”

“Now see here, Cowper!”
“Forget it.”
“Unh…all right. But the first thing—the very first—is to finish that

wall. I want to put everybody to work right away.”

“Mmm…” Cowper said. “I’m sorry. You can’t.”
“Why not?”
“Because we are going to build a house today. Bill Kennedy and Sue

Briggs are getting married tonight.”

“Huh? I hadn’t heard.”
“I guess you are the first to hear. They told me about it privately, at

breakfast.”

Rod was not surprised, as Bill and Sue preferred each other’s

company. “Look, do they have to get married tonight? That wall is urgent,
Grant; I’m telling you.”

“Don’t be so intense, Rod. You can get along a night or two with

bigger fires. Remember, there are human values more important than
material values.”

The Beach of Bones

“July 29—BILL AND SUE GOT MARRIED TONIGHT. Hizzoner never looked
lovelier. He made a mighty pretty service out of it—I cried and so did the
other girls. If that boy could do the way he can talk! I played Mendelssohn’s
Wedding March on my harmonica with tears running down my nose and
gumming up the reeds—that’s a touch I wanted to put into darling Carmen’s
wedding but I couldn’t resist being bridesmaid. The groom got stuck
carrying his lady fair over the threshold of their ‘house’—if I may call it
that—and had to put her down and shove her in ahead of him. The ceiling is
lower than it ought to be which is why he got stuck, because we ran out of
rock and Roddie raised Cain when we started to use part of the wall.
Hizzoner was leading the assault on the wall and both of them got red in the
face and shouted at each other. But Hizzoner backed down after Roddie got
him aside and said something—Bill was pretty sore at Roddie but Bob
sweet-talked him and offered to swap houses and Roddie promised Bill that
we would take the roof off and bring the walls up higher as soon as the wall
is finished. That might not be as soon as he thinks, though—usable rock is
getting hard to find. I’ve broken all my nails trying to pry out pieces we
could use. But I agree with Roddie that we ought to finish that wall and I
sleep a lot sounder now that he is running the watch and I’ll sleep sounder
yet when that wall is tight and the pincushion back of it finished. Of course
we girls sleep down at the safe end but who wants to wake up and find a
couple of our boys missing? It is not as if we had them to spare, bless their
silly little hearts. Nothing like a man around the house, Mother always said,
to give a home that lived-in look.

“July 30—I’m not going to write in this unless something happens.

Hizzoner talks about making papyrus like the Egyptians but I’ll believe it
when I see it.

practically all night. I turned in after breakfast and slept until late afternoon
—when I woke up there was Roddie, red-eyed and cross, yelling for more
rocks and more firewood. Sometimes Roddie is a little hard to take.

“Aug 9—the salt lick Alice found is closer than the one Shorty found

last week, but not as good.

“Aug 14—Jackie finally made up her mind to marry Jim and I think

Roddie is flabbergasted—but I could have told him a month ago. Roddie is
stupid about such things. I see another house & wall crisis coming and
Roddie will get a split personality because he will want Jimmy and
Jacqueline to have a house right away and the only decent stone within
reach is built into the wall.

“Aug 15—Jimmy and Jackie, Agnes and Curt, were married today in a

beautiful double ceremony. The Throxtons have the Baxter house
temporarily and the Pulvermachers have the Kennedy’s doll house while we
partition the cave into two sets of married quarters and a storeroom.

“Sep 1—the roots I dug up didn’t poison me, so I served a mess of

them tonight. The shield from power pack of that Thunderbolt gun we
salvaged—Johann’s, it must have been—made a big enough boiler to cook
a little helping for everybody. The taste was odd, maybe because Agnes had
been making soap in it—it wasn’t very good soap, either. I’m going to call
these things yams because they look like yams although they taste more like
parsnips. There are a lot of them around. Tomorrow I in going to try boiling
them with greens, a strip of side meat, and plenty of salt. Yum, yum! I’m
going to bake them in ashes, too.

“Sep 16—Chad Ames and Dick Burke showed up with their tails

tucked in; Hizzoner got soft-hearted and let em stay. They say Jock
McGowan is crazy. I can believe it.

“Sep 28—Philip Schneider died today, hunting. Roy carried him in, but

he was badly clawed and lost a lot of blood and was D.O.A. Roy resigned
as boss hunter and Hizzoner appointed Cliff. Roy is broken up about it but

nobody blames him. The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away. Blessed be
the Name of the Lord.

“Oct 7—I’ve decided to marry M.

“Oct 10—seems I was mistaken—M. is going to marry Margery

Chung. Well, they are nice kids and if we ever get out of this I’ll be glad
I’m single since I want to buck for a commission in the Amazons. Note: be
a little more standoffish, Caroline. Well, try!

“Oct 20—Carmen????

“Oct 21—Yes.

“Nov 1—well Glory be! I’m the new City Manager. Little Carol, the

girl with two left feet. Just a couple of weeks, temporary and acting while
Roddie is away, but say ‘sir’ when you speak to me. Hizzoner finally let
Roddie make the down-river survey he has been yipping about,
accompanying it with a slough of advice and injunctions that Roddie will
pay no attention to once he is out of sight—if I know Roddie. It’s a two-
man team and Roddie picked Roy as his teamer. They left this morning.

“Nov 5—being City Manager is not all marshmallow sundae. I wish

Roddie would get back.

“Nov 11—Hizzoner wants me to copy off in here the ‘report of the

artifacts committee’! Mick Mahmud has been keeping it in his head which
strikes me as a good place. But Hizzoner has been very jumpy since Roddie
and Roy left, so I guess I will humor him—here it is:

“12 spare knives (besides one each for everybody)
“53 firearms and guns of other sorts—but only about half of them with
even one charge left.
“6 Testaments
“2 Peace of the Flame
“1 Koran
“1 Book of Mormon
“1 Oxford Book of English Verse, Centennial Edition

“1 steel bow and 3 hunting arrows
“1 boiler made from a wave shield and quite a bit of metal and plastic
junk (worth its weight in uranium, I admit) from the Thunderbolt
Jackie salvaged.
“1 stew pan (Carmen’s)
“1 pack playing cards with the nine of hearts missing
“13 matches, any number of pocket flamers no longer working, and 27
burning glasses
“1 small hand ax
“565 meters climbing line, some of it chopped up for other uses
“91 fishhooks (and no fish fit to eat!)
“61 pocket compasses, some of them broken
“19 watches that still run (4 of them adjusted to our day)
“2 bars of scented soap that Theo has been hoarding
“2 boxes Kwik-Kure and part of a box of Tan-Fast
“Several kilos of oddments that I suppose we will find a use for but I
won’t list. Mick has a mind like a pack rat.
“Lots of things we have made and can make more of—pots, bows and

arrows, hide scrapers, a stone-age mortar & pestle we can grind seeds on if
you don’t mind grit in your teeth, etc. Hizzoner says the Oxford Verse is the
most valuable thing we have and I agree, but not for his reasons. He wants
me to cover all the margins with shorthand, recording all special knowledge
that any of us have—everything from math to pig-raising. Cliff says go
ahead as long as we don’t deface the verses. I don’t see when I’m going to
find time. I’ve hardly been out of the settlement since Roddie left and sleep
is something I just hear about.

“Nov 13—only two more days. ‘For this relief, much thanks…’

“Nov 16—I didn’t think they would be on time.

“Nov 21—We finally adopted our constitution and basic code today,

the first town meeting we’ve had in weeks. It covers the flyleaves of two
Testaments, Bob’s and Georgia’s. If anybody wants to refer to it, which I
doubt, that’s where to look.

Why, oh, why didn’t I twist Hizzoner’s arm and make him let me go?

“Dec 15—there’s no use kidding ourselves any longer.

“Dec 21—the Throxtons and Baxters and myself and Grant gathered

privately in the Baxter house tonight and Grant recited the service for the
dead. Bob said a prayer for both of them and then we sat quietly for a long
time, Quaker fashion. Roddie always reminded me of my brother Rickie, so
I privately asked Mother to take care of him, and Roy, too—Mother had a
lap big enough for three, any time.

“Grant hasn’t made a public announcement; officially they are just

‘overdue.’

“Dec 25—Christmas”

Rod and Roy traveled light and fast downstream, taking turns leading

and covering. Each carried a few kilos of salt meat but they expected to eat
off the land. In addition to game they now knew of many edible fruits and
berries and nuts; the forest was a free cafeteria to those who knew it. They
carried no water since they expected to follow the stream. But they
continued to treat the water with respect; in addition to ichthyosaurs that
sometimes pulled down a drinking buck there were bloodthirsty little fish
that took very small bites—but they traveled in schools and could strip an
animal to bones in minutes.

Rod carried both Lady Macbeth and Colonel Bowie; Roy Kilroy

carried his Occam’s Razor and a knife borrowed from Carmen Baxter. Roy
had a climbing rope wrapped around his waist. Each had a hand gun
strapped to his hip but these were for extremity; one gun had only three
charges. But Roy carried Jacqueline Throxton’s air pistol, with freshly
envenomed darts; they expected it to save hours of hunting, save time for
travel.

Three days downstream they found a small cave, found living in it a

forlorn colony of five girls. They powwowed, then headed on down as the
girls started upstream to find the settlement. The girls had told them of a
place farther down where the creek could be crossed. They found it, a wide

rocky shallows with natural stepping stones…then wasted two days on the
far side before crossing back.

By the seventh morning they had found no cave other than one the

girls had occupied. Rod said to Roy, “Today makes a week. Grant said to be
back in two weeks.”

“That’s what the man said. Yes, sir!”
“No results.”
“Nope. None.”
“We ought to start back.”
Roy did not answer. Rod said querulously, “Well, what do you think?”
Kilroy was lying down, watching the local equivalent of an ant. He

seemed in no hurry to do anything else. Finally he answered, “Rod, you are
bossing this party. Upstream, downstream—just tell me.”

“Oh, go soak your head.”
“On the other hand, a bush lawyer like Shorty might question Grant’s

authority to tell us to return at a given time. He might use words like ‘free
citizen’ and ‘sovereign autonomy.’ Maybe he’s got something—this
neighborhood looks awfully far ‘West of the Pecos.’”

“Well…we could stretch it a day, at least?. We won’t be taking that

side trip going back.”

“Obviously. Now, if I were leading the party—but I’m not.”
“Cut the double talk! I asked for advice.”
“Well, I say we are here to find caves, not to keep a schedule.”
Rod quit frowning. “Up off your belly. Let’s go.”
They headed downstream.

The terrain changed from forest valley to canyon country as the stream

cut through a plateau. Game became harder to find and they used some of
their salt meat. Two days later they came to the first of a series of bluffs
carved eons earlier into convolutions, pockets, blank dark eyes. “This looks
like it.”

“Yes,” agreed Roy. He looked around. “It might be even better farther

down.”

“It might be.”
They went on.

canyons gave way to a broad savannah, treeless except along the banks of
the river. Rod sniffed. “I smell salt.”

“You ought to. There’s ocean over there somewhere.”
“I don’t think so.” They went on.
They avoided the high grass, kept always near the trees. The colonists

had listed more than a dozen predators large enough to endanger a man,
from a leonine creature twice as long as the biggest African lion down to a
vicious little scaly thing which was dangerous if cornered. It was generally
agreed that the leonine monster was the “stobor” they had been warned
against, although a minority favored a smaller carnivore which was faster,
trickier, and more likely to attack a man.

One carnivore was not considered for the honor. It was no larger than a

jack rabbit, had an oversize head, a big jaw, front legs larger than hind, and
no tail. It was known as “dopy joe” from the silly golliwog expression it
had and its clumsy, slow movements when disturbed. It was believed to live
by waiting at burrows of field rodents for supper to come out. Its skin cured
readily and made a good water bag. Grassy fields such as this savannah
often were thick with them.

They camped in a grove of trees by the water. Rod said, “Shall I waste

a match, or do it the hard way?”

“Suit yourself. I’ll knock over something for dinner.”
“Watch yourself. Don’t go into the grass.”
“I’ll work the edges. Cautious Kilroy they call me, around the

insurance companies.”

Rod counted his three matches, hoping there would be four, then

started making fire by friction. He had just succeeded, delayed by moss that
was not as dry as it should have been, when Roy returned and dropped a
small carcass. “The durnedest thing happened.”

The kill was a dopy joe; Rod looked at it with distaste. “Was that the

best you could do? They taste like kerosene.”

“Wait till I tell you. I wasn’t hunting him; he was hunting me.”
“Don’t kid me!”
“Truth. I had to kill him to keep him from snapping my ankles. So I

brought him in.”

insanity in his family.”

“Probably.” Roy started skinning it.
Next morning they reached the sea, a glassy body untouched by tide,

unruffled by wind. It was extremely briny and its shore was crusted with
salt They concluded that it was probably a dead sea, not a true ocean. But
their attention was not held by the body of water. Stretching away along the
shore apparently to the horizon were millions on heaping millions of
whitened bones. Rod stared. “Where did they all come from?”

Roy whistled softly. “Search me. But if we could sell them at five

pence a metric ton, we’d be millionaires.”

“Billionaires, you mean.”
“Let’s not be fussy.” They walked out along the beach, forgetting to be

cautious, held by the amazing sight. There were ancient bones, cracked by
sun and sea, new bones with gristle clinging, big bones of the giant antelope
the colonists never hunted, tiny bones of little buck no larger than terriers,
bones without number of all sorts. But there were no carcasses.

mystery. When they turned they knew that they were turning back not just
to camp but to head home. This was as far as they could go.

On the trip out they had not explored the caves. On their way back Rod

decided that they should try to pick the best place for the colony, figuring
game, water supply, and most importantly, shelter and ease of defense.

They were searching a series of arched galleries water-carved in

sandstone cliff. The shelf of the lowest gallery was six or seven meters
above the sloping stand of soil below. The canyon dropped rapidly here;
Rod could visualize a flume from upstream, bringing running water right to
the caves…not right away, but when they had time to devise tools and cope
with the problems. Someday, someday—but in the meantime here was
plenty of room for the colony in a spot which almost defended itself. Not to
mention, he added, being in out of the rain.

Roy was the better Alpinist; he inched up, flat to the rock, reached the

shelf and threw down his line to Rod—snaked him up quickly. Rod got an
arm over the edge, scrambled to his knees, stood up—and gasped, “What
the deuce!”

“That,” said Roy, “is why I kept quiet. I thought you would think I was

crazy.”

“I think we both are.” Rod stared around. Filling the depth of the

gallery, not seen from below, was terrace on terrace of cliff dwellings.

They were not inhabited, nor had they ever been by men. Openings

which must have been doors were no higher than a man’s knee, not wide
enough for shoulders. But it was clear that they were dwellings, not merely
formations carved by water. There were series of rooms arranged in half a
dozen low stories from floor to ceiling of the gallery. The material was a
concrete of dried mud, an adobe, used with wood.

stick his head into an opening; Rod shouted, “Hey! Don’t do that!”

“Why not? It’s abandoned.”
“You don’t know what might be inside. Snakes, maybe.”
“There are no snakes. Nobody’s ever seen one.”
“No…but take it easy.”
“I wish I had a torch light.”
“I wish I had eight beautiful dancing girls and a Cadillac copter. Be

careful. I don’t want to walk back alone.”

They lunched in the gallery and considered the matter. “Of course they

were intelligent,” Roy declared. “We may find them elsewhere. Maybe
really civilized now—these look like ancient ruins.”

“Not necessarily intelligent,” Rod argued. “Bees make more

complicated homes.”

“Bees don’t combine mud and wood the way these people did. Look at

that lintel.”

“Birds do. I’ll concede that they were bird-brained, no more.”
“Rod, you won’t look at the evidence.”
“Where are their artifacts? Show me one ash tray marked ‘Made in

Jersey City.’”

“I might find some if you weren’t so jumpy.”
“All in time. Anyhow, the fact that they found it safe shows that we

can live here.”

“Maybe. What killed them? Or why did they go away?”
They searched two galleries after lunch, found more dwellings. The

dwellers had apparently formed a very large community. The fourth gallery

they explored was almost empty, containing a beginning of a hive in one
corner. Rod looked it over. “We can use this. If may not be the best, but we
can move the gang in and then find the best at our leisure.”

“We’re heading back?”
“Uh, in the morning. This is a good place to sleep and tomorrow we’ll

travel from ‘can’ to ‘can’t’—I wonder what’s up there?” Rod was looking at
a secondary shelf inside the main arch.

Roy eyed it. “I’ll let you know in a moment.”
“Don’t bother. It’s almost straight up. We’ll build ladders for spots like

that.”

“My mother was a human fly, my father was a mountain goat. Watch

me.”

The shelf was not much higher than his head. Roy had a hand over—

when a piece of rock crumbled away. He did not fall far.

Rod ran to him. “You all right, boy?”
Roy grunted, “I guess so,” then started to get up. He yelped.
“What’s the matter?”
“My right leg. I think…ow! I think it’s broken.”
Rod examined the break, then went down to cut splints. With a piece

of the line Roy carried, used economically, for he needed most of it as a
ladder, he bound the leg, padding it with leaves. It was a simple break of the
tibia, with no danger of infection.

They argued the whole time. “Of course you will,” Roy was saying.

“Leave me a fresh kill and what salt meat there is. You can figure some way
to leave water.”

“Come back and find your chawed bones!”
“Not at all. Nothing can get at me. If you hustle, you can make it in

three days.”

“Four, or five more likely. Six days to lead a party back. Then you

want to go back in a stretcher? How would you like to be helpless when a
stobor jumps us?”

“But I wouldn’t go back. The gang would be moving down here.”
“Suppose they do? Eleven days, more likely twelve—Roy, you didn’t

just bang your shin; you banged your head, too.”

dangerous; it was merely tedious. Rod would have liked to explore all the
caves, but the first time he was away longer than Roy thought necessary to
make a kill Rod returned to find his patient almost hysterical. He had let his
imagination run away, visioning Rod as dead and thinking about his own
death, helpless, while he starved or died of thirst. After that Rod left him
only to gather food and water. The gallery was safe from all dangers; no
watch was necessary, fire was needed only for cooking. The weather was
getting warmer and the daily rains dropped off.

They discussed everything from girls to what the colony needed, what

could have caused the disaster that had stranded them, what they would
have to eat if they could have what they wanted, and back to girls again.
They did not discuss the possibility of rescue; they took it for granted that
they were there to stay. They slept much of the time and often did nothing,
in animal-like torpor.

Roy wanted to start back as soon as Rod removed the splints, but it

took him only seconds to discover that he no longer knew how to walk. He
exercised for days, then grew sulky when Rod still insisted that he was not
able to travel; the accumulated irritations of invalidism spewed out in the
only quarrel they had on the trip.

shouted, “Go ahead! See how far you get on that gimp leg!”

Five minutes later Rod was arranging a sling, half dragging Roy, white

and trembling and thoroughly subdued, back up onto the shelf. Thereafter
they spent ten days getting Roy’s muscles into shape, then started back.

Shorty Dumont was the first one they ran into as they approached the

settlement. His jaw dropped and he looked scared, then he ran to greet
them, ran back to alert those in camp. “Hey, everybody! They’re back!”

Caroline heard the shout, outdistanced the others in great flying leaps,

kissed and hugged them both. “Hi, Carol,” Rod said. “What are you
bawling about?”

“Oh, Roddie, you bad, bad boy!”

“It Won’t Work, Rod”

IN THE MIDST OF JUBILATION ROD HAD TIME TO NOTICE many changes. There
were more than a dozen new buildings, including two long shedlike affairs
of bamboo and mud. One new hut was of sunbaked brick; it had windows.
Where the cooking fire had been was a barbecue pit and by it a Dutch oven.
Near it a stream of water spilled out of bamboo pipe, splashed through a
rawhide net, fell into a rock bowl, and was led away to the creek…he
hardly knew whether to be pleased or irked at this anticipation of his own
notion.

He caught impressions piecemeal, as their triumphal entry was

interrupted by hugs, kisses; and bone-jarring slaps on the back, combined
with questions piled on questions. “No, no trouble—except that Roy got
mad and busted his leg…yeah, sure, we found what we went after; wait till
you see…no…yes… Jackie!… Hi, Bob!—it’s good to see you, too, boy!
Where’s Carmen… Hi, Grant!”

Cowper was grinning widely, white teeth splitting his beard. Rod

noticed with great surprise that the man looked old—why, shucks, Grant
wasn’t more than twenty-two, twenty-three at the most. Where did he pick
up those lines?

“Rod, old boy! I don’t know whether to have you two thrown in the

hoosegow or decorate your brows with laurel.”

“We got held up.”
“So it seems. Well, there is more rejoicing for the strayed lamb than

for the ninety and nine. Come on up to the city hall.”

“The what?”
Cowper looked sheepish. “They call it that, so I do. Better than

‘Number Ten, Downing Street’ which it started off with. It’s just the hut
where I sleep—it doesn’t belong to me,” he added. “When they elect
somebody else, I’ll sleep in bachelor hall.” Grant led them toward a little
building apart from the others and facing the cooking area.

The wall was gone.
Rod suddenly realized what looked strange about the upstream end of

the settlement; the wall was gone completely and in its place was a
thornbush barricade. He opened his mouth to make a savage comment—
then realized that it really did not matter. Why kick up a row when the
colony would be moving to the canyon of the Dwellers? They would never
need walls again; they would be up high at night, with their ladders pulled
up after them. He picked another subject.

“Grant, how in the world did you guys get the inner partitions out of

those bamboo pipes?”

pole, then reach in and whittle. All it takes is patience. Waxie worked it out.
But you haven’t seen anything yet. We’re going to have iron.”

“Huh?”
“We’ve got ore; now we are experimenting. But I do wish we could

locate a seam of coal. Say, you didn’t spot any, did you?”

Dinner was a feast, a luau, a celebration to make the weddings look

pale. Rod was given a real plate to eat on—unglazed, lopsided, ungraceful,
but a plate. As he took out Colonel Bowie, Margery Chung Kinksi put a
wooden spoon in his hand. “We don’t have enough to go around, but the
guests of honor rate them tonight.” Rod looked at it curiously. It felt odd in
his hand.

Dinner consisted of boiled greens, some root vegetables new to him,

and a properly baked haunch served in thin slices. Roy and Rod were
served little unleavened cakes like tortillas. No one else had them, but Rod
decided that it was polite not to comment on that. Instead he made a fuss
over eating bread again.

Margery dimpled. “We’ll have plenty of bread some day. Maybe next

year.”

There were tart little fruits for dessert, plus a bland, tasteless sort

which resembled a dwarf banana with seeds. Rod ate too much.

Grant called them to order and announced that he was going to ask the

travelers to tell what they had experienced. “Let them get it all told—then
they won’t have to tell it seventy times over. Come on, Rod. Let’s see your
ugly face.”

“Aw, let Roy. He talks better than I do.”
“Take turns. When your voice wears out, Roy can take over.”
Between them they told it all, interrupting and supplementing each

other. The colonists were awed by the beach of a billion bones, still more
interested in the ruins of the Dwellers. “Rod and I are still arguing,” Roy
told them. “I say that it was a civilization. He says that it could be just
instinct. He’s crazy with the heat; the Dwellers were people. Not humans, of
course, but people.”

“Then where are they now?”
Roy shrugged. “Where are the Selenites, Dora? What became of the

Mithrans?”

“Roy is a romanticist,” Rod objected. “But you’ll be able to form your

own opinions when we get there.”

“That’s right, Rod,” Roy agreed.
“That covers everything,” Rod went on. “The rest was just waiting

while Roy’s leg healed. But it brings up the main subject. How quickly can
we move? Grant, is there any reason not to start at once? Shouldn’t we
break camp tomorrow and start trekking? I’ve been studying it—how to
make the move, I mean—and I would say to send out an advance party at
daybreak. Roy or I can lead it. We go downstream an easy day’s journey,
pick a spot, make a kill, and have fire and food ready when the rest arrive.
We do it again the next day. I think we can be safe and snug in the caves in
five days.”

“Dibs on the advance party!”
“Me, too!”
There were other shouts but Rod could not help but realize that the

response was not what he had expected. Jimmy did not volunteer and
Caroline merely looked thoughtful. The Baxters he could not see; they were
in shadow.

He turned to Cowper. “Well, Grant? Do you have a better idea?”
“Rod,” Grant said slowly, “your plan is okay…but you’ve missed a

point.”

“Yes?”
“Why do you assume that we are going to move?”
“Huh? Why, that’s what we were sent for! To find a better place to

hitch? Of course we move!”

Cowper examined his nails. “Rod, don’t get sore. I don’t see it and I

doubt if other people do. I’m not saying the spot you and Roy found is not
good. It may be better than here—the way this place used to be. But we are
doing all right here—and we’ve got a lot of time and effort invested. Why
move?”

“Why, I told you. The caves are safe, completely safe. This spot is

exposed…it’s dangerous.”

“Maybe. Rod, in the whole time we’ve been here, nobody has been

hurt inside camp. We’ll put it to a vote, but you can’t expect us to abandon
our houses and everything we have worked for to avoid a danger that may
be imaginary.”

barricade?” Rod demanded, pointing.

“I think a stobor would get a chest full of pointed stakes if he tried it,”

Grant answered soberly. “That ‘crummy barricade’ is a highly efficient
defense. Take a better look in the morning.”

“Where we were you wouldn’t need it. You wouldn’t need a night

watch. Shucks, you wouldn’t need houses. Those caves are better than the
best house here!”

would have to abandon. Let’s look it over in the daylight, fellow, and then
talk.”

“Well…no, Grant, there is only one issue: the caves are safe; this place

isn’t. I call for a vote.”

“Easy now. This isn’t a town meeting. It’s a party in your honor. Let’s

not spoil it.”

“Well… I’m sorry. But we’re all here; let’s vote.”
“No.” Cowper stood up. “There will be a town meeting on Friday as

usual. Goodnight, Rod. Goodnight, Roy. We’re awfully glad you’re back.
Goodnight all.”

to want to discuss the proposed move. Bob Baxter came over, put a hand on
Rod and said, “See you in the morning, Rod. Bless you.” He left before Rod
could get away from a boy who was talking to him.

said, “Jimmy? Where do you stand?”

well. But she told me to tell you that we were back of you a hundred
percent, always.”

“Thanks. I feel better.”
“See you in the morning? I want to check on Jackie.”
“Sure. Sleep tight.”
He was finally left with Caroline. “Roddie? Want to inspect the guard

with me? You’ll do it after tonight, but we figured you could use a night
with no worries.”

“Wait a minute. Carol…you’ve been acting funny.”
“Me? Why, Roddie!”
“Well, maybe not. What do you think of the move? I didn’t hear you

pitching in.”

She looked away. “Roddie,” she said, “if it was just me, I’d say start

tomorrow. I’d be on the advance party.”

“Good! What’s got into these people? Grant has them buffaloed but I

can’t see why.” He scratched his head. “I’m tempted to make up my own
party—you, me, Jimmy and Jack, the Baxters, Roy, the few who were rarin’
to go tonight, and anybody else with sense enough to pound sand.”

She sighed. “It won’t work, Roddie.”
“Huh? Why not?”
“I’ll go. Some of the youngsters would go for the fun of it. Jimmy and

Jack would go if you insisted…but they would beg off if you made it easy
for them. The Baxters should not and I doubt if Bob would consent. Carmen
isn’t really up to such a trip.”

Unkillable

THE MATTER NEVER CAME TO A VOTE. Long before Friday Rod knew how a
vote would go—about fifty against him, less than half that for him, with his
friends voting with him through loyalty rather than conviction or possibly
against him in a showdown.

He made an appeal in private to Cowper. “Grant, you’ve got me licked.

Even Roy is sticking with you now. But you could swing them around.”

“I doubt it. What you don’t see, Rod, is that we have taken root. You

may have found a better place…but it’s too late to change. After all, you
picked this spot.”

“Not exactly, it…well, it just sort of happened.”
“Lots of things in life just sort of happen. You make the best of them.”
“That’s what I’m trying to do! Grant, admitted that the move is hard;

we could manage it. Set up way stations with easy jumps, send our biggest
huskies back for what we don’t want to abandon. Shucks, we could move a
person on a litter if we had to—using enough guards.”

“If the town votes it, I’ll be for it. But I won’t try to argue them into it.

Look, Rod, you’ve got this fixed idea that this spot is dangerously exposed.
The facts don’t support you. On the other hand see what we have. Running
water from upstream, waste disposal downstream, quarters comfortable and
adequate for the climate. Salt—do you have salt there?”

“We didn’t look for it—but it would be easy to bring it from the

seashore.”

“We’ve got it closer here. We’ve got prospects of metal. You haven’t

seen that ore outcropping yet, have you? We’re better equipped every day;
our standard of living is going up. We have a colony nobody need be
ashamed of and we did it with bare hands; we were never meant to be a
colony. Why throw up what we have gained to squat in caves like savages?”

Rod sighed. “Grant, this bank may be flooded in the rainy season—

aside from its poor protection now.”

“It doesn’t look it to me, but if so, we’ll see it in time. Right now we

are going into the dry season. So let’s talk it over a few months from now.”

Rod gave up. He refused to resume as “City Manager” nor would

Caroline keep it when Rod turned it down. Bill Kennedy was appointed and
Rod went to work under Cliff as a hunter, slept in the big shed upstream
with the bachelors, and took his turn at night watch. The watch had been
reduced to one man, whose duty was simply to tend fires. There was talk of
cutting out the night fires, as fuel was no longer easy to find nearby and
many seemed satisfied that the thorn barrier was enough.

Rod kept his mouth shut and stayed alert at night.
Game continued to be plentiful but became skittish. Buck did not come

out of cover the way they had in rainy weather; it was necessary to search
and drive them out. Carnivores seemed to have become scarcer. But the first
real indication of peculiar seasonal habits of native fauna came from a very
minor carnivore. Mick Mahmud returned to camp with a badly chewed
foot; Bob Baxter patched him up and asked about it.

“You wouldn’t believe it.”
“Try me.”
“Well, it was just a dopy joe. I paid no attention to it, of course. Next

thing I knew I was flat on my back and trying to shake it loose. He did all
that to me before I got a knife into him. Then I had to cut his jaws loose.”

“Lucky you didn’t bleed to death.”
When Rod heard Mick’s story, he told Roy. Having had one experience

with a dopy joe turned aggressive, Roy took it seriously and had Cliff warn
all hands to watch out; they seemed to have turned nasty.

Three days later the migration of animals started.
At first it was just a drifting which appeared aimless except that it was

always downstream. Animals had long since ceased to use the watering
place above the settlement and buck rarely appeared in the little valley; now
they began drifting into it, would find themselves baffled by the thorn
fence, and would scramble out. Nor was it confined to antelope types;
wingless birds with great “false faces,” rodents, rooters, types nameless to
humans, all joined the migration. One of the monstrous leonine predators
they called stobor approached the barricade in broad daylight, looked at it,
lashed his tail, then clawed his way up the bluff and headed downstream
again.

game walked into camp.

left his seat near the barbecue pit and went over to Jimmy and Jacqueline.
“What’s the matter with this place? It’s spooky.”

Jimmy twitched his shoulders. “I feel it. Maybe it’s the funny way the

animals are acting. Say, did you hear they killed a joe inside camp?”

“I know what it is,” Jacqueline said suddenly. “No ‘Grand Opera.’”
“Grand Opera” was Jimmy’s name for the creatures with the awful

noises, the ones which had turned Rod’s first night into a siege of terror.
They serenaded every evening for the first hour of darkness. Rod’s mind
had long since blanked them out, heeded them no more than chorusing
cicadas. He had not consciously heard them for weeks.

Now they failed to wail on time; it upset him.
He grinned sheepishly. “That’s it, Jack. Funny how you get used to a

thing. Do you suppose they are on strike?”

in voice tomorrow.”

Rod had trouble getting to sleep. When the night watch gave an alarm

he was up and out of bachelors’ barracks at once, Colonel Bowie in hand.
“What’s up?”

Arthur Nielsen had the watch. “It’s all right now,” he answered

nervously. “A big buffalo buck crashed the fence. And this got through.” He
indicated the carcass of a dopy joe.

“You’re bleeding.”
“Just a nip.”
Others gathered around. Cowper pushed through, sized the situation

and said, “Waxie, get that cut attended to. Bill…where’s Bill? Bill, put
somebody else on watch. And let’s get that gap fixed as soon as it’s light.”

It was greying in the east. Margery suggested, “We might as well stay

up and have breakfast. I’ll get the fire going.” She left to borrow flame from
a watch fire.

Rod peered through the damaged barricade. A big buck was down on

the far side and seemed to have at least six dopy joes clinging to it. Cliff
was there and said quietly, “See a way to get at them?”

“Only with a gun.”

“We can’t waste ammo on that.”
“No.” Rod thought about it, then went to a pile of bamboo poles, cut

for building. He selected a stout one a head shorter than himself, sat down
and began to bind Lady Macbeth to it with rawhide, forming a crude pike
spear.

Caroline came over and squatted down. “What are you doing?”
“Making a joe-killer.”
She watched him. “I’m going to make me one,” she said suddenly and

jumped up.

By daylight the animals were in full flight downstream as if chased by

forest fire. As the creek had shrunk with the dry season a miniature beach,
from a meter to a couple of meters wide, had been exposed below the bank
on which the town had grown. The thorn kraal had been extended to cover
the gap, but the excited animals crushed through this weak point and now
streamed along the water past the camp.

After a futile effort no attempt was made to turn them back. They were

pouring into the valley; they had to go somewhere, and the route between
water and bank made a safety valve. It kept them from shoving the
barricade aside by sheer mass. The smallest animals came through it
anyhow, kept going, paid no attention to humans.

Rod stayed at the barricade, ate breakfast standing up. He had killed

six joes since dawn while Caroline’s score was still higher. Others were
making knives into spears and joining them. The dopy joes were not
coming through in great numbers; most of them continued to chase buck
along the lower route past camp. Those who did seep through were speared;
meeting them with a knife gave away too much advantage.

Cowper and Kennedy, inspecting defenses, stopped by Rod; they

looked worried. “Rod,” said Grant “how long is this going to last?”

him, Shorty! It looks as if the joes were driving the others, but I don’t think
they are. I think they’ve all gone crazy.”

“But what would cause that?” demanded Kennedy.
“Don’t ask me. But I think I know where all those bones on that beach

came from. But don’t ask why. Why does a chicken cross the road? Why do
lemmings do what they do? What makes a plague of locusts? Behind you!
Jump!”

“Better detail somebody to chuck these into the water, Bill, before they
stink. Look, Grant, we’re okay now, but I know what I would do.”

“What? Move to your caves? Rod, you were right—but it’s too late.”
“No, no! That’s spilt milk; forget it. The thing that scares me are these

mean little devils. They are no longer dopy; they are fast as can be and
nasty…and they can slide through the fence. We can handle them now—but
how about when it gets dark? We’ve got to have a solid line of fire inside
the fence and along the bank. Fire is one thing they can’t go through… I
hope.”

frowned.

“You bet it will. But it will get us through the night. See here, give me

the ax and six men with spears. I’ll lead the party.”

Kennedy shook his head. “It’s my job.”
“No, Bill,” Cowper said firmly. “I’ll lead it. You stay here and take

care of the town.”

led one each. They tried to pick lulls in the spate of animals but Bill’s party
was caught on the bluff above, where it had been cutting wood and
throwing it down past the cave. They were treed for two hours. The little
valley had been cleaned out of dead wood months since; it was necessary to
go into the forest above to find wood that would burn.

Cliff Pawley, hunter-in-chief, led a fifth party in the late afternoon,

immediately broke the handle of the little ax. They returned with what they
could gather with knives. While they were away one of the giant buck they
called buffalo stampeded off the bluff, fell into camp, broke its neck. Four
dopy joes were clinging to it. They were easy to kill as they would not let
go.

Jimmy and Rod were on pike duty at the barricade. Jimmy glanced

back at where a couple of girls were disposing of the carcasses. “Rod,” he
said thoughtfully, “we got it wrong. Those are stobor…the real stobor.”

“Huh?”
“The big babies we’ve been calling that aren’t ‘stobor.’ These things

are what the Deacon warned us against.”

your toes, boy; here they come again.”

Cowper ordered fires laid just before dark and was studying how to

arrange one stretch so as not to endanger the flume when the matter was
settled; the structure quivered and water ceased to flow. Upstream
something had crashed into it and broken the flimsy pipe line.

The town had long since abandoned waterskins. Now they were caught

with only a few liters in a pot used by the cooks, but it was a hardship rather
than a danger; the urgent need was to get a ring of fire around them. There
had already been half a dozen casualties—no deaths but bites and slashings,
almost all from the little carnivores contemptuously known as dopy joes.
The community’s pool of antiseptics, depleted by months of use and utterly
irreplaceable, had sunk so low that Bob Baxter used it only on major
wounds.

When fuel had been stretched ready to burn in a long arc inside the

barricade and down the bank to where it curved back under the cave, the
results of a hard day’s work looked small; the stockpile was not much
greater than the amount already spread out. Bill Kennedy looked at it. “It
won’t last the night, Grant.”

“It’s got to, Bill. Light it.”
“If we pulled back from the fence and the bank, then cut over to the

bluff—What do you think?”

Cowper tried to figure what might be saved by the change. “It’s not

much shorter. Uh, don’t light the downstream end unless they start curving
back in on us. But let’s move; it’s getting dark.” He hurried to the cooking
fire, got a brand and started setting the chain of fire. Kennedy helped and
soon the townsite was surrounded on the exposed sides by blaze. Cowper
chucked his torch into the fire and said, “Bill, better split the men into two
watches and get the women up into the cave—they can crowd in somehow.”

“You’ll have trouble getting thirty-odd women in there, Grant.”
“They can sit up all night. But send them up. Yes, and the wounded

men, too.”

“Can do.” Kennedy started passing the word. Caroline came storming

up, spear in hand.

“Grant, what’s this nonsense about the girls having to go up to the

cave? If you think you’re going to cut me out of the fun you had better

think again!”

Cowper looked at her wearily. “Carol, I haven’t time to monkey. Shut

your face and do as you are told.”

Caroline opened her mouth, closed it, and did as she was told. Bob

Baxter claimed Cowper’s attention; Rod noticed that he looked very upset.
“Grant? You ordered all the women up to the cave?”

“Yes.”
“I’m sorry but Carmen can’t.”
“You’ll have to carry her. She is the one I had most on my mind when I

decided on the move.”

“But—” Baxter stopped and urged Grant away from the others. He

spoke insistently but quietly. Grant shook his head.

“It’s not safe, Grant,” Baxter went on, raising his voice. “I don’t dare

risk it. The interval is nineteen minutes now.”

“Well…all right. Leave a couple of women with her. Use Caroline,

will you? That’ll keep her out of my hair.”

“Okay.” Baxter hurried away.
Kennedy took the first watch with a dozen men spread out along the

fire line; Rod was on the second watch commanded by Cliff Pawley. He
went to the Baxter house to find out how Carmen was doing, was told to
beat it by Agnes. He then went to the bachelors’ shed and tried to sleep.

at least five meters long go bounding through the camp and disappear
downstream. It had jumped the barrier, the stakes behind it, and the fire
behind that, all in one leap.

Rod called out, “Anybody hurt?”
Shorty Dumont answered. “No. It didn’t even stop to wave.” Shorty

was bleeding from a slash in his left calf; he seemed unaware of it. Rod
crawled back inside tried again to sleep.

He was awakened again by the building shaking. He hurried out.

“What’s up?”

“That you, Rod? I didn’t know anybody was inside. Give me a hand;

we’re going to burn it.” The voice was Baxter’s; he was prying at a corner
post and cutting rawhide strips that held it.

Rod put his spear where it would not be stepped on, resheathed

Colonel Bowie, and started to help. The building was bamboo and leaves,

with a mud-and-thatch roof; most of it would burn. “How’s Carmen?”

“Okay. Normal progress. I can do more good here. Besides they don’t

want me.” Baxter brought the corner of the shed down with a crash,
gathered a double armful of wreckage and hurried away. Rod picked up a
load and followed him.

The reserve wood pile was gone; somebody was tearing the roof off

the “city hall” and banging pieces on the ground to shake clay loose. The
walls were sunbaked bricks, but the roof would burn. Rod came closer, saw
that it was Cowper who was destroying this symbol of the sovereign
community. He worked with the fury of anger. “Let me do that, Grant. Have
you had any rest?”

“Huh? No.”
“Better get some. It’s going to be a long night. What time is it?”
“I don’t know. Midnight, maybe.” Fire blazed up and Cowper faced it,

wiping his face with his hand. “Rod, take charge of the second watch and
relieve Bill. Cliff got clawed and I sent him up.”

“Okay. Burn everything that will burn—right?”
“Everything but the roof of the Baxter house. But don’t use it up too

fast; it’s got to last till morning.”

“Got it.” Rod hurried to the fire line, found Kennedy. “Okay, Bill, I’ll

take over—Grant’s orders. Get some sleep. Anything getting through?”

firelight. “I’m not going to sleep, Rod. Find yourself a spot and help out.”

Rod shook his head. “You’re groggy. Beat it. Grant’s orders.”
“No!”
“Well…look, take your gang and tear down the old maids’ shack.

That’ll give you a change, at least.”

“Uh—all right.” Kennedy left, almost staggering. There was a lull in

the onrush of animals; Rod could see none beyond the barricade. It gave
him time to sort out his crew, send away those who had been on duty since
sunset, send for stragglers. He delegated Doug Sanders and Mick Mahmud
as firetenders, passed the word that no one else was to put fuel on the fires.

He returned from his inspection to find Bob Baxter, spear in hand,

holding his place at the center of the line. Rod put a hand on his shoulder.
“The medical officer doesn’t need to fight. We aren’t that bad off.”

Baxter shrugged. “I’ve got my kit, what there is left of it. This is where

I use it.”

“Haven’t you enough worries?”
Baxter grinned wanly. “Better than walking the floor. Rod, they’re

stirring again. Hadn’t we better build up the fires?”

“Mmm…not if we’re going to make it last. I don’t think they can come

through that.”

Baxter did not answer, as a joe came through at that instant. It

ploughed through the smouldering fire and Baxter speared it. Rod cupped
his hands and shouted, “Build up the fires! But go easy.”

“Behind you, Rod!”
Rod jumped and whirled, got the little devil. “Where did that one come

from? I didn’t see it.”

Before Bob could answer Caroline came running out of darkness.

“Bob! Bob Baxter! I’ve got to find Bob Baxter!”

“Over here!” Rod called.
Baxter was hardly able to speak. “Is she—is she?” His face screwed up

in anguish.

“No, no!” yelled Caroline. “She’s all right, she’s fine. It’s a girl!”
Baxter quietly fainted, his spear falling to the ground. Caroline

grabbed him and kept him from falling into the fire. He opened his eyes and
said, “Sorry. You scared me. You’re sure Carmen is all right?”

“Right as rain. The baby, too. About three kilos. Here, give me that

sticker—Carmen wants you.”

Baxter stumbled away and Caroline took his place. She grinned at

Rod. “I feel swell! How’s business, Roddie? Brisk? I feel like getting me
eight or nine of these vermin.”

Cowper came up a few minutes later. Caroline called out, “Grant, did

you hear the good news?”

“Yes. I just came from there.” He ignored Caroline’s presence at the

guard line but said to Rod, “We’re making a stretcher out of pieces of the
flume and they’re going to haul Carmen up. Then they’ll throw the stretcher
down and you can burn it.”

“Good.”
“Agnes is taking the baby up. Rod, what’s the very most we can crowd

into the cave?”

edge now.”

all married men and the youngest boys. The bachelors will hold on here.”

“I’m a bachelor!” Caroline interrupted.
Cowper ignored her. “As soon as Carmen is safe we do it—we can’t

keep fires going much longer.” He turned away, headed up to the cave.

Caroline whistled softly. “Roddie, we’re going to have fun.”
“Not my idea of fun. Hold the fort, Carol. I’ve got to line things up.”

He moved down the line, telling each one to go or to stay.

Jimmy scowled at him. “I won’t go, not as long as anybody stays. I

couldn’t look Jackie in the face.”

“You’ll button your lip and do as Grant says—or I’ll give you a

mouthful of teeth. Hear me?”

“I hear you. I don’t like it.”
“You don’t have to like it, just do it. Seen Jackie? How is she?”
“I snuck up a while ago. She’s all right, just queasy. But the news

about Carmen makes her feel so good she doesn’t care.”

Rod used no age limit to determine who was expendable. With the

elimination of married men, wounded, and all women he had little choice;
he simply told those whom he considered too young or not too skilled that
they were to leave when word was passed. It left him with half a dozen,
plus himself, Cowper, and—possibly—Caroline. Trying to persuade
Caroline was a task he had postponed.

He returned and found Cowper. “Carmen’s gone up,” Cowper told

him. “You can send the others up now.”

“Then we can burn the roof of the Baxter house.”
“I tore it down while they were hoisting her.” Cowper looked around.

“Carol! Get on up.”

She set her feet. “I won’t!”
Rod said softly, “Carol, you heard him. Go up—right now!”
She scowled, stuck out her lip, then said, “All right for you, Roddie

Walker!”—turned and fled up the path.

Rod cupped his hands and shouted, “All right, everybody! All hands

up but those I told to stay. Hurry!”

“Hey! Take it slow! Somebody will get pushed over the edge if you don’t
quit shoving.”

The queue stopped. Jimmy called out, “Everybody exhale. That’ll do

it.”

Somebody called back, “Throw Jimmy off…that will do it.” The line

moved again, slowly. In ten minutes they accomplished the sardine-packing
problem of fitting nearly seventy people into a space comfortable for not
more than a dozen. It could not even be standing room since a man could
stand erect only on the outer shelf. The girls were shoved inside, sitting or
squatting, jammed so that they hardly had air to breathe. The men farthest
out could stand but were in danger of stepping off the edge in the dark, or of
being elbowed off.

up the path, came back in a few minutes. “Crowded as the bottom of a
sack,” he said. “Here’s the plan. They can scrunch back farther if they have
to. It will be uncomfortable for the wounded and Carmen may have to sit up
—she’s lying down—but it can be done. When the fires die out, we’ll
shoehorn the rest in. With spears poking out under the overhang at the top
of the path we ought to be able to hold out until daylight. Check me?”

“Sounds as good as can be managed.”
“All right. When the time comes, you go up next to last, I go up last.”
“Unh… I’ll match you.”
Cowper answered with surprising vulgarity and added, “I’m boss; I go

last. We’ll make the rounds and pile anything left on the fires, then gather
them all here. You take the bank, I take the fence.”

It did not take long to put the remnants on the fires, then they gathered

around the path and waited—Roy, Kenny, Doug, Dick, Charlie, Howard,
and Rod and Grant. Another wave of senseless migration was rolling but
the fires held it, bypassed it around by the water.

were only glowing coals in spots. He looked for signs of daylight in the
east. Howard Goldstein said, “One broke through at the far end.”

“Hold it, Goldie,” Cowper said. “We won’t bother it unless it comes

here.” Rod shifted his spear back to his right hand.

get through, but worse, it was hard to see them, so little light did the embers
give off. Cowper turned to Rod and said, “All right, everybody up. You
tally them.” Then he shouted, “Bill! Agnes! Make room, I’m sending them
up.”

Rod threw a glance at the fence, then turned. “Okay, Kenny first. Doug

next, don’t crowd. Goldie and then Dick. Who’s left? Roy—” He turned,
uneasily aware that something had changed.

Grant was no longer behind him. Rod spotted him bending over a

dying fire. “Hey, Grant!”

“Be right with you.” Cowper selected a stick from the embers, waved

it into flame. He hopped over the coals, picked his way through sharpened
stakes, reached the thornbush barrier, shoved his torch into it. The dry
branches flared up. He moved slowly away, picking his way through the
stake trap.

“I’ll help you!” Rod shouted. “I’ll fire the other end.”
Cowper turned and light from the burning thorn showed his stern,

bearded face. “Stay back. Get the others up. That’s an order!”

The movement upward had stopped. Rod snarled, “Get on up, you

lunkheads! Move!” He jabbed with the butt of his spear, then turned around.

Cowper had set the fire in a new place. He straightened up, about to

move farther down, suddenly turned and jumped over the dying line of fire.
He stopped and jabbed at something in the darkness…then screamed.

“Grant!” Rod jumped down, ran toward him. But Grant was down

before he reached him, down with a joe worrying each leg and more
coming. Rod thrust at one, jerked his spear out, and jabbed at the other,
trying not to stab Grant. He felt one grab his leg and wondered that it did
not hurt.

Then it did hurt, terribly, and he realized that he was down and his

spear was not in his hand. But his hand found his knife without asking;
Colonel Bowie finished off the beast clamped to his ankle.

Everything seemed geared to nightmare slowness. Other figures were

thrusting leisurely at shapes that hardly crawled. The thornbush, flaming
high, gave him light to see and stab a dopy joe creeping toward him. He got
it, rolled over and tried to get up.

his left leg hurt. He looked down and saw a compress of leaves wrapped
with a neat hide bandage. He was in the cave and there were others lying
parallel to him. He got to one elbow. “Say, what—”

“Sssh!” Sue Kennedy crawled over and knelt by him. “The baby is

asleep.”

“Oh…”
“I’m on nurse duty. Want anything?”
“I guess not. Uh, what did they name her?”
“Hope. Hope Roberta Baxter. A pretty name. I’ll tell Caroline you are

awake.” She turned away.

Caroline came in, squatted and looked scornfully at his ankle. “That’ll

teach you to have a party and not invite me.”

“I guess so. Carol, what’s the situation?”
“Six on the sick list. About twice that many walking wounded. Those

not hurt are gathering wood and cutting thorn. We fixed the ax.”

“Yes, but…we’re not having to fight them off?”
“Didn’t Sue tell you? A few buck walking around as if they were

dazed. That’s all.”

“They may start again.”
“If they do, we’ll be ready.”
“Good.” He tried to raise up. “Where’s Grant? How bad was he hurt?”
She shook her head. “Grant didn’t make it, Roddie.”
“Huh?”
“Bob took off both legs at the knee and would have taken off one arm,

but he died while he was operating.” She made a very final gesture. “In the
creek.”

Rod started to speak, turned his head and buried his face. Caroline put

a hand on him. “Don’t take it hard, Roddie. Bob shouldn’t have tried to
save him. Grant is better off.”

Rod decided that Carol was right—no frozen limb banks on this

planet. But it did not make him feel better. “We didn’t appreciate him,” he
muttered.

“Stow it!” Caroline whispered fiercely. “He was a fool.”
“Huh? Carol, I’m ashamed of you.”

was a fool, Roddie Walker. Most of us knew…but we loved him anyhow. I
would’uv married him, but he never asked me.” She wiped at tears. “Have
you seen the baby?”

“No.”
Her face lit up. “I’ll fetch her. She’s beautiful.”
“Sue said she was asleep.”
“Well…all right. But what I came up for is this: what do you want us

to do?”

“Huh?” He tried to think. Grant was dead. “Bill was his deputy. Is Bill

laid up?”

“Didn’t Sue tell you?”
“Tell me what?”
“You’re the mayor. We elected you this morning. Bill and Roy and I

are just trying to hold things together.”

Rod felt dizzy. Caroline’s face kept drawing back, then swooping in;

he wondered if he were going to faint.

“—plenty of wood,” she was saying, “and we’ll have the kraal built by

sundown. We don’t need meat; Margery is butchering that big fellow that
fell off the bluff and busted his neck. We can’t trek out until you and
Carmen and the others can walk, so we’re trying to get the place back into
shape temporarily. Is there anything you want us to do now?”

He considered it. “No. Not now.”
“Okay. You’re supposed to rest.” She backed out, stood up. “I’ll look

in later.” Rod eased his leg and turned over. After a while he quieted and
went to sleep.

Sue brought broth in a bowl, held his head while he drank, then

fetched Hope Baxter and held her for him to see. Rod said the usual
inanities, wondering if all new babies looked that way.

Then he thought for a long time.
Caroline showed up with Roy. “How’s it going, Chief?” Roy said.
“Ready to bite a rattlesnake.”
“That’s a nasty foot, but it ought to heal. We boiled the leaves and Bob

used sulfa.”

“Feels all right. I don’t seem feverish.”

anything, Roddie? Or to tell us anything?”

“Yes.”
“What?”
“Get me out of here. Help me down the path.”
Roy said hastily, “Hey, you can’t do that. You’re not in shape.”
“Can’t I? Either help, or get out of my way. And get everybody

together. We’re going to have a town meeting.”

They looked at each other and walked out on him. He had made it to

the squeeze at the top when Baxter showed up. “Now, Rod! Get back and
lie down.”

“Out of my way.”
“Listen, boy, I don’t like to get rough with a sick man. But I will if you

make me.”

“Bob…how bad is my ankle?”
“It’s going to be all right…if you behave. If you don’t—well, have you

ever seen gangrene? When it turns black and has that sweetish odor?”

“Quit trying to scare me. Is there any reason not to put a line under my

arms and lower me?”

“Well…”
They used two lines and a third to keep his injured leg free, with

Baxter supervising. They caught him at the bottom and carried him to the
cooking space, laid him down. “Thanks,” he grunted. “Everybody here who
can get here?”

“I think so, Roddie. Shall I count?”
“Never mind. I understand you folks elected me cap—I mean

‘mayor’—this morning?”

“That’s right,” agreed Kennedy.
“Uh, who else was up? How many votes did I get?”
“Huh? It was unanimous.”
Rod sighed. “Thanks. I’m not sure I would have held still for it if I’d

been here. I gathered something else. Do I understand that you expect me to
take you down to the caves Roy and I found? Caroline said something…”

Roy looked surprised. “We didn’t vote it, Rod, but that was the idea.

After last night everybody knows we can’t stay here.”

Rod nodded. “I see. Are you all where I can see you? I’ve got

something to say. I hear you adopted a constitution and things while Roy
and I were away. I’ve never read them, so I don’t know whether this is legal
or not. But if I’m stuck with the job, I expect to run things. If somebody
doesn’t like what I do and we’re both stubborn enough for a showdown,
then you will vote. You back me up, or you turn me down and elect
somebody else. Will that work? How about it, Goldie? You were on the law
committee, weren’t you?”

Howard Goldstein frowned. “You don’t express it very well, Rod.”
“Probably not. Well?”
“But what you have described is the parliamentary vote-of-confidence.

That’s the backbone of our constitution. We did it that way to keep it simple
and still democratic. It was Grant’s notion.”

“I’m glad,” Rod said soberly. “I’d hate to think that I had torn up

Grant’s laws after he worked so hard on them. I’ll study them, I promise,
first chance I get. But about moving to the caves—we’ll have a vote of
confidence right now.”

Goldstein smiled. “I can tell you how it will come out. We’re

convinced.”

Rod slapped the ground. “You don’t understand! If you want to move,

move…but get somebody else to lead you. Roy can do it. Or Cliff, or Bill.
But if you leave it to me, no dirty little beasts, all teeth and no brains, are
going to drive us out. We’re men…and men don’t have to be driven out, not
by the likes of those. Grant paid for this land—and I say stay here and keep
it for him!”

Civilization

THE HONORABLE RODERICK L. WALKER, Mayor of Cowpertown, Chief of
State of the sovereign planet GO-73901-II (Lima Catalog), Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces, Chief Justice, and Defender of Freedoms, was
taking his ease in front of the Mayor’s Palace. He was also scratching and
wondering if he should ask somebody to cut his hair again—he suspected
lice…only this planet did not have lice.

His Chief of Government, Miss Caroline Beatrice Mshiyeni, squatted

in front of him. “Roddie, I’ve told them and told them and told them…and
it does no good. That family makes more filth than everybody else put
together. You should have seen it this morning. Garbage in front of their
door…flies!”

“I saw it.”
“Well, what do I do? If you would let me rough him up a little. But

you’re too soft.”

“I guess I am.” Rod looked thoughtfully at a slab of slate erected in the

village square. It read:

To the Memory of

ULYSSES GRANT COWPER,

First Mayor

—who died for his city

The carving was not good; Rod had done it.
“Grant told me once,” he added, “that government was the art of

getting along with people you don’t like.”

“Well, I sure don’t like Bruce and Theo!”
“Neither do I. But Grant would have figured out a way to keep them in

line without getting rough.”

come back. That was bad enough. But when he married that little…well!”

have married either of them.”

“It’s no joke. It’s almost—Hope! Quit teasing Grantie!” She bounced

up.

Miss Hope Roberta Baxter, sixteen months, and Master Grant

Roderick Throxton, thirteen months, stopped what they were doing, which
was, respectively, slapping and crying. Both were naked and very dirty. It
was “clean” dirt; each child had been bathed by Caroline an hour earlier,
and both were fat and healthy.

Hope turned up a beaming face. “’Ood babee!” she asserted.
“I saw you.” Caroline upended her, gave her a spat that would not

squash a fly, then picked up Grant Throxton.

“Give her to me,” Rod said.
“You’re welcome to her,” Caroline said. She sat down with the boy in

her lap and rocked him. “Poor baby! Show Auntie Carol where it hurts.”

“You shouldn’t talk like that. You’ll make a sissy of him.”
“Look who’s talking! Wishy-Washy Walker.”
Hope threw her arms around Rod, part way, and cooed, “Woddie!”

adding a muddy kiss. He returned it. He considered her deplorably spoiled;
nevertheless he contributed more than his share of spoiling.

“Sure,” agreed Carol. “Everybody loves Uncle Roddie. He hands out

the medals and Aunt Carol does the dirty work.”

“Carol, I’ve been thinking.”
“Warm day. Don’t strain any delicate parts.”
“About Bruce and Theo. I’ll talk to them.”
“Talk!”
“The only real punishment is one we never use—and I hope we never

have to. Kicking people out, I mean. The McGowans do as they please
because they don’t think we would. But I would love to give them the old
heave-ho…and if it comes to it, I’ll make an issue of it before the town—
either kick them out or I quit.”

“They’d back you. Why, I bet he hasn’t taken a bath this week!”
“I don’t care whether they back me or not. I’ve ridden out seven

confidence votes; someday I’ll be lucky and retire. But the problem is to

convince Bruce that I am willing to face the issue, for then I won’t have to.
Nobody is going to chance being turned out in the woods, not when they’ve
got it soft here. But he’s got to be convinced.”

“Uh, maybe if he thought you were carrying a grudge about that slice

in the ribs he gave you?”

“And maybe I am. But I can’t let it be personal, Carol; I’m too stinkin’

proud.”

“Uh… Turn it around. Convince him that the town is chompin’ at the

bit—which isn’t far wrong—and you are trying to restrain them.”

“Um, that’s closer. Yes, I think Grant would have gone for that. I’ll

think it over.”

bath. I declare I don’t know where they find so much dirt.”

She swung away with a child on each hip, heading for the shower

sheds. Rod watched her lazily. She was wearing a leather bandeau and a
Maori grass skirt, long leaves scraped in a pattern, curled, and dried. It was
a style much favored and Caroline wore it around town, although when she
treated herself to a day’s hunting she wore a leather breechclout such as the
men wore.

The same leaf fibre could be retted and crushed, combed and spun, but

the cloth as yet possessed by the colony was not even enough for baby
clothes. Bill Kennedy had whittled a loom for Sue and it worked, but
neither well nor fast and the width of cloth was under a half meter. Still,
Rod mused, it was progress, it was civilization. They had come a long way.

The town was stobor-tight now. An adobe wall too high and sheer for

any but the giant lions covered the upstream side and the bank, and any lion
silly enough to jump it landed on a bed of stakes too wide now for even
their mighty leaps—the awning under which Rod lolled was the hide of one
that had made that mistake. The wall was pierced by stobor traps, narrow
tunnels just big enough for the vicious little beasts and which gave into
deep pits, where they could chew on each other like Kilkenny cats—which
they did.

It might have been easier to divert them around the town, but Rod

wanted to kill them; he would not be content until their planet was rid of
those vermin.

nickname “dopy joe” except during the dry season and then they did not
become dangerous until the annual berserk migration—the last of which
had passed without loss of blood; the colony’s defenses worked, now that
they understood what to defend against. Rod had required mothers and
children to sit out the stampede in the cave; the rest sat up two nights and
stayed on guard…but no blade was wet.

Rod thought sleepily that the next thing they needed was paper; Grant

had been right…even a village was hard to run without writing paper.
Besides, they must avoid losing the habit of writing. He wanted to follow
up Grant’s notion of recording every bit of knowledge the gang possessed.
Take logarithms—logarithms might not be used for generations, but when it
came time to log a couple of rhythms, then…he went to sleep.

“You busy, Chief?”
Rod looked up at Arthur Nielsen. “Just sleeping…a practice I heartily

recommend on a warm Sabbath afternoon. What’s up, Art? Are Shorty and
Doug pushing the bellows alone?”

ruined.” Nielsen sat down wearily. He was hot, very red in the face, and
looked discouraged. He had a bad burn on a forearm but did not seem to
know it. “Rod, what are we doing wrong? Riddle me that.”

“Talk to one of the brains. If you didn’t know more about it than I do,

we’d swap jobs.”

“I wasn’t really asking. I know two things that are wrong. We can’t

build a big enough installation and we don’t have coal. Rod, we’ve got to
have coal; for cast iron or steel we need coal. Charcoal won’t do for
anything but spongy wrought iron.”

“What do you expect to accomplish overnight, Art? Miracles? You are

years ahead of what anybody could ask. You’ve turned out metal, whether
it’s wrought iron or uranium. Since you made that spit for the barbecue pit,
Margery thinks you are a genius.”

“Yes, yes, we’ve made iron—but it ought to be lots better and more of

it. This ore is wonderful…the real Lake Superior hematite. Nobody’s seen
such ore in commercial quantity on Terra in centuries. You ought to be able
to breathe on it and make steel. And I could, too, if I had coal. We’ve got

clay, we’ve got limestone, we’ve got this lovely ore—but I can’t get a hot
enough fire.”

But Waxie was upset. “Want to knock off and search for coal?”

“Uh…no, I don’t. I want to rebuild that furnace.” Nielsen gave a bitter

description of the furnace’s origin, habits, and destination.

“Who knows most about geology?”
“Uh, I suppose I do.”
“Who knows next most?”
“Why, Doug I guess.”
“Let’s send him out with a couple of boys to find coal. You can have

Mick in his place on the bellows—no, wait a minute. How about Bruce?”

“Bruce? He won’t work.”
“Work him. If you work him so hard he runs away and forgets to come

back, we won’t miss him. Take him, Art, as a favor to me.”

“Well…okay, if you say so.”
“Good. You get one bonus out of losing your batch. You won’t miss

the dance tonight. Art, you shouldn’t start a melt so late in the week; you
need your day of rest…and so do Shorty and Doug.”

“I know. But when it’s ready to go I want to fire it off. Working the

way we do is discouraging; before you can make anything you have to
make the thing that makes it—and usually you have to make something else
to make that. Futile!”

“You don’t know what ‘futile’ means. Ask our ‘Department of

Agriculture.’ Did you take a look at the farm before you came over the
wall?”

“Well, we walked through it.”
“Better not let Cliff catch you, or he’ll scalp you. I might hold you for

him.”

“Humph! A lot of silly grass! Thousands of hectares around just like

it.”

“That’s right. Some grass and a few rows of weeds. The pity is that

Cliff will never live to see it anything else. Nor little Cliff. Nevertheless our
great grandchildren will eat white bread, Art. But you yourself will live to
build precision machinery—you know it can be done, which, as Bob Baxter

says, is two-thirds of the battle. Cliff can’t live long enough to eat a slice of
light, tasty bread. It doesn’t stop him.”

“You should have been a preacher, Rod.” Art stood up and sniffed

himself. “I’d better get a bath, or the girls won’t dance with me.”

“I was just quoting. You’ve heard it before. Save me some soap.”

Caroline hit two bars of Arkansas Traveler, Jimmy slapped his drum,

and Roy called, “Square ’em up, folks!” He waited, then started in high,
nasal tones:

“Honor y’r partners!
“Honor y’r corners!
“Now all jump up and when y’ come down—”
Rod was not dancing; the alternate set would be his turn. The colony

formed eight squares, too many for a caller, a mouth organ, and a primitive
drum all unassisted by amplifying equipment. So half of them babysat and
gossiped while the other half danced. The caller and the orchestra were
relieved at each intermission to dance the other sets.

Most of them had not known how to square-dance. Agnes

Pulvermacher had put it over almost single-handed, in the face of kidding
and resistance—training callers, training dancers, humming tunes to
Caroline, cajoling Jimmy to carve and shrink a jungle drum. Now she had
nine out of ten dancing.

Rod had not appreciated it at first (he was not familiar with the history

of the Mormon pioneers) and had regarded it as a nuisance which interfered
with work. Then he saw the colony, which had experienced a bad letdown
after the loss in one night of all they had built, an apathy he had not been
able to lift—he saw this same colony begin to smile and joke and work hard
simply from being exposed to music and dancing.

He decided to encourage it. He had trouble keeping time and could not

carry a tune, but the bug caught him, too; he danced not well but with great
enthusiasm.

The village eventually limited dances to Sabbath nights, weddings, and

holidays—and made them “formal”…which meant that women wore grass
skirts. Leather shorts, breechclouts, and slacks (those not long since cut up
for rags) were not acceptable. Sue talked about making a real square dance
dress as soon as she got far enough ahead in her weaving, and a cowboy

shirt for her husband…but the needs of the colony made this a distant
dream.

Shorty, and came over. “Come on, Roddie, let’s kick some dust.”

“I asked Sue,” he said hastily and truthfully. He was careful not to ask

the same girl twice, never to pay marked attention to any female; he had
promised himself long ago that the day he decided to marry should be the
day he resigned and he was not finding it hard to stay married to his job. He
liked to dance with Caroline; she was a popular partner—except for a
tendency to swing her partner instead of letting him swing her—but he was
careful not to spend much social time with her because she was his right
hand, his alter ego.

Rod went over and offered his arm to Sue. He did not think about it;

the stylized amenities of civilization were returning and the formal
politenesses of the dance made them seem natural. He led her out and
assisted in making a botch of Texas Star.

Later, tired, happy, and convinced that the others in his square had

made the mistakes and he had straightened them out, Rod returned Sue to
Bill, bowed and thanked him, and went back to the place that was always
left for him. Margery and her assistants were passing out little brown
somethings on wooden skewers. He accepted one. “Smells good, Marge.
What are they?”

“Mock Nile birds. Smoked baby-buck bacon wrapped around

hamburger. Salt and native sage, pan broiled. You’d better like it; it took us
hours.”

“Mmmm! I do! How about another?”
“Wait and see. Greedy.”
“But I need more. I work hardest. I have to keep up my strength.”
“That was work I saw you doing this afternoon?” She handed him

another.

“I was planning. The old brain was buzzing away.”
“I heard the buzzing. Pretty loud, when you lie on your back.”
He snagged a third as she turned away, looked up to catch Jacqueline

smiling; he winked and grinned.

“Happy, Rod?”
“Yes indeedy. How about you, Jackie?”

“I’ve never been happier,” she said seriously.
Her husband put an arm around her. “See what the love of a good man

can do, Rod?” Jimmy said. “When I found this poor child she was beaten,
bedraggled, doing your cooking and afraid to admit her name. Now look at
her!—fat and sassy.”

“I’m not that fat!”
“Pleasingly plump.”
Rod glanced up at the cave. “Jackie, remember the night I showed

up?”

“I’m not likely to forget.”
“And the silly notion I had that this was Africa? Tell me—if you had it

to do over, would you rather I had been right?”

“I never thought about it. I knew it was not.”
“Yes, but ‘if’? You would have been home long ago.”
Her hand took her husband’s. “I would not have met James.”
“Oh, yes, you would. You had already met me. You could not have

avoided it—my best friend.”

“Possibly. But I would not change it. I have no yearning to go ‘home,’

Rod. This is home.”

“Me neither,” asserted Jimmy. “You know what? This colony gets a

little bigger—and it’s getting bigger fast—Goldie and I are going to open a
law office. We won’t have any competition and can pick our clients. He’ll
handle the criminal end, I’ll specialize in divorce, and we’ll collaborate on
corporate skulduggery. We’ll make millions. I’ll drive a big limousine
drawn by eight spanking buck, smoking a big cigar and sneering at the
peasants.” He called out, “Right, Goldie?”

“Precisely, colleague. I’m making us a shingle: ‘Goldstein & Throxton

—Get bailed, not jailed!’”

“Keerect. But make that: ‘Throxton & Goldstein.’”
“I’m senior. I’ve got two more years of law.”
“A quibble. Rod, are you going to let this Teller U. character insult an

old Patrick Henry man?”

“Probably. Jimmy, I don’t see how you are going to work this. I don’t

think we have a divorce law. Let’s ask Caroline.”

“A trifle. You perform the marriages, Rod; I’ll take care of the

divorces.”

“Ask Caroline what?” asked Caroline.
“Do we have a divorce law?”
“Huh? We don’t even have a getting-married law.”
“Unnecessary,” explained Goldstein. “Indigenous in the culture.

Besides, we ran out of paper.”

“Correct, Counselor,” agreed Jimmy.
“Why ask?” Caroline demanded. “Nobody is thinking about divorce or

I would know before they would.”

“We weren’t talking about that,” Rod explained. “Jackie said that she

had no wish to go back to Terra and Jimmy was elaborating. Uselessly, as
usual.”

Caroline stared. “Why would anybody want to go back?”
“Sure,” agreed Jimmy. “This is the place. No income tax. No traffic,

no crowds, no commercials, no telephones. Seriously, Rod, every one here
was aiming for the Outlands or we wouldn’t have been taking a survival
test. So what difference does it make? Except that we’ve got everything
sooner.” He squeezed his wife’s hand. “I was fooling about that big cigar;
I’m rich now, boy, rich!”

Agnes and Curt had drawn into the circle, listening. Agnes nodded and

said, “For once you aren’t joking, Jimmy. The first months we were here I
cried myself to sleep every night, wondering if they would ever find us.
Now I know they never will—and I don’t care! I wouldn’t go back if I
could; the only thing I miss is lipstick.”

Her husband’s laugh boomed out. “There you have the truth, Rod. The

fleshpots of Egypt…put a cosmetics counter across this creek and every
woman here will walk on water.”

“That’s not fair, Curt! Anyhow, you promised to make lipstick.”
“Give me time.”
Bob Baxter came up and sat down by Rod. “Missed you at the meeting

this morning, Rod.”

“Tied up. I’ll make it next week.”
“Good.” Bob, being of a sect which did not require ordination, had

made himself chaplain as well as medical officer simply by starting to hold
meetings. His un-dogmatic ways were such that Christian, Jew, Monist, or
Moslem felt at ease; his meetings were well attended.

“Bob, would you go back?”

“Go where, Caroline?”
“Back to Terra.”
“Yes.”
Jimmy looked horrified. “Boil me for breakfast! Why?”
“Oh, I’d want to come back! But I need to graduate from medical

school.” He smiled shyly. “I may be the best surgeon in the neighborhood,
but that isn’t saying much.”

“Well…” admitted Jimmy, “I see your point. But you already suit us.

Eh, Jackie?”

“Yes, Jimmy.”
“It’s my only regret,” Bob went on. “I’ve lost ones I should have

saved. But it’s a hypothetical question. ‘Here we rest.’”

The question spread. Jimmy’s attitude was overwhelmingly popular,

even though Bob’s motives were respected. Rod said goodnight; he heard
them still batting it around after he had gone to bed; it caused him to discuss
it with himself.

he had not thought of it for—how long?—over a year. At first it had been
mental hygiene, protection of his morale. Later it was logic: a delay in
recall of a week might be a power failure, a few weeks could be a technical
difficulty—but months on months was cosmic disaster; each day added a
cipher to the infinitesimal probability that they would ever be in touch
again.

He was now able to ask himself: was this what he wanted?
Jackie was right; this was home. Then he admitted that he liked being

big frog in a small puddle, he loved his job. He was not meant to be a
scientist, nor a scholar, he had never wanted to be a businessman—but what
he was doing suited him…and he seemed to do it well enough to get by.

“‘Here we rest!’”
He went to sleep in a warm glow.

Cliff wanted help with the experimental crops. Rod did not take it too

seriously; Cliff always wanted something; given his head he would have
everybody working dawn to dark on his farm. But it was well to find out
what he wanted—Rod did not underrate the importance of domesticating

plants; that was basic for all colonies and triply so for them. It was simply
that he did not know much about it.

Cliff stuck his head into the mayor’s hut. “Ready?”
“Sure.” Rod got his spear. It was no longer improvised but bore a point

patiently sharpened from steel salvaged from Braun’s Thunderbolt. Rod had
tried wrought iron but could not get it to hold an edge. “Let’s pick up a
couple of boys and get a few stobor.”

“Okay.”
Rod looked around. Jimmy was at his potter’s wheel, kicking the

treadle and shaping clay with his thumb. “Jim! Quit that and grab your pike.
We’re going to have some fun.”

Throxton wiped at sweat. “You’ve talked me into it.”
They added Kenny and Mick, then Cliff led them upstream. “I want

you to look at the animals.”

“All right,” agreed Rod. “Cliff, I had been meaning to speak to you. If

you are going to raise those brutes inside the wall, you’ll have to be careful
about their droppings. Carol has been muttering.”

“Rod, I can’t do everything! And you can’t put them outside, not if

you expect them to live.”

second!”

front of it, apparently asleep. Rod did not speak at once; he was fighting
down rage. He wrestled with himself, aware that the next moment could
change his future, damage the entire colony. But his rational self was
struggling in a torrent of anger, bitter and self-righteous. He wanted to do
away with this parasite, destroy it. He took a deep breath and tried to keep
his mouth from trembling.

“Bruce!” he called softly.
McGowan opened his eyes. “Huh?”
“Isn’t Art working his plant today?”
“Could be,” Bruce admitted.
“Well?”
“‘Well’ what? I’ve had a week and it’s not my dish. Get somebody

else.”

to be caught naked than without his knife. It was the all-purpose tool, for
cutting leather, preparing food, eating, whittling, building, basketmaking,
and as make-do for a thousand other tools; their wealth came from knives,
arrows were now used to hunt—but knives shaped the bows and arrows.

But a knife had not been used by one colonist against another since

that disastrous day when Bruce’s brother had defied Rod. Over the same
issue, Rod recalled; the wheel had turned full circle. But today he would
have immediate backing if Bruce reached for his knife.

But he knew that this must not be settled by five against one; he alone

must make this dog come to heel, or his days as leader were numbered.

It did not occur to Rod to challenge Bruce to settle it with bare hands.

Rod had read many a historical romance in which the hero invited someone
to settle it “man to man,” in a stylized imitation fighting called “boxing.”
Rod had enjoyed such stories but did not apply them to himself any more
than he considered personally the sword play of The Three Musketeers;
nevertheless, he knew what “boxing” meant—they folded their hands and
struck certain restricted blows with fists. Usually no one was hurt.

The fighting that Rod was trained in was not simply strenuous

athletics. It did not matter whether they were armed; if he and Bruce fought
bare hands or otherwise, someone would be killed or badly hurt. The only
dangerous weapon was man himself.

Bruce stared sullenly. “Bruce,” Rod said, striving to keep his voice

steady, “a long time ago I told you that people worked around here or got
out. You and your brother didn’t believe me so we had to chuck you out.
Then you crawled back with a tale about how Jock had been killed and
could you please join up? You were a sorry sight. Remember?”

McGowan scowled. “You promised to be a little angel,” Rod went on.

“People thought I was foolish—and I was. But I thought you might
behave.”

was always throwing his weight around, too.”

“Bruce, get up and get out of town! I don’t care where, but if you are

smart, you will shag over and tell Art you’ve made a mistake—then start
pumping that bellows. I’ll stop by later. If sweat isn’t pouring off you when
I arrive…then you’ll never come back. You’ll be banished for life.”

McGowan looked uncertain. He glanced past Rod, and Rod wondered

what expressions the others wore. But Rod kept his eyes on Bruce. “Get
moving. Get to work, or don’t come back.”

Bruce got a sly look. “You can’t order me kicked out. It takes a

majority vote.”

Jimmy spoke up. “Aw, quit taking his guff, Rod. Kick him out now.”
Rod shook his head. “No. Bruce, if that is your answer, I’ll call them

together and we’ll put you in exile before lunch—and I’ll bet my best knife
that you won’t get three votes to let you stay. Want to bet?”

Bruce sat up and looked at the others, sizing his chances. He looked

back at Rod. “Runt,” he said slowly, “you aren’t worth a hoot without
stooges…or a couple of girls to do your fighting.”

it was too late for reason, too late for talk. He would have to try to take
him…he was not sure he could.

“I’ll fight you,” he said hoarsely. “Right now!”
Cliff said urgently, “Don’t, Rod. We’ll manage him.”
“No. Come on, McGowan.” Rod added one unforgivable word.
McGowan did not move. “Get rid of that joe sticker.”
Rod said, “Hold my spear, Cliff.”
Cliff snapped, “Now wait! I’m not going to stand by and watch this.

He might get lucky and kill you, Rod.”

“Get out of the way, Cliff.”
“No.” Cliff hesitated, then added, “Bruce, throw your knife away. Go

ahead—or so help me I’ll poke a joe-sticker in your belly myself. Give me
your knife, Rod.”

Bruce straightened up and flipped his knife at Cliff’s feet. Cliff rasped, “I
still say not to, Rod. Say the word and we’ll take him apart.”

“Back off. Give us room.”
“Well—no bone breakers. You hear me, Bruce? Make a mistake and

you’ll never make another.”

would work against him; Bruce had him on height and reach and weight.

“Okay,” McGowan agreed. “Just cat clawing. I am going to show this

rube that one McGowan is worth two of him.”

Cliff sighed. “Back off, everybody. Okay—get going!”
Crouched, they sashayed around, not touching. Only the preliminaries

could use up much time; the textbook used in most high schools and
colleges listed twenty-seven ways to destroy or disable a man hand to hand;
none of the methods took as long as three seconds once contact was made.
They chopped at each other, feinting with their hands, too wary to close.

Rod was confused by the injunction not to let the fight go to

conclusion. Bruce grinned at him. “What’s the matter? Scared? I’ve been
waiting for this, you loudmouthed pimple—now you’re going to get it!” He
rushed him.

Rod gave back, ready to turn Bruce’s rush into his undoing. But Bruce

did not carry it through; it had been a feint and Rod had reacted too
strongly. Bruce laughed. “Scared silly, huh? You had better be.”

Rod realized that he was scared, more scared than he had ever been.

The conviction flooded over him that Bruce intended to kill him…the
agreement about bonebreakers meant nothing; this ape meant to finish him.

He backed away, more confused than ever…knowing that he must

forget rules if he was to live through it…but knowing, too, that he had to
abide by the silly restriction even if it meant the end of him. Panic shook
him; he wanted to run.

He did not quite do so. From despair itself he got a cold feeling of

nothing to lose and decided to finish it. He exposed his groin to a savate
attack.

He saw Bruce’s foot come up in the expected kick; with fierce joy he

reached in the proper shinobi counter. He showed the merest of hesitation,
knowing that a full twist would break Bruce’s ankle.

Then he was flying through air; his hands had never touched Bruce. He

had time for sick realization that Bruce had seen the gambit, countered with
another—when he struck ground and Bruce was on him.

“Can you move your arm, Rod?”
He tried to focus his eyes, and saw Bob Baxter’s face floating over

him. “I licked him?”

Baxter did not answer. An angry voice answered, “Cripes, no! He

almost chewed you to pieces.”

Rod stirred and said thickly, “Where is he? I’ve got to whip him.”

fixed him.” Baxter insisted, “Shut up. See if you can move your left arm.”

everywhere. “It’s not broken,” Baxter decided. “Maybe a green-stick break.
We’ll put it in sling. Can you sit up? I’ll help.”

“I want to stand.” He made it with help, stood swaying. Most of the

villagers seemed to be there; they moved jerkily. It made him dizzy and he
blinked.

“Take it easy, boy,” he heard Jimmy say. “Bruce pretty near ruined

you. You were crazy to give him the chance.”

“I’m all right,” Rod answered and winced. “Where is he?”
“Behind you. Don’t worry, we fixed him.”
“Yes,” agreed Cliff. “We worked him over. Who does he think he is?

Trying to shove the Mayor around!” He spat angrily.

Bruce was face down, features hidden in one arm; he was sobbing.

“How bad is he hurt?” Rod asked.

“Him?” Jimmy said scornfully. “He’s not hurt. I mean, he hurts all

right—but he’s not hurt. Carol wouldn’t let us.”

Caroline squatted beside Bruce, guarding him. She got up. “I should

have let ’em,” she said angrily. “But I knew you would be mad at me if I
did.” She put hands on hips. “Roddie Walker, when are you going to get
sense enough to yell for me when you’re in trouble? These four dopes stood
around and let it happen.”

“Wait a minute, Carol,” Cliff protested. “I tried to stop it. We all tried,

but—”

“But I wouldn’t listen,” Rod interrupted. “Never mind, Carol, I flubbed

it.”

“If you would listen to me—”
“Never mind!” Rod went to McGowan, prodded him. “Turn over.”
Bruce slowly rolled over. Rod wondered if he himself looked as bad.

Bruce’s body was dirt and blood and bruises; his face looked as if someone
had tried to file the features off. “Stand up.”

Bruce started to speak, then got painfully to his feet. Rod said, “I told

you to report to Art, Bruce. Get over the wall and get moving.”

McGowan looked startled. “Huh?”

and get to work. Or keep moving and don’t come back. Now move!”

back to work, folks. The fun is over. Cliff, you were going to show me the
animals.”

“Huh? Look Rod, it’ll keep.”
“Yes, Rod,” Baxter agreed. “I want to put a sling on that arm. Then

you should rest.”

Rod moved his arm gingerly. “I’ll try to get along without it. Come on,

Cliff. Just you and me—we’ll skip the stobor hunt.”

He had trouble concentrating on what Cliff talked about…something

about gelding a pair of fawns and getting them used to harness. What use
was harness when they had no wagons? His head ached, his arm hurt and
his brain felt fuzzy. What would Grant have done? He had failed…but what
should he have said, or not said? Some days it wasn’t worth it.

“—so we’ve got to. You see, Rod?”
“Huh? Sure, Cliff.” He made a great effort to recall what Cliff had

been saying. “Maybe wooden axles would do. I’ll see if Bill thinks he can
build a cart.”

“But besides a cart, we need—”
Rod stopped him. “Cliff, if you say so, we’ll try it. I think I’ll take a

shower. Uh, we’ll look at the field tomorrow.”

A shower made him feel better and much cleaner, although the water

spilling milk-warm from the flume seemed too hot, then icy cold. He
stumbled back to his hut and lay down. When he woke he found Shorty
guarding his door to keep him from being disturbed.

It was three days before he felt up to inspecting the farm. Nielsen

reported that McGowan was working, although sullenly. Caroline reported
that Theo was obeying sanitary regulations and wearing a black eye. Rod
was self-conscious about appearing in public, had even considered one
restless night the advisability of resigning and letting someone who had not
lost face take over the responsibility. But to his surprise his position seemed
firmer than ever. A minority from Teller University, which he had thought
of wryly as “loyal opposition,” now no longer seemed disposed to be
critical. Curt Pulvermacher, their unofficial leader, looked Rod up and

offered help. “Bruce is a bad apple, Rod. Don’t let him get down wind
again. Let me know instead.”

“Thanks, Curt.”
“I mean it. It’s hard enough to get anywhere around here if we all pull

together. We can’t have him riding roughshod over us. But don’t stick your
chin out. We’ll teach him.”

Rod slept well that night. Perhaps he had not handled it as Grant would

have, but it had worked out. Cowpertown was safe. Oh, there would be
more troubles but the colony would sweat through them. Someday there
would be a city here and this would be Cowper Square. Upstream would be
the Nielsen Steel Works. There might even be a Walker Avenue…

He felt up to looking over the farm the next day. He told Cliff so and

gathered the same party, Jimmy, Kent, and Mick. Spears in hand they
climbed the stile at the wall and descended the ladder on the far side. Cliff
gathered up a handful of dirt, tasted it. “The soil is all right. A little acid,
maybe. We won’t know until we can run soil chemistry tests. But the
structure is good. If you tell that dumb Swede that the next thing he has to
make is a plough…”

“Waxie isn’t dumb. Give him time. Hell make you ploughs and

tractors, too.”

“I’ll settle for a hand plough, drawn by a team of buck. Rod, my notion

is this. We weed and it’s an invitation to the buck to eat the crops. If we
built another wall, all around and just as high—”

“A wall! Any idea how many man-hours that would take, Cliff?”
“That’s not the point.”
Rod looked around the alluvial flat, several times as large as the land

enclosed in the city walls. A thorn fence, possibly, but not a wall, not yet…
Cliff’s ambitions were too big. “Look, let’s comb the field for stobor, then
send the others back. You and I can figure out afterwards what can be
done.”

“All right. But tell them to watch where they put their big feet.”
Rod spread them in skirmish line with himself in the center. “Keep

dressed up,” he warned, “and don’t let any get past you. Remember, every
one we kill now means six less on S-Day.”

They moved forward. Kenny made a kill, Jimmy immediately made

two more. The stobor hardly tried to escape, being in the “dopy joe” phase

of their cycle.

Rod paused to spear one and looked up to speak to the man on his

right. But there was no one there. “Hold it! Where’s Mick?”

“Huh? Why, he was right here a second ago.”
Rod looked back. Aside from a shimmer over the hot field, there was

nothing where Mick should have been. Something must have sneaked up in
the grass, pulled him down—“Watch it, everybody! Something’s wrong.
Close in…and keep your eyes peeled.” He turned back, moved diagonally
toward where Mick had disappeared.

Suddenly two figures appeared in front of his eyes—Mick and a

stranger.

A stranger in coveralls and shoes… The man looked around, called

over his shoulder, “Okay, Jake! Put her on automatic and clamp it.” He
glanced toward Rod but did not seem to see him, walked toward him, and
disappeared.

With heart pounding Rod began to run. He turned and found himself

facing into an open gate…and down a long, closed corridor.

off,” he ordered. “We’re going to match in with the Gap. There may be
local disturbance.”

In Achilles’ Tent

IT HAD BEEN A HALF HOUR SINCE MICK HAD STUMBLED through the gate as it
had focused, fallen flat in the low gravity of Luna. Rod was trying to bring
order out of confusion, trying to piece together his own wits. Most of the
villagers were out on the field, or sitting on top of the wall, watching
technicians set up apparatus to turn the locus into a permanent gate, with
controls and communications on both sides. Rod tried to tell one that they
were exposed, that they should not run around unarmed; without looking up
the man had said, “Speak to Mr. Johnson.”

He found Mr. Johnson, tried again, was interrupted. “Will you kids

please let us work? We’re glad to see you—but we’ve got to get a power
fence around this area. No telling what might be in that tall grass.”

“Oh,” Rod answered. “Look, I’ll set guards. We know what to expect.

I’m in ch—”

“Beat it, will you? You kids mustn’t be impatient.”
So Rod went back inside his city, hurt and angry. Several strangers

came in, poked around as if they owned the place, spoke to the excited
villagers, went out again. One stopped to look at Jimmy’s drum, rapped it
and laughed. Rod wanted to strangle him.

“Rod?”
“Uh?” He whirled around. “Yes, Margery?”
“Do I cook lunch, or don’t I? All my girls have left and Mel says its

silly because we’ll all be gone by lunch time—and I don’t know what to
do.”

“Huh? Nobody’s leaving…that I know of.”
“Well, maybe not but that’s the talk.”
He was not given time to consider this as one of the ubiquitous

strangers came up and said briskly, “Can you tell me where to find a lad
named Roderick Welker?”

“Walker,” Rod corrected. “I’m Rod Walker. What do you want?”

“My name is Sansom, Clyde B. Sansom—Administrative Officer in

the Emigration Control Service. Now, Welker, I understand you are group
leader for these students. You can—”

“I am Mayor of Cowpertown,” Rod said stonily. “What do you want?”
“Yes, yes, that’s what the youngster called you. ‘Mayor.’” Sansom

smiled briefly and went on. “Now, Walker, we want to keep things orderly. I
know you are anxious to get out of your predicament as quickly as possible
—but we must do things systematically. We are going to make it easy—just
delousing and physical examination, followed by psychological tests and a
relocation interview. Then you will all be free to return to your homes—
after signing a waiver-of-liability form, but the legal officer will take care of
that. If you will have your little band line up alphabetically—uh, here in this
open space, I think, then I will—” He fumbled with his briefcase.

“Who the deuce are you to give orders around here?”
Sansom looked surprised. “Eh? I told you. If you want to be technical,

I embody the authority of the Terran Corporation. I put it as a request—but
under field conditions I can compel co-operation, you know.”

Rod felt himself turn red. “I don’t know anything of the sort! You may

be a squad of angels back on Terra but you are in Cowpertown.”

Mr. Sansom looked interested but not impressed. “And what, may I

ask, is Cowpertown?”

“Huh? This is Cowpertown, a Sovereign nation, with its own

constitution, its own laws—and its own territory.” Rod took a breath. “If the
Terran Corporation wants anything, they can send somebody and arrange it.
But don’t tell us to line up alphabetically!”

“Atta boy, Roddie!”
Rod said, “Stick around, Carol,” then added to Sansom, “Understand

me?”

“Do I understand,” Sansom said slowly, “that you are suggesting that

the Corporation should appoint an ambassador to your group?”

“Well…that’s the general idea.”
“Mmmm…an interesting theory, Welker.”
“‘Walker.’ And until you do, you can darn well clear the sightseers out

—and get out yourself. We aren’t a zoo.”

smiled. Rod said, “Show him out, Carol. Put him out, if you have to.”

“Yes, sir!” She advanced on Sansom, grinning.
“Oh, I’m leaving,” Sansom said quickly. “Better a delay than a mistake

in protocol. An ingenious theory, young man. Good-by. We shall see each
other later. Uh…a word of advice? May I?”

“Huh? All right.”
“Don’t take yourself too seriously. Ready, young lady?”
Rod stayed in his hut. He wanted badly to see what was going on

beyond the wall, but he did not want to run into Sansom. So he sat and
gnawed his thumb and thought. Apparently some weak sisters were going
back—wave a dish of ice cream under their noses and off they would trot,
abandoning their land, throwing away all they had built up. Well, he
wouldn’t! This was home, his place, he had earned it; he wasn’t going back
and maybe wait half a lifetime for a chance to move to some other planet
probably not as good.

Let them go! Cowpertown would be better and stronger without them.
Maybe some just wanted to make a visit, show off grandchildren to

grandparents, then come back. Probably…in which case they had better
make sure that Sansom or somebody gave them written clearance to come
back. Maybe he ought to warn them.

But he didn’t have anyone to visit. Except Sis—and Sis might be

anywhere—unlikely that she was on Terra.

Bob and Carmen, carrying Hope, came in to say good-by. Rod shook

hands solemnly. “You’re coming back, Bob, when you get your degree…
aren’t you?”

“Well, we hope so, if possible. If we are permitted to.”
“Who’s going to stop you? It’s your right. And when you do, you’ll

find us here. In the meantime we’ll try not to break legs.”

Baxter hesitated. “Have you been to the gate lately, Rod?”
“No. Why?”
“Uh, don’t plan too far ahead. I believe some have already gone back.”
“How many?”
“Quite a number.” Bob would not commit himself further. He gave

Rod the addresses of his parents and Carmen’s, soberly wished him a
blessing, and left.

care, he was not hungry. Jimmy came in at what should have been shortly

after lunch, nodded and sat down. Presently he said, “I’ve been out at the
gate.”

“So?”
“Yup. You know, Rod, a lot of people wondered why you weren’t there

to say good-by.”

“They could come here to say good-by!”
“Yes, so they could. But the word got around that you didn’t approve.

Maybe they were embarrassed.”

“Me?” Rod laughed without mirth. “I don’t care how many city boys

run home to mama. It’s a free country.” He glanced at Jim. “How many are
sticking?”

“Uh, I don’t know.”
“I’ve been thinking. If the group gets small, we might move back to

the cave just to sleep, I mean. Until we get more colonists.”

“Maybe.”
“Don’t be so glum! Even if it got down to just you and me and Jackie

and Carol, we’d be no worse off than we once were. And it would just be
temporary. There’d be the baby, of course—I almost forgot to mention my
godson.”

“There’s the baby,” Jimmy agreed.
“What are you pulling a long face about? Jim…you’re not thinking of

leaving?”

Jimmy stood up. “Jackie said to tell you that we would stick by

whatever you thought was best.”

Rod thought over what Jimmy had not said. “You mean she wants to

go back? Both of you do.”

“Now, Rod, we’re partners. But I’ve got the kid to think about. You see

that?”

“Yes. I see.”
“Well—”
Rod stuck out his hand. “Good luck, Jim. Tell Jackie good-by for me.”
“Oh, she’s waiting to say good-by herself. With the kid.”
“Uh, tell her not to. Somebody once told me that saying good-by was a

mistake. Be seeing you.”

“Well—so long, Rod. Take care of yourself.”
“You, too. If you see Caroline, tell her to come in.”

He said bluntly, “How many are left?”

“Not many,” she admitted.
“How many?”
“You and me—and a bunch of gawkers.”
“Nobody else?”
“I checked them off the list. Roddie, what do we do now?”
“Huh? It doesn’t matter. Do you want to go back?”
“You’re boss, Roddie. You’re the Mayor.”
“Mayor of what? Carol, do you want to go back?”
“Roddie, I never thought about it. I was happy here. But—”
“But what?”
“The town is gone, the kids are gone—and I’ve got only a year if I’m

ever going to be a cadet Amazon.” She blurted out the last, then added,
“But I’ll stick if you do.”

“No.”
“I will so!”
“No. But I want you to do something when you go back.”
“What?”
“Get in touch with my sister Helen. Find out where she is stationed.

Assault Captain Helen Walker—got it? Tell her I’m okay…and tell her I
said to help you get into the Corps.”

“Uh… Roddie, I don’t want to go!”
“Beat it. They might relax the gate and leave you behind.”
“You come, too.”
“No. I’ve got things to do. But you hurry. Don’t say good-by. Just go.”
“You’re mad at me, Roddie?”
“Of course not. But go, please, or you’ll have me bawling, too.”
She gave a choked cry, grabbed his head and smacked his cheek, then

galloped away, her sturdy legs pounding. Rod went into his shack and lay
face down. After a while he got up and began to tidy Cowpertown. It was
littered, dirtier than it had been since the morning of Grant’s death.

It was late afternoon before anyone else came into the village. Rod

heard and saw them long before they saw him—two men and a woman. The
men were dressed in city garb; she was wearing shorts, shirt, and smart

sandals. Rod stepped out and said, “What do you want?” He was carrying
his spear.

The woman squealed, then looked and added, “Wonderful!”
One man was carrying a pack and tripod which Rod recognized as

multi-recorder of the all-purpose sight-smell-sound-touch sort used by news
services and expeditions. He said nothing, set his tripod down, plugged in
cables and started fiddling with dials. The other man, smaller, ginger haired,
and with a terrier mustache, said, “You’re Walker? The one the others call
‘the Mayor’?”

“Yes.”
“Kosmic hasn’t been in here?”
“Cosmic what?”
“Kosmic Keynotes, of course. Or anybody? LIFE-TIME-SPACE?

Galaxy Features?”

“I don’t know what you mean. There hasn’t been anybody here since

morning.”

The stranger twitched his mustache and sighed. “That’s all I want to

know. Go into your trance, Ellie. Start your box, Mac.”

“Wait a minute,” Rod demanded. “Who are you and what do you

want?”

“Eh? I’m Evans of Empire… Empire Enterprises.”
“Pulitzer Prize,” the other man said and went on working;
“With Mac’s help,” Evans added quickly. “The lady is Ellie Ellens

herself.”

Rod looked puzzled. Evans said, “You don’t know? Son, where have

you—never mind. She’s the highest paid emotional writer in the system.
She’ll interpret you so that every woman reader from the Outlands
Overseer to the London Times will cry over you and want to comfort you.
She’s a great artist.”

Miss Ellens did not seem to hear the tribute. She wandered around

with a blank face, stopping occasionally to look or touch.

She turned and said to Rod, “Is this where you held your primitive

dances?”

“What? We held square dances here, once a week.”
“‘Square dances’… Well, we can change that.” She went back into her

private world.

“The point is, brother,” Evans went on, “we don’t want just an

interview. Plenty of that as they came through. That’s how we found out
you were here—and dropped everything to see you. I’m not going to dicker;
name your own price—but it’s got to be exclusive, news, features,
commercial rights, everything. Uh…” Evans looked around. “Advisory
service, too, when the actors arrive.”

“Actors?!”
“Of course. If the Control Service had the sense to sneeze, they would

have held you all here until a record was shot. But we can do it better with
actors. I want you at my elbow every minute—we’ll have somebody play
your part. Besides that—”

“Wait a minute!” Rod butted in. “Either I’m crazy or you are. In the

first place I don’t want your money.”

“Huh? You signed with somebody? That guard let another outfit in

ahead of us?”

“What guard? I haven’t seen anybody.”
Evans looked relieved. “We’ll work it out. The guard they’ve got to

keep anybody from crossing your wall—I thought he might have both
hands out. But don’t say you don’t need money; that’s immoral.”

“Well, I don’t. We don’t use money here.”
“Sure, sure…but you’ve got a family, haven’t you? Families always

need money. Look, let’s not fuss. We’ll treat you right and you can let it pile
up in the bank. I just want you to get signed up.”

“I don’t see why I should.”
“Binder,” said Mac.
“Mmm…yes, Mac. See here, brother, think it over. Just let us have a

binder that you won’t sign with anybody else. You can still stick us for
anything your conscience will let you. Just a binder, with a thousand
plutons on the side.”

“I’m not going to sign with anybody else.”
“Got that, Mac?”
“Canned.”
Evans turned to Rod. “You don’t object to answering questions in the

meantime, do you? And maybe a few pictures?”

“Uh, I don’t care.” Rod was finding them puzzling and a little

annoying, but they were company and he was bitterly lonely.

himself telling more than he realized he knew. At one point Evans asked
about dangerous animals. “I understand they are pretty rough here. Much
trouble?”

“Why, no,” Rod answered with sincerity. “We never had real trouble

with animals. What trouble we had was with people…and not much of
that.”

“You figure this will be a premium colony?”
“Of course. The others were fools to leave. This place is like Terra,

only safer and richer and plenty of land. In a few years—say!”

“Say what?”
“How did it happen that they left us here? We were only supposed to

be here ten days.”

“Didn’t they tell you?”
“Well…maybe the others were told. I never heard.”
“It was the supernova, of course. Delta, uh—”
“Delta Gamma one thirteen,” supplied Mac.
“That’s it. Space-time distortion, but I’m no mathematician.”
“Fluxion,” said Mac.
“Whatever that is. They’ve been fishing for you ever since. As I

understand it, the wave front messed up their figures for this whole region.
Incidentally, brother, when you go back—”

“I’m not going back.”
“Well, even on a visit. Don’t sign a waiver. The Board is trying to call

it an ‘Act of God’ and duck responsibility. So let me put a bug in your ear:
don’t sign away your rights. A friendly hint, huh?”

“Thanks. I won’t—well, thanks anyhow.”
“Now how about action pix for the lead stories?”
“Well…okay.”
“Spear,” said Mac.
“Yeah, I believe you had some sort of spear. Mind holding it?”
Rod got it as the great Ellie joined them. “Wonderful!” she breathed. “I

can feel it. It shows how thin the line is between man and beast. A hundred
cultured boys and girls slipping back to illiteracy, back to the stone age, the
veneer sloughing away…reverting to savagery. Glorious!”

We had laws, we had a constitution, we kept clean. We—” He stopped;
Miss Ellens wasn’t listening.

“Savage ceremonies,” she said dreamily. “A village witch doctor

pitting ignorance and superstition against nature. Primitive fertility rites—”
She stopped and said to Mac in a businesslike voice, “We’ll shoot the
dances three times. Cover ’em a little for ‘A’ list; cover ’em up a lot for the
family list—and peel them down for the ‘B’ list. Got it?”

“Got it,” agreed Mac.
“I’ll do three commentaries,” she added. “It will be worth the trouble.”

She reverted to her trance.

“Wait a minute!” Rod protested. “If she means what I think she means,

there won’t be any pictures, with or without actors.”

“Take it easy,” Evans advised. “I said you would be technical

supervisor, didn’t I? Or would you rather we did it without you? Ellie is all
right, brother. What you don’t know—and she does—is that you have to
shade the truth to get at the real truth, the underlying truth. You’ll see.”

“But—”
Mac stepped up to him. “Hold still.”
Rod did so, as Mac raised his hand. Rod felt the cool touch of an air

brush.

“Hey! What are you doing?”
“Make up.” Mac returned to his gear.
“Just a little war paint,” Evans explained. “The pic needs color. It will

wash off.”

Rod opened his mouth and eyes in utter indignation; without knowing

it he raised his spear. “Get it, Mac!” Evans ordered.

“Got it,” Mac answered calmly.
Rod fought to bring his anger down to where he could talk. “Take that

tape out,” he said softly. “Throw it on the ground. Then get out.”

“Slow down,” Evans advised. “You’ll like that pic. We’ll send you

one.”

He aimed his spear at the multiple lens.

Mac slipped in front, protected it with his body. Evans called out,

“Better look at this.”

of funny places, brother, but we go prepared. You damage that recorder, or
hurt one of us, and you’ll be sued from here to breakfast. It’s a serious
matter to interfere with a news service, brother. The public has rights, you
know.” He raised his voice. “Ellie! We’re leaving.”

“Not yet,” she answered dreamily. “I must steep myself in—”
“Right now! It’s an ‘eight-six’ with the Reuben Steuben!”
“Okay!” she snapped in her other voice.
Rod let them go. Once they were over the wall he went back to the city

hall, sat down, held his knees and shook.

Later he climbed the stile and looked around. A guard was on duty

below him; the guard looked up but said nothing. The gate was relaxed to a
mere control hole but a loading platform had been set up and a power fence
surrounded it and joined the wall. Someone was working at a control board
set up on a flatbed truck; Rod decided that they must be getting ready for
major immigration. He went back and prepared a solitary meal, the poorest
he had eaten in more than a year. Then he went to bed and listened to the
jungle “Grand Opera” until he went to sleep.

“Anybody home?”
Rod came awake instantly, realized that it was morning—and that not

all nightmares were dreams. “Who’s there?”

“Friend of yours.” B. P. Matson stuck his head in the door. “Put that

whittler away. I’m harmless.”

Rod bounced up. “Deacon! I mean ‘Doctor.’”
“‘Deacon,’” Matson corrected. “I’ve got a visitor for you.” He stepped

aside and Rod saw his sister.

Some moments later Matson said mildly, “If you two can unwind and

blow your noses, we might get this on a coherent basis.”

Rod backed off and looked at his sister. “My, you look wonderful,

Helen.” She was in mufti, dressed in a gay tabard and briefs. “You’ve lost
weight.”

“Not much. Better distributed, maybe. You’ve gained, Rod. My baby

brother is a man.”

“How did you—” Rod stopped, struck by suspicion. “You didn’t come

here to talk me into going back? If you did, you can save your breath.”

Matson answered hastily. “No, no, no! Farthest thought from our

minds. But we heard about your decision and we wanted to see you—so I
did a little politicking and got us a pass.” He added, “Nominally I’m a
temporary field agent for the service.”

“Oh. Well, I’m certainly glad to see you…as long as that is

understood.”

“Sure, sure!” Matson took out a pipe, stoked and fired it. “I admire

your choice, Rod. First time I’ve been on Tangaroa.”

“On what?”
“Huh? Oh. Tangaroa. Polynesian goddess, I believe. Did you folks

give it another name?”

Rod considered it. “To tell the truth, we never got around to it. It…

well, it just was.”

Matson nodded. “Takes two of anything before you need names. But

it’s lovely, Rod. I can see you made a lot of progress.”

jerked the rug out.” He shrugged. “Like to look around?”

“I surely would.”
“All right. Come on, Sis. Wait a minute—I haven’t had breakfast; how

about you?”

with a bite. Helen?”

“Yes, indeed.”
Rod scrounged in Margery’s supplies. The haunch on which he had

supped was not at its best. He passed it to Matson. “Too high?”

Matson sniffed it. “Pretty gamy. I can eat it if you can.”
“We should have hunted yesterday, but…things happened.” He

frowned. “Sit tight. I’ll get cured meat.” He ran up to the cave, found a
smoked side and some salted strips. When he got back Matson had a fire
going. There was nothing else to serve; no fruit had been gathered the day
before. Rod was uneasily aware that their breakfasts must have been very
different.

But he got over it in showing off how much they had done—potter’s

wheel, Sue’s loom with a piece half finished, the flume with the village
fountain and the showers that ran continuously, iron artifacts that Art and

Doug had hammered out. “I’d like to take you up to Art’s iron works but
there is no telling what we might run into.”

“Come now, Rod, I’m not a city boy. Nor is your sister helpless.”
Rod shook his head. “I know this country; you don’t. I can go up there

at a trot. But the only way for you would be a slow sneak, because I can’t
cover you both.”

Matson nodded. “You’re right. It seems odd to have one of my

students solicitous over my health. But you are right. We don’t know this
set up.”

Rod showed them the stobor traps and described the annual berserk

migration. “Stobor pour through those holes and fall in the pits. The other
animals swarm past, as solid as city traffic for hours.”

“Catastrophic adjustment,” Matson remarked.
“Huh? Oh, yes, we figured that out. Cyclic catastrophic balance, just

like human beings. If we had facilities, we could ship thousands of
carcasses back to Earth every dry season.” He considered it. “Maybe we
will, now.”

“Probably.”
“But up to now it has been just a troublesome nuisance. These stobor

especially—I’ll show you one out in the field when—say!” Rod looked
thoughtful. “These are stobor, aren’t they? Little carnivores heavy in front,
about the size of a tom cat and eight times as nasty?”

“Why ask me?”
“Well, you warned us against stobor. All the classes were warned.”
“I suppose these must be stobor,” Matson admitted, “but I did not

know what they looked like.”

“Huh?”
“Rod, every planet has its ‘stobor’…all different. Sometimes more

than one sort.” He stopped to tap his pipe. “You remember me telling the
class that every planet has unique dangers, different from every other planet
in the Galaxy?”

“Yes…”
“Sure, and it meant nothing, a mere intellectual concept. But you have

to be afraid of the thing behind the concept, if you are to stay alive. So we
personify it…but we don’t tell you what it is. We do it differently each year.

It is to warn you that the unknown and deadly can lurk anywhere…and to
plant it deep in your guts instead of in your head.”

“Well, I’ll be a—Then there weren’t any stobor! There never were!”
“Sure there were. You built these traps for them, didn’t you?”

When they returned, Matson sat on the ground and said, “We can’t stay

long, you know.”

“I realize that. Wait a moment.” Rod went into his hut, dug out Lady

Macbeth, rejoined them. “Here’s your knife, Sis. It saved my skin more
than once. Thanks.”

She took the knife and caressed it, then cradled it and looked past

Rod’s head. It flashed by him, went tuck-spong! in a corner post. She
recovered it, came back and handed it to Rod. “Keep it, dear, wear it always
in safety and health.”

“Gee, Sis, I shouldn’t. I’ve had it too long now.”
“Please. I’d like to know that Lady Macbeth is watching over you,

wherever you are. And I don’t need a knife much now.”

“Huh? Why not?”
“Because I married her,” Matson answered.
Rod was caught speechless. His sister looked at him and said, “What’s

the matter, Buddy? Don’t you approve?”

“Huh? Oh, sure! It’s…” He dug into his memory, fell back on quoted

ritual: “‘May the Principle make you one. May your union be fruitful.’”

“Then come here and kiss me.”
Rod did so, remembered to shake hands with the Deacon. It was all

right, he guessed, but—well, how old were they? Sis must be thirtyish and
the Deacon…why the Deacon was old—probably past forty.

It did not seem quite decent.
But he did his best to make them feel that he approved. After he

thought it over he decided that if two people, with their lives behind them,
wanted company in their old age, why, it was probably a good thing.

“So you see,” Matson went on, “I had a double reason to look you up.

In the first place, though I am no longer teaching, it is vexing to mislay an
entire class. In the second place, when one of them is your brother-in-law it
is downright embarrassing.”

“You’ve quit teaching?”

leading a party out…and this time your sister and I are going to settle down
and prove a farm.” Matson looked at him. “Wouldn’t be interested, would
you? I need a salted lieutenant.”

“Huh? Thanks, but as I told you, this is my place. Uh, where are you

going?”

“Territa, out toward the Hyades. Nice place—they are charging a stiff

premium.”

Rod shrugged. “Then I couldn’t afford it.”
“As my lieutenant, you’d be exempt. But I wasn’t twisting your arm; I

just thought you ought to have a chance to turn it down. I have to get along
with your sister, you know.”

Rod glanced at Helen. “Sorry, Sis.”
“It’s all right, Buddy. We’re not trying to live your life.”
“Mmm…no.” Matson puffed hard; then went on. “However, as your

putative brother and former teacher I feel obligated to mention a couple of
things. I’m not trying to sell you anything, but I’ll appreciate it if you’ll
listen. Okay?”

“Well…go ahead.”
“This is a good spot. But you might go back to school, you know.

Acquire recognized professional status. If you refuse recall, here you stay…
forever. You won’t see the rest of the Outlands. They won’t give you free
passage back later. But a professional gets around, he sees the world. Your
sister and I have been on some fifty planets. School does not look attractive
now—you’re a man and it will be hard to wear boy’s shoes. But—” Matson
swept an arm, encompassed all of Cowpertown, “—this counts. You can
skip courses, get field credit. I have some drag with the Chancellor of
Central Tech. Hmmm?”

briskly. “No harm done.”

“Wait. Let me tell you.” Rod tried to think how to explain how he

felt…“Nothing, I guess,” he said gruffly.

Matson smoked in silence. “You were leader here,” he said at last.
“Mayor,” Rod corrected. “Mayor of Cowpertown. I was the Mayor, I

mean.”

those bureaucrats in the control service wouldn’t dispute that you’ve proved
the land. Technically you are an autonomous colony—I hear you told
Sansom that.” Matson grinned. “You’re alone, however. You can’t live
alone, Rod…not and stay human.”

“Well, yes—but aren’t they going to settle this planet?”
“Sure. Probably fifty thousand this year, four times that many in two

years. But, Rod, you would be part of the mob. They’ll bring their own
leaders.”

“I don’t have to be boss! I just—well, I don’t want to give up

Cowpertown.”

“Rod, Cowpertown is safe in history, along with Plymouth Rock,

Botany Bay, and Dakin’s Colony. The citizens of Tangaroa will
undoubtedly preserve it as a historical shrine. Whether you stay is another
matter. Nor am I trying to persuade you. I was simply pointing out
alternatives.” He stood up. “About time we started, Helen.”

“Yes, dear.” She accepted his hand and stood up.
“Wait a minute!” insisted Rod. “Deacon… Sis! I know I sound like a

fool. I know this is gone…the town, and the kids, and everything. But I
can’t go back.” He added, “It’s not that I don’t want to.”

Matson nodded. “I understand you.”
“I don’t see how. I don’t.”
“Maybe I’ve been there. Rod, everyone of us is beset by two things: a

need to go home, and the impossibility of doing it. You are at the age when
these hurt worst. You’ve been thrown into a situation that makes the crisis
doubly acute. You—don’t interrupt me—you’ve been a man here, the old
man of the tribe, the bull of the herd. That is why the others could go back
but you can’t. Wait, please! I suggested that you might find it well to go
back and be an adolescent for a while…and it seems unbearable. I’m not
surprised. It would be easier to be a small child. Children are another race
and adults deal with them as such. But adolescents are neither adult nor
child. They have the impossible, unsolvable, tragic problems of all fringe
cultures. They don’t belong, they are second-class citizens, economically
and socially insecure. It is a difficult period and I don’t blame you for not
wanting to return to it. I simply think it might pay. But you have been king

of a whole world; I imagine that term papers and being told to wipe your
feet and such are out of the question. So good luck. Coming, dear?”

“Deacon,” his wife said, “Aren’t you going to tell him?”
“It has no bearing. It would be an unfair way to influence his

judgment.”

“You men! I’m glad I’m not male!”
“So am I,” Matson agreed pleasantly.
“I didn’t mean that. Men behave as if logic were stepping on crack in a

sidewalk. I’m going to tell him.”

“On your head be it.”
“Tell me what?” demanded Rod.
“She means,” said Matson, “that your parents are back.”
“What?”
“Yes, Buddy. They left stasis a week ago and Daddy came out of the

hospital today. He’s well. But we haven’t told him all about you—we
haven’t known what to say.”

The facts were simple, although Rod found them hard to soak up.

Medical techniques had developed in two years, not a pessimistic twenty; it
had been possible to relax the stasis, operate, and restore Mr. Walker to the
world. Helen had known for months that such outcome was likely, but their
father’s physician had not approved until he was sure. It had been mere
coincidence that Tangaroa had been located at almost the same time. To
Rod one event was as startling as the other; his parents had been dead to
him for a long time.

“My dear,” Matson said sternly, “now that you have thrown him into a

whingding, shall we go?”

“Yes. But I had to tell him.” Helen kissed Rod quickly, turned to her

husband. They started to walk away.

Rod watched them, his face contorted in an agony of indecision.
Suddenly he called out, “Wait! I’m coming with you.”
“All right,” Matson answered. He turned his good eye toward his wife

and drooped the lid in a look of satisfaction that was not quite a wink. “If
you are sure that is what you want to do, I’ll help you get your gear
together.”

“Oh, I haven’t any baggage. Let’s go.”
Rod stopped only long enough to free the penned animals.

The Endless Road

MATSON CHAPERONED HIM THROUGH EMIGRANTS’ GAP, saved from possible
injury a functionary who wanted to give Rod psychological tests, and saw
to it that he signed no waivers. He had him bathed, shaved, and barbered,
then fetched him clothes, before he let him be exposed to the Terran world.
Matson accompanied them only to Kaibab Gate. “I’m supposed to have a
lodge dinner, or something, so that you four can be alone as a family. About
nine, dear. See you, Rod.” He kissed his wife and left.

“Sis? Dad doesn’t know I’m coming?”
Helen hesitated. “He knows. I screened him while Deacon was

primping you.” She added, “Remember, Rod, Dad has been ill…and the
time has been only a couple of weeks to him.”

“Oh, that’s so, isn’t it?” Used all his life to Ramsbotham anomalies,

Rod nevertheless found those concerned with time confusing—planet-
hopping via the gates did not seem odd. Besides, he was extremely edgy
without knowing why, the truth being that he was having an attack of fear
of crowds. The Matsons had anticipated it but had not warned him lest they
make him worse.

The walk through tall trees just before reaching home calmed him. The

necessity for checking all cover for dangerous animals and keeping a tree
near him always in mind gave his subconscious something familiar to chew
on. He arrived home almost cheerful without being aware either that he had
been frightened by crowds or soothed by non-existent dangers of an urban
forest.

His father looked browned and healthy—but shorter and smaller. He

embraced his son and his mother kissed him and wept. “It’s good to have
you home, son. I understand you had quite a trip.”

“It’s good to be home, Dad.”
“I think these tests are much too strenuous, I really do.”

Rod started to explain that it really had not been a test, that it had not

been strenuous, and that Cowpertown—Tangaroa, rather—had been a soft
touch. But he got mixed up and was disturbed by the presence of “Aunt”
Nora Peascoat—no relation but a childhood friend of his mother. Besides,
his father was not listening.

But Mrs. Peascoat was listening, and looking—peering with little eyes

through folds of flesh. “Why, Roderick Walker, I knew that couldn’t have
been a picture of you.”

“Eh?” asked his father. “What picture?”
“Why, that wild-man picture that had Roddie’s name on it. You must

have seen it; it was on facsimile and Empire Hour both. I knew it wasn’t
him. I said to Joseph, ‘Joseph,’ I said, ‘that’s not a picture of Rod Walker—
its a fake.’”

“I must have missed it. As you know, I—”
“I’ll send it to you; I clipped it. I knew it was a fake. It’s a horrible

thing, a great naked savage with pointed teeth and a fiendish grin and a long
spear and war paint all over its ugly face. I said to Joseph—”

there was no picture of you on the news services, surely?”

“Uh, yes and no. Maybe.”
“I don’t follow you. Why should there be a picture of you?”
“There wasn’t any reason. This bloke just took it.”
“Then there was a picture?”
“Yes.” Rod saw that “Aunt” Nora was eyeing him avidly: “But it was a

fake—sort of.”

“I still don’t follow you.”
“Please, Pater,” Helen intervened. “Rod had a tiring trip. This can

wait.”

“Oh, surely. I don’t see how a picture can be ‘a sort of a fake.’”
“Well, Dad, this man painted my face when I wasn’t looking. I—” Rod

stopped, realizing that it sounded ridiculous.

“Then it was your picture?” “Aunt” Nora insisted.
“I’m not going to say any more.”
Mr. Walker blinked. “Perhaps that is best.”
“Aunt” Nora looked ruffled. “Well, I suppose anything can happen

some very strange things did happen…not all of them nice.”

She looked as if daring Rod to deny it. Rod said nothing. She went on,

“I don’t know what you were thinking of, letting a boy do such things. My
father always said that if the Almighty had intended us to use those gate
things instead of rocket ships He would have provided His own holes in the
sky.”

Helen said sharply, “Mrs. Peascoat, in what way is a rocket ship more

natural than a gate?”

“Why, Helen Walker! I’ve been ‘Aunt Nora’ all your life. ‘Mrs.

Peascoat’ indeed!”

Helen shrugged. “And my name is Matson, not Walker—as you

know.”

Peascoat to stay for dinner. Mr. Walker added, “Yes, Nora, join us Under the
Lamp.”

Rod counted to ten. But Mrs. Peascoat said she was sure they wanted

to be alone, they had so much to talk about…and his father did not insist.

Rod quieted during ritual, although he stumbled in responses and once

left an awkward silence. Dinner was wonderfully good, but he was
astonished by the small portions; Terra must be under severe rationing. But
everyone seemed happy and so he was.

“I’m sorry about this mix-up,” his father told him. “I suppose it means

that you will have to repeat a semester at Patrick Henry.”

“On the contrary, Pater,” Helen answered, “Deacon is sure that Rod

can enter Central Tech with advanced standing.”

“Really? They were more strict in my day.”
“All of that group will get special credit. What they learned cannot be

learned in classrooms.”

Seeing that his father was inclined to argue Rod changed the subject.

“Sis, that reminds me. I gave one of the girls your name, thinking you were
still in the Corps—she wants to be appointed cadet, you see. You can still
help her, can’t you?”

“I can advise her and perhaps coach her for the exams. Is this

important to you, Buddy?”

you, too, around genius, and always good-natured and willing—but strong
and fast and incredibly violent when you need it…sudden death in all
directions.”

“Roderick.” His father glanced at the lamp.
“Uh, sorry, Dad. I was just describing her.”
“Very well. Son…when did you start picking up your meat with your

fingers?”

Rod dropped the tidbit and blushed. “Excuse me. We didn’t have

forks.”

Helen chuckled. “Never mind, Rod. Pater, it’s perfectly natural.

Whenever we paid off any of our girls we always put them through
reorientation to prepare them for the perils of civil life. And fingers were
made before forks.”

“Mmm…no doubt. Speaking of reorientation, there is something we

must do, daughter, before this family will be organized again.”

“So?”
“Yes. I mean the transfer of guardianship. Now that I am well, by a

miracle, I must reassume my responsibilities.”

Rod’s mind slipped several cogs before it penetrated that Dad was

talking about him. Guardian? Oh… Sis was his guardian, wasn’t she? But it
didn’t mean anything.

Helen hesitated. “I suppose so, Pater,” she said, her eyes on Rod, “if

Buddy wants to.”

“Eh? That is not a factor, daughter. Your husband won’t want the

responsibility of supervising a young boy—and it is my obligation…and
privilege.”

Helen looked annoyed. Rod said, “I can’t see that it matters, Dad. I’ll

be away at college—and after all I am nearly old enough to vote.”

His mother looked startled. “Why, Roddie dear!”
“Yes,” agreed his father. “I’m afraid I can’t regard a gap of three years

as negligible.”

“What do you mean, Dad? I’ll be of age in January.”
Mrs. Walker clasped a hand to her mouth. “Jerome we’ve forgotten the

time lag again. Oh, my baby boy!”

Mr. Walker looked astonished, muttered something about “—very

difficult” and gave attention to his plate. Presently he looked up. “You’ll

pardon me, Rod. Nevertheless, until you are of age I must do what I can; I
hardly think I want you to live away from home while at college.”

“Sir? Why not?”
“Well—I feel that we have drifted apart, and not all for the best. Take

this girl you spoke of in such surprising terms. Am I correct in implying
that she was, eh…a close chum?”

Rod felt himself getting warm. “She was my city manager,” he said

flatly.

“Your what?”
“My executive officer. She was captain of the guard, chief of police,

anything you want to call her. She did everything. She hunted, too, but that
was just because she liked to. Carol is, uh—well, Carol is swell.”

“Roderick, are you involved with this girl?”
“Me? Gosh, no! She was more like a big sister. Oh, Carol was sweet

on half a dozen fellows, one time or another, but it never lasted.”

“I am very glad to hear that you are not seriously interested in her. She

does not sound like desirable companionship for a young boy.”

“Dad—you don’t know what you are saying!”
“Perhaps. I intend to find out. But what is this other matter? ‘City

Manager!’ What were you?”

“I,” Rod said proudly, “was Mayor of Cowpertown.”
His father looked at him, then shook his head. “We’ll speak of this

later. Possibly you need, eh—medical help.” He looked at Helen. “We’ll
attend to the change in guardianship tomorrow. I can see that there is much
I must take care of.”

Helen met his eyes. “Not unless Buddy consents.”
“Daughter!”
“The transfer was irrevocable. He will have to agree or I won’t do it!”
Mr. Walker looked shocked, Mrs. Walker looked stricken. Rod got up

and left the room…the first time anyone had ever done so while the Lamp
of Peace was burning. He heard his father call after him but he did not turn
back.

and let myself in quietly,” Matson explained. He inspected Rod’s face. “I
told you,” he said slowly, “that it would be rough. Well, sweat it out, son,
sweat it out.”

“I can’t stand it!”
“Yes, you can.”

In Emigrants’ Gap the sturdy cross-country wagons were drawn up in

echelon, as they had been so often before and would be so many times
again. The gate was not ready; drivers gathered at the booth under Liberty’s
skirts, drinking coffee and joking through the nervous wait. Their
professional captain was with them, a lean, homely young man with deep
lines in his face, from sun and laughing and perhaps some from worry. But
he did not seem to be worrying now; he was grinning and drinking coffee
and sharing a doughnut with a boy child. He was dressed in fringed
buckskin, in imitation of a very old style; he wore a Bill Cody beard and
rather long hair. His mount was a little pinto, standing patiently by with
reins hanging. There was a boot scabbard holding a hunting rifle on the
nigh side of the saddle, but the captain carried no guns on his person;
instead he wore two knives, one on each side.

A siren sounded and a speaker above the Salvation Army booth

uttered: “Captain Walker, ready with gate four.”

Rod waved at the control booth and shouted, “Call off!” then turned

back to Jim and Jacqueline. “Tell Carol I’m sorry she couldn’t get leave. I’ll
be seeing you.”

“Might be sooner than you think,” asserted Jim. “My firm is going to

bid this contract.”

“Your firm? Where do you get that noise? Have they made him a

partner, Jackie?”

“No,” she answered serenely, “but I’m sure they will as soon as he is

admitted to the Outlands bar. Kiss Uncle Rod good-by, Grant.”

“No,” the youngster answered firmly.
“Just like his father,” Jimmy said proudly. “Kisses women only.”
The count was running back down; Rod heard it and swung into

saddle. “Take it easy, kids.” The count passed him, finished with a shouted,
“ONE!”

“Reins up! Reeeiins UP!” He waited with arm raised and glanced

through the fully-dilated gate past rolling prairie at snow-touched peaks
beyond. His nostrils widened.

shouted, “Roll ’em! Ho!” as he squeezed and released the little horse with
his knees. The pinto sprang forward, cut in front of the lead wagon, and
Captain Walker headed out on his long road.

Table of Contents

Teaser
By Robert A. Heinlein
Copyright
Dedication
Contents
1 The Marching Hordes
2 The Fifth Way
3 Through the Tunnel
4 Savage
5 The Nova
6 “I Think He Is Dead”
7 “I Should Have Baked a Cake”
8 “Fish, or Cut Bait”
9 “A Joyful Omen”
10 “I So Move”
11 The Beach of Bones
12 “It Won’t Work, Rod”
13 Unkillable
14 Civilization
15 In Achilles’ Tent
16 The Endless Road

