USE OF WEAPONS 
IAIN M. BANKS 

Published: 1990. ISBN: 1 85723 135 X 

 'Slight Mechanical Destruction' 

 Prologue 

 1. The Good Soldier 

o One 

o XIII 

o Two 

o XII 

o Three 

o XI 

o Four 

o X 

o Five 

 2. An Outing 

o IX 

o Six 

o VIII 

o Seven 

o VII 

o Eight 

o VI 

o Nine 

o V 

 3. Remembrance 

o Ten 

o IV 

o Eleven 

o III 

o Twelve 

o II 

o Thirteen 

o I 

o Fourteen 

 Epilogue 

 Zakalwe's Song 

 (States of War) 

Acknowledgement 

I blame Ken MacLeod for the whole thing. It was his idea to argue the 
old warrior out of retirement, and he suggested the fitness program, 
too. 

c/o 
SC, 
Year 
115 
(Earth, 
Khmer 
calendar). 

Marain original, own translation. Unpublished. 

'Happiness? Happiness... is to wake up, on a bright spring morning, 
after an exhausting first night spent with a beautiful... passionate... 
multi-murderess.' 

'... Shit, is that all?' 

He drained the glass, then studied it as the alcohol made its way 
down his throat. His throat tingled, and it seemed to him that the 
light tingled in his eyes. He turned the glass over in his hands, moving 
it carefully and smoothly, seemingly fascinated by the roughness of 
the ground areas and the silky slickness of the unetched parts. He 
held it up to the sun, his eyes narrowing. The glass sparkled like a 
hundred tiny rainbows, and minute twists of bubbles in the slender 
stem glowed golden against the blue sky, spiralling about each other 
in a fluted double helix. 

He lowered the glass, slowly, and his gaze fell upon the silent city. He 

squinted out over the roofs and spires and towers, out over the 
clumps of trees marking the sparse and dusty parks, and out over 
the distant serrated line of the city walls to the pale plains and the 
smoke-blue hills shimmering in the heat haze beyond, beneath a 
cloudless sky. 

Without taking his eyes from the view, he suddenly jerked his arm, 
throwing the glass over his shoulder, back into the cool hall, where it 
vanished into the shadows and shattered. 

'You bastard,' said a voice, after a slight pause. The voice sounded 
both muffled and slurred. 'I thought that was the heavy artillery. I 
nearly crapped myself. You want to see the place covered with shit?... 
Oh hell; I've bit the glass, too... mmm... I'm bleeding.' There was 
another pause. 'You hear?' The muffled, slurred voice increased a 
little in volume. 'I'm bleeding... You want to see the floor covered 
with shit and pedigree blood?' There was a scraping, tinkling sound, 
then silence, then, 'You bastard.' 

The young man on the balcony turned away from the view over the 
city and walked back inside the hall, only a little unsteadily. The hall 
was echoing and cool. The floor was mosaic, millennia old, veneered 
over in more recent times with a transparent, scratch-proof covering 
to protect the tiny ceramic fragments. In the centre of the hall there 
was a massive, elaborately carved banqueting table, surrounded by 
chairs. Around the walls were scattered smaller tables, more chairs, 
low chests of drawers, and tall sideboards, all made from the same 
dark, heavy wood. 

Some of the walls were painted with fading but still impressive 
murals, mostly of battlefields; other walls, painted white, supported 
huge mandalas of old weapons; hundreds of spears and knives, 
swords and shields, pikes and maces, bolas and arrows all arranged 
in great whorls of pitted blade like the shrapnel of impossibly 
symmetrical explosions. Rusting firearms pointing importantly at 
each other above blocked-off fireplaces. 

There were one or two dulled paintings and frayed tapestries on the 
walls, but vacant spaces for many more. Tall triangular windows of 
coloured glass threw wedges of light across the mosaic and the wood. 

The white stone walls rose to red piers at the top, supporting huge 
black beams of wood that closed over the length of the hall like a 
giant tent of angular fingers. 

The young man kicked an antique chair the right way up and 
collapsed into it. 'What pedigree blood?' he said. He rested one hand 
on the surface of the great table, and put the other up to and over 
his scalp, as if through thick long hair, though in fact his head was 
shaved. 

'Eh?' said the voice. It appeared to come from somewhere beneath 
the great table the young man sat beside. 

'What aristocratic connections have you ever had, you drunken old 
bum?' The young man rubbed his eyes with clenched fists, then, with 
his hands open, massaged the rest of his face. 

There was a lengthy pause. 

'Well, I was once bitten by a princess.' 

The young man looked up at the hammer-beamed ceiling and 
snorted. 'Insufficient evidence.' 

He got up and went out onto the balcony again. He took a pair of 
binoculars from the balustrade and looked through them. He tutted, 
swaying, then retreated to the windows, bracing himself against the 
frame so that the view steadied. He fiddled with the focus, then shook 
his head and put the binoculars back on the stonework and crossed 
his arms, leaning against the wall and gazing out over the city. 

Baked; brown roofs and rough gable ends, like crusts and ends of 
bread; dust like flour. 

Then, in an instant, under the impact of remembrance, the 
shimmering view before him turned grey and then dark, and he 
recalled other citadels (the doomed tent city in the parade-ground 
below, as the glass in the windows shook; the young girl - dead now 
- curled up in a chair, in a tower in the Winter Palace). He shivered, 
despite the heat, and shoved the memories away. 

'What about you?' 

The young man looked back into the hall. 'What?' 

'You ever had any, umm, connections, with our, ah... betters?' 

The young man looked suddenly serious. 'I once...' he began, then 
hesitated. 'I once knew some-one who was... nearly a princess. And 
I carried part of her inside me, for a time.' 

'Say again? You carried...' 

'Part of her inside me, for a time.' 

Pause. Then, politely: 'Wasn't that rather the wrong way round?' 

The young man shrugged. 'It was an odd sort of relationship.' 

He turned back to the city again, looking for smoke, or people, or 
animals, or birds, or anything that moved, but the view might as well 
have been painted on a backdrop. Only the air moved, shimmering 
the view. He thought about how you could make a backdrop tremble 
just so to produce the same effect, then abandoned the thought. 

'See anything?' rumbled the voice under the table. 

The young man said nothing, but rubbed his chest through the shirt 
and open jacket. It was a general's jacket, though he wasn't a 
general. 

He came away from the window again and took up a large pitcher 
that stood on one of the low tables by the wall. He lifted the pitcher 
above his head and carefully up-ended it, his eyes closed, his face 
raised. There was no water in the pitcher, so nothing happened. The 
young man sighed, gazed briefly at the painting of a sailing ship on 
the side of the empty jug, and gently replaced it on the table, exactly 
where it had been. 

He shook his head and turned away, striding up to one of the hall's 
two giant fireplaces. He hauled himself up onto the broad 
mantelpiece, where he stared intently at one of the ancient weapons 

mounted on the wall; a huge wide-mouthed gun with an ornamental 
stock and open firing mechanism. He started trying to prise the 
blunderbuss away from the stonework, but it was too firmly attached. 
He gave up after a while and jumped to the floor, staggering a little 
as he landed. 

'See anything?' said the voice again, hopefully. 

The young man walked carefully from the fireplace towards one 
corner of the hall, and a long, ornate sideboard. Its top was covered 
by a profusion of bottles, as was a considerable area of the nearby 
floor. He searched through the collection of mostly broken, mostly 
empty bottles until he found one that was intact and full. When he 
found it he sat carefully on the floor, broke the bottle open against 
the leg of a nearby chair, and emptied into his mouth the half of the 
bottle's contents that hadn't spilled over his clothes or splashed 
across the mosaic. He coughed and spluttered, put the bottle down, 
then kicked it away under the sideboard as he got up. 

He made his way towards another corner of the hall, and a tall pile of 
clothes and guns. He picked up a gun, untangling it from a knot of 
straps, sleeves and ammunition belts. He inspected the weapon, then 
threw it down again. He swept several hundred small empty 
magazines aside to get at another gun, but then discarded that one 
too. He picked up two more, checked them and slung one round his 
shoulder while placing the other on a rug-covered chest. He went on 
through the weapons until he had three guns slung about him, and 
the chest was nearly covered with various bits and pieces of hard-
ware. He swept the gear on the chest into a tough, oil-stained bag 
and dumped that on the floor. 

'No,' he said. 

As he spoke, there was a deep rumble, unlocated and indeterminate, 
something more in the ground than in the air. The voice under the 
table muttered something. 

The young man walked over to the windows, setting the guns down 
on the floor. 

He stood there a while, looking out. 

'Hey,' said the voice under the table. 'Help me up, will you? I'm under 
the table.' 

'What're you doing under the table, Cullis?' said the young man, 
kneeling to inspect the guns; tapping indicators, twisting dials, 
altering settings and squinting down sights. 

'Oh, this and that; you know.' 

The young man smiled, and crossed to the table. He reached 
underneath and with one arm dragged out a large, red-faced man 
who wore a field-marshal's jacket a size too big for him, and who had 
very short grey hair and only one real eye. The large man was helped 
up; he stood carefully, then slowly brushed one or two bits of glass 
off the jacket. He thanked the young man by slowly nodding his head. 

'What time is it, anyway?' he asked. 

'What? You're mumbling.' 

'Time. What time is it?' 

'It's day time.' 

'Ha.' The large man nodded wisely. 'Just as I thought.' Cullis watched 
the young man go back to the window and the guns, then heaved 
himself away from the great table; he arrived, eventually, at the table 
holding the large water-pitcher which was decorated with a painting 
of an old sailing ship. 

He lifted the pitcher up, swaying slightly, turned it upside down over 
his head, blinked his eyes, wiped his face with his hands and flapped 
the collar of his jacket. 

'Ah,' he said, 'that's better'. 

'You're drunk,' said the young man, without turning away from the 
guns. 

The older man considered this. 

'You almost manage to make that sound like a criticism,' he replied, 
with dignity, and the tapped his false eye and blinked over it a few 
times. He turned as deliberately as possible and faced the far wall, 
staring at a mural of a sea battle. He fixed on one particularly large 
warship portrayed there and seemed to clench his jaw slightly. 

His head jerked back, there was a tiny cough and a whine that 
terminated in a miniature explosion; three metres away from the 
warship in the mural, a large floor-standing vase disintegrated in a 
cloud of dust. 

The large grey-haired man shook his head sadly and tapped his false 
eye again. 'Fair enough,' he said, 'Im drunk.' 

The young man stood up, holding the guns he had selected, and 
turned to look at the older man. 'If you had two eyes you'd be seeing 
double. Here; catch.' 

So saying, he threw a gun towards the older man, who stretched out 
one hand to catch it at just the same time as the gun hit the wall 
behind him and clattered to the floor. 

Cullis blinked. 'I think,' he said, 'I would like to go back under the 
table.' 

The young man came over, picked up the gun, checked it again, and 
handed it to the older man, wrapping his large arms around it for 
him. Then he manoeuvred Cullis over to the pile of weapons and 
clothes. 

The older man was taller than the young man, and his good eye and 
the false eye - which was in fact a light micro-pistol - stared down at 
the young man as he pulled a couple of ammunition belts from the 
floor and slung them over the older man's shoulders. The young man 
grimaced as Cullis looked at him; he reached up and turned the older 
man's face away, then from a breast pocket in the too-big field-
marshal's jacket extracted what looked like - and was - an armoured 
eye-patch. He fitted the strap carefully over the taller man's grey, 

crew-cut head. 

'My god!' Cullis gasped, 'I've gone blind!' 

The young man reached up and adjusted the eye patch. 'Your pardon. 
Wrong eye.' 

'That's better.' The older man drew himself up, taking a deep breath. 
'Where are the bastards?' his voice was still slurred; it made you want 
to clear your throat. 

'I can't see them. They're probably still outside. The shower yesterday 
is keeping the dust down.' The young man put another gun into Cullis' 
arms. 

'The bastards.' 

'Yes, Cullis.' A couple of ammunition boxes were added to the guns 
cradled in the older man's arms. 

'The filthy bastards.' 

'That's right, Cullis.' 

'The... Hmm, you know, I could do with a drink.' Cullis swayed. He 
looked down at the weapons cradled in his arms, apparently trying to 
puzzle out how they had appeared there. 

The young man turned round to lift more guns from the pile, but 
changed his mind when he heard a large clattering, breaking noise 
behind him. 

'Shit,' Cullis muttered, from the floor. 

The young man went over to the bottle-strewn sideboard. He loaded 
up with as many full bottles as he could find and returned to where 
Cullis was snoring peacefully under a pile of guns, boxes, ammunition 
belts and the dark-splintered remains of a formal banqueting chair. 
He cleared the debris off the older man and undid a couple of buttons 
on the too-large field-marshal's jacket, then stuffed the bottles inside, 
between jacket and shirt. 

Cullis opened his eye and watched this for a moment. 'What time did 
you say it was?' 

He buttoned Cullis' jacket up halfway. 'Time to go, I think.' 

'Hmm. Fair enough. You know best, Zakalwe.' Cullis closed his eye 
again. 

The young man Cullis had called Zakalwe walked quickly to one end 
of the great table, which was covered by a comparatively clean 
blanket. A large, impressive gun lay there; he picked it up and 
returned to the large, unimpressive form snoring on the floor. He took 
the old man by the collar and backed off towards the door at the end 
of the hall, dragging Cullis with him. He stopped to pick up the oil-
stained bag full of weaponry he'd sorted out earlier, slinging that over 
one shoulder. 

He'd dragged Cullis halfway to the door when the older man woke up, 
and with his one good eye fixed him with an upside-down bleary 
stare. 

'Hey.' 

'What, Cullis?' he grunted, heaving him another couple of metres. 

Cullis looked round the quiet white hall as it slid past him. 'Still think 
they'll bombard this place?' 

'Mm-hmm.' 

The grey-haired man shook his head. 'Na,' he said. He took a deep 
breath. 'Na,' he repeated, shaking his head. 'Never.' 

'Cue incoming' the young man muttered, glancing around. 

Nevertheless the silence continued as they reached the doors and he 
kicked them open. The stairs that led down to the rear entrance hall 
and out into the courtyard were of brilliant green marble edged with 
agate. He made his way down, armaments and bottles clinking, gun 
bumping, dragging Cullis down step after step, the big man's heels 
thumping and scraping as he went. 

The old man grunted with each step, and once mumbled. 'Not so 
damn hard, woman.' The young man stopped at that point and looked 
at the old man, who snored and dribbled saliva from the corner of his 
mouth. The young man shook his head and continued. 

On the third landing he stopped for a drink, allowing Cullis to snore 
on, then felt sufficiently fortified to continue the descent. He was still 
licking his lips and had just grabbed Cullis' collar when there came an 
increasing, deepening, whistling noise. He dropped to the floor and 
hauled Cullis half on top of him. 

The explosion was close enough to crack the high windows and loosen 
some plaster, which fell gracefully down through the triangular 
wedges of sunlight and pattered delicately on the stairs. 

'Cullis!' He grabbed the other man's collar again and leapt backwards 
down the stairs. 'Cullis!' he yelled, skidding round the landing, almost 
falling. 'Cullis, you dozy old prick! Wake up!' 

Another falling howl split the air; the whole palace shuddered to the 
detonation and a window blew in overhead; plaster and glass 
showered down the stairwell. Half crouched and still pulling Cullis, he 
staggered and cursed down another flight of stairs. 'CULLIS!' he 
roared, tearing past empty alcoves and exquisitely rendered murals 
in the pastoral style. 'Fuck your geriatric ass, Cullis; WAKE UP!' 

He skidded round another landing, the remaining bottles clanking 
furiously and the big gun knocking chunks out of decorative panels. 
The deepening whistle again; he dived as the stairs leapt up at him 
and glass burst overhead; everything was white as the dust whirled. 
He staggered to his feet and saw Cullis sitting upright, scattering 
plaster shards from his chest and rubbing his good eye. Another 
explosion, rumbling further away. 

Cullis looked miserable. He waved one hand through the dust. 'This 
isn't fog and that wasn't thunder, right?' 

'Right,' he shouted, already leaping downstairs. 

Cullis coughed and staggered after him. 

More shells were arriving as he reached the courtyard. One burst to 
his left as he emerged from the palace; he jumped into the half-track 
and tried to start it. The shell blew the roof off the royal apartments. 
Showers of slates and tiles hammered into the courtyard, turning into 
little dusty clouds in their own tributary explosions. He put one hand 
over his head and rummaged in the passenger's footspace for a 
helmet. A large chunk of masonry bounced off the engine cover of 
the open vehicle, leaving a sizeable dent and a cloud of dust. 'Oh... 
shiiiiit,' he said, finally finding a helmet and jamming it onto his head. 

'Filthy Ba...!' yelled Cullis, tripping over just before he reached the 
half-track and tumbling into the dust. He swore, then dragged himself 
into the machine. Another shell and another ploughed into the 
apartments to their left. 

The clouds of dust kicked up by the bombardment were drifting across 
the faces of the buildings; sunlight sheared a gigantic wedge through 
the chaos of the courtyard, edging shadow with light. 

'I honestly thought they'd go for the parliament buildings,' Cullis said 
mildly, gazing at the burning wreck of a truck on the far side of the 
courtyard. 

'Well, they didn't!' He punched the starter again, shouting at it. 

'You were right,' Cullis sighed and looked puzzled. 'What was the bet 
we had again?' 

'Who cares?' he roared, kicking somewhere beneath the dashboard. 
The half-track's motor stumbled into life. 

Cullis shook flaked tile from his hair while his comrade strapped on 
his own helmet and handed a second one to him. Cullis accepted it 
with relief and began to fan his face with it, patting the area of his 
chest over his heart as if in encouragement. 

Then he drew his hand away, staring in disbelief at the warm red 
liquid on it. 

The engine died. Cullis heard the other man bellow abuse and slam 

the starter again; the engine coughed and spluttered, to the 
accompaniment of whistling shells. 

Cullis looked down to the seat beneath him as more explosions 
thundered, far away in the dust. The half-track shuddered. 

The seat below Cullis was covered in red. 

'Medic!' he yelled. 

'What?' 

'Medic!' Cullis screamed over another explosion, holding his red-
stained hand out. 'Zakalwe! I'm hit!' His good eye was wide with 
shock. His hand trembled. 

The young man looked exasperated and slapped Cullis' hand away. 
'That's wine, you cretin!' He lunged forward, hauled a bottle out of 
the older man's tunic and dropped it in his lap. 

Cullis looked down, surprised. 'Oh,' he said. 'Good.' He peered inside 
his jacket and carefully extracted a few pieces of broken glass. 
'Wondered why it was fitting so well,' he mumbled. 

The engine caught suddenly, roaring like something made furious by 
the shaking ground and the swirling dust. Explosions in the gardens 
sent brown sprays of earth and pieces of shattered statuary over the 
courtyard wall, landing spattering and chunking all around them. 

He wrestled with the gear-lever until the drive engaged and nearly 
threw him and Cullis out of the half-track as it leapt forward, out of 
the courtyard and into the dusty road beyond. Seconds later the 
major part of the great hall collapsed under the combined zeroed-in 
weight of a dozen or so heavy artillery pieces, and smashed down 
into the courtyard, filling it and the surrounding area with splintered 
wood and masonry and yet more tumbling clouds of dust. 

Cullis scratched his head and muttered into the helmet he had just 
been sick into. 

'The bastards,' he said. 

'That's right, Cullis.' 

'The filthy bastards.' 

'Yes, Cullis.' 

The half-track turned a corner and roared away, towards the desert. 

She made her way through the turbine hall, surrounded by an ever-
changing ring of friends, admirers and animals - nebula to her 
attractive focus - talking to her guests, giving instructions to her staff, 
making suggestions and offering compliments to the many and 
various entertainers. Music filled the echoing space above the 
ancient, gleaming machines, sitting silently amongst the chattering 
throng of gaily dressed party-goers. She bowed graciously and smiled 
to a passing Admiral and twirled a delicate black flower in her hand, 
putting the bloom to her nose to draw in its heady fragrance. 

Two of the hralzs at her feet leapt up, yelping, fore-paws attempting 
to find purchase on the smooth lap of her formal gown, their 
glistening snouts raised to the flower. She bent, tapping both animals 
gently on the nose with the bloom, making them bounce down to the 
floor again, sneezing and shaking their heads. The people around her 
laughed. Stooping, gown belling, she rubbed her hands through the 
pelt of one of the animals, shaking its big ears, then raised her head 
to the major-domo as he approached, deferentially threading his way 
through the crowd around her. 

'Yes, Maikril?' she said. 

'The System Times photographer,' the major-domo said quietly. He 
straightened as she rose, until he was looking up at her, his chin level 
with her bare shoulders. 

'Admitting defeat?' She grinned. 

'I believe so, ma'am. Requesting an audience.' 

She laughed. 'So well put. How many did we get this time?' 

The major-domo sidled a little closer, looking nervously at one of the 
hralzs when it snarled at him. 'Thirty-two moving-picture cameras 
ma'am; over a hundred still.' 

She brought her mouth conspiratorially close to the major-domo's ear 
and said, 'Not counting the ones we found on our guests.' 

'Quite, Ma'am.' 

'I'll see... him? Her?' 

'Him, Ma'am.' 

'Him, later. Tell him ten minutes; remind me in twenty. West atrium.' 
She glanced at the single platinum bracelet she wore. Recognising 
her retinae, a tiny projector disguised as an emerald briefly displayed 
a holo plan of the old power station in twin cones of light aimed 
straight at her eyes. 

'Certainly, Ma'am,' Maikril said. 

She touched his arm and whispered, 'We're heading over to the 
aboretum, all right?' 

The major-domo's head barely moved to indicate he had heard. She 
turned regretfully to the people around her, her hands clasped as 
though in pleading. 'I'm sorry. Will you all excuse me, just a 
moment?' She put her head to one side, smiling. 

of the wine fountains. She led, skirts rustling, while the major-domo 
struggled to keep up with her long-legged gait. She waved to those 
who greeted her; government ministers and their shadows, foreign 
dignitaries 
and 
attaches, 
media 
stars 
of 
all 
persuasions, 

revolutionaries and Navy brass, the captains of industry and 
commerce and their more extravagantly wealthy shareholders. The 
hralzs snapped perfunctorily at the heels of the major-domo, their 
claws skittering on the polished mica floor, all ungainly, then 
bounding forward when they encountered one of the many priceless 
rugs scattered throughout the turbine hall. 

At the steps to the aboretum, hidden from the main hall by the 
easternmost dynamo housing, she paused, thanked the major-domo, 
shooed the hralzs away, patted her perfect hair, smoothed her 
already immaculately smooth gown and checked that the single white 
stone on the black choker was centered, which it was. She started 
down the steps towards the tall doors of the arboretum. 

One of the hralzs whined from the top of the steps, bouncing up and 
down on its forelegs, eyes watering. 

She looked back, annoyed. 'Quiet, Bouncer! Away!' 

The animal lowered its head and snuffled off. 

She closed the double doors quietly behind her, taking in the quiet 
extent of luxuriant foliage the arboretum presented. 

Outside the high crystal curve of the partial dome, the night was 
black. Small sharp lights burned on tall masts inside the arboretum, 
casting deep jagged shadows amongs the crowded plants. The air 
was warm and smelled of earth and sap. She breathed deeply and 
walked towards the far side of the enclosure. 

The man turned quickly to find her standing behind him, leaning 
against a light-mast, her arms crossed, a small smile on her lips and 
in her eyes. Her hair was blue-black, like her eyes; her skin was fawn 
and she looked slimmer than she did on newscasts, when for all her 
height she could seem stocky. He was tall and very slim and 
unfashionably pale, and most people would have thought his eyes 
were too close together. 

He looked at the delicately patterned leaf he still held in one fragile-
looking hand, then let it go, smiling uncertainly, and stepped out of 
the extravagantly flowered bush he'd been investigating. He rubbed 
his hands, looked bashful. 'I'm sorry, I...' he gestured nervously. 

'That's all right,' she said, reaching out. They clasped hands. 'You're 
Relstoch Sussepin, aren't you?' 

'Umm..., yes,' he said, obviously surprised. He was still holding her 
hand. He realised this, and looked even more discomforted, quickly 
letting go. 

'Diziet Sma.' She bowed her head a little, very slowly, letting her 
shoulder-length hair swing, keeping her eyes on him. 

'Yes, I know, of course. Umm... pleased to meet you.' 

'Good,' she nodded. 'And I you. I've heard your work.' 

'Oh.' He looked boyishly pleased and clapped his hands in a gesture 
he didn't seem to notice himself making. 'Oh. That's very...' 

'I didn't say that I liked it,' she said, the smile hovering only on one 
side of her mouth now. 

'Ah.' Crestfallen. 

So cruel. 'But I do like it, very much,' she said, and suddenly she was 
communicating amused - even conspiratorial - contrition through her 
expression. 

He laughed and she felt something relax inside her. This was going 
to be all right. 

'I did wonder why I'd been invited,' he confessed, the deep-set eyes 
somehow bright. 'Everybody here seems so...', he shrugged, '... 
important. That's why I...', he waved awkwardly behind him at the 
plant he'd been inspecting. 

'You don't think composers should be regarded as important?' she 
asked, gently chiding. 

'Well... compared to all these politicians and Admirals and business 
people... in terms of power, I mean... And I'm not even a very well-
known musician. I'd have thought Savntreig, or Khu, or...' 

'They've composed their careers very well, certainly,' she agreed. 

He paused for a moment, then gave a small laugh and looked down. 
His hair was very fine, and glinted in the high mast light. It was her 
turn to fall in with his laugh. Maybe she ought to mention the 
commission now, rather than leaving it to their next meeting, when 
she would reduce the numbers - even if they were distant numbers, 
at the moment - to something a little more friendly... or even leaving 
it to a private rendezvous, later still, once she was sure he had been 
captivated. 

How long should she spin this out? He was what she wanted, but it 
would mean so much more after a charged friendship; that long, 
exquisite exchange of gradually more intimate confidences, the slow 
accumulation of shared experiences, the languorous spiralling dance 
of attraction, coming and going and coming and going, winding closer 
and closer, until that laziness was sublimed in the engulfing heat of 
requital. 

He looked her in the eyes, and said, 'You flatter me, Ms Sma.' 

She returned his gaze, raising her chin a little, acutely aware of each 
nuance in her carefully translated body language. There was an 
expression on his face she did not think so childish, now. His eyes 
reminded her of the stone on her bracelet. She felt a little light-
headed, and took a deep breath. 

'Ahem.' 

She froze. 

The word had been pronounced from behind and to one side of her. 
She saw Sussepin's gaze falter and shift. 

Sma kept her expression serene as she turned, then glared at the 
grey-white casing of the drone as though attempting to melt holes in 
it. 

'What?' she said, in a voice that might have etched steel. 

The drone was the size - and near enough the shape - of a small 
suitcase. It floated in towards her face. 

'Trouble, toots,' it said, then moved briskly to one side, angling its 
body so that it appeared to be contemplating the inky heights of sky 
beyond the crystal semisphere. 

Sma looked down at the brick floor of the arboretum, her lips pursed. 
She allowed herself the tiniest of shakes of the head. 

'Mr Sussepin,' she smiled, and spread her hands. This pains me, but... 
will you...?' 

'Of course.' He was already moving, and went quickly past, nodding 
once. 

'Perhaps we can talk later,' she said. 

He turned, still backing off. 'Yes; I'd... that would...' He seemed to 
lose inspiration, and nodded nervously again, walking quickly to the 
doors at the far end of the arboretum. He left without looking back. 

Sma whirled round to the drone, which was now humming innocently 
and apparently staring into the depths of a gaudily coloured flower, 
its stubby snout half buried in the bloom. It noticed her and looked 
up. She stood with legs apart, put one fist on her hip and said, ' 
"Toots"?' 

The drone's aura field flashed on; the mixture of purple regret and 
gunmetal puzzlement looked distinctly unconvincing. 'I don't know, 

Sma... just slipped out. Alliteration.' 

Sma kicked at a dead branch, fixed the drone with a glare and said, 
'Well?' 

'You're not going to like this,' the drone said quietly, retreating a little 
and going dark with sorrow. 

Sma hesitated. She looked away for a moment, shoulders suddenly 
slumping. She sat down on one of the tree roots. The gown crumpled 
around her. 'It's Zakalwe, isn't it?' 

The drone flashed rainbow in surprise; so quickly - she thought - it 
might even have been genuine. 'Good grief,' it said. 'How...?' 

She waved the question away. 'I don't know. Tone of voice. Human 
intuition... Just that time again. Life was getting to be too much fun.' 
She closed her eyes and rested her head against the rough dark trunk 
of the tree. 'So?' 

The drone Skaffen-Amtiskaw lowered itself to the same height as the 
woman's shoulder and floated near her. She looked at it. 

'We need him back again,' it told her. 

'I sort of thought so,' Sma sighed, flicking away an insect which had 
just landed on her shoulder. 

'Well, yes. I'm afraid nothing else will work; it has to be him 
personally.' 

'Yeah, but does it have to be me personally?' 

'That's... the consensus.' 

'Wonderful,' Sma said sourly. 

'You want the rest?' 

'Does it get any better?' 

'Not really.' 

'Hell,' Sma clapped her hands on her lap and rubbed them up and 
down. 'Might as well have it all at once.' 

'You would have to leave tomorrow.' 

'Aw drone, come on!' She buried her head in her hands. She looked 
up. The drone was fiddling with a twig. 'You're kidding.' 

''Fraid not.' 

'What about all this?' She waved towards the turbine hall doors. 'What 
about the peace conference? What about all the froth out there with 
their greased-up palms and their beady eyes? What about three years 
work? What about an entire fucking planet...?' 

'The conference will go ahead.' 

'Oh sure, but what about this "pivotal role" I was supposed to be 
playing?' 

'Ah,' said the drone, bringing the twig right up to the sensing band 
on the front of its casing, 'well...' 

'Oh no.' 

'Look, I know you don't like...' 

'No, drone; it's not...' Sma got up suddenly and went to the edge of 
the crystal wall, looking out into the night. 

'Dizzy...', the drone said, drifting closer. 

'Don't you "Dizzy" me.' 

'Sma... it isn't real. It's a stand-in; electronic, mechanical, electro-
chemical, chemical; a machine; a Mind-controlled machine, not alive 
in itself. Not a clone or...' 

'I know what it is, drone,' she said, clasping her hands behind her. 

The drone floated closer to her, putting its fields to her shoulders, 
squeezing gently. She shook its grip off, looked down. 

'We need your permission, Diziet.' 

'Yeah, I know that, too.' She looked up for stars that were twice 
hidden, by cloud and by the lights of the arboretum. 

'You can, of course, stay here if you want to.' The drone's voice was 
heavy, remorseful. 'The peace conference is certainly important; it 
needs... somebody to smooth things through. No doubt about that.' 

'And what's so goddamn crucial I have to high-tail it tomorrow?' 

'Remember Voerenhutz?' 

'I remember Voerenhutz,' she said, voice flat. 

'Well, the peace lasted forty years, but it's breaking down now. 
Zakalwe worked with a man called...' 

'Maitchigh?' she frowned, half turning her head to the drone. 

'Beychae. Tsoldrin Beychae. He became president of the cluster 
following our involvement. While he was in power he held the political 
system together, but he retired eight years ago, long before he had 
to, to pursue a life of study and contemplation.' The drone made a 
sighing noise. 'Things have slipped back since, and at the moment 
Beychae lives on a planet whose leaders are subtly hostile to the 
forces Zakalwe and Beychae represented and we backed, and who 
are taking a leading part in the factionalising of the group. There are 
several small conflicts under way and many more brewing; full-scale 
war involving the entire cluster is, as they say, imminent.' 

'And Zakalwe?' 

'Basically, it's an Out. Down to the planet, convince Beychae he's 
needed, and at the very least get him to declare an interest. But it 
may mean a physical spring, and the added complication is Beychae 
may require a lot of convincing.' 

Sma thought it through, still regarding the night. 'No tricks we can 
play?' 

'The two men know each other too well for anything other than the 
real Zakalwe to work... likewise Tsoldrin Beychae and the political 
machine throughout the entire system. Too many memories involved 
altogether.' 

'Yeah,' Sma said quietly. 'Too many memories.' She rubbed her bare 
shoulders, as though she was cold. 'What about big guns?' 

'We've a nebula fleet assembling; a core of one Limited System 
Vehicle and three General Contact Units stationed around the cluster 
itself, plus eighty or so GCUs keeping their tracks within a month's 
rush-in distance. There ought to be four or five GSVs within a two-
to-three-months dash for the next year or so. But that's very, very 
much a last resort.' 

'Megadeath figures looking a bit equivocal are they?' Sma sounded 
bitter. 

'If you want to put it that way,' Skaffen Amtiskaw said. 

'Oh goddamn,' Sma said quietly, closing her eyes. 'So; how far away 
is Voerenhutz? I've forgotten.' 

'Only about forty days, but we have to pick Zakalwe up first; say... 
ninety for the whole outward journey.' 

She turned around. 'Who's going to control the stand-in if the ship's 
taking me?' Her gaze flicked skyward. 

'The Just Testing will remain here in any event,' the drone said. 'The 
very fast picket Xenophobe has been put at your disposal. It can uplift 
tomorrow, a little after noon, earliest... should you wish.' 

Sma stood still for a moment, feet together and arms crossed, her 
lips pursed and face pinched. Skaffen-Amtiskaw introspected for a 
moment, and decided it felt sorry for her. 

The woman was immobile and silent for a few seconds; then, 

abruptly, she was striding towards the turbine hall doors, heels 
clattering on the brick pathway. 

The drone swooped after her, falling in at her shoulder. 'What I wish,' 
Sma said, 'is that you had a better sense of timing.' 

'I'm sorry. Did I interrupt something?' 

'Not at all. And what the hell's a "very fast picket" anyway?' 

'New name for a (Demilitarised) Rapid Offensive Unit,' the drone said. 

She glanced at it. It wobbled, shrugging. 

'It's supposed to sound better.' 

'And it's called the Xenophobe. Well that's just fine. Can the stand-in 
pick up immediately?' 

'Noon tomorrow; can you de-brief up to...?' 

'Tomorrow morning.' Sma said, as the drone flicked round in front of 
her and sucked the tall doors open; she strode through and leapt up 
the steps into the turbine hall, skirts gathered in front her her. The 
hralzs came skidding round the corner from the hall and gathered 
yelping and bouncing around her. Sma stopped, while they milled 
around her, sniffing her hems and trying to lick her hands. 

'No,' she told the drone. 'On second thoughts, scan me tonight, when 
I tell you. I'll get rid of this lot early if I can. I'm going to find 
Ambassador Onitnert now, have Maikril tell Chuzleis she's to get the 
minister over to the bar at turbine one in ten minutes. Make my 
apologies to the System Times hacks, have them taken back to the 
city and released; give them a bottle of nightflor each. Cancel the 
photographer, give him one still camera and let him take... sixty-four 
snaps, strictly full permission required. Have one of the male staff 
find Relstoch Sussepin and invite him to my apartments in two hours. 
Oh, and-' 

Sma broke off suddenly and went down on her haunches to cradle 
the long snout of one of the whimpering hralzs in her hands. 'Gainly, 

Gainly, I know, I know,' she said, as the big-bellied animal keened 
and licked at her face. 'I wanted to be here to see your babies born, 
but I can't...' she sighed, hugged the beast, then held its chin in one 
hand. 'What am I to do, Gainly? I could have you put to sleep until I 
come back, and you'd never know... but all your friends would miss 
you.' 

'Have them all put to sleep,' the drone suggested. 

Sma shook her head. 'You take care of them till I get back,' she told 
the other hralz. 'All right?' She kissed the animal's nose and got up. 
Gainly sneezed. 

'Two other things, drone,' Sma said, walking through the excited 
pack. 

'What?' 

'Don't call me "Toots" again, all right?' 

'All right. What else?' 

They rounded the gleaming bulk of the long-stilled number six 
turbine, and Sma stopped for a moment, surveying the busy crowd 
in front of her, taking a deep breath and straightening her shoulders. 
She was already smiling as she started forward and said quietly to 
the drone, 'I don't want the stand-in screwing anybody.' 

'Okay,' the drone said as they went towards the partying people. 'It 
is, after all, in a sense, your body.' 

'That's just it, drone,' Sma said, nodding to a waiter, who scurried 
forward, drinks tray proffered. 'It isn't my body.' 

and glanded a little snap to lift the mood. 

From the south balcony of the apartments fashioned from the 
station's admin block, she looked down to the deep valley and the 
line of tail lights strung out along Riverside Drive. An aircraft whistled 
overhead, banking and disappearing over the tall curved lip of the old 
dam. She watched the plane go, then turned towards the penthouse 
doors, taking off the small formal jacket and slinging it over her 
shoulder. 

Music was playing, deep inside the sumptuous suite beneath the roof 
garden. She headed instead for the study, where Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
was waiting. 

The scan to update the stand-in took only a couple of minutes. She 
came round with the usual feeling of dislocation, but it passed quickly 
enough. She kicked off her shoes and padded through the soft dark 
corridors towards the music. 

Relstoch Sussepin drew himself out of the seat he'd been occupying, 
still holding a softly glowing glass of nightflor. Sma stopped in the 
doorway. 

'Thank you for staying,' she said, dropping the little jacket onto a 
couch. 

'That's all right.' He brought the glass of glowing drink towards his 
lips, then seemed to think the better of it, and cradled it in both hands 
instead. 'What, ah... was there anything, in particular you...?' 

Sma smiled, somehow sadly, and put both hands on the wings of a 
big revolving chair, which she stood behind. She looked down at the 
hide cushion. 'Perhaps, now, I'm flattering myself,' she said. 'But, not 
to put too fine a point on it...' She looked up at him. 'Would you like 
to fuck?' 

Relstoch Sussepin stood stock still. After a while he raised the glass 
to his lips and took a long slow drink, then brought the glass slowly 
back down again. 'Yes,' he said. 'Yes, I wanted to... instantly.' 

'There's only tonight,' she said, holding up one hand. 'Just tonight. 
It's difficult to explain, but from tomorrow onwards... for maybe half 
a year or more, I'm going to be incredibly busy; two-places-at-once 
sort of busy, you know?' 

He shrugged. 'Sure. Anything you say.' 

Sma relaxed then, and a smile grew gradually on her face. She 
pushed the big chair round and slid the bracelet from her wrist to let 
it fall into the seat. Then she gently unbuttoned the top of her gown, 
and stood there. 

Sussepin drained his glass, placed it on a shelf, and walked towards 
her. 

'Lights,' she whispered. 

The lights slowly dimmed, right down, until eventually the softly 
glowing dregs of the finished drink made the glass on the shelf the 
brightest thing in the room. 

'Wake up.' 

He woke up. 

Dark. He straightened, beneath the covers, wondering who had 
talked to him like that. Nobody talked to him in that tone, not any 
more; even half asleep, coming unexpectedly awake in what must be 
the middle of the night, he heard something in that tone he hadn't 
heard for two, maybe three decades. Impertinence. Lack of respect. 

He brought his head out of the sheltering cover, into the warm air of 
the room, and looked round in the one-light gloom, to see who had 
dared address him like that. An instant of fear - had somebody got 
past the guards and security screens? - was replaced by a furious 
hunger to see who had the effrontery to speak like that to him. 

The intruder sat in a chair just beyond the end of the bed. He looked 

odd in a way which was itself odd; a very new sort of unusualness, 
unplaceable, even alien. He gave the impression of being a slightly 
skewed projection. The clothes looked strange too; baggy, brightly 
coloured, even in the dim light of the bedside lamp. The man was 
dressed like a clown or a jester, but his somehow too symmetrical 
face looked... grim? Contemptuous? That... foreignness made it 
difficult to tell. 

He started to grope for his glasses, but it was just sleep in his eyes. 
The surgeons had given him new eyes five years ago, but sixty years 
of short-sightedness had left him with an ingrained reaction to reach 
for glasses which were not there, whenever he first woke up. A small 
price to pay, he had always thought, and now, with the new retro-
ageing treatment... The sleep cleared from his eyes. He sat up, 
looking at the man in the chair, and began to think he was having a 
dream, or seeing a ghost. 

The man looked young; he had a broad, tanned face and black hair 
tied back behind his head, but thoughts of spirits and the dead came 
into his head not because of that. It was something about the dark, 
pit-like eyes, and the alien set of that face. 

'Good evening, Ethnarch.' The young man's voice was slow and 
measured. It sounded, somehow, like the voice of someone much 
older; old enough to make the Ethnarch feel suddenly young in 
comparison. It chilled him. He looked around the room. Who was this 
man? How had he got in here? The palace was meant to be 
impregnable. There were guards everywhere. What was going on? 
The fear came back. 

The girl from the previous evening lay still on the far side of the wide 
bed, just a lump under the covers. A couple of dormant screens on 
the wall to the Ethnarch's left reflected the bedside light's weak glow. 

He was frightened, but fully awake now and thinking quickly. There 
was a gun concealed in the bed's headboard; the man at the end of 
the bed didn't seem to be armed (but then why was he here?). But 
the gun represented a desperate last resort. The voice code was the 
thing. The mikes and cameras in the room were on standby, their 
automatic circuits waiting for a specific sentence to activate them; 

sometimes he wanted privacy in here, other times he wanted to 
record something only for himself, and of course he'd always known 
there was a possibility that somebody unauthorised might get in here, 
no matter how tight the security was. 

He cleared his throat. 'Well well, this is a surprise.' His voice was 
even, he sounded calm. 

He smiled thinly, pleased with himself. His heart - the heart of an 
athletic young anarchist woman up until eleven years ago - was 
beating quickly, but not worryingly so. He nodded. 'This is a surprise,' 
he repeated. There; it was done. An alarm would already be ringing 
in the basement control room; the guards would come piling through 
the door in a few seconds. Or they might not risk that, and instead 
release the ceiling gas cylinders, blasting them both into 
unconsciousness in a blinding fog. There was a danger that would 
rupture his eardrums (he thought, swallowing), but he could always 
take a new pair from a healthy dissident. Maybe he wouldn't even 
have to do that; the rumour was that the retro-ageing might include 
the possibility of body-parts regrowing. Well, nothing wrong with 
strength in depth; back-ups. He liked the feeling of security that gave 
one. 'Well, well,' he heard himself say, just in case the circuits hadn't 
picked up the code first or second time round, 'this is indeed a 
surprise.' The guards should be here any second... 

The brightly dressed young man smiled. He flexed oddly, and leant 
forward until his elbows rested on the top of the bed's ornate 
footboard. His lips moved, to produce what might have been a smile. 
He reached into one pocket of the baggy pantaloons and produced a 
small black gun. He pointed it straight at the Ethnarch and said. 'Your 
code won't work, Ethnarch Kerian. There won't be any more surprises 
that you're expecting and I'm not. The basement security centre is 
as dead as everything else.' 

The Ethnarch Kerian stared at the little gun. He'd seen water pistols 
that looked more impressive. What is going on? Can he really have 
come to kill me? The man certainly didn't dress like an assassin, and 
surely any serious assassin would just have killed him in his sleep. 
The longer this fellow sat here, talking, the more danger he was in, 
whether he had knocked out the links to the security centre or not. 

So he might be mad, but he probably wasn't an assassin. It was 
simply ludicrous that a real, professional assassin would behave like 
this, and only an extremely able and completely professional assassin 
could have penetrated the palace security... Thus, the Ethnarch 
Kerian tried to convince his suddenly wildly beating, mutinous heart. 
Where were the damn guards? He thought again about the gun 
hidden in the ornamental headboard behind him. 

The young man folded his arms, so that the little gun was no longer 
pointing at the Ethnarch. 'Mind if I tell you a little story?' 

He must be mad. 'No; no; why don't you tell me a story?' the 
Ethnarch said, in his most friendly and avuncular voice. 'What's your 
name, by the way; you appear to have the advantage over me.' 

'Yes, I do, don't I?' the old voice from the young lips said. 'Actually 
there are two stories, but you know most of one of them. I'll tell them 
at the same time; see if you can tell which is which.' 

'I-' 

'Ssh,' the man said, putting the little gun to his lips. The Ethnarch 
half glanced at the girl on the other side of the bed. He realised he 
and the intruder had been talking in quite low tones. Maybe if he 
could get the girl to wake, she might draw his fire, or at least distract 
him while he grabbed for the gun in the headboard; he was faster 
than he had been for twenty years, thanks to the new 
treatment... where the hell were those guards ? 

'Now look here, young man!' he roared. 'I just want to know what 
you think you're doing here! Eh?' 

His voice - a voice that had filled halls and squares, without 
amplification - echoed through the room. Dammit, the guards in the 
basement security centre ought to be able to hear it without any 
microphones. The girl on the other side of the bed didn't even stir. 

The young man was smirking. 'They're all asleep, Ethnarch. There's 
just you and me. Now; this story...' 

'What...' the Ethnarch Kerian gulped, drawing his legs up under the 
covers. 'What are you here for?' 

The intruder looked mildly surprised. 'Oh, I'm here to take you out, 
Ethnarch. You are going to be removed. Now...' he laid the gun on 
the broad top of the bed footboard. The Ethnarch stared at it. It was 
too far away for him to grab, but... 

'The story,' the intruder said, settling back in the chair. 'Once upon a 
time, over the gravity well and far away, there was a magical land 
where they had no kings, no laws, no money and no property, but 
where everybody lived like a prince, was very well-behaved and 
lacked for nothing. And these people lived in peace, but they were 
bored, because paradise can get that way after a time, and so they 
started to carry out missions of good works; charitable visits upon 
the less well-off, you might say; and they always tried to bring with 
them the thing that they saw as the most precious gift of all; know-
ledge; information; and as wide a spread of that information as 
possible, because these people were strange, in that they despised 
rank, and hated kings... and all things hierarchic... even Ethnarchs.' 
The young man smiled thinly. So did the Ethnarch. He wiped his brow 
and shifted back a little in the bed, as though getting more 
comfortable. Heart still pounding. 

'Well, for a time, a terrible force threatened to take away their good 
works, but they resisted it, and they won, and came out of the conflict 
stronger then before, and if they had not been so unconcerned with 
power for its own sake, they would have been terribly feared, but as 
it was they were only slightly feared, just as a matter of course given 
the scale of their power. And one of the ways it amused them to wield 
that power was to interfere in societies they thought might benefit 
from the experience, and one of the most efficient ways of doing that 
in a lot of societies is to get to the people at the top. 

'Many of their people become physicians to great leaders, and with 
medicines and treatments that seem like magic to the comparatively 
primitive people they're dealing with, ensure that a great and good 
leader has a better chance of surviving. That's the way they prefer to 
work; offering life, you see, rather than dealing death. You might call 
them soft, because they're very reluctant to kill, and they might agree 

with you, but they're soft the way the ocean is soft, and, well; ask 
any sea captain how harmless and puny the ocean can be.' 

'Yes, I see,' the Ethnarch said, sitting back a little further shifting a 
pillow into place behind his back, and checking just where he was in 
relation to the section of headboard that concealed the gun. His heart 
was thrashing in his chest. 

'Another thing they do, these people, another way they deal in life 
rather than death, is they offer leaders of certain societies below a 
certain technological level the one thing all the wealth and power 
those leaders command cannot buy them; a cure for death. A return 
to youth.' 

The Ethnarch stared at the young man, suddenly more intrigued than 
terrified. Did he mean the retro-ageing? 

'Ah; it's starting to click into place now, isn't it?' the young man 
smiled. 'Well, you're right. Just that process that you've been going 
through, Ethnarch Kerian. Which you've been paying for, this last 
year. Which you did - if you remember - promise to pay for with more 
than just platinum. Do you remember, hmmm?' 

'I... I'm not sure.' The Ethnarch Kerian stalled. He could see the panel 
in the headboard where the gun was from the corner of his eye. 

'You promised to stop the killings in Youricam, remember?' 

'I may have said I'd review our segregation and resettlement policy 
in the -' 

'No,' the young man waved his hand, 'I mean the killings, Ethnarch; 
the death trains, remember? The trains where the exhaust comes out 
of the rear carriage, eventually.' The young man made a sort of sneer 
with his mouth, shook his head. 'Trigger any memories, that? No?' 

'I have no idea what you're talking about,' the Ethnarch said. His 
palms were sweating, cold and slick. He rubbed them on the 
bedclothes; the gun mustn't slip, if he got to it. The intruder's gun 
was still lying on the bed's footboard. 

'Oh, I think you do. In fact, I know you do.' 

'If there have been any excesses by any members of the security 
forces, they will be thoroughly -' 

'This isn't a press conference, Ethnarch.' The man tipped slightly back 
in his seat, away from the gun on the footboard. The Ethnarch tensed, 
quivering. 

'The point is, you made a deal and then didn't stick to it. And I'm here 
to collect on the penalty clause. You were warned, Ethnarch. That 
which is given can also be taken away.' The intruder tipped further 
back in his seat, glanced round the dark suite, and nodded at the 
Ethnarch, while putting his hands clasped behind his head. 'Say 
goodbye to all this, Ethnarch Kerian. You're -' 

The Ethnarch turned, banged the hidden panel with his elbow, and 
the section of headboard flicked round; he tore the gun from its clips 
and swung it at the man, finding the trigger and pulling. 

Nothing happened. The young man was watching him, hands still 
behind his neck, body rocking slowly back and forward in the chair. 

The Ethnarch clicked the trigger a few more times. 

'Works better with these,' the man said, reaching into a shirt pocket, 
and throwing a dozen bullets onto the bed at the Ethnarch's feet. 

The gleaming bullets snicked at they rolled and gathered in a fold in 
the bedclothes. The Ethnarch Kerian stared at them. 

'... I'll give you anything,' he said, over a thick and dry tongue. He 
sensed his bowels start to relax, and squeezed desperately, feeling 
suddenly like a child again, as though the retro-ageing had taken him 
even further back. 'Anything. Anything. I can give you more than you 
ever dreamed of; I can -' 

'Not interested in that,' the man said, shaking his head. 'The story 
isn't finished yet. You see, these people; these nice kind people who 
are so soft and prefer to deal in life... when somebody goes back on 

a deal with them, even when somebody kills after they've said they 
wouldn't, they still don't like to kill in return. They'd rather use their 
magic and their precious compassion to do the next best thing. And 
so people disappear.' The man sat forward again, leaning on the 
footboard. The Ethnarch stared, shaking, at him. 

'They - these nice people - they disappear bad people,' the young 
man said. 'And they employ people to come and collect these bad 
men and take them away. And these people - these collectors - they 
like to put the fear of death into their collectees, and they tend to 
dress...' he gestured at his own colour-fully motley clothes, '... 
casually; and of course - thanks to the magic - they never have any 
problems getting into even the most heavily guarded palace.' 

The Ethnarch swallowed, and with one furiously shaking hand, finally 
put down the useless gun he was holding. 

'Wait,' he said, trying to control his voice. His sweat soaked the 
sheets. 'Are you saying -' 

'We're nearly at the end of the story,' the young man interrupted. 
'These nice people - who you would call soft, like I say - they remove 
the bad people, and they take them away. They put them somewhere 
they can't do any harm. Not a paradise, but not somewhere that feels 
like a prison, either. And these bad people, they might have to listen 
sometimes to the nice people telling them how bad they've been, and 
they never again get the chance to change histories, but they live a 
comfortable, safe life, and they die peacefully... thanks to the nice 
people. 

'And though some would say the nice people are too soft, the soft, 
nice people would say that the crimes committed by the bad people 
are usually so terrible there is no known way of making the bad 
people start to suffer even a millionth of the agony and despair they 
have produced, so what is the point in retribution? It would be just 
another obscenity to cap the tyrant's life with his own death.' The 
young man looked briefly troubled, then shrugged. 'Like I say; some 
people would say they're too soft.' He took the little gun from he 
footboard and put it into a pocket of his pantaloons. 

The man stood slowly. The Ethnarch's heart still pounded, but in his 
eyes there were tears. The young man leant down, picked up some 
clothes and threw them at the Ethnarch, who grabbed at them, held 
them to his chest. 

'My offer stands,' the Ethnarch Kerian said. 'I can give you -' 

'Job satisfaction,' the young man sighed, staring at one set of 
fingernails. 'That's all you can give me, Ethnarch. I'm not interested 
in anything else. Get dressed; you're leaving.' 

The Ethnarch started to pull on his shirt. 'Are you sure? I believe I 
have invented some new vices even the old Empire didn't know about. 
I'd be willing to share them with you.' 

'No, thank you.' 

'Who are these people you're talking about, anyway?' The Ethnarch 
fastened his buttons. 'And may I yet know your name?' 

'Just get dressed.' 

'Well, I still think we can come to some sort of arrangement...' The 
Ethnarch secured his collar. 'And this is all really quite ridiculous, but 
I suppose I ought to be thankful you're not an assassin, eh?' 

The young man smiled, seemed to pick something from a fingernail. 
He put his hands in the pantaloon pockets as the Ethnarch kicked the 
bedclothes down and picked up his britches. 

'Yes,' the young man said. 'Must be rather awful, thinking you're 
about to die.' 

'Not the most pleasant experience,' agreed the Ethnarch, putting one 
leg, then another, into his trousers. 

'But such a relief, I imagine, when you get the reprieve.' 

'Hmm.' The Ethnarch gave a small laugh. 

'A bit like being rounded up in a village and thinking you're going to 

be shot...' the young man mused, facing the Ethnarch from the foot 
of the bed. '... and then being told your fate is nothing worse than 
resettlement.' He smiled. The Ethnarch hesitated. 

'Resettled; by train,' the man said, taking the little black gun out of 
his pocket. 'By a train which contains your family; your street; your 
village...' 

The young man adjusted something on the small black gun. '... And 
then ends up containing nothing but engine fumes, and lots of dead 
people.' He smiled, thinly. 'What do you think, Ethnarch Kerian? 
Something like that?' 

The Ethnarch stopped moving, staring wide-eyed at the gun. 

'The nice people are called the Culture,' the young man explained, 
'And I always did think they were too soft.' He stretched his arm out, 
holding the gun. 'I stopped working for them some time ago. I'm 
freelance now.' 

The Ethnarch looked, speechless, into the dark, ancient eyes above 
the barrel of the black gun. 

'I,' said the man, 'am called Cheradenine Zakalwe.' He levelled the 
gun at the Ethnnarch's nose. 'You are called dead.' 

He fired the gun... The Ethnarch had put his head back and started 
to scream; so the single shot pierced the roof of his mouth before it 
exploded inside his skull. 

Brain's splattered over the ornate headboard. The body thumped into 
the skin-soft bedclothes and twitched once, spreading blood. 

Then, moving slowly, he peeled off the gaudy clothes. He put them 
in a small black rucksack. Underneath, the one-piece suit was 

shadow-dark. 

He took the matt-black mask from the rucksack and put it round his 
neck, though not yet over his face. He moved to the head of the bed 
and peeled a little transparent patch from the neck of the sleeping 
girl, then went back into the dark depths of the room, slipping the 
mask over his face as he did so. 

Using the nightsight, he undipped the panel over the security systems 
control unit, and carefully removed several small boxes. Then, 
walking very softly and slowly now, he crossed to the wall-sized 
pornographic painting which concealed the door to the Ethnarch's 
emergency escape route to the sewers and the palace roof. 

He turned back, before he slowly closed the door, and looked at the 
bloody mess on the curved carved surface of the headboard. He 
smiled his thin smile, a little uncertainly. 

Then he slipped away into the stone-black depths of the palace, like 
a piece of the night. 

The dam lay wedged between the tree-studded hills like a fragment 
from some enormous shattered cup. The morning sunshine shone up 
the valley, hit the concave grey face of the dam, and produced a 
white reflecting flood of light. Behind the dam, the long diminished 
lake was dark and cold. The water came less than halfway up the 
massive concrete bulwark, and the forests beyond had long since 
reclaimed over half the slopes the dam's rising water had once 
drowned. Sail-boats lay tethered to jetties strung along one side of 
the lake, the chopping waters slapping at their glistening hulls. 

High overhead, birds carved the air, circling in the warmth of the 
sunlight above the shadow of the dam. One of the birds dipped and 
swooped, gliding down towards the lip of the dam and the deserted 
roadway which ran along its curved summit. The bird pulled its wings 
in just as it seemed it was about to collide with the white railings 
which ran on either side of the road; it flashed between the dew-

sparkled stanchions, executed a half roll, partially opened its wings 
again, and plummeted towards the obsolete power station that had 
become the grandly eccentric - not to mention pointedly symbolic - 
home of the woman called Diziet Sma. 

The bird settled belly-down to the swoop, and, level with the roof 
garden, flung out its wings, grasping at the air and fluttering to a 
precipitous halt, talons tacketing down on a window ledge set in the 
highest storey of the old admin block apartments. 

Wings folded, soot-dark head to one side, one beady eye reflecting 
the concrete light, the bird hopped forward to a slid-open window, 
where soft red curtains rippled out into the breeze. It stuck its head 
under the fluttering hem of the material and peered into the darkened 
room beyond. 

'You missed it.' Sma said with quiet scorn, happening to pad past the 
window just at that moment. She sipped from a glass of water she 
held. Droplets from her shower beaded her tawny body. 

The bird's head swivelled, following her as she crossed to the closet 
and commenced to dress. Swivelling back, the bird's gaze shifted to 
the male body lying in the air a little less than a metre above the 
floor-mounted bed-base. Inside the dim haze of the bed's AG field, 
the pale figure of Relstoch Sussepin stirred, and rolled over in mid-
air. His arms floated out to either side, until the weak centering field 
on his side of the bed brought them slowly back in towards his body 
again. In the dressing room, Sma gargled with some water, then 
swallowed it. 

Fifty metres east, Skaffen-Amtiskaw floated high in the air above the 
floor of the turbine hall, surveying the wreckage of the party. The 
section of the drone's mind that was controlling the guard-drone 
disguised as a bird took a last look at the filigree of scratches on 
Sussepin's buttocks, and the already fading bite-marks on Sma's 
shoulders (as she covered them with a gauzy shirt), and then 
released the guard-drone from its control. 

The bird squawked, jumped back from the curtain, and fell fluttering 
and frenzied off the ledge, before opening its wings and beating back 

up past the gleaming face of the dam, its shrill alarm-cries echoing 
back from the concrete slopes and disturbing it further. Sma heard 
the distant feedback of commotion as she buttoned her waistcoat, 
and smiled. 

'Good night, no sleep,' Sma yawned, shooing the whining hralzs back 
into the building's marble hall, where Maikril the major-domo stood 
unhappily with a bunch of leads. She stepped out into the sunlight, 
pulling on gloves. The drone held the car door open for her. She filled 
her lungs with the fresh morning air and ran down the steps, boot 
heels clattering. She jumped into the car, winced a little as she settled 
in the driver's seat, then flicked a switch that started the roof folding 
back, while the drone loaded her luggage into the trunk. She tapped 
the battery gauges on the vehicle's dash and blipped the accelerator, 
just to feel the wheel motors strain against the brakes. The drone 
secured the trunk and floated into the rear seats. She waved to 
Maikril, who was chasing one of the hralzs along the steps outside the 
turbine hall, and didn't notice. Sma laughed, stood on the throttle and 
slipped the brakes. 

The car leapt off in a spray of gravel, took the right-hander beneath 
the trees with centimetres to spare, shot out through the station's 
granite gates with a farewell shimmy of its rear end, and accelerated 
hard down Riverside Drive. 

'We could have flown,' the drone pointed out, over the rush of air. 

But it suspected Sma wasn't listening. 

The semantics of fortification were pan-cultural, she thought, as she 
descended the stone steps from the curtain wall of the castle, gazing 
up at the drum-shaped keep, hazy in the distance on its hill behind 
several more layers of walls. She walked across the grass, Skaffen-
Amtiskaw at her shoulder, and exited the fort through a postern. 

The view led down to the new port and the straits, where seaships 
passed smoothly in the late morning sunlight, heading for ocean or 
inland sea, according to their lanes. From the other side of the castle 
complex, the city revealed its presence with a distant rumble and - 
because the light wind came from that direction - the smell of... well, 
she just thought of it as City, after three years here. She supposed 
all cities smelled different, though. 

Diziet Sma sat on the grass with her legs drawn up to her chin, and 
looked out across the straits and their arching suspension bridges to 
the sub-continent on the far shore. 

'Anything else?' the drone asked. 

'Yeah; take my name off the judging panel for the Academy show... 
and send a stalling letter to that Petrain guy.' She frowned in the 
sunlight, shading her eyes. 'Can't think of anything else.' 

The drone moved in front of her, teasing a small flower from the grass 
in front of her and playing with it. 'Xenophobe's just entered the 
system,' it told her. 

'Well happy day,' Sma said sourly. She wetted one finger and rubbed 
a little speck of dirt from the toe of one boot. 

'And that young man in your bed just surfaced; asking Maikril where 
you've got to.' 

Sma said nothing, though her shoulders shook once and she smiled. 
She lay back on the grass, one arm behind her. 

The sky was aquamarine, stroked with clouds. She could smell the 
grass, and taste the scent of small, crushed flowers. She looked back 
up over her forehead at the grey-black wall towering behind her, and 

wondered if the castle had ever been attacked on days like this. Did 
the sky seem so limitless, the waters of the straits so fresh and clean, 
the flowers so bright and fragrant, when men fought and screamed, 
hacked and staggered and fell and watched their blood mat the grass? 

Mists and dusk, rain and lowering cloud seemed the better 
background; clothes to cover the shame of battle. 

She stretched, suddenly tired, and shivered with a little flashback of 
the night's exertions. And, like somebody holding something 
precious, and it slipping from their fingers, but them having the speed 
and the skill to catch it again before it hit the floor, she was able - 
somewhere inside herself - to dip down and retrieve the vanishing 
memory as it slipped back into the clutter and noise of her mind, and 
glanding recall she held it, savoured it, re-experienced it, until she 
felt herself shiver again in the sunlight, and came close to making a 
little moaning noise. 

She let the memory escape, and coughed and sat up, glancing to see 
if the drone had noticed. It was nearby, collecting tiny flowers. 

A party of what she guessed were schoolchildren came chattering and 
squealing up the path from the metro station, heading towards the 
postern. Heading and tailing the noisy column were adults, possessed 
of that air of calmly tired wariness she'd seen before in teachers and 
mothers with many children. Some of the kids pointed at the floating 
drone as they passed, wide-eyed and giggling and asking questions, 
before they were ushered through the narrow gate, voices disap-
pearing. 

It was, she'd noticed, always the children who made a fuss like that. 
Adults just assumed that there was some trick behind the apparently 
unsupported body of the machine, but children wanted to know how 
it worked. One or two scientists and engineers had looked startled, 
too, but she guessed a stereotype of unworldiness meant nobody 
believed them that there must be something odd going on. Anti 
gravity was what was going on, and the drone in this society was like 
a flashlight in the stone age, but - to her surprise - it was almost 
disappointingly easy just to brazen it out. 

'The ships just met up,' the drone informed her. 'They're transferring 
the stand-in for real, rather than displacing it.' 

Sma laughed, plucked a blade of grass and sucked on it. 'Old JT really 
doesn't trust its displacer, does it?' 

'I think the thing's senile, myself,' the drone said sniffily. It was 
carefully slicing holes in the barely more than hair-thin stems of the 
flowers it had picked, then threading the stems through each other, 
creating a little chain. 

Sma watched the machine, its unseen fields manipulating the little 
blossoms as dexterously as any lace-maker flicking a pattern into 
existence. 

It was not always so refined. 

Once, maybe twenty years ago, far away on another planet in another 
part of the galaxy altogether, on the floor of a dry sea forever scoured 
by howling winds, beneath the mesa that had been islands on the 
dust that had been silt, she had lodged in a small frontier town at the 
limit of the railways' reach, preparatory to hiring mounts to venture 
into the deep desert and search out the new child messiah. 

At dusk, the riders came into the square, to take her from the inn; 
they'd heard her strangely coloured skin alone would fetch a 
handsome price. 

The inn-keeper made the mistake of trying to reason with the men, 
and was pinned to his own door with a sword; his daughters wept 
over him before they were dragged away. 

Sma turned, sickened, from the window, heard boots thunder on the 
rickety stairs. Skaffen-Amtiskaw was near the door. It looked, 
unhurried at her. Screams came from the square outside and from 
elsewhere inside the inn. Somebody battered at the door of her room, 
loosing dust and shaking the floor. Sma was wide eyed, bereft of 
stratagems. 

She stared at the drone. 'Do something,' she gulped. 

'My pleasure,' murmured Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 

The door burst open, slamming against the mud wall. Sma flinched. 
The two black-cloaked men filled the doorway. She could smell them. 
One strode in towards her, sword out, rope in the other hand, not 
noticing the drone at one side. 

'Excuse me,' said Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 

The man glanced at the machine, without breaking stride. 

Then he wasn't there any more, and dust filled the room, and Sma's 
ears were ringing, and pieces of mud and paper were falling from the 
ceiling and fluttering through the air, and there was a large hole 
straight through the wall into the next room, across from where 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
- 
seemingly 
defying 
the 
law 
concerning 

action/reaction - hovered in exactly the same place as before. A 
woman shrieked hysterically in the room through the hole, where 
what was left of the man was embedded in the wall above her bed, 
his blood spattered copiously over ceiling, floor, walls, bed and her. 

The second man whirled into the room, discharging a long gun point-
blank at the drone; the bullet became a flat coin of metal a centimetre 
in front of the machine's snout, and clunked to the floor. The man 
unsheathed and swung his sword in one flashing movement, scything 
at the drone through the dust and smoke. The blade broke cleanly on 
a bump of red-coloured field just above the machine's casing, then 
the man was lifted off his feet. 

Sma was crouched down in one corner, dust in her mouth and hands 
at her ears, listening to herself scream. 

The man thrashed wildly in the centre of the room for a second, then 
he was a blur through the air above her, there was another colossal 
pulse of sound, and a ragged aperture appeared in the wall over her 
head, beside the window looking out to the square. The floorboards 
jumped and dust choked her. 'Stop!' she screamed. The wall above 
the hole cracked and the ceiling creaked and bowed down, releasing 
lumps of mud and straw. Dust clogged her mouth and nose and she 
struggled to her feet, almost throwing herself out of the window in 

her desperate attempt to find air. 'Stop,' she croaked, coughing dust. 

The drone floated smoothly to her side, wafting dust away from Sma's 
face with a field-plane, and supporting the sagging ceiling with a 
slender column. Both field components were shaded deep red, the 
colour of drone pleasure. 'There, there,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said to 
her, patting her back, Sma choked and spluttered from the window 
and stared horrified at the square below. 

The body of the second man lay like a sodden red sack under a cloud 
of dust in the midst of the riders. While they were still staring, before 
most of the raiders could raise their swords, and before the inn-
keeper's daughters - being lashed to two of the mounts by their 
captors - realised what the almost unrecognisable lump on the ground 
in front of them was and started screaming again, something 
thrummed past Sma's shoulder and darted down towards the men. 

One of the warriors roared, brandishing his sword and lunging 
towards the door of the inn. 

He managed two steps. He was still roaring when the knife missile 
flicked past him, field outstretched. 

It separated his neck from his shoulders. The roar turned to a sound 
like the wind, bubbling thickly through the exposed wind-pipe as his 
body crashed to the dust. 

Faster - and turning more tightly - than any bird or insect, the knife 
missile made an almost invisibly quick circle round most of the riders, 
producing an odd stuttering noise. 

Seven of the riders - five standing, two still mounted - collapsed into 
the dust, in fourteen separate pieces. Sma tried to scream at the 
drone, to make the missile stop, but she was still choking, and now 
starting to retch. The drone patted her back. 'There, there,' it said, 
concernedly. In the square, both of the inn-keeper's daughters 
slipped to the ground from the mounts they had been tied to, their 
bonds slashed in the same cut that had killed all seven men. The 
drone gave a little shudder of satisfaction. 

One man dropped his sword and started to run. The knife missile 
plunged straight through him. It curved like red light shining on a 
hook, and slashed across the necks of the last two dismounted riders, 
felling both. The mount of the final rider was rearing up in front of 
the missile, its fangs bared, forelegs lashing, claws exposed. The 
device went through its neck and straight into the face of its rider. 

On emerging from the resulting detonation, the machine slammed to 
a stop in mid-air, while the rider's headless body slid off his 
collapsing, thrashing animal. The knife missile spun slowly about, 
seemingly reviewing its few seconds' work, then it started to float 
back towards the window. 

The inn-keeper's daughters had fainted. 

Sma vomited. 

The frenzied mounts leapt and screamed and ran about the courtyard, 
a couple of them dragging bits of their riders with them. 

The knife missile swooped and butted one of the hysterical mounts 
on the head, just as the animal was about to trample the two girls 
lying still in the dust, then the tiny machine dragged them both out 
of the carnage, towards the doorway where their father's body lay. 

Finally, the sleek, spotless little device rose gently to the window - 
daintily avoiding Sma's projected bile - and snicked back into the 
drone's casing. 

'Bastard!' Sma tried to punch the drone, then kick it, then picked up 
a small chair and smashed it against the drone's body. 'Bastard! You 
fucking murderous bastard!' 

'Sma,' the drone said reasonably, not moving in the slowly settling 
maelstrom of dust, and still holding the ceiling up. 'You said do 
something.' 

'Meatfucker!' She smashed a table across its back. 

'Ms Sma; language!' 

'You split-prick shit, I told you to stop!' 

'Oh. Did you? I didn't quite catch that. Sorry.' 

She stopped then, hearing the utter lack of concern in the machine's 
voice. She thought very clearly that she had a choice here; she could 
collapse weeping and sobbing and not get over this for a long time, 
and maybe never be out of the shadow of the contrast between the 
drone's cool and her breakdown; or. 

She took a deep breath, calmed herself. 

She walked up to the drone and said quietly, 'All right; this time... 
you get away with it. Enjoy it when you play it back.' She put one 
hand flat on the drone's side. 'Yeah; enjoy. But if you ever do 
anything like that again...' she slapped its flank softly and whispered, 
'you're ore, understand?' 

'Absolutely,' said the drone. 

'Slag; components; motherjunk.' 

'Oh, please, no,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw sighed. 

'I'm serious. You use minimum force from now on. Understand? 
Agree?' 

'Both.' 

She turned, picked up her bag and headed for the door, glancing once 
into the adjoining room through the hole the first man had made. The 
woman in there had fled. The man's body was still cratered into the 
wall, blood like rays of ejecta. 

Sma looked back to the machine, and spat on the floor. 

suddenly there in front of her, its body shining in the sunlight. 'Here.' 
It stretched a field out, offering her the little chain of bright flowers it 
had made. 

Sma bowed towards it; the machine slipped the chain over her head 
like a necklace. She stood up and they went back into the castle. 

'When's it get here?' Sma said, listening to the warm wind hum 
through the jagged spaces of the aerials around her. 

'It's over there,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, jabbing forward. She looked 
in the direction it had indicated, and could just make out the spare, 
curved outline of a four-person module, sitting nearby; it was giving 
a very good impression of being transparent. 

Sma looked around the forest of masts and stays for a moment, the 
wind ruffling her hair, then shook her head. She walked to the 
module-shape, momentarily dizzied by the sensation that there 
wasn't anything there, then that there was. A door swung up from 
the module's side, revealing the interior as though opening a 
passageway into another world, which was - in a sense, she supposed 
- exactly what it was doing. 

She and the drone entered. 'Welcome aboard, Ms Sma,' said the 

module. 

'Hello.' 

The door closed. The module tipped back on its rear end, like a 
predator preparing to pounce. It waited a moment for a flock of birds 
to clear the airspace a hundred metres above, then it was gone, 
powering into the air. Watching from the ground - if they hadn't 
blinked at the wrong moment - a very keen-eyed observer might just 
have seen a column of trembling air flick skyward from the summit 
of the keep, but would have heard nothing; even in high supersonic 
the module could move more quietly than any bird, displacing tissue-
thin layers of air immediately ahead of it, moving into the vacuum so 
created, and replacing the gases in the skin-thin space it had left 
behind; a falling feather produced more turbulence. 

Standing in the module, gazing at the main screen, Sma watched the 
view beneath the module shrink rapidly, as the concentric layers of 
the castle's defences came crashing in like time-reversed waves from 
the edges of the screen; the castle became a dot between the city 
and the straits, and then the city itself disappeared and the view 
began to tip as the module angled out for its rendezvous with the 
very fast picket Xenophobe. 

Sma sat down, still watching the screen, eyes searching in vain for 
the valley on the outskirts of the city where the dam and the old 
power station lay. 

The drone watched too, while it signalled to the waiting ship and 
received confirmation the vessel had displaced Sma's luggage out of 
the trunk of the car and into the woman's quarters on board. 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw studied Sma, as she stared - a little glumly, it 
thought - at the hazing-over view on the module screen, and 
wondered when the best time would be to give her the rest of the bad 
news. 

Because, despite all this wonderful technology, somehow (incredibly; 
uniquely, as far as the drone knew... how in the name of chaos did a 
lump of meat outwit and destroy a knife missile?), the man called 

Cheradenine Zakalwe had shaken off the tail they'd put on him after 
he'd resigned the last time. 

So, before they did anything else, Sma and it had to find the damn 
human first. If they could. 

A minute later, something that looked exactly like Diziet Sma joined 
the tour party, while the guide was explaining how developments in 
artillery, heavier-than-air flight and rocketry had made the ancient 
fortress obsolete. 

They shared their eyrie with the state coach of the Mythoclast, a 
cluttered army of statues, and a jumble of assorted chests, cases and 
cupboards packed with treasure from a dozen great houses. 

Astil Tremerst Keiver selected a roquelaure from a tall chiffonier, 
closed the cabinet's door and admired himself in the mirror. Yes, the 
cloak looked very fine on him, very fine indeed. He flourished it, 
pirouetting, drew his ceremonial rifle from its scabbard, and then 
made a circuit of the room, around the grand state coach, making a 
'ki-shauw, ki-shauw!' noise, and pointing the gun at each black-
curtained window in turn as he swept by them (his shadow dancing 
gloriously across the walls and the cold grey outlines of the statues), 
before arriving back at the fireplace, sheathing the rifle, and sitting 
suddenly and imperiously down on a highly-wrought little chair of 
finest bloodwood. 

The chair collapsed. He thumped into the flagstones and the bolstered 

gun at the side fired, sending a round into the angle between the floor 
and the curve of wall behind him. 

'Shit, shit, shit!' he cried, inspecting his breeks and cloak, respectively 
grazed and holed. 

The door of the state coach burst open and someone flew out, 
crashing into an escritoire and demolishing it. The man was still and 
steady in an instant, presenting - in that infuriatingly efficient martial 
way of his - the smallest possible target, and pointing the appallingly 
large and ugly plasma cannon straight at the face of deputy vice-
regent-in-waiting Astil Tremerst Keiver the Eighth. 

'Eek! Zakalwe!' Keiver heard himself say, and threw the cloak over 
his head. (Damn!) 

When Keiver brought the cloak down again - with, he felt, all the not 
inconsiderable dignity he could muster - the mercenary was already 
rising from the debris of the little desk, taking a quick look round the 
room, and switching off the plasma weapon. 

Keiver was, naturally, immediately aware of the hateful similarity of 
their positions, and so stood up quickly. 

'Ah. Zakalwe. I beg your pardon. Did I wake you?' 

The man scowled, glanced down at the remains of the escritoire, 
slammed shut the door of the state coach, and said, 'No; just a bad 
dream.' 

'Ah. Good.' Keiver fiddled with the ornamental pommel of his gun, 
wishing that Zakalwe didn't make him feel - so unjustifiably, dammit 
- inferior, and crossed in front of the fireplace to sit (carefully, this 
time) on a preposterous porcelain throne stationed to one side of the 
hearth. 

He watched the mercenary sit down on the hearth-stone, leaving the 
plasma cannon on the floor in front of him and stretching. 'Well, a 
half watch's sleep will have to suffice.' 

'Hmm,' Keiver said, feeling awkward. He glanced at the ceremonial 
coach the other man had been sleeping in, and so recently vacated. 
'Ah.' Keiver drew the roquelaure about him, and smiled. 'I don't 
suppose you know the story behind that old carriage, do you?' 

The mercenary - the so-called (Ha!) War Minister - shrugged. 'Well,' 
he said. 'The version I heard was that in the Interregnum, the 
Archpresbyter told the Mythoclast he could have the tribute, income 
and souls of all the monasteries he could raise his state coach above, 
using one horse. The Mythoclast accepted, founded this castle and 
erected this tower with foreign loans, and using a highly efficient 
pulley system powered by his prize stallion, winched the coach up 
here during the Thirty Golden Days to claim every monastery in the 
land. He won the bet and the resulting war, disestablished the Final 
Priesthood, paid off his debts, and only perished because the groom 
in charge of the prize stallion objected to the fact that the beast died 
of its exertions, and strangled him with its blood and foam-flecked 
bridle... which, according to legend, is immured within the base of 
the porcelain throne you're sitting on. So we're told.' He looked at the 
other man and shrugged again. 

Keiver was aware that his mouth was hanging open. He closed it. 'Ah, 
you know the story.' 

'No; just a wild guess.' 

Keiver hesitated, then laughed loudly. 'By hell! You're a rum chap, 
Zakalwe!' 

The mercenary stirred the remains of the bloodwood chair with one 
heavily-booted foot, and said nothing. 

Keiver was aware that he ought to do something, and so stood. He 
wandered to the nearest window, drew back the drape and unlocked 
the interior shutters, levered the external shutters aside and stood, 
arm against the stones, gazing out at the view beyond. 

The Winter Palace, besieged. 

Outside, on the snow-strewn plain, amongst the fires and trenches, 

there were huge wooden siege structures and missile launchers, 
heavy artillery and rock-throwing catapults; juried field projectors 
and gas-powered-searchlights; a heinous collection of blatant 
anachronisms, 
developmental 
paradoxes 
and 
technological 

juxtapositions. And they called it progress. 

'I don't know,' Keiver breathed. 'Men fire guided missiles, from their 
mounts' saddles; jets are shot down by guided arrows; throw-knives 
explode like artillery shells, or like as not get turned back by ancestral 
armour backed by these damned field projectors... where's it all to 
end, eh, Zakalwe?' 

'Here, in about three heartbeats, if you don't close those shutters or 
pull the black-out drapes behind you.' He stabbed at the logs in the 
grate with a poker. 

'Ha!' Keiver withdrew rapidly from the window, half ducking as he 
pulled the lever to close the external shutters. 'Quite!' He hauled the 
drape across the window, dusting down his hands, watching the other 
man as he prodded at the logs in the fire. 'Indeed!' He took his place 
on the porcelain throne again. 

Of course, Mr so-called War Minister Zakalwe liked to pretend he did 
have an idea where it was all going to end; he claimed to have some 
sort of explanation for it all, about outside forces, the balance of 
technology, and the erratic escalation of military wizardry. He always 
seemed to be hinting at greater themes and conflicts, beyond the 
mere here-and-now, forever trying to establish some - frankly 
laughable - otherworldly superiority. As though that made any 
difference to the fact that he was nothing more than a mercenary - a 
very lucky mercenary - who'd happened to catch the ear of the Sacred 
Heirs and impress them with a mixture of absurdly risky exploits and 
cowardly plans, while the one he'd been paired with - him, Astil 
Tremerst Keiver the Eighth, deputy regent-in-waiting, no less - had 
behind him a thousand years of breeding, natural seniority and - 
indeed, for that was just the way things were, dammit - superiority. 
After all, what sort of War Minister - even in these desperate days - 
was so incapable of delegating that he had to sit out a watch up here, 
waiting for an attack that would probably never come? 

Keiver glanced at the other man, sitting staring into the flames, and 
wondered what he was thinking. 

I blame Sma. She got me into this crock of shit. 

He looked around the cluttered spaces of the room. What had he to 
do with idiots like Keiver, with all this historical junk, with any of this? 
He didn't feel part of it, could not identify with it, and he did not 
entirely blame them for not listening to him. He supposed he did have 
the satisfaction of knowing that he had warned the fools, but that was 
little enough to warm yourself with, on a cold and closing night like 
this. 

He'd fought; put his life at risk for them, won a few desperate rear-
guard actions, and he had tried to tell them what they ought to do; 
but they'd listened too late, and given him some limited power only 
after the war was already more or less lost. But that was just the way 
they were; they were the bosses, and if their whole way of life 
vanished because it was a tenet of that way that people like them 
automatically knew how to make war better than even the most 
experienced commoners or outsiders, then that was not unjust; 
everything came level in the end. And if it meant their deaths, let 
them all die. 

In the meantime, while supplies held out, what could be more 
pleasant? No more long cold marches, no boggy excuses for camps, 
no outside latrines, no scorched earth to try and scrape a meal from. 
Not much action, and maybe he would get itchy feet eventually, but 
that was more than compensated for by being able to satisfy the more 
highly-placed itches of some of the noble ladies also trapped in the 
castle. 

Anyway, he knew in his heart that there was a relief in not being 
listened to, sometimes. Power meant responsibility. Advice unacted 
upon almost always might have been right, and in the working out of 
whatever plan was followed, there was anyway always blood; better 
it was on their hands. The good soldier did as he was told, and if he 
had any sense at all volunteered for nothing, especially promotion. 

'Ha,' Keiver said, rocking in the china chair. 'We found more grass 

seed today.' 

'Oh, good.' 

'Indeed.' 

Most of the courtyards, gardens and patios were already given over 
to pasture; they'd torn the roofs off some of the less architecturally 
important halls and planted there as well. If they weren't blown to 
bits in the meantime, they might - in theory - feed a quarter of the 
castle's garrison indefinitely. 

Keiver shivered, and wrapped the cloak more tightly about his legs. 
'But this is a cold old place, Zakalwe, isn't it?' 

He was about to say something in reply when the door at the far end 
of the room opened a crack. 

He grabbed the plasma cannon. 

'Is... is everything all right?' said a quiet, female voice. 

He put the gun down, smiling at the small pale face peering from the 
doorway, long black hair following the line of the door's studded 
wood. 

'Ah, Neinte!' Keiver exclaimed, rising only to bow deeply to the young 
girl (princess, indeed!) who was - technically, at least, not that that 
precluded other, more productive, even lucrative, relationships in the 
future - his ward. 

'Come on in,' he heard the mercenary tell the girl. 

(Damn him, always taking the initiative like that; who did he think he 
was?) 

The girl crept into the room, gathering her skirts in front of her. 'I 
thought I heard a shot...' 

The mercenary laughed. 'That was a little time ago,' he said, rising to 
show the girl to a seat near the fire. 

'Well,' she said, 'I had to dress...' 

The man laughed louder. 

'My lady,' Keiver said, rising slightly late, and flourishing what would 
now - thanks to Zakalwe - look like a rather awkward bow. 'Forfend 
we should have disturbed your maidenly slumber...' 

Keiver heard the other man stifle a guffaw as he kicked a log further 
into the fire. The princess Neinte giggled. Keiver felt his face heat up, 
and decided to laugh. 

Neinte - still very young, but already beautiful in a delicate, fragile 
way - wrapped her arms round her drawn-up legs, and stared into 
the fire. 

He looked from her to Keiver, in the silence that followed (except that 
the deputy vice-regent-in-waiting said, 'Yes, well.'), and thought - as 
the logs crackled and the scarlet flames danced - how like statues the 
two young people suddenly looked. 

Just once, he thought, I'd like to know whose side I'm really on in 
something like this. Here I am, in this absurd fortress, packed with 
riches, crammed with concentrated nobility - such as it was, he 
thought, watching Keiver's vacant-looking eyes - facing out the 
hordes beyond (all claw and tackle, brute force and brute intelligence) 
trying to protect these delicate, simpering products of a millennia's 
privilege, and never knowing whether I'm doing the tactically or the 
strategically right thing. 

The Minds did not assume such distinctions; to them, there was no 
cut-off between the two. Tactics cohered into strategy, strategy 
disintegrated into tactics, in the sliding scale of their dialectical moral 
algebra. It was all more than they ever expected the mammal brain 
to cope with. 

He recalled what Sma had said to him, long long ago back in that new 
beginning (itself the product of so much guilt and pain); that they 
dealt in the intrinsically untoward, where rules were forged as you 
went along and were never the same twice anyway, where just by 

the nature of things nothing could be known, or predicted, or even 
judged with any real certainty. It all sounded very sophisticated and 
abstract and challenging to work with, but in the end it came down 
to people and problems. 

This girl was what it came down to, here, this time; barely more than 
a child, and trapped in the great stone castle with the rest of the 
cream or scum (depending on how you looked at it), to live or die, 
depending on how well I advise, and on how capable these clowns 
are of taking that advice. 

He looked at the girl's, flame-lit face, and felt something more than 
distant desire (for she was attractive), or fatherly protectiveness (for 
she was so young, and he, despite his appearance, so old). Call it... 
he didn't know what. A realisation; an awareness of the tragedy the 
whole episode represented; the break-up of the Rule, the dissolution 
of power and privilege and the whole elaborate, top-heavy system 
this child represented. 

The muck and dirt, the king with fleas. For theft, mutilation; for the 
wrong thoughts, death. An infant mortality rate as astronomical as 
the life-expectancy was minute, and the whole grisly, working 
package wrapped in a skein of wealth and advantage designed to 
maintain the dark dominion of the knowing over the ignorant (and 
the worst of it was the pattern; the repetition; the twisted variations 
of the same depraved theme in so many different places). 

So this girl, called a princess. Would she die? The war was going 
against them, he knew, and the same symbolic grammar that 
presented her with the prospect of power if things went well, also 
dictated her use, her expendability, if all failed about them. Rank 
demanded its tribute; the obsequious bow or the mean stab, 
according to the outcome of this struggle. 

He saw her suddenly old, in the flickering firelight. He saw her shut 
in some slimed dungeon, waiting, hoping, scabbed with lice and 
ragged in sack-cloth, head shaved, eyes dark and hollow in the raw 
skin, and finally marched out one snow-filled day, to be nailed to a 
wall with arrows or bullets, or face the cold axe blade. 

Or maybe that too was too romantic. Maybe there would be some 
desperate flight to asylum, a lonely and bitter exile spent growing old 
and worn, barren and senile, forever remembering the ever more 
golden old times, composing futile petitions, hoping for a return, but 
growing slowly, inevitably, into something like the pampered 
uselessness her upbringing had always conditioned her for, but 
without any of the compensations she had been bred to expect from 
her station. 

With a feeling of sickness, he saw that she meant nothing. She was 
just another irrelevant part of another history, heading - with or 
without the Culture's carefully evaluated nudges in what they saw as 
the right direction - for what would probably be better times and an 
easier life for most. But not her, he suspected, not right at this 
moment. 

Born twenty years earlier, she might have expected a good marriage, 
a productive estate, access to the court, and lusty sons, talented 
daughters... twenty years from now, perhaps an astutely mercantile 
husband, or even - in the unlikely event this particular genderist 
society was heading that way so soon - a life of her own; academic, 
in business, doing good works; whatever. 

But, probably, death. 

High in a turret of a great castle rising on a black crag above snowy 
plains, besieged and grand, crammed full of an empire's treasure, 
and he sitting by a log fire was a sad and lovely princess... I used to 
dream about such things, he thought. I used to long for them, ache 
for them. They seemed the very stuff of life, its essence. So why does 
all this taste of ashes? 

I should have stayed on that beach, Sma. Perhaps after all I am 
getting too old for this. 

He made himself look away from the girl. Sma said he tended to get 
too involved, and she was not totally wrong. He'd done what they'd 
asked; he'd be paid, and at the end of all this, after all, there was his 
own attempt to claim absolution for a past crime. Livueta, say you 
will forgive me. 

'Oh!' The princess Neinte had just noticed the wreckage of the 
bloodwood chair. 

'Yes,' Keiver stirred uncomfortably. 'That, ah... that was, umm, me, 
I'm afraid. Was it yours? Your family's?' 

'Oh, no! But I knew it; it belonged to my uncle; the archduke. It used 
to be in his hunting lodge. It had a great big animal's head above it. 
I was always frightened to sit in it because I dreamt the head would 
fall from the wall and one of the tusks would stick right into my head 
and I'd die!' She looked at both men in turn and giggled nervously. 
'Wasn't I silly?' 

'Ha!' said Keiver. 

(While he watched them both and shivered. And tried to smile.) 

'Well,' Keiver laughed. 'You must promise not to tell your uncle that 
I broke his little seat, or I shall never be invited to one of his hunts 
again!' Keiver laughed louder. 'Why, I might even end up with my 
head fixed on one of his walls!' 

The girl squealed and put a hand to her mouth. 

(He looked away, shivering again, then threw a piece of wood onto 
the fire, and did not notice then or afterwards that it was a piece of 
the bloodwood chair he had added to the flames, and not a log at all.) 

Sma suspected a lot of ship crews were crazy. For that matter, she 
suspected a fair few of the ships themselves weren't totally together 
in the sanity department, either. There were only twenty people on 
the very fast picket Xenophobe, and Sma had noticed that - as a 
general rule - the smaller the crew, the weirder the behaviour. So she 
was already prepared for the ship's staff being pretty off the wall even 
before the module entered the ship's hangar. 

'Ah-choo!' the young crewman sneezed, covering his nose with one 

hand while extending the other to Sma as she stepped from the 
module. Sma jerked her hand back, looking at the young man's red 
nose and streaming eyes. 'Ais Disgarb, Ms Sma,' the fellow said, 
blinking and sniffing, and looking hurt, 'Belcome aboard.' 

Sma put her hand out again cautiously. The crewman's hand was 
extremely hot. 'Thank you,' Sma said. 

'Skaffen-Amtiskaw,' the drone said from behind her. 

'Heddo,' the young man waved at the drone. He took a small piece of 
cloth from one sleeve and dabbed at his leaky eyes and nose. 

'Are you entirely all right?' Sma said. 

'Dot really,' he said. 'God a cold. Blease,' he indicated to one side, 
'cob with be.' 

'A cold,' Sma nodded, falling into step alongside the fellow; he was 
dressed in a jellaba, as though he'd just got out of bed. 

'Yes,' the young man said, leading the way through the Xenophobe's 
collection of smallcraft, satellites and assorted paraphernalia towards 
the rear of the hangar. He sneezed again, sniffed. 'Sobthig ob a fad 
on the shib ad the bow-bid.' (Here Sma, immediately behind the man 
as they walked between two closely parked modules, turned quickly 
back to look at Skaffen-Amtiskaw and mouthed the word. 'What?' at 
it, but the machine wobbled, shrugging. ME NEITHER it printed on its 
aura field, in letters of grey on a rosy background.) 'Be all tought it'd 
be abusing to relax our ibude systebs and cadge colds,' the young 
crewman explained, showing her and the drone into an elevator at 
one end of the hangar. 

'All of you?' Sma said, as the door closed and the elevator rolled and 
rose. 'The whole crew?' 

'Yes, dough dot all ad the sabe tibe. The peebil who've recobered say 
id's very pleasid abter it's ober.' 

'Yes,' Sma said, glancing at the drone, which was keeping a standard 

pattern of formal blue on its aura field, apart from one large red dot 
on its side that probably only she could see; it was pulsing rapidly. 
When she noticed it she almost started laughing herself. She cleared 
her throat. 'Yes, I suppose it would be.' 

The young man sneezed mightily. 

'Due for a spot of R-and-R soon, are we?' Skaffen-Amtiskaw asked 
him. Sma nudged the machine with her elbow. 

The young crewman looked puzzledly at the machine. 'Jusd bidished 
sub, adjilly.' 

He glanced away to the elevator door as it started to open, Skaffen-
Amtiskaw and Sma exchanged looks; Sma crossed her eyes. 

They stepped into a wide social area, floored and walled with some 
dark red wood, polished to the point of gleaming; it supported a 
variety of richly upholstered couches and chairs, and a few low tables. 
The ceiling wasn't particularly high, but very attractive, composed of 
great flutes of gathered-up material rippling in from the walls and 
hung with many little lanterns. From the light level, it looked to be 
early morning, ship time. A group of people round one of the tables 
broke up and came towards her. 

'Biz Sba,' the young crewman said indicating Sma, his voice seeming 
to get thicker all the time. The other people - about fifty-fifty men 
and women - smiled, introduced themselves. She nodded, exchanged 
a few words; the drone said hello. 

One of the people in the group held a little bundle of brown and yellow 
fur, cradled against one shoulder rather as one might hold a baby. 
'Here.' the man said, presenting the tiny furry creature to Sma. She 
took it reluctantly. It was warm, had four limbs arranged 
conventionally, smelled attractive and wasn't any sort of animal she'd 
ever seen before; it had large ears on a large head, and as she held 
it, it opened its huge eyes and looked at her. 'That's the ship,' the 
man who'd handed her the animal said. 

'Hello,' the tiny being squeaked. 

Sma looked it up and down. 'You're the Xenophobe?' 

'Its representative. The bit you can talk to. You can call me Xeny.' It 
smiled; it had little round teeth. 'I know most ships just use a drone, 
but,' it glanced at Skaffen-Amtiskaw, 'they can be a bit boring, don't 
you think?' 

Sma smiled, and sensed Skaffen-Amtiskaw's aura flicker out of the 
corner of her eye. 'Well, sometimes,' she agreed. 

'Oh yes,' the little creature said, nodding. 'I'm much cuter.' It 
wriggled in her hands, looking happy. 'If you like,' it giggled, 'I'll show 
you to your cabin, yes?' 

'Yes; good idea,' nodded Sma, and put the thing over her shoulder. 
The crewpeople called out to say they'd see her later as she, the 
ship's bizarre remote drone and Skaffen-Amtiskaw headed for the 
accommodation section. 

'Ooh, you're nice and warm,' the little brown and yellow creature 
mumbled sleepily, snuggling into Sma's neck as they headed down a 
deeply carpeted corridor for Sma's quarters. It stirred and she found 
herself patting its back. 'Left here,' it said, at a junction, then, That's 
us just breaking orbit now, by the way.' 

'Good,' Sma said. 

'Can I cuddle up with you when you sleep?' 

Sma stopped, detached the creature from her shoulder with one hand 
and stared it in the face. 'What?' 

'Just for chumminess' sake,' the little thing said, yawning wide and 
blinking. 'I'm not being rude; it's a good bonding procedure.' 

Sma was aware of Skaffen-Amtiskaw glowing red just behind her. 
She brought the yellow and brown device closer to her face. 
'Listen, Xenophobe -' 

'Xeny.' 

'Xeny; you are a million-tonne starship; a Torturer class Rapid 
Offensive Unit. Even -' 

'But I'm demilitarised!' 

'Even without your principal armament, I bet you could waste planets 
if you wanted to -' 

'Aw, come on; any silly GCU can do that!' 

'So what is all this shit for?' She shook the furry little remote drone, 
quite hard. Its teeth chattered. 

'It's for a laugh!' it cried. 'Sma; don't you appreciate a joke?' 

'I don't know. Do you appreciate being drop-kicked back to the 
accommodation area?' 

'Ooo! What's your problem, lady? Have you got something against 
small furry animals, or what? Look, Ms Sma; I know very well I'm a 
ship, and I do everything I'm asked to do - including taking you to 
this frankly rather fuzzily specified destination - and do it very 
efficiently, too. If there was the slightest sniff of any real action, and 
I had to start acting like a warship, this construct in your hands would 
go lifeless and limp immediately, and I'd battle as ferociously and 
decisively as I've been trained to. Meanwhile, like my human 
colleagues, I amuse myself harmlessly. If you really hate my current 
appearance, all right; I'll change it; I'll be an ordinary drone, or just 
a disembodied voice, or talk to you through Skaffen-Amtiskaw here, 
or through your personal terminal. The last thing I want to do 
is offend a guest.' 

Sma pursed her lips. She patted the thing on its head, and sighed. 
'Fair enough.' 

'I can keep this shape?' 

'By all means.' 

'Oh goody!' It squirmed with pleasure, then opened its big eyes wide 
and looked hopefully at her. 'Cuddle?' 

'Cuddle.' Sma cuddled it, patted its back. 

She turned to see Skaffen-Amtiskaw lying dramatically on its back in 
mid-air, its aura field flashing the lurid orange that was used to signal 
Sick Drone in Extreme Distress. 

She turned to Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 'How long are we on this ship for?' 

'Thirty days?' Skaffen-Amtiskaw suggested. 

Sma gritted her teeth and looked round the fairly cosy-looking but - 
compared to the echoing spaces of the old power station mansion - 
rather small cabin. 'Thirty days with a crew of viral masochists and a 
ship that thinks it's a cuddly toy.' She shook her head, sat into the 
bed field. 'Subjectively, drone, this could be a long trip.' She collapsed 
back into the bed, muttering. 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw decided right now would probably still not be the 
best time to tell the woman about Zakalwe being missing. 

'I'll just go and take a look round, if you don't mind,' it said, drifting 
towards the door over the neat line of bags that was Sma's luggage. 

'Yeah, on you go,' Sma waved one arm lazily, then shucked off the 
jacket and let it fall to the deck. 

The drone had almost made it to the door when Sma sat bolt upright, 
a frown on her face, and said, 'Wait a minute; what did the ship mean 
about "... rather fuzzily specified destination"? Doesn't it know where 
the hell we're going?' 

Oh-oh, thought the drone. 

It spun in the air. 'Ah,' it said. 

Sma's eyes narrowed. 'We are just going to get Zakalwe, aren't we?' 

'Yes. Of course.' 

'We're not doing anything else?' 

'Absolutely not. We find Zakalwe; we brief him; we take him to 
Voerenhutz. Simple as that. We might be asked to hang around for a 
bit, overseeing, but that isn't definite yet.' 

'Yes, yes, I expected that, but... where exactly is Zakalwe?' 

'Where exactly?' The drone said. 'Well, I mean; you know, that's...' 

'All right,' Sma said, exasperated, 'approximately, then.' 

'No problem,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, backing off towards the door. 

'No problem?' Sma said, puzzled. 

'Yes; no problem. We know that. Where he is.' 

'Good,' Sma nodded. 'Well?' 

'Well what?' 

'Well,' Sma said loudly, 'where is he?' 

'Crastalier.' 

'Cras...?' 

'Crastalier. That's where we're heading.' 

Sma shook her head, yawned. 'Never heard of it.' She flopped back 
in the bed field, stretching. 'Crastalier.' Her yawn deepened; she put 
a hand to her mouth. 'You only had to say that the first time, 
goddamit.' 

'Sorry,' the drone said. 

'Mmm. Never mind.' Sma put out one hand, waved it through the 
bedside beam that controlled the cabin lights, so that they dimmed. 
She yawned again. 'Think I'll catch some sleep. Take my boots off, 
will you?' 

Gently but quickly, the drone slipped Sma's boots off, gathered her 
jacket and hung it in a walk-in cupboard, swept the bags in there too, 
then - as Sma turned over in the bed field, eyes fluttering closed - 
the drone slipped out of the room. 

It hovered in the air outside, looking at its reflection in the polished 
wood on the far side of the corridor. 

'That,' it said to itself, 'was close.' Then it went for a wander. 

Sma eye's flicked wide; she yelped, spluttered, jumped back from the 
door, a scream gathering in her throat. 

The instant after her eyes had widened, before the signal to jump 
back from the door had travelled all the way to her leg muscles, there 
was an impression of almost invisibly sudden movement in the cabin, 
belatedly followed by a bang and a sizzling sound. 

There, stationed between her and the door, were all three of the 
drone's knife missiles, hovering roughly level with her eyes, sternum 
and groin; she was looking at them through a haze of field the 
machine had also thrown in front of her. Then it clicked off. 

The knife missiles swung lazily away through the air and clicked back 
into Skaffen-Amtiskaw's casing. 'Don't do that to me,' the machine 
muttered, returning to sorting out Sma's socks. 

Sma wiped her mouth and stared at the three-metre tall, brown and 
yellow coloured furry monster cowering in the corridor outside the 
door. 

'Ship... Xeny, what the hell are you doing?' 

'I'm sorry,' the huge creature said, its voice only a little deeper than 
when it had been baby-sized. 'I thought if you didn't relate to a small 
furry animal, perhaps a bigger version...' 

'Shee-it.' Sma said, shaking her head. 'Come in,' she called, heading 
back for the bathroom area. 'Or did you just want to show me how 
much you've grown?' She rinsed out the paste and spat. 

Xeny squeezed through the door, stooped, and sidled into a corner. 
'Sorry about that, Skaffen-Amtiskaw.' 

'No problem,' the other machine replied. 

'Ah, no, Ms Sma,' Xeny called. 'I actually wanted to talk to you 
about...' 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw went still, just for a second. There was, in fact, a 
fairly lengthy, detailed and slightly heated exchange between the 
drone and the ship's Mind during that time, but Sma was only aware 
of Xeny pausing as it spoke. 

'... about having a fancy-dress party, this evening, in your honour,' 
the ship improvised. 

Sma smiled from the bathroom area, 'That's a lovely idea, ship. Thank 
you, Xeny. Yes; why not?' 

'Good; I just thought I'd check with you, first. Any ideas about 
costumes?' 

Sma laughed. 'Yeah; I'll go as you; make me one of those suits you're 

wearing.' 

'Ha. Yes. Good idea. Actually, that might be rather a common choice, 
but we'll make it two people can't go as the same thing. Right. I'll 
talk to you later.' Xeny lumbered from the room and the door slid 
shut. Sma appeared out from the bathroom area, slightly surprised 
at this sudden departure, but just shrugged. 

'Short but eventful visit,' she observed, rummaging through the socks 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw had just carefully arranged in chromatic order. 
'That machine's weird.' 

'What do you expect?' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 'It's a star-ship.' 

- You might (the ship Mind communicated to Skaffen-Amtiskaw) have 
told me you were keeping the size of our target destination from her. 

- I am hoping (the drone replied) that our people already out there 
will find the guy we're looking for and give us an exact position, in 
which case Sma will never need to know there was ever any problem. 

- Indeed, but why not just be honest with her in the first place? 

- Ha! You don't know Sma! 

- Oh. Do I take it she's temperamental? 

- What do you expect? She's a human! 

serious, thorough-going whoopee). 

Sma breakfasted, was shown round the ship - though there was little 
to see; the ship was almost all engine - and spent most of the rest of 
the day reviewing her knowledge of the Voerenhutz cluster's history 
and politics. 

The ship sent formal invitations to each of the crew, and specified a 
strict rule of No Shop Talk. It hoped that this, plus the narcotic wealth 
of the consumables, would keep everybody off the subject of where 
exactly they were heading for. It had toyed with the idea of just telling 
people there was a problem here and asking them not to talk about 
it, but suspected there were at least two of the crew who would take 
such a proscription as a challenge to their integrity requiring them to 
raise the issue at the first possible opportunity. It was on occasions 
like this that the Xenophobe tended to consider changing its status to 
that of an unstaffed ship, but it knew it would miss the humans if it 
did decide to ask them to leave; they were fun to have around, 
usually. 

The ship played loud music, showed exciting screen holos, and set up 
a fabulous surrounding holo landscape of lush green and blue, filled 
with floating bushes and hovering trees where strange, eight-winged 
birds capered and beyond which a glowing white layer of mist plied 
by tall, feathery cloudships extended to neck-stretchingly tall cliffs of 
pastel-shaded rock, set about with further small clouds, draped with 
blue and sparkling gold waterfalls, and topped by fabulous cities of 
spires and slender bridges. Ship-slaved soligrams of famous historical 
figures wandered about the party, adding to the illusion of numbers, 
and were only too happy to engage the disguised revellers in 
conversation. More treats and surprises were promised for later. 

Sma went as Xeny, Skaffen-Amtiskaw as a model of the Xenophobe, 
and the ship itself produced yet another remote drone; an aquatic 
one, still brown and yellow, but looking like a rather fat and large-
eyed fish, and floating in a field-held metre-diameter sphere of water 
which drifted through the party-space like some odd balloon. 

'Ais Disgarve, who you've met before,' the ship drone said, voice 
sounding rather bubbly as it introduced Sma to the young man who'd 

greeted her in the hangar the day before. 'And Jetart Hrine.' 

Sma smiled, nodded at Disgarve - making a mental note to stop 
thinking of him as Disgarb - and the young woman at his side. 

'Hello again. How do you do?' 

'Heddo,' said Disgarve, dressed as some sort of ancient cold-climate 
explorer, all swathed in furs. 

'Hi,' Jetart Hrine said. She was quite short and round, very young 
looking, and her skin was so black it was almost blue. She wore some 
ancient - and surprisingly brightly coloured - military uniform, and 
sported a smooth-bore projectile rifle slung over one shoulder. She 
sipped from a glass and said. 'I know there's no shop talk, Ms Sma, 
but frankly Ais and I have been wondering why our dest -' 

'Aah!' the ship drone said, its water sphere suddenly collapsing. Water 
crashed all around the feet of Sma, Hrine and Disgarve, all of whom 
jumped back a little. The fish-drone fell to the red wood deck and 
flapped around. 'Water!' it croaked. Sma picked it up by the tail. 

'What happened?' she asked it. 

'Field malfunction. Water! Quickly!' 

Sma looked at Disgarve and Hrine, both of whom seemed rather 
bemused. Skaffen-Amtiskaw, in its starship disguise, wound quickly 
through the party-goers towards them. 'Water!' the ship drone 
repeated, wriggling. 

A frown gathered on Sma's brow, inside the brown and yellow suit. 
She looked at the woman dressed as a soldier. 'What were you about 
to say, Ms Hrine?' 

'I was - oof!' 

A one-in-five-hundred-and-twelfth scale model of the very fast 
picket Xenophobe thumped into the woman, making her stagger 
backwards, dropping her glass. 

'Hey!' Disgarve said, pushing the offending Skaffen-Amtiskaw away. 
Hrine looked annoyed, and rubbed her shoulder. 

'Sorry; clumsy me!' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, loudly. 

'Water! Water!' yelped the ship drone, struggling in Sma's furry paw. 

'Shut up!' Sma told it. She went close to Jetart Hrine, putting her own 
body between the woman and Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 'Ms Hrine; 
complete your question, would you?' 

'I just wanted to know why...' 

The floor shook, the entire landscape around them trembled; light 
flashed from high above, and as they looked up, they saw the 
fabulous gleaming cities of the cliff tops far above disappear in vast 
blooms of light, which slowly faded, leaving falling clouds of debris, 
crashing towers and disintegrating bridges. The mighty cliffs split 
asunder and kilometres-high tsunami of seething lava and boiling 
grey-black clouds of smoke and ash burst out, exploding over the 
quivering landscape below, where the cloudships were sinking and 
the eight-winged birds were spinning so fast their wings were coming 
off, sending them spinning into the blue-green shrubbery in 
squawking explosions of feathers and leaves. 

Jetart Hrine stared in disbelief. Sma grabbed the woman's collar with 
one paw and shook her. 'It's trying to distract you!' she yelled. She 
turned to the fish-drone in her other paw. 'Cut it out!' she screamed 
at it. She shook the woman again, while Disgarve tried to pry her paw 
away from the woman. Sma shook his hand off. 'What were you trying 
to say?' 

'Why don't we know where we're going?' Hrine shouted into Sma's 
face, over the noise of the earth splitting open in a gout of flame. A 
huge black shape reared from the chasm, red-eyed. 

'We're going to Crastalier!' Sma yelled. A vast silver human baby 
appeared in the sky, shining, beatific and be-rayed, spun about with 
glowing figures. 

'So what?' Hrine bellowed, as lightning zapped from mega-baby to 
earth-beast and thunder assaulted the ears. 'Crastalier's an Open 
Cluster; there must be half a million stars in it!' 

Sma froze. 

The holos went back to the way they had been before the cataclysms. 
The music resumed, but it was quieter now, and very soothing. The 
ship's crew stood around, looking mystified. There was much 
shrugging. 

The piscine ship-drone and Skaffen-Amtiskaw exchanged looks. The 
ship drone, still held in Sma's paw, suddenly became the holo of a 
fish 
skeleton. 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
projected 
the 
model 
of 

the Xenophobe tumbling disintegrating and trailing smoke to the 
deck. They both flashed back to their previous disguises as Sma 
turned slowly and looked at them both. 

'An... Open... Cluster?' she said, and took off the brown and yellow 
head of the fancy-dress suit. 

Sma's mouth was in the shape of a smile. It was not an expression 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw had learned to view with anything other than 
extreme trepidation. 

- Oh shit. 

- I think we are in the presence of one annoyed human female, 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 

- You don't say. Any ideas? 

- None whatsoever. You can field this; my fish-like ass is out of here. 

- Ship! You can't do this to me! 

- Can and am. This is your prototype. Talk to me later. Bye. 

The fish-drone went limp in Sma's paw. She let it drop to the water-
slicked floor. 

The drone dispensed with the warship disguise; it floated in front of 
her, fields on clear. It dipped its front a little, held it there. 'Sma,' it 
said quietly. 'I'm sorry. I didn't lie but I did deceive.' 

'My cabin,' Sma said calmly, after a brief pause. 'Excuse us,' she said 
to Disgarve and Hrine, and walked away, followed by the drone. 

'I thought if I told you, you wouldn't come.' 

'Drone; this is my job.' 

'I know, but you were so reluctant to leave...' 

'After three years, with no warning, what do you expect? But how 
long did I actually hold out? Even knowing about the stand-in? Come 
on, drone; you told me what the situation was and I accepted. There 
was no need to keep quiet about Zakalwe giving us the slip.' 

'I'm sorry,' the drone said, very quietly. 'This is inadequate, I know, 
but I really am sorry. Please say you might be able to forgive me one 
day.' 

'Oh, don't take the contrition bit too far. Just tell me things in future.' 

'All right.' 

Sma let her head drop for a moment, then brought it back up. 'You 
can start by telling me how Zakalwe got away. What did we have 
trailing him?' 

'A knife missile.' 

'Quite a late model, too,' the drone said. 'Nanoguns, mono-filament 
warps, effector; point seven value brain.' 

'And Zakalwe got away from this beast?' Sma was almost laughing. 

'Not just away; he wasted it.' 

'Shee-it,' Sma breathed. 'I didn't think Zakalwe was that 
smart. Was he smart, or just incredibly lucky? What happened? How 
did he do it?' 

'Well, it's very secret,' the drone said. 'So please don't tell anybody 
at all.' 

'My honour,' Sma said ironically, palm on chest. 

'Well,' the drone said, making a sighing noise. 'It took him a year to 
set up but, on the place where we dropped him - after his last job for 
us - the local humanoids shared their planet with large sea-going 
mammals of about equivalent intelligence; quite a viable symbiotic 
relationship, with much cross-cultural contact. Zakalwe - using the 
exchange we'd given him as payment for his work - bought a 
company which made medical and signalling lasers. His trap involved 
a hospital facility the humanoids were setting up on the coast of an 
ocean to treat these sea-going mammals. One of the pieces of 
medical equipment being tested was a very large Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance Scanner.' 

'A what?' 

'Fourth most primitive way of looking inside your average water-
based living being.' 

'Go on.' 

The process involves the use of extremely strong magnetic fields. 
Zakalwe was supposedly testing a laser attached to the machine - on 
a holiday, when there was nobody else around - when he somehow 

got the knife missile to enter the scanning machine, and then turned 
on the power.' 

'I thought knife missiles weren't magnetic.' 

'They're not, but there was just enough metal in it to set up crippling 
eddy currents if it tried to move too fast.' 

'But it could still move.' 

'Not fast enough to get out of the way of the laser Zakalwe had set 
up at one end of the scanner. It was only supposed to illuminate, to 
help produce holos of the mammals, but Zakalwe had in fact installed 
a military strength device; it grilled the knife missile.' 

'Wow.' Sma nodded, staring down at the floor. 'The man never ceases 
to amaze.' She looked at the drone. 'Zakalwe must have wanted away 
from us awful bad.' 

'It looks that way,' agreed the drone. 

'So maybe there's no way he'll want to work for us again. Maybe he 
never wants even to hear from us again.' 

'I'm afraid that must be a possibility.' 

'Even if we can find him.' 

'Quite.' 

'And all we know is that he's somewhere in an Open Cluster called 
Crastalier?' Sma's voice sounded tinged with disbelief. 

'It's a bit more focused than that,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 'There are 
maybe ten or twelve systems he could be in by now, if he left 
immediately after stiffing the knife missile, and took the fastest ships 
available. Thankfully, the tech level in the meta-civilisation 
isn't that high.' The drone hesitated, then said. 'To be honest, we 
might have been able to catch up with him, if we'd gone in fast and 
strong immediately... But I think the controlling Minds were so 
impressed with Zakalwe's trick they thought he deserved to get away. 

We kept a very general watch on the volume, but it's only in the last 
ten days the search has become serious. We're bringing in ships and 
people from wherever we can now; I'm sure we'll find him.' 

'Ten or twelve systems, drone?' Sma said shaking her head. 

'Twenty-plus planets; maybe three hundred sizeable space habitats... 
not including ships, of course.' 

Sma closed her eyes. Her head shook. 'I don't believe this.' 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw thought the better of saying anything. 

The woman's eyes opened. 'Want to pass on a suggestion or two?' 

'Certainly.' 

'Forget the habitats. And forget any planets that aren't fairly 
Standard; check out... deserts, temperate zones; forests but not 
jungles... and no cities.' She shrugged, rubbed her mouth with her 
hand. 'If he's still trying hard to stay hidden, we'll never find him. If 
he only wanted to get away to live his own life without being watched, 
we have a chance. Oh, and look for wars, of course. Especially wars 
that aren't too big... and interesting wars, know what I mean?' 

'Right. Transmitted.' Normally the drone would have poured scorn on 
this bit of amateur psychological sleuthing, but this time it decided to 
bite its metaphorical tongue, and relayed Sma's remarks to the 
unresponding ship for transmission to the search fleet ahead of them. 

Sma took a deep breath, shoulders rising and falling. 'Party still going 
on?' 

'Yes,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, surprised. 

Sma jumped off the bed and stepped into the Xeny suit. 'Well; let's 
not be party poopers.' 

She fastened the suit, scooped up the brown and yellow head and 
walked for the door. 

'Sma,' the drone said, following. 'I thought you'd be mad.' 

'Maybe I will be, once the calm wears off,' she admitted, opening the 
door and putting the suit head on. 'But just right now, I really can't 
be bothered.' 

They went down the corridor. She looked back at the clear-fielded 
machine behind her; 'Come on, drone; it's meant to be fancy dress. 
But try something a little more imaginative than a warship this time.' 

'Hmm,' the machine said. 'Any suggestions?' 

'I don't know,' Sma sighed, 'What would suit you? I mean, what is 
the perfect role-model for a cowardly lying patronising hypocritical 
bastard with no trust in or respect for another person?' 

There was silence from behind as they approached the noise and light 
of the party. So she turned round and, instead of the drone, saw a 
classically proportioned, handsome, but somehow anonymous-
looking young man following her down the corridor, his gaze just 
moving up from her behind to her eyes. 

Sma laughed. 'Yes; very good.' She walked a few more steps. 'On 
second thoughts, I think I preferred the warship.' 

He never wrote things in the sand. He resented even leaving 
footprints. He saw it as a one-way commerce; he did the beach-
combing, and the sea provided the materials. The sand was the 
middle-man, displaying the goods as though it was a long, soggy shop 
counter. He liked the simplicity of this arrangement. 

Sometimes he watched the ships passing, far out to sea. Now and 
again he'd wish that he was on one of the tiny dark shapes, on his 
way to some bright and strange place, or on his way - imagining 
harder - to a quiet home port, to twinkling lights, amiable laughter, 
friends and welcome. But usually he ignored the slow specks, and got 
on with his walking and gathering, and kept his eyes on the grey-

brown wash of the beach's slope. The horizon was clear and far and 
empty, the wind sang low in the dunes, and the seabirds wheeled and 
cried, comfortingly random and argumentative in the cold skies 
above. 

The brash, noisy home-cars came sometimes, from the interior. The 
home-cars were loaded with shining metal and flashing lights, they 
had multi-coloured windows and highly ornamental grilles, they 
fluttered with flags and dripped with enthusiastically imagined but 
sloppily executed paint-jobs, and they groaned and flexed, over-
loaded, as they came coughing and spluttering and belching fumes 
down the sandy track from the parktown. Adults leaned out of 
windows or stood one-legged on running boards; children ran 
alongside, or clung to the ladders and straps that covered their sides, 
or sat squealing and shouting on the roof. 

They came to see the strange man who lived in a funny wooden shack 
in the dunes. They were fascinated, if also slightly repelled, by the 
strangeness of living in something that was dug into the ground, 
something that did not - could not - move. They would stare at the 
line where the wood and tar-paper met the sand, and shake their 
heads, walking right round the small, skewed hut, as if looking for 
the wheels. They talked amongst themselves, trying to imagine what 
it must be like to have the same view and the same sort of weather 
all the time. They opened the rickety door and sniffed the dark, 
smoky, man-scented air inside the hut, and shut the door quickly, 
declaring that it must be unhealthy to live in the same place, joined 
to the earth. Insects. Rot. Stale air. 

He ignored them. He could understand their language, but he 
pretended not to. He knew that the ever-changing population of the 
parktown inland called him the tree-man, because they liked to 
imagine he had put down roots like his wheel-less shack had. He was 
usually out when they came to the shack, anyway. They lost interest 
in it fairly quickly, he found; they went to the shore line to shriek 
when they got their feet wet, and throw stones at the waves, and 
build little cars in the sand; then they climbed back into their home-
cars, and went sputtering and creaking back inland, lights flashing, 
horns honking, leaving him alone again. 

He found dead seabirds all the time, and the washed-up carcases of 
sea mammals every few days. Beachweed and sea-flowers lay strewn 
like party streamers over the sands, and - when they dried - rippled 
in the wind and slowly unravelled, finally disintegrating to be blown 
out to sea or far inland in bright clouds of colour and decay. 

Once he found a dead sailor, lying washed and bloated by the ocean, 
extremities nibbled, one leg moving to the slow foamy beat of the 
sea. He stood and looked at the man for a while, then emptied his 
canvas bag of its flotsam booty, tore it flat, and gently covered the 
man's head and upper torso with it. The tide was ebbing, so he did 
not drag the body further up the beach. He walked to the parktown, 
for once not pushing his little wooden cart of tide treasure before him, 
and told the sheriff there. 

The day he found the little chair he ignored it, but it was still there 
when he walked back past that stretch of beach on his return. He 
went on, and the next day combed in the other direction towards a 
different flat horizon, and thought the gale the following night would 
have removed it, but found it there again, the next day, and so took 
it, and in his shack repaired it with twine and a new leg made from a 
washed-up branch, and put it by the door of the shack, but never sat 
in it. 

A woman came to the shack, every five or six days. He'd met her in 
parktown, soon after he'd arrived, on the third or fourth day of a 
drinking binge. He paid her in the mornings, always more than he 
thought she expected, because he knew she was frightened by the 
strange, unmoving shack, 

She'd talk to him about her old loves and old hopes and new hopes 
and he half listened, knowing she thought he didn't really understand 
what she was saying. When he talked it was in another language, and 
the story was even less believeable. The woman would lie close to 
him, her head on his smooth and unscarred chest, while he talked 
into the dark air above the bed, his voice not echoing in the wood-
flimsy space of the shack, and he'd tell her, in words she would never 
understand, about the magic land where everyone was a wizard and 
nobody ever had terrible choices to make, and guilt was almost 
unknown, and poverty and degradation were things you had to teach 

children about to let them understand how fortunate they were, and 
where no hearts broke. 

He told her about a man, a warrior, who'd worked for the wizard doing 
things they could or would not bring themselves to do, and who 
eventually could work for them no more, because in the course of 
some driven, personal campaign to rid himself of a burden he would 
not admit to - and even the wizards had not discovered - he found, 
in the end, that he had only added to that weight, and his ability to 
bear was not without limit after all. 

And he told her, sometimes, about another time and another place, 
far away in space and far away in time and even further away in 
history, where four children had played together in a huge and 
wonderful garden, but seen their idyll destroyed with gunfire, and of 
the boy who became a youth and then a man, but who for ever after 
carried more than love for a girl in his heart. Years later, he would 
tell her, a small but terrible war was waged in this faraway place, and 
the garden itself laid waste. (And, eventually, the man did lose the 
girl from his heart.) Finally, when he had almost talked himself to 
sleep, and the night was at its darkest, and the girl was long since 
gone to the land of dreams, sometimes he would whisper to her about 
a great warship, a great metal warship, becalmed in stone but still 
dreadful and awful and potent, and about the two sisters who were 
the balance of that warship's fate, and about their own fates, and 
about the Chair, and the Chairmaker. 

Then he would sleep, and when he woke, each time, the girl and the 
money would be gone. 

He would turn back to the dark tar-paper walls then, and seek sleep, 
but not find it, and so rise and dress and go out, and comb the 
horizon-wide beach again, under the blue skies or the black skies, 
beneath the wheeling seabirds screaming their meaningless songs to 
the sea and the brine-charged breeze. 

The weather varied, and because he'd never bothered to find out, he 
never knew what season it was, but the weather swung between 
warm and bright and cold and dull, and sometimes sleet came, 
chilling him, and winds blew around the dark hut, keening through 

the gaps in the planks and the tar-paper, and stirring the slack 
disturbances of sand on the floor inside the shack like abraded 
memories. 

Sand would build up inside the hut, blown in from one direction or 
another, and he would scoop it carefully, throw it out the door to the 
wind like an offering, and wait for the next storm. 

He always suspected there was a pattern to these slow sandy 
inundations, but he could not bring himself to try to work out what 
that pattern was. Anyway, every few days he had to trundle his little 
wooden cart into the parktown, and sell his sea-begotten wares, and 
collect money, and so food, and so the girl that came to the shack 
every five days or six. 

The parktown changed every time he went there, streets being 
created or evaporating as the home cars arrived or departed; it all 
depended where people chose to park. There were some fairly static 
landmarks, like the sheriff's compound and the fuel stockade and the 
smithy wagon and the area where the light-engineering caravans set 
up shop, but even those changed slowly, and all about them was in 
constant flux, so that the geography of the parktown was never the 
same on two visits. He drew a secret satisfaction from this inchoate 
permanence, and did not hate going there as much as he pretended. 

The track there was rutted and soft, and never got any shorter; he 
always hoped the random shiftings of the parktown might slowly draw 
its bustle and light closer to him, but it never happened, and he would 
console himself with the thought that if the parktown came closer 
then so would the people, and their bumbling inquisitiveness. 

There was a girl in the parktown, the daughter of one of the dealers 
he traded with, who seemed to care for him more than the others; 
she made him drinks and brought him sweetmeats from her father's 
caravan, and seldom said anything, but slipped the food to him, and 
smiled shyly and walked quickly off again, her pet seabird - flightless, 
half of each wing cut off - waddling after her, squawking. 

He said nothing to her that he didn't have to say, and always averted 
his eyes from her slim brown shape. He did not know what the 

courting laws were in this place, and while accepting the drink and 
food always seemed the easiest course, he did not want to intrude 
any more than he had to in the lives of these people. He told himself 
she and her family would move away soon, and accepted the offerings 
she brought him with a nod but no smile or word, and did not always 
finish what he was given. He noticed there was a young man who 
always seemed to be around whenever the girl served him, and he 
caught the boy's eyes a few times, and knew that the youth wanted 
the girl, and looked away each time. 

The young man came after him one day when he was on his way back 
to the shack within the dunes. The youth walked in front of him and 
tried to make him talk; hit him on the shoulder, shouting into his 
face. He feigned incomprehension. The young man drew lines in the 
sand in front of him which he duly plodded over with his cart and 
stood looking, blinking at the youth, both hands still on the handles 
of the cart, while the boy shouted louder and drew another line on 
the sand between them. 

Eventually, he got fed up with the whole performance, and the next 
time the young man prodded his shoulder he took his arm and twisted 
it and forced the youth to the sand and held him there for a while, 
twisting the arm in its socket just enough - he hoped - to avoid 
breaking anything but with sufficient force to disable the fellow for a 
minute or two while he took up his cart again and trundled it slowly 
away over the dunes. 

It seemed to work. 

Two nights later - the night after the regular woman had come and 
he'd told her about the terrible battleship and the two sisters and the 
man who was not yet forgiven - the girl came knocking at his door. 
The pet seabird with the clipped wings jumped and squawked outside 
while the cried and told him she loved him and there'd been an 
argument with her father, and he tried to push her away, but she 
slipped in underneath his arm and lay weeping on his bed. 

He looked out into the starless night and stared into the eyes of the 
crippled, silent bird. Then he went over to the bed, dragged the girl 
from it and forced her out of the door, slamming it and bolting it. 

Her cries, and those of the bird, came through the gaps in the planks 
for a while, like the seeping sand. He stuck his fingers in his ears and 
pulled the grimy covers over his head. 

Her family, the sheriff, and perhaps twenty other people from the 
parktown, came for him the next night. 

The girl had been found that evening, battered and raped and dead 
on the path from his shack. He stood in the doorway of the hut, 
looking out into the torch-lit crowd, met the eyes of the young man 
who had wanted the girl, and knew. 

There was nothing he could do, because the guilt in one pair of eyes 
was outshone by the vengeance in too many others, and so he 
slammed the door and ran, across the shack and straight through the 
rickety planks on the far side and out into the dunes and the night. 

He fought five of them that night and nearly killed two, until he found 
the young man and one of his friends searching unenthusiastically for 
him back near the track. 

He clubbed the friend unconscious, took the young man by the throat. 
He gathered up both their knives, and held one blade to the throat of 
the youth as he marched him back to the shack. 

He set fire to the shack. 

When the light had attracted a dozen or so of the men, he stood up 
on the tallest dune above the hollow, holding the youth with one 
hand. 

The parktown people gazed up at the stranger, lit by flames. He let 
the boy fall to the sand, threw him both knives. 

The boy picked up the knives; charged. 

He moved, let the boy go past, disarmed him. He gathered both 
knives; threw them hilt down in the sand in front of the boy. The 
youth struck out again, knife in each hand. Again - hardly seeming to 
move - he let the youth crash past, and slipped the knives from his 

grasp. He tripped the youth, and while he was still lying on the dune's 
top, threw the knives, sending them both thudding into the sand a 
centimetre on either side of his head. The youth screamed, plucked 
both blades out and threw them. 

His head hardly moved as they hissed by his ears. The people 
watching in the flame-lit hollow moved their heads, following the 
trajectory the knives had to take, to the dunes behind them. But when 
they looked back again, wondering, both blades were in the stranger's 
hands, plucked from the air. He tossed them to the boy again. 

The youth caught them, screamed, fumbled blood-handed to get 
them the right way round, and rushed again at the stranger, who 
dropped him, whacked the knives from his hands, and for a long 
moment held one of the young man's elbows poised over his knee, 
arm raised, ready to break... then shoved the boy away. He picked 
up the knives again, placed them in the open palms of the youth. 

He listened to the boy sobbing into the dark sand, while the people 
watched. 

He got ready to run again, glancing behind him. 

The crippled seabird hopped and fluttered, clipped wings beating on 
air and sand, to the top of the dune. It cocked one flame-bright eye 
at the stranger. 

The people in the hollow seemed frozen by the dancing flames. 

The bird waddled to the prone, sobbing figure of the boy on the sand, 
and screamed. It flapped, shrieked, and stabbed at the boy's eyes. 

The boy tried to fend it off, but the bird leapt into the air and whooped 
and beat and feathers flew and when the boy broke one of its wings 
and it fell to the sand, facing away from him, it jetted liquid shit at 
him. 

The boy's face fell back to the sand. His body shook with sobs. 

The stranger watched the eyes of the people in the hollow, while his 

shack caved in and the orange sparks swirled up into the still night 
sky. 

Eventually the sheriff and the girl's father came and took the boy 
away, and a moon later the girl's family left, and two moons later the 
tightly bound body of the young man was lowered into a freshly 
picked hole in the nearest outcrop of rock, and covered with stones. 

The woman stopped coming to him; he never saw her again. He told 
himself he was getting so little for his haul that he could not have 
paid her and eaten as well. 

The worst thing, he found, was that there was nobody to talk to. 

Twenty metres from the woman, he stopped and carefully inspected 
a length of fishing net on the tideline, the floats still attached and 
gleaming like earth-bound suns in the low morning light. 

He glanced at the woman. She was sitting, legs crossed, arms folded 
across her lap, staring out to sea. Her simple gown was the colour of 
the sky. 

He went up to the woman and put his new canvas bag down at her 
side. She did not move. 

After a hundred or so waves had approached and broken and slipped 
away again, he cleared his throat. 

'A few times,' he said, 'I had the feeling I was being watched.' 

Sma said nothing for a while. The seabirds pivoted inside the spaces 
of the air, calling in a language he still did not understand. 

'Oh, people have always felt that,' Sma said, at last. 

He smoothed away a wormcast in the sand. 'I don't belong to you 
Diziet.' 

'No,' she said, turning to him. 'You're right. You don't belong to us. 
All we can do is ask.' 

'What?' 

'That you come back. We have a job for you.' 

'What is it?' 

'Oh...' Sma smoothed her gown over her knees. 'Helping to drag a 
bunch of aristos into the next millenium, from the inside.' 

'Why?' 

'It's important.' 

'Isn't everything?' 

'And we can pay you properly this time.' 

'You paid me off very handsomely the last time. Lots of money and a 
new body. What more can a chap ask for?' He gestured at the canvas 
bag at her side, and at himself, clothed in salt-stained rags. 'Don't let 
this fool you. I haven't lost the loot. I'm a rich man; very rich, here.' 
He watched the waves roll up towards them, then break and foam 

and fall away again. 'I just wanted the simple life, for a while.' He 
gave a sort of half-laugh, and realised it was the first time he'd even 
started to laugh since he'd come here. 

'I know,' Sma said. 'But this is different. Like I said; we can pay you 
properly, now.' 

He looked at her. 'Enough. No more being cryptic. What do you 
mean?' 

She turned her gaze to him. He had to work hard at not looking away. 

'We've found Livueta,' she said. 

He stared into her eyes for a time, and then blinked and looked away. 
He cleared his throat, looking back out to the glittering sea, and had 
to sniff and wipe his eyes. Sma watched as the man moved one hand 
slowly to his chest, not realising he was doing it, and rubbed at the 
skin there, just over his heart. 

'Mm-hmm. You're sure?' 

'Yes, we're sure.' 

He looked out over the waves after that, and suddenly felt that they 
were no longer bringing things to him, no longer messengers from 
the distant storms offering their bounty, but instead had become a 
pathway; a route, another distant sort of opportunity, beckoning. 

That simple? he thought to himself. A word - a single name - from 
Sma and I'm all ready to go, take off, and take up their arms again? 
Because of her? 

He let a few more waves roll up and down. The seabirds wailed. Then 
he sighed. 'All right,' he said. He pushed one hand up through his 
tangled, matted hair. 'Tell me about it.' 

'The fact remains,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw insisted, 'that the last time we 

went through this rigmarole, Zakalwe fucked up. They froze his ass 
in that Winter Palace.' 

'All right,' Sma said. 'But it wasn't like him. Okay, so one time he gets 
it wrong... we don't know why. So maybe now he's had time to get 
over it, he'll actually want a chance to show he can still do the 
business. Maybe he can't wait for us to find him.' 

'Good grief,' sighed the drone. 'Wishful thinking from Sma the 
Cynical. Maybe you're starting to lose your touch too.' 

'Oh shut up.' 

She watched the planet swing towards them on the module screen. 

As an ice breaker, the fancy-dress party had been a crushing success. 
Sma had woken up in a cushion-filled alcove of the rec area, birth-
naked and in a tangle of assorted equally nude limbs and torsos. She 
had extricated one arm carefully from under the voluptuous sleeping 
form of Jetart Hrine, stood shakily, and gazed round the softly 
breathing bodies, appraising the men in particular, and then - 
treading very carefully, nearly over-balancing several times on the 
plump cushions, her muscles all complaining and trembly - tip-toed 
her way between the slumbering crew to the welcome solidity of the 
red-wood floor. The rest of the area had already been tidied. The ship 
must have sorted out everybody's clothes, for they lay in neat piles 
on a couple of large tables, just outside the alcove. 

Sma massaged her slightly tingling genitals, grimacing. Bending over, 
they looked quite pink and raw; things looked slippery, and she 
decided she needed a bath. 

The drone met her at the entrance to the corridor. Its red glowing 
field looked at least partially like a comment. 'Good night's sleep?' it 

inquired. 'Don't start that again.' 

The drone floated at her shoulder as she headed for the elevator. 

'You've made friends with the crew, then.' 

She nodded. 'Very good friends with all of them, by the feel of it. 
Where's the ship's pool?' 

'Floor above the hangar,' the machine said, following her into the 
elevator. 

'Record anything exciting last night?' Sma asked, leaning back 
against the elevator wall as they dropped. 

'Sma,' exclaimed the drone. 'I would not be so ungallant!' 

'Hmm.' She raised one eyebrow. The elevator stopped, door opening. 
'What memories, though,' the drone said, breathily. 'Your appetite 
and stamina are a credit to your species. I think.' 

Sma dived into the smaller whirlpool, and, on surfacing, spat a jet of 
water at the machine, which dodged and backed into the elevator. 
'I'll just leave you to it, then. Judging from last night, even an 
innocent offensive-model drone isn't safe from you once you get the 
bit between your teeth. So to speak.' 

Sma splashed at it. 'Get out of here, you prurient pisspot.' 

'And sweet-talking won't work ei...' the drone said, as the elevator 
door closed. 

She would not have been surprised if the atmosphere in the ship had 
been a little embarrassed for a day or two thereafter, but the crew 
seemed quite cool about it all, and she decided that, basically, they 
were good sports. Happily, the fad for having colds passed quickly. 
She settled down to studying Voerenhutz, trying to guess where in 
the interlinked civilisations they were heading for Zakalwe might be... 
and enjoying herself, though - in the case of the latter activity - not 
on anything like the same scale or with quite the same frenetic 
abandon as she obviously had on her first night aboard. 

Ten days out, the Just Testing sent news that Gainly had been 
delivered of twins; mother and pups doing well. Sma prepared a 
signal that her stand-in was to give the hralz a big kiss, from her, 
then hesitated, realising that the machine that was impersonating her 
would doubtless already have done so. She felt bad, and in the end 
just sent a formal acknowledgement. 

She kept up on recent developments in Voerenhutz; the latest 
Contact forecasts were getting gloomier all the time. The brush-fire 
conflicts on a dozen planets each threatened to ignite a full-scale war, 
and - while getting a direct answer was proving difficult - she formed 
the impression that even if they found and convinced Zakalwe almost 
as soon as they landed, and hauled his ass out on the Xenophobe with 
the ship pushing its design limits, the chances of getting him to 
Voerenhutz in time to make any difference were at best fifty-fifty. 

'Holy shit,' the drone said one day, as she sat in her cabin, reviewing 
cautiously optimistic reports on the peace conference back home (for 
so she had started to think of it, she admitted to herself). 

'What?' She turned to the machine. 

It looked at her. 'They just changed the course schedule for the What 
Are The Civilian Applications?' 

Sma waited. 

'That's a Continent class GSV,' the drone said. 'Sub-class Prompt, one 
of the limiteds.' 

'You said it was a General; now it's a Limited; make up your mind.' 

'No, I mean it's a limited edition; the go-faster model; even nippier 
than this beast, once it gets going,' the drone said. It floated closer 
to her, fields set a weird mixture of olive and purple, which she 
seemed to remember indicated Awe. She'd certainly never 
seen that expression on Skaffen-Amtiskaw before. 'It's heading for 
Crastalier,' it told her. 

'For us? For Zakalwe?' she frowned. 

'Nobody'll say, but it looks like it to me. A whole General Systems 
Vehicle, just for us. Wow!' 

'Wow,' Sma mimicked sourly, and pressed the screen for the view 
forward of the Xenophobe, still charging through the star systems for 
Crastalier. In their false representation on the screen, the stars ahead 
blazed blue-white, and - at the right magnification - the overall 
structure of the Open Cluster was easily visible. 

She shook her head, went back to the peace conference reports. 
'Zakalwe, you asshole,' she muttered to herself, 'you'd better fucking 
show up soon.' 

Five days later, and still five days away, the General Contact 
Unit Very Little Gravitas Indeed signalled from the depths of the Open 
Cluster Crastalier that it thought it had picked up Zakalwe's trail. 

'I just get the feeling this is going to be a complete debacle,' the 
drone said. 

'Yes,' Sma said, 'but you're not in charge.' 

'I'm serious,' the machine told her. 'Zakalwe's lost it. He doesn't want 
to be found, he won't be talked round, and even if by some miracle 
he can be, he can't do the same thing with Beychae. The man's 
washed up.' 

Sma had a sudden, strange flash of memory then, back to the 
horizon-wide beach, and the man who'd sat at her side for a while, 
watching the wide ocean roll its waves up and down the glistening 
slope of sand. 

She shook herself out of it. 'He's still together enough to junk a knife 
missile,' she told the machine, watching the hazy, cloud-shadowed 

ocean scroll beneath the dropping module. They were approaching 
the cloud tops. 

'That was for him. For us, it'll be another Winter Palace job; I can feel 
it.' 

She shook her head, apparently hypnotised by the view of cloud and 
curving ocean. 'I don't know what happened there. He got into that 
siege and just wouldn't break out. We warned him; we told him, in 
the end, but he just wouldn't... couldn't do it. I don't know what 
happened to him, I really don't; he just wasn't himself.' 

'Well, he lost his head on Fohls. Maybe he lost more than that. 
Perhaps he lost it all on Fohls. Maybe we didn't quite save him in 
time.' 

'We got to him in time,' Sma said, remembering Fohls as well now, 
as they plunged into a bulging cloud-top and the screen went grey. 
She didn't bother to adjust the wavelength, apparently content to 
look at the glowing, featureless interior of the cumulus. 

'It was still traumatic,' the drone said. 

'I'm sure, but...' she shrugged. The view of ocean and clouds burst 
clear onto the screen again, and the module angled steeper, powering 
down towards the waves. The sea flashed up towards them; Sma 
turned the screen off. She looked bashfully at Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 'I 
never like watching that,' she confessed. The drone said nothing. 
Inside the module, all was peace and quiet. After a moment, she 
asked, 'We in yet?' 

'Doing our submarine impression,' the drone said crisply. 'Landfall in 
fifteen minutes.' 

She turned the screen back on, got it to adjust for a sonic display, 
and watched the rolling sea floor speed by beneath. The module was 
manoeuvring hard, swinging and diving and zooming all the time, 
avoiding sea creatures as it followed the slowly rising slope of 
continental shelf towards the land. The view on the screen was 
disconcerting; she switched it off again, turned to the drone. 

'He'll be all right, and he'll come with us; we still know where that 
woman is.' 

'Livueta the Contemptuous?' sneered the drone. 'Short shrift she 
gave him last time. She'd have blown his head off if I hadn't been 
there. Why the hell should Zakalwe want to meet her again?' 

'I don't know,' Sma frowned. 'He won't say, and Contact hasn't got 
round to doing the full procedure on the place we think he came from. 
I think it must involve something from his past... something he did, 
once, before we ever heard of him. I don't know. I think he loves her, 
or did, and still thinks he does... or just wants...' 

'What? Wants what? Go on; you tell me.' 

'Forgiveness?' 

'Sma, given all the things Zakalwe's done, just since we've known 
him, they'd have to invent a personal deity for him alone, to even 
start forgiving him.' 

Sma turned away to look at the blank screen again. She shook her 
head and said quietly, 'It doesn't work that way, Skaffen-Amtiskaw.' 

Or any other way, the drone thought to itself, but didn't say anything. 

Sma watched its top hatch close, and stepped off the back of the 
drone, onto the pitted concrete of the dock. The module was ninety-
per cent submerged; it looked like some flat-bottomed boat turned 
turtle. She straightened the rather vulgar culottes which were, 
regrettably, the height of fashion here just now, and looked up and 
around at the crumbling empty warehouses which all but enclosed 

the quiet dock. The city - she was oddly gratified to find - grumbled 
beyond. 

'What was that you were saying about not looking in cities?' Skaffen-
Amtiskaw inquired. 

'Don't be crass,' she said, then clapped her hands and rubbed them. 
Looking down at the drone, she grinned. 'Anyway: time to start 
thinking like a suitcase, old chum. Make with a handle.' 

'I hope you realise I find this every bit as demeaning as you think I 
must,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, with quiet dignity, then extended a 
soligram handle from one side, and flipped over. Sma gripped the 
handle and strained at it. 

'An empty suitcase, asshole,' she grunted. 

'Oh, pardon me, I'm sure,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw muttered, and went 
light. 

At least, she thought, they're fairly Standard. She had never liked 
being altered to impersonate the natives. Anyway; they had inter-
system travel here, and were fairly used to seeing people who looked 
different, even alien on occasion. As usual, of course, she was very 
tall in comparison, but she could live with a few stares. 

'He's still in there?' she said quietly, looking at the armed guards 

outside the Foreign Ministry. 

'Discussing some sort of weird trust set-up with the top brass,' the 
drone whispered. 'Want to eavesdrop?' 

'Hmm. No.' 

They had a bug in the appropriate conference chamber; literally a fly 
on the wall. 

'Wa!' the drone yelped. 'I don't believe this man!' 

Sma glanced at the drone, despite herself. She frowned. 'What's he 
said?' 

'Not that!' the drone gasped. 'The Very Little Gravitas Indeed just 
worked out what the maniac's been up to here.' 

The GCU was still in orbit, providing back-up for the Xenophobe; its 
Contact procedures and equipment had provided and were providing 
most of the information about the place; its bug was monitoring the 
conference chamber. Meanwhile, it was scanning computers and 
information banks over the entire planet. 

'Well?' Sma said, watching another troop carrier rumble past on the 
boulevard. 

'The man's insane. Power mad!' the drone muttered, seemingly to 
itself. 'Forget Voerenhutz; we have to get him out of here for the sake 
of these people.' 

Sma elbowed the suitcase-drone. 'What, dammit?' 

'Okay; here, Zakalwe's a goddamn magnate, right? Mega-powerful; 
interests everywhere; initial stake what he brought with him from the 
place he junked the knife missile; the loot we gave him last time, plus 
profits. And what is the core of his business empire, here? 
Genetechnology.' 

Sma thought for a moment. 'Oh-oh,' she said, sitting back on the 
bench, crossing her arms. 

'Whatever you're imagining, it's worse. Sma; there are five rather 
elderly autocrats on this planet, in competing hegemonies. They are 
all getting healthier. They are all getting, in fact, younger. That 
oughtn't to be possible for another twenty, thirty years.' 

Sma said nothing. There was a funny feeling in her belly. 

'Zakalwe's corporation,' the drone said quickly, 'is receiving crazy 
money from each of those five people. It was on the take from a sixth 
geezer, but he died about one-twenty days ago; assassinated. The 
Ethnarch Kerian. He controlled the other half of this continent. It's his 
demise that has led to all this military activity. Also, with the 
exception of the Ethnarch Kerian, these suddenly rejuvenated 
autocrats 
were 
showing 
signs 
of 
becoming 

uncharacteristically benign, from about the time they started getting 
so suspiciously frisky.' 

Sma closed her eyes for a moment, opened them. 'Is it working?' she 
said, through a dry mouth. 

'Like hell; they're all under threat from coups; their own military, as 
a rule. Worse than that, Kerian's death lit a slow fuse. This whole 
place is going super-critical! And we are talking tootsies on the event 
horizon; these meatbrained loonies have thermonukes. He's crazy!' 
the drone suddenly screeched. Sma hissed to quiet it, even though 
she knew the drone would be sound-fielding its words so that only 
she could hear. The drone spluttered on: 'He must have cracked the 
gene-coding in his own cells; the steady-state retro-ageing that we 
gave him; he's been selling it! For money and favours, trying to get 
these monomaniac dictators to behave like nice people. Sma! He's 
trying to set up his own contact section! And he's fucking it! 
Completely!' 

She whacked the machine with one fist. 'Calm down, dammit.' 

'Sma,' the drone said, voice almost languid, 'I am calm. I'm just 
trying to communicate to you the enormity of the planetary cock-up 
Zakalwe has managed to concoct here. The Very Little Gravitas 
Indeed has blown a fuse; even as we talk, Contact Minds in an ever-
expanding sphere centred right here are clearing their intellectual 

decks and trying to work out what the hell to do to tidy this stunningly 
ghastly mess. If that GSV hadn't been on its way here anyway, they'd 
have diverted it because of this. An asteroid belt-sized pile of shit is 
about to hit a fan exactly the size of this planet, thanks to Zakalwe's 
ludicrous good-guy schemes, and Contact is going to have to try and 
field all of it.' It hesitated. 'Yeah; I just got the word.' It sounded 
relieved. 'You have a day to haul Zakalwe's loop-eyed ass out of here, 
otherwise we snatch him; emergency displace, no holds barred.' 

Sma took a very deep breath. 'Apart from that... everything all right?' 

'This, Ms Sma, is no time for levity,' the drone said, soberly. Then; 
'Shit!' 

'What now?' 

'Meeting's over, but Zakalwe the Insane isn't taking his car; he's 
heading for the elevator down to the tube system. Destination... 
naval base. There's a submarine waiting for him.' 

Sma stood. 'Submarine, eh?' She smoothed the culottes. 'Back to the 
docks, agree?' 

'Agreed.' 

She hefted the drone, started walking, looking for a cab. 'I've asked 
the Very Little Gravitas Indeed to fake a radio message,' Skaffen-
Amtiskaw told her. 'A cab should pull up here momentarily.' 

'And they say there's never one around when you need one.' 

'You're worrying me, Sma. You're taking all this far too calmly.' 

'Oh, I'll panic later.' Sma took a deep breath and let it out slowly. 
'Could that be the cab?' 

'I believe it is.' 

'What's "To the docks"?' 

The drone told her, and she said it. The cab sped off through the 

largely military traffic. 

'Sixty klicks an hour,' fumed the drone. 'Sixty klicks an hour!' 

'To them it's fast; don't be so unsympathetic to your fellow machines.' 
Sma watched the screen as the vessel a kilometre in front of them 
burrowed its way through the ocean. The abyssal plain was kilometres 
below. 

'It isn't one of us, Sma,' the drone said wearily. 'It's just a submarine; 
the smartest thing inside it is the human captain. I rest my case.' 

'Any idea where it's heading yet?' 

'No. The captain's orders are to take Zakalwe wherever he wants to 
go, and after giving him this general heading, Zakalwe's kept quiet. 
There's a whole heap of islands and atolls he could be making for, or 
- several days travel away at this crawl - thousands of kilometres of 
coastline, on another continent.' 

'Check out the islands, and that coastline. There must be a reason 
he's heading this way.' 

'It's being checked out!' the drone snapped. 

Sma looked at it. Skaffen-Amtiskaw flashed a delicate shade of 
purple, intimating contrition. 'Sma; this... man... totally blew it the 
last time; we're five or six million down on that last job, all because 
he wouldn't break out of the Winter Palace and balance things out. I 
could show you scenes of the terror there that would blanch your hair. 
Now he's come very close indeed to instigating a global catastrophe 
here. Since the guy suffered what happened to him on Fohls - since 
he started trying to be a good guy in his own right - he's been a 

disaster. If we do get him, and can get him to Voerenhutz, I just 
worry what sort of chaos he'll engender there. The man's bad news. 
Never mind outing Beychae; offing Zakalwe would be doing 
everybody a favour.' 

Sma looked into the centre of the drone's sensory band. 'One;' she 
said, 'don't talk about human lives as though they're just collateral.' 
She breathed deeply. 'Two; remember the massacre, in the courtyard 
of that inn?' she asked calmly. 'The guys through the walls, and your 
knife missile let off the leash?' 

'One; sorry to have offended your mammalian sensibilities. Two; 
Sma, will you ever let me forget it?' 

'Remember what I said would happen if you ever tried anything like 
that again?' 

'Sma,' the drone said tiredly, 'if you are seriously trying to imply that 
I might kill Zakalwe, all I can say is; don't be ridiculous.' 

'Just remember.' She watched the slowly scrolling screen. 'We have 
our orders.' 

'Agreed on courses of action, Sma. We don't have orders, remember?' 

Sma nodded. 'We have our agreed on courses of action. We lift Mr 
Zakalwe and take him to Voerenhutz. If at any stage you disagree, 
you can always butt out. I'll be given another offensive drone.' 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw was silent for a second, then said, 'Sma, that is 
probably the most hurtful thing you have ever said to me - which is 
saying a lot - but I'll ignore it, I think, because we are both under a 
lot of stress at the moment. Let my actions speak. As you say; we lift 
the planetfucker and drop him in Voerenhutz. Though, if this voyage 
goes on too much longer, it'll all be taken out of our hands - or fields, 
as the case may be - and Zakalwe will wake up on Xenophobe or the 
GCU, wondering what happened. All we can do is wait and see.' 

The drone paused then. 'Looks like it could be those equatorial islands 
we're heading for,' it told her. 'Zakalwe owns half of them.' 

Sma nodded silently, watching the distant submarine creep through 
the ocean. She scratched at her lower abdomen after a while, and 
turned to the drone. 'You sure you didn't record anything from that, 
umm, sort of orgy, first night on the Xenophobe? 

'Positive.' 

She frowned back at the screen. 'Huh. Pity.' 

'What's Zakalwe doing?' Sma said, after he'd been ashore for ten 
minutes or so. The submarine had dived again as soon as it recovered 
its inflatable, and taken a course back to the port it had departed 
from. 

'He's saying goodbye to a girl,' sighed the drone. 

'Is that it?' 

'That would appear to be the only thing to draw him here.' 

'Shit! Couldn't he have taken a plane?' 

'Hmm. No; no airstrip, but anyway, this is a fairly sensitive 
demilitarised zone; no unexpected flights of any sort allowed, and the 
next seaplane isn't for a couple of days. The sub was actually the 
fastest way of...' 

The drone fell silent. 

'Skaffen-Amtiskaw?' Sma said. 

'Well,' the drone said slowly, 'the doxy just smashed a lot of 
ornaments and a couple of pieces of very valuable furniture, and then 
ran off and buried herself in her bed, weeping... but apart from that, 
Zakalwe just sat down in the middle of the lounge with a large drink 
and said (and I quote), "Okay; if that's you, Sma, come and talk to 
me."' 

Sma looked at the view on the screen. It showed the small atoll, the 
central island lying green and squashed looking between the vibrant 
blues and greens of ocean and sky. 

'You know,' she said, 'I think I would like to kill Zakalwe.' 

'There's a queue. Surface?' 

'Surface. Let's go see the asshole.' 

Light. Some light. Not very much. Air foul and everywhere pain. He 
wanted to scream and writhe, but could find no breath and make 
nothing move. A dark destroying shadow welled up inside him, 
exterminating thought, and he lost consciousness. 

Everything was metaphor; all things were something other than 
themselves. The pain, for example, was an ocean, and he was adrift 
on it. His body was a city and his mind a citadel. All communications 
between the two seemed to have been cut, but within the keep that 
was his mind he still had power. The part of his consciousness that 
was telling him the pain did not hurt, and that all things were like 

other things, was like... like... he found it hard to think of a 
comparison. A magic mirror, maybe. 

Still thinking about that, the light faded, and he slipped away again, 
into the darkness. 

The light grew slowly in strength until it was almost painful. He felt 
suddenly terrified, because it seemed to him that he really was on a 
tiny creaking leaking boat, tossed scudding across a seething black 
ocean, in the teeth of a howling gale, but now there was light, and it 
appeared to come from somewhere above him, but when he tried to 
look at his hand, or the tiny boat, he still couldn't see anything. The 
light shone into his eyes, but it failed to illuminate anything else. The 
idea terrified him; the tiny boat was swamped by a wave and he was 
submerged again in the ocean of pain, burning through every pore of 
his body. Somewhere, thankfully, somebody threw a switch, and he 
slipped underneath to darkness, silence and... no pain. 

Somebody was asking questions... Who...? He waited for a reply, 
from outside or from within himself, but nothing came from 
anywhere; he felt lost and abandoned, and the worst of it was that 

he felt abandoned by himself. 

He decided to ask himself some questions. What was the citadel? That 
was his mind. The citadel was supposed to come with a city attached, 
which was his body, but it looked like something else had taken over 
the city, and there was just the castle, just the keep left. What was 
the boat, and the ocean? The ocean was pain. He was in the boat 
now, but before that he'd been in the ocean, up to his neck, waves 
breaking over him. The boat was... some learned technique which 
was protecting him from the pain, not letting him forget it was there, 
but keeping its debilitating effects away from him, letting him think. 

So far so good, he thought. Now, what is the light? 

He might have to come back to that one. Same with: What is the 
sound? 

He tried another question: Where is this happening? 

He searched his sodden clothes but found nothing in any of the 
pockets. He looked for a name tag that he felt ought to be sewn on 
to his collar, but it seemed to have been ripped off. He searched the 
small boat, but still found no answers. So he tried to imagine being 
in the distant keep over the towering waves, and visualised himself 
walking into a cavernous store room of jumble and nonsense and 
memories buried deep in the castle... but could see nothing in detail. 
His eyes closed and he wept with frustration, while the small boat 
juddered and tipped underneath him. 

When he opened his eyes, he was holding a little clip of paper with 
the word FOHLS printed on it. He was so surprised he let the slip of 
paper go; the wind whipped it away into the dark sky over the black 
waves. But he had remembered. Fohls was the answer. The planet of 
Fohls. 

He felt relieved, and a little proud. He'd discovered something. 

What was he doing here? 

Funeral. He seemed to remember something about a funeral. Surely 

it had not been his own. 

Was he dead? He thought about this question for a while. He 
supposed it was possible. Maybe there was an afterlife, after all. Well, 
if there was life after death, that would teach him. Was this sea of 
pain a divine punishment? Was the light a god? He dipped his hand 
over the side of the boat, into the pain; it filled him, and he withdrew. 
Cruel god if that really was the case. What about all the stuff I did for 
the Culture? he wanted to ask. Doesn't that cancel some of the bad 
out? Or were those smug self-satisfied bastards wrong all along? God, 
he'd love to be able to go back and tell them. Imagine the look on 
Sma's face! 

But he didn't think he was dead. It hadn't been his funeral. He could 
remember the flat-topped tower by the cliffs looking out over the sea, 
and helping to carry some old warrior's body there. Yes, somebody 
had died and they were being ceremonially disposed of. 

Something was nagging at him. 

Suddenly he clutched at the boat's rotten timbers and stared out over 
the heaving ocean. 

There was a ship. Every now and again he could see a ship, far in the 
distance. Barely more than a dot, and mostly the waves were in the 
way, but it was a ship. A hole seemed to open somewhere inside him; 
his guts fell through it. 

He thought he recognised the ship. 

Then the boat split apart, and he dropped through it, through the 
water underneath, then splashed out of the underside of the water, 
into air again, and saw the ocean beneath him, and a tiny speck of 
its surface, which he was falling towards. It was another small boat; 
he crashed through it, through more water, through more air, 
through the wreckage of a boat, through another layer of water and 
another level of air... 

Hey - one part of his mind thought, as he fell - this is like how Sma 
described the Reality... splashed through more waves, through the 

water, out into air, heading for more waves... 

This wasn't going to stop. He remembered that the Reality Sma had 
described was expanding all the time; you could fall through forever; 
really forever, not until the end of the universe; literally forever. 

That won't do, he thought to himself. He'd have to face the ship. 

He landed in a little creaking, leaking boat. 

The ship was much closer now. The ship was huge and dark and 
bristled with guns and it was heading straight for him, bow wave a 
huge white V of foam bisected by its stem. 

Shit, he wasn't going to be able to get away from it. The cruel curves 
of the bows raced slicing towards him. He closed his eyes. 

Once upon a time there was... a ship. A great ship. A ship for 
destroying things with; other ships, people, cities... It was very big 
and it was designed to kill people and to keep people inside it from 
being killed. 

He tried not to remember what the great ship was called. Instead he 
saw the ship somehow installed near the middle of a city, and felt 
confused, and could not work out how it got there. The ship started 
to look like a castle, for some reason, and that did, and did not, make 
sense. He began to feel frightened. The ship's name was like some 
huge sea creature, bumping into the hull of his boat; like a battering-
ram thudding into the walls of the castle keep. He tried to block it 
out, knowing it was just a name but not wanting to hear it because it 
always made him feel bad. 

He put his hands over his ears. That worked for a moment. But then 
the ship, set in stone, near the centre of the battered city, fired its 
great guns, gouting black and flashing yellow-white, and he knew 
what was coming, and tried to scream to cover the noise, but when 
it arrived it was the name of the ship that the guns had spoken, and 
it shattered the boat, demolished the castle, and resounded through 
the bones and spaces of his skull, like the laughter of an insane god, 
forever. 

The light went out then, and he sank gratefully away from the awful, 
accusing sound. 

inside. Staberinde. It's only a word. 

The Staberinde. The ship. He turned away from the light, back into 
the darkness. 

Now, from somewhere, comes touch, touch coming in from out there. 
Not pain but touch. Two different things... 

The touch, again. It feels like the touch of a hand; a hand touching 
his face, causing more pain, but still a touch, and distinguishably a 
hand. His face felt terrible. He must look terrible. 

Where am I again? Crash. Funeral. Fohls. 

Crash. Of course; my name is... 

Too hard. 

What do I do, then? 

That's easier. You are a paid agent of the most advanced - well, 
certainly the most energetic - humanoid civilisation in the... Reality? 
(No.) Universe? (No.) Galaxy? Yes, galaxy... and you were 
representing them at a... a... funeral, and you were coming back on 
some stupid aircraft to be picked up and taken away from all this, 
when something happened on board the aircraft and it went... and 
he'd seen flames and... and there had been that old jungle floating 
right... then nothing and pain, and nothing but pain. Then drifting and 
floating in and out of it. 

The hand touched his face again. And this time there was something 
to see. He thought it looked like a cloud, or like a moon through a 
cloud, itself unseen but shining through. 

Possibly the two were connected, he thought. Yes; here it comes 
again, and yes, there we are; sensation, feeling; the hand on the face 
again. Throat, swallowing, water or some liquid. You are being given 
something to drink. From the way it goes down there seems to be... 
yes, upright, we are upright, not on our back. The hands, own hands, 
they are... an open feeling, feeling very open, very vulnerable, naked. 

Thinking about his body was bringing the pain back again. He decided 
to give up on that. Try something else. 

Try the crash again. Back from the funeral and the desert coming 
right up... no, mountains. Or was it jungle? He couldn't remember. 
Where are we? Jungle, no... desert, no... what then? Don't know. 

Asleep, he thought suddenly; you were asleep in the aircraft in the 
night, and had just enough time to wake up in the darkness and see 
flames and begin to realise before light detonated inside your head. 
After that, pain. But you didn't see any sort of terrain floating/rushing 
up to meet you, because it was very dark. 

remember how to see, he slowly made out dusty streaks of light in a 
brown gloom, and saw earthenware pots near a mud or earth wall, 
and a small fireplace in the centre of the room, and spears leaning 
against a wall, and other blades. Straining his neck to bring his head 
up, he could see something else; the rough wooden frame he was 
tied to. 

The wooden frame was in the shape of a square; two diagonals made 
an X inside the square. He was naked, his hands and feet lashed, one 
to each corner of the frame, which was propped against a wall at 
about forty-five degrees. A thick hide strap secured his waist to the 
centre of the X, and all over his body were markings of blood and 
paint. 

He relaxed his neck. 'Oh shit,' he heard himself croak. He didn't like 
the look of this. 

Where the hell was the Culture? They ought to be rescuing him; that 
was their job. He did their dirty work, they looked after him. This was 
the deal. So where the hell were they? 

The pain came back, like an old friend by now, from almost 
everywhere. Straining his neck like that had hurt. Sore head (maybe 
concussion); broken nose, cracked or broken ribs, one broken arm, 
two broken legs. Maybe internal injuries; his insides felt pretty sore 
too; the worst, in fact. He felt bloated and full of decay. 

Shit, he thought, I might actually be dying. 

He shifted his head, grimacing, (pain poured in as if some protecting 
shell on his skin had been cracked by the movement) and looked at 
the ropes lashing him to the wooden frame. Traction was no way to 
treat a fracture, he told himself, and laughed very briefly, because 
with the first contraction of his stomach muscles his ribs pulsed 
suddenly, as though they were at red heat. 

He could hear things; distant noises of people shouting now and 
again, and children yelling, and some sort of animal baying. 

He closed his eyes, but heard nothing more distinct. He opened them 

again. The wall was earth, and he was probably underground, for 
there were thick sawn-off roots sticking into the space around him. 
The light was composed of two nearly vertical shafts, slightly angled 
beams of direct sunlight, so... near midday, near the equator. 
Underground, he thought, and felt sick. Nice and hard to find. He 
wondered if the plane had been on course when it crashed, and how 
far from the crash site he'd been carried. No point in worrying about 
it. 

What else could he see? Crude benches. A coarse cushion, dented. It 
looked like somebody had sat there, facing him. He assumed it was 
the owner of the hand he had felt, if there had been one. There was 
no fire in a circle of stones set underneath one of the holes in the 
roof. Spears leant against the wall, and other weaponish things were 
strewn about the place. They were not battle-weapons; ceremonial, 
or maybe torture. He caught a whiff of something awful, just then, 
and knew it was gangrene, and knew it must be him. 

He began to slip over the edge again, uncertain whether he was falling 
asleep or really going unconscious, but hoping for one or the other, 
willing either, because all this was more than he could handle just 
now. Then the girl came in. She had a jug in her hand, and set it 
down before looking at him. He tried to speak, but couldn't. Maybe 
he hadn't really spoken earlier when he'd thought he said, 'Shit.' He 
looked at the girl and attempted a smile. 

She went out again. 

He felt somehow heartened, seeing the girl. A man would have been 
bad news, he thought. A girl meant things might not be so bad after 
all. Maybe. 

The girl came back, with a bowl of water. She washed him, rubbing 
away the the blood and the paint. There was some pain. Predictably 
nothing happened when she washed his genitals; he'd have liked to 
show signs of life, just for form's sake. 

He tried to speak, but failed. The girl let him sip some water from a 
shallow bowl, and he croaked at her, but nothing distinguishable. She 
left again. 

The next time she came back with some men. They wore many 
strange clothes, like feathers and skins and bones and wooden tiles 
of armour laced with gut. They were painted too, and they brought 
pots and small sticks with them, and used them to paint him again. 

They finished and stood back. He wanted to tell them he didn't suit 
red, but nothing came out. He felt himself falling away, out into the 
darkness. 

The entire frame he was strapped to had be lifted and carted out of 
the gloom. He faced the sky. Blinding light filled his eyes, dust filled 
his nose and mouth, and shouts and screams filled his mind. He felt 
himself shiver like a fever victim, tearing pain from each shattered 
limb. He tried to shout, and to raise his head to see, but all there was 
was noise and dust. His insides felt worse; skin taut over his belly. 

Then he was upright again, and the village was beneath him. It was 
small, there were some tents, some wicker and clay dwellings and 
some holes into the ground. Semi-arid; an indeterminate scrub - 
stamped down inside the perimeter of the village - vanished quickly 
beyond it, into a yellow-glowing mist. The sun was just visible, low 
down. He couldn't work out if it was dawn or dusk. 

What he really saw were the people. They were all in front of him; he 
was up on a mound, the frame tied to two large stakes, and the 
people were beneath him, all on their knees, heads bowed. There 
were tiny children, their heads forced down by nearby adults, there 
were old people held up from collapsing completely by those around 
them, and every age in between. 

Then in front of him walked three people, the girl and two of the men. 
The men, one on either side of the girl, lowered their heads, knelt 
down quickly and arose again, and made a sign. The girl did not 
move, and her gaze was fixed on a point between his eyes. She was 

One of the men held a large earthenware pot. The other had a long, 
curved, broad-bladed sword. 

'Hey,' he croaked. He couldn't manage anything else. The pain was 
getting very bad now; being upright didn't do his broken limbs any 
good at all. 

The chanting people seemed to swing about his head; the sunlight 
dipped and veered, and the three people in front of him became 
many, multiplying and wavering, unsteady in the waste of mist and 
dust before him. 

Where the hell was Culture? 

There was a terrible roaring noise in his head, and the diffuse glow in 
the midst which was the sun was starting to pulse. The sword glittered 
to one side; the earthenware pot gleamed on the other. The girl stood 
directly in front of him, and put her hand into his hair, grasping it. 

The roaring noise was filling his ears, and he could not tell if he was 
shouting and screaming or not. The man to his right raised the sword. 

The girl pulled his hair, yanking his head out; he screamed, above 
the roaring noise, as his broken bones grated. He stared at the dust 
at the hem of the girl's robe. 

'You bastards!' he thought, not sure, even then, exactly who he 
meant. 

He managed to scream one syllable. 'El -!' 

Then the blade slammed into his neck. 

The name died. Everything had ended but it still went on. 

There was no pain. The roaring noise was actually quieter. He was 
looking down at the village and the crouching people. The view 
swung; he could still feel the pull of the roots of his hair straining at 

the skin on his scalp. He was swung round. 

The slack, headless body dribbled blood down its chest. 

That was me! he thought. Me! 

He was swung round again; the man with the sword was wiping blood 
from the blade with a rag. The man with the earthenware pot was 
trying not to look into his staring eyes, and holding the pot out 
towards him, the lid in his other hand. So that's what it's for, he 
thought, feeling somehow stunned into an eerie calmness. Then the 
roaring noise seemed to gather and start to fade at once. The view 
was going red. He wondered how much longer this could go on. How 
long did a brain survive without oxygen? 

Now I really am two, he thought, remembering, eyes closing. 

And he thought of his heart, stopped now, and only then realised, 
and wanted to cry but could not, for he had finally lost her. Another 
name formed in his kind. Dar... 

The roar split the skies. He felt the girl's grip loosen. The expression 
on the face of the youth holding the pot was almost comically fearful. 
People looked up from the crowd; the roar became a scream, a blast 
of air swept dust into the air and made the girl holding him stagger; 
a dark shape swung quickly through the air above the village. 

A little late... he heard himself think, slipping away. 

There was more noise for a second or two - screams, maybe - and 
something whacked into his head, and he was rolling away, dust in 
his mouth and eyes... but he was starting to lose interest in all that 
stuff, and was happy to let the darkness wash over him. Maybe he 
was picked up again, later. 

But that seemed to happen to somebody else. 

When the terrible noise came, and the great, carved black rock landed 
in the middle of the village - just after the sky's offering had been 
separated from his body and so joined to the air - everybody ran into 
the thinning mist, to get away from the screaming light. They 
gathered, whimpering, at the water hole. 

After only fifty heartbeats, the dark shape appeared above the village 
again, rising hazily into the thinner mists near the sky. It did not roar 
this time, but moved quickly off with a noise like the wind, and shrank 
to nothing. 

The shaman sent his apprentice back to see how things stood; the 
quaking youth disappeared into the mist. He returned safely, and the 
shaman led the still terrified people back to the village. 

The body of the sky-offering still hung limply on the wooden frame at 
the summit of the mound. His head had disappeared. 

After much chanting and grinding entrails, spotting shapes in the 
mists and three trances, the priest and his apprentice decided it was 
a good omen, and yet a warning at the same time. They sacrificed a 
meat-animal belonging to the family of the girl who had dropped the 
sky-offering's head, and put the beast's head in the earthenware pot 
instead. 

'Dizzy! How the devil are you?' He took her hand and helped her up 
onto the wooden pier from the roof of the just-surfaced module. He 
put his arms round her. 'Good to see you again!' he laughed. Sma 
patted his waist, finding herself unwilling to hug him back. He didn't 
seem to notice. 

He let her go, looked down to see the drone rising up from the 
module. 'And Skaffen-Amtiskaw! They still letting you out without a 
guard?' 

'Hello, Zakalwe,' the drone said. 

He put his arm round Sma's waist. 'Come on up to the shack; we'll 
have lunch.' 

'All right,' she said. 

They walked along the small wooden pier to a stone path laid across 
the sand, and on into the shade under the trees. The trees were blue 
or purple; huge puff heads of dark colour standing out against the 
pale blue sky, and tugged at by a warm, intermittent breeze. They 
sweated delicate perfumes from the tops of their silver-white trunks. 
The drone lifted to above tree height a couple of times, when other 
people passed on the path. 

The man and woman walked through the sunlit avenues between the 
trees until they came to where a wide pool of water trembled 
reflections of twenty or so white huts; a small, sleek seaplane floated 
at a wooden jetty. They entered the cluster of buildings and climbed 
some steps to a balcony that looked over the pool and the narrow 
channel that led from it to the lagoon on the far side of the island. 

The sun was sifted through the tree-heads; shadows moved to and 
fro along the veranda and over the small table and the two 
hammocks. 

He motioned Sma to sit on the first hammock; a female servant 
appeared and he ordered lunch for two. When the servant had gone, 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw floated down and sat on the parapet of the 
veranda's wall, overlooking the pool. Sma levered herself into the 
hammock carefully. 

'It true you own this island, Zakalwe?' 

'Um...' he looked round, apparently uncertain, then nodded his head. 
'Oh yes; so I do.' He kicked off his sandals and slumped into the other 
hammock, letting it sway. He picked up a bottle from the floor, and 
with each sway of the hammock poured a little more from the bottle 
into two glasses on the small table. He increased the swing when he 
had finished to be able to hand her drink to her. 

'Thank you.' 

He sipped at his drink and closed his eyes. She watched the glass on 
his chest where his hands held it, and watched the liquid swill this 
way, that way, lethargic and eye-brown. She moved her gaze to his 
face and saw he had not changed; hair a bit darker than she 
remembered; swept away from his broad, tanned forehead and tied 
in a pony-tail behind. Fit-looking as ever. No older-looking, of course, 
because they'd stabilised his age as part of his payment for the last 
job. 

His eyes opened slowly, heavy-lidded, and he looked back at her, 
smiling slowly. The eyes look older, she thought. But she could have 
been wrong. 

'So,' she said, 'we playing games here, Zakalwe?' 

'What do you mean, Dizzy?' 

'I've been sent to get you back again. They want you to do another 
job. You must have guessed that, so tell me now whether I'm wasting 
my time here or not. I'm in no mood to try and argue you...' 

'Dizzy!' he exclaimed, sounding hurt, pivoting his legs off the 
hammock and onto the floor, then smiling persuasively, 'Don't be like 
that; of course you're not wasting your time. I've already packed.' 

He beamed at her like a happy child, his tanned face open and 
smiling. She looked at him with relief and disbelief. 

'So what was all the run-around for?' 

'What run-around?' he said innocently, sitting back in the hammock 
again. 'I had to come here to say goodbye to a close friend, that was 
all. But I'm ready to go. What's the scam?' 

Sma stared, open-mouthed. Then she turned to the drone. 'Do we 
just go now?' 

'No point,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 'The course the GSV's on, you can 
have two hours here, then go back to the Xenophobe; it can match 
with the What in about thirty hours.' It swivelled to look at the man. 

'But we need a definite word. There's a teratonne of GSV with twenty-
eight million people on board charging in this direction; if it's to wait 
here it has to slow down first, so it needs to know for sure. You really 
are coming? This afternoon?' 

'Drone, I just told you. I'll do it.' He leaned towards Sma. 'What is the 
job again?' 

'Voerenhutz,' she told him. 'Tsoldrin Beychae.' 

He beamed, teeth gleaming. 'Old Tsoldrin still above ground? Well, 
it'll be good to see him again.' 

'You have to talk him back into his working clothes again.' 

He waved one hand airily. 'Easy,' he said, drinking. 

Sma watched him drink. She shook her head. 

'Don't you want to know why, Cheradenine?' she asked. 

He started to make a gesture with one hand that meant the same as 
a shrug, then thought better of it. 'Umm; sure. Why, Diziet?' he 
sighed. 

'Voerenhutz is coalescing into two groups; the people gaining the 
upper hand at the moment want to pursue aggressive terraforming 
policies...' 

'That's sort of...' he burped, 're-decorating a planet, right?' 

Sma closed her eyes briefly. 'Yes. Sort of. Whatever you choose to 
call it, it's ecologically insensitive, to put it mildly. These people - they 
call themselves the Humanists - also want a sliding scale of sentient 
rights which will have the effect of letting them take over whatever 
even intelligently inhabited worlds they're militarily able to. There are 
a dozen brush-fire wars going on right now. Any one of them could 
spark the big one, and to an extent the Humanists encourage these 
wars because they appear to prove their case that the Cluster is too 
crowded and needs to find new planetary habitats.' 

'They also,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, 'refuse to acknowledge machine 
sentience fully; they exploit proto-conscious computers and claim 
only human subjective experience has any intrinsic value; carbon 
fascists.' 

'I see,' he nodded, and looked very serious. 'And you want old 
Beychae to get into harness with these Humanist guys, right?' 

'Cheradenine!' Sma scolded, as Skaffen-Amtiskaw's fields went 
frosty. 

He looked hurt. 'But they're called the Humanists!' 

'That's just their name, Zakalwe.' 

'Names are important,' he said, apparently serious. 

'It's still just what they call themselves; it doesn't make them the 
good guys.' 

'Okay.' He grinned at Sma. 'Sorry.' He tried to look more business-
like. 'You want him pulling in the other direction, like last time.' 

'Yes,' Sma said. 

'Fine. Sounds almost easy. No soldiering?' 

'No soldiering.' 

'I'll do it.' He nodded. 

'Do I hear the sound of a barrel-bottom being scraped?' Skaffen-
Amtiskaw muttered. 

'Just send the signal.' Sma told it. 

'Okay,' said the drone. 'Signal sent.' It made a good impression of 
glowering at the man with its fields. 'But you'd better not change your 
mind.' 

'Only the thought of having to spend any time in your company, 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw, could possibly disinduce me from accompanying 
the delightful Ms Sma here to Voerenhutz.' He glanced concernedly 
at the woman. 'You are coming, I hope.' 

Sma nodded. She sipped at her drink, while the servant laid some 
small dishes on the table between the hammocks. 

'Just like that, Zakalwe?' she said, once the servant had gone again. 

'Just like what, Diziet?' He smiled over his glass. 

'You're leaving. After, what... five years? Building up your empire, 
sorting out your scheme to make the world a safer place, using our 
technology, trying to use our methods... you're prepared just to walk 
away from it all, for however long it takes? Dammit, even before you 
knew it was Voerenhutz you'd said yes; could have been on the other 
side of the galaxy, for all you knew; could have been the Clouds. You 
might have been saying yes to a four-year trip.' 

He shrugged. 'I like long voyages.' 

Sma looked into the man's face for a while. He looked unworried, full 
of life. Pep and vim were the words that came to mind. She felt 
vaguely disgusted. 

He shrugged, eating some fruit from one of the little dishes, 'Besides, 
I have a trust arrangement set up. It'll all be looked after until I come 
back.' 

'If there's anything to come back to,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw observed. 

'Of course there will be,' he said, spitting a pip over the edge of the 
veranda wall. 'These people like to talk about war, but they aren't 
suicidal.' 

'Oh, that's all right then,' the drone said, turning away. 

The man just smiled at it. He nodded at Sma's untouched plate. 'You 
not hungry, Diziet?' 

'Lost my appetite,' she said. 

He swung out of the hammock, brushing his hand together. 'Come 
on,' he said, 'let's go for a swim.' 

He bent down, engrossed, his earnest face peering into the water, his 
face reflected there. He seemed to speak to it. 

'You still look very good, you know. I hope you feel suitably flattered.' 

She went on drying herself. 'I'm too old for flattery, Zakalwe.' 

'Rubbish.' He laughed, and the water rippled under his mouth. He 
frowned hard and dipped his hands under, slowly. 

She watched the concentration on his face as his arms slid deeper 
under the water, mirroring themselves. 

He smiled again, his eyes narrowing as his hands steadied; his arms 
were in deep now, and he licked his lips. 

He lunged forward, yelled excitedly, then cupped his hands out of the 
water and came over to her where she sat against some rocks. He 
was grinning hugely. He held his hands out for her to see. She looked 
in and saw a small fish, brilliant shimmering blue and green and red 
and gold, a gaudy splash of rippling light squirming inside the man's 
cupped hands. She frowned as he leant back against the rock again. 

'Now just you put that back where you found it, Cheradenine, and the 
way you found it.' 

His face fell and she was about to say something else, kinder, when 
he grinned again and threw the fish back into the pool. 

'As if I'd do anything else.' He came and sat beside her on the rock. 

She looked out to sea. The drone was further up the beach, ten 
metres behind them. She carefully smoothed the tiny dark hairs on 
her forearms until they were lying flat. 'Why did you try all that stuff, 
Zakalwe?' 

'Giving the elixir of youth to our glorious leaders?' He shrugged. 
'Seemed like a good idea at the time,' he confessed, lightly. 'I don't 
know; I thought it might be possible. I thought interfering was maybe 
a lot easier then you lot made it out to be. I thought one man with a 
strong plan, not interested in his own aggrandisement...' He 
shrugged, glanced at her. 'It might all work out yet. You never know.' 

'Zakalwe, it isn't going to work out. You're leaving us an incredible 
mess here.' 

'Ah,' he nodded. 'You are coming in, then. Thought you might.' 

'In some fashion, I think we'll have to.' 

'Best of luck.' 

'Luck...' Sma began, but then thought the better of it. She ran her 
fingers through her damp hair. 

'How much trouble am I in, Diziet?) 

'For this?' 

'Yes, and the knife missile. You heard about that?' 

'I heard.' She shook her head. 'I don't think you're in any more 
trouble than you're ever in, Cheradenine, just by being you.' 

He smiled. 'I hate the Culture's... tolerance.' 

'So,' she said, slipping her blouse over her head, 'what are your 
terms?' 

'Pay as well, eh?' He laughed. 'Minus the rejuve... the same as the 
last time. Plus ten per cent more negotiables.' 

'Exactly the same?' She looked at him sadly, her wet bedraggled hair 
hanging down from her shaking head. 

He nodded. 'Exactly.' 

'You're a fool, Zakalwe.' 

'I keep trying.' 

'It won't be any different.' 

'You can't know that.' 

'I can guess.' 

'And I can hope. Look, Dizzy, it's my business, and if you want me to 
come with you then you've got to agree to it, all right?' 

'All right.' 

He looked wary. 'You still know where she is?' 

Sma nodded. 'Yes, we know.' 

'So it's agreed?' 

She shrugged and looked out to sea. 'Oh; it's agreed. I just think 
you're wrong. I don't think you should go to her again.' She looked 
him in the eye. 'That's my advice.' 

He stood up and dusted some sand off his legs. 

'I'll remember.' 

They walked back to the huts and the still sea pool in the centre of 
the island. She sat on a wall, waiting while he made his final 
goodbyes. She listened for crying, or the sound of breakages, but in 
vain. 

The wind blew her hair gently, and to her surprise, despite it all, she 
felt warm and well; the scent from the tall trees stretched around 

her, and their shifting shadows made the ground seem to move in 
time with the breeze so that air and trees and light and earth swayed 
and rippled like the bright-dark water in the island's central pool. She 
closed her eyes and sounds came to her like faithful pets, nuzzling 
her ear; sounds of the brushing tree-heads, like tired lovers dancing; 
sounds of the ocean, swirling over rocks, softly stroking the golden 
sands; sounds of what she did not know. 

Perhaps soon she would be back in the house below the grey-white 
dam. 

What an asshole you are, Zakalwe, she thought. I could have stayed 
home; they could have sent the stand-in... dammit, they could 
probably have just sent the drone, and you'd still have come... 

He appeared looking bright and fresh and carrying a jacket. A 
different servant carried some bags. 'Okay; let's go,' he said. 

They walked to the pier while the drone tracked them, overhead. 

'By the way,' she said. 'Why ten per cent more money?' 

He shrugged as they walked onto the wooden pier. 'Inflation.' 

Sma frowned. 'What's that?' 

When you sleep beside a head full of images, there is an osmosis, a 
certain sharing in the night. So he thought. He thought a lot then; 
more than he ever had, perhaps. Or maybe he was just more aware 
of the process, and the identity of thought and passing time. 
Sometimes he felt as though every instant he spent with her was a 
precious capsule of sensation to be lovingly wrapped and carefully 
placed somewhere inviolable, away from harm. 

But he only fully realised that later; it wasn't something he was fully 
aware of at the time. At the time, it seemed to him that the only thing 
he was fully aware of, was her. 

He lay, often, looking at her sleeping face in the new light that fell in 
through the open walls of the strange house, and he stared at her 
skin and hair with his mouth open, transfixed by the quick stillness of 
her, struck dumb with the physical fact of her existence as though 
she was some careless star-thing that slept on quite unaware of its 
incandescent power; the casualness and ease with which she slept 
there amazed him; he couldn't believe that such beauty could survive 
without some superhumanly intense conscious effort. 

On such mornings he would lie and look at her and listen to the 
sounds that the house made in the breeze. He liked the house; it 
seemed... fit. Normally, he'd have hated it. 

Here and now, though, he could appreciate it, and happily see it as a 
symbol; open and closed, weak and strong, outside and inside. When 
he'd first seen it, he'd thought it would blow away in the first serious 
gale, but it seemed these houses rarely collapsed; in the very rare 
storms, people would retreat to the centre of the structures, and 
huddle round the central fire, letting the various layers and 
thicknesses of covering shake and sway on their posts, gradually 
sapping the force of the wind, and providing a core of shelter. 

Still - as he'd pointed out to her when he first saw it from the lonely 
ocean road - it would be easy to torch and simple to rob, stuck out 
here in the middle of nowhere. (She'd looked at him as though he 
were mad, but then kissed him.) 

That vulnerability intrigued and troubled him. There was a likeness to 
her there; to her as a poet and as a woman. It was similar, he 
suspected, to one of her images; the symbols and metaphors she 
used in the poems he loved to hear her read out loud but could never 
quite understand (too many cultural allusions, and this baffling 
language he had not yet fully understood, and still sometimes made 
her laugh with). Their physical relationship seemed to him at once 
more whole and complete, and more defyingly complex than anything 
similar he had known. The paradox of love physically incarnate and 

the most personal attack being the same thing tied knots in him, 
sometimes sickened him, as in the midst of this joy he fought to 
understand the statements and promises that might be being implied. 

Sex was an infringement, an attack, an invasion; there was no other 
way he could see it; every act, however magical and intensely 
enjoyed, and however willingly conducted, seemed to carry a 
harmonic of rapacity. He took her, and however much she gained in 
provoked pleasure and in his own increasing love, she was still the 
one that suffered the act, had it played out upon her and inside her. 
He was aware of the absurdity of trying too hard to develop the 
comparison between sex and war; he had been laughed out of several 
embarrassing situations trying to do so ('Zakalwe,' she would say, 
when he tried to explain some of this, and she would put her cool slim 
fingers behind his neck, and stare out from the rumbustious black 
tangle of her hair, 'You have serious problems.' She would smile), but 
the feelings, the acts, the structure of the two were to him so close, 
so self-evidently akin, that such a reaction only forced him deeper 
into his confusion. 

But he tried not to let it bother him; at any time he could simply look 
at her and wrap his adoration for her around himself like a coat on a 
cold day, and see her life and body, moods and expressions and 
speech and movements as a whole enthralling field of study that he 
could submerge himself in like a scholar finding his life's work. 

(This was more like it, some small, remindful voice inside him said. 
This is more like the way it's suppose to be; with this, you can leave 
all that other stuff behind, the guilt and the secrecy and the lies; the 
ship and the chair and the other man... But he tried not listen to that 
voice.) 

You're saying nothing lasts forever, he heard the fellow whine. (Well, 
pretty trite, he thought.) 

No, he heard her say. I'm saying with very few exceptions nothing 
lasts forever, and amongst those exceptions, no work or thought of 
man is numbered. 

She went on talking after this, but he homed in on that. That was 
better, he thought. I liked that. She sounds interesting. Wonder what 
she looks like? 

He stuck his head round the corner of the booth and looked in at 
them. The man was in tears; the woman was... well, lots of 
hair... very striking face; sharp and almost aggressive. Tidy body. 

'Sorry,' he told them. 'But I just wanted to point out that "Nothing 
lasts forever" can be a positive statement... well, in some 
languages...' Having said it, it did occur to him that in this language 
it wasn't; they had different words for different sorts of nothing. He 
smiled, ducked back into his own booth, suddenly embarrassed. He 
stared accusatorily at the drink in front of him. Then he shrugged, 
and pressed the bell to attract a waiter. 

Shouts from the next booth. A clatter and a little shriek. He looked 
round to see the man storming off through the bar, heading for the 
door. 

The girl appeared at his elbow. She was dripping. 

He looked up into her face; it was damp; she wiped it with a 
handkerchief. 

'Thank you for your contribution,' she said icily. 'I was bringing things 
to a conclusion quite smoothly there until you stepped in.' 

'I'm very sorry,' he said, not at all. 

She took her handkerchief and wrung it out over his glass, dribbling. 
'Hmm,' he said, 'too kind.' He nodded at the dark spots on her grey 
coat. 'Your drink or his?' 

'Both,' she said, folding the kerchief and starting to turn away. 

'Please; let me buy you a replacement.' 

She hesitated. The waiter arrived at the same moment. Good omen, 
he thought. 'Ah,' he said to the man. 'I'll have another... whatever it 
is I've been drinking, and for this lady...' 

She looked at his glass. 'The same,' she said. She sat down across 
the table. 

'Think of it as... reparations,' he said, digging the word out of the 
implanted vocabulary he'd been given for his visit. 

She looked puzzled. '"Reparations"... that's one I'd forgotten; 
something to do with war, isn't it?' 

'Yep,' he said, smothering a belch with one hand. 'Sort of like... 
damages?' 

She shook her head. 'Wonderfully obscure vocabulary, but totally 
bizarre grammar.' 

'I'm from out of town,' he said breezily. This was true. He'd never 
been within a hundred light years of the place. 

'Shias Engin,' she nodded. 'I write poems.' 

'You're a poet?' he said, delighted. 'I've always been fascinated by 
poets. I tried writing poems, once.' 

'Yes,' she sighed and looked wary. 'I suspect everyone does, and you 
are...?' 

'Cheradenine Zakalwe; I fight wars.' 

She smiled. 'I thought there hadn't been a war for three hundred 
years; aren't you getting a little out of practice?' 

'Yeah; boring, isn't it?' 

She sat back in the seat, took off her coat. 'From just how far out of 
town have you come, Mr Zakalwe?' 

'Aw heck, you've guessed,' he looked downcast. 'Yeah; I'm an alien. 
Oh. Thank you.' The drinks arrived; he passed one to her. 

'You do look funny,' she said, inspecting him. 

' "Funny"?' he said indignantly. 

She shrugged. 'Different.' She drank. 'But not all that different.' She 
leaned forward on the table. 'Why do you look so similar to us? I know 
all the outworlders aren't humanoid, but a lot are. How come?' 

'Well,' he said, hand at his mouth again, 'It's like this; the...' he 
belched. '... the dustclouds and stuff in the galaxy are... its food, and 
its food keeps speaking back to it. That's why there are so many 
humanoid species; nebulae's last meals repeating on them.' 

She grinned. 'That simple, is it?' 

He shook his head. 'Na; not at all. Very complicated. But,' he held up 
one finger. 'I think I know the real reason.' 

'Which is?' 

'Alcohol in the dust clouds. Goddamn stuff is everywhere. Any lousy 
species ever invents the telescope and the spectroscope and starts 
looking in between the stars, what do they find?' He knocked the 
glass on the table. 'Loads of stuff; but much of it alcohol.' He drank 
from the glass. 'Humanoids are the galaxy's way of trying to get rid 
of all that alcohol.' 

'It's all starting to make sense now,' she agreed, nodding her head 
and looking serious. She looked inquisitively at him. 'So, why are you 
here? Not come to start a war. I hope.' 

'No, I'm on leave; come to get away from them. That's why I chose 
this place.' 

'How long you here for?' 

'Till I get bored.' 

She smiled at him. 'And how long do you think that will take?' 

'Well,; he smiled back, 'I don't know.' He put his glass down. She 
drained hers. He reached out for the button to call the waiter, but her 
finger was already there. 

'My turn,' she said. 'Same again?' 

'No,' he said. 'Something quite different, this time, I feel.' 

The fact of her talent - maybe her genius - played a role, too. It added 
to the extent of his disbelief, this ability to be more than the thing he 
loved, and to present to the outside world an entirely different aspect. 
She was what he knew here and now, complete and rich and 
measureless, and yet when both of them were dead (and he found 
he could think about his own death again now, without fear), a world 
at least - many cultures, perhaps - would know her as something 
utterly dissimilar, a poet; a fabricator of sets of meanings that to him 
were just words on a page or titles that she sometimes mentioned. 

One day, she said, she would write a poem about him, but not yet. 
He thought what she wanted was for him to tell her the story of his 

life, but he had already told her he could never do that. He didn't 
need to confess to her; there was no need. She had already 
unburdened him, even if he did not know quite how. Memories are 
interpretations, not truth, she insisted, and rational thought was just 
another instinctive power. 

He felt the slowly healing polarisation of his mind, matching his to 
hers, the alignment of all his prejudices and conceits to the lodestone 
of the image she represented for him. 

She helped him, and without knowing it. She mended him, reaching 
back to something so buried he'd thought it inaccessible forever, and 
drawing its sting. So perhaps it was also that which stunned him; the 
effect this one person was having on memories so terrible to him that 
he had long ago resigned himself to them only growing more potent 
with age. But she just ringed them off, cut them out, parcelled them 
up and threw them away, and she didn't even realise she was doing 
it, had no idea of the extent of her influence. 

He held her in his arms. 

'Older and younger than you.' 

'Cryptic crap; answer the question.' 

He grimaced into the darkness. 'Well... how long do you people live?' 

'I don't know. Eighty, ninety years?' 

He had to remember the length of the year, here. Close enough. 'Then 
I'm... about two hundred and twenty; a hundred and ten; and thirty.' 

She whistled, moved her head on his shoulder. 'A choice.' 

'Sort of. I was born two hundred and twenty years ago, I have lived 

for a hundred and ten of them, and physically I'm about thirty.' 

The laughter was deep in her throat. He felt her breasts sweep across 
his chest as she swung on top of him. 'I'm fucking a hundred-and-ten 
year old?' she sounded amused. 

He laid his hands on the small of her back, smooth and cool. 'Yeah; 
great, isn't it? All the benefits of experience without the con -' 

She came down kissing him. 

Her lips parted, closed again; her lips rubbed against each other, side 
to side, and her nose wrinkled. He watched these things with a secret 
delight, as fascinated as a child playing boo with an adult who kept 
disappearing round the side of a cot. 

She slept on. He rested his head again. 

'So many scars, Zakalwe,' she said, shaking her head, tracing lines 

across his chest. 

'I keep getting into scraps,' he admitted. 'I could have all these heal 
completely, but... they're good for... remembering.' 

She put her chin on her chest. 'Come on; admit you just like showing 
them off to the girls.' 

'There is that, too.' 

'This one looks nasty, if your heart's in the same place as ours... given 
that everything else seems to be.' She ran her finger round a little 
puckered mark near one nipple. She felt him tense, and looked up. 
There was a look in the man's eyes that made her shiver. Suddenly 
he seemed all the years he'd claimed, and more. She drew herself 
up, ran her hand through her hair. 'That one still a bit fresh, huh?' 

'That's...' he made the effort of trying to smile, and ran his own finger 
over the tiny dimpled crease on his flesh. '... that's one of the oldest, 
funnily enough.' The look faded from his eyes. 

'This one?' she said brightly, touching one side of his head. 

'Bullet.' 

'In a big battle?' 

'Well, sort of. In a car, to be precise. A woman.' 

'Oh no!' she clapped a hand to her mouth, mimicking horror. 

'It was very embarrassing.' 

'Well, we won't go into that one... what about this?' 

'Laser... very strong light,' he explained, when she looked puzzled. 
'Much longer ago.' 

'This one?' 

'Ahm... combination of things; insects, in the end.' 

'Insects?' She quivered. 

(And he was back there; in the drowned volcano. A long time ago, 
now, but still there, still within him... and still safer to think about 
than that crater over his heart, where another, even more ancient 
memory dwelt. He remembered the caldera, and saw again the pool 
of stagnant water, the stone at its centre and the surrounding walls 
of the poisoned lake. He felt once more the long slow scrape his body 
had made, and the intimacy of insects... But that remorseless 
concentricity didn't matter any more; here was here and now was 
now.) 

'You don't want to know,' he grinned. 

'I think I'll take your word for that,' she agreed, nodding slowly, the 
long black hair swinging heavily. 'I know; I'll kiss them all better.' 

'Could be a long job,' he told her as she swivelled and moved to his 
feet. 

'You in a hurry?' she asked him, kissing a toe. 

'Not at all,' he smiled, lying back. 'Take all the time you want. Take 
forever.' 

'Why do you always wake before me?' 

'I don't know,' he sighed. So did the house, as the breeze moved its 
equivocal walls. 'I like watching you sleep.' 

'Why?' She rolled and lay on her back, turning her head to him, the 

hair rolling bounteously to him. He laid his head on that dark fragrant 
field, remembering the smell of her shoulder, stupidly wondering if 
she smelt different awake than asleep. 

He nuzzled her shoulder and she laughed a little, shrugging that 
shoulder and pressing her head against his. He kissed her neck and 
answered before he forgot the question completely 

'When you're awake you move, and I miss things.' 

'What things?' He felt her kissing his head. 

'Everything you do. When you're asleep you hardly move, and I can 
take it all in. There's enough time.' 

'Strange.' Her voice was slow. 

'You smell the same awake as you do asleep, did you know that?' He 
propped up his head and looked into her face, grinning. 

'You...' she started, then looked down. Her smile looked very sad 
when she looked back up. 'I love hearing that sort of nonsense,' she 
said. 

He heard the unsaid part. 'You mean; you love hearing that sort of 
nonsense now, but won't at some indeterminate point in the future.' 
(He hated the awful triteness of it, but she had her own scars.) 

'I suppose,' she said, holding one of his hands. 

'You think too much about the future.' 

'Maybe we cancel out each other's obsessions, then.' 

He laughed. 'I suppose I walked into that one.' 

She touched his face, studied his eyes. 'I really shouldn't fall in love 
with you, Zakalwe.' 

'Why not?' 

'Lots of reasons. All the past and all the future; because you are who 
you are, and I am who I am. Just everything.' 

'Details,' he said, waving one hand. 

She laughed, shaking her head and burying it in her own hair. She 
surfaced and gazed up at him. 

'I just worry it won't last.' 

'Nothing lasts, remember?' 

'I remember,' she nodded slowly. 

'You think this won't last?' 

'Right now... it feels... I don't know. But if we ever want to hurt each 
other...' 

'Then let's not do that,' he said. 

She lowered her eyelids, bent her head to him, and he put out his 
hand and cradled her head. 

'Maybe it is that simple,' she said. 'Perhaps I like to dwell on what 
might happen so as never to be surprised.' She brought her face up 
to his. 'Does that worry you?' she said, her head shaking, an 
expression very like pain around here eyes. 

'What?' He leant forward to kiss her, smiling, but she moved her head 
to indicate she did not want to, and he drew back while she said: 

'That I... can't believe enough not have doubts.' 

'No. I don't worry about that.' He did kiss her. 

'Strange that taste-buds have no taste,' she murmured into his neck. 
They laughed together. 

Sometimes, at night, lying there in the dark when she was asleep or 
silent, he thought he saw the real ghost of Cheradenine Zakalwe 

come walking through the curtain walls, dark and hard and holding 
some huge deadly gun, loaded and set; the figure would look at him, 
and the air around him seemed to drip with... worse than hate; 
derision. At such moments, he was conscious of himself lying there 
with her, lying as love-struck and besotted as any youth, lying there 
wrapping his arms around a beautiful girl, talented and young, for 
whom there was nothing he wouldn't do, and he knew perfectly and 
completely that to what he had been - to what he had become or 
always was - that sort of unequivocal, selfless, retreating devotion 
was an act of shame, something that had to be wiped out. And the 
real Zakalwe would raise his gun, look him in the eye through the 
sights and fire, calmly and unhesitatingly. 

But then he would laugh and turn to her, kiss her or be kissed, and 
there was no threat and no danger under this sun or any other that 
could take him from her then. 

'Don't forget we've got to go up to that krih today. This morning, in 
fact.' 

'Oh yes,' he said. He rolled onto his back, she sat up and stretched 
her arms out, yawning, forcing her eyes wide and glaring up at the 
fabric roof. Her eyes relaxed, her mouth closed, she looked at him, 
rested her elbow on the head of the bed, and combed his hair with 
her fingers. 'It probably isn't stuck though.' 

'Mmm, maybe not,' he agreed. 

'It might not be there when we look today.' 

'Indeed.' 

'If it is still there we'll go up, though.' 

He nodded, reached up, took her hand, clasped. 

She smiled, quickly kissed him and then sprang out of the bed and 
walked to the far level. She opened the waving translucent drapes 
and unslung a pair of field glasses from a hook on a frame-pole. He 
lay and watched her as she brought the glasses to her eyes, surveyed 

the hillside above. 

'Still there,' she said. Her voice was far away. He closed his eyes. 

'We'll go up today. Maybe in the afternoon.' 

'We should.' Far away. 

'All right.' 

Probably the stupid animal hadn't got stuck at all; more than likely it 
had dozed off into an absent-minded hibernation. They did that, so 
he heard; they just stopped eating and looked ahead and stared with 
their big dumb eyes at something, and closed them sleepily and went 
into a coma, purely by accident. The first rain, or a bird landing on it 
would probably wake it. Perhaps it was stuck though; the krih had 
thick coats and they got entangled with the bushes and tree branches 
sometimes, and couldn't move. They would go up today; the view 
was pleasant, and anyway he could do with some exercise that wasn't 
mostly horizontal. They would lie on the grass and talk, and look out 
to the sea sparkling in the haze, and maybe they would have to free 
the animal, or wake it up, and she would look after it with a look he 
knew not to disturb, and in the evening she would write, and that 
would be another poem. 

As a nameless lover, he had appeared in many of her recent works, 
though as usual she would throw the bulk of them away. She said 
she would write a poem specifically about him, one day, maybe when 
he had told her more about his life. 

The house whispered, moved in its parts, waving and flowing, 
spreading light and dimming it; the varying thicknesses and strengths 
of drape and curtain that formed the walls and divisions of the place 
rustled against each other secretly, like half-heard conversations. 

Far away, she put her hand to her hair, pulled one side absently as 
she moved papers on the desk around with one finger. He watched. 
Her finger stirred through what she'd written yesterday, toying with 
the parchments; circling them around slowly; slowly flexing and 
turning, watched by her, watched by him. 

The glasses hung from her other hand, straps down, forgotten, and 
he wandered a long slow gaze over her as she stood against the light; 
feet, legs, behind, belly, chest, breasts, shoulders, neck; face and 
head and hair. 

The finger moved on the desk top where she would write a short 
poem about him in the evening, one he would copy secretly in case 
she wasn't happy with it and threw it out, and as his desire grew and 
her calm face saw no finger move, one of them was just a passing 
thing, just a leaf pressed between the pages of the other's diary, and 
what they had talked themselves into, they could be silent out of. 

'I must do some work today,' she said to herself. 

There was a pause. 

'Hey?' he said. 

'Hmm?' Her voice was far away. 

'Let's waste a little time, hmm?' 

'A nice euphemism, sir,' she mused, distantly. 

He smiled. 'Come and help me think of better ones.' 

She smiled, and they both looked at each other. 

There was a long pause. 

Swaying slightly, scratching his head, he put the gun stock-down on 
the floor of the smallbay, held the weapon by its barrel, and squinted 
one-eyed into the muzzle, muttering. 

'Zakalwe,' Diziet Sma said, 'we diverted twenty-eight million people 
and a trillion tonnes of space ship two months off course to get you 
to Voerenhutz on time; I'd appreciate it if you'd wait until the job is 
done before you blow your brains out.' 

He turned round to see Sma and the drone entering the rear of the 
smallbay; a traveltube capsule flicked away behind them. 

'Eh?' he said, then waved. 'Oh, hi.' He wore a white shirt - sleeves 
rolled up - black pantaloons, and nothing on his feet. He picked the 
plasma rifle up, shook it, banged it on the side with his free hand, 
and sighted down the length of the smallbay. He steadied, squeezed 
the trigger. 

Light flared briefly, the gun leapt back at him, and there was an 
echoing snap of noise. He looked down to the far end of the bay, two 
hundred metres away, where a glittering black cube perhaps fifteen 
metres to a side sat under the overhead lights. He peered at the 
distant black object, pointed the gun at it again, and inspected the 
magnified view on one of the gun's screens. 'Weird,' he muttered, 
and scratched his head. 

There was a small tray floating at his side; it held an ornate metal 
jug and a crystal goblet. He took a drink from the goblet, staring 
intently at the gun. 

'Zakalwe,' Sma said. 'What, exactly, are you doing?' 

'Target practice,' he said. He drank from the goblet again. 'You want 
a drink, Sma? I'll order another glass...' 

'No thanks.' Sma looked down to the far end of the bay, at the strange 
and gleaming black cube. 'And what is that?' 

'Ice,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 

'Yeah,' he nodded, putting the goblet down to adjust something on 
the plasma rifle. 'Ice.' 

'Dyed black ice,' the drone said. 

'Ice,' Sma said, nodding, but none the wiser. 'Why ice?' 

'Because,' he said, sounding annoyed, 'this... this ship with the 
incredibly silly name and its twenty-eight trillion people and its hyper-
zillion billion squintillion tonnage hasn't got any decent rubbish, that's 

why.' He flicked a couple of switches on the side of the rifle, aimed 
again. 'Trillion fucking tonnes and it hasn't got any goddamn garbage; 
apart from its brain, I suppose.' He squeezed the trigger again. His 
shoulder and arm were pushed back once more, while the light 
flickered from the weapon's muzzle and sound stuttered. He stared 
at the view in the sight-screen. 'This is ridiculous!' he said. 

'But why are you shooting at ice?' Sma insisted. 

'Sma,' he cried, 'are you deaf? Because this parsimonious pile of junk 
claims it hasn't got any rubbish on board it can let me shoot at.' He 
shook his head, opened an inspection panel on the side of the 
weapon. 

'Why not shoot at target holos like everybody else?' Sma asked. 

'Holos are all very well, Diziet, but...' He turned and presented her 
with the gun. 'Here; hold this a minute, will you? Thanks.' He fiddled 
with something inside the inspection panel while Sma held the gun in 
both hands. The plasma rifle was a metre and a quarter long, and 
very heavy. 'Holos are all right for calibration and that sort of crap, 
but for... for getting the feel of a weapon, you have to really... 
really waste something, you know?' He glanced at her. 'You have to 
feel the kick, and see the debris. Real debris. Not this holographic 
shit; the real stuff.' 

Sma and the drone exchanged looks. 

'You hold this... cannon,' Sma said to the machine. Skaffen-
Amtiskaw's fields were glowing pink with amusement. It took the 
weight of the gun from her while the man continued to tinker with 
the weapon's insides. 

'I don't think a General Systems Vehicle thinks in terms of junk, 
Zakalwe,' Sma said, sniffing dubiously at the contents of the ornately-
worked metal jug. She wrinkled her nose. 'Just matter that's currently 
in use and matter that's available to be recycled and turned into 
something else to be used. No such thing as rubbish.' 

'Yeah,' he muttered. 'That's the crap it came out with as well.' 

'Gave you ice instead, eh?' the drone said. 

'Had to settle for it.' He nodded, clicking the armoured inspection 
panel back into place and lifting the gun out of the drone's grip. 
'Should take a hit all right, but now I can't get the damn gun to work.' 

'Zakalwe,' the drone sighed. 'It would hardly be surprising if it isn't 
working. That thing belongs in a museum. It's eleven hundred years 
old. We make pistols that are more powerful, nowadays.' 

He sighted carefully, breathed smoothly... then smacked his lips, put 
the gun down and took a drink from the goblet. He looked back at 
the drone. 'But this thing's beautiful,' he told the machine, taking up 
the gun and flourishing it. He slapped the weapon's darkly cluttered 
side. 'I mean, take a good look at it; it looks powerful!' He gave an 
admiring growl, then took up his stance again and shot. 

This firing fared no better than the others. He sighed and shook his 
head, staring at the weapon. 'It's not working,' he said plaintively. 'It 
just isn't working. I'm getting recoil, but it just isn't working.' 

'May I?' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. It floated towards the gun. The man 
looked suspiciously at the drone. Then he turned the gun over to it. 

The plasma rifle flashed from every available screen, things clicked 
and beeped, the inspection panels flicked open and shut, and then 
the drone gave the gun back to the man. 'It's in perfect working 
order,' it said. 

'Huh.' He held the weapon in one hand, up and out from his body, 
then slapped the back of the stock with his other hand, whirling the 
big rifle round so that it spun like a rotor in front of his face and chest. 
He didn't take his eyes off the drone while he did this. He was still 
looking at the machine when he twisted his wrist, brought the gun to 
a stop - already aimed straight at the distant black cube of ice - and 
fired it, all in one smooth action. Again, the gun seemed to fire, but 
the ice sat undisturbed. 

'The hell it's working,' he said. 

'How exactly did your conversation with the ship go, when you asked 
for your "rubbish"?' the drone inquired. 

'I don't remember,' he said loudly. 'I told it what a complete cretin it 
was for not having some junk to shoot at, and it said when people 
wanted to shoot at real shit they usually used ice. So I said, all right 
then, you scumbag rocket... or something like that; give me some 
ice!' He held out his hands expressively. 'That was all.' He dropped 
the gun. 

The drone caught it. 'Try asking it to clear the bay for firing practice,' 
it suggested. 'Specifically, ask it to clear a space in its trapdoor 
coverage.' 

He accepted the gun from the drone, looking disdainful. 'All right,' he 
said slowly. He looked about to say something else, talking into mid-
air, then looked uncertain. He scratched his head, glanced at the 
drone and appeared to be about to talk to it, then looked away again. 
Finally he jabbed a finger at Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 'You... you ask for... 
all that. It'll sound better coming from another machine.' 

'Very well. It's done,' the drone said. 'You only had to ask.' 

'Hmm,' he said. He switched his suspicious look from the drone to the 
distant black cube. He lifted the gun and aimed at the icy mass. 

He fired. 

The gun rammed back against his shoulder, and a blinding flash of 
light threw his shadow behind him. The sound was like a grenade 
going off. A pencil-thin white line seared the length of the smallbay 
and joined the gun to the fifteen metre cube of ice, which shattered 
into a million fragments in a floor-thumping detonation of light and 
steam and a furiously blossoming cloud of black vapour. 

Sma stood, her hands clasped behind her back, and watched debris 
fountain fifty metres to the top of the bay, where it ricocheted off the 
roof. More black shrapnel flew the same distance to crash into the 
bay's side walls... and tumbling, glittering black shards slithered 
across the floor towards them. Most skidded to a stop on the ridged 

surface of the bay, though a few small pieces - blown a long way 
through the air before thumping into the deck - did actually slide past 
the two humans and the watching drone, and clunk into the rear wall 
of the bay. Skaffen-Amtiskaw picked up a fist-size piece from near 
Sma's feet. The sound of the explosion echoed clangingly back off the 
walls a few times, gradually fading. 

Sma felt her ears relax. 'Happy, Zakalwe?' she asked. 

He blinked, then switched the gun off and turned to Sma. 'Seems to 
be working all right now,' he shouted. 

Sma nodded. 'Mm-hmm.' 

He motioned with his head. 'Let's go get a drink.' He took up the 
goblet, and drank as he walked towards the traveltube port. 

'A drink?' Sma said, falling into step with the man and nodding at the 
glass he was drinking from. 'Why; what's that?' 

'Nearly finished, that's what this is,' he told her, loudly. He poured a 
last half-glass from the metal jug into the goblet. 

'Ice?' the drone offered, holding up the dripping black lump. 

'No thanks.' 

Something flickered in the traveltube, and a capsule was suddenly 
there, door rolling open. 'What's this... trapdoor coverage, anyway?' 
he asked the machine. 

'General Systems Vehicle internal explosion protection,' the drone 
explained, letting the humans board the capsule first. 'Snaps 
anything significantly more powerful than a fart straight into 
hyperspace; blast, radiation; the lot.' 

'Shit,' he said, disgusted. 'You mean you can let nukes off in these 
fuckers and they don't even notice?' 

The drone wobbled. 'They notice; probably nobody else does.' 

The man stood swaying in the capsule, watching the door roll back 
into place, shaking his head sorrily. 'You people just have no idea of 
fair play, do you?' 

'Cheradenine?... Cheradenine?' 

He heard the voice, but wasn't sure the woman was really talking to 
him. It was a beautiful voice. He wanted to reply to it. But he couldn't 
work out how to. It was very dark. 

'Cheradenine?' 

A very patient voice. Concerned, somehow, but a hopeful voice; a 
cheerful, even loving voice. He tried to remember his mother. 

'Cheradenine?' the voice said again. Trying to get him to wake up. 
But he was awake. He tried moving his lips. 

'Cheradenine... can you hear me?' 

He moved his lips, exhaled at the same time, and thought he might 
have produced a noise. He tried to open his eyes. The darkness 
wavered. 

'Cheradenine...?' There was a hand at his face, gently stroking his 
cheek. Shias! he thought for a second, then swept that memory away 
to where he kept all the others. 

'H...' he managed. Just the start of a sound. 

'Cheradenine...' the voice said, close to his ear now. 'It's Diziet here. 
Diziet Sma. Remember me?' 

'Diz...' he succeeded in saying, after a couple of failures. 

'Cheradenine?' 

'Yeah...' he heard himself breathe. 

'Try to open your eyes, will you?' 

'Try'n...' he said. Then light came, as though it had had nothing to do 
with him trying to open his eyes. Things took a while to gel, but 
eventually he saw a restful green ceiling, illuminated from the sides 
by a fan-shaped glow of concealed lighting, and Diziet Sma's face 
looking down at him. 

'Well done, Cheradenine.' She smiled at him. 'How are you feeling?' 

He thought about this. 'Weird,' he said. He was thinking hard now, 
trying to remember how he'd got here. Was this some sort of 
hospital? How had he got here? 

'Where is this?' he said. Might as well try the direct approach. He tried 
shifting his hands, but without success. Sma glanced somewhere over 
his head as he did so. 

'The GSV Congenital Optimist You're all right... you're going to be all 
right.' 

'If I'm all right, why can't I move my hands or fee... shit.' 

Suddenly he was tied to the wooden frame again; the girl was in front 
of him. He opened his eyes and saw her; Sma. A misty, uncertain 
light glowed all around. He wrenched at his bonds, but there was no 
sign of give, no hope... he felt the tug on his hair, then the thudding 
cut of the blade, and saw the girl in the red robe looking at him from 
somewhere over his be-bodied head. 

Everything revolved. He closed his eyes. 

The moment passed. He swallowed. He took a breath and opened his 
eyes again; at least these things seemed to be working. Sma looked 
down, relieved. 'You just remembered?' 

'Yeah. I just remembered.' 

'You going to be okay?' She sounded serious, but still reassuring. 

'I'll be all right,' he said. Then; 'it's just a scratch.' 

She laughed, looked away for a bit, and when she looked to him 
again, she was biting her lip. 

'Hey,' he said. 'Narrow one, this time, huh?' he smiled. 

Sma nodded. 'You could say that. Another few seconds and you'd 
have suffered brain damage; another few minutes and you'd have 
been dead. If only you'd had a homing implant; we could have picked 
you up days...' 

'Oh now, Sma,' he said gently. 'You know I can't be bothered with all 
that stuff.' 

'Yeah, I know,' she said. 'Well, whatever; you're going to have to stay 
like this for a while.' Sma smoothed hair from his forehead. 'It'll take 
about two hundred days or so to grow a new body. They want me to 
ask you; do you want to sleep through the whole thing, or do you 
want to stay awake as normal... or anything in between? It's up to 
you. Makes no difference to the process.' 

'Hmm.' He thought about this. 'I suppose I get to do lots of improving 
things, like listen to music and watch films or whatever, and read?' 

'If you want,' Sma shrugged. 'You can go the whole hog and spool 
fantasy head-tapes if you want.' 

'Drink?' 

'Drink?' 

'Yeah; can I get drunk?' 

'I don't know,' Sma said, looking above and to one side. A voice 
muttered something. 

'Who's that?' he asked. 

'Stod Perice.' A young man nodded, coming into view, upside down. 
'Medic. Hello there, Mr Zakalwe. I'll be looking after you, however you 
decide to spend the time.' 

'D'you dream when you're under, if you do it that way?' he asked the 
medic. 

'Depends how deep you want to go. We can send you so far down 
you think no more than a second's passed during those two hundred 
days, or you can lucid dream every second of them. Whatever you 
want.' 

'What do most people do?' 

'Switch right off; wake up with a new body after no appreciable time.' 

'Thought so. Can I get drunk while I'm hooked up to whatever the 
hell it is I'm hooked up to?' 

Stod Perice grinned. 'I'm sure we could arrange it. If you want, we 
could give you drug-glands; ideal opportunity, just...' 

'No thanks.' He closed his eyes briefly and tried to shake his head. 
'Occasional inebriety will be quite sufficient.' 

Stod Perice nodded. 'Well, I think we can rig you for that.' 

'Great. Sma?' he looked at her. She raised her eyebrows. 'I'll stay 
awake,' he told her. 

Sma smiled slowly. 'I had a feeling you might.' 

'You sticking around?' 

'Could do,' the woman said. 'Would you like me to?' 

'I'd appreciate it.' 

'And I'd like to.' She nodded thoughtfully. 'Okay. I'll watch you put 
on weight.' 

'Thanks. And thanks for not bringing that goddamn drone. I can 
imagine the jokes.' 

'... Yes,' Sma said, hesitantly, so that he said: 

'Sma? What is it?' 

'Well...' The woman looked uncomfortable. 

'Tell me.' 

'Skaffen-Amtiskaw,' she said, awkwardly. 'It sent you a present.' She 
fished a small package from her pocket, flourished it, embarrassed. 
'I... I don't know what it is, but...' 

'Well I can't open it. Come on, Sma.' 

Sma opened the package. She looked at the contents. Stod Perice 
leant over, and then turned quickly away, holding one hand at his 
mouth, coughing. 

Sma pursed her lips. 'I may ask for a new escort drone.' 

He closed his eyes. 'What is it?' 

'It's a hat.' 

It was only later, in the dim red of the hospital section light, while 
Sma danced slowly with some new conquest, and Stod Perice was 
dining out with friends and telling them the story of the hat, and life 
went on throughout the rest of the great ship, that he remembered 
how, a few years earlier, and very far away, Shias Engin had traced 
the wounds on his body (cool slim fingers on the puckered new-
looking flesh, the smell of her skin and the tingling sweep of her hair). 

And in two hundred days he would have a new body. And (And this?... 
I'm sorry. Still fresh, that one?)... the wound over his heart would be 
gone forever, and the heart beneath his chest would not be the same 
one. 

And he realised he had lost her. 

Not Shias Engin, whom he'd loved, or thought he had, and certainly 
lost... but her; the other one, the real one, the one who'd lived within 
him through a century of icy sleep. 

He had thought he would not lose her until the day he died. 

Now he knew differently, and felt broken by the knowledge and the 
loss. 

He whispered her name to the quiet red night. 

Overhead, the ever-watchful medical monitoring unit saw some fluid 
seep from the bodiless human's tear ducts, and wondered dumbly at 
it. 

'Eighty, relative,' the drone said. 

'You think he'll want to come out of retirement? Just because I ask 
him to?' He looked sceptical. 

'You're all we could think of,' Sma told him. 

'Can't you just let the old guy grow old in peace?' 

'There's a little more at stake than the happy retirement of one ageing 
politico, Zakalwe.' 

'What? The universe? Life as we know it?' 

'Yes; tens, maybe hundreds of millions of times over.' 

'Very philosophical.' 

'And you didn't let the Ethnarch Kerian grow old in peace, did you?' 

'Damn right,' he said, and wandered a little further into the armoury. 
'That old pisshead deserved to die a million times.' 

The converted minibay engineering space housed a dazzling array of 
Culture and other weaponry. Zakalwe, Sma thought, was like a kid in 
a toy store. He was selecting gear and loading it onto a pallet which 
Skaffen-Amtiskaw was guiding after the man, down the aisles of racks 
and drawers and shelves all stuffed and packed with projectile 
weapons, line guns, laser rifles, plasma projectors, multitudinous 
grenades, effectors, plane charges, passive and reactive armour, 
sensory and guard devices, full combat suits, missile packs, and at 
least a dozen other distinctly different types of device Sma didn't 
recognize. 

'You'll never be able to carry this lot, Zakalwe. 'This is just the 
shortlist,' he told her. He took a stocky, boxy-looking gun with no 
appreciable barrel from a shelf. He held it out to the drone, 'What's 
this?' 

'CREWS; assault rifle,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 'Seven fourteen tonne 
batteries; seven-element single shot to forty-four point eight 
kilorounds a second (minimum firing time eight point seven five 
seconds), maximum single burst; seven times two-fifty kilogrammes; 
frequency from mid-visible to high X-ray.' 

He hefted it. 'Not very well balanced.' 

'That's its stowed configuration. Slide the whole top back.' 

'Hmm.' He pretended to aim the readied gun. 'Now, what's to stop 
you putting your supporting hand over here, where the beams are 
going?' 

'Common sense?' suggested the drone. 

'Uh-huh. I'll stick with my obsolete plasma rifle.' He put the gun back. 
'Anyway, Sma; you should be pleased old men do want to come out 
of retirement for you. Dammit, I should be devoting myself to 
gardening or something, not storming off to the galactic backwoods 
doing your dirty work.' 

'Oh, yeah,' Sma said. 'And a big struggle I had too, convincing you to 
quit your "gardening" and come back to us. Shit, Zakalwe; your bags 
were packed.' 

'I must have telepathically already have realized the urgency of the 
situation.' He heaved a massive black gun from a rack, swung it with 
both hands, grunting with the effort. 'Holy shit. Do you fire this 
mother or just use it as a battering ram?' 

'Idiran hand cannon,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw sighed. 'Don't wave it around 
like that; it's very old and quite rare.' 

'No fucking wonder.' He struggled to lift the gun back into its rack, 
then continued down the aisle. 'Come to think of it, Sma, I'm so old 
my whole life ought to be on triple time or something; I'm probably 
grossly undercharging you for this whole sorry escapade.' 

'Well, if you're going to look at it that way, we should be charging you 
for... patent infringement? Giving those old guys their youth back 
using our technology.' 

'Don't knock it. You don't know what it's like getting that old that 
early.' 

'Yeah, but it applies to everybody; you were giving it only to the most 
evil, power-mad bastards on the planet.' 

'They were top-down societies! What do you expect? Anyway; if I'd 
given it to everybody... think of the population explosion!' 

'Zakalwe, I thought about that when I was about fifteen; they teach 
you that sort of stuff in early school, in the Culture. It was all thought 
through long ago; it's part of our history, part of our upbringing. 
That's why what you did would look insane to a school-kid. You are 

like a school-kid, to us. You don't even want to get old. Nothing more 
immature than that.' 

'Whoo!' he said, stopping suddenly and taking something from an 
open shelf. 'What's this?' 

'Beyond your ken,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 

'What a beauty!' He gripped the stunningly complicated weapon and 
twirled it. 'What is this?' he breathed. 

'Micro Armaments System, Rifle,' the drone narrated. 'It's... oh, look, 
Zakalwe; it has ten separate weapon systems, not including the semi-
sentient guard facility, the reactive shield components, the IFF-set 
quick-reaction swing-packs or the AG unit, and before you ask, the 
controls are all on the wrong side because that's the left-hand bias 
version, and the balance - like the weight and the independently 
variable inertia - are fully adjustable. It also takes about half a year's 
training just to learn how to use it safely, let alone competently, so 
you can't have one.' 

'I don't want one,' he said, stroking the weapon. 'But what a device!' 
He put it back with the rest. He glanced at Sma. 'Dizzy; I know the 
way you people think; I respect it, I guess... but your life isn't my 
life. I live in unsafe ways in dangerous places; always have done, 
always will do. I'll die soon enough anyway, so why should I suffer 
the additional burden of getting old, even slowly?' 

'Don't try and hide behind necessity, Zakalwe. You could have 
changed your life; you don't have to live the way you do; you could 
have joined the Culture, become one of us; at least lived the way we 
do, but -' 

'Sma!' he exclaimed, turning to her. 'That's for you; it isn't for me. 
You think I'm wrong to have my age stabilised; even the chance of 
immortality is... wrong, to you. Okay; I can see that. In your society, 
the way you live your lives, of course it is. You have your three-fifty, 
four hundred years, and know you'll get right to the end of them; die 
with your boots off. For me... that won't work. I don't have that 
certainty. I enjoy the perspective from the edge, Sma; I like to feel 

that up-draft on my face. So sooner or later I'll die; violently, 
probably. Maybe even foolishly, because that's often the way of it; 
you avoid nukes and determined assassins... and then choke on a 
fish bone... but who cares? So; your stasis is your society, and mine... 
is my age. But we are both assured of death.' 

Sma looked at the floor, hands clasped behind her back. 'All right,' 
she said. 'But don't forget who gave you that perspective from the 
edge.' 

He smiled sadly. 'Yes; you saved me. But you've also lied to me; sent 
- no, listen - sent me on damn fool missions where I was on the 
opposite side from the one I thought I was on, had me fight for 
incompetent aristos I'd gladly have strangled, in wars where I didn't 
know you were backing both sides, filled my balls full of alien seed I 
was supposed to inject into some poor damn female... nearly got me 
killed... very nearly got me killed a dozen times or more...' 

'You've never forgotten me for that hat, have you?' Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
said, with fake bitterness. 

'Oh, Cheradenine,' Sma said. 'Don't pretend it hasn't been fun, too.' 

'Sma, believe me; it has not all been "fun".' He leant against a cabinet 
full of ancient projectile weapons. 'And, worse than all that,' he 
insisted, 'is when you turn the goddamn maps upside-down.' 

'What?' Sma said, puzzled. 

'Turning the maps upside down,' he repeated. 'Have you 
any idea how annoying and inconvenient it is when you get to a place 
and find that they map the place the other way up compared to the 
maps you've got? Because of something stupid like some people think 
a magnetic needle is pointing up to heaven, when other people think 
it's just heavier and pointing down? Or because it's done according to 
the galactic plane or something? I mean, this might sound trivial, but 
it's very upsetting.' 

'Zakalwe, I had no idea. Let me offer you my apologies and those of 
the entire Special Circumstances Section; no, all of Contact; no: the 

entire Culture; no: all intelligent species.' 

'Sma, you remorseless bitch, I'm trying to be serious.' 

'No, I don't think you are. Maps...' 

'But it's true! They turn them the wrong way up!' 

'Then there must,' Diziet Sma said, 'be a reason for it.' 

'What?' he demanded. 

'Psychology,' Sma and the drone said at the same time. 

He heard the accusatory tone in Sma's voice, and looked up. 'Yes; 
two suits. So what?' 

'Those can be used to imprison somebody, Zakalwe; I know that. 
They're not just for protection.' 

'Sma; if I'm lifting this guy out of a hostile environment, with no 
immediate help from you guys because you have to stand off and be 
seen to be pure - fake though that might be - I have to have the tools 
to do the job. Serious FYT suits are numbered among those tools.' 

'One,' Sma said. 

'Sma, don't you trust me?' 

'One,' Sma repeated. 

'Goddamn it! All right!' He dragged the suit away from the pile of 

equipment. 

'Cheradenine,' Sma said, suddenly conciliatory. 'Remember; we need 
Beychae's... commitment, not just his presence. That's why we 
couldn't impersonate him; that's why we couldn't tamper with his 
mind...' 

'Sma, you're sending me to tamper with his mind.' 

'All right,' Sma said, suddenly nervous-looking. She clapped her 
hands once softly, looked a little embarrassed. 'By the way, 
Cheradenine, ah... what exactly are your plans? I know better than 
to ask for a mission profile or anything formal, but how do you mean 
to get to Beychae?' 

He sighed. 'I'm going to make him want to come to me.' 

'How?' 

'Just one word.' 

'A word?' 

'A name.' 

'What, yours?' 

'No; mine was supposed to be kept a secret when I was advisor to 
Beychae, but it must have leaked out by now. Too dangerous. I'll use 
another name.' 

'Ah hah.' Sma looked expectantly at him, but he went back to 
choosing between the various bits of equipment he'd picked out. 

'Beychae's in this university, right?' he said, not turning to look at 
Sma. 

'Yes; in the archives, almost permanently. But there are a lot of 
archives and he moves around a lot, and there are always guards.' 

'Okay,' he told her. 'If you want to do something useful, try finding 

something that the university might want.' 

Sma shrugged. 'It's a capitalist society. How about money?' 

'I'll be doing that myself...' he paused, looked suspicious. 'I will be 
allowed plenty of discretion in that area, won't I?' 

'Unlimited expenses,' Sma nodded. 

He smiled. 'Wonderful.' He paused. 'What source? A tonne of 
platinum? Sack of diamonds? My own bank?' 

'Well, more or less your own bank, yes,' Sma said. 'We've beea 
building up something called the Vanguard Foundation since the last 
war; commercial empire, comparatively ethical, expanding quietly. 
That's where your unlimited expenses will come from.' 

'Well, with my unlimited expenses I'll probably try offering this 
university lots of money; but it would be better if there was some 
actual thing we could tempt them with.' 

'All right,' she said, nodding. Then her brow wrinkled. She indicated 
the combat suit.' What did you call that thing?' 

He looked puzzled, then said, 'Oh; it's an FYT suit.' 

'Yes; a serious FYT suit; that's what you said. But I thought I knew 
all the nomenclature; I've never heard that acronym before. What 
does it stand for?' 

'It stands for a serious fuck-you-too suit.' He grinned. 

Sma made a clicking noise with her tongue. 'Should have known 
better than to ask, shouldn't I?' 

cluster. It had accelerated hard, and now it was braking hard. He was 
packing the gear he would need into a capsule that would take him 
down to the surface of the planet where Tsoldrin Beychae was; the 
initial stage of his in-system journey would be on a fast three-person 
module; it would loiter in the atmosphere of a nearby gas-giant 
planet. The Xenophobe itself would wait in interstellar space, ready 
to provide support if needed. 

'Are you positive you don't want Skaffen-Amtiskaw to come with 
you?' 

'Absolutely positive; keep that air-borne asshole to yourself.' 

'Some other drone?' 

'No.' 

'A knife missile?' 

'Diziet; no! I don't want Skaffen-Amtiskaw or anything else that 
thinks it can think for itself.' 

'Hey; just refer to me as though I'm not here,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
said. 

'Wishful thinking, drone.' 

'Better than none at all, so above par for you,' the machine said. 

He looked at the drone. 'You sure they didn't issue a factory-recall on 
your batch number?' 

'Myself,' said the drone, sniffily, 'I have never been able to see what 
virtue there could be in something that was eighty per cent water.' 

'Anyway,' Sma said. 'You know all the relevant stuff, yes?' 

'Yes,' he said tiredly. The man's tanned, smoothly muscled body 
rippled as he bent, securing the plasma rifle in the capsule. He wore 
a pair of briefs. Sma - hair still tousled from bed, for this was early 
morning by ship time - wore a jellaba. 

'You know the people to contact?' she fretted. 'And who's in charge 
and on what side...' 

'And what to do if my credit facilities are suddenly withdrawn? Yes; 
everything.' 

'If - when you get him out - you head for...' 

'The enchanting, sunny system of Impren,' he said tiredly, in a sing-
song voice, 'Where there are lots of friendly natives in a variety of 
ecologically sound space Habitats. Which are neutral.' 

'Zakalwe,' Sma said suddenly, taking his face in both hands and 
kissing him. 'I hope this all works out.' 

'Me too, funnily enough,' he said. He kissed Sma back; she pulled 
away eventually. He shook his head, running his gaze down and up 
the woman's body, grinning. 'Ah... one day, Diziet.' 

She shook her head and smiled insincerely. 'Not unless I'm 
unconscious or dead, Cheradenine.' 

'Oh. I can still hope, then?' 

Sma slapped his backside. 'On your way, Zakalwe.' 

He stepped into the armoured combat suit. It closed around him. He 
flipped the helmet back. 

He looked suddenly serious. 'You just make sure you know where -' 

'We know where she is,' Sma said quickly. 

He looked at the floor of the hanger for a moment, then smiled back 
into Sma's eyes. 

'Good.' He clapped his gloves together. 'Great; I'll be off. See you 
later, with any luck.' He stepped into the capsule. 

'Take care, Cheradenine,' Sma said. 

'Yes; look after your disgusting cloven butt,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said. 

'Depend on it,' he said, and blew both of them a kiss. 

He looked out through the open faceplate, and wiped a little sweat 
from his brow. It was dusk over the plateau. A few metres away, by 
the light of two moons and a fading sun, he could see the rimrock, 
frost-whitened. Beyond was the great gash in the desert which 
provided the setting for the ancient, half-empty city where Tsoldrin 
Beychae now lived. 

Clouds drifted, and the dust collected. 

'Well,' he sighed, to no-one in particular, and looked up into yet 
another alien sky. 'Here we are again.' 

The man stood on a tiny spur of clay and watched the roots of the 
huge tree as they were uncovered and washed bare by a gurgling 
wash of dun-coloured water. Rain swarmed through the air; the broad 
brown swell of rushing water tearing at the roots of the tree leapt 
with thrashing spray. The rain alone had brought visibility down to a 
couple of hundred metres and had long since soaked the man in the 
uniform to the skin. The uniform was meant to be grey, but the rain 
and the mud had turned it dark brown. It had been a fine, well-fitting 
uniform, but the rain and the mud had reduced it to a flopping rag. 

The tree tipped and fell, crashing back into the brown torrent and 
spraying mud over the man, who stepped back, and lifted his face to 
the dull grey sky, to let the incessant rain wash the mud from his 
skin. The great tree blocked the thundering stream of brown slurry 

and forced some of it over the clay spur, forcing the man further back, 
along a crude stone wall to a high lintel of ancient concrete, which 
stretched, cracked and uneven, up to a small ugly cottage squatting 
near the crown of the concrete hill. He stayed, watching the long 
brown bruise of the swollen river as it flowed over and ate into the 
little isthmus of clay; then the spur collapsed, the tree lost its 
anchorage on that side of the river, and was turned round and turned 
over and transported bodily on the back of the tumbling waters, 
heading into the sodden valley and the low hills beyond. The man 
looked at the crumbling bank on the other side of the flood, where 
the great tree's roots protruded from the earth like ripped cables, 
then he turned and walked heavily up towards the little cottage. 

He walked round it. The vast square concrete plinth, nearly a half-
kilometre to a side, was still surrounded by water; brown waves 
washed its edges on every side. The towering hulks of ancient metal 
structures, long since fallen into disrepair, loomed through the haze 
of rain, squatting on the pitted and cracked surface of the concrete 
like forgotten pieces in some enormous game. The cottage - already 
made ridiculous by the expanse of concrete around it - looked 
somehow even more grotesque than the abandoned machines, just 
because of their proximity. 

The man looked all about as he walked round the building, but saw 
nothing that he wanted to see. He went into the cottage. 

The assassin flinched as he threw open the door. The chair she was 
tied to - a small wooden thing - was balanced precariously against a 
thick set of drawers, and when she jerked, its legs rasped on the 
stone floor and sent chair and girl sliding to the ground with a whack. 
She hit her head on the flagstones and cried out. 

He sighed. He walked over, boots squelching with each step, and 
dragged the chair upright, kicking a piece of broken mirror away as 
he did so. The woman was hanging slackly, but he knew she was 
faking. He manoeuvred the chair into the centre of the small room. 
He watched the woman carefully as he did this, and kept out of the 
way of her head; earlier when he'd been tying her up she'd butted 
him in the face, very nearly breaking his nose. 

He looked at her bonds. The rope that bound her hands behind the 
back of the chair was frayed; she had been trying to cut through the 
bindings using the broken hand-mirror from the top of the set of 
drawers. 

He left her hanging inertly in the middle of the room, where he could 
see her, then went over to the small bed cut into one thick wall of the 
cottage, and fell heavily into it. It was dirty, but he was exhausted 
and too wet to care. 

He listened to the rain hammering on the roof, and listened to the 
wind whining through the door and the shuttered windows, and 
listened to the steady plopping of drops coming through the leaking 
roof and dropping onto the flagstones. He listened for the noise of 
helicopters, but there were no helicopters. He had no radio and he 
wasn't sure they knew where to look anyway. They would be 
searching as well as the weather allowed, but they'd be looking for 
his staff car, and it was gone; washed away by the brown avalanche 
of river. Probably, it would take days. 

He closed his eyes, and started to fall asleep almost immediately, but 
it was as though the consciousness of defeat would not let him 
escape, and found him even there, filling his nearly sleeping mind 
with images of inundation and defeat, and harried him out of his rest, 
back into the continuing pain and dejection of wakefulness. He rubbed 
his eyes, but the scummy water on his hands ground grains of sand 
and earth into his eyes. He cleaned one finger as best he could on 
the filthy rags on the bed, and rubbed some spit into his eyes, 
because he thought if he allowed himself to cry, he might not be able 
to stop. 

He looked at the woman. She was pretending to come round. He 
wished he had the strength and the inclination to go over and hit her, 
but he was too tired, and too conscious that he would be taking out 
on her the defeat of an entire army. Belting any one individual - let 
alone a helpless, cross-eyed woman - would be so pathetically petty 
a way of trying to find recompense for a downfall of that magnitude 
that even if he did live, he would be ashamed forever that he had 
done such a thing. 

She moaned dramatically. A thin strand of snot detached itself from 
her nose and fell onto the heavy coat she wore. 

He looked away, disgusted. 

He heard her sniff, loudly. When he looked back, her eyes were open, 
and she was staring malevolently at him. She was only slightly cross-
eyed, but the imperfection annoyed him more than it should have. 
Given a bath and a decent set of clothes, he thought, the woman 
might almost have looked pretty. But right now she was buried inside 
a greasy green greatcoat smudged all over with mud, and her dirty 
face was almost completely hidden; partially by the collar of the 
heavy coat, and partially by her long, filthy hair, which was attached 
to the green greatcoat in various places by glistening blobs of mud. 
She moved oddly in the chair, as though scratching her back against 
the chair. He could not decide whether she was testing the ropes that 
bound her, or was just troubled by fleas. 

He doubted she had been sent to kill him; almost certainly she was 
what she was dressed as; an auxiliary. Probably she had been left 
behind in a retreat and had wandered about too frightened or proud 
or stupid to surrender until she had seen the staff car in difficulties in 
the storm-washed hollow. Her attempt at killing him had been brave 
but laughable. By sheer luck she'd killed his driver with one shot; a 
second had struck him a glancing blow on the side of the head, 
making him groggy while she threw the empty gun away and leapt 
into the car with her knife. The driverless car had slid down a greasy 
grass slope into the brown torrent of the river. 

Such a stupid act. Sometimes, heroics revolted him; they seemed like 
an insult to the soldier who weighed the risks of the situation and 
made calm, cunning decisions based on experience and imagination; 
the sort of unshowy soldiering that didn't win medals but wars. 

Still dazed from the bullet-graze, he had fallen into the car's rear 
footwell as it pitched and yawed, caught in the swollen force of the 
river. The woman had nearly buried him in the voluminous thick coat. 
Stuck like that, head still ringing from the shot that had grazed his 
skull, he'd been unable to get a good swing at her. For those absurd, 
confined, frustrating minutes, the struggle with the girl had seemed 

like a microcosm of the plain-wide muddle his army was now 
embroiled in; he had the strength to knock her out cold, but the 
cramped battleground and the hiding weight of her enveloping coat 
had muffled him and imprisoned him until it was too late. 

The car had hit the concrete island and tipped right over, throwing 
them both out onto the corroded grey surface. The woman had given 
a little scream; she'd raised the knife that had been caught in the 
folds of the green greatcoat all that time, but he had finally got his 
clear punch, and connected satisfyingly with her chin. 

She'd thumped back to the concrete; he'd turned round to see the 
car scraping off the slipway, torn away by the surging brown tide. 
Still on its side, it had sunk almost immediately. 

He'd turned back, and felt tempted to kick the unconscious woman. 
He'd kicked the knife instead, sending it whirling away into the river, 
following the drowned staff car. 

'What?' he said, shaken from his reverie. 

'We'll win,' she said, giving a furious shake that rattled the chair's 
legs on the stone floor. 

Why did I tie the silly fool to a chair, of all things? he thought. 'You 
could well be right,' he told her, tiredly. 'Things are looking... damp 
at the moment. Make you feel any better?' 

'You're going to die,' the woman said, staring. 

'Nothing more certain than that,' he agreed, gazing at the leaking 
roof above the rag bed. 

'We are invincible. We will never give up.' 

'Well, you've proved fairly vincible before.' He sighed, remembering 
the history of this place. 

'We were betrayed!' the woman shouted. 'Our armies never were 
defeated; we were -' 

'Stabbed in the back; I know.' 

'Yes! But our spirit will never die. We -' 

'Aw, shut up!' He said, swinging his legs off the narrow bed and facing 
the woman. 'I've heard that shit before. "We was robbed." "The folks 
back home let us down." "The media were against us." Shit...' He ran 
a hand through his wet hair. 'Only the very young or the very stupid 
think wars are waged just by the military. As soon as news travels 
faster than a despatch rider or a bird's leg the whole... nation... 
whatever... is fighting. That's your spirit; your will. Not the grunt on 
the ground. If you lose, you lose. Don't whine about it. You'd have 
lost this time too if it hadn't been for this fucking rain.' He held up a 
hand as the woman drew breath. 'And no, I don't believe God is on 
your side.' 

'Heretic!' 

'Thank you.' 

'I hope your children die! Slowly!' 

'Hmm,' he said, 'I'm not sure I qualify, but if I do it'd be a long spit.' 
He collapsed back on the bed, then looked aghast, and levered 
himself back up again. 'Shit; they really must get to you people 
young; that's a terrible thing for anybody to say, let alone a woman.' 

'Our women are more manly than your men,' the woman sneered. 

'And still you breed. Choice must be limited, I suppose.' 

'May your children suffer and die horribly!' the woman shrieked. 

'Well, if that's really the way you feel,' he sighed, lying back again, 
'then there's nothing worse I can wish on you than to be exactly the 

fuckhead you so obviously are.' 

'Barbarian! Infidel!' 

'You'll run out of expletives soon; I'd advise saving some for later. 
Not that keeping forces in reserve has ever been precisely you guys' 
strong point, has it?' 

'We will crush you!' 

'Hey; I'm crushed, I'm crushed.' He waved one hand languidly. 'Now 
back off.' 

The woman howled and shook the small chair. 

Maybe, he thought, I ought to be thankful for the chance to be away 
from the responsibilities of command, the minute-to-minute changes 
in conditions that the fools couldn't deal with themselves and that 
bogged you down as surely as the mud; the continual flood of reports 
of units immobilised, washed away, deserting, cut off, retreating from 
vital positions, yelling for help, for relief, for reinforcements, more 
trucks, more tanks, more rafts, more food, more radios... past a 
certain point there was nothing he could do; he could only 
acknowledge, reply, turn-down, delay, order to make a stand; 
nothing, nothing. The reports kept on coming in, building up like a 
one-colour, paper mosaic of a million pieces, the picture of an army, 
bit-by-bit disintegrating, softened by the rain just like a sheet of 
paper, made soggy and tearable and gradually coming apart. 

That was what he was escaping by being marooned here... yet he 
was not secretly thankful, he was not actually glad; he was furious 
and angry at being away, at leaving it all in the hands of others, of 
being away from the centre, from knowing what was happening. He 
fretted like a mother for a young son just marched off to war, driven 
to tears or pointless screams for the powerlessness of it, the heedless 
unstoppable momentum. (It struck him then that the whole process 
didn't really require any enemy forces at all. The battle was him and 
the army under his command, against the elements. A third party 
was superfluous.) 

First the rains, then their unheard-of severity, then the landslide that 
had cut them off from the rest of the command convoy, then this 
bedraggled idiot of a would-be assassin... 

He swung back upright again, held his head in his hands. 

Had he tried to do too much? He had had ten hours sleep in the last 
week; had that clouded his mind, impaired his judgement? Or had he 
slept too much; might that little extra bit of wakefulness have made 
all the difference? 

'I hope you die!' the woman's voice squawked. 

He looked at her, frowning, wondering why she had interrupted his 
thoughts, wishing she'd shut up. Maybe he should gag her. 

'You're retreating,' he pointed out. 'A minute ago you were telling me 
I would die.' He slumped back on the bed. 

'Bastard!' she screamed. 

He looked at her, suddenly thinking that he was as much a prisoner 
where he lay as she was where she sat. Snot gathered under her nose 
again. He looked away. 

He heard her snort back, then spit. He would have smiled if he'd had 
the strength. She showed contempt with a spit; what was her one 
dribble compared to the deluge that was drowning a fighting machine 
he had worked two years to bring together and train? 

And why, why had he tied her to a chair of all things? Did he try to 
make chance and fate redundant by scheming against himself? A 
chair; a girl tied to the chajr... about the same age, maybe a little 
older... but the same slim figure, with a lying greatcoat that tried to 
pretend she was bigger, but failed. About the same age, about the 
same shape... 

He shook his head, forcing his thoughts away from that battle, that 
failure. 

She saw him look at her and shake his head. 

'Don't you laugh at me!' she screamed, shaking backwards and 
forwards in the chair, furious at his scorn. 

'Shut up, shut up,' he said wearily. He knew it wasn't convincing, but 
he could not sound any more authoritative. 

She shut up, remarkably. 

The rains, and her; sometimes he wished he did believe in Fate. 
Maybe it did sometimes help to believe in Gods. Sometimes - like 
now, when things fell against him and every turn he took brought him 
up against another vicious twist of the knife, another hammering on 
the bruises he'd already collected - it would be comforting to think 
that it was all designed, all pre-ordained, all already written, and you 
just turned the pages of some great and inviolable book... Maybe you 
never did get a chance to write your own story (and so his own name, 
even that attempt at terms, mocked him). 

He didn't know what to think; was there as petty and suffocating a 
destiny as some people seemed to think? 

He didn't want to be here; he wanted to be back where the busy to-
and-fro of teport and command stifled all other traffic in the mind. 

'You're losing; you've lost this battle, haven't you?' 

He considered saying nothing, but on reflection she would take this 
as a sign he was weak, and so continue. 

'What a penetrating insight,' he sighed. 'You remind me of some of 
the people who planned this war. Cross-eyed, stupid and static.' 

'I'm not cross-eyed!' she screamed, and instantly started crying, her 
head forced down by the weight of huge sobs that shook her body 
and waved the folds of the coat, making the chair creak. 

Her dirty long hair hid her face, falling from her head over the wide 
lapels of the greatcoat; her arms were almost level with the ground, 
so far forward had she slumped in her crying. He wanted the strength 
to go over and cuddle her, or bash her brains out; anything to stop 

her making that unnecessary noise. 

'All right, all right, you haven't got cross-eyes, I'm sorry.' 

He lay back with one arm thrown across his eyes, hoping he sounded 
convincing, but sure he sounded as insincere as he was. 

'I don't want your sympathy!' 

'Sorry again; I retract the retraction.' 

'Well... I haven't... It's just a... a slight defect, and it didn't stop the 
army board from taking me.' 

(They were also, he recalled, taking children and pensioners, but he 
didn't say that to the woman.) She was trying to wipe her face on the 
lapels of the greatcoat. 

She sniffed heavily, and when she brought her head back and her 
hair swung away, he saw there was a large dew-drop on the tip of 
her nose. He got up without thinking - the tiredness shrieking in 
indignation - and tore a portion of the thin curtain over the bed-alcove 
off as he went over to her. 

She saw him coming with the ragged scrap and screamed with all her 
might; she emptied her lungs with the effort of announcing to the 
rainy world outside that she was about to be murdered. She was 
rocking the chair, and he had to jump at it and land with one boot on 
one of the cross-members between the legs to stop it from tipping 
over. 

He put the rag over her face. 

She stopped struggling. She went limp, not fighting or squirming but 
knowing it was utterly pointless to go on doing anything. 

'Good,' he said, relieved, 'Now, blow.' 

She blew. 

He withdrew the rag, folded it over, put it back over her face and told 

her to blow again. She blew again. He folded it over again and wiped 
her nose, hard. She squealed; it was sore. He sighed again and threw 
the rag away. 

He didn't lie down again because it only made him sleepy and 
thoughtful, and he didn't want to sleep because he felt he might never 
wake up, and he didn't want to think because it wasn't getting him 
anywhere. 

He turned away and stood at the door, which was as close anywhere 
as it could be and still half open. Rain spattered in. 

He thought of the others; the other commanders. Damn; the only 
other one he trusted was Rogtam-Bar, and he was too junior to take 
charge. He hated being put into positions like this, coming in on an 
already established command structure, usually corrupt, usually 
nepotistic, and having to take so much on himself that any absence, 
any hesitation, even any rest, gave the clueless froth-heads around 
him a chance to fuck things up even further. But then, he told himself, 
what General was ever totally happy with the command he took over? 

Anyway, he hadn't left them enough: a few crazy plans that would 
almost certainly never come off; his attempts to use the weapons 
that were not obvious. Too much of it was still inside his own head. 
That one private place, where he knew even the Culture did not look, 
though through their own warped fastidiousness, not through 
inability... 

He forgot all about the woman. It was as if she didn't exist when he 
wasn't looking at her, and her voice and her attempt to cut herself 
free were the results of some absurd supernatural manifestation. 

He opened the cottage door wide. You could see anything in the rain. 
The individual drops became streaks with the slowness of the eye; 
they merged and re-emerged as cyphers for the shapes you carried 
inside you; they lasted less than a heartbeat in your sight and they 
went on for ever. 

He saw a chair, and a ship that was not a ship; he saw a man with 
two shadows, and he saw that which cannot be seen; a concept; the 

adaptive, self-seeking urge to survive, to bend everything that can 
be reached to that end, and to remove and to add and to smash and 
to create so that one particular collection of cells can go on, can move 
onwards and decide, and keeping moving, and keeping deciding, 
knowing that - if nothing else - at least it lives. 

And it had two shadows, it was two things; it was the need and it was 
the method. The need was obvious; to defeat what opposed its life. 
The method was that taking and bending of materials and people to 
one purpose, the outlook that everything could be used in the fight; 
that nothing could be excluded, that everything was a weapon, and 
the ability to handle those weapons, to find them and choose which 
one to aim and fire; that talent, that ability, that use of weapons. 

A chair, and a ship that was not a ship, a man with two shadows, 
and... 

'What are you going to do with me?' The woman's voice was 
quivering. He looked round at her. 

'I don't know; what do you think?' 

She looked at him with her eyes widening, horrified. She seemed to 
be gathering her breath for another scream. He didn't understand it; 
he'd asked her a perfectly normal, pertinent question and she acted 
as if he'd said he was going to kill her. 

'Please don't. Oh please don't, oh please please don't,' she sobbed 
again, dryly. Then her back seemed to break, and her imploring face 
bowed almost to her knees as she drooped again. 

'Do what?' He was mystified. 

She didn't appear to hear him; she just hung there, her slack body 
jerked by her sobs. 

It was at moments like this he stopped understanding people; he just 
had no comprehension of what was going on in their minds; they 
were denied, unfathomable. He shook his head and started walking 
round the room. It was smelly and damp, and it carried this 

atmosphere as though this was no innovation. This had always been 
a hole. Probably some illiterate had lived here, custodian of the 
derelict machines from another, more fabulous age, long-shattered 
by the conspicuous love of war these people exhibited; a mean life in 
an ugly place. 

When would they come? Would they find him? Would they think he 
was dead? Had they heard his message on the radio, after the 
landslide had cut them off from the rest of the command convoy? 

Had he worked the damn thing right? 

Maybe he hadn't. Maybe he would be left behind; they might think a 
search was useless. He hardly cared. It would be no additional pain 
to be captured; he'd drowned in that already, in his mind. He could 
almost welcome it, if he set his mind to it; he knew he could. All he 
needed was the strength to be bothered. 

'If you're going to kill me, please will you do it quickly?' 

He was getting annoyed at these constant interruptions. 

'Well, I wasn't going to kill you, but keep on whining like this and I 
may change my mind.' 

'I hate you.' It seemed to be all she could think of. 

'And I hate you too.' 

She started crying again, loudly. 

He looked out into the rain again, and saw the Staberinde. 

Defeat, defeat, the rain whispered; tanks foundering in the mud, the 
men giving up under the torrential rain, everything coming to bits. 

And a stupid woman, and a runny nose... He could laugh at it, at the 
sharing of time and place between the grand and the petty, the 
magnificently vast and the shoddily absurd, like horrified nobility 
having to share a carriage with drunk and dirty peasants being sick 
over them and copulating under them; the finery and fleas. 

Laugh, that was the only answer, the only reply that couldn't be 
bettered or itself laughed down; the lowest of the low of common 
denominators. 

'Do you know who I am?' he said, turning suddenly. The thought had 
just occurred to him that maybe she didn't realise who he was, and 
he wouldn't have been in the least surprised to find out that she had 
tried to kill him just because he was in a big car, and not because she 
had recognised the Commander-in-Chief of the entire army. He 
wouldn't be at all surprised to find that; he almost expected it. 

She looked up. 'What?' 

'Do you know who I am? Do you know my name or rank?' 

'No,' she spat. 'Should I?' 

'No, no,' he laughed, and turned away. 

He looked briefly out at the grey wall of rain, as though it was an old 
friend, then turned, went back to the bed and fell onto it again. 

The government wouldn't like it either. Oh, the things he'd promised 
them, the riches, the lands, the gains of wealth, prestige and power. 
They'd have him shot if the Culture didn't pull him out; they'd see 
him dead for this defeat. It would have been their victory but it would 
be his defeat. Standard complaint. 

He tried to tell himself that, mostly, he'd won. He knew he had, but 
it was only the moments of defeat, the instants of paralysis that made 
him really think, and try to join up the weave of his life into a whole. 
That was when his thoughts returned to the battleship Staberinde and 
what it represented; that was when he thought about the 
Chairmaker, and the reverberating guilt behind that banal 
description... 

It was a better sort of defeat this time, it was more impersonal. He 
was the commander of the army, he was responsible to the 
government, and they could remove him; in the final reckoning, then, 
he was not responsible; they were. And there was nothing personal 

in the conflict. He'd never met the leaders of the enemy; they were 
strangers to him; only their military habits and their patterns of 
favoured troop movements and types of build-up were familiar. The 
cleanness of that schism seemed to soften the rain of blows. A little. 

He envied people who could be born, be raised, mature with those 
around them, have friends, and then settle down in one place with 
one set of acquaintances, live ordinary and unspectacular, unrisky 
lives and grow old and be replaced, their children coming to see 
them... and die old and senile, content with all that had gone before. 

He could never have believed he would ever feel like this, that he 
would so ache to be like that, to have despairs just so deep, joys just 
so great; to never strain the fabric of life or fate, but to be minor, 
unimportant, uninfluential. 

It seemed utterly sweet, infinitely desirable, now and forever, 
because once in that situation, once you were there... would you ever 
feel the awful need to do as he had done, and try for those heights? 
He doubted it. He turned back to look at the woman in the chair. 

But it was pointless, it was stupid; he thought about thoughtless 
things. If I were a seabird... but how could you be a seabird? If you 
were a seabird your brain would be tiny and stupid and you would 
love half-rotted fish guts and tweaking the eyes out of little grazing 
animals; you would know no poetry and you could never appreciate 
flying as fully as the human on the ground yearning to be you. 

If you wanted to be a seabird you deserved to be one. 

'Ah! The camp leader and the camp follower. You haven't quite got it 
right thought, sir, you're supposed to tie her in the bed...' 

He jumped; spun round, hand going to the holster at his waist. 

Kirive Socroft Rogtam-Bar kicked the door shut and stood shaking 
rain from a large shiny cape in the doorway, smiling ironically and 
looking annoyingly fresh and handsome considering he'd had no sleep 
for days. 

'Bar!' He almost ran to him, they clapped their arms about each other 
and laughed. 

'The very same. General Zakalwe; hello there. I wondered if you 
would like to join me in a stolen vehicle. I have an Amph outside...' 

'What!' He threw open the door again and looked out onto the waters. 
There was a large and battered amphibious truck fifty metres away, 
near one of the towering machines. 

'That's one of their trucks,' he laughed. 

Rogtam-Bar nodded unhappily. 'Yes, I'm afraid so. They seem to want 
it back, too.' 

'They do?' He laughed again. 

'Yes. By the way, I'm afraid the government has fallen. Forced out of 
office.' 

'What? Because of this?' 

'That's the impression I got, I must say. I think they were so busy 
blaming you for losing their idiotic war that they didn't realise people 
connected them with it as well. Wide asleep as usual.' Rogtam-Bar 
smiled. 'Oh; and that manic idea of yours; the commando squad 
placing the sink-charges on the Maclin reservoir? It worked. Sent all 
that water into the dam and made the thing overflow; didn't actually 
break, according to the intelligence reports, but it... over-topped, is 
that the expression? Anyway; an awful lot of water went down the 
valley and swept away most of the Fifth Army's High Command... not 
to mention quite a bit of the Fifth itself, judging from the bods and 
tents seen floating past our lines over the last few hours... And there 
we all were, thinking you were crazy for dragging that hydrologist 
around with the general staff for the past week.' Rogtam-Bar clapped 
his gloved hands. 'Whatever. Things must be serious; there's talk of 
peace, I'm afraid.' He looked the General up and down. 'But you'll 
have to present a prettier picture than that, I suspect, if you're to 
start talking terms with our pals on the other side. You been mud 
wrestling, General?' 

'Only with my conscience.' 

'Really? Who won?' 

'Well, it was one of those rare occasions when violence really doesn't 
solve anything.' 

'I know the scenario well; usually crops up when one is trying to 
decide whether to open the next bottle, or not.' Bar nodded at the 
door. 'After you.' He produced a large umbrella from within his cloak, 
opened it and held it out. 'General; allow me!' Then he looked into 
the centre of the room. 'And what about your friend?' 

'Oh.' He looked back at the woman, who had turned herself around 
and was staring, horrified, at them. 'Yes, my captive audience.' He 
shrugged. 'I've seen stranger mascots; let's take her, too.' 

'Never question the high command,' Bar said. He handed over the 
umbrella. 'You take this. I'll take her.' He looked reassuringly at the 
woman, tipped his cap. 'Only literally, ma'am.' 

The woman let out a piercing shriek. 

Rogtam-Bar winced. 'Does she do that a lot?' he asked. 

'Yes; and watch her head when you pick her up; near busted my 
nose.' 

'When it's such an attractive shape already. See you in the Amph, 
sir.' 

'Right you are,' he said, manoeuvering the umbrella through the 
doorway, and walking down the concrete slope, whistling. 

'Bastard infidel!' the woman in the chair screamed, as Rogtam-Bar 
approached her and the chair from behind, cautiously. 

'You're in luck,' he told her. 'I don't normally stop for hitchers.' 

He picked up the chair with the woman in it and took them both down 
to the vehicle, where he dumped them in the back. 

She screamed the whole way. 

'Was she this noisy all the time?' Rogtam-Bar asked, as he reversed 
the machine back out into the flood. 'Mostly.' 

'I'm surprised you could hear yourself think.' He looked out into the 
pouring rain, smiling ruefully. 

The city was built inside a canyon two kilometres deep and ten 
across; the canyon wound through the desert for eight hundred 
kilometres, a jagged gash in the crust of the planet. The city took up 
only thirty of those kilometres. 

He stood on the rimrock, looking inwards, and was confronted by a 
staggered confusion of buildings and houses and streets and steps 
and storm drains and railway lines, all grey and misty in filmy layers 
under a foggy-red setting sun. 

Like slow waters from a broken dam, nebulous rollers of cloud swung 
down the canyon; they foundered persistently among the juts and 
cracks of the architecture, and seeped away like tired thoughts. 

In a very few places, the topmost buildings had over-reached the 
rimrock and spilled onto the desert, but the rest of the city gave the 
impression that it lacked the energy or the momentum to proceed 
that far, and so had kept within the canyon, sheltered from the winds 
and kept temperate by the canyon's own natural microclimate. 

The city, speckled with dim lights, seemed strangely silent and 
motionless. He listened hard, and finally caught what sounded like 

the high howl of some animal, from deep inside some misty suburb. 
Searching the skies, he could see the far specks of circling birds, 
wheeling in the still and coldly heavy air. Gliding in the deep distance 
over the cluttered terraces, stepped streets and zig-zagging roads, 
they were the source of a far, hoarse crying. 

Further down, he saw some silent trains, thin lines of light, slowly 
crossing between tunnels. Water showed as black lines, in aqueducts 
and canals. Roads ran everywhere, and vehicles crawled along them, 
lights like sparks as they scuttled like the tiny prey of the wheeling 
birds. 

It was a cold autumn evening, and the air was bitter. He'd taken off 
the combat suit and left it in the capsule, which had buried itself in a 
sandy hollow. Now he wore the baggy clothes that were popular here 
again; they had been in fashion when he'd worked here last time, and 
he felt oddly pleased that he'd been away long enough for the style 
to cycle round again. He was not superstitious, but the coincidence 
amused him. 

He squatted down and touched the rimrock. He lifted a handful of 
pebbles and topweeds, then let them sift through his fingers. He 
sighed and got to his feet, pulling on gloves, putting on a hat. 

The city was called Solotol, and Tsoldrin Beychae was here. 

He dusted a little sand from his coat - an old raincoat from far away, 
and of purely sentimental value - placed a pair of very dark glasses 
on his nose, picked up a modest case, and went down into the city. 

'I'd like your two top floors, please.' 

The clerk looked confused, then leaned forward. 'I'm sorry, sir?' 

'The two top floors of the hotel; I'd like them.' He smiled. 'I haven't 

made a reservation; sorry.' 

'Aah...' the clerk said. He appeared a little worried as he looked at his 
reflection in the dark glasses. 'The two...?' 

'Not a room, not a suite, not a floor, but two floors, and not any two 
floors; the two top floors. If you have any guests presently occupying 
any of the rooms in the top two floors, I suggest you ask them politely 
to accept a room on another floor; I'll pay their bills up till now.' 

'I see...' the hotel clerk said. He seemed unsure whether to take all 
this seriously or not. 'And... how long was sir thinking of staying?' 

'Indefinitely. I'll pay for a month, in advance. My lawyers will cable 
the funds by lunchtime tomorrow.' He opened the case and took out 
a wad of paper money, placing it on the desk. I'll pay for one night in 
cash, if you like.' 

'I see,' the clerk said, eyes fixed on the money. 'Well, if sir would like 
to fill in this form...' 

'Thank you. Also, I'll want an elevator for my personal use, and access 
to the roof. I expect a pass key will be the best solution.' 

'Aah. Indeed. I see. Excuse me just a moment, sir.' The clerk went 
off to get the manager. 

He negotiated a bulk discount for the two floors, then agreed a fee 
for the use of the lift and the roof that brought the deal back to what 
it had been in the first place. He just liked haggling. 

'And sir's name?' 

'I'm called Staberinde,' he said. 

closets and doors, window shutters, balcony covers and drug 
cabinets, and left everything open. He tested the bath in the suite; 
the water ran hot. He took a couple of small chairs out of the 
bedroom, and another set of four from the lounge, and put them in 
another suite alongside. He turned all the lights on, looking at 
everything. 

He looked at patterns of coverings and curtains and hangings and 
carpets, at the murals and paintings on the walls, and at the design 
of the furniture. He rang for some food to be delivered, and when it 
came, on a small trolley, he pushed the trolley in front of him from 
room to room, eating on the move while he wandered through the 
quiet spaces of the hotel, gazing all about, and occasionally looking 
at a tiny sensor which was supposed to tell him if there were any 
surveillance devices around. There weren't. 

He paused at a window, looking out, and rubbed absently at a small 
puckered mark on his chest that was not there any more. 

'Zakalwe?' said a tiny voice from his breast. He looked down, took a 
thing like a bead out of a shirt pocket. He clipped it to one ear, taking 
off his dark glasses and putting them in the pocket instead. 

'Hello.' 

'It's me; Diziet. You all right?' 

'Yeah. I found a place to stay.' 

'Great. Listen; we've found something. It's perfect!' 

'What?' he said, smiling at the excitement in Sma's voice. He pressed 
a button to close the curtains. 

'Three thousand years ago here there was a guy who became a 
famous poet; wrote on wax tablets set in wooden frames. He did a 
group of one hundred short poems he always maintained were the 
best things he ever wrote. But he couldn't get them published, and 
he decided to become a sculptor instead; he melted the wax from 
ninety-eight of the tablets - keeping numbers one and one hundred - 

to carve a wax model, made a sand mould around it, and cast a 
bronze figure which still exists.' 

'Sma, is this leading anywhere?' he said, pressing another button to 
open the curtains again. He rather liked the way they swished. 

'Wait! When we first found Voerenhutz and did the standard total scan 
of each planet, we naturally took a holo of the bronze statue; found 
some traces of the original casting sand and the wax in a cranny. 

'And it wasn't the right wax! 

'It didn't match the two surviving tablets! So the GCU waited till it 
had finished the total scan and then did some detective work. The 
guy who did the bronze, and who had done the poems, later became 
a monk, and ended up an abbot of a monastery. There was one 
building added while he was head man; legend has it he used to go 
there and contemplate the vanished ninety-eight poems. The building 
has a double wall.' Sma's voice rose triumphantly; 'Guess what's in 
the cavity!' 

'Walled-in disobedient monks?' 

'The poems! The waxes!' Sma yelled. Then her voice dropped a little. 
'Well, most of them. The monastery was abandoned a couple of 
hundred years ago, and it looks like some shepherd lit a fire against 
a wall sometime and melted three or four of them... but the rest 
are there!' 

'Is that good?' 

'Zakalwe; they're one of the great lost literary treasures of the planet! 
The university of Jarnsaromol, where your pal Beychae's hanging out, 
has most of the guy's parchment manuscripts, the other two 
tablets and the famous bronze. They'd give anything to get their 
hands on those tablets! Don't you see? It's perfect!' 

'Sounds all right, I suppose.' 

'Damn you, Zakalwe! Is that all you can say?' 

'Dizzy, luck this good never lasts long; it'll average out.' 

'Don't be so pessimistic, Zakalwe.' 

'Okay, I won't,' he sighed, closing the curtains again. 

There was a noise of exasperation from Diziet Sma. 'Well; I just 
thought I'd tell you. We'll be going soon. Sleep well.' 

The channel beeped closed. He smiled ruefully. He left the little 
terminal where it was, like an earring. 

He gave orders he was not to be disturbed, and as the night 
deepened, he turned all the heating up full and opened all the 
windows. He spent some time testing the balconies and drainage 
pipes around the outer walls; he climbed nearly to the ground and all 
the way round the facade as he tested ledges and pipes and sills and 
cornices for their strength. He saw lights in less than a dozen other 
guest rooms. When he was satisfied he knew the outside of the hotel, 
he returned to his floor. 

He leant on the balcony, a smoky bowl cradled in his hand. 
Occasionally he lifted the bowl to his face and inhaled deeply; the rest 
of the time he looked out over the sparkling city, whistling. 

Watching the light-speckled view, he thought while most cities looked 
like canvases, spread flat and thin, Solotol was like a half-open book; 
a rippling sculptured V sinking deep into the planet's geological past. 
Above, the clouds over the canyon and the desert glowed with 
orange-red light, reflecting the channelled flare of the city. 

He imagined that from the other side of the city, the hotel must look 
rather strange, with its topmost floor fully lit, the others practically 
black. 

He supposed he had forgotten how different the setting of the canyon 
made the city, compared to others. Still, this too is similar, he 
thought. All is similar. 

He had been to so many different places and seen so much the same 

and so much utterly different that he was amazed by both 
phenomena... but it was true; this city was not so different from many 
others he'd known. 

Everywhere they found themselves, the galaxy bubbled with life and 
its basic foods kept on speaking back to it, just like he'd told Shias 
Engin (and, thinking of her, felt again the texture of her skin and the 
sound of her voice). Still, he suspected if the Culture had really 
wanted to, it could have found far more spectacularly different and 
exotic places for him to visit. Their excuse was that he was a limited 
creature, adapted to certain sorts of planets and societies and types 
of warfare. A martial niche, Sma had called it. 

He smiled a little grimly, and took another deep breath from the drug 
bowl. 

He entered the courtyard of a large hotel which contrived to look 
expensive and slightly run-down at the same time. Dully-dressed 
gardeners, raking leaves from the surface of an old swimming pool, 
stared at the man as though he had no right to be there. 

Men were painting the interior of the porch outside the lobby, and he 
had to work his way round them to get in. The painters were using 
specially inferior paint made to very old recipes; it was guaranteed to 
fade and crack and peel in a most authentic manner within a year or 
two. 

The foyer was rich with decoration. The man pulled a thick purple 
rope near one corner of the reception desk. The clerk appeared, 
smiling. 

'Good morning, Mr Staberinde. A pleasant walk?' 

'Yes, thank you. Have breakfast sent up, will you?' 

'Immediately, sir.' 

'Hello?' 

'Zakalwe?' It was Sma's voice. 

'Good grief; you still here?' 

'We're about to break orbit.' 

'Well, don't wait on my account.' He felt inside a shirt pocket and 
fished out the terminal bead. 'Why the phone? This transceiver 
packed up?' 

'No; just making sure there are no problems patching into the phone 

system.' 

'Fine. That all?' 

'No. We've located Beychae more exactly; still in Jarnsaromol 
University, but he's in library annexe four. That's a hundred metres 
under the city; the university's safest safe store. Quite secure at the 
best of times, and they have extra guards, though no real military.' 

'But where does he live; where does he sleep?' 

'The curator's apartments; they're attached to the library.' 

'He ever come to the surface?' 

'Not that we can find out.' 

He whistled. 'Well, that might or might not be a problem.' 

'How are things at your end?' 

'Fine,' he said, biting into a sweetmeat. 'Just waiting for the offices to 
open; I've left a message with the lawyers to phone me. Then I start 
causing a fuss.' 

'All right. There shouldn't be any problems there; the necessary 
instructions have been issued, and you should get anything you want. 
Any problems, get in touch and we'll fire off an indignant cable.' 

'Yeah, Sma, I've been thinking; just how big is this Culture 
commercial empire, this Vanguard Corporation?' 

'Vanguard Foundation. It's big enough.' 

'Yeah, but how big? How far can I go?' 

'Well, don't buy anything bigger than a country. Look, Cheradenine; 
be as extravagant as you want in creating your fuss. Just get Beychae 
for us. Quickly.' 

'Yeah, yeah; okay.' 

'We're heading off now, but we'll keep in touch. Remember; we're 
here to help if you need it.' 

'Yeah. Bye.' He put the phone down and turned the screen sound up 
again. 

'Caves, natural and artificial, are scattered through the rock of the 
canyon walls in almost as great a profusion as the buildings on the 
sloping surface. Many of the city's old hydroelectric sources are there, 
hollowed out into rock and humming; and a few small factories and 
workshops still survive, hidden away beneath the cliffs and shale, 
with only their stubby chimneys on the desert surface to show their 
position. This upward river of warm fumes counterpoints the network 
of sewage and drainage pipes, which also shows on the surface on 
occasion, and presents a complex pattern of tracery through the 
fabric of the city.' 

The phone beeped. 

'Hello?' 

'Mr... Staberinde?' 

'Yes.' 

'Ah, yes; good morning. My name is Kiaplor, of...' 

'Ah; the lawyers.' 

'Yes. Thank you for your message. I have here a cable granting you 
full access to the income and securities of the Vanguard Foundation.' 

'I know. Are you quite happy with this, Mr Kiaplor?' 

'Umm... I... yes; the cable makes the position quite clear... though it 
is an unprecedented degree of individual discretion, given the size of 
the account. Not that the Vanguard Foundation has ever behaved 
exactly conventionally at any time.' 

'Good. The first thing I'd like is to have funds sufficient to cover a 
month's hire of two floors of the Excelsior transferred to the hotel's 

account, immediately. Then I want to start buying a few things.' 

'Ah... yes. Such as?' 

He dabbed at his lips with a napkin. 'Well, for a start, a street.' 

'A street?' 

'Yes. Nothing too ostentatious, and it doesn't have to be very long, 
but I want a whole street, somewhere near the city centre. Do you 
think you can look for a suitable one, immediately?' 

'Ah... well, yes, we can certainly start looking. I...' 

'Good. I'll call at your offices in two hours; I'd like to be in a position 
to come to a decision then.' 

'Two...? Umm... well, ah...' 

'Speed is essential, Mr Kiaplor. Put your best people on it.' 

'Yes. Very well.' 

'Good. I'll see you in a couple of hours.' 

'Yes. Right. Goodbye.' He turned the screen sound back up again. 

'Very little new building has been done for hundreds of years; Solotol 
is a monument, an institution; a museum. The factories, like the 
people, are mostly gone. Three universities lend areas of the city 
some life, during part of the year, but the general air is said by many 
people to be archaic, even stultified, though some people enjoy the 
feel of living in what is, in effect, the past. Solotol has no sky-lighting; 
the trains still run on metal rails, and the ground vehicles must remain 
on the ground, because flying within the city or immediately above it 
is banned. A sad old place, in many ways; large sections of the city 
are uninhabited or only occupied for part of the year. The city is still 
a capital in name, but it does not represent the culture to which it 
belongs; it is an exhibit, and while many come to visit it, few choose 
to stay.' 

He shook his head, put his dark glasses on, and turned the screen 
off. 

So little happened in the city during the off season that the carnival 
had attracted instant attention. He had hired people to serve the 
drugs and food and drink he had laid on; he had banned cars and 
unhappy faces, and people who didn't smile when they tried to get 
into the street were made to wear funny masks until they had livened 
up a bit. He breathed in deeply from where he leaned on the high 
window, and his lungs soaked up the heady fumes of a very busy bar 
just below; the drug smoke made it just this far up and hung in a 
cloud. He smiled, found it very heartening; it was all perfect. 

People walked around and talked together or in groups, exchanging 
their smoky bowls, laughing and smiling. They listened to the band 
and watched people dancing. They gave a great cheer each time the 
mortar fired. Many of them laughed at the leaflets full of political jokes 
that were given out with every bowl of drugs or food and every mask 
and novelty; they laughed too at the big, guady banners that were 
strung across the fronts of the dilapidated old buildings and across 
the street itself. The banners were either absurd or humorous, too. 
PACIFISTS AGAINST WALLS! and, EXPERTS? WHAT DO THEY KNOW? 
were two of the more translatable examples. 

There were games and trials of wit or strength, there were free 
flowers and party hats and a much frequented Compliments stall 
where one paid a little money, or gave a paper hat or whatever, and 
was told what a nice, pleasant, good, unshowy, quiet-tempered, 
undemonstrative, 
restrained, 
sincere, 
respectful, 
handsome, 

cheerful, good-willed person one was. 

He looked down on all of this, shades pushed up onto the tied-back 
hair above his forehead. Down there, submerged in it, he knew he 
would feel somehow apart from it all. But from his high vantage point 
he could look down and see the people as a mass with different faces; 
they were far enough away to present a single theme, close enough 
to introduce their own harmonious variations. They enjoyed 
themselves, were made to laugh or to giggle, encouraged to get 
drugged and silly, captivated by the music, slightly deranged by the 
atmosphere. 

He watched two people in particular. 

They were a man and a woman, walking slowly through the street, 
looking all around. The man was tall and had dark hair cut short and 
kept artificially unkempt and curly; he was smartly dressed and 
carried a small dark beret in one hand; a mask dangled from the 
other. 

The woman was almost as tall, and slimmer. She was dressed like 
the man, in unfussy dark grey-black, with a mandala of pleated white 
at her neck. Her hair was black, shoulder-length, and quite straight. 
She walked as though there were many admiring people watching 
her. 

They walked side by side, without touching each other; they spoke 
now and again, merely tipping their heads in the direction of their 
companion and looking to the other side, perhaps at what they were 
talking about, as they spoke. 

He thought he remembered their photographs from one of the 
briefings on the GSV. He moved his head a little to one side, to make 
sure the earring terminal had a good shot of them, then told the tiny 
machine to record the view. 

A few moments later, the two people disappeared beneath the 
banners at the far end of the street; they'd walked through the 
carnival without taking part in anything. 

The street party went on; a small shower came and drove people 
under the awnings and covers and into some of the small houses, but 
it was short, and more people were coming all the time; small children 
ran with bright streamers of paper, winding coloured trails round 
posts and people and stalls and tables. Puff-bombs exploded in smoky 
balls of coloured incense, and laughing, choking people staggered 
about, thumping each others' backs and shouting at the laughing 
children who threw the things. 

He drew away from the window, losing interest. He sat in the room 
for a little, squatting on an old chest in the dust, hand rubbing his 
chin, thoughtful, only raising his eyes when an upward landslide of 
balloons jostled up past the casement. He brought the dark glasses 
down. From inside, the balloons looked just the same. 

He walked down the narrow stairs, his boots clacking on the old wood; 
he took the old raincoat up from the rail at the bottom, and let himself 
out of the rear door into another street. 

The driver pulled the car away and he sat in the back as they rolled 
past the rows of old buildings. They came to the end of the street and 
turned into the steep road that ran at right-angles to it and the street 
the party was in. They slid past a long dark car with the man and the 
woman in it. 

He looked round. The dark car followed them. 

He told the driver to exceed the speed limit. They sped, and the car 
following them kept pace. He hung on and watched the city slithering 
past. They raced through some of the old government areas; the 
grand buildings were grey, and heavily decorated with wall founts and 
water channels; elaborate patterns of water ran down their walls in 
vertical waves, dropping like theatre curtains. There were some 
weeds, but less than he would have expected. He couldn't remember 
if they let the water-walls ice up, turned them off, or added anti-
freeze. Scaffolding hung from many of the buildings. Workmen 

scratched and scraped at the worn stones, and turned to watch the 
two big cars go tearing through the squares and plazas. 

He clung on to a grab handle in the rear of the car, and sorted through 
a large collection of keys. 

They stopped in an old narrow street, down near the banks of the 
great river itself. He got out smartly and hurried into a small entrance 
under a tall building. The following car roared into the street as he 
closed but did not lock the door. He went down some steps, unlocking 
several rusting sets of gates. When he got down to the bottom of the 
building he found the funicular car waiting on the platform. He opened 
the door, got in and pulled the lever. 

There was a slight jerk as the car started off up the incline, but it ran 
smoothly enough. He watched through the back windows as the man 
and then the woman came out onto the platform. He smiled as they 
looked up and saw the car disappearing into the tunnel. The little 
coach struggled up the smooth slope into the daylight. 

At the point where the uphill and the downhill coach passed each 
other, he got out onto the outer platform of the car and stepped over 
onto the downhill coach. It ran on, propelled by the extra weight of 
water that it carried in its tanks, picked up from the stream at the 
high terminal of the old line. He waited a bit, then jumped out of that 
car about a quarter of the way down, onto the step? at the side of 
the track. He climbed up a long metal ladder, into another building. 

He was sweating slightly by the time he got to the top. He took off 
the old raincoat and walked back to the hotel with it over his arm. 

her elbows spread out, but her hands together under her side-turned 
face. Her eyes were closed and her pale, oiled body was massaged 
with apparent roughness by a powerfully-built man with grey hair and 
facial scars. 

The man at the window watched the falling snow in two ways. First 
as a mass, with his eyes on one static point, so that the snowflakes 
became a mere swirl and the currents of air and gusts of light wind 
that moved them became manifest in patterns of circling, spiralling, 
falling. Then, by looking at the snow as individual flakes, selecting 
one high in the indeterminate galaxy of grey on grey, he saw one 
path, one separate way down through all the quiet hurry of the fall. 

He watched them as they hit the black sill outside, where they grew 
steadily but imperceptibly to form a soft white ledge. Others struck 
the window itself, sticking there briefly, then falling away, blown off. 

The woman seemed asleep. She smiled slightly, and the exact 
geography of her face was altered by the forces that the grey-haired 
man exerted on her back, shoulders and flanks. Her oiled flesh moved 
this way and that, and the gliding fingers seemed to provide force 
without causing friction, ribbing and creasing the skin like the smooth 
action of the sea on underwater grass. Her buttocks were covered by 
a black towel, her hair was loose and spilling over pan of her face, 
and her pale breasts were long ovals squashed beneath her trim 
body. 

'What is to be done, then?' 

'We need to know more.' 

'That is always true. Back to the problem.' 

'We could have him deported.' 

'For what?' 

'We need to give no reason, though we could invent one easily 
enough.' 

'That might start the war before we are ready for it.' 

'Shush now; we must not talk of this "war" thing. We are officially on 
the best of terms with all our Federation members; there is no need 
for worry. Everything is under control.' 

'Said an official spokesperson... Do you think we should get rid of 
him?' 

'It may be the wisest course. One might feel better with him out of 
the way... I have a horrible feeling he must be here for a purpose. He 
has been given full use of the Vanguard Foundation's monies, and 
that... wilfully mysterious organisation has opposed us every step 
along the road for thirty years. The identity and location of its owners 
and executives have been one of the cluster's best-kept secrets; 
unparalleled reserve. Now - suddenly - this man appears, spending 
with a quite vulgar profligacy and maintaining a high, if still 
coquettishly shy, profile... just when it might prove extremely 
awkward.' 

'Perhaps he is the Vanguard Foundation.' 

'Nonsense. If it's anything appreciable at all, it's some interfering 
aliens, or a do-good machine, either running on some dead magnate's 
conscience will - or even running with a transcription of a human 
personality - or it's a rogue machine, accidentally conscious with no-
one to oversee it. I think every other possibility has been discounted 
over the years. This man Staberinde is a puppet; he spends money 
with the desperation of an indulged child worried such generosity will 
not last. He's like a peasant winning a lottery. Revolting. But he must 
- I repeat - be here for a purpose.' 

'If we kill him, and he turns out to have been important, then we 
might start a war, and too early.' 

'Perhaps, but I feel we must do what is not expected. To prove our 
humanity, to exploit our intrinsic advantage over the machines, if for 
no other reason.' 

'Indeed, but isn't it possible he could be of use to us?' 

'Yes.' 

The man at the window smiled at his reflection in the glass and tapped 
out a little rhythm on the inside sill. 

The woman on the couch kept her eyes closed, her body moving to 
the steady beat of the hands that plied her waist and flanks. 

'But wait. There were links between Beychae and the Vanguard 
Foundation. If this is so...' 

'If this is so... then perhaps we can persuade Beychae to our side, 
using this person, this Staberinde.' The man put his finger to the glass 
and traced the path of a snowflake, drifting down the other side. His 
eyes crossed as he watched it. 

'We could...' 

'What?' 

'Adopt the Dehewwoff system.' 

'The...? Need to know more.' 

The Dehewwoff system of punishing by disease; graded capital 
punishment; the more serious the crime the more serious the disease 
the culprit is infected with. For minor crimes a mere fever, loss of 
livelihood and medical expenses; for more damaging misdeeds a bout 
of something lasting perhaps months, with pain and a long 
convalescence, bills and no sympathy, sometimes marks to show 
later on. For really ghastly crimes, infection with diseases rarely 
survived; near certain death but possible divine intervention and 
miracle cure. Of course, the lower one's class, the more virulent one's 
punishment, to allow for the hardier constitutions of the toilers. 
Combinations, and recurring strains, provide sophistications to the 
basic idea.' 

'Back to the problem.' 

'And I hate those dark glasses.' 

'I repeat; back to the problem.' 

'... we need to know more.' 

'So they all say.' 

'And I think we should speak to him.' 

'Yes. Then we kill him.' 

'Restraint. We speak to him. We shall find him again and ask him 
what he wants and perhaps who he is. We shall keep quiet and be 
thoughtful and we shall not kill him unless he needs to be killed.' 

'We nearly spoke to him.' 

'No sulking. It was preposterous. We are not here to chase cars and 
run after idiot recluses. We plan. We think. We shall send a note to 
the gentleman's hotel...' 

'The Excelsior. Really, one would have hoped such a respected 
establishment might not have been so easily seduced by mere 
money.' 

'Indeed; and then we shall go to him, or have him come to us.' 

'Well, we certainly ought not to go to him. And as for him coming to 
us, he may refuse. Regret that... Due to an unforeseen... A previous 
commitment prevents... Feel it would be unwise at this juncture, 
perhaps another... Can you imagine how humiliating that would be?' 

'Oh, all right. We'll kill him.' 

'All right we'll try to kill him. If he survives we shall talk to him. If he 
survives he will want to talk to us. Commendable plan. Must agree. 
No question, left no choice; mere formality.' 

The woman fell silent. The grey-haired man heaved at her hips with 
his great hands, and strange patterns of sweat broke from the 
unscarred areas of his face; the hands swirled and swept over the 
woman's rump, and she bit her bottom lip just a little as her body 

moved in a sweet impersonation, flat beat on a white plain. Snow was 
falling. 

'You know,' he told the rock, 'I've got this really nasty feeling that I'm 
dying... but then all my feelings are pretty nasty at the moment, 
come to think of it. What do you think?' 

The rock didn't say anything. 

He had decided that the rock was the centre of the universe, and he 
could prove it, but the rock just didn't want to accept its obviously 
important place in the overall scheme of things, at least not yet 
anyway, so he was left talking to himself. Or he could talk to the birds 
and the insects. 

Everything wavered again. Things like waves, like clouds of carrion 
birds, closed in on him, centring, zeroing, trapping his mind and 
picking it off like a rotten fruit under a machine-gun. 

He tried to crawl away unobtrusively; he could see what was coming 
next; his life was going to flash before him. What an appalling 
thought. 

Mercifully, only bits of it came back to him, as if the images mirrored 
his smashed body, and he remembered things like sitting in a bar on 
a little planet, his dark glasses making strange patterns with the 
darkened window; he remembered a place where the wind was so 
bad they used to judge its severity by the number of trucks that got 
blown over each night; he remembered a tank battle in the great 
monoculture fields like seas of grass, all madness and submerged 
desperation and commanders standing on the tanks and the areas of 
burning crop, slowly spreading, burning through the night, spreading 
darkness ringed by fire... the cultivated grassland was the reason for 
and prize of that war, and was destroyed by it; he remembered a 
hose playing under searchlit water, its silent coils writhing; he 
remembered the never-ending whiteness and the attritional tectonics 
of the crashing tabular bergs, the bitter end of a century's slow sleep. 

And a garden. He remembered the garden. And a chair. 

'Scream!' he screamed, and started flapping his arms about, trying 
to work up enough of a run to get into the air and away from... from... 
he hardly knew. He hardly moved, either; his arms flapped a little 
and scraped a few more guano pellets away, but the ring of patient 
birds clustered around him, waiting for him to die, just looked on, 
unfooled, at this display of inadequately avian behaviour. 

'Oh all right,' he mumbled, and collapsed back, clutching his chest 
and staring into the bland blue sky. What was so terrible about a 
chair, anyway? He started crawling again. 

He hauled himself around the little puddle, scraping his way through 
the dark pellets the birds had left, then at a certain point set off 
towards the waters of the lake. He got only so far, then stopped, 
turned back, and went on round the puddle again, scraping aside the 
black bird-shit pellets, apologising to the little insects he disturbed as 
he did so. When he got back to the place where he'd been earlier, he 
stopped and took stock. 

The warm breeze brought the smell of sulphur from the lake to him... 
And he was back in the garden again, remembering the smell of 
flowers. 

Over the years and the generations, many children were born and 
brought up in the great house, and played in the wonderful gardens 
that surrounded it, but there were four in particular whose story 

became important for people who had never seen the house, or heard 
of the family's name. Two of the children were sisters, called 
Darckense and Livueta; one of the boys was their elder brother, called 
Cheradenine, and they all shared the family name; Zakalwe. The last 
child was not related to them, but came from a family that had long 
been allied to theirs; he was called Elethiomel. 

Cheradenine was the older boy; he could just remember the fuss 
when Elethiomel's mother came to the great house, large with child, 
in tears, and surrounded by fussing servants and huge guards and 
weeping maids. For a few days the attention of the whole house 
seemed to be centred on the woman with the child in her womb, and 
- though his sisters played happily on, glad of the lessened 
watchfulness of their nannies and guards - he already resented the 
unborn infant. 

The troop of royal cavalry came to the house a week later, and he 
remembered his father out on the broad steps leading down into the 
courtyard, talking calmly, his own men running quietly through the 
house, taking up positions at every window. Cheradenine ran to find 
his mother; as he ran through the corridors, he put one hand out in 
front of him, as though holding reins, and with his other hand slapped 
one hip, making a one-two-three, one-two-three clopping noise, 
pretending he was a cavalryman. He discovered his mother with the 
woman who had the child inside her; the woman was crying and he 
was told to go away. 

The boy was born that night, to the sound of screams. 

Cheradenine noticed that the atmosphere in the house changed 
greatly after that, and everyone was at once even more busy than 
before but less worried. 

For a few years he could torment the younger boy, but then 
Elethiomel, who grew faster than he did, started to retaliate, and an 
uneasy truce developed between the two boys. Tutors taught them, 
and Cheradenine gradually came to realise that Elethiomel was their 
favourite, always learning things more quickly than he did, always 
being praised for his abilities developing so early, always being called 
advanced and bright and clever. Cheradenine tried hard to match 

him, and gleaned a little recognition for not just giving up, but it never 
seemed that he was really appreciated. Their martial instructors were 
more evenly divided on their merits; Cheradenine was better at 
wrestling and strike-fighting; Elethiomel the more accomplished with 
gun and blade (under proper supervision; the boy could get carried 
away sometimes), though Cheradenine was perhaps his equal with a 
knife. 

The two sisters loved them both, regardless, and they played through 
the long summers and the brief, cold winters, and - apart from the 
first year, after Elethiomel was born - spent a little of each spring and 
autumn in the big city, far down the river, where the parents of 
Darckense, Livueta and Cheradenine kept a tall town house. None of 
the children liked the place, though; its garden was so small and the 
public parks so crowded. Elethiomel's mother was always quieter 
when they went to the city, and cried more often, and went away for 
a few days every so often, all excited before she went, then sobbing 
when she returned. 

They were in the city once, one fall, and the four children were 
keeping out of the way of the short-tempered adults when a 
messenger came to the house. 

They couldn't help but hear the screams, and so abandoned their toy 
war and ran out of the nursery onto the landing to peer through the 
railings down into the great hall, where the messenger stood, head 
down, and Elethiomel's mother screamed and shrieked. Cheradenine, 
Livueta and Darckense's mother and father both held onto her, 
talking calmly. Finally, their father motioned the messenger away, 
and the hysterical woman slumped silent to the floor, a piece of paper 
crumpled in her hand. 

Father looked up then, and saw the children, but looked at Elethiomel, 
not at Cheradenine. They were all sent to bed soon after. 

When they returned to the house in the country a few days later, 
Elethiomel's mother was crying all the time, and did not come down 
for meals. 

'He didn't do any of those things,' Elethiomel said, kicking the stone 
bulwark, looking down. 'He was a good man.' 

'If he was good, why did the King have him killed?' 

'I don't know. People must have told tales about him. Told lies.' 

'But the King's clever,' Cheradenine said triumphantly, throwing 
another pebble into the spreading circles of waves. 'Cleverer than 
anybody. That's why he's king. He'd know if they were telling lies.' 

'I don't care,' Elethiomel insisted. 'My father wasn't a bad man.' 

'He was, and your mother must have been extremely naughty too, or 
they wouldn't have made her stay in her room all this time.' 

'She hasn't been bad!' Elethiomel looked up at the other boy, and felt 
something build up inside his head, behind his nose and eyes. 'She's 
ill. She can't leave her room!' 

'That's what she says,' Cheradenine said. 

'Look! Millions of flowers! Look; we're going to make perfume! Do you 
want to help?' The two sisters ran up behind them, arms full of 
flowers. 'Elly...' Darckense tried to take Elethiomel's arm. 

He pushed her away. 

'Oh, Elly... Sheri, please don't,' Livueta said. 

'She hasn't been bad!' he shouted at the other boy's back. 

'Yes she ha-as,' Cheradenine said, in a sing-song voice, and flicked 
another pebble into the lake. 

'She hasn't!' Elethiomel screamed, and ran forward, pushing the 
other boy hard in the back. 

Cheradenine yelled and fell off the carved bulwark; his head struck 
the stonework as he fell. The two girls screamed. 

Elethiomel leant over the parapet and saw Cheradenine splash into 
the centre of his many-layered circle of waves. He disappeared, came 
back up again, and floated face down. 

Darckense screamed. 

'Oh, Elly, no!' Livueta dropped all her flowers and ran towards the 
steps. Darckense kept on screaming and squatted down on her 
haunches, back against the stone bulwark, crushing her flowers to 
her chest. 'Darkle! Run to the house!' Livueta cried from the staircase. 

Elethiomel watched the figure in the water move weakly, producing 
bubbles, as Livueta's steps sounded slapping on the deck underneath. 

A few seconds before the girl jumped into the shallow water to haul 
her brother out, and while Darckense screamed on, Elethiomel swept 
the remaining pebbles off the parapet, sending them pattering and 
plopping into the water around the boy. 

quite it either). He tried to think of all the nastiest things that could 
happen in a chair, dismissed them one by one as they hadn't 
happened to him or to anybody he knew - at least as far as he could 
remember - and finally concluded that his fixation on the idea of a 
chair was a random thing; it just so happened to be a chair and that 
was all there was to it. 

Then there were the names; names that he'd used; pretend names 
that didn't really belong to him. Imagine calling himself after a ship! 
What a silly person, what a naughty boy; that was what he was trying 
to forget. He didn't know, he didn't understand how he could have 
been so stupid; now it all seemed so clear, so obvious. He wanted to 
forget about the ship; he wanted to bury the thing, so he shouldn't 
go calling himself after it. 

Now he realised, now he understood, now when it was too late to do 
anything about it. 

Ah, he made himself want to be sick. 

A chair, a ship, a... something else; he forgot. 

'But we're not peasants, or... or...' 

'Artisans,' Elethiomel provided. 

'You will not argue, and you shall learn something of what it is to 
work with materials,' Cheradenine's father told the two boys. 

'But it's common!' 

'So is learning how to write, and to work with numbers. Proficiency in 
those skills will not make you clerks any more than working with iron 
will make you blacksmiths.' 

'But...' 

'You will do as you are told. If it is more in accord with the martial 
ambitions you both lay claim to, you may attempt to construct blades 
and armour in the course of your lessons.' 

The boys looked at each other. 

'You might also care to tell your language tutor that I instructed you 
to ask him whether it is acceptable for young men of breeding to 
begin almost every sentence with the unfortunate word, "But". That 
is all.' 

'Thank you, sir.' 

'Thank you, sir.' 

Outside, they agreed that metalwork might not be so bad after all. 
'But we've got to tell Big-nose about saying "But". We'll get lines!' 

'No we won't. Your old man said that we might care to tell Big-nose; 
that's not the same as actually telling us to tell him.' 

'Ha. Yeah.' 

Livueta wanted to take up metalwork too, but her father would not 
allow her to; it was not seemly. She persevered. He would not relent. 
She sulked. They compromised, on carpentry. 

The boys made knives and swords, Darckense pots, and Livueta the 
furniture for a summerhouse, deep in the estate. It was in that 
summerhouse where Cheradenine discovered... 

Dammit, he'd rather think about the other bad time, the day with the 

gun they'd taken from the armoury... 

Na; he didn't want to think at all. He tried to stop thinking about it all 
by bashing his head up and down, staring at the mad blue sky and 
hitting his head up-down, up-down off the pale scaly rocks beneath 
his head where the guano pellets had been swept away, but it hurt 
too much and the rocks just gave and he didn't have the strength 
seriously to threaten a determined speckfly anyway, so he stopped. 

Where was he? 

Ah yes, the crater, the drowned volcano... we're in a crater; an old 
crater in an old volcano, long dead and filled with water. And in the 
middle of the crater there was a little island and he was on the little 
island, and he was looking off the little island at the crater walls and 
he was a man wasn't he children, and he was a nice man and he 
was dying on the little island and... 

'Scream?' he said. 

Doubtfully, the sky looked down. 

It was blue. 

'We could run away.' 

They were scuffing through the fallen leaves on a path through the 
estate. Elethiomel talked quietly. They couldn't even walk out here 
now without guards. The men kept thirty paces ahead and twenty 
behind. How could you play properly with all these guards around? 
Back nearer the house they were allowed out without guards, but that 

was even more boring. 

'Don't be silly,' Livueta said. 

'It's not silly,' Darckense said. 'We could go to the city. It would be 
something to do.' 

'Yes.' Cheradenine said. 'You're right. It would be.' 

'Why do you want to go to the city?' Livueta said. 'It might be... 
dangerous there.' 

'Well it's boring here,' Darckense said. 

'Yeah, it is,' Cheradenine agreed. 

'We could take a boat and sail away,' Cheradenine said. 

'We wouldn't even really have to sail, or row,' Elethiomel said. 'All 
we'd have to do is push the boat out and we'd end up in the city 
eventually anyway.' 

'I wouldn't go,' Livueta said, kicking at a pile of leaves. 

'Oh, Livvy,' Darckense said. 'Now you're being boring. Come on. 
We've got to do things together.' 

'I wouldn't go,' Livueta repeated. 

Elethiomel pressed his lips together. He kicked hard at a huge pile of 
leaves, sending them up into the air like an explosion. A couple of the 
guards turned round quickly, then relaxed, looked away again. 'We've 
got to do something,' he said, looking at the guards ahead, admiring 
the big automatic rifles they were allowed to use. He'd never even 
been allowed to touch a proper big gun; just piddling little small-bore 
pistols and light carbines. 

He caught one of the leaves as it fell past his face. 

'Leaves...' he turned the leaf, this way and that, in front of his eyes. 
'Trees are stupid,' he told the others. 

'I don't mean that,' he said, crumpling the leaf in his hands. 'I mean 
they're such a stupid idea. All this waste every autumn. A tree that 
kept its leaves wouldn't have to grow new ones; it would grow bigger 
than all the rest; it would be the king of the trees.' 

'But the leaves are beautiful!' Darckense said. 

Elethiomel shook his head, exchanging looks with Cheradenine. 
'Girls!' he laughed, sneering. 

Where was the volcano? 

The volcano was on a big island on an inland sea, somewhere. 

He looked around at the distant heights of the crater walls, trying to 
remember where this somewhere was. As he moved, his shoulder 
hurt, where one of the robbers had stabbed him. He'd attempted to 
protect the wound by shooing the clouds of flies away, but he was 
fairly sure they'd already laid their eggs. 

(Not too near the heart; at least he still carried her there, and it would 
take a while for the corruption to spread that far. He'd be dead by 
then, before they found their way to his heart and her.) 

But why not? Go ahead; be my guests, little maggots, eat away, sup 
your fill; quite probably I'll be dead anyway by the time you hatch, 
and will save you the pain and torment of my attempts to scratch you 

out... Dear little maggots, sweet little maggots. (Sweet little me; I'm 
the one that's being eaten.) 

He paused and thought about the pool, the little puddle that he 
orbited around, like a captured rock. It was at the bottom of a small 
depression, and it seemed to him that he kept on trying to get out 
away from the stinking water and the slime and the flies that crowded 
around it and the bird shit he kept crawling through... He didn't 
manage it; he always seemed to end up back here for some reason, 
but he thought about it a lot. 

The pool was shallow, muddy, rocky and smelly; it was foul and horrid 
and bloated past its normal limits with the sickness and the blood that 
he had spilled out into it; he wanted to leave, to get well away from 
it. Then he would send in a heavy-bomber raid. 

He started to crawl again, hauling himself round the pool, disturbing 
pellets and insects, and heading off towards the lake at one point, 
then coming back, back to the same point as before, and stopping, 
gazing transfixed at the pool and the rock. 

What had he been doing? 

Helping the locals, as usual. Honest counsel; advisor, keeping the 
loonies at bay and people sweet; later leading a small army. But 
they'd assumed he'd betray them, and that he'd use the army he'd 
trained as his own power base. So, on the eve of their victory, the 
very hour they'd finally stormed the Sanctum, they'd struck at him, 
too. 

They'd taken him to the furnace room, stripped him naked; he'd 
escaped, but soldiers had been pounding down the stairs and he'd 
had to run. He'd been forced into the river, when they cornered him 
again. The dive almost knocked him out. Currents took him and he 
spun, lazily... he woke up in the morning, under a winch housing on 
a big river barge; he had no idea how he'd got there. There was a 
rope trailing astern, and he could only guess he'd climbed up that. 
His head still hurt. 

He took some clothes which were drying on a line behind the 

wheelhouse, but he was seen; he dived overboard with them, swam 
to the shore. He'd still been hounded, and all the time he was forced 
further away from the city and Sanctum, where the Culture might 
look for him. He spent hours trying to work out how to contact them. 

He'd been on a stolen mount, skirting the edge of a water-filled 
volcanic crater when the robbers struck; they'd beaten him and raped 
him and cut the tendons in his legs and tossed him into the stinking, 
yellow-tinged waters of the crater lake, then thrown boulders at him 
as he tried to swim away, using only his arms, legs floating uselessly 
behind him. 

He knew one of the rocks would hit him sooner or later, so he tried 
to coax up some of that wonderful Culture training, quickly 
hyperventilated, and then dived. He only had to wait a couple of 
seconds. A big rock splashed into the water, in the line of bubbles 
he'd left when he dived; he embraced the rock like a lover as it 
wobbled down towards him, and let it take him deep into the darkness 
of the lake, switching off the way he'd been taught to, but not really 
caring very much if it didn't work, and he never woke up again. 

He'd thought ten minutes when he dived. He woke up in crushing 
darkness; remembered, and dragged his arms out from under the 
rock. He kicked for the light but nothing happened. He used his arms. 
The surface came down to meet him, eventually. Air had never tasted 
so sweet. 

The walls of the crater lake were sheer; the tiny rock island was the 
only place to swim to. Screeching birds lifted from the island as he 
thrashed his way ashore. 

At least, he thought, as he dragged himself onto the rock through the 
guano, it wasn't the priests that found me. Then I'd really have been 
in trouble. 

The bends set in a few minutes later, like slow acid seeping into every 
joint, and he wished the priests had got him. 

Still - he told himself, talking to keep his mind away from the pain - 
they would come for him; the Culture would come down with a 

beautiful big ship and they would take him up and make it all better. 

He was sure they would. He'd be looked after and made better and 
he'd be safe, very safe and well looked after and free from pain, back 
in their paradise, and it would be like... like being a child again; like 
being in the garden again. Except - some rogue part of his mind 
reminded him - bad things happened in gardens too, sometimes. 

'There's only one magazine!' 

'I couldn't see the others.' 

'God you're blind, Zak. Have to do, I suppose.' 

'Ugh; it's oily,' Darckense said. 

'That stops rust,' Cheradenine explained. 

'Where are we supposed to let it off?' Livueta asked. 

'We'll hide it here and then get out after dinner,' Elethiomel said, 
taking the weapon from Darckense. 'It's Big-nose for studies and he 
always sleeps right through anyway. Mother and father will be 
entertaining that colonel; we can get out of the house and into the 
woods and fire - not "let off", actually - fire the gun there.' 

'We'll probably get killed,' Livueta said. 'The guards will think we're 
terrorists.' 

Elethiomel shook his head patiently. 'Livvy, you are stupid.' He 
pointed the gun at her. 'It's got a silencer; what do you think this bit 
is?' 

'Huh,' Livueta said, pushing the point away from her. 'Has it got a 
safety catch?' 

Elethiomel looked uncertain for just a moment. 'Of course,' he said, 
loudly, then flinched a little and glanced at the closed door to the hall. 
'Of course,' he whispered. 'Come on; we'll hide it here and come back 
for it when we've got away from Big-nose.' 

'You can't hide it here,' Livueta said. 

'Bet I can.' 

'It smells too much,' Livueta said. 'The oil smells; you'd smell it as 
soon as you walked in here. What if father decides to go for a walk?' 

Elethiomel looked worried. Livueta moved past him, opened a small 
high window. 

'How about hiding it on the stone boat?' Cheradenine suggested. 
'Nobody ever goes there at this time of year.' 

Elethiomel thought about this. He grabbed the cloak Cheradenine had 
wrapped the gun in originally and covered the weapon again. 'All 
right. You take it.' 

'Take you, rock,' he said. He squinted at it. 

Ah yes, here we have the nasty big flat rock, sitting doing nothing, 
just amoral and dull, and it sits like an island in the polluted pool. The 

pool is a tiny lake on the little island, and the island is in a drowned 
crater. The crater is a volcanic crater, the volcano forms part of an 
island in a big inland sea. The inland sea is like a giant lake on a 
continent and the continent is like an island sitting in the seas of the 
planet. The planet is like an island in the sea of space within its 
system, and the system floats within the cluster, which is like an 
island in the sea of the galaxy, which is like an island in the 
archipelago of its local group, which is an island within the universe; 
the universe is like an island floating in a sea of space in the Continua, 
and they float like islands in the Reality, and... 

But down through the Continua, the Universe, the Local Group, the 
Galaxy, the Cluster, the System, the Planet, the Continent, the 
Island, the Lake, the Island... the rock remained. AND THAT MEANT 
THE ROCK, THE CRAPPY AWFUL ROCK HERE WAS THE CENTRE OF 
THE UNIVERSE, THE CONTINUA, THE WHOLE REALITY! 

The word was caldera. The lake was in a drowned caldera. He raised 
his head, looked out over the still, yellowish water towards the crater 
cliffs, and seemed to see a boat made of stone. 

'Scream,' he said. 

'Piss off,' he heard the sky say, unconvinced. 

'See,' Livueta whispered. 'It smells a bit of gun-oil anyway.' 

'I can't smell any,' Elethiomel lied. 

The banqueting rooms - where a visiting Colonel and his staff were 
being wined and dined that evening - faced the parks to the front of 
the house; the lake with the stone boat was at the rear. 

'Just going to walk round the lake, Sergeant,' Cheradenine told the 
guard who stopped them on the gravel path towards the stone boat. 
The sergeant nodded, told them to walk quickly; it would soon be 
dark. 

They sneaked onto the boat, found the rifle where Cheradenine had 
hidden it, under a stone bench on the upper deck. 

As he lifted it from the flagstone deck, Elethiomel knocked the gun 
against the side of the bench. 

There was a snapping noise, and the magazine fell off; then there 
was a noise like a spring, and bullets clicked and clattered over the 
stones. 

'Idiot!' Cheradenine said. 

'Shut up!' 

'Oh no,' Livueta said, bending down and scooping up some of the 
rounds. 

'Let's go back,' Darckense whispered. 'I'm frightened.' 

'Don't worry,' Cheradenine said, patting her hand. 'Come on; look for 
the bullets.' 

It seemed to take ages to find them and clean them and press them 
back into the magazine. Even then, they thought there were probably 
a few missing. By the time they'd finished and got the magazine 
slotted back into place, it was almost night. 

'It's far too dark,' Livueta said. They were all crouched down at the 
balustrade, looking out over the lake to the house. Elethiomel held 
the gun. 

'No!' he said. 'We can still see.' 

'No we can't, not properly,' Cheradenine told him. 

'Let's leave it till tomorrow,' Livueta said. 

'They'll notice we're gone soon,' Cheradenine whispered. 'We haven't 
got the time!' 

'No!' Elethiomel said, looking out to where the guard walked slowly 
past the end of the causeway. Livueta looked too; it was the sergeant 
who'd talked to them. 

'You're being an idiot!' Cheradenine said, and put one hand out, 
taking hold of the gun. Elethiomel pulled away. 

'It's mine; leave it!' 

'It is not yours!' Cheradenine hissed. 'It's ours; it belongs to our 
family, not yours!' He got both hands on the gun. Elethiomel pulled 
back again. 

'Stop it!' Darckense said, her voice tiny. 

'Don't be so...' Livueta started to say. 

She looked over the edge of the parapet, to where she thought she'd 
heard a noise. 

'Give it here!' 

'Let it go!' 

'Please stop; please stop. Let's go back in, please...' 

Livueta didn't hear them. She was staring, wide-eyed, dry-mouthed, 
over the stone parapet. A black-covered man picked up the rifle the 
guard sergeant had dropped. The guard sear-geant himself lay on the 
gravel. Something glittered in the black-dressed man's hand, 
reflecting the lights of the house. The man pushed the slack form of 
the sergeant off the gravel, into the lake. 

Her breath caught in her throat. Livueta ducked down. She flapped 

her hands at the two boys. 'St...' she said. They still struggled. 

'St...' 

'Mine!' 

'Let go!' 

'Stop!' she hissed, and struck them both on the head. They both 
stared at her. 'Somebody just killed that sergeant; just out there.' 

'What?' Both boys looked over the parapet. Elethiomel still held the 
gun. 

Darckense squatted down and started to cry. 

'Where?' 

'There; that's his body! There in the water!' 

'Sure,' Elethiomel said in a whispered drawl. 'And who...' 

The three of them saw one shadowy figure move towards the house, 
keeping in the shade of the bushes bordering the path. A dozen or so 
men - just patches of darkness on the gravel - moved along the side 
of the lake, where there was a narrow strip of grass. 

'Terrorists!' Elethiomel said excitedly, as the three all ducked back 
behind the balustrade, where Darckense wept quietly. 

'Tell the house,' Livueta said. 'Fire the gun.' 

'Take the silencer off first,' Cheradenine said. 

Elethiomel struggled with the end of the barrel. 'It's stuck!' 

'Let me try!' All three tried. 

'Fire it anyway,' Cheradenine said. 

'Yeah!' Elethiomel whispered. He shook the gun, hefted it. 'Yeah!' he 

said. He knelt, put the gun on the stone bulwark, sighted. 

'Be careful,' Livueta said. 

Elethiomel aimed at the dark men, crossing the path towards the 
house. He pulled the trigger. 

The gun seemed to explode. The whole deck of the stone boat lit up. 
The noise was tremendous; Elethiomel was thrown back, gun still 
firing, blasting tracer into the night sky. He crashed into the bench. 
Darckense shrieked at the top of her lungs. She leapt up; firing 
sounded from near the house. 

'Darkle; get down!' Livueta screamed. Lines of light flickered and 
cracked above the stone boat. 

Darckense stood screaming, then started to run for the stairs. 
Elethiomel shook his head, looked up as the girl ran past him. Livueta 
grabbed at her and missed. Cheradenine tried to tackle her. 

The lines of light lowered, detonating chips of rock off the stones all 
around them in tiny clouds of dust, at the same time as Darckense, 
still screaming, stumbled to the stairs. 

The bullet entered Darckense through the hip: the other three heard 
- quite distinctly - the noise that it made, above the gunfire and the 
girl's scream. 

The attack on the house was beaten off. Darckense lived. She almost 
died, from loss of blood, and shock; but she lived. The best surgeons 
in the land fought to rebuild her pelvis, shattered into a dozen major 
pieces and a hundred splinters by the impact of the round. 

Bits of bone had travelled her body; they found fragments in her legs, 
in one arm, in her internal organs, even a piece in her chin. The army 

surgeons were fairly used to dealing with that sort of injury, and they 
had the time (because the war hadn't yet started then) and the 
incentive (for her father was a very important man) to put her back 
together as best they could. Still, she would walk awkwardly until she 
stopped growing, at least. 

One of the bone shards travelled further than her own body; it 
entered his. Just above the heart. 

The army surgeons said it would be too dangerous to operate. In 
time, they said, his body would reject the fragment of bone. 

He started to crawl round the pool again. 

Caldera! That was the word, the name. 

(Such signals were important, and he'd found the one he'd been 
looking for.) 

Victory, he said to himself, as he hauled himself round, scattering a 
last few of the bird-droppings out of his way, and apologising to the 
insects. Everything was going to be just fine, he decided. He knew 
that, now, and knew that in the end you always won, and that even 
when you lost, you never knew, and there was only one fight, and he 
was at the centre of the whole ridiculous thing any way, and Caldera 
was the word, and Zakalwe was the word, and Staberinde was the 
word, and - 

'They never learn,' the sky sighed, quite distinctly. 

'Fuck you,' he said. 

He heard a scream from inside. Darckense. 

He dashed up the steps, drawing his pistol, and kicked the door open. 

Darckense's startled face twisted over her shoulder, regarding him. 
Her hands were still clasped round Elethiomel's neck. Elethiomel sat, 
trousers round his ankles, hands on Darckense's naked hips under 
her bunched-up dress, and looked calmly at him. 

Elethiomel was sitting on the little chair that Livueta had made in her 
carpentry class, long ago. 

'Hi there, old chap,' he said to the young man holding the pistol. 

Cheradenine looked into Elethiomel's eyes for a moment, then turned 
away, holstering the pistol and buttoning the holster and walking out, 
closing the door behind him. 

Behind him he heard Darckense crying, and Elethiomel laughing. 

The island had changed, thanks to the man. Scraped in a circle all 

round the central depression of the islet, drawn in a pathway of black 
bird droppings cleared away from the pale rock, and with the 
appropriate tail of just the right length leading off to one side (its 
other end pointing at the rock, which was the central dot), the island 
seemed to have a letter or simple pictogram printed on it, white on 
black. 

It was the local signal for 'Help me!', and you would only have seen 
it from an aircraft, or from space. 

They left behind the shell of the recaptured mansion and the glowing 
red fires which lit its once grand interior (the fires reflected on the 
waters of an ornamental lake, by the wreckage of a demolished boat 
made of stone). 

The tank ripped through the woods, demolishing small trees and little 
bridges over streams. 

He saw the clearing with the summerhouse through the trees; it was 
lit by a flickering white light, as though by God. 

They got to the clearing; a star-shell had fallen into the trees above, 
its parachute entangled in the branches. It sizzled and sputtered and 
shed a pure, sharp, extreme light all over the clearing. 

Inside the summerhouse, the little wooden chair was quite visible. 
The tank's gun was pointing straight at the small building. 

'Sir?' the tank commander said, peering worriedly from the hatch 
beneath. 

Major Zakalwe looked down at him. 

'Fire,' he said. 

The first snow of the year settled over the upper slopes of the cleft 
city; it floated out of the grey-brown sky and fitted itself over the 
streets and the buildings like a sheet thrown over a corpse. 

He dined alone at a large table. The screen he had wheeled into the 
middle of the brightly lit room flickered with the images of released 
prisoners from some other planet. The balcony doors were lying open, 
and through them drifted small examples of the falling snow. The rich 
carpet of the room was frosted white where the snow had settled, 
and stained dark further in where the heat of the room had melted 
the crystals back into water again. Outside, the city was a mass of 
half-unseen grey shapes. Ordered lights ran in lines and curls, 
dimmed by distance and passing flurries. 

Darkness came like a black flag waved over the canyon, drawing back 
the greyness from the shores of the city, then pushing forward the 
individual specks of street and building lights as though in 
recompense. 

The silent screen and silent snow conspired; light flung a path into 
the silent chaos of the fall beyond the window. He got up and closed 
the doors, the shutters and the curtains. 

rain. There too the precise new day was displayed; he looked down 
from the car and studied the sight. Every detail delighted him; he 
counted arches and cars and traced the lines of water and road and 
flue and track through all their convolutions and hidings; he inspected 
every flash of reflected sunlight, squinted at every dot of wheeling 
bird and noted every broken window, through the very dark glasses. 

The car was the longest and sleekest of all those he'd bought or hired; 
it was an eight seater with a huge inefficient rotary engine driving 
both rear axles, and he had its collapsible slatted hood down. He sat 
in the back and enjoyed the feel of the cold air on his face. 

The terminal earring beeped. 'Zakalwe?' 

'Yes, Diziet?' he said. Talking quietly, he didn't think the driver would 
hear him over the wind-roar. He raised the screen between them 
anyway. 

'Hello. Good. Very slight time delay from here, but not much. How's 
it going?' 

'Nothing yet. I'm called Staberinde and I'm causing a fuss. I own 
Staberinde Airlines, there's a Staberinde Street, a Staberinde Store, 
a Staberinde Railway, Staberinde Local Broadcasts... there's even a 
cruise liner called the Staberinde. I've spent money like hydrogen, 
established within a week a business empire most people would take 
a lifetime to set up, and I'm instantly one of the most talked-about 
people on the planet, maybe in the Cluster...' 

'Yes. But, Cher...' 

'Had to take a service tunnel and leave the hotel by an annexe this 
morning; the courtyard's crammed with press.' He glanced over his 
shoulder. 'I'm amazed we really seem to have shaken the hounds off.' 

'Yes, Che...' 

'Dammit, I'm probably putting the war off all by myself just by being 
this crazy; people would rather see what I'm going to squander my 
money on next than fight.' 

He sighed, looked out at the derelict buildings speeding by to one 
side, not far under the rimrock. 'It's supposed to get the name 
Staberinde into the media, so that even a recluse studying ancient 
documents will get to hear the name.' 

'... And?' 

'... And there was something we did in the war, Beychae and I; a 
particular stratagem. We called it the Staberinde strategy. But only 
between ourselves. Strictly between ourselves; it only meant 
anything to Beychae because I explained about its... origin. If he 
hears that word he must wonder what's going on.' 

'Sounds like a great theory, Cheradenine, but it hasn't actu-
ally worked, has it?' 

'No.' He sighed, then frowned. 'There is media input to this place he's 
in, isn't there? You're sure he's not just a prisoner?' 

'There is network access, but not directly. They've got it well 
screened; even we can't see exactly what's going on. And we are 
certain he's not a prisoner.' 

He thought for a moment. 'How's the pre-war situation?' 

'Well, the full-scale still looks inevitable, but the likely lead time's 
increased by a couple of days, to eight-to-ten, after a viable trigger-
event. So... so far, so good, to be optimistic.' 

'Hmm.' He rubbed his chin, watching the frozen waters of an aqueduct 
slide past, fifty metres beneath the turnpike. 'Well,' he said. 'I'm on 
my way now to the university; breakfast with the Dean. I'm setting 
up the Staberinde Scholarship and the Staberinde Fellowship and the 
Staberinde... Chair,' he grimaced. 'And maybe even the Staberinde 
College. Perhaps I should mention these stupendously important wax 
tablets to the man as well.' 

'Yes, good idea,' Sma said, after a short pause. 

'Okay. I don't suppose they have any bearing on what Beychae's got 
his nose buried in, have they?' 

'No,' Sma said. 'But they'd certainly be stored in the same place he's 
working; I guess you could reasonably ask to inspect their security 
arrangements down there, or just want to see where they'd be kept.' 

'All right. I'll mention the tablets.' 

'Check the guy hasn't got a weak heart, first.' 

'Yeah, Diziet.' 

'One other thing. That couple you asked us about; the ones that came 
to your street party.' 

'Yeah.' 

'They're Governance; that's the term they use for major local 
stockholders who tell the corporate chiefs...' 

'Yes, Diziet, I remember the term.' 

'Well, these two are Solotol's, and what they say goes; the Chief 
Execs will almost certainly do exactly as they suggest as far as 
Beychae is concerned, and that means the official government will, 
too. They are also, of course, effectively above the law. Don't mess 
with them, Charadenine.' 

'Me?' he said innocently, smiling to the cold, dry wind. 

'Yes, you. That's all from this end. Have a nice breakfast.' 

'Bye,' he said. The city slid past; the car's tyres made hissing, tearing 
noises on the dark-surfaced turnpike. He turned up the heating in the 
footwell. 

This was a quiet part of the under-cliff road. The driver slowed for a 
sign and some flashing lights ahead, then almost skidded at the 

sudden diversion sign and emergency road markings that turned 
them off the road, over a ramp and down onto a long concrete 
channel with sheer walls. 

They came to a steep rise with only sky visible beyond; the red lines 
indicating the diversion led over the summit. The driver slowed, then 
shrugged and gunned the engine. The hump of concrete raised the 
nose of the big car, hiding what was on the far side. 

When the driver saw what was over the concrete summit, he shouted 
in fear and tried to turn and brake. The big car tipped forward, onto 
the ice, and started to slide. 

He had been jolted by the turn and then annoyed that the view had 
been taken away. He looked round at the driver and wondered what 
was going on. 

Somebody had diverted them off the turnpike and onto a storm drain. 
The turnpike was heated and didn't ice up; the storm drain was a 
sheet of ice. They had entered near the top, through one small sluice 
out of several dozen spread in a semicircle; the broad drain led down 
into the depths of the city, crossed by bridges, for over a kilometre. 

The car had partially turned as the driver came over the top of the 
sluice baffle; the vehicle was sliding down sideways, its wheels 
spinning and engine roaring, lumbering on and on down the 
steepening expanse of the drain and rapidly picking up speed. 

The driver tried to brake again, then attempted to go into reverse, 
and finally tried to steer towards the slab-high sides of the drain, but 
the car was slithering down faster all the time, and the ice provided 
no purchase. The car's wheels shook and the whole body shuddered 
as it hit ridges in the ice. The air whistled and the side-on tyres 
whined. 

He was staring at the sides of the drain, whirling by at a ridiculous 
speed. The vehicle was still slowly turning as it skidded; the driver 
screamed as they headed for a massive bridge support; the rear of 
the car banged and the whole vehicle leapt as it battered into the 
concrete. Bits of metal flew into the air and crashed into the ice 

behind, then started skidding down after them. The car was spinning 
faster now, in the other direction. 

Bridges, tributary drains, viaducts, overhanging buildings, aqueducts 
and huge pipes spanning the drain; all flashed by the revolving car, 
hurtling past in the bright light, some shocked white faces gasping 
from parapets or open windows. 

He looked forward and saw the driver opening his door. 

'Hey!' he shouted, reaching forward to grab the man. 

The car thundered over the uneven ice. The driver jumped. 

He flung himself into the front, just missing the driver's ankles. He 
landed down at the pedals, grasped at the levers and controls and 
tugged himself into the driver's seat. The vehicle was turning faster, 
jolting and screaming as it hit ridges and raised metal grilles set in 
the slope; he glimpsed one wheel and various bits of bodywork 
bouncing away behind him. Another teeth-chattering contact with a 
bridge support ripped an entire axle free; it flew into the air and 
exploded against an iron leg supporting a building, dislodging bricks 
and glass and scattering metal like shrapnel. 

He grabbed the steering wheel; it flopped about uselessly. He had the 
idea of keeping the car pointing forward if he could, until the gradually 
increasing temperature further down the canyon provided a wet 
rather than icy slope, but if there was no steering he might as well 
jump off too. 

The wheel thumped and burned his hands as it turned; the tyres 
squealed wildly; he was thrown forward and his nose hit the wheel. 
That felt like a dry patch, he thought. He looked ahead, down the 
slope, where the ice was becoming patchy, hugging the shadows of 
buildings where the shade fell across the spillway. 

The car was almost straight. He grabbed at the wheel again and 
tramped the brake. It didn't seem to do anything. He pedalled reverse 
instead. Now the gearbox screamed too; his face wrinkled at the 
appalling noise, his feet juddered on the quivering pedal. The wheel 

came alive again, for longer, and he was thrown forward once more; 
this time he kept a hold of the wheel, and ignored the blood streaming 
from his nose. 

Everything was roaring now. The wind and the tyres and the body of 
the car; his ears popped and throbbed with the rapidly increasing air 
pressure. He looked ahead and saw the concrete was green with 
weeds. 

'Shit!' he yelled to himself. There was another lip ahead; he wasn't 
near the bottom yet; there was another length of slope to come. 

He recalled the driver mentioning tools inside the front passenger 
bench; he hauled the seat up and grabbed the biggest piece of metal 
he could see, then kicked the door open and jumped. 

He slammed into the concrete, almost losing his grip on the metal 
tool. The car started to slew in front of him, leaving a last patch of 
ice and hitting the section of the slope covered by weed; curved 
fountains of spray leapt from its remaining wheels. He rolled over, 
onto his back, spray hissing up into his face as he slithered down the 
steep, weeded slope; he held the metal tool in both hands, clamped 
it between his chest and upper arm; forced it down into the concrete 
under the water and weeds. 

The metal thrummed in his hands. 

The spillway lip swept up towards him. He pressed harder; the tool 
bit into the rough concrete, shaking his whole body, jarring his teeth 
and his vision; a tight wad of ripped-up weed grew under his arm like 
some mutant hair. 

The car hit the lip first; it somersaulted into the air and started 
tumbling, disappearing. He hit the lip and almost lost his hold on the 
tool again. He rose and slowed, but not enough. Then he was over. 
The dark glasses sailed off his face; he resisted the urge to grab at 
them. 

The spillway continued for another half kilometre; the car smashed 
upside-down into the concrete slope, scattering debris which 

continued skidding down towards the river at the bottom of the 
canyon's great V; the gearbox and remaining axle parted company 
with the chassis and bounced into some pipes straddling the drain, 
fracturing them. Water poured out. 

He went back to treating the metal tool as though it was an ice-axe, 
and slowly reduced his speed. 

He passed under the fractured pipes, which were gushing warm 
water. 

What, not sewage? he thought brightly. Today was looking up. 

He looked, perplexed, at the metal tool still vibrating in his grip, and 
wondered exactly what it was; probably something to do with the 
tyres or starting the engine, he decided, looking around. 

He negotiated one final spillway lip and slid gently into the shallows 
of the broad river Lotol itself. Bits of the car had already arrived. 

He stood up and squelched ashore. He checked there was nothing 
else coming down the spillway that might strike him, and sat. He was 
shaking; he dabbed at his bloody nose. He felt bruised from the 
battering in the car. There were some people staring at him over the 
top of a nearby promenade. He waved at them. 

He stood up, wondering how you got out of this concrete canyon. He 
looked up the spillway, but could see only a short way; a final lip of 
concrete blocked the rest of the view. 

He wondered what had happened to the driver. 

The concrete lip he was looking at formed a dark bump against the 
skyline. The bump hung for a few seconds, then came down on the 
thin coating of water that floated down the slope, staining it red. What 
was left of the driver skidded past him and bumped into the river, 
edging past the chassis of the shattered car and setting off 
downstream, swirling pinkly in the water, revolving. 

He shook his head. He brought his hand up to his nose, waggled the 

tip experimentally, and gasped with pain. This made the fifteenth 
time he'd broken his nose. 

'I miss breakfast, lose a perfectly proficient driver and my best car, I 
break my nose yet again and get an old raincoat of immense 
sentimental value dirtier than it's ever been in its life before, and all 
you can say is "That's funny"?' 

'Sorry, Cheradenine. I just mean, that's weird. I don't know why 
they'd do something like that. You are certain it was deliberate? Oof.' 

'What was that?' 

'Nothing. You are certain it wasn't just an accident?' 

'Positive. I called for a spare car, and the police, then went back to 
where it happened. No diversion; all gone. But there were traces of 
industrial solvent where they'd removed the false red road markings 
from the top of the storm drain.' 

'Ah. Ah; yeah...' Sma's voice sounded odd. 

He took the transceiver bead off his ear lobe and looked hard at it. 
'Sma...' 

'Whoo. Yeah, well, as I said; if it was those two Governance bods, the 
police won't do anything. But I can't understand them behaving like 
that.' 

He let the wash-bowl drain and dabbed tenderly at his nose with a 
fluffy hotel towel. He put the terminal earring back on his ear. 'Maybe 
they just object to the fact I'm using Vanguard money. Maybe they 

think I'm Mr Vanguard or something.' He waited for a reply. 'Sma? I 
said maybe they...' 

'Ow. Yes. Sorry. Yes; I heard you. You might be right.' 

'Anyway, there's more.' 

'God. What?' 

He picked up an ornately decorated plastic screen-card, which - 
against a background of what looked like a fairly wild party - slowly 
flashed a message on and off. 'An invitation. To me. I'll read it out: 
"Mr Staberinde; congratulations on your narrow escape. Do please 
come to a fancy-dress party this evening; a car will pick you up at 
rim-set. Costume provided." No address.' He put the card back behind 
the wash-bowl taps. 'According to the concierge that arrived at about 
the same time I called the police after my car went tobogganing.' 

'Fancy dress party, eh?' Sma giggled. 'Better watch your ass, 
Zakalwe.' There was more giggling, not all of it Sma's. 

'Sma,' he said frostily. 'If I've called at an awkward time...' 

Sma cleared her throat, sounded suddenly business-like. 'Not at all. 
Sounds like it was the same lot. You going?' 

'I think so, but not in their costume, whatever that turns out to be.' 

'All right. We'll track you. Are you absolutely positive you don't want 
a knife missile or...' 

'I don't want to get into that argument again, Diziet,' he said, dabbing 
his face dry and sniffing hard again, inspecting himself in the mirror. 
'What I was thinking about was this; if these people did react like this 
just because of Vanguard, maybe we can persuade them there's an 
opportunity for them here.' 

'What sort of opportunity?' 

He went through to the bedroom, collapsed on the bed, staring up at 
the painted ceiling. 'Beychae was connected with Vanguard at first, 

yes?' 

'Honorary President-Director. Gave it credibility while we were 
starting up. He was only involved for a year or two.' 

'But there is that link.' He swung his legs off the bed and sat up, 
staring out of the window at the snow-bright city. 'And one of the 
theories we believe these guys have is that Vanguard is run by some 
sort of namby-pamby machine that's developed consciousness and 
conscience...' 

'Or just by some old recluse with philanthropic intentions,' Sma 
agreed. 

'So; say this mythical machine or person had existed, but then 
somebody else got hold of the reins; disabled the machine, killed the 
philanthropist. And then started spending their ill-gotten gains.' 

'Hmm,' Sma said. 'Mmm. Mmm.' She coughed again. 'Yes... ah. Well, 
they'd be acting a lot like you've been, I suppose.' 

'So do I,' he said, going to the window; he picked up a pair of dark 
glasses from a small table, put them on. 

Something beeped near the bed. 'Hold on.' He turned, crossed to the 
bedside and picked up the same small device he'd scanned the two 
top floors with when he'd first arrived. He looked at the display, 
smiled, and left the room. Walking down the corridor, still holding the 
machine, he said, 'Sorry; somebody bouncing a laser off the window 
in the room I was in, trying to eavesdrop.' 

He entered a suite facing uphill and sat on the bed. 'Anyway; could 
you make it look like there'd been some sort of... event in the 
Vanguard Foundation, a few days before I arrived here? Some sort of 
cataclysmic change but the signs are only appearing now? I don't 
know what, especially as it all has to be back-dated, but something 
that the markets, say, only just get hold of now; something buried in 
the trading figures... would that be possible?' 

'I...' Sma said, hesitantly. 'I don't know. Ship?' 

'Hello?' the Xenophobe said. 

'Can we do what Zakalwe just asked?' 

'I'll listen to what it was,' the ship said. Then, 'Yes; best get one of 
the GCUs to handle it, but it can be done.' 

'Great,' he said, lying back on the bed. 'Also, as of now - and again, 
back-dating where we can interfere with computer records - 
Vanguard becomes an unethical corporation. Sell the R&D 
department investigating ultra-strong materials for space habitats 
and that sort of stuff; have it pick up stock in companies promoting 
terraforming. Close a few factories; start a few lock-outs; halt all 
charitable works; skim the pension fund.' 

'Zakalwe! We're supposed to be the good guys!' 

'I know, but if I can get our Governance pals to think I've taken over 
Vanguard, and I think the way they do...' He paused. 'Sma; do I have 
to spell it out?' 

'Ah... ouch. What? Oh... no; you think they might try and get you to 
convince Beychae that Vanguard's still doing what we want it to do, 
and so get him to declare for it?' 

'Exactly.' He clasped his hands under his neck, adjusting his pony-
tail. This bed had mirrors on the ceiling above, not a painting. He 
studied the distant reflection of his nose. 

'Long... um, shot, Zakalwe,' Sma said. 

'I think we have to try it.' 

'It means wrecking a commercial reputation it's taken decades to 
establish.' 

'That more important than stopping the war, Diziet?' 

'Of course not, but... ah... of course not, but we can't be certain it'll 
work.' 

'Well, I say we do it now. It has a better chance than offering the 
university those goddamn tablets.' 

'You've never liked that plan, have you, Zakalwe?' Sma sounded 
annoyed. 

'This one's better, Sma. I can feel it. Get it done now, so they've 
heard about it by the time I get to the party tonight.' 

'Okay, but that thing with the tablets...' 

'Sma; I've re-arranged the meeting with the Dean for the day after 
tomorrow, okay? I can mention the goddamn tablets then. But make 
sure all this Vanguard stuff goes through now, all right?' 

'I... oh... ah... yeah, right. I suppose so... so... oh, wow. Look, 
Zakalwe, something's just come up; was there anything else?' 

'No,' he said loudly. 

'Aww... great. Umm... right, Zakalwe; bye.' 

The transceiver beeped. He tore it off his ear and threw it across the 
room. 

'Rampant bitch,' he breathed. He looked at the ceiling. 

He lifted the bedside telephone. 'Yeah; can I speak to... Treyvo? Yes 
please.' He waited, dug between two molars with a fingernail. 'Yeah; 
night-clerk Treyvo? My very good friend... listen; I'd like a little 
company, you know? Indeed... well, there's a largish tip if... that's 
right... and, Treyvo; if she comes with a Press pass secreted 
anywhere, you're a dead man.' 

clasped itself around him. He got back into the car and drove back 
down to the hotel, just in time to meet the limousine sent by his hosts 
for that evening. 

The cluster's media had been cleared from the hotel courtyard that 
afternoon, on his instructions, so there was no undignified dive 
through their lights and mikes and questions. He stood, dark glasses 
in place, on the steps of the hotel as the great dark car - significantly 
more impressive than the one he'd almost been killed in that morning, 
he was somewhat disappointed to note - drew smoothly to a halt. A 
huge man, grey haired, with a pale, heavily scarred face, unfolded 
himself from the driver's compartment and held open a rear door, 
bowing slowly. 

'Thank you,' he said to the big man as he stepped into the vehicle. 
The fellow bowed again, and closed the door. He sat back in plushly 
luxurious upholstery that couldn't make up its mind whether it was a 
seat or a bed. The car's windows dimmed in response to the lights of 
the media people as the vehicle exited from the hotel courtyard. He 
gave what he hoped was a regal wave, all the same. 

He found a switch on an arm that let him talk to the grey-haired 
driver. 'I take it this is my fancy-dress costume. What is it exactly?' 

The driver looked down, took something from a jacket pocket, and 
manipulated it. 'Hello,' said an artificial voice. 'My name is Mollen. I 
cannot talk, so I use this machine instead.' He glanced up at the road, 
then down again at whatever machine he was using. 'What do you 
want to ask me?' 

He didn't like the way the big guy took his eyes off the road each time 
he wanted to say something, so he just said, 'never mind.' He sat 
back and watched the lights go past, taking the suit helmet off again. 

They drew into the courtyard of a large, dark house down near a river 
in a side-canyon. 'Please follow me, Mr Staberinde,' Mollen said 
through his machine. 

'Certainly.' He lifted the suit helmet and followed the taller man up 
the steps and into a large foyer. He was carrying the costume he'd 
found in the car. Animal heads glared from the walls of the tall 
entrance hall. Mollen closed the doors and led him to an elevator 
which hummed and rattled its way down for a couple of floors; he 
heard the noise and could detect the drug-smoke odour of the party 
even before the doors were opened. 

He handed the bundle of clothes to Mollen, keeping only a thin cloak. 
'Thanks; I won't be needing the rest.' 

They went out into the party, which was noisy and crowded and full 
of bizarre costumes. The men and women all looked sleek and well-
fed; he breathed in the drug smoke that wreathed the motley figures 
about him; Mollen led the way through the crowd. People fell silent 
as they passed, and a babble of conversation started up in his wake. 
He heard the word 'Staberinde' several times. 

They went through doors guarded by men even bigger than Mollen, 
down a flight of softly carpeted stairs, and into a large room walled 
with glass on one side. Boats bobbed on black water in an 
underground dock on the far side of the glass, which reflected a 
smaller but more bizarre party. He peeked under the dark glasses, 
but the view was no brighter. 

As on the floor above, people walked around with either drug bowls 
or, for the especially daring, drink glasses. Everybody was either 
badly injured or actually mutilated. 

Men and women turned to look at the new arrival as he followed 
Mollen in. Some men and women had arms broken and twisted, the 
bones tearing through the skin, showing whitely under the plain light; 

some had huge gashes cut into their bodies, some had whole areas 
of their flesh flayed and seared, some had had breasts or arms 
amputated, or eyes put out, often with the removed article or articles 
dangling from other parts of their bodies. The woman from the street 
party came towards him, a hand-wide flap of her belly hanging down 
over her glistening skirt, her belly muscles rippling inside like dull red 
glistening chords. 

'Mr Staberinde; you've come as a space man,' she said. There was 
an over-elaborate modulation to her voice he found instantly 
annoying. 

'Well, I've sort of compromised,' he said, swirling the cape and 
fastening it across his shoulders. 

The woman held out her hand. 'Well; welcome, anyway.' 

'Thank you,' he said, taking her hand and kissing it. He half expected 
the suit sensory fields to pick up a whiff of some deadly poison on the 
woman's delicate hand, and signal danger, but the alarm remained 
quiet. He grinned as she took her hand away. 

'What do you find funny, Mr Staberinde?' 

'This!' he laughed, nodding at the people around them. 

'Good,' she said, laughing a little (her belly quivered). 'We did hope 
our party might amuse you. Allow me to introduce our good friend 
who is making all this possible.' 

She took his arm and guided him through the grisly multitude to a 
man sitting on a stool next to a tall, dull grey machine. He was small 
and smiling and kept wiping his nose with a large kerchief which he 
stuffed raggedly into his otherwise immaculate suit. 

'Doctor, this is the man we told you of, Mr Staberinde.' 

'Sincere greetings and things,' said the little doctor, his face 
collapsing into a moist and toothy smile. 'Welcome to our Injured 
Party.' He waved round the room at the wounded people, and waved 

his hands enthusiastically. 'Would you like an injury? The process is 
quite painless, and causes no inconvenience; repairs are speedy and 
there aren't any scars. What can I tempt you with? Lacerations? 
Compound fracture? Castration? How about a multiple trepanning? 
You'd be the only one here.' 

He folded his arms and laughed. 'You're too kind. Thank you, but no.' 

'Oh don't, please,' the little man said, looking wounded. 'Don't spoil 
the party; everybody else is taking part; do you really want to feel so 
left out? There is no risk of pain or permanent damage of any sort. I 
have carried out this sort of operation all over the civilised universe, 
and have never had any complaints except from people who get too 
attached to their injuries and resist repair. My machine and I have 
performed novelty injuries and wounds in every centre of civilisation 
in the Cluster; you may not have this chance again, you know; we 
leave tomorrow, and I'm all booked up for the next two years 
standard. Are you absolutely sure you don't want to participate?' 

'More than absolutely.' 

'Leave Mr Staberinde alone, Doctor,' the woman said, 'If he does not 
want to join us then we must respect his wishes. Must we not, Mr 
Staberinde?' The woman took his arm in hers. He looked at her injury, 
wondering what sort of transparent shielding kept everything intact. 
Her breasts were frosted with small, tear-shaped gems, and kept high 
by tiny field projectors on their undersides. 

'Yes, of course.' 

'Good. Would you wait a moment, please? Please share this.' She 
pushed her drink into his hand and stooped forward to talk to the 
doctor. 

He turned to look at the people in the room. Strips of flesh hung from 
beautiful faces, grafted breasts swung from tanned backs, slender 
arms hung like bloated necklaces; chips of bone peeped from torn 
skin, veins and arteries and muscles and glands squirmed and 
sparkled in the plain light. 

He lifted the glass the woman had given him and wafted some of its 
fumes into the fields around the helmet neck; an alarm sounded and 
a small screen on the suit's wrist revealed the specific poison in the 
glass. He smiled, pushed the glass through the suit's neck-field and 
knocked the contents back, then coughed a little as the half-alcohol 
concoction went down his throat. He smacked his lips. 

'Oh, you've finished it,' the woman came back to him. She was patting 
her smooth belly, now whole again, and motioned him towards 
another area of the room. She donned a small, glittering waistcoat as 
they walked through the mutilated throng. 

'Yes.' He handed her the glass. 

They went through a door into an old workshop; lathes and punches 
and drills stood around under layers of dust and flaking paint and 
metal. Three chairs stood under a hanging light, a small cabinet 
beside them. The woman shut the door and waved him into one of 
the low seats. He sat down, placing the suit helmet on the floor at his 
side. 

'Why didn't you come in the costume we sent you?' She altered the 
lock on the door, then turned to him, suddenly smiling. She adjusted 
the glittering waistcoat. 

'It didn't suit me.' 

'You think that does?' she nodded at the black suit as she sat down, 
crossing her legs. She tapped the cabinet. It opened out with chinking 
glasses and already smoking drug bowls. 

'I find it reassuring.' 

She leant over, offering him a glass of gleaming liquid, which he 
accepted. He settled into the chair again. 

She sat back too, cradling a bowl in both hands and closing her eyes 
as she leant over it, breathing in deeply. She flapped a little of the 
smoke under the lapels of the waistcoat, so that as she spoke the 
heavy fumes curled back out between the material and her breasts, 

and twisted slowly into her face. 

'We are so glad you could come, whatever your attire. Tell me; how 
are you finding the Excelsior? Does it meet with your requirements?' 

He smiled thinly. 'It'll do.' 

The door opened. The man he'd seen with the woman at the street 
party and when they had chased him in their car was outside. He 
stood back for Mollen to enter before him. Then he strode to the 
remaining seat and placed himself in it. Mollen stood near the door. 

'What have you been saying?' the man asked, waving away the 
woman's hand with a glass in it. 

'He's about to tell us who he is,' the woman said; they both looked at 
him. 'Aren't you, Mr... Staberinde?' 

'No I'm not. You tell me who you are.' 

'I think you know who we are, Mr Staberinde,' the man said. 
'We thought we knew who you were, up until a few hours ago. Now 
we're not so sure.' 

'Me, I'm just a tourist.' He sipped at the drink, looking at them over 
the top of the glass. He inspected his drink. Minute specks of gold 
floated in its glittering depths. 

'For a tourist, you've bought an awful lot of souvenirs that you'll never 
be able to take home with you,' the woman said. 'Streets, railways, 
bridges, canals, apartment blocks, stores, tunnels.' She waved her 
hand in the air to indicate that the list went on. 'And that's just in 
Solotol.' 

'I get carried away.' 

'Were you trying to attract attention?' 

He smiled. 'Yes, I suppose I was.' 

'We heard you suffered an unpleasant experience this morning, Mr 

Staberinde,' the woman said. She wriggled down deeper into the 
chair, drawing up her legs. 'Something to do with a storm-drain.' 

'That's right. My car was diverted down a spillway, from the top.' 

'You weren't hurt?' She sounded sleepy. 

'Not seriously; I stayed in the car until...' 

'No, please.' The hand waved up from the indistinct mass of the chair, 
tiredly, 'I have no head for details.' 

He said nothing; he pursed his lips. 

'I understand your driver was not so lucky,' the man said. 

'Well, he's dead.' He leant forward in his seat. 'Actually, I thought you 
people might have arranged the whole thing.' 

'Yes,' said the woman from the mass of the chair, her voice floating 
up like the smoke, 'Actually we did.' 

'I find frankness so appealing, don't you?' The man looked admiringly 
at the knees, breasts and head of the woman, the only parts of her 
still showing above the furry arms of the seat. He smiled. 'Of course, 
Mr Staberinde, my companion jests. We would never do such a 
terrible thing. But we might be able to lend you some assistance in 
finding the real culprits.' 

'Really?' 

The man nodded. 'We think now we might like to help you, you see?' 

'Oh, sure.' 

The man laughed. 'Who exactly are you, Mr Staberinde?' 

'I told you; I'm a tourist.' He sniffed the bowl. 'I wandered into a little 
money recently, and I always wanted to visit Solotol - in style - and 
that's what I've been doing.' 

'How did you get control of the Vanguard Foundation, Mr Staberinde?' 

'I thought direct questions like that were impolite.' 

'They are,' the man smiled. 'I beg your pardon. May I guess your 
profession, Mr Staberinde? I mean before you became a gentleman 
of leisure, of course.' 

He shrugged. 'If you like.' 

'Computers,' the man said. 

He had started to raise his glass to his lips, just so he could hesitate, 
as he now did. 'No comment,' he said, not meeting the man's eyes. 

'So,' the man said. 'The Vanguard foundation is under new 
management, is it?' 

'Damn right. Better management.' 

The man nodded. 'So I heard, just this afternoon.' He sat forward in 
his chair and rubbed his hands together. 'Mr Staberinde; I don't want 
to pry into your commercial operations and future plans, but I wonder 
if you'd give us even a vague idea in what direction you see the 
Vanguard Foundation going, over the next few years. Purely as a 
matter of interest, for now.' 

'That's easy,' he grinned. 'More profits. Vanguard could have been 
the biggest corp of the lot if it had been aggressive with its marketing. 
Instead it's been run like a charity; relied on coming up with some 
new technological gizmo to restore its position each time it falls 
behind. But from now on it fights like the other big boys, and it backs 
winners.' (The man nodded wisely.) The Vanguard Foundation's been 
too... meek until now.' He shrugged. 'Maybe that's just what happens 
when you leave something to be run by machines. But that's over. 
From now on the machines do what I tell them to, and the Vanguard 
Foundation becomes a competitor; a predator, yeah?' He laughed, 
not too harshly, he hoped, conscious he might overdo this. 

The man smiled slowly but broadly. 'You... believe in keeping 

machines in their place, yes?' 

'Yeah.' He nodded vigorously. 'Yeah, I do.' 

'Hmm. Mr Staberinde, have you heard of Tsoldrin Beychae?' 

'Sure. Hasn't everybody?' 

The man raised his eyebrows liquidly. 'And you think...?' 

'Could have been a great politician, I suppose.' 

'Most people say he was a great politician,' the woman said from the 
chair's depths. 

He shook his head, looking into his drug bowl. 'He was on the wrong 
side. It was a shame, but... to be great you have to be on the winning 
side. Part of greatness is knowing that. He didn't. Same as my old 
man.' 

'Ah...' said the woman. 

'Your father, Mr Staberinde?' the man said. 

'Yeah,' he admitted. 'He and Beychae... well, it's a long story, but... 
they knew each other, long ago.' 

'We have time for the story,' the man said easily. 

'No,' he said. He stood up, putting down the bowl and glass, and 
taking up the suit helmet. 'Look; thanks for the invitation and all, but 
I think I'll head back now; I'm a little tired, and I took a bit of a 
battering in that car, you know?' 

'Yes,' the man said, standing too. 'We're really sorry about that.' 

'Oh, thanks.' 

'Perhaps we can offer something in compensation?' 

'Oh yeah? Like what?' He fiddled with the suit helmet. 'I got lots of 

money.' 

'How would you like to talk to Tsoldrin Beychae?' 

He looked up, frowning. 'I don't know; should I? Is he here?' He 
gestured out towards the party. The woman giggled. 

'No.' The man laughed. 'Not here. But in the city. Would you like to 
talk to him? Fascinating fellow, and no longer actively on the wrong 
side, as it were. Devoted to a life of study, these days. But still 
fascinating, as I say.' 

He shrugged. 'Well... maybe. I'll think about it. It crossed my mind 
to leave, after the craziness this morning.' 

'Oh, I beg you to reconsider that, Mr Staberinde. Please; sleep on it. 
You might do a great deal of good, for all of us, if you would talk to 
the chap. Who knows; you might even help make him great.' He held 
out one hand towards the door. 'But I can tell you want to go. Let me 
see you to the car.' They walked to the door. Mollen stood back. 'Oh. 
This is Mollen. Say hello, Mollen.' The grey-haired man touched a 
small box at his side. 

'Hello,' it said. 

'Mollen can't speak, you see. Hasn't said a word in all the time we've 
known him.' 

'Yes,' said the woman. She was completely submerged in the chair 
now. 'We decided he needed to clear his throat; so we took out his 
tongue.' She either giggled or belched. 

'We've met.' He nodded to the big man, whose face contorted 
strangely under the scars. 

The party in the boat-house cellar went on. He almost collided with a 
woman who had her eyes on the back of her head. Some of the 
revellers were exchanging limbs now. People sported four arms, or 
none (begging for drinks to be brought to their mouths), or an extra 
leg, or had arms or legs of the wrong sex. One woman was parading 

around with a man in tow who wore a sickly stupid grin; the woman 
kept lifting her skirt and displaying a complete set of male sexual 
equipment. 

He hoped they all forgot who had what at the end of the evening. 

They passed through the tame party, where fireworks were 
showering everybody with cool sparks; they were all laughing at that 
and - he could think of no other word - cavorting. 

He was wished farewell. It was the same car that took him back, 
though it had a different driver. He watched the lights and the city's 
calm expanses of snow, and thought about people at parties and 
people at war; he saw the party they had just left, and he saw the 
grey-green trenches with mud-caked men waiting nervously; he saw 
people dressed in shiny black, whipping each other and being tied 
up... and he saw people shackled to bed frames or chairs, shrieking, 
while the uniformed men applied their particular skills. 

He sometimes had to be reminded, he realised, that he still possessed 
the capacity to despise. 

The car powered its way through the silent streets. He took the dark 
glasses off. The empty city swept past. 

Once - between the time he'd taken the Chosen across the badlands 
and the time he'd ended up broken like an insect in the flooded 
caldera, scratching signs in the dirt - he had taken some leave, and 
for a while had entertained the idea of giving up his work for the 
Culture, and doing something else instead. It had always seemed to 
him that the ideal man was either a soldier or a poet, and so, having 
spent most of his years being one of those - to him - polar opposites, 
he determined to attempt to turn his life around and become the 
other. 

He lived in a small village, in a small, rural country on a small, 
undeveloped, unhurried planet. He stayed with an old couple in a 

cottage in the trees in the dales beneath the high tors. He rose early 
and went for long walks. 

The countryside looked new and green and fresh; it was summer, and 
the fields and woods, the path sides and river banks were full of 
unnameable flowers of every colour. The tall trees flexed in the warm 
summer winds, leaves bright and fluttering like flags, and water ran 
off the moors and hills and across the bunched stones of sparkling 
streams like some clarified concentrate of the air itself. He sweated 
to the crests of the gnarled hills, climbed the outcrop rocks at their 
summits, and ran whooping and laughing across the broader tops, 
under the brief shadows of the small high clouds. 

On the moors, in the hills, he saw animals. Tiny ones that darted 
invisibly into thickets from almost under-foot, larger ones that leapt 
and stopped, looked back, then leapt away again, disappearing into 
burrows or between rocks; larger ones still that ran flowing off across 
the ground in herds, watching him, and then became almost invisible 
when they stopped to graze. Birds mobbed him when he walked too 
near their nests; others called out from nearby, one-wing fluttering, 
trying to distract him, when he approached theirs. He was careful not 
to step on their nests. 

He always took a small notebook with him on his walks, and made a 
point of writing down anything interesting. He tried to describe the 
feel of the grasses in his fingers, the way the trees sounded, the 
visual diversity of the flowers, the way the animals and birds moved 
and reacted, the colour of the rocks and the sky. He kept a proper 
journal in a larger book, back in his room at the old couple's cottage. 
He wrote his notes up in that each evening, as though filling out a 
report for some higher authority. 

In another large journal book, he wrote his notes out again, along 
with further notes on the notes, and then started to cross words out 
of the completed, annotated notes, carefully removing word after 
word until he had something that looked like a poem. This was how 
he imagined poetry to be made. 

He had brought some books of poetry with him, and when the 
weather was wet, which was only rarely, he stayed in and tried to 

read them. Usually, though, they sent him to sleep. The books he had 
brought about poetry and poets confused him even more, and he had 
to continually re-read passage after passage to retain each word, and 
even then still felt none the wiser. 

He went into the village tavern every few days, and played skittle and 
pebble games with the locals. The mornings after these evenings he 
regarded as recovery periods, and left his notebook behind when he 
walked. 

The rest of the time he tired himself out and kept fit; climbing trees 
to see how high he could get before the branches became too thin, 
climbing rock faces and old quarries, balancing his way across fallen 
trees in steep gullies, leaping from rock to rock across rivers, and 
sometimes stalking and then chasing the animals on the moor, 
knowing he could never catch up with them, but laughing as he 
sprinted after them. 

The only other people he saw in the hills were farmers and shepherds. 
Sometimes he saw slaves working in the fields, and very rarely he 
met other people out walking. He didn't like to stop and talk to them. 

The one other person he ever saw regularly was a man who flew a 
kite on the high hills. They only saw each other from a distance. At 
first it just happened that their paths never crossed, but later he 
made sure that they didn't meet; he would change direction if he saw 
the gaunt figure of the man walking towards him, climb up a different 
hill if he saw the little red kite flying above the summit he'd intended 
to head for. It had become a sort of tradition, a little private custom. 

The days went on. He sat on a hill once, and saw a slave running 
through the fields beneath, through the strange slow patterns that 
the currents in the wind pushed through the golden-red pelt of the 
land. The slave's path left a trail like the wake behind a ship. She got 
as far as the river, where the landlord's mounted overseer ran her 
down. He watched the overseer beat the woman - saw the long stick 
rise and fall, tiny in the distance - but he couldn't hear anything 
because the wind was in the wrong direction. When the woman finally 
lay still on the river bank, the overseer got down off his mount and 
knelt near her head; he saw something flash, but could not tell 

exactly what was going on. The overseer rode off; hobbled slaves 
came and took the woman away, later. 

He made a note. 

That evening, after dinner in the house of the old couple, once the 
wife had gone to bed, he told the old man what he had seen. The 
man nodded slowly, chewing on a mildly narcotic root, and spat juice 
into the fire. The overseer was known to be strict, the old man said; 
he took the tongue of any slave who tried to escape. He kept the 
tongues drying on a string stretched over the entrance to the slaves' 
compound at the lordship's farm. 

He and the old man drank some fierce grain spirit from little cups, 
and then the old man told him a folk tale. 

In the tale, a man walking through the wild wood was tempted from 
the path by some beautiful flowers, and then saw a handsome young 
woman lying asleep in a clearing. He went to the maiden, and she 
woke. He sat down beside her and as they talked he realised that she 
smelled of flowers, a perfume more wonderful than anything he had 
ever experienced before, and so intense that he was made dizzy by 
the heady strength of it. After a while, surrounded by her flowery 
scent, enchanted by her softly lilting voice and shy demeanour, he 
asked to kiss her, and finally was allowed, and their kisses grew 
passionate, and they coupled. 

But as they did so, even from the first moment that joined them, 
whenever the man looked out of one eye he saw the woman change. 
From one eye she looked as she had from the first, but looking 
through the other eye she was older, no longer just past her 
childhood. With each beat of their love she grew older (though only 
seen through one eye), through her maturity and late glow and the 
matron look, to spry then frail old age. 

All the time the man could see her in all her youth by just closing one 
eye - and certainly could not stop himself from the act they had 
embarked upon - but always he was tempted to sneak a look through 
the other eye, and be shocked and amazed at the terrible 
transformation taking place beneath him. 

In the last few movements of his knowledge, he closed his eyes, only 
opening both at the moment of fulfilment, when he saw - with both 
eyes, now - that he had taken to him a rotting corpse, already known 
by worms and grubs; the smell of flowers changed in that instant to 
an overpowering stench of corruption, but in such a way that he knew 
that it had always smelled like that, and as his loins gave themselves 
to the corpse, his belly threw out his last meal at the same time. 

The wood spirit had his life by two strands, therefore, and with both 
hands took a firm grip of him, unravelled him from the weave of life, 
and dragged him away to the shadow world. 

His soul was shattered into a million pieces there, and thrown over 
the world, to make up the souls of all pollen-flies, which bring new 
life and old death to flowers, at the same time. 

He thanked the old man for telling him the story, and told him some 
tales he remembered from his own upbringing. 

A few days later he was running after one of the small animals on the 
moor; it skidded on some dew-wet grass and tumbled end-over-end, 
finally falling, limbs spread, on some stones, winding itself. He gave 
a victorious, whooping cry and threw himself forward down the slope 
towards the animal as it wobbled to its feet; he jumped the last couple 
of metres, landing with both feet, just beside where the animal had 
fallen; it collected itself and sped off again, unharmed, and vanished 
down a hole. He laughed, breathing hard, sweating. He stood there, 
put his hands on his knees and bent at the waist, trying to get his 
breath back. 

Something moved under his feet. He saw it, felt it. 

There was a nest under him. He had landed right on it. The eggs, 
their speckled shells shattered, spread their fluids over his boot heels 
and into the twigs and moss. 

He moved his foot, already sick in his heart. Something black wriggled 
underneath. It moved into the sunlight; a black head and neck; a 
black eye staring up at him, bright and hard as a jet pebble at the 
bottom of a brook. The bird struggled, making him jump back a little, 

as though he had landed with naked feet on something that stung; 
the bird flapped hopelessly out onto the moor grass, hopping on one 
foot, dragging one limp wing after it. It stopped, a little way off, 
sideways to him, and tipped its head, seeming to regard him. 

He wiped his boots on the moss. All the eggs were smashed. The bird 
made a small keening noise. He turned away and began to walk off, 
then stopped, cursed, retraced his steps and stamped after the bird, 
catching it easily in a storm of squawks and feathers. 

He twisted its neck and dropped the limp remains into the grass. 

That evening he stopped writing his journal and never returned to it. 
The weather grew humid and oppressive and no rains fell. The man 
with the kite waved and called out to him one day, from the top of a 
hill; he hurried away, sweating. 

It was ten or so days after the incident with the bird that he admitted 
to himself he would never be a poet. 

He left a couple of days later and was never heard of again, even 
though the lord's marshal sent word to every town in the land, 
because the stranger was suspected of being involved in what 
happened the night he left, when the overseer at the lord's farm was 
found trussed in his bed, his face fixed in an expression of darkest 
horror, and his mouth and throat stuffed with dried human tongues 
and pieces of blank paper, on which he had choked to death. 

He slept until after dawn, then went for a walk to think. He left via 
the service tunnel from the main hotel to the annexe, and left the 
dark glasses in his pocket. The hotel had cleaned the old raincoat; he 
put it on and some thick gloves and wound a scarf round his neck. 

He walked carefully along warmed streets and dripping pavements, 
and held his head up to gaze at the sky. His breath went before him. 
Little snow-falls slumped off buildings and wires as the weak sunlight 
and a mild breeze raised the temperature. The gutters ran with clear 

water and soggy bergs of bumping slush; pipes from buildings ran or 
dripped with the melt and, when a vehicle passed, it did so with a wet 
hiss. He crossed the road to the other side, where the sun was. 

He climbed steps and crossed bridges; he walked gingerly over icy 
parts where there was no heating, or it had failed. He wished he'd 
put on better boots; these looked fine but they didn't have enough 
grip. To avoid falling you had to walk like an old man, hands splayed 
as though trying to grasp a stick, bending at the waist when you 
wanted to walk straight-backed. This annoyed him, but walking on 
without acknowledging the changed conditions, and slipping on his 
backside, appealed to him even less. 

When he did slip, it was in front of some young people. He was 
walking carefully down some icy steps leading onto a broad 
suspension bridge over a railway junction. The youngsters were 
walking towards him, laughing and joking with each other. He divided 
his attention between the treacherous steps and the group. They 
looked very young, and their actions, gestures and pealing voices all 
seemed to bubble with energy, suddenly making him feel his age. 
There were four of them; the two young men trying to impress the 
girls, talking loudly. One of the girls in particular was tall and dark, 
and elegant in that unselfconscious manner of the recently matured. 
He kept 

his eyes on her, straightening his back, and just before his feet went 
out from under him, felt a slight swagger return to his walk. 

He crashed down on the last step, and sat for a moment, then smiled 
thinly and got up just before the four young people drew level with 
him. (One of the young men was guffawing, making a show of 
covering his mufflered mouth with a gloved hand.) 

He brushed some snow from the tails of the raincoat, and flicked 
some of it at the young man. They went by and on up the steps, 
laughing. He walked halfway across the bridge - grimacing at the pain 
seeping up from his backside - and heard a voice call; he turned 
around and took a snowball full in the face. 

He caught a glimpse of them laughing as they sprinted away from the 

top of the steps, but he was too busy clearing the snow from his 
nostrils and stinging eyes to see properly. His nose throbbed fiercely, 
but hadn't re-broken. He walked on, passing an older couple walking 
arm in arm, who shook their heads and tutted and said something 
about damned students. He just nodded to them and wiped his face 
with a handkerchief. 

He smiled as he left the bridge, up more steps to an esplanade cut 
under old office buildings. Once, he knew, he would have been 
embarrassed at what had happened, embarrassed at slipping, at 
being seen to slip, at being hit by the snowball after so gullibly turning 
round 
on 
cue, 
and 
at 
the 
elderly 
couple 
witnessing 
his 

embarrassment. Once he might have chased after the youngsters, to 
give them a fright at least, but not now. 

He stopped at a small hot drinks stall set up on the esplanade and 
ordered a mug of soup. He leant against the stall and pulled off one 
glove with his teeth; he held the steaming mug in his hand, feeling 
the warmth. He went to the railings, sat down on a bench and drank 
the soup slowly, in careful sips. The man in the soup stall wiped the 
counter and listened to the radio, smoking a ceramic cigarette on a 
chain round his neck. 

His backside still ached dully from the slip. He smiled at the city 
through the steam rising from the mug. Served him right, he told 
himself. 

When he got back to the hotel they'd left a message. Mr Beychae 
would like to meet him. They would send a car after lunch, unless he 
objected. 

'Well, I suppose.' 

'You're not still being pessimistic, are you?' 

'All I'm saying is, don't get your hopes up.' He lay back on the bed 
looking at the ceiling paintings, talking to Sma via the earring 
transceiver. 'I might just get to meet him, but I doubt I'll have any 
chance to get him out. Probably find he's gone senile and says, "Hey, 
Zakalwe; still working for the Culture against these gas-heads?" In 
which case I want my ass hauled out, all right?' 

'We'll get you out, don't worry about that.' 

'If and when I do get the guy, you still want me to head for the Impren 
Habitats?' 

'Yes. You'll have to use the module; we can't risk bringing 
the Xenophobe in. If you do spring Beychae they'll be on maximum 
alert; we'd never get in and out without being noticed, and that could 
swing the whole Cluster against us for interfering.' 

'So how far's Impren by module?' 

'Two days.' 

He sighed. 'I suppose we can handle that.' 

'You all ready, in case you can do anything today?' 

'Yeah. Capsule's buried in the desert and primed; module's hiding in 
the nearest gas-giant, waiting for the same signal. If they take the 
transceiver from me, how do I get in touch?' 

'Well,' Sma said. 'Much as I'd like to say "I told you so", and displace 
you a scout or knife missile, we can't; their surveillance might just be 
good enough to spot it. Best we can do is put a microsat in orbit and 
just passive-scan; watch, in other words. If it sees you in trouble, 
we'll signal the capsule and the module for you. The alternative is to 
use the phone, would you believe. There's the unlisted Vanguard 
numbers you already have... Zakalwe?' 'Hmm?' 

'You do have those numbers?' 

'Oh, yeah.' 

'Or, we've a downlink tap on Solotol's emergency services; just dial 
three ones and scream "Zakalwe!" at the operator; we'll hear.' 

'I am filled with confidence,' he breathed, shaking his head. 'Don't 
worry, Cheradenine.' 

'Me, worry?' 

'Hello.' 

'Hello there, Mollen.' 

'A pleasant day.' 

'Yes.' 

'Where are we going?' 

'I don't know.' 

'But you're driving.' 

'Yes.' 

'Then you must know where we're going.' 

'Please repeat that?' 

'I said you must know where you're going if you're driving.' 

'I'm sorry.' 

He stood by the side of the car while Mollen held the door open. 

'Well, at least tell me whether it's very far, I may want to tell people 
I won't be back for a while.' 

The large man frowned, the scarred face creasing in strange 
directions, unusual patterns. He hesitated over which button on the 
box to press. Mollen's tongue licked his lips as he concentrated. So 
they had not literally taken his tongue out, after all. 

He assumed whatever was wrong with Mollen was to do with his vocal 
chords. Why the man's superiors hadn't just fitted him with an 
artificial or re-grown set he couldn't deduce, unless they preferred 
their underlings to have a limited set of replies. Certainly they'd have 
a hard time speaking ill of you. 

'Yes.' 

'Yes it's far away?' 

'No.' 

'Make up your mind.' He stood with his hand on the open car door, 
indifferent to his unkindness to the grey-haired man; he rather 
wanted to test his inbuilt vocabulary. 

'I'm sorry.' 

'Is it quite close then, within the city?' 

The scarred face frowned again. Mollen tutted with his lips and 
pressed another set of buttons with an apologetic look. 'Yes.' 

'Within the city?' 

'Perhaps.' 

'Thank you.' 

'Yes.' 

He got in. It was a different car to that he'd been in the night before. 
Mollen got into the separate driver's compartment and belted himself 

in carefully; he pedalled a gear and drew smoothly away. A couple of 
other cars followed immediately behind them, then stopped at the 
entrance to the first street they took outside the hotel, blocking the 
cars of the pursuing media people. 

He was watching the small, high specks of wheeling birds when the 
view started to disappear. At first he thought that black screens were 
rising outside the windows behind and to either side of him. Then he 
saw the bubbles; it was some black liquid which was filling the space 
between the double-layers of glass in the back of the car. He pressed 
the button to talk to Mollen. 'Hey!' he shouted. 

The black liquid was halfway up the screens, gradually rising between 
him and Mollen as well as on the other three sides. 

'Yes?' Mollen said. 

He grabbed a door handle. The door opened; a draft of cold air 
whistled in. The black liquid continued to fill the space between the 
panes of glass. 'What is this?' 

He saw Mollen carefully pressing a button on his voice synthesiser, 
before the liquid blocked the view forward. 

'Do not be alarmed, Mr Staberinde. This is just a precaution, to ensure 
that Mr Beychae's privacy is respected,' said an obviously prepared 
message. 

'Hmm. Okay.' He shrugged; he shut the door and was left in the dark 
until a small light came on. He sat back and did nothing. The 
unexpectedness of the blacking out was perhaps meant to frighten 
him, perhaps designed to see what he would do. 

They drove on; the yellow light of the small bulb gave a stale, warm 
feel to the interior of the car, which although large 

was made to seem small by the absence of an exterior view; he 
turned up the ventilation, sat back again. He kept the dark glasses 
on. 

They turned corners, zoomed and dived, boomed through tunnels and 
over bridges. He guessed he noticed the vehicle's motions more 
because of the lack of any outside reference. 

They echoed through a tunnel for a long time, going downwards in 
what felt like a straight line but could have been a wide spiral, then 
the car stopped. There was a moment of silence, then some indistinct 
noises from outside, perhaps including voices, before they moved 
forward again a short way. The transceiver jabbed delicately at his 
ear-lobe. He pushed the bead further into his ear. 'X-ray radiation,' 
the earring whispered. 

He allowed himself a small smile. He waited for them to open the door 
and demand the transceiver... but the car only moved forward a little 
again. 

The vehicle dropped. Its engine was silent; he presumed they were 
in a large elevator. They stopped, moved forward again, still silent, 
paused, then carried on forward and down. This time the spiral was 
obvious. There was still no noise from the vehicle's engine, so they 
were either being towed, or freewheeling. 

The black liquid drained slowly from the windows as they drew to a 
halt. They were in a wide tunnel under long white strip lights. The 
tunnel extended back until it started to curve, forward until it ended 
before large metal doors. 

Mollen was nowhere to be seen. 

He tested the car door, opened it, stepped out. 

The tunnel was warm, though the air seemed fresh enough. He took 
off the old raincoat. He looked at the metal doors. Set into them was 
a smaller door. There was no handle to pull, so he pushed it, but 
nothing happened. He went back to the car, found the horns, blew 
them. 

The noise crashed into the tunnel, rang in his ears, echoing. He sat 
in the back of the car. 

After a while, the woman came through the small door. She came to 
the car, looked in through the window. 

'Hello.' 

'Good afternoon. Here I am.' 

'Yes. And still wearing your glasses.' She smiled. 'Please; come with 
me,' she said, and walked quickly off. He collected the old raincoat 
and followed. 

The lift stopped. They entered a small hallway like that of a private 
house, set about with pictures and potted plants and finished in 
streaky, smokily smooth stone. A thick carpet smothered their 
footsteps as they went down some steps and onto a large balcony set 
halfway up the wall of a large hall; everywhere else the hall was 
covered with books or tables, and they walked down a staircase with 
books below the wood under their feet, books above the wood over 
their heads. 

She guided him round floor-standing book-stacks, and led him to a 
table with chairs around it. A machine stood on the table-top with a 
small screen set into it and spools scattered about it. 

'Wait here, please.' 

Beychae was in his bedroom, resting. The old man - bald, face deeply 
lined, dressed in robes which hid the modest paunch he'd developed 
since he'd devoted himself to study - blinked as she tapped at and 
opened the door. His eyes were still bright. 

'Tsoldrin. I'm so sorry to disturb you. Come and see who I've brought 

to see you.' 

He came with her along the corridor, and stood at the door while the 
woman pointed to the man standing at the table with the tape-
reading screen on it. 

'Do you know him?' 

Tsoldrin Beychae put on some glasses - he was old-fashioned enough 
to wear his age rather than try to disguise it - and peered at the man. 
The fellow was fairly young, long-legged, dark-haired - the hair swept 
back, held in a pony-tail - and possessed a striking, even handsome 
face, darkened by the sort of beard-growth that never disappears 
through surface shaving alone. The lips were disquieting, looked at 
exclusively; they appeared cruel and arrogant, and only when the eye 
took in the rest of the face as well did this impression seem too 
severe, and - reluctantly, perhaps - the observer had to allow that 
the dark glasses could not completely hide wide eyes and full brows, 
which - open and obvious - made the complete impression not 
disagreeable. 

'I might have met him, I'm not sure,' Beychae said slowly. He thought 
that perhaps he had met the man before; there was something 
worryingly familiar about that face, even behind the shades. 

'He wants to meet you,' the woman said. 'I took the liberty of telling 
him it was mutual. He thinks you might have known his father.' 

'His father?' Beychae said. That might account for it; perhaps the 
fellow bore a resemblance to somebody he'd known, and that 
accounted for the odd, slightly disturbing feeling he was experiencing. 
'Well,' he said, 'Let's see what he has to say for himself, shall we?' 

'Why not?' the woman said. They walked out into the centre of the 
library. Beychae drew himself up; he'd noticed that he was stooping 
more these days, but he was still vain enough to want to greet people 
straight-backed. The man turned round towards them. 'Tsoldrin 
Beychae,' the woman said; 'Mr Staberinde.' 

'An honour, sir,' he said, looking at Beychae with a strange, intense 

expression, his face tight-looking, wary. He took the older man's hand 
in his. 

The woman looked puzzled. The expression on Beychae's old, lined 
face was unreadable. He stood looking at the man, his hand limp in 
the other's grip. 

'Mr... Staberinde,' Beychae said, flatly. 

Beychae turned to the woman in the long black gown. 'Thank you.' 

'My pleasure,' she murmured, and backed away. 

He could see Beychae knew. He turned and walked towards an aisle 
between the book-stacks, and watched Beychae follow him, eyes full 
of wonderment. He stood between the shelved books, and - as though 
it might have been an unconscious movement - tapped his ear as he 
spoke to Beychae. 'I think you may have known my... ancestor. He 
went by a different name.' He took off the dark glasses. 

Beychae looked at him. His expression did not change. 'I think I did,' 
Beychae said, glancing round the space behind him. He indicated a 
table and chairs. 'Please; let's sit down.' 

He replaced the glasses. 

'So what brings you here, Mr Staberinde?' 

He sat down across the table from the older man. 'Curiosity, as far as 
you're concerned. What brought me to Solotol was... just an urge to 
see it. I'm, ah... connected with the Vanguard Foundation; there have 
been some changes at the top there. I don't know if you've heard.' 

The old man shook his head. 'No; I don't keep up with the news, down 
here.' 

'Yes.' He made a show of looking around. 'I guess...' he looked back 
into Beychae's eyes '... I guess it isn't the best place for 
communication, hmm?' 

Beychae opened his mouth, then looked annoyed. He glanced behind 

him. 'Perhaps not,' he agreed. He stood up again. 'Excuse me.' 

He watched the older man go. He forced himself to sit where he was. 

He looked round the library. So many old books; they smelled. So 
many words set down, so many lives spent scribbling, so many eyes 
dimmed by reading. He wondered that people bothered as much as 
they did. 

'Now?' he heard the woman say. 

'Why not?' 

He turned in the seat to watch Beychae and the woman emerge from 
the stacks. 'Well, Mr Beychae,' the woman said. 'It might be 
awkward...' 

'Why? Have the elevators stopped working?' 

'No, but...' 

'Then what's to stop us? Let's go; I haven't seen the surface for too 
long.' 

'Ah. Well, all right... I'll make the arrangements.' She smiled 
uncertainly, then walked away. 

'Well, 
Z... 
Staberinde,' 
Beychae 
sat 
down 
again, 
smiling 

apologetically for an instant. 'We'll take a little trip to the surface, 
shall we?' 

'Yeah; why not?' he said, carefully not looking too enthusiastic. 'You 
keeping well, Mr Beychae? I heard you retired.' 

They talked generally for a few minutes, then a young blonde woman 
walked out of the stacks, arms loaded with books. She blinked hard 
when she saw him, then came over behind Beychae, who looked up 
and smiled at her. 'Ah; my dear; this is Mr... Staberinde.' Beychae 
smiled diffidently at him. 'My assistant, Ms Ubrel Shiol.' 

'Delighted,' he nodded. 

Shit, he thought. 

Ms Shiol put the books down on the table and put her hand on 
Beychae's shoulder. The old man put his own thin fingers on top of 
hers. 

'I hear we might be taking a trip up to the city,' the woman said. She 
looked down at the old man, smoothed her plain smock dress with 
her other hand. 'This is very sudden.' 

'Yes,' Beychae agreed. He smiled up at her. 'You'll find that old men 
still retain the ability to surprise, on occasion.' 

'It'll be cold,' the woman said, drawing away. 'I'll fetch your warm 
clothes.' 

Beychae watched her go. 'Wonderful girl,' he said. 'Don't know what 
I'd do without her.' 

'Indeed,' he replied. You may have to learn, he thought. 

They left the tunnel for the bright light of day; snow covered a broad 
yard with tall wire gates before them. Security men watched the car 
go past as the gates opened. The car set off down a side road for the 
nearest turnpike, then stopped at the junction. 

'Is there a fair on anywhere?' Beychae asked. 'I always enjoyed the 
noise and bustle of fairs.' 

He recalled there was some sort of travelling circus camped in a 
meadow down near the river Lotol. He suggested they went there. 

Mollen turned the car onto the broad, almost empty boulevard. 

They all looked at him. 

He'd put his arm back on the seat, behind Beychae and Urbrel Shiol, 
and brushed Shiol's hair, dislodging a clasp Shiol had secured her hair 
with. He laughed, and retrieved the clasp from the shelf under the 
car's rear window. The manoeuvre had given him the chance to look 
back. 

There was a large half-track vehicle following them. 'Flowers, Mr 
Staberinde?' the woman in the black robe said. 'I'd like to buy some 
flowers,' he said, smiling first at her, then at Shiol. He clapped his 
hands. 'Why not? To the Flower Market, Mollen!' He sat back, smiling 
beatifically. Then he sat forward, all apologetic. 'If that's all right,' he 
said to the woman. 

She smiled. 'Of course. Mollen; you heard.' The car turned down 
another road. 

In the Flower Market, amongst the packed and flurried stalls, he 
bought flowers and presented them to the woman and to Ubrel Shiol. 
'There's the fair!' he said, pointing over the river, where the tents and 
holograms of the fair sparkled and rotated. 

As he'd hoped, they took the Flower Market Ferry. It was a tiny, one-
vehicle platform. He looked back at the half-track waiting on the other 
side. 

The far bank. They drove towards the fair; Beychae chattered, 
remembering fairs from his youth for Ubrel Shiol. 

'Thank you for my flowers, Mr Staberinde,' the woman sitting across 
from him said, putting them to her face and breathing in their scent. 

'My pleasure,' he said, then leant across Shiol to tap Beychae on the 
arm, to attract his attention to a piece of fairground equipment 
wheeling into the sky over some nearby roofs. The car drew to a stop 
at a light-controlled junction. 

He reached across Shiol again, pulled down a zip before she realised 
what was happening, and extracted the gun he'd already felt there. 
He looked at it and started to laugh, as though the whole thing was 
a silly mistake, then turned it and fired at the glass screen behind 
Mollen's head. 

The glass shattered. He was already kicking through it, launching 
himself from the seat and lancing forward with one leg. His foot 
crashed through the disintegrating glass and connected with Mollen's 
head. 

The car leapt forward, then stalled. Mollen slumped. The instant of 
stunned silence lasted just long enough for him to shout, 
'Capsule; here!' 

The woman across from him moved; her hand dropped the flowers 
and went to her waist and a fold in the robe. He punched her in the 
jaw, sending her head cracking back against the still intact part of the 
glass screen behind her. He swivelled, crouched near the door, as the 
woman slid unconscious to the floor beside him and the flowers spilled 
across the footwell. He looked back at Beychae and Shiol. Both their 
mouths were open. 'Change of plan,' he said, taking off the dark 
glasses and throwing them onto the floor. 

He dragged them both out. Shiol was screaming. He threw her 
against the rear of the car. 

Beychae found his voice; 'Zakalwe, what the hell do you...' 

'She had this, Tsoldrin!' he yelled back, flourishing the gun. 

Ubrel Shiol used the second or so that the gun wasn't pointing at her 
to stab a kick at his head. He dodged it, let the woman spin, then 
cracked her, open handed, across the neck. She crumpled. The 
flowers he had given her rolled under the car. 

'Ubrel!' Beychae shrieked, falling to the woman's side. 'Zakalwe! 
What have you done to...' 

'Tsoldrin...' he began. The driver's door burst open and Mollen 
launched himself at him. They tumbled across the road into the 
gutter; the gun went spinning. 

He found himself wedged against the kerb, Mollen above him, 
bunching his lapels in one hand, the other arm swinging up, the voice 
machine swinging out on a lanyard as the huge, scarred fist plunged 
downwards. 

He feinted, then flung himself in the other direction. He jumped up 
as Mollen's fist hit the kerb stones. 

'Hello,' said Mollen's voice box as it clattered into the road surface. 

He tried to steady, aiming a kick at Mollen's head, but he was off-
balance. Mollen caught his foot with his good hand. He wriggled out 
of the grip, but only by turning away. 

'Pleased to meet you,' the box said, swinging again as Mollen rose, 
shaking his head. 

He aimed another kick at Mollen's head. 'What do you require?' The 
machine said, as Mollen dodged the kick and threw himself forwards. 
He dived, skidded across the concrete road surface, rolled and stood. 

Mollen faced him; his neck was bloody. He staggered, then seemed 
to remember something, and dug inside his tunic. 

'I am here to help you,' said the voice box. 

He flung himself forward, smashing a fist into Mollen's head as the 
big man turned, loosing a small gun from his tunic. He was too far 
away to grab it, so he pivoted and swung one foot, connecting with 
the gun in the man's fist and forcing his hand up. The grey-haired 
man staggered back, looking pained and rubbing his wrist. 

'My name is Mollen. I cannot speak.' 

He'd hoped the kick might have dislodged the gun from Mollen's grip 
but it didn't. Then he realised that directly behind him were Beychae 
and the unconscious Shiol; he stood for a second while Mollen aimed 
the gun at him, waggling his body one way then the other, so that 
Mollen, shaking his head again, let his hand waver on the gun. 

'Pleased to meet you.' 

He dived at Mollen's legs. Collided satisfactorily. 

'No, thank you.' They crashed into the kerb-side. 'Excuse me...' 

He brought his fist up, tried to whack the man across the head again. 

'Could you tell me where this is?' 

But Mollen rolled. His punch sailed through air. Mollen shifted and 
almost head-butted him. He had to duck, hitting his head against the 
kerb-stones. 

'Yes, please.' 

He splayed his fingers as his head rang with light, flung them out 
where he thought Mollen's eyes ought to be, and felt something 
connect liquidly. Mollen screamed. 

'I cannot reply to that.' 

He bounced up using hands and feet, kicking out at Mollen as he did 
so. 

'Thank you.' His foot slammed into Mollen's head. 'Would you repeat 
that, please?' 

Mollen rolled slowly into the gutter and lay still. 'What time is it?' 
What time is it? What time is it?' 

He stood up shakily on the sidewalk. 

'My name is Mollen. Can I help you? You are not allowed in here. This 
is private property. Where do you think you are going? Stop or I 

shoot. Money is no object. We have powerful friends. Could you direct 
me to the nearest telephone? I'll fuck you harder all right, bitch; feel 
this.' 

He smashed Mollen's voice machine with one boot. 

'Graap! No user-serviceable components ins -' 

Another stamp silenced it. 

He looked up at Beychae, who was crouched by the side of the car, 
Ubrel Shiol's head cradled in his lap. 

'Zakalwe! You madman!' Beychae screeched. 

He dusted himself down, looked back in the direction of the hotel. 
'Tsoldrin,' he said calmly. 'This is an emergency.' 

'What have you done?' Beychae - eyes wide, face aghast - screamed 
at him, glancing from Shiol's inert form to Mollen's, then taking a 
detour via the slumped feet of the woman lying unconscious in the 
car, flowers scattered around her feet, before returning to Shiol's 
already bruised neck. 

He looked to the sky. He saw a speck. Relieved, he turned back to 
Beychae. 'They were about to kill you,' he told him. 'I was sent to 
stop them. We have about...' 

There was a noise beyond the buildings shielding the river and the 
Flower Market; a bang and a whoosh. They both looked to the sky; 
the enlarging speck that was the capsule blossomed with light on a 
stalk that led back behind the buildings towards the Flower Market. 
The capsule sailed through the resulting incandescent bloom, seemed 
to shake itself, then a lance of light darted from it back down the 
same line, as though in reply. 

The sky above the Flower Market flared; the road underneath them 
bounced, and a terrific crack of sound burst over the roadway and 
rolled back from cliffs further up the slope city. 

'We had about a minute,' he said, breathless, 'before we had to leave.' 

The capsule swooped from the sky, a four-metre cylinder of darkness 
impacting on the road surface. Its hatches opened. He went to it and 
took out a very large gun. He touched a couple of controls. 'Now we 
have no time.' 

'Zakalwe!' Beychae said, voice suddenly controlled. 'Are you insane?' 

A tearing, screaming noise came above the city, from up-canyon. 
They both looked up at a slim shape streaking towards them, bellying 
down through the air. 

He spat into the gutter. He raised the plasma rifle, sighted at the fast 
approaching dot, and fired. 

A bolt of light leapt from gun to sky; the aircraft burst smoke, and 
veered away on a helix of debris, crashing somewhere down-canyon 
in a scream that became thunder, echoes rolling back from all over 
the city. 

He looked back at the old man. 

'What was the question again?' 

The black fabric of the tent roof was above him and yet he could see 
through it to the sky, which was the shaded blue of day, and bright, 
but black as well because he could see through that easy blueness, 
and beyond was a darkness more profound than that inside the tent, 
a darkness where the scattered suns burned, tiny firefly lights in the 
cold black empty deserts of the night. 

A dark crop of stars reached out towards him, picked him up softly 
between vast fingers like some delicate ripe fruit. In that immense 
enfolding he felt deliriously sane, and understood then that in an 
instant - any instant, and with only the most minute of efforts - he 
might understand everything, but did not desire to. He felt as though 
some awesome galaxy-quaking machinery, always hidden under the 
surface of the universe, had somehow connected itself to him, and 

dusted him with its power. 

He sat in a tent. His legs were crossed, his eyes were closed. He had 
sat like this for days now. He wore a loose-fitting robe, like the nomad 
people. His uniform lay neatly folded a metre behind him. His hair 
was short; stubble grew on his face, and there was a sheen of sweat 
on his skin. It seemed to him that sometimes he was outside of 
himself, looking back at his body, sitting there on the cushions under 
the dark fabric roof. His face grew darker because the black hairs 
grew through the skin, yet looked lighter because the film of sweat 
on it glistened in the lights of the lamps and the smoke-hole in the 
roof. This adversarial symbiosis, competition creating stasis, amused 
him. He would rejoin his body, or set off further afield, with a sense 
of Tightness at the core of things. 

The tent was dark inside, filled with a thick and heavy atmosphere at 
once stale and sweet; heavy with perfume, smoky with incense. All 
was sweet and rich and highly decorated; the hanging rugs were thick 
and picked out with many colours and precious metal thread; the 
carpet was piled like a field of golden grain, and the plump, scented 
cushions and languorously thick coverings made a fabulously 
patterned landscape under the dark flute of roof. Small censers 
smoked lazily; little night-heaters sat extinguished, dream-leaf 
holders and crystal chalices, jewelled boxes and clasped books were 
strewn across the undulating fabric landscape like glittering temples 
on the plains. 

Lies. The tent was bare and he sat on a sack stuffed with straw. 

The girl watched him move. It was a hypnotic movement, barely 
noticeable at first, but once you had seen it, once the eye grew 
accustomed to it, it became very obvious and quite fascinating. He 
moved from the waist, round and round, neither slowly nor quickly, 
his head describing a flattened circle. It reminded the girl of the way 
that, sometimes, rising smoke would begin to twist as it rose towards 
the hole in the roof of a tent. The man's eyes seemed to move in 
compensation for this subtle, ceaseless motion, shifting tinily behind 
the brown-pink lids. 

The tent was just big enough for the girl to stand up in. It was pitched 

at a crossroads in the desert, where two tracks crossed the sea of 
sand. It would have been a town or even a city long since, but the 
nearest water was three days' ride away. The tent had been here for 
four days, and might be here another two or three, depending on how 
long the man stayed in the dream-leaf sleep. She took up a pitcher 
from a small tray and filled a cup with water. She went over to the 
man, and put the cup to his lips, holding one hand under his chin as 
she carefully tipped the cup. 

The man drank, still moving. He turned his face away after he'd drunk 
half the water in the cup. She took a cloth and dabbed at his face, 
removing a little of the sweat. 

Chosen, he said to himself. Chosen, Chosen, Chosen. A long way to 
a strange place. Taking the Chosen one through the scorching dust 
and the mad tribes of the badlands to the lush meadows and gleaming 
spires of the Perfumed Palace on the cliff. Now he reaped a little 
reward. 

The tent sits between the trade routes, outside turned in for the 
season, and in the tent sits a man, a soldier, back from uncounted 
wars, scarred and seared and broken and healed and broken and 
healed and repaired and made good again... and for once he was 
unwary, guard down, committing his mind to a wild, affecting drug, 
and his body to the care and protection of a young girl. 

The girl, whose name he did not know, brought water to his lips and 
a cool cloth to his brow. He remembered a fever, a hundred and more 
years ago, a thousand and more years away, and the hands of 
another girl, cool and tender, soothing and smoothing. He heard the 
lawn birds keen from the grounds outside the great house that lay in 
the estate cradled in the broad river's bend; an oxbow of calm in the 
livid landscape of his memories. 

Torpor-heavy, the drug flowed through him, winding and unwinding, 
a current of random ordering. (He remembered a stone beach on the 
river's banks, where the ever-flowing water had swept silt, sand, 
gravel, pebbles, stones and boulders in a linear progression of size 
and weight, ordering - through its steady, liquid weight - the 
elemental stone in a curve, like something distributed on a graph.) 

The girl watched and waited, calm that the stranger had taken to the 
drug like one of their own, and was himself calm under its influence. 
She hoped this was, as he seemed to be, an exceptional man, and 
not an ordinary one, for that would imply their nomad kind was not 
the uniquely strong race they believed they were. 

She had feared the power of the drug would be too much for him, 
and that he would shatter like a red-glowing cooking pot dropped into 
water, the way she had heard other strangers had, vainly thinking 
the dream-leaf was just another dalliance in their self-indulgent lives. 
But he had not fought it. For one who was a soldier, used to fighting, 
he had displayed a rare insight in just giving in without a struggle, 
and accepting the prescriptions of the drug. She admired this in an 
outsider. She doubted the conquerors would be so pliably strong. 
Even some of their own young men - often the most impressive, in 
every other way - could not accept the crushing gifts the dream-leaf 
brought, and yelped and gibbered through an abbreviated nightmare, 
mewling for their mother's breast, pissing and shitting and crying and 
screaming their most shaming fears to the desert winds. The drug 
was rarely fatal, in the supervised quantities that had become ritual, 
but the after-effects could be; more than one young brave had chosen 
the blade in the belly to the disgrace of knowing a leaf had been 
stronger than he. 

It was, she reflected, a pity that this man was not one of their own 
kind; he might have made a good husband, and sired many strong 
sons and cunning daughters. Many marriages were made in dream-
leaf tents, and she had at first taken it as an insult that she had been 
asked to shepherd the stranger through his leaf-days, until she'd 
been convinced it was an honour, that he had done their people a 
great service, and she would be allowed her pick of the tribe's young 
novitiates, when their testing time came. 

And, when he took the dream-leaf, he had insisted on the stage that 
they normally reserved for their elder soldiers and matriarchs; no 
child's dose for him. She watched him circle, flexing continually from 
the waist, as though he sought to stir something in his brain. 

By the roads, by the crossed signs of those single lines, worn by 
trade, commerce and passing knowledge; thin trails in the dust, pale 

marks in the brown page of the desert. The tent stood in Summer, 
when the white side was turned out and the black side in. In Winter 
it was outside-in. 

He imagined that he felt his brain revolve inside his skull. 

In the white tent that was black, and both at once, by the crossroads 
on the desert, a white/black impermanence like a fallen leaf before 
the winds blow, trembling in the breeze beneath the poised wave that 
was the stone circumference of mountains, capped by snow and ice 
like foam frozen in the high thin air. 

He swept away, leaving the tent, so that it fell away beneath him, 
became a speck beside the thin trails in the dust, and the mountains 
swam past, white capping ochre, and the trails and the tent 
disappeared, and the mountains shrank, and the glaciers and the 
starveling snows of summer became white claws on the rock, and the 
curved edge pressed in, compressing the view, so that the globe 
beneath became a coloured boulder, stone, pebble, gravel, grain of 
sand, speck of silt-dust, then was lost in the sandstorm whirl of the 
great revolving lens that was the home of all of them, which itself 
became a fleck on a thin bubble surrounding emptiness, skeined to 
its lonely siblings by the fabric that was only a slimly different 
articulation of nothingness. 

More specks. All vanished. Darkness reigned. 

He was still there. 

Beneath it all, he'd been told, was more. All you had to do, Sma said, 
was think in seven dimensions and see the whole universe as a line 
on the surface of a torus, starting at a point, becoming a circle as it 
was born, then expanding, moving up the inside of the torus, over 
the top, to the outside, then relapsing, falling back in, shrinking. 
Others had gone before it, others came after it (the greater/smaller 
spheres outside of/inside their own universe, seen in four 
dimensions). Different time-scales lived outside and inside the torus; 
some universes expanding forever, others living less than a blink of 
an eye. 

But it was too much. It all meant too much to matter. He had to 
concentrate on what he knew and what he was and what he had 
become, for the moment at least. 

He found a sun, a planet, out of all that existence, and fell towards 
it, knowing this was the place, the font of all his dreams and 
memories. 

He searched for meaning, found ashes. Where does it hurt? Well, 
just here, actually. A wrecked summerhouse, smashed and burned. 
No sign of a chair. 

Sometimes, like now, the banality of it all quite took his breath away. 
He stopped and checked, for there were drugs that did that; took 
your breath away. He was still breathing. Probably his body was 
already set up to ensure that anyway, but the Culture - Chaos bless 
it twice - had set up a further program in him, to make certain. 
Cheating, as far as these people were concerned (he saw the girl in 
front of him, and watched her, through mostly-closed eyes, then 
closed again), but that was just too bad; he'd done something for 
them, little though they really knew it, and now they could do 
something for him. 

But the throne, Sma had said once, is the ultimate symbol for many 
cultures. To sit, in splendour, is the highest articulation of power. The 
rest come to you; lower, often bowing, frequently backing off, 
sometimes prostrate (though that is always a bad sign, said the 
Culture's blessed statistics), and to sit, to be made less animal by 
that evolutionarily uncalled-for posture, signified the ability to use. 

There were some small civilisations - barely more than tribes, Sma 
had said - where they slept sitting, in special sleep chairs, because 
they believed that to lie down was to die (did they not always find the 
dead lying down?). 

Zakalwe (was that really his name? It suddenly sounded strange and 
alien in his remembrance), Zakalwe, Sma said, I visited a place (how 
had they come to this? What had made him mention anything about 
this? Had he been drunk? Guard down again? Probably trying to 
seduce Sma, but ended up under the table again), Zakalwe I once 

visited a place where they killed people by putting them in a chair. 
Not torture - that was common enough; beds and chairs were very 
much the par when it came to getting people helpless and confined, 
to inflict pain upon them - but actually set it up to kill them while they 
sat. They - get this - they either gassed them or they passed very 
high electric currents through them. A pellet dropped into a container 
beneath the seat, like some obscene image of a commode, producing 
a fatal gas; or a cap over their head, and their hands dipped in some 
conducting fluid, to fry their brains. 

You want to know the punch-line? Yeah, Sma, give us the punch-line. 
This same state had a law that forbade - and I quote - 'cruel and 
unusual punishments!' Can you believe that? 

He circled around the planet, so far away. 

Then fell towards it, through the air to the ground. 

He found the shell of the mansion, like a forgotten skull; he found the 
wrecked summerhouse, like a shattered skull; he found the stone 
boat, like a deserted image of a skull. Fake. It was never floating. 

He saw another boat; a ship; a hundred thousand tonnes of 
destruction, sitting in its own dry image of desuetude, its layers 
bristling outwards. Primary, secondary, tertiary, anti-aircraft, small... 

He circled, then tried to approach, zeroing in... 

But there were too many layers, and they defeated him. 

He was thrown out again, and had to circle the planet once more, and 
as he did so, saw the Chair, and saw the Chairmaker - not the one 
he'd thought of, before; the other Chairmaker, the real one, and one 
that he had to keep returning to, through all the memories - in all his 
ghastly glory. 

But some things were too much. 

Some things were too much to bear. 

Damn people. Damn others. Damn there being other people. 

Back to the girl. (Why did there have to be other people?) 

Yes she still had little experience as a guider-through, but as a 
stranger the man had been given to her, because they thought she 
was the best of the untried. But she would show them. Perhaps, 
through this, they were already considering her for the Matriarchs. 

She would lead them one day. She felt this in her bones. The same 
bones that ached when she saw a child fall; the same ache in her 
cupped child-bones that came when she saw someone fall hard to the 
ground, would be her guide through the politics and tribulations of 
the tribe. She would prevail. Like this man here in front of her, but 
different. She had that inner strength, too. She would lead her 
people; it was like a child inside her, growing, that certainty. She 
would stir her people against the conquerors; she would show their 
brief hegemony for what it was; a side-track on the desert trail that 
was their destiny. The people beyond the plains, in their corrupt 
perfumed palace on the cliff, would fall beneath them. The power and 
thought of the women, and the power and bravery of their men - 
desert thorns - would crush the decadent petal-people of the cliffs. 
The sands would be theirs again. Temples would be carved in her 
name. 

Lies. The girl was young and knew nothing of the tribes' thoughts or 
destiny. She was a scrap thrown to him, to ease his passage into what 
they imagined would be his death-dream. Her vanquished people's 
fate scarcely mattered to her; they had replaced that ancient heritage 
with thoughts of prestige and gadgets. 

Let her dream. He relaxed into the calm frenzy of the drug. 

There was a nexus where the vanishing-point of memory met the 
time-light from another place, and he was not yet sure he had out-
run it. 

He tried to see the great house again, but it was obscured by smoke 
and star-shell. He looked to the great battleship, confined within its 
dry-land dock, but it would not grow any larger. It was a capital ship, 
no more, no less, and he could not access the depths of meaning that 
it really held for him. 

All he'd done was take the Chosen across the wastes to the Palace. 
Why had they wanted the Chosen to get to the court? It seemed 
absurd. The Culture did not believe in such supernatural, 
superstitious nonsense. But the Culture required him to make sure 
the Chosen got to the Court, despite all sorts of nastiness getting in 
his way. 

To perpetuate a corrupt line. To carry on a reign of stupidness. 

Well, they had their own reasons. You took the money and ran. 
Except there was no money, as such. What was a boy to do? 

Believe. Though they scorned belief. Do. Act, though they were wary 
of action. He was their whipper boy, he realised. A borrowed hero. 
They thought little enough of heroes for this to be a boost to one's 
own self-belief. 

Come with us, do these things, that you would like to do anyway, 
except more so, and we will give you what you could never really 
have anywhere or anytime else; real proof that you are doing the 
right thing; that not only are you having immense fun, it is also for 
the common good. So enjoy. 

And he did, and he enjoyed, though he was not always sure it was 
for the right reasons. But that did not matter to them. 

The Chosen to the Palace. 

He stood back from his life and was not ashamed. All he'd ever done 
was because there was something to be done. You used those 
weapons, whatever they might happen to be. Given a goal, or having 
thought up a goal, you had to aim for it, no matter what stood in your 
way. Even the Culture recognised that. They couched it in terms of 
what could be done at a specific time and level of technological 
capability, but they recognised that all was relative, everything was 
in flux... 

He tried, all of a sudden - hoping to take it by surprise - to sweep and 
crash back down to that place with the war-shelled mansion and the 
burned-out summerhouse and the foundering boat made of stone... 

but the memory would not bear the weight of it, and he was flung out 
again, swirled away, cast into the nothingness, consigned to the 
oblivion of the deliberately not-thought thoughts. 

The tent stood at the focus of the desert trails. White without, black 
within, it seemed to image his crossroad imaginings. 

Hey hey hey. It's only a dream. 

Except it wasn't a dream, and he was in complete control, and if he 
opened his eyes he could see the girl sitting there in front of him, 
staring at him, wondering, and there was never any doubt about who 
was where and what was when, and in a way that was the worst thing 
about this drug; that it let you go anywhere, anytime - as not a few 
drugs did - but it still let you connect back to reality whenever you 
really wanted to. 

Cruel, he thought. 

The Culture might just have it right after all; being able to call up 
almost any drug or combinations of drugs seemed suddenly less 
indulgent and decadent than he'd imagined, before. 

The girl, he saw, in one awful instant, would do great things. She 
would be famous and important, and the tribe around her would do 
great - and terrible - things, and it would all be for nothing, because 
whatever terrible train of events he had set in motion by taking the 
Chosen to the Palace, this tribe would not survive; they were the 
dead. Their mark upon the desert of life was already being obscured, 
sands blowing over, grain by grain by grain... He had already helped 
to scuff it out, no matter that they hadn't realised this yet. They 
would, after he was gone. The Culture would take him away from 
here, and put him down somewhere else, and this adventure would 
collapse with the rest into meaninglessness, and nothing very much 
would be left, as he went on to do roughly the same thing somewhere 
else. 

Actually, he could happily have killed the Chosen, because the boy 
was a fool, and he had seldom been in the company of anybody quite 
so stupid. The youth was a cretin, and didn't even realise that he was. 

He could think of no more disastrous combination. 

He swept back towards the planet he had once abandoned. 

Came in so far, was forced away. He tried again, but without any real 
self-belief. 

Was rejected. Well, he'd expected no more. 

The Chairmaker was not the person who made the chair, he thought, 
immediately lucid. It was and was not him. There are no Gods, we 
are told, so I must make my own salvation. 

His eyes were already closed, but he closed them again. 

He swayed in a circle, unknowing. 

Lies; he wept and screamed, fell at the scornful feet of the girl. 

Lies; he circled on. 

Lies; he fell to the girl, hands out, grasping for a mother that was not 
there. 

Lies. 

Lies. 

Lies; he circled on, tracing his own private symbol in the air between 
the crown of his head and the day-bright hole that was the tent's 
smoke-hole. 

He sank towards the planet again, but the girl in the black/white tent 
reached out and wiped his brow and, in that tiny movement, seemed 
to wipe his being away... 

(Lies.) 

... It was a long time later he found out he'd only taken the Chosen 
to the Palace because the brat was to be the last of the line. Not 
merely stupid, but also impotent, the Chosen fathered no strong sons 
and no cunning daughters (as the Culture had known all along), and 
the fractious desert tribes swept in a decade later led by a Matriarch 
who had guided most of the warriors under her command through 
the dream-leaf time, and had seen one stronger and stranger than all 
of them suffer its effects and come through unscathed but still 
unfulfilled, and known through that very experience that there was 
more to their desert existence than had been guessed at by the myths 
and elders of her nomad tribe. 

He loved the plasma rifle. He was an artist with it; he could paint 
pictures of destruction, compose symphonies of demolition, write 
elegies of annihilation, using that weapon. 

He stood, thinking about it, while the wind moved dead leaves round 
his feet and the ancient stones faced into the wind. 

They hadn't made it off the planet. The capsule had been attacked 
by... something. He couldn't tell from the damage whether it had 
been a beam weapon or some sort of warhead going off nearby. 
Whatever it had been, it had disabled them. Clamped to the outside 
of the capsule, he'd been lucky to be on the side that shielded him 
from whatever had hit it. Had he been on the other side, facing the 
beam or the warhead, he'd be dead. 

They must have been hit by some crude effector weapon as well, 
because the plasma rifle seemed to have fused. It had been cradled 
between his suit and the capsule skin and couldn't have been affected 
by whatever wrecked the capsule itself, but the weapon had smoked 
and got hot, and when they'd finally landed - Beychae shaken but 

unhurt - and opened up the gun's inspection panels, it was to find a 
melted, still-warm mess inside. 

Maybe if he'd taken just a little less time to convince Beychae; maybe 
if he'd just knocked the old guy out and left the talking for later. He'd 
taken too much time, given them too much time. Seconds counted. 
Dammit, milliseconds, nanoseconds counted. Too much time. 

'Insane,' Beychae repeated, cradling Ubrel Shiol's head in his hands. 
Saliva trickled from the woman's mouth. 'You're insane, Zakalwe; 
insane.' He started to cry. 

He went over to the old man, knelt on one knee, holding the gun he'd 
taken from Shiol. 'Tsoldrin; what do you think she had this for?' He 
put his hand on the old man's shoulder. 'Didn't you see the way she 
moved when she tried to kick me? Tsoldrin; librarians... research 
assistants... they just don't move like that.' He reached out and 
patted the unconscious woman's collar flat and tidy again. 'She was 
one of your jailers, Tsoldrin; she would probably have been you 
executioner.' He reached under the car, pulled out the bouquet of 
flowers, and placed them gently under her blonde head, removing 
Beychae's hands. 

'Tsoldrin,' he said. 'We have to go. She'll be all right.' He arranged 
Shiol's arms in a less awkward position. She was already on her side, 
so she wouldn't choke. He reached carefully under Beychae's arms 
and slowly drew the old man up to his feet. Ubrel Shiol's eyes flickered 
open; she saw the two men in front of her; she muttered something, 
and one hand went to the back of her neck. She started to roll over, 
unbalanced in her grogginess; the hand that had gone to her neck 
came away clutching a tiny cylinder like a pen; he felt Beychae stiffen 

as the girl looked up and, as she fell forward, tried to point the little 
laser at Beychae's head. 

Beychae looked into her dark, half-unfocused eyes, over the top of 
the pen laser, and felt a sort of appalled disconnectedness. The girl 
tried hard to steady herself, aiming at him. Not Zakalwe, he thought; 
at me. Me! 

'Ubrel...' he began. 

The girl fell back in a dead faint. 

Beychae stared down at her body lying limp on the road. Then he 
heard somebody saying his name and tugging his arm. 

'Tsoldrin... Tsoldrin... Come on, Tsoldrin.' 

'Zakalwe; she was aiming at me, not you!' 

'I know, Tsoldrin.' 

'She was aiming at me!' 

'I know. Come on; here's the capsule.' 

'At me...' 

'I know, I know. Get in here.' 

The capsule was a hundred metres away, down in the trees. 

He picked up the plasma rifle for the fifth or sixth time and inspected 
it. 

It made him want to cry; it was such a beautiful weapon. Every time 
he picked it up he half hoped that it would be all right, that the Culture 
had fitted it with some self-repair facility without telling him, that the 
damage would be no more... 

The wind blew; the leaves scattered. He shook his head, exasperated. 
Beychae, sitting in his thickly padded trousers and long jacket, turned 
to look at him. 

'Broken?' the old man asked. 

'Broken,' he said. His face took on an expression of annoyance; he 
gripped the weapon round the muzzle with both hands and swung it 
round his head, then let it go and sent it whirling away into the trees 
below; it disappeared in a flurry of dislodged leaves. 

He sat down beside Beychae. 

Plasma rifle gone, just a pistol left; only one suit; probably no way he 
could use the suit's AG without giving away their position; capsule 
wrecked; module nowhere to be seen; no word from the terminal 
earring or the suit itself... it was a sorry mess. He checked the suit 
for whatever broadcast signals it was picking up; the wrist screen 
displayed some news headlines programme; nothing about Solotol 
was mentioned. A few of the Cluster's brush-fire wars were. 

Beychae looked at the small screen too. 'Can you tell from that 
whether they are looking for us?' he asked. 

'Only if we see it on the news. Military stuff will be tight-beamed; slim 
chance we'll pick up a transmission.' He looked at the clouds. 'We'll 
probably find out more directly, soon enough.' 

'Hmm,' Beychae said. He frowned at the flagstones, then said, 'I think 
I might know where this place is, Zakalwe.' 

'Yeah?' he said, unenthusiastically. He put his elbows on his knees, 
his chin in his hands, and looked out over the wooded plains to the 
low hills on the horizon. 

Beychae nodded. 'I've been thinking about it. I believe this is the 
Srometren Observatory, in Deshal Forest.' 

'How far is that from Solotol?' 

'Oh; different continent. Good two thousand kilometres.' 

'Same latitude,' he said glumly, looking up at the chill grey skies. 

'Approximately, if this is the place I think it is.' 

'Who's in charge here?' he asked. 'Whose jurisdiction? Same lot as in 
Solotol; the Humanists?' 

'The same.' Beychae said, and got up, brushing the seat of his pants 
and looking around the flattened hill-top at the curious stone 
instruments that covered its flagstones. 'Srometren Observatory!' he 
said. 'How ironic we should happen to come down here, on our way 
to the stars!' 

'Probably not just chance,' he said, picking up a twig and brushing a 
few random shapes in the dust at his feet. 'This place famous?' 

'Of course,' Beychae said. 'It was the centre of astronomical research 
for the old Vrehid Empire for five hundred years.' 

'On any tourist routes?' 

'Certainly.' 

'Then it probably has a beacon nearby, to guide aircraft in. Capsule 
may have made for it when it knew it was crippled. Makes us easier 
to find.' He gazed up at the sky. 'For everybody, unfortunately.' He 
shook his head, went back to scratching in the dust with the twig. 

'What happens now?' Beychae said. 

He shrugged. 'We wait and see who turns up. I can't get any of the 
communication gear to work, so we don't know if the Culture knows 
all that's happened or not... for all I know the Module's still coming 
for us, or a whole Culture starship's on its way, or - probably more 
likely - your pals from Solotol...' He shrugged, threw down the twig 
and sat back against the stonework behind him, glancing skyward. 
They might be watching us right now.' 

Beychae looked up too. 'Through the clouds?' 

'Through the clouds.' 

'Shouldn't you be hiding, then? Running off through the woods?' 

'Maybe,' he said. 

Beychae stood looking down at the other man. 'Where were you 
thinking of taking me, if we'd got away?' 

'The Impren System. There are space Habitats there,' he said. 
'They're neutral, or at least not as pro-war as this place.' 

'Do your... superiors really think war is so close, Zakalwe?' 

'Yes,' he sighed. He already had the suit's face-plate hinged up; now, 
with another look at the sky, he took the whole helmet off. He put 
one hand up over his forehead and through his drawn-back hair, then 
reached back and took the pony-tail out of its little ring, shaking his 
long black hair down. 'It might take ten days, might take a hundred, 
but it's coming.' He smiled thinly at Beychae. 'For the same reasons 
as last time.' 

'I thought we'd won the ecological argument against terra-forming,' 
said Beychae. 

'We did, but times change; people change, generations change. We 
won the battles for the acknowledgement of machine sentience, but 
by all accounts the issue was fudged after that. Now people are 
saying, yes, they're sentient, but it's only human sentience 
that counts. Plus, people never need too much of an excuse to see 

other species as inferior.' 

Beychae was silent for a while, then said, 'Zakalwe, has it ever 
occurred to you that in all these things the Culture may not be as 
disinterested as you imagine, and it claims?' 

'No, it never occurred to me,' he said, though Beychae got the 
impression the man hadn't really thought first before answering. 

'They want other people to be like them, Cheradenine. They don't 
terraform, so they don't want others to either. There are arguments 
for it as well, you know; increasing species diversity often seems 
more important to people than preserving a wilderness, even without 
the provision of extra living space. The Culture believes profoundly in 
machine sentience, so it thinks everybody ought to, but I think it also 
believes every civilisation should be run by its machines. Fewer 
people want that. The issue of cross-species tolerance is, I'll grant, of 
a different nature, but even there the Culture can sometimes appear 
to be insistent that deliberate inter-mixing is not just permissible but 
desirable; almost a duty. Again, who is to say that is correct?' 

'So you should have a war to... what? Clear the air?' He inspected the 
suit helmet. 

'No, Cheradenine, I'm just trying to suggest to you that the Culture 
may not be as objective as it thinks it is, and, that being the case, its 
estimation concerning the likelihood of war may be equally 
untrustworthy.' 

'There are small wars on a dozen planets right now, Tsoldrin. People 
are talking war in public; either about how to avoid it, or how it might 
be limited, or how it can't possibly happen... but it's coming; you can 
smell it. You should catch the newscasts, Tsoldrin. Then you'd know.' 

'Well then, perhaps war is inevitable,' Beychae said, looking away 
over the wooded plains and hills beyond the observatory. 'Maybe it's 
just... time.' 

'Crap,' he said. Beychae looked at him, surprised. 'There's a saying: 
"War is a long cliff." You can avoid the cliff completely, you can walk 

along the top for as long as you have the nerve, you can even choose 
to leap off, and if you only fall a short way before you hit a ledge you 
can always scramble back up again. Unless you're just plain invaded, 
there are always choices, and even then, there's usually something 
you've missed - a choice you didn't make - that could have avoided 
invasion in the first place. You people still have your choices. There's 
nothing inevitable about it.' 

'Zakalwe,' Beychae said. 'You surprise me. I'd have thought you -' 

'You'd have thought I'd be in favour of war?' he said, standing, a sad 
small smile on his lips. He put one hand on the other man's shoulder. 
'You've had your nose buried in books for too long, Tsoldrin.' He 
walked away past the stone instruments. Beychae looked down at the 
suit helmet, lying on the flagstones. He followed the other man. 

'You're right, Zakalwe. I have been out of the flow of things for a long 
time. I probably don't know who half the people in power are these 
days, or exactly what the issues are, or the precise balance of the 
various alliances... so the Culture cannot be so... desperate they think 
I can alter whatever's going to happen. Can they?' 

He turned round. He looked into Beychae's face. 'Tsoldrin, the truth 
is I don't know. Don't think I haven't thought about this. It might be 
just that you, as a symbol, really,.would make all the difference, and 
maybe everybody is desperate to find an excuse not to have to fight; 
you could be that excuse if you come along, uncontaminated by 
recent events, as though from the dead, and provide a face-saving 
compromise. 

'Or maybe the Culture secretly thinks a small short war is a good 
idea, or even knows there's nothing it can do to stop a full-scale one, 
but has to be seen to be doing something, no matter how long a shot 
it might be, so that people can't say later "Why didn't you try this?"' 
He shrugged. 'I never try to second-guess the Culture, Tsoldrin, let 
alone Contact, and certainly not Special Circumstances.' 

'You just do their bidding.' 

'And get well paid for it.' 

'But you see yourself on the side of good, do you, Cheradenine?' 

He smiled and sat on the stone plinth, legs swinging. 'I have no idea 
whether 
they're 
the 
good 
guys 
or 
not, 
Tsoldrin. 
They 

certainly seem to be, but then who knows that seeming is being?' He 
frowned, looked away. 'I have never seen them be cruel, even when 
they might have claimed they had an excuse to be so. It can make 
them seem cold, sometimes.' He shrugged again. 'But there are folks 
that'll tell you it's the bad gods that always have the most beautiful 
faces and the softest voices. Shit,' he said, and jumped off the stone 
table. He went to stand by the balustrade which marked one edge of 
the old observatory, looking to where the sky was starting to redden 
above the horizon. It would be dark in an hour. 'They keep their 
promises and they pay top rates. They make good employers, 
Tsoldrin.' 

'That does not mean we ought to let them decide our fate.' 

'You'd rather let those decadent dickheads in Governance do it 
instead?' 

'At least they're involved, Zakalwe; it isn't just a game to them.' 

'Oh, I think it is. I think that's exactly what it is to them. The 
difference is that unlike the Culture's Minds, they don't know enough 
to take games seriously.' He took a deep breath and watched the 
wind stir the branches beneath them; leaves fell away. 'Tsoldrin; 
don't say you're on their side.' 

'The sides were always strange,' Beychae said. 'We all said that all 
we wanted was the best for the Cluster, and I think we all meant it, 
mostly. We all still want that. But I don't know what the right thing 
to do is; I sometimes think I know too much, I've studied too much, 
learned too much, remembered too much. It all seems to average 
out, somehow; like dust that settles over... whatever machinery we 
carry inside us that leads us to act, and puts the same weight 
everywhere, so that always you can see good and bad on each side, 
and always there are arguments, precedents for every possible 
course of action... so of course one ends up doing nothing. Perhaps 
that's only right; perhaps that's what evolution requires, to leave the 

field free for younger, unencumbered minds, and those not afraid to 
act.' 

'Okay, so it's a balance. All societies are like that; the damping hand 
of the old and the firebrand youth together. It works out through 
generations, or through the set-up of your institutions, and their 
change and even replacement; but Governance, the Humanists, 
combine the worst of both approaches. Ancient, vicious, discredited 
ideas backed with adolescent war-mania. It's a crock of shit, Tsoldrin, 
and you know it. You've earned the right to some leisure; nobody's 
arguing. But that won't stop you feeling guilty when - not if - the bad 
stuff comes. You have the power, Tsoldrin, whether you like it or not; 
just doing nothing is a statement, don't you understand that? What 
is all your studying worth, all your learning, all your knowledge, if it 
doesn't lead to wisdom? And what's wisdom but knowing what is 
right, and what is the right thing to do? You're almost a god to some 
of the people in this civilisation, Tsoldrin; again, whether you like it 
or not. If you do nothing... they'll feel abandoned. They'll feel despair. 
And who can blame them?' 

He made a resigned sort of gesture with his hands, putting them both 
down on the stone parapet, gazing out to the darkening sky. Beychae 
was silent. 

He gave the old man a while longer to think, then looked round at the 
flat stone summit of the hill, at all the strange stone instruments. 'An 
observatory, eh?' 

'Yes,' Beychae said after a moment's hesitation. He touched one of 
the stone plinths with one hand. 'Believed to have been a burial site, 
four or five thousand years ago; then to have had some sort of 
astrological significance; later, they may have predicted eclipses with 
readings taken here. Finally, the Vrehids built this observatory to 
study the motions of the moons, planets and stars. There are water-
clocks, sundials, sextants, planet-dials... partial orreries... there are 
crude seismographs here, too, or at least earthquake direction indica-
tors.' 

'They have telescopes?' 

'Very poor ones, and only for a decade or so before the Empire fell. 
The results they got from the telescopes caused a lot of problems; 
contradicted what they already knew, or thought they knew.' 

'That figures. What's this?' One of the plinths held a large, rusty metal 
bowl with a sharp central spindle. 

'Compass, I think,' Beychae said. 'It works by fields,' he smiled. 

'And this? Looks like a tree stump.' It was a huge, rough, very slightly 
fluted cylinder perhaps a metre in height, and twice that across. He 
tapped the edge. 'Hmm; stone.' 

'Ah!' Tsoldrin said, joining him at the stone cylinder. 'Well, if it's what 
I think it is... it was originally just a tree stump, of course...' He ran 
his hand over the stone surface, looked round the edge for 
something. 'But it was petrified, long ago. Look though; you can still 
see the rings in the wood.' 

He leant closer, looking at the grey stone surface by the fading 
afternoon light. The growth rings of the long dead tree were indeed 
visible. He leant forward, taking off one of the suit gloves, and with 
his fingers stroked the surface of the stone. Some differential 
weathering of the wood-become-rock had made the rings tangible; 
his fingers felt the tiny ridges run beneath their surface like the 
fingerprint of some mighty stone god. 

'So many years,' he breathed, putting his hand back to the very 
sapling centre of the stump, and running his hand out again. Beychae 
said nothing. 

Every year a complete ring, signature of bad year and good by the 
spacing, and every ring complete, sealed, hermetic. Every year like 
part of a sentence, every ring a shackle, chained and chaining to the 
past; every ring a wall, a prison. A sentence locked in the wood, now 
locked in stone, frozen twice, sentenced twice, once for an imaginable 
time, then for an unimaginable time. His finger ran over the ring 
walls, dry paper over ridged rock. 

'This is just the cover,' Beychae said from the other side. He was 

squatting down, looking for something on the side of the great stone 
stump. 'There ought to be... ah. Here we are. Don't expect we'll be 
able to actually lift it, of course...' 

'Cover?' he said, putting the glove back on and walking round to 
where Beychae was. 'Cover for what?' 

'A sort of puzzle the Imperial Astronomers played when the viewing 
was patchy,' Beychae said. 'There; see that handhold?' 

'Just a second,' he said. 'Want to stand back a little?' Beychae stood 
back. 'It's supposed to take four strong men, Zakalwe.' 

'This suit's more powerful than that, though balancing might be a 
little...' He found two hand-holds on the stone. 'Suit command; 
strength normal max.' 

'You have to talk to the suit?' Beychae asked. 

'Yeah,' he said. He flexed, lifting one edge of the stone cover up; a 
tiny explosion of dust under the sole of one of the suit's boots 
announced a trapped pebble giving up the struggle. 'This one you do; 
they have ones you just have to think about something, but...' he 
pulled on one edge of the cover, sticking one leg out to shift his centre 
of gravity as he did so. '... but I just never liked the idea of that.' He 
held the whole stone top of the petrified stump above his head, then 
walked awkwardly, to the noise of crunching, popping gravel under 
his feet, to another stone table; he lowered, shifted the stone cover 
sidways until it rested on the table, and returned; he made the 
mistake of clapping his hands together, and produced what sounded 
like a gunshot. 'Oops,' he grinned. 'Suit command; strength off.' 

Revealed by the removal of the stone cap was a shallow cone. It 
seemed to have been carved from the petrified stump itself. Looking 
closer, he could see that it was ridged, tree ring by tree ring. 

'Quite clever,' he said, mildly disappointed. 

'You're not looking at it properly, Cheradenine,' Beychae told him. 
'Look closer.' 

He looked closer. 

'I don't suppose you have anything very small and spherical, do you?' 
Beychae said, 'Like a... ball-bearing.' 

'A ball-bearing?' he said, a pained expression on his face. 

'You don't have such things?' 

'I think you'll find in most societies ball-bearings don't last much 
beyond 
room-temperature 
superconductivity, 
let 
alone 
field 

technology. Unless you're into industrial archeology and trying to 
keep some ancient machine running. No, I don't have any ball...' he 
peered closer at the centre of the shallow rock cone. 'Notches.' 

'Exactly.' Beychae smiled. 

He stood back, looking at the ridged cone as a whole. 'It's a maze!' 

Maze. There had been a maze in the garden. They outgrew it, became 
too familiar with it, eventually only used it when other children they 
didn't like came for the day to the great house; they could lose them 
in the maze for a few hours. 

'Yes,' Beychae nodded. 'They would start out with small coloured 
beads or pebbles, and try to work their way to the rim.' He looked 
closer. 'They say there might have been a way to turn it into a game, 
by painting lines that divided each ring into segments; little wooden 
bridges and blocking pieces like walls could be used to facilitate one's 
own progress or prevent that of one's rivals.' Beychae squinted closer 
in the fading light. 'Hmm. Paint must have faded.' 

He looked down at the hundreds of tiny ridges on the surface of the 
shallow cone - like a model of a huge volcano, he thought - and 
smiled. He sighed, looked at the screen set into the wrist of the suit, 
tried the emergency signal button again. No reply. 

'Trying to contact the Culture?' 

'Mmm,' he said, gazing again at the petrified maze. 

'What will happen to you if Governance find us?' Beychae asked. 

'Oh,' he shrugged, walking back to the balustrade they had stood at 
earlier. 'Probably not much. Not very likely they'll just blow my brains 
out; they'll want to question me. Should give the Culture plenty of 
time to get me out; either negotiated or just snapped away. Don't 
worry about me.' He smiled at Beychae. 'Tell them I took you by 
force. I'll say I stunned you and stuffed you into the capsule. So don't 
worry; they'll probably let you go straight back to your studies.' 

'Well,' Beychae said, rejoining the other man at the balustrade. 'My 
studies were a delicate construction, Zakalwe; they maintained my 
carefully developed disinterest. They may not be so easy to resume, 
after your... exuberantly violent interruption.' 

'Ah.' He tried not to smile. He looked down at the trees, then at the 
suit gloves, as though checking all the fingers were there. 'Yeah. 
Look, Tsoldrin... I'm sorry... I mean about your friend, Ms Shiol.' 

'As am I,' Beychae said quietly. He smiled uncertainly. 'I felt happy, 
Cheradenine. I hadn't felt like that for... well, long enough.' They 
stood watching the sun sink behind the clouds. 'You are certain she 
was one of theirs? I mean, absolutely?' 

'Beyond any reasonable doubt, Tsoldrin.' He thought he saw tears in 
the old man's eyes. He looked away. 'Like I said; I'm sorry.' 

'I hope,' Beychae said, 'that is not the only way the old can be made 
happy... can be happy. Through deceit.' 

'Maybe it wasn't all deceit,' he said. 'And anyway, being old isn't what 
it used to be; I'm old,' he reminded Beychae, who nodded, took out 
a kerchief and sniffed. 

'Of course; so you are. I forgot. Strange, isn't it? Whenever we see 
people after a long time we are always surprised how they've grown 
or aged. But when I see you, well, you haven't changed a bit, and 
instead I feel very old - unfairly, unjustifiably old - beside you, 
Cheradenine.' 

'Actually I have changed, Tsoldrin.' He grinned. 'But no, I haven't got 
any older.' He looked Beychae in the eye. 'They'd give you this, too, 
if you asked them. The Culture would let you grow younger, then 
stabilise your age, or let you grow old again, but very slowly.' 

'Bribery, Zakalwe?' Beychae said, smiling. 

'Hey, it was just a thought. And it'd be a payment, not a bribe. And 
they wouldn't force it on you. But it's academic, anyway.' He paused, 
nodding into the sky. 'Completely academic; now. Here comes a 
plane.' 

Tsoldrin looked out to the red clouds of sunset. He couldn't see any 
aircraft. 

'A Culture one?' Beychae asked cautiously. 

He smiled. 'In the circumstances, Tsoldrin, if you can see it, it isn't a 
Culture one.' He turned and walked quickly, picking up the suit helmet 
and putting it on. Suddenly the dark figure became inhuman, behind 
the armoured, sensor-studded faceplate of the suit. He took a large 
pistol from the suit holster. 

'Tsoldrin,' his voice came booming from speakers set in the suit chest 
as he checked the settings on the gun. 'If I were you I'd get back to 
the capsule, or just plain run away and hide.' The figure turned to 
face Beychae, the helmet like the head of some gigantic, fearsome 
insect. 'I'm fixing to give these assholes a fight, just for the sheer hell 
of it, and it might be best for you if you weren't nearby.' 

The ship was over eighty kilometres long and it was called the Size 
Isn't Everything. The last thing he'd been on for any length of time 
had actually been bigger, but then that had been a tabular iceberg 
big enough to hide two armies on, and it didn't beat the General 
Systems Vehicle by much. 

'How do these things hold together?' He stood on a balcony, looking 

out over a sort of miniature valley composed of accommodation units; 
each stepped terrace was smothered in foliage, the space was criss-
crossed by walk-ways and slender bridges, and a small stream ran 
through the bottom of the V. People sat at tables in little courtyards, 
lounged on the grass by the stream side or amongst the cushions and 
couches of cafes and bars on the terraces. Hanging above the centre 
of the valley, beneath a ceiling of glowing blue, a travel-tube snaked 
away into the distance on either side, following the wavy line of the 
valley. Under the tube, a line of fake sunlight burned, like some enor-
mous strip light. 

'Hmm?' Diziet Sma said, arriving at his elbow with two drinks; she 
handed one to him. 

'They're too big,' he said. He turned to face the woman. He'd seen 
the things they called bays, where they built smaller space ships 
(smaller in this case meant over three kilometres long); vast 
unsupported hangars with thin walls. He'd been near the immense 
engines, which as far as he could gather were solid, and inaccessible 
(how?), and obviously extremely massive; he'd felt oddly threatened 
on discovering that there was no control room, no bridge, no flight 
deck anywhere in the vast vessel, just three Minds - fancy computers, 
apparently - controlling everything (what!?) 

And now he was finding out where the people lived, but it was all too 
big, too much, too flimsy somehow, especially if the ship was 
supposed to accelerate as smartly as Sma claimed. He shook his 
head. 'I don't understand; how does it hold together?' 

Sma smiled. 'Just think; fields, Cheradenine. It's all done with force 
fields.' She put one hand out to his troubled face, patted one cheek. 
'Don't look so confused. And don't try to understand it all too quickly. 
Let it soak in. Just wander around; lose yourself in it for a few days. 
Come back whenever.' 

in which you could never drown, and he threw himself into it to try to 
understand if not it, then the people who had built it. 

He walked for days, stopping at bars and restaurants whenever he 
felt thirsty, hungry or tired; mostly they were automatic and he was 
served by little floating trays, though a few were staffed by real 
people. They seemed less like servants and more like customers 
who'd taken a notion to help out for a while. 

'Of course I don't have to do this,' one middle-aged man said, 
carefully cleaning the table with a damp cloth. He put the cloth in a 
little pouch, sat down beside him. 'But look; this table's clean.' 

He agreed that the table was clean. 

'Usually,' the man said. 'I work on alien - no offence - alien religions; 
Directional Emphasis In Religious Observance; that's my speciality... 
like when temples or graves or prayers always have to face in a 
certain direction; that sort of thing? Well, I catalogue, evaluate, 
compare; I come up with theories and argue with colleagues, here 
and elsewhere. But... the job's never finished; always new examples, 
and even the old ones get re-evaluated, and new people come along 
with new ideas about what you thought was settled... but,' he slapped 
the table, 'when you clean a table you clean a table. You feel you've 
done something. It's an achievement.' 

'But in the end, it's still just cleaning a table.' 

'And therefore does not really signify on the cosmic scale of events?' 
the man suggested. 

He smiled in response to the man's grin, 'Well, yes.' 

'But then, what does signify? My other work? Is that really important, 
either? I could try composing wonderful musical works, or day-long 
entertainment epics, but what would that do? Give people pleasure? 
My wiping this table gives me pleasure. And people come to a clean 
table, which gives them pleasure. And anyway,' the man laughed, 
'people die; stars die; universes die. What is any achievement, 
however great it was, once time itself is dead? Of course, if all I did 

was wipe tables, then of course it would seem a mean and despicable 
waste of my huge intellectual potential. But because I choose to do 
it, it gives me pleasure. And,' the man said with a smile, 'it's a good 
way of meeting people. So; where are you from, anyway?' 

He ate when he was hungry and drank when he was thirsty, every 
time trying a different dish or drink from the stunningly complicated 
menus, and when he wanted to sleep - as the whole vessel gradually 
cycled into a red-tinged dusk, the ceiling light-bars dimming - he just 
asked a drone, and was directed to the nearest unoccupied room. The 
rooms were all roughly the same size, and yet all slightly different; 
some were very plain, some were highly decorated. The basics were 
always there; bed - sometimes a real, physical bed, sometimes one 
of their weird field-beds - somewhere to wash and defaecate, 
cupboards, places for personal effects, a fake window, a holo screen 
of some sort, and a link up to the rest of the communications net, 
both aboard and off-ship. The first night away, he linked into one of 
their direct-link sensory entertainments, lying on the bed with some 
sort of device activated under the pillow. 

He did not actually sleep that night; instead he was a bold pirate 
prince who'd renounced his nobility to lead a brave crew against the 
slaver ships of a terrible empire amongst the spice and treasure isles; 
their quick little ships darted amongst the lumbering galleons, picking 
away the rigging with chain shot. They came ashore on moonless 
nights, attacking the great prison castles, releasing joyous captives; 
he personally fought the wicked governor's chief torturer, sword 
against sword; the man finally fell from a high tower. An alliance with 
a beautiful lady pirate begot a more personal liaison, and a daring 
rescue from a mountain monastery when she was captured... 

He pulled away from it, after what had been weeks of compressed 
time. He knew (somewhere at the back of his mind) even as it 
happened that none of it was real, but that seemed like the least 
important property of the adventure. When he came out of it - 
surprised to discover that he had not actually ejaculated during some 
of the profoundly convincing erotic episodes - he discovered that only 
a night had passed, and it was morning, and he had, somehow, 
shared the strange story with others; it had been a game, apparently. 
People had left messages for him to get in touch, they had enjoyed 
playing the game with him so much. He felt oddly ashamed, and did 
not reply. 

The rooms he slept in always contained places to sit; field extensions, 
mouldable wall units, real couches, and - sometimes - ordinary chairs. 
Whenever the rooms held chairs, he moved them outside, into the 
corridor or onto the terrace. 

It was all he could do to keep the memories at bay. 

'You mean it makes no difference?' 

'Not much,' the woman said. She pressed on a little studded lanyard 
she held in one hand, spoke as though to her shoulder. 'I'll take it.' 
The field-unit put them in shadow as it hovered above them. Just 
another solid slab, as far as he could see. It was red; a different colour 
from the black slickness of the starboard Main Engine Block Lower 
under their feet. She manipulated the lanyard, guiding the huge red 
block down; two other people standing twenty metres away watched 
the far end of the unit. 

'The trouble is,' the woman said, watching the vast red building-brick 
come slowly down, 'that even when people do get sick and die young, 
they're always surprised when they get sick. How many healthy 
people do you think actually say to themselves, "Hey, I'm healthy 
today!", unless they've just had a serious illness?' She shrugged, 
pressed the lanyard again as the field-unit lowered to a couple of 
centimetres off the engine surface. 'Stop,' she said quietly. 'Inertia 
down five. Check.' A line of light flashed on the surface of the engine 
block. She put one hand on the block, and pressed it again. It moved. 
'Down dead slow,' she said. She pressed the block into place. 'Sorzh; 
all right?' she asked. He didn't hear the reply, but the woman 
obviously did. 

'Okay; positioned; all clear.' She looked up as the lifter tugs sailed 
back towards the engineering space, then back at him. 'All that's 
happened is that reality has caught up with the way people always 
did behave anyway. So, no, you don't feel any wonderful release from 
debilitating illnesses.' She scratched one ear. 'Except maybe when 
you think about it.' She grinned. 'I guess in school, when you're 
seeing how people used to live... how aliens still do live... then it hits 
home, and I suppose you never really lose that entirely, but you don't 
spend much time thinking about it.' 

They walked across the black expanse of thoroughly featureless 
material ('Ah,' the woman had said, when he'd mentioned this, 'you 
take a look at it under a microscope; it's beautiful! What did you 
expect, anyway? Cranks? Gears? Tanks full of chemicals?') 

'Can't machines build these faster?' he asked the woman, looking 
around the starship shell. 

'Why, of course!' she laughed. 

'Then why do you do it?' 

'It's fun. You see one of these big mothers sail out those doors for 
the first time, heading for deep space, three hundred people on 
board, everything working, the Mind quite happy, and you think; I 
helped build that. The fact a machine could have done it faster doesn't 
alter the fact that it was you who actually did it.' 

'Hmm,' he said. 

(Learn woodwork; metalwork; they will not make you a carpenter or 
a blacksmith any more than mastering writing will make you a clerk.) 

'Well, you may "hmm" as you wish,' the woman said, approaching a 
translucent hologram of the half-completed ship, where a few other 
construction workers were standing, pointing inside the model and 
talking. 'But have you ever been gliding, or swum underwater?' 

'Yes,' he agreed. 

The woman shrugged. 'Yet birds fly better than we do, and fish swim 
better. Do we stop gliding or swimming because of this?' 

He smiled. 'I suppose not.' 

'You suppose correctly,' the woman said. 'And why?' she looked at 
him, grinning. 'Because it's fun.' She looked at the holo model of the 
ship to one side. One of the other workers called to her, pointing at 
something in the model. She looked at him. 'Excuse me, will you?' 

He nodded, as he backed off. 'Build well.' 

'Thank you. I trust we shall.' 

'Oh,' he asked. 'What's this ship to be called?' 

'Its Mind wishes it to be called the Sweet and Full of Grace,' the 
woman laughed. Then she was deep in discussion with the others. 

how quickly he got used to this behaviour, but never fully joined in. 

It took him a while to realise that all the drones he saw - even more 
various in their design than humans were in their physiology - didn't 
all belong to the ship. Hardly any did, in fact; they had their own 
artificial brains (he still tended to think of them as computers). They 
seemed to have their own personalities, too, though he remained 
sceptical. 

'Let me put this thought experiment to you,' the old drone said, as 
they played a card-game which it had assured him was mostly luck. 
They sat - well, the drone floated - under an arcade of delicately pink 
stone, by the side of a small pool; the shouts of people playing a 
complicated ball-game on the far side of the pool filtered through 
bushes and small trees to them. 

'Forget,' said the drone, 'about how machine brains are actually put 
together; think about making a machine brain - an electronic 
computer - in the image of a human one. One might start with a few 
cells, as the human embryo does; these multiply, gradually establish 
connections. So one would continually add new components and 
make the relevant, even - if one was to follow the exact development 
of 
one 
single 
human 
through 
the 
various 
stages 
- 

the identical connections. 

'One would, of course, have to limit the speed of the messages 
transmitted down those connections to a tiny fraction of their normal 
electronic speed, but that would not be difficult, nor would having 
these neuron-like components act like their biological equivalents 
internally, firing their own messages according to the types of signal 
they received; all this could be done comparatively simply. By 
building up in this gradual way, you could mimic exactly the 
development of a human brain, and you could mimic its output; just 
as an embryo can experience sound and touch and even light inside 
the womb, so could you send similar signals to your developing 
electronic equivalent; you could impersonate the experience of birth, 
and use any degree of sensory stimulation to fool this device into 
thinking it was feeling touching, tasting, smelling, hearing and seeing 
everything your real human was (or, of course, you might choose not 
actually to fool it, but always give it just as much genuine sensory 

input, and of the same quality, as the human personality was 
experiencing at any given point). 

'Now; my question to you is this; where is the difference? The brain 
of each being works in exactly the same way as the other; they will 
respond to stimuli with a greater correspondence than one finds even 
between monozygotic twins; but how can one still choose to call one 
a conscious entity, and the other merely a machine? 

'Your brain is made up of matter, Mr Zakalwe, organised into 
information-handling, processing and storage units by your genetic 
inheritance and by the biochemistry of first your mother's body and 
later your own, not to mention your experiences since some short 
time before your birth until now. 

'An electronic computer is also made up of matter, but organised 
differently; what is there so magical about the workings of the huge, 
slow cells of the animal brain that they can claim themselves to be 
conscious, but would deny a quicker, more finely-grained device of 
equivalent power - or even a machine hobbled so that it worked with 
precisely the same ponderous-ness - a similar distinction? 

'Hmm?' the machine said, its aura field flashing the pink he was 
beginning to identify as drone amusement. 'Unless, of course, you 
wish to invoke superstition? Do you believe in gods?' 

He smiled. 'I have never had that inclination,' he said. 

'Well then,' the drone said. 'What would you say? Is the machine in 
the human image conscious, sentient, or not?' 

He studied his cards. 'I'm thinking,' he said, and laughed. 

somebody dressed as a savage, or in some obviously non-Culture 
garb, was quite possibly just dressing up like that for a laugh, or going 
to a party... but there were some very obviously different species 
around as well). 

'Yes, young man?' the alien said. It had eight limbs, a fairly distinct 
head with two quite small eyes, curiously flower-like mouth parts, 
and a large, almost spherical, lightly haired body, coloured red and 
purple. Its own voice was composed of clicks from its mouth and 
almost subsonic vibrations from its body; a small amulet did the 
translating. 

He asked if he could sit with the alien; it directed him to the seat 
across the table from it in the cafe where he had overheard it talking 
briefly to a passing human about Special Circumstances. 

'... It is in layers,' the alien replied to his question. 'A tiny core of 
Special Circumstances, a shell of Contact, and a vast chaotic 
ecosphere of everything else. Bit like a... you come from a planet?' 

He nodded. The creature glanced at its amulet for a translation of the 
gesture the man had used - it was not what the Culture called nodding 
- then said, 'Well, it is like a planet, only the core is tiny; very tiny. 
And the ecosphere is more disparate and less distinct than the 
wrapping of atmosphere round a globe; a red giant star might even 
be a better comparison. But in the end, you will never know them, 
because you will be like me, in Special Circumstances, and only ever 
know them as the great, irresistible force behind you; people like you 
and I are the edge; you will in time come to feel like a tooth on the 
biggest saw in the galaxy, sir.' The alien's eyes closed; it waggled all 
its limbs very energetically, and its mouth parts crackled. 'Ha ha ha!' 
the amulet said, primly. 

'How did you know I was actually involved with Special 
Circumstances?' he asked, sitting back. 

'Ah! How much my vanity wishes me to claim I simply guessed, so 
clever I am... but I heard there was a new recruit coming aboard,' 
the alien told him. 'And that it was a fairly human-basic male. You... 
smell right, if I may use that turn of phrase. And you... have just 

been asking all the right questions.' 

'And you're in SC too?' 

'For ten standard years now.' 

'Think I should do it? Work for them?' 

'Oh yes; I imagine it's better than what you left, no?' 

He shrugged, remembering the blizzard and the ice. 'I suppose.' 

'You enjoy... fighting, yes?' 

'Well... sometimes,' he admitted. 'I'm good at it, so they say. Not that 
I'm necessarily convinced of that myself.' 

'No-one wins all the time, sir,' the creature said. 'Not through skill, 
anyway, and the Culture does not believe in luck, or at the very least 
does not believe it is transferrable. They must like your attitude, 
that's all. Hee hee.' 

The alien laughed quietly. 

'To be good at soldiering,' it said, 'is a great curse, I think sometimes. 
Working for these people at least relieves one of some of the 
responsibility. I have never found cause to complain.' The alien 
scratched its body, looked down, picked something from the hairs 
around where he would have guessed its belly might be, and ate it. 
'Of course, you must not expect to be told the truth all the time. You 
can insist that they do, always, and they will do so, but they may not 
be able to use you as often as they might like to; sometimes they 
need you not to know you are fighting on the wrong side. My advice 
would be to just do as they ask; much more exciting.' 

'Are you in it for the excitement?' 

'Partly, and partly because of family honour; SC did something for 
my people once, and we could not let them steal our honour by 
accepting nothing in return. I work until that debt is paid off.' 

'How long's that?' 

'Oh, for life,' the creature said, sitting back in a gesture he felt 
reasonably justified in translating as surprise. 'Until I die, of course. 
But who cares? As I say; it's fun. Here.' It banged its drink-bowl on 
the table to attract a passing tray. 'Let's have another drink; see who 
gets drunk first.' 

'You have more legs.' He grinned. 'I think I might fall over more 
easily.' 

'Ah, but the more the legs, the bigger the tangle.' 

'Fair enough.' He waited for a fresh glass. 

To one side of them was a small terrace and the bar, to the other a 
gulf of airy space. The ship, the GSV, went on beyond its apparent 
boundaries. Its hull was pierced multitudinously by terraces, 
balconies, walk-ways, open windows, and open bay doors. 
Surrounding the vessel proper was an immense ellipsoid bubble of 
air, held inside dozens of different fields, which together made up the 
Vehicle's real - though insubstantial - hull. 

He took up the recharged glass when it arrived, and watched a 
puttering, piston-engined, paper-winged hang-glider zip past the 
terrace; he waved at the pilot, then shook his head. 

'To the Culture,' he said, raising his glass to the alien. It matched his 
gesture. 'To its total lack of respect for all things majestic.' 

'Agreed,' the alien said, and together they drank. 

He woke up the next morning lying soaked as well as soused half 

underneath a small waterfall in one of the ace section valleys; Chori 
was suspended from a nearby railing by all eight leg-hooks, making 
a sporadic clattering noise that he decided was snoring. 

'What's wrong?' she gasped. 

'What? With me; nothing! What's wrong with you?' 

She made a sort of shrugging motion, looked puzzled. 'I came; that's 
all; what's the... Oh.' She put one hand to her mouth, eyes wide. 'I 
forgot. I'm sorry. You're not... Oh dear.' She giggled. 'How 
embarrassing.' 

'What?' 

'Well, we just... you know; it takes... it goes on... longer, you know?' 

He didn't think he had quite believed what he had heard about the 
Culture's altered physiology until then. He hadn't accepted that they 
had changed themselves so. He had not believed that they really had 
chosen to extend such moments of pleasure, let alone breed into 
themselves all the multifarious drug glands that could enhance almost 
any experience (not least sex). 

Yet - in a way - it made sense, he told himself. Their machines could 

do everything else much better than they could; no sense in breeding 
super-humans for strength or intelligence, when their drones and 
Minds were so much more matter- and energy-efficient at both. But 
pleasure... well, that was a different matter. 

What else was the human form good for? 

He supposed such single-mindedness was admirable, in a way. 

He took the woman in his arms again. 'Never mind,' he said. 'Quality 
not quantity. Let's try that again, shall we?' 

She laughed and took his face in her hands. 'Dedication; that's a good 
quality in a man.' 

(The cry in the summerhouse that had attracted; 'Hello, old chap.' 
Tanned hands on the pale hips...) 

'Well, I have stopped offering to pay for things in bars.' 

'That's a start.' 

'It was a very easy habit to break.' 

'Par for the course. That all?' 

'Well... also, your women are very friendly.' 

'So are the men,' Sma arched one eyebrow. 

'The life here seems... idyllic.' 

'Well, you have to like crowds, perhaps.' 

He looked round the almost deserted pool complex. 'That's relative, 
I suspect.' 

(And thought: the garden; the garden. They have made their life in 
its image!) 

'Why,' Sma smiled. 'Are you tempted to stay?' 

'Not even slightly.' He laughed. 'I'd go crazy here, or slip forever into 
one of your shared dream-games. I need... more.' 

'But will you take it from us?' Sma said, stopping, treading water. 'Do 
you want to work with us?' 

'Everybody seems to think I should; they believe you're fighting the 
good fight. It's just that... I get suspicious when everybody agrees 
about something.' 

Sma laughed. 'How much would it matter if we weren't fighting the 
good fight, Cheradenine? If all we were offering was pay and 
excitement?' 

'I don't know,' he admitted. 'It would make it even harder. I'd just 
like... I'd like to believe, to finally know, to finally be able to prove 
that I was...' He shrugged, grinned. '... doing good.' 

Sma sighed. In the water, this meant that she bobbed up then sank 
down a little. 'Who knows, Zakalwe? We don't know that; we think 
we're right; we even think we can prove it, but we can never be sure; 
there are always arguments against us. There is no certainty; least 
of all in Special Circumstances, where the rules are different.' 

'I thought the rules were meant to be the same for everybody.' 

'They are. But in Special Circumstances we deal in the moral 
equivalent of black holes, where the normal laws - the rules of right 
and wrong that people imagine apply everywhere else in the universe 
- break down; beyond those metaphysical event-horizons, there 
exist... special circumstances.' She smiled. 'That's us. That's our 
territory; our domain.' 

'To some people,' he said, 'that might sound like just a good excuse 
for bad behaviour.' 

Sma shrugged. 'And perhaps they would be right. Maybe that is all it 
is.' She shook her head, pulled one hand through her long wet hair. 
'But if nothing else, at least we need an excuse; think how many 
people need none at all.' 

She swam off. 

He watched her stroke powerfully away through the water for a 
moment. One of his hands went, without him really realising it, to a 
small puckered scar on his chest, just over where his heart was, and 
rubbed it, while he frowned, staring at the glittering, unsteady surface 
of the water. 

Then he swam after the woman. 

He never saw Chori again, and heard that she'd been killed on active 
service some fifteen years later. He was told this news while they 
were regrowing his body on the GSV Congenital Optimist after he'd 
been beheaded on - and then rescued from - a planet called Fohls. 

He crouched behind the parapet, at the far edge of the old 
observatory from the single approaching plane. Behind him, down a 
steep slope, were bushes and trees and a collection of roofless, 
overgrown buildings. He watched the aircraft come closer, checked 
for more coming from other directions, but couldn't find any. Inside 
the suit, watching the transmitted view, he frowned as the aircraft 
came closer, slowing all the time, its obese arrowhead shape 
silhouetted against the sunset as it approached. 

He watched it drop slowly towards the observatory platform; a ramp 
hinged from the craft's belly; three legs flexed out. He took some 
effector readings from the machine, then shook his head, ducked and 
ran back down the slope. 

Tsoldrin was sitting in one of the ruined buildings. He looked surprised 
when the suited figure entered through the creeper-choked doorway. 

'Yes, Cheradenine?' 

'It's a civilian craft,' he said, pushing the face-plate up. He was 
grinning. 'I don't think it's looking for us after all. Might still provide 
an escape route, though.' He shrugged. 'Worth a try.' He gestured 
back up the slope. 'You coming along?' 

Tsoldrin Beychae looked through the dusk at the matt black figure in 
the doorway. He had been sitting here wondering what he ought to 
do, and had not yet come up with any answers. Part of him just 
wanted to get back to the peace and quiet and certainty of the 
university library, where he could live happily, without fuss, ignore 
the world, and immerse himself in the old books, trying to understand 
ancient ideas and histories, hoping to make sense of them, one day, 
and perhaps explain his own ideas, try to point out the lessons of 

these elder histories, perhaps make people think again about their 
own times and ideologies. For a time - for a long time, there - it had 
seemed entirely and definitely the most worthwhile and productive 
thing he could do... but he was not sure of that any longer. 

Perhaps, he thought, there were more important things to be done 
which he could have a hand in. Perhaps he ought to go with Zakalwe, 
as the man - and the Culture - wanted. 

Could he just relapse back into his studies, after this? 

Zakalwe coming back from the past, as rash and brash as ever; Ubrel 
- could she really have been? - just acting a part, making him feel 
very old and foolish, now, but angry as well; and the whole Cluster 
drifting rudderless towards the rocks, all over again. 

Did he have any right not to try and do something, even if the Culture 
was wrong about his stature in the civilisation? He didn't know. He 
could see that Zakalwe had tried to appeal to his vanity, but what if 
even half of what he said was true? Was it right to sit back and just 
let things happen, however much it might be the easiest, least 
stressful course? If there was a war, and he knew he'd done nothing, 
how would he feel afterwards? 

Damn you, Zakalwe, he thought. He stood up. 'I'm still thinking,' he 
said. 'But let's see how far you can get.' 

'Good man.' The suited figure's voice betrayed no obvious trace of 
emotion. 

famous Srometren Observatory; at least four and a half thousand 
years of history have been played out beneath your feet here, 

gentlepeople. I'm going to have to fairly rattle through it to tell it all 
to you in the time we have here, so listen close...' 

The aircraft hovered, AG field buzzing, just above the western edge 
of the observatory platform. Its legs hung, dangling in mid-air, 
apparently extended merely as a precaution. About forty people had 
disembarked from it down the belly-ramp, and now stood around one 
of the stone instrument plinths while an eager young tour guide 
talked to them. 

He watched through the stone balustrade, scanning the group with 
the suit's built-in effector and watching the results on the visor-screen 
head-up. Thirty plus of the people were carrying what were in effect 
terminals; links to the planet's communications net. The suit's 
computer covertly interrogated the terminals through the effector. 
Two of the terminals were switched on; one receiving a sports 
broadcast, another receiving music. The rest were on stand-by. 

'Suit,' he whispered (not that even Tsoldrin, right beside him, could 
have heard him, let alone the people in the tourist group). 'I want to 
disable those terminals, quietly; to stop them from transmitting.' 

'Two receiving terminals are transmitting location code,' the suit said. 

'Can I disable their transmit function without altering their present 
location code function, or their present reception?' 

'Yes.' 

'Right; the priority being preventing any further new signals, disable 
all the terminals.' 

'Disabling all thirty-four non-Culture personal commnet terminals 
within range; confirm.' 

'Confirmed, dammit; do it...' 

'Order carried out.' 

He watched the head-up alter as the internal power-states of the 
terminals sank back to near zero. The tour guide was leading the 

people across the stone plateau of the old observatory, towards 
where he and Beychae were, and away from the hovering aircraft. 

He shoved the suit face-plate up, looked round at the other man. 
'Okay; let's go. Quietly.' 

He went first, through the undergrowth, between the crowding trees; 
it was quite dark under the half-fallen foliage, and Beychae stumbled 
a couple of times, but they made relatively little noise as they trod 
the carpet of dead leaves round two sides of the observatory 
platform. 

When they were under the aircraft, he scanned it with the suit 
effector. 

'You beautiful little machine,' he breathed, watching the results come 
up. The aircraft was automatic, and very stupid. A bird probably had 
a more complicated brain. 'Suit; patch into the aircraft; assume 
control without letting anybody else know.' 

'Assuming covert control-jurisdiction of single aircraft within range; 
confirm.' 

'Confirmed. And stop asking me to confirm everything.' 

'Control-jurisdiction assumed. Lapsing confirmatory instruction 
protocols; confirm.' 

'Good grief. Confirmed!' 

'Confirm protocol lapsed.' 

He considered just floating up, holding Beychae, into the craft, but 
even though the aircraft's own AG would probably mask the signal 
his suit gave off, it might not. He glanced up the steep slope, then 
turned to Beychae and whispered. 'Give me your hand; we're going 
up.' The old man did as he asked. 

They went steadily up the slope, the suit kicking foot-holds in the 
earth. They stopped at the balustrade. The aircraft blocked out the 
evening sky above them, yellow light spilling from the belly entrance 

above the ramp, faintly illuminating the nearer stone instruments. 

He checked on the tour group while Beychae got his breath back. The 
tourists were at the far side of the observatory; the guide was shining 
a flashlight at some ancient piece of stonework. He stood up. 'Let's 
go,' he told Beychae, who straightened. They stepped over the 
balustrade, walked to the ramp and up into the aircraft. He followed 
Beychae; he watched the rear view on the helmet screen, but couldn't 
tell whether anybody in the tour group had noticed them or not. 

'Suit; close the ramp,' he told the suit, as he and Beychae entered 
the single large space of the craft's interior. It was ornately luxurious, 
its walls slung with hangings and its deeply carpeted floor dotted with 
large chairs and couches; there was an autobar at one end, while the 
opposite wall was a single huge screen, presently displaying the last 
of the sunset. 

The ramp chimed and hissed as it came up. 'Suit; retract legs,' he 
said, hinging the suit face-plate back. Happily, the suit was smart 
enough to realise he meant the aircraft's legs, not its own. It had 
occurred to him that somebody might just be able to leap onto one 
of the craft's legs from the observatory balustrade. 'Suit; adjust 
aircraft altitude; up ten metres.' 

The light buzzing noise around them changed, then settled back to 
what it had been before. He watched Beychae take off his heavy 
jacket, then looked round the interior of the craft; the effector said 
there was nobody else aboard, but he wanted to make sure. 'Let's 
see where this thing was headed next,' he said, as Beychae sat down 
on a long couch, sighing and stretching. 'Suit; the aircraft's next 
destination?' 

'Gipline Space Terminal,' the clipped voice told him. 

'That sounds perfect. Take us there, suit, and make it look as legal 
and normal as possible.' 

'Under way,' the suit said. 'ETA forty minutes.' 

The craft's background noise altered, climbing in pitch; the floor 

moved just a little. The screen on the far side of the large cabin 
showed them moving out across the wooded hills, rising into the air. 

He took a walk round the craft, confirming there was nobody else 
aboard, then sat by Beychae, who he thought looked very tired. It 
had been a long day, he supposed. 

'You all right?' 

'I'm glad to be sitting down, I'll say that.' Beychae kicked off his 
boots. 

'Let me get you a drink, Tsoldrin,' he said, taking off the helmet and 
heading for the bar. 'Suit,' he said, suddenly struck by an idea. 'You 
know one of the Culture's down-link numbers in Solotol.' 

'Yes.' 

'Connect with one via the aircraft.' 

He bent down, looking at the autobar. 'And how does this work?' 

'The autobar is voice acti -' 

'Zakalwe!' Sma's voice cut across that of the suit, making him start. 
He straightened. 'Where are...?' the woman's voice said, then paused. 
'Oh; you've got yourself an aircraft, have you?' 

'Yes,' he said. He looked across to where Beychae was watching him. 
'On our way to Gipline Port. So what happened? Where's that module? 
And Sma, I'm hurt; you haven't called, you haven't written, sent 
flowers...' 

'Is Beychae all right?' Sma said urgently. 

'Tsoldrin's fine,' he told her, smiling at the other man. 'Suit; get this 
autobar to fix us a couple of refreshing but strong drinks.' 

'He's okay; good.' The woman sighed. The autobar made a clicking, 
gurgling noises. 'We haven't called,' Sma said, 'because if we had 
we'd have let them know where you were; we lost the tight-link when 

the capsule got blasted. Zakalwe, that was ridiculous; it was pure 
chaos after the capsule wasted the truck in the Flower Market and 
you downed that fighter; you're lucky you made it as far as you did. 
Where is the capsule, anyway?' 

'Back at the observatory; Srometren,' he said, looking down as a 
hatch opened in the autobar. He took the tray with the two drinks on 
it over to Beychae, sat down at his side. 'Sma; say hello to Tsoldrin 
Beychae,' he said, handing the other man his drink. 

'Mr Beychae?' Sma's voice said from the suit. 

'Hello?' Beychae said. 

'Pleased to talk to you Mr Beychae. I do hope Mr Zakalwe is treating 
you all right. Are you well?' 

'Tired, but hale.' 

'I trust Mr Zakalwe has found time to communicate to you the 
seriousness of the political situation in the Cluster.' 

'He has,' Beychae said. 'I am... I am certainly considering doing what 
you ask, and for the moment have no urge to return to Solotol.' 

'I see,' Sma said, 'I appreciate what you say. I'm sure Mr Zakalwe 
will do all he can to keep you safe and well while you're deliberating, 
won't you, Cheradenine?' 

'Of course, Diziet. Now; where's that module?' 

'Stuck under the cloud tops of Soreraurth, where it was before. 
Thanks to your nova-profile escapades down there, everything's on 
maximum alert; we can't move anything without being seen, and if 
we're seen to be interfering, we might start the war all by ourselves. 
Describe where that capsule is again; we're going to have to passive-
spot it from the microsatellite and then blast it from up here, to 
remove the evidence. Shit, this is messy, Zakalwe.' 

'Well, pardon me,' he said. He drank again. 'The capsule's under a 
large yellow-leafed deciduous tree between eighty and... one-thirty 

metres north-east of the observatory. Oh; and the plasma rifle's 
about... twenty to forty metres due west.' 

'You lost it?' Sma sounded incredulous. 

'Threw it away in a fit of pique,' he admitted, yawning. 'It got 
Effectorized.' 

'Told you it belonged in a museum,' another voice interrupted. 

'Shut-up, Skaffen-Amtiskaw,' he said. 'So, Sma, what now?' 

'Gipline Space Terminal, I suppose,' the woman replied. 'We'll see if 
we can book you on something outgoing; for Impren, or nearby. At 
worst, you've got a civilian trip ahead of you of weeks at least; if 
we're lucky they'll stand down the alert and the module can sneak 
out and rendezvous. Either way though, the war may be a little closer, 
thanks to what happened in Solotol today. Just think about that, 
Zakalwe.' The channel closed. 

'She sounds unhappy with you, Cheradenine,' Beychae said. 

He shrugged. 'No change there,' he sighed. 

light left the sunset sky; moon-glow lit up some thinner patches of 
cloud. The flashlight flickered. 'Anybody at all; please reply! Oh, 
please!' 

He looked up at the wall-drapes. 'I suppose we could try and make 
some clothes out of stuff here,' he said doubtfully. 

'The aircraft baggage hold might prove a more fruitful source of 
attire,' the drone's voice purred, and told him how to open the floor 
hatch. 

He surfaced with two suitcases, wrenched them open. 'Clothes!' he 
said. He took some out; they looked sufficiently unisex. 

'And you'll have to lose your suit and weaponry, too,' the drone said. 

'What?' 

'You'll never get on board a ship with that stuff, Zakalwe, even with 
our help. You've to pack it all in something - one of those cases would 
be ideal - and leave it in the port; we'll try and pick it up once the 
heat's off.' 

'But!' 

Beychae himself suggested they shaved his head, when they were 
discussing how to disguise him. The last use the wonderfully 
sophisticated combat suit was put to was as a razor. Then he took it 
off; they both changed into the rather loud but thankfully loose-fitting 
clothes. 

The craft landed; the Space Terminal was a wilderness of concrete 
lined off like a game board by the lifts that took craft down to and up 
from the handling facilities. 

Tight beam established again, the earring terminal could whisper to 
him, guide him and Beychae. 

But he felt naked without the suit. 

The earring terminal indicated which door to take. They moved along 
a staff-only corridor, through two security doors which swung open 
for them even before they got to them, then - after a pause - came 
out into a huge crowded concourse full of people, screens, kiosks and 
seats. Nobody noticed them, because a moving walkway had just 
slammed to a stop, toppling dozens of people on top of each other. 

A security camera in the left luggage area swung up to look at the 
ceiling for the minute it took them to deposit the suitcase with the 
suit in it. The instant they'd gone, the camera resumed its slow 
sweeping. 

More or less the same happened when they picked up their tickets at 
the appropriate desk. Then, while they were walking along another 
corridor, they saw a party of armed security guards enter from the 
other end. 

He just kept on walking. He sensed Beychae hesitate at his side. He 

turned, smiled easily at the other man, and when he turned back, the 
guards were stopped, the leading guard holding one hand to his ear 
and looking at the floor; he nodded, turned and pointed to a side 
corridor; the guards set off down it. 

'We're not just being incredibly lucky, I take it?' Beychae muttered. 

He shook his head. 'Not unless you count it as incredibly lucky that 
we've got a near military-standard electro-magnetic effector 
controlled by a hyper-fast starship Mind working this entire port like 
an arcade game from a light-year or so off, no.' 

The shuttle flight was relatively uneventful; in the station, they 
passed across one transit lounge - in something of a commotion, due 
to a man with a direct neural implant seemingly having a fit on the 
floor - straight into a final security check. 

In the corridor between the lounge lock and the ship, he heard Sma's 
voice, tiny in his ear. 'That's it, Zakalwe. Can't tight beam on the ship 
without being spotted. We'll only contact in a real emergency. Use 
the Solotol phonelink if you want to talk, but remember it'll be 
monitored. Goodbye; good luck.' 

And then he and Beychae were through another air lock, and on the 
clipper Osom Emananish, which would take them into interstellar 
space. 

He spent the hour or so before departure walking round the clipper, 

just checking it all out, so that he knew where everything was. 

The speaker system, and most of the visible screens, announced their 
departure. The clipper drifted, then dawdled, then raced away from 
the station; it swung away past the sun and the gas-giant Soreraurth. 
Soreraurth was where the module was having to keep hidden, a 
hundred kilometres deep in the vast perpetual storm that was the 
mighty planet's atmosphere. An atmosphere that would be 
plundered, mined, stripped and altered by the Humanists, if they had 
their way. He watched the gas-giant fall astern, wondered who was 
really right and wrong, and felt an odd helplessness. 

He was passing through the bustle of a small bar, on his way to check 
on Beychae, when he heard a voice behind him say, 'Ah; sincere 
hellos, and things! Mr Starabinde, isn't it?' 

He turned slowly. 

It was the small doctor from the scar party. The little man stood at 
the crowded bar, beckoning to him. 

He walked over, squeezing between the chattering passengers. 

'Doctor; good day.' 

The little man nodded, 'Stapangarderslinaiterray; but call me Stap.' 

'With pleasure, and even relief.' He smiled. 'And please call me 
Sherad.' 

'Well! Small cluster, isn't it? May I buy you a drink?' He flashed his 
toothy grin, which - caught in a small spotlight above the bar - glared 
quite startlingly. 

'What an excellent idea.' 

They found a small table, wedged up against one bulkhead. The 
doctor wiped his nose, adjusted his immaculate suit. 

'So, Sherad, what brings you along on this little jaunt?' 

'Well, actually... Stap,' he said quietly. 'I'm travelling sort of... 
incognito, so I'd appreciate it if you didn't... broadcast my name, you 
know?' 

'Absolutely!' Doctor Stap said, nodding fiercely. He glanced round 
conspiratorially, leaned closer. 'My discretion is exemplary. Have had 
to "travel quietly"...' his eyebrows waggled '... myself, on occasion. 
You just let me know if I can be of any help.' 

'You're very kind.' He raised his glass. 

They drank to a safe voyage. 

'Are you going to the "end of the line", to Breskial?' Stap asked. 

He nodded. 'Yes; myself and a business associate.' 

Doctor Stap nodded, grinning. 'Ah, a "business associate" Ah.' 

'No, doctor; not a "business associate", a business associate; a 
gentleman, and quite elderly, and in a different cabin... would that all 
three descriptions were their opposite, of course.' 

'Ha! Quite!' the doctor said. 

'Another drink?' 

'What's to know?' He shrugged. He glanced at the screen, on the door 
of Beychae's cramped cabin. 'Nothing on the news?' 

'Nothing,' Beychae said. 'They mentioned an all-ports security 
exercise, but nothing directly about you or me.' 

'Well, we probably aren't in any more danger because the doc's 
aboard than we were already.' 

'How much is that?' 

'Too much. They're bound to work out what happened eventually; 
we'll never get to Breskial before they do.' 

'Then?' 

'Then, unless I can think of something, the Culture either has to let 
us be taken back, or take this ship over, which is going to be tricky 
to explain, and bound to remove some of your credibility.' 

'If I decide to do as you ask, Cheradenine.' 

He looked at the other man, sitting alongside him on the narrow bed. 
'Yeah; if.' 

There was little flammable on board, nothing explosive, and most of 
the 
circuitry 
was 
optical 
rather 
than 
electronic. 
Doubtless 

the Xenophobe could make the clipper Osom Emananish dance and 
sing with the effector equivalent of one hand tied behind its back, 
from somewhere in the next stellar system, but without the combat 
suit or a weapon, he was going to have a tough job trying to do 
anything, if and when it came to it. 

Meanwhile the clipper crawled through space; Beychae stayed in his 
cabin, catching up on the news via the screen, and sleeping. 

'I seem to have swapped one subtle form of imprisonment for 
another, Cheradenine,' he observed, the day after they left, as the 

other man brought him supper. 

'Tsoldrin, don't go cabin crazy; if you want to go out, go out. It's a 
little safer this way, but... well, only a little.' 

'Well,' Tsoldrin said, taking the tray and lifting the cover to inspect 
the contents. 'For now it's easy enough to treat the news and current 
affairs casts as my research material, so I do not feel unduly 
confined.' He set the cover aside. 'But a couple of weeks might be 
asking rather too much, Cheradenine.' 

'Don't worry,' he said, dejectedly. 'I doubt it'll come to that.' 

'They let you aboard with that thing?' he laughed. 

'Shh, good sir,' the doctor said, pulling the other man away from the 
press of people. 'I have a long-standing arrangement with the 
shipping line; my machine is recognised as being of primary medical 
importance.' 

'Sounds expensive. You must have to charge a lot, doctor.' 

'There is, of course, a small consideration involved, but well within 
the means of most cultured people, and I can assure you of some 
very exclusive company, and complete discretion, as ever.' 

'Thank you for the offer, Doctor, but I'm afraid not.' 

'It really is the opportunity of a lifetime; you are most lucky to have 

the chance a second time.' 

'I'm sure. Perhaps if it occurs a third time. Excuse me.' He patted 
Stap on the shoulder. 'Oh; shall I see you for drinks this evening?' 

The doctor shook his head. 'I'll be setting up; preparing, I'm afraid, 
Sherad.' He looked somehow plaintive. 'It is a great opportunity,' he 
said, toothily. 

'Oh, I'm well aware of that, Doctor Stap.' 

'Thank you. It's taken years of diligent practice.' 

'I bet.' 

'Oh no; you're going to tell me you're not wicked at all; I can see it 
in your eyes. Yes; yes, it's there; purity! I recognise the symptoms. 
But,' he put one hand on her forearm, 'don't worry. It can be cured.' 

She pushed him away, but only with the softest of pressures. 'You're 
terrible.' The hand that had pushed him away lingered just for a 
moment on his chest. 'You're bad.' 

'I confess. You have seen into my soul...' He looked round for a 
second, as the background noise of the ship altered. He smiled back 
at the lady. 'But, ah, it gives me such succour to confess to one so 
close to a goddess-like beauty.' 

She laughed throatily, her slender neck exposed as she put her head 
back. 'Do you normally get anywhere with this line?' she asked, 
shaking her head. 

He looked hurt, shook his head sadly. 'Oh, why are beautiful women 
so cynical these days?' 

Then he saw her gaze shift to somewhere behind him. 

He turned. 'Yes, Officer?' he said to one of the two junior officers he 
found standing behind him. Both had guns in open holsters. 

'Mr... Sherad?' the young man said. 

He watched the young officer's eyes and suddenly felt sick; the man 
knew. They'd been traced. Somebody somewhere had put the 
numbers together and come up with the right answer. 'Yes?' he said, 
grinning rather stupidly. 'You guys wanna drink?' He laughed, looked 
round at the woman. 

'No thank you, sir. Would you come with us please?' 

'Whassa matter?' he said, sniffing, then draining his glass. He wiped 
his hands on the lapels of his jacket. 'Captain need some help steering 
the ship, yeah?' he laughed, slid off his bar stool, turned to the 
woman, took her hand and kissed it. 'My dear lady; I bid you farewell, 
until we meet again.' He put both hands to his chest. 'But always 
remember this; there is forever a piece of my heart that belongs to 
you.' 

She smiled uncertainly. He laughed loudly, turned and bumped into 
the bar stool. 'Whoops!' he said. 

'This way, Mr Sherad,' the first one said. 'Yeah; yeah; just wherever.' 

He'd hoped they'd take him into the crew-only section, but when they 
got into the small lift, they pressed for the lowest deck; stores, non-
vacuum luggage, and the brig. 

'I think I'm going to be sick,' he said, as soon as the doors closed. He 
bent over, retched, forcing out the last few drinks. 

One jumped out of the way, to keep his shiny boots clean; the other, 
he sensed, was bending down, putting one hand to his back. 

He stopped throwing up, slammed one elbow up into the man's nose; 
he crashed back into the elevator's rear doors. The second man 
hadn't quite recovered his balance. He straightened and punched him 

straight in the face. The second one folded, knees then backside 
hammering into the floor. The lift chimed, stopped between decks, its 
weight-limit alarm triggered by all the commotion. He thumped the 
topmost button and the lift started up. 

He took the guns from the two unconscious officers; neural stunners. 
He shook his head. The elevator chimed again. The floor they'd left. 
He stepped forward, stuffing the two stun guns into his jacket as he 
braced his feet in the far corners of the small space, straddling the 
two men, and pressed his hands against the doors. He grunted with 
the effort of holding the doors closed, but eventually the elevator 
gave up the struggle. Still holding the doors with both hands, he 
twisted his body until he got his head to the topmost button, and 
pressed it with his forehead. The lift hummed upwards again. 

When the doors opened, three people stood outside, on the private 
lounge level. They looked at the two unconscious guards and the 
small watery pool of vomit. Then he zapped them with the stun guns, 
and they fell. He pulled one of the officers half out of the elevator so 
the lift couldn't close its doors, and used a stun gun on both men too. 

The Starlight Lounge door was closed. He pressed the button, looking 
back down the corridor, where the lift doors pulsed gently against the 
fallen officer's body like some unsubtle lover. There was a distant 
chime, and a voice said, 'Please clear the doors. Please clear the 
doors.' 

'Yes?' said the door to the Starlight Lounge. 

'Stap; it's Sherad. I changed my mind.' 

'Excellent!' The door opened. 

He went quickly inside, hit the shut button. The modest lounge was 
full of drug smoke, low light, and mutilated people. Music played, and 
all eyes - not all of them in their sockets - turned to him. The doctor's 
tall grey machine was over near the bar, where a couple of people 
were serving. 

He got the doctor between him and the others, stuck the stun gun 

under the little man's chin. 'Bad news, Stap. These things can be fatal 
at close range, and this one's on maximum. I need your machine. I'd 
prefer to have your co-operation, too, but I can get by without it. 
I'm very serious, and in a terrible hurry, so what's it to be?' 

Stap made a gurgling noise. 

'Three,' he said, pressing the stun gun a little harder into the little 
doctor's neck. 'Two,...' 

'All right! This way!' 

He let him go, following Stap across the floor to the tall machine he 
used for his strange trade. He kept his hands together, stun pistols 
hidden up each sleeve; he nodded to a few people as they passed. 
He spotted a clear line of fire to somebody on the far side of the room, 
just for an instant. He zapped them; they fell spectacularly onto a 
laden table. While everybody was looking there, he and Stap - 
prodded once to keep going when the crash came from the distant 
table - got to the machine. 

'Excuse me,' he said to one of the bar girls. 'Would you help the 
doctor?' He nodded behind the bar. 'He wants to move the machine 
through there, don't you, Doc?' 

They entered the small store room behind the bar. He thanked the 
girl outside, closed the door, locked it, and shifted a pile of containers 
in front of it. He smiled at the alarmed-looking doctor. 

'See that wall behind you, Stap?' 

The doctor's gaze flicked that way. 

'We're going through it, Doc, with your machine.' 

'You can't! You...' 

He put the stun gun against the man's forehead. Stap closed his eyes. 
A corner of handkerchief, protruding from a breast pocket, trembled. 

'Stap; I think I know how that machine must work to do what it does. 

I want a cutting field; a slicer that'll take molecular bonds apart. If 
you won't do it, and right now, I'll put you out and try it myself, and 
if I get it wrong and fuse the fucker, you're going to have some very, 
very unhappy customers out there; they might even do what you've 
done to them, but without the old machine here, hmm?' 

Stap swallowed. 'Mm...' he began. One of his hands moved slowly 
towards his jacket. 'Mmm... mmm... my t-t-tool k-kit.' 

He took the wallet of tools out, turned shakily to the machine and 
opened a panel. 

The door behind them chimed. He found some sort of chromed bar 
utensil on a shelf, moved the containers in front of the door aside - 
Stap looked round, but saw the gun was still pointed at him, and 
turned back - and jammed the piece of metal into the gap between 
the sliding door and its housing. The door gave an outraged chirp, 
and a red light blinked urgently on the open/close button. He slid the 
containers back again. 

'Hurry up, Stap,' he said. 

'I'm doing all I can!' the little doctor yelped. The machine made a 
deep buzzing noise. Blue light played around a cylindrical section 
about a metre from the floor. 

He looked at the section, eyes narrowing. 

'What are you hoping to do?' the doctor said, voice shaking. 

'Just keep working, Doc; you have half a minute before I try doing it 
myself.' He looked over the doctor's shoulder, saw him fiddling with 
a circular control mapped out in degrees. 

All he could hope to do was get the machine going and then attack 
whatever parts of the ship he could. Disable it, somehow. All ships 
tended to be complicated, and, to a degree, the cruder a ship was, 
paradoxically the more complicated it was too. He just had to hope 
he could hit something vital without blowing the thing up. 

'Nearly ready,' the doctor said. He looked nervously backwards, one 
shaking finger going towards a small red button. 

'Okay, Doc,' he told the trembling man, looking suspiciously at the 
blue light playing round the cylindrical section. He squatted down 
level with the doctor. 'Go on,' he nodded. 

'Um...' The doctor swallowed. 'It might be better if you stood back, 
over there.' 

'No. Let's just try it, eh?' He hit the little red button. A hemi-disc of 
blue light shot out over their heads from the cylindrical section of the 
machine and sliced through the containers he had stacked against 
the door; fluids spurted out of them. The shelves to one side 
collapsed, supports severed by the humming blue disc. He grinned at 
the wreckage; if he'd still been standing, the blue field would have 
cut him in half. 

'Nice try, Doc,' he said. The little doctor slumped to the floor like a 
pile of wet sand as the stun pistol hummed. Snack packets and drink 
cartons showered onto the floor from the demolished shelves; the 
ones falling through the blue beam hit the floor shredded; drink 
poured from the punctured containers in front of the door. There was 
a thumping noise coming from behind the containers. 

He rather appreciated the heady smell of alcohol filling the store 
room, but hoped there weren't enough spirits involved to cause a fire. 
He spun the machine around, splashing through the drink gradually 
collecting on the floor of the small store room; the flickering blue half-
disc cut through more shelves before sinking into the bulkhead 
opposite the door. 

The machine shook; the air filled with a teeth-cracking whine, and 
black smoke spun round against the wrecked shelves as though 
propelled by the cutting blue light and then fell quickly to the surface 
of the sloshing drink filling the bottom decimetre of the store room, 
where it collected like a tiny dark fogbank. He started manipulating 
the controls on the machine; a little holo screen showed the shape of 
the field; he found a couple of tiny joysticks that altered it, producing 
an elliptical field. The machine thumped harder; the noise rose in 

pitch and black smoke poured out around him. 

The thumping from behind the door got louder. The black smoke was 
rising in the room, and already he felt light-headed. He pushed hard 
against the machine with his shoulder; it trundled forward, howling; 
something gave. 

He put his back against the machine and pushed with his feet; there 
was a bang from in front of the machine and it started to roll away 
from him; he turned, pushed with his shoulder again, staggering past 
smoking shelves through a glowing hole into a wrecked room full of 
tall metal cabinets. Drink spluttered through the gap. He held the 
machine steady for a moment; he opened one of the cabinets, to find 
a glittering mass of hair-fine filaments wrapped round cables and 
rods. Lights winked on a long thin control board, like some linear city 
seen at night. 

He pursed his lips and made a kissing sound at the fibres. 
'Congratulations,' he said to himself. 'You have won a major prize.' 
He hunkered down at the humming machine, adjusted the controls 
to something like the way Stap had had them, but producing a circular 
field, then switched it to full power. 

The blue disc slammed into the grey cabinets in a blinding maelstrom 
of sparks; the noise was numbing. He left the machine where it was 
and waddled away under the blue disc, splashing back into the control 
room. He eased himself over the still unconscious doctor, kicked the 
containers away from the door and removed the metal tool from the 
door. The blue beam wasn't extending far through the gap from the 
control room, so he stood up, shoved the door open with his shoulder, 
and fell out into the arms of a startled ship's officer, just as the field 
machine blew up and blasted both of them across the bar and into 
the lounge. All the lights in the lounge went out. 

The hospital ceiling was white, like the walls and the sheets. Outside, 
on the surface of the berg, all was white as well. Today was a 
whiteout; a bright scour of dry crystals wheeling past the hospital 

windows. The last four days had been the same while the storm-wind 
blew, and the weather people said they expected no break for another 
two or three days. He thought of the troops, hunkered down in 
trenches and ice caves, afraid to curse the howling storm, because it 
meant there would probably be no fighting. The pilots would be glad 
too, but pretend they were not, and would loudly curse the storm that 
prevented them flying; having looked at the forecast, most would 
now be getting profoundly drunk. 

He watched the white windows. Seeing the blue sky was supposed to 
be good for you. That was why they built hospitals on the surface; 
everything else was under the surface of the ice. The outer walls of 
the hospital were painted bright red, so that they would not be 
attacked by enemy aircraft. He had seen enemy hospitals from the 
air, strung out across the white glare of the berg's snow hills like 
bright drops of blood fallen frozen from some wounded soldier. 

A whorl of whiteness appeared briefly at one window as the snow 
flurry circled on some vortex in the gale, then disappeared. He stared 
at the falling chaos beyond the layers of glass, eyes narrowing, as 
though by sheer concentration he might find some pattern in the 
inchoate blizzard. He put one hand up, touching the white bandage 
which circled his head. 

His eyes closed, as he tried - again - to remember. His hand fell to 
the sheets over his chest. 

'How are we today?' said the young nurse. She appeared at the 
bedside, holding a small chair. She placed the chair between his bed 
and the empty one to his right. All the other beds were empty; he 
was the only person in the ward. There hadn't been a big attack for 
a month or so. 

She sat down. He smiled, glad to see her, and glad that she had the 
time to stop and talk. 'Okay,' he nodded. 'Still trying to remember 
what happened.' 

She smoothed her white uniform over her lap. 'How are your fingers 
today?' 

He held up both hands, waggled the fingers on his right hand, then 
looked at his left; the fingers moved a little. He frowned. 'About the 
same,' he said, as though apologising. 

'You're seeing the doc this afternoon; he'll probably get the physics 
to take a look at you.' 

'What I need is a physio for my memory,' he said, closing his eyes 
briefly. 'I know there was something important I had to remember...' 
His voice trailed off. He realised he'd forgotten the nurse's name. 

'I don't think we have such things,' she smiled. 'Did they have them 
where you came from?' 

'This had happened before; yesterday, hadn't it? Hadn't he forgotten 
her name yesterday too? He smiled. 'I ought to say I don't 
remember,' he said, grinning. 'But no, I don't think they did.' 

He'd forgotten her name yesterday, and the day before, but he'd 
come up with a plan; he'd done something about it... 

'Perhaps they didn't need them there, with that thick skull of yours.' 

She was still smiling. He laughed, trying to remember what the plan 
was he'd come up with. Something to do with blowing, with breath, 
and paper... 

'Perhaps not,' he agreed. His thick skull; that was why he was here. 
A thick skull, a skull thicker or at least more hardy than they were 
used to; a thick skull that had not quite shattered when somebody 
had shot him in in the head. (But why, when he had not been fighting 
at the time, when he'd been amongst his own side, his fellow pilots?) 

Fractured, instead; fractured, broken, but not smashed irre-
trievably... He looked to one side, where there was a little cabinet. A 
fold of paper lay on its surface. 

'Don't tire yourself out trying to remember things,' the nurse said. 
'Maybe you won't remember things; it doesn't matter very much. 
Your mind has to heal too, you know.' 

He heard her talk, took in what she was saying... but he was trying 
to remember what it was he'd told himself the day before; that little 
slip of paper; he had to do something to it. He blew at it; the top of 
the folded paper slip hinged up, so that he could see what was written 
underneath; TALIBE. The paper sank back again. He'd angled it - he 
remembered now - so that she couldn't see. 

Her name was Talibe. Of course; it sounded familiar. 

'I am healing,' he said. 'But there was something I had to remember, 
Talibe. It was important; I know it was.' 

She stood up, patted him on one shoulder. 'Forget it. You mustn't 
worry yourself. Why not take a nap; shall I draw the curtains?' 

'No,' he said. 'Can't you stay longer, Talibe?' 

'You need your rest, Cheradenine,' she said, putting one hand to his 
brow. 'I'll be back soon, to take your temperature and change your 
dressings. Ring the bell if you need anything else.' She patted his 
hand, and went away, taking the small white chair with her; she 
stopped at the doors, looked back. 'Oh, yes; did I leave a pair of 
scissors here, last time I changed your dressing?' 

He looked around him, and shook his head. 'Don't think so.' 

Talibe shrugged. 'Oh well.' She went out of the ward; he heard her 
put the chair down on the corridor floor as the doors swung closed. 

He looked at the window again. 

Talibe took the chair away each time because he'd gone crazy when 
he'd first seen it, when he woke up for the first time. Even after that, 
when his mental state seemed more stable, he would shiver, wide-
eyed with fear when he woke each morning, just because the white 
chair was sitting there at the side of his bed. So they had stacked the 
ward's few chairs out of his sight, in one corner, and Talibe, or the 
doctors, brought the chair in from the corridor with them when they 
came to see him. 

He wished he could forget that; forget about the chair, and the 
Chairmaker, forget about the Staberinde. Why did that stay sharp 
and fresh, after so many years and so long a journey? And yet 
whatever had happened just a few days ago - when somebody had 
shot him, left him for dead in the hangar - that was dim and vague 
as something seen through the storm of snow. 

He stared at the frozen clouds beyond the window, the amorphous 
frenzy of the snow. Its meaningless mocked him. 

He slumped down in the bed, letting the piled bedclothes submerge 
him, like some drift, and slept, his right hand under the pillow, curled 
round one leg of the scissors he'd taken from Talibe's tray the day 
before. 

'Getting better,' he told the other man. 

Insile sat on the nearest bed, threw his cap on the pillow, unfastened 
the top button of his uniform. His short, spiky black hair made his 
pale face look white as the blankness still filling the world beyond the 
ward windows. 'How they treating you?' 

'Fine.' 

'Damn good-looking nurse you've got out there.' 

'Talibe.' He smiled. 'Yes; she's okay.' 

Insile laughed and set back on the bed, supporting himself with his 
arms splayed out behind. 'Only "okay"? Zakalwe, she's gorgeous. You 
get bed-baths?' 

'No; I'm able to walk to the bathroom.' 

'Want me to break your legs?' 

'Perhaps later.' He laughed. 

Insile laughed a little too, then looked at the storm beyond the 
windows. 'How about your memory? Getting any better?' He picked 
at the doubled-over white sheet near where his cap lay. 

'No,' he said. In fact he thought it might be, but somehow he didn't 
want to tell people; maybe he thought it would be bad luck. 'I 
remember being in the mess, and that card game... then...' Then he 
remembered seeing the white chair at his bedside and filling his lungs 
with all the air in the world and screaming like a hurricane until the 
end of time, or at least until Talibe came and calmed him (Livueta? 
he'd whispered; Dar... Livueta?). He shrugged.'... then I was here.' 

'Well,' Saaz said, straightening the crease on his uniform trousers, 
'the good news is, we managed to get the blood off the hangar floor.' 

'I expect it to be returned.' 

'Deal, but we're not cleaning it.' 

'How are the others?' 

Saaz sighed, shook his head, smoothed the hair at the back of his 
neck. 'Oh, just the same dear lovable fine bunch of lads they ever 
were.' He shrugged. 'The rest of the squadron... said to send their 
best wishes for a rapid recovery. But you pissed them off that night.' 
He looked sadly at the man in the bed. 'Cheri, old pal, nobody likes 
the war, but there are ways of saying so... You just did it wrong. I 
mean, we all appreciate what you've done; we know this isn't really 
your battle, but I think... I think some of the guys... even feel bad 
about that. I hear them sometimes; you must have; at night, having 
nightmares. You can see that look in their eyes sometimes, like they 
know how bad the odds are, and they just aren't going to come 
through all this. They're scared; they might try to put a bullet 
through my head if I said so to their face, but scared is what they 
are. They'd love a way out of this war. They're brave men, and they 
want to fight for their country, but they want out, and nobody who 

knew the odds would blame them. Any honourable excuse. They 
wouldn't shoot themselves in the foot, and nowadays they won't go 
for a walk outside in ordinary shoes and come back with frostbite 
because too many did that early on; but they'd love a way out of this. 
You don't have to be here, but you are; you choose to fight, and a lot 
of them resent you for it; it makes them feel like cowards, because 
they know that if they were in your boots they'd be on land, telling 
the girls what a brave pilot they have the chance to dance with.' 

'I'm sorry I upset them.' He touched the bandages on his head. 'I'd 
no idea they felt this strongly though.' 

'They don't.' Insile frowned. 'That's what's weird.' He got up and 
walked over to the nearest window, looking out at the blizzard. 

'Shit, Cheri, half those guys would've gladly invited you into the 
hangar and done their best to lose you a couple of teeth, but a gun?' 
He shook his head. 'There's not one of those guys I'd trust behind me 
with a bread roll or a handful of ice-cubes, but if it was a gun...' He 
shook his head again. 'I wouldn't think twice. They just aren't like 
that.' 

'Maybe I imagined it all, Saaz,' he said. 

Saaz looked round, a worried expression on his face. It melted a little 
when he saw his friend was smiling. 'Cheri; I admit I don't want 
to imagine I'm wrong about one of them, but the alternative is... just 
somebody else. I don't know who. The military police don't know 
either.' 

'I don't think I was much help to them,' he confessed. 

Saaz came back, sat down on the other bed again. 'You really have 
no idea who you talked to afterwards? Where you went?' 

'None.' 

'You told me you were going to the briefing room, to check out the 
latest targets.' 

'Yes, so I've heard.' 

'But when Jine went there - to invite you to step into the hangar for 
saying such terrible things about our high command and our low 
tactics - you weren't there.' 

'I don't know what happened, Saaz; I'm sorry, but I just...' He felt 
tears prick behind his eyes. The suddenness surprised him. He put 
the fruit back down in his lap. He made a very large sniffing noise, 
rubbed his nose, and coughed, patted his chest. 'I'm sorry,' he 
repeated. 

Insile watched the other man for a moment as he reached for a 
handkerchief from the bedside table. 

Saaz shrugged, grinned broadly. 'Hey; never mind. It'll come back to 
you. Maybe it was just some loony ground-crewman pissed off 
because you'd stepped on his fingers once too often. If you want to 
remember, don't try too hard.' 

'Yeah; "Get some rest", I've heard that before, Saaz.' He picked the 
fruit from his lap, placed it on the bedside cabinet. 

'Can I get you anything, for next time?' Insile asked. 'Apart from 
Talibe, on whom I may have designs myself if you refuse to rise to 
the occasion.' 

'No, thanks.' 

'Booze?' 

'No, I'm saving myself for the mess-room bar.' 

'Books?' 

'Really, Saaz; nothing.' 

'Zakalwe,' Saaz laughed. 'There isn't even anybody else here for you 
to talk to; what do you do all day?' 

He looked at the window, then back at Saaz. 'I think, quite a lot,' he 

said. 'I try to remember.' 

Saaz came over to the bed. He looked very young. He hesitated, then 
punched him gently in the chest. He glanced at the bandages. 'Don't 
get lost in there, old buddy-pal.' 

He was expressionless for a moment. 'Yeah; don't worry. But anyway, 
I'm a good navigator.' 

The frustration of it made him want to scream sometimes; to tear the 
white plump pillows in half and pick up the white chair and smash it 
through the windows to let the mad white fury out there inside. 

He wondered how quickly he'd freeze if the windows were open. 

Well, at least it would be appropriate; he'd arrived here frozen, so 
why not leave the same way? He entertained the thought that some 
cell-memory, some bone-remembered affinity had drawn him here, 
of all places, where the great battles were fought on the titanic 
crashing tabular bergs, calved from their vast glaciers and swirling 
like ice-cubes in some planet-sized cocktail glass, a scatter of ever-
shifting frozen islands, some of them hundreds of kilometres long, 
circling the world between pole and tropic, their broad backs a white 
wasteland spattered with blood and bodies, and the wrecks of tanks 
and planes. 

To fight for what would inevitably melt and could never provide food 
or minerals or a permanent place to live, seemed an almost deliberate 
caricature of the conventional folly of war. He enjoyed the fight, but 
even the way the war was fought disturbed him, and he had made 
enemies amongst the other pilots, and his superiors, by speaking his 

mind. 

But somehow he knew that Saaz was right; it had not been what he'd 
said in the mess that had led to somebody trying to kill him. At least 
(said something in him), not directly... 

'Thank you, Nurse,' he said at the door, then closed it, smiled, and 
came over to the bed; he had the white chair. He sat in it and drew 
himself up, so that his girth was made to look less. 'Well, Captain 
Zakalwe, how are we coming along?' 

A flowery smell, Thone's preferred scent, drifted over from the man. 
'I hope to be flying within a couple of weeks, sir,' he said. He'd never 
liked the CO, but made the effort of smiling bravely. 

'Do you?' Thone said. 'Do you now. That's not what the doctors say, 
Captain Zakalwe. Unless they're saying different things to me than 
they are to you.' 

He frowned. 'Well, it might be a... few weeks, sir...' 

'It might be we have to send you home, I think, Captain Zakalwe,' 
Thone said, with an insincere smiled. '... or at least to the mainland, 
as I'm told your home is further afield, eh?' 

'I'm sure I'll be able to return to my duties, sir. Of course, I realise 
there will be a medical, but...' 

'Yes, yes, yes,' Thone said. 'Well, we'll just have to see, won't we. 
Hmm. Very good.' He stood up. 'Is there anyth -' 

'There's nothing you can get -' He began, then saw the look on 
Thone's face. 'I beg your pardon, sir.' 

'As I was saying, Captain; is there anything I can get you?' 

He looked down at the white sheets. 'No, sir. Thank you, sir.' 

'A speedy recovery, Captain Zakalwe,' Thone said frostily. 

He saluted Thone, who nodded, turned and left. 

He was left looking at the white chair. 

Nurse Talibe came in after a few moments, arms crossed, her round, 
pale face very calm and kind. 'Try to sleep,' she told him, and took 
the chair away. 

He woke with the smell of flowers in his nostrils. 

He clutched beneath the pillow, felt the single leg of the sharp, long-
nosed scissor. 

He remembered Thone's face. 

He remembered the briefing room, and the four COs; they'd invited 
him for a drink, said they wanted a word. 

In the room of one of them - he couldn't remember their names, but 
he would remember soon, and already he would recognise them - 
they asked him about what they'd heard he'd said in the mess. 

And, a little drunk, and thinking he was very clever, thinking he might 
find out something interesting, he'd told them what he suspected they 
wanted to hear, not what he'd said to the other pilots. 

And had discovered a plot. He wanted the new government to be true 
to its populist promises, and end the war. They wanted to stage a 
coup, and they needed good pilots. 

High on the drink and his nerves, he'd left them thinking he was for 
them, and gone straight to Thone. Thone the hard but fair; Thone the 
dislikeable and petty, Thone the vain, the perfumed, but Thone the 
man known to be pro-government. (Though Saaz Insile had once said 
the man was pro-government with the pilots, and anti-government 
with their superiors.) 

And the look on Thone's face... 

Not then; later. After Thone had told him to say nothing to anybody 
else, because he thought there might be traitors amongst the pilots 
too, and told him to go to bed as though nothing had happened, and 
he'd gone, and because he'd still been drunk, maybe, woken up that 
second too late as they came for him, shoved some impregnated rag 
over his face and held it there while he struggled, but eventually had 
to breathe, and the choking fumes took him. 

Dragged through the corridors, socked feet sliding over the tiles; men 
on either side. They went to one of the hangars, and somebody went 
to the lift controls, and he still could only dimly see the floor in front 
of him and could not raise his head. But he could smell flowers, from 
the man on his right. 

The clamshell doors opened overhead, cracking; he heard the noise 
of the storm, shrieking from the darkness. They dragged him over to 
the lift. 

He tensed, swung round, grabbed at Thone's collar; saw the man's 
face; appalled, full of fear. He felt the man on the other side of him 
grab at his free arm; he wriggled, got his other arm free from Thone, 
saw the pistol in the CO's holster. 

He got the gun; he remembered shouting, getting away but falling; 
he tried to shoot but the gun would not work. Lights flickered on at 
the far side of the hangar. It's not loaded! It's not loaded! Thone 
shouted to the others. They looked over to the far side of the hangar; 

there were planes in the way, but there was somebody there, 
shouting about opening the hangar doors at night with the lights on. 

He never saw who shot him. A sledgehammer hit the side of his head 
and the next thing he saw was the white chair. 

The snow boiled wildly beyond the floodlit windows. 

He watched it until dawn, remembering and remembering. 

'Yes, of course, but first your medication.' 

He took her hand in his. 'No, Talibe; first phone the squadron.' He 
winked at her. 'Please, for me.' 

She shook her head. 'Pest.' She walked away through the doors. 

'He's on leave,' she told him, taking up the clipboard to check off the 
medication he was receiving. 

'Shit!' Saaz hadn't said anything about leave. 

'Captain, tut tut,' she said, shaking a bottle. 

'The police, Talibe. Call the military police; do it now. This really is 
urgent.' 

'Medication first, Captain.' 

'Well as soon as I've taken it, you promise?' 

'Promise. Open wide.' 

'Aaaah...' 

And what would have happened if he had? 

He felt under the pillow again, for the scissor. It was there, cool and 
sharp. 

'I am perky; I am awake!' 

'Quiet, and take these.' 

He took them. 

He fell asleep clutching the scissor under the pillow, while the 
whiteness outside the windows went on and on and eventually 
penetrated the glass, layer by layer, by a process of discrete osmosis, 
and gravitated naturally to his head, and spun slowly in orbit round 
him, and joined with the white torus of bandages and dissolved them 
and unwound them and deposited the remains in one corner of the 
room where the white chairs gathered, muttering, plotting, and slowly 

pressed in against his head, tighter and tighter, whirling in the silly 
snow-flake dance, faster and faster as they came closer and closer 
until eventually they became the bandage, cold and tight about his 
fevered head, and - finding the treated wound - slunk in through his 
skin and his skull, coldly and crisply and crystally into his brain. 

'You sure he's out?' 

'I gave him twice the usual dose. If he isn't out he's dead.' 

'Still got a pulse. You take his arms.' 

'Okay... Hup! Hey: look at this!' 

'Huh.' 

'My fault. I wondered where those had got to. Sorry.' 

'You did fine, kid. You better go. Thanks. This won't be forgotten.' 

'Okay...' 

'What?' 

'It... it will be quick, yes? Before he wakes up?' 

'Sure. Oh, sure; yeah. He won't ever know. Won't feel a thing.' 

He woke, and knew he was dying. The blizzard had already numbed 
one side of his face. One hand was stuck to the hard-packed snow 
beneath him. He was still in the standard-issue hospital pyjamas. The 
cold was not cold; it was a stunning sort of pain, eating into him from 
every direction. 

He raised his head, looking around. A few flat metres of snow, in what 
might have been morning light. The blizzard a little quieter than it 
had been, but still fierce. The last temperature he'd heard quoted had 
been ten below, but with the wind-chill, it was much, much worse 
than that. His head and hands and feet and genitals all ached. 

The cold had woken him. It must have. It must have woken him 
quickly or he would already be dead. They must just have left him. If 
he could find which way they'd gone, follow them... 

He tried to move, but could not. He screamed inside, to produce the 
most awesome surge of will he had ever attempted... and succeeded 
only in rolling over, and sitting up. 

The effort of it was almost too much; he had to put his hands behind 
him to steady himself. He felt them both freeze there. He knew he 
would never stand up. 

Talibe... he thought, but the blizzard swept that away in an instant. 

Forget Talibe. You're dying. There are more important things. 

He stared into the milky depths of the blizzard as it swept towards 
and past him, like tiny soft stars all packed and hurrying. His face felt 
pierced by a million tiny hot needles, but then started to go numb. 

To have come all this way, he thought, just to die in somebody else's 
war. How silly it all seemed now. Zakalwe, Eleth-iomel, Staberinde; 
Livueta, Darckense. The names reeled off, were blown away by the 
sapping cold of the howling wind. He felt his face shrivel, felt the cold 
burrow through skin and eyeballs to his tongue and teeth and bones. 

He ripped one hand away from the snow behind him; the cold already 
anaesthetising the flayed palm. He opened the jacket of the pyjamas, 

tore off buttons, and exposed the puckered little mark on his chest 
over his heart to the cold blast. He put his hand on the ice behind 
him, and tipped his head up. The bones in his neck seemed to grate, 
clicking as his head moved, as though the cold was seizing up his 
joints. 'Darckense...' he whispered to the boiling chill of the blizzard. 

He saw the woman walking calmly towards him through the storm. 

She walked on the surface of the hard-packed snow, dressed in long 
black boots and a long coat with a furry black collar and cuffs, and 
she wore a small hat. 

Her neck and face were exposed, as were her gloveless hands. She 
had a long, oval face, and deep dark eyes. She walked easily up to 
him, and the storm behind her seemed to part at her back, and he 
felt himself in the lee of something more than just her tall body, and 
something like warmth seemed to seep through his skin, wherever it 
faced her. 

He closed his eyes. He shook his head, which hurt a little, but he did 
it all the same. He opened his eyes again. 

She was still there. 

She had half knelt in front of him, her hands folded on one skirted 
knee, her face level with his. He peered forward, wrenched one hand 
free from the snow again (it was numb, but when he brought the 
hand round, he saw the raw flesh he'd torn from the snow). He tried 
to touch her face, but she took his hand in one of hers. She was 
warm. He thought he had never felt such glorious warmth in all his 
life. 

He laughed, as she held his hand and the storm parted round her and 
her breath clouded the air. 

'Goddamn,' he said. He knew he sounded groggy with the cold and 
with the drug. 'An atheist my entire fucking life, and it turns out the 
credulous assholes were right all along!' He wheezed, coughed. 'Or 
do you surprise them too by not turning up?' 

'You flatter me, Mr Zakalwe,' the woman said, in a superbly deep and 
sexy voice. 'I am not Death, or some imagined Goddess. I am as real 
as you...' She stroked his torn, bleeding palm with one long, strong 
thumb. 'If a little warmer.' 

'Oh, I'm sure you're real,' he said. 'I can feel you're rea...' 

His voice faded; he looked behind the woman. There was a huge 
shape appearing inside the whirling snow. Grey-white like the snow, 
but a single shade darker, it floated up behind the woman, quiet and 
huge and steady. The storm seemed to die, just around them. 

'That's called a twelve person module, Cheradenine,' the woman said. 
'It's come to take you away, if you want to be taken away; to the 
mainland, if you like. Or further afield, away with us if you'd prefer 
that.' 

He was tired of blinking and shaking his head. Whatever insane part 
of his mind wanted to play this bizarre game out would just have to 
be humoured for as long as it took. What it had to do with the 
Staberinde and the Chair, he couldn't tell yet, but if that was what it 
was all about - and what else could it be about? - then there was still 
no point, in this weakened, dying state, trying to fight it. Let it 
happen. He had no real choice. 'With you?' he said, trying not to 
laugh. 

'With us. We'd like to offer you a job.' She smiled. 'But let's talk 
somewhere a little warmer, shall we?' 

'Warmer?' 

She made a single tossing motion with her head. 'The module.' 

'Oh; yeah,' he agreed. 'That.' He tried to pull his other hand away 
from the packed snow behind, failed. 

He looked back at her; she had taken a small flask from her pocket. 
She reached round behind him, slowly poured the flask's contents 
over his hand. It warmed, and came away steaming gently. 

'Okay?' she said, taking his hand, gently helping him up. She pulled 
some slippers from her pocket. 'Here.' 

'Oh.' He laughed. 'Yeah; thanks.' 

She put her arm under one of his, her hand under his other shoulder. 
She was strong. 'You seem to know my name,' he said. 'What's yours, 
if that isn't an impertinent question?' 

She smiled as they walked through the few flakes of gently falling 
snow, towards the slab-sided bulk of the thing she'd called a module. 
It had got so quiet - despite the snow nearby, streaking past - that 
he could hear their feet making the snow creak. 

'My name,' she said. 'Is Rasd-Coduresa Diziet Embless Sma da' 
Marenhide.' 

'No kidding!' 

'But you may call me Diziet.' 

He laughed. 'Yeah; right. Diziet.' 

She walked, he stumbled, into the orange warmth of the module 
interior. The walls looked like highly polished wood, the seats like 
burnished hide, the floor like a fur rug. It all smelled like a mountain 
garden. 

He tried to fill his lungs with the warm, fragrant air. He swayed and 
turned, stunned, to the woman. 

'This is real!' he breathed. 

With enough breath, he might have screamed it. 

The woman nodded. 'Welcome aboard, Cheradenine Zakalwe.' 

He fainted. 

Twelve 

He stood in the long gallery and faced into the light. The tall white 
curtains billowed softly around him, quiet in the warm breeze. His 
long black hair was lifted only slightly by the gentle wind. His hands 
were clasped behind his back. He looked pensive. The silent, lightly 
clouded skies over the mountains, beyond the fortress and the city, 
threw a blank, pervasive light across his face, and standing there like 
that, in plain dark clothes, he looked somehow insubstantial, like 
some statue, or a dead man propped against the battlements to fool 
the foe. 

Somebody spoke his name. 

'Whaa...?' He came to. He looked into the face of an old man who 
looked vaguely familiar. 'Beychae?' he heard himself say. Of course; 
the old man was Tsoldrin Beychae. Older-looking than he 
remembered. 

He looked around, listening. He heard a hum and saw a small, bare 
cabin. Seaship? Spaceship? 

Osom Emananish, a voice from his memory told him. Spaceship; 
clipper, bound for... somewhere near Impren (whatever and 
wherever that was). Impren Habitats. He had to get Tsoldrin Beychae 
to the Impren Habitats. Then he remembered the little doctor and his 
wonderful field machine with the cutting blue disc. Digging deeper, in 
a way that would not have been possible without the Culture's 
training and subtle changes, he found the little running loop of 
memory that took over from what his brain had already stored. The 
room with the fibre optics; blowing a kiss because it was just what 
he'd wanted; the explosion, sailing across the bar into the lounge; 
crashing, hitting his head. The rest was very vague; distant screams, 
and being picked up and carried. Nothing sensible from the voices 

he'd registered while he'd been unconscious. 

He lay for a moment, listening to what his body was telling him. No 
concussion. Slight damage to his right kidney, lots of bruises, 
abrasions on both knees, cuts on right hand... nose still mending. 

He raised himself up, looked again at the cabin; bare metal walls, two 
bunks, one small stool Beychae was sitting on. 'This the brig?' 

Beychae nodded. 'Yes; the prison.' 

He lay back. He noticed he was wearing a disposable crew jumpsuit. 
The terminal bead had gone from his ear, and the lobe was raw and 
sore enough to make him suspect the transceiver hadn't relinquished 
its grip there without a struggle. 'You too, or just me?' he asked. 

'Just you.' 

'What about the ship?' 

'I believe we are heading for the nearest stellar system, on the 
vessel's back-up drive.' 

'What's the nearest system?' 

'Well, the one inhabited planet is called Murssay. There's a war going 
on in part of it; one of those brush-fire conflicts you mentioned. 
Apparently the ship may not be allowed to land.' 

'Land?' He grunted, feeling the back of his head. Largish bruise. 'This 
ship can't land; it's not built for in-atmosphere stuff.' 

'Oh,' Tsoldrin said. 'Well, perhaps they meant we wouldn't be able to 
go down to the surface.' 

'Hmm. Must have some sort of orbiter; a space station, yes?' 

Beychae shrugged. 'I suppose so.' 

He looked round the cabin, making it obvious he was looking for 
something, 'What do they know about you?' He gestured round the 

cabin with his eyes. 

Beychae smiled. 'They know who I am; I've talked to the captain, 
Cheradenine. They did receive an order from the shipping company 
to turn back, though they didn't know why. Now they know why. The 
captain had the choice of waiting for Humanist naval units to pick us 
up, or heading for Murssay, and he chose the latter - despite some 
pressure, I believe - from Governance, via the shipping company. 
Apparently he insisted that the distress channel was used when he 
informed the shipping line of both what had happened to the ship, 
and who I was.' 

'So now everybody knows?' 

'Yes. I imagine by now the whole Cluster knows exactly who both of 
us are. But the point is that I think the captain might not be entirely 
unsympathetic to our cause.' 

'Yeah, but what happens when we get to Murssay?' 

'Looks like we get rid of you, Mr Zakalwe.' said a voice from a speaker 
overhead. 

He looked at Beychae. 'I hope you heard that too.' 

'I believe that might be the captain,' Beychae said. 

'It is,' said the man's voice, 'And we just got informed that we part 
company before we even get to Murssay station.' The man sounded 
peeved. 

'Really, captain?' 

'Yes, really, Mr Zakalwe; I have just received a military 
communication from the Balzeit Hegemonarchy of Murssay. They 
want to uplift you and Mr Beychae before we connect with the Station. 
As they're threatening to attack us if we don't comply, I intend to do 
as they ask; technically under protest, but frankly it will be a relief to 
be rid of you. I may add that the vessel they intend to take you off 
with must be a couple of centuries old, and was not thought to be 

space-worthy until now. If it survives to make the rendezvous in a 
couple of hours, you ought to have an eventful journey through 
Murssay's atmosphere. Mr Beychae; I believe if you reasoned with 
the Balzeit people they might let you continue with us to Murssay 
Station. Whatever you decide, sir, let me wish you a safe trip.' 

Beychae sat back on the small stool. 'Balzeit,' he said, nodding 
thoughtfully. 'I wonder why they want us?' 

'They want you, Tsoldrin,' he said, swinging his feet off the bed. He 
looked uncertain. 'They on the good-guys's side? There's so damn 
many of these little wars...' 

'Well, in theory they are,' Beychae said. 'I think they believe planets 
and machines can have souls.' 

'Yeah, I thought they were,' he said, getting slowly to his feet. He 
flexed his arms, moved his shoulders. 'If this Murssay Station is 
neutral territory, you'd be better going there, though I'd guess this 
Balzeit gang want you, not me.' 

He rubbed the back of his head again, trying to remember what the 
situation was on Murssay. Murssay was just the sort of place that 
could start a full-scale war. There was, in effect, a Consolidationist-
Humanist war taking place between relatively archaic military forces 
on Murssay; Balzeit was on the consolidationist side, even though the 
high command was some sort of priesthood. Why they wanted 
Beychae, he wasn't sure, though he vaguely recalled that the priests 
were into hero-worship in a fairly serious way. Though, having heard 
that Beychae was nearby, maybe they just wanted to hold him to 
ransom. 

Six hours later they rendezvoused with the ancient Balzeit spacecraft. 

They 
stood 
by 
the 
airlock; 
him, 
Beychae, 
the Osom 

Emananish's captain, and four suited figures with guns. The suited 
men wore visored helmets, their pale brown faces visible inside, 
foreheads marked with a blue circle. The circles actually seemed to 
glow, he thought, and he wondered if they were there because of 
some generous religious principle, to help snipers. 

'Yes, Mr Zakalwe,' the captain said. He was a rotund little man with a 
shaved head. He smiled. 'They want you, not Mr Beychae.' 

He looked at the four armed men. 'What are they up to?' he asked 
Beychae. 

'I have no idea,' Beychae admitted. 

He waved his hands out, appealing to the four men. 'Why do you 
want me?' 

'Please come with us, sir,' one of the suited men said, via a suit 
speaker, in what was obviously not his first language. 

'"Please"?' he said. 'You mean I have a choice?' 

The man looked uncomfortable in his suit. He talked for a while 
without any noise coming from the speaker, then said, 'Sir Zakalwe, 
is very important you come. You must. Is very important.' 

He shook his head. 'I must,' he repeated seemingly to himself. He 
turned to the captain. 'Captain, sir; could I have my earring back, 
please?' 

'No,' the captain said, with a beatific grin. 'Now, get off my ship.' 

the clipper sat behind him. The three-man crew - also suited up - 
seemed suspiciously busy, and he had the disquieting impression that 
the manual controls in front of them were not just for emergencies. 

The craft re-entered the atmosphere spectacularly; buffeted, 
creaking, surrounded by gas glowing bright (seen through, he 
realised with a gut-wrenching shock, windows; crystal or glass, not 
screens), and with a gradually increasing howl. The air got even 
warmer. Flashing lights, hurried chatter between the crew, and some 
hurried movements and more excited talk, did not make him feel any 
happier. The glow disappeared and the sky turned from violet to blue; 
the buffeting returned. 

They swept into the night, and plunged into cloud. The flashing lights 
all over the control panels looked even more worrying in darkness. 

It was a rolling landing on some sort of runway, in a thunderstorm. 
The four troopers who'd boarded the Osom Emananish cheered 
weakly from behind him as the landing gear - wheels, he supposed - 
touched down. The craft trundled on for a worryingly long time, 
slewing twice. 

When they finally rolled to a stop, the three crewmen all sat back 
slumped in their seats, arms dangling over the edges, silent and 
staring out into the rain-filled night. 

He undid the belts, took off the helmet. The troopers opened the 
interior airlock. 

When they opened the outer door, it was to reveal rain and lights and 
trucks and tanks and some low buildings in the background, and a 
couple of hundred people, some in military uniforms, some in long 
robes, rain-slicked, some trying to hold umbrellas over others; all 
seemed to have the circular marks on their foreheads. A group of a 
dozen or so, all old, robed, white haired, faces spattered with rain, 
walked to the bottom of the steps that led from the craft to the 
ground. 

'Please, sir,' one of the troopers held out a hand to indicate they 
should descend. The white-haired men in the robes gathered in an 

arrowhead formation at the foot of the steps. 

He stepped out, stood on the little platform before the stairs. The rain 
battered into one side of his head. 

A great shout went up, and the dozen old men at the foot of the steps 
each bowed their head and went down on one knee, into the puddles 
on the dark and wind-whipped runway. A blast of blue light ripped 
the blackness beyond the low buildings, its flickering brilliance 
momentarily illuminating hills and mountains in the distance. The 
assembled people started to chant. It took him a few moments to 
work out what it was, then realised they were yelling, 'Za-kal-we! Za-
kal-we!' 

'Oh oh,' he said to himself. Thunder bellowed in the hills. 

'Messiah...' 

'I really wish you wouldn't use that word.' 

'Oh! Oh, well, Sir Zakalwe; what do you wish?' 

'Ah... how about,' he gestured with his hands. 'Mister?' 

'Sir Zakalwe, sir; you are pre-ordained! You have been beseen!' The 
high priest, sitting across the railway carriage, clenched his hands. 

'"Be-seen"?' 

'Indeed! You are our salvation; our divine recompense! You have 
been sent!' 

'Sent,' he repeated, still trying to come to terms with what had 
happened to him. 

They'd switched the floodlights off shortly after he'd set foot on the 
ground. The priests enveloped him, took him, many arms round his 
shoulders, from the concrete apron to an armoured truck; the lights 
went out on the runway and they were left with the slit-light from the 
truck and tank-lights; cones made fans by blinkers clipped over the 
lights. He was bustled away down a track to a railway station where 
they transferred to a shuttered carriage that clattered into the night. 

There were no windows. 

'Why yes! Our faith has a tradition of finding outside influences, 
because they are always greater.' The high priest - Napoerea, he'd 
said his name was - made a bowing motion. 'And what can be greater 
than the man who was ComMil?' 

ComMil; he had to dredge his memory for that one. ComMil; that was 
what he had been, according to the Cluster's media; director of 
military operations when he and Tsoldrin Beychae had been involved 
in the whole crazy dance the last time. Beychae had been ComPol, in 
charge of politics (ah, these fine divisions!). 

'ComMil...' He nodded, not really much the wiser. 'And you think I 
can help you?' 

'Sir Zakalwe!' the high priest said, shifting down from his seat to kneel 
on the floor again. 'You are what we believe in!' 

He sat back in the upholstered cushions. 'May I ask why?' 

'Sir; your deeds are legend! Forever since the last unpleasantness! 
Our Guider, before he died, prophesied that our salvation would come 
from "beyond the skies", and your name was one of those mentioned; 
so coming to us in our hour of need, you must be our salvation!' 

'I see,' he said, seeing nothing. 'Well, we'll see what we can do.' 

'Messiah!' 

The train drew up in a station somewhere; they were escorted from 
it to an elevator, then to a suite of rooms that he was told looked out 
over the city beneath but it was all in black-out. The internal screens 
were closed. The rooms themselves were quite opulent. He inspected 
them. 

'Yes. Very nice. Thank you.' 

'And here are your boys,' the high priest said, sweeping aside a 
curtain in the bedroom to reveal a languorously displayed half-dozen 
or so young men lying on a very large bed. 

'Well... I, uh... Thank you,' he said, nodding to the high priest. He 
smiled at the boys, who all smiled back. 

'Zakalwe?' 

'Hi, Sma.' 

'Listen...' 

'No. You listen; I would really like to know what the fuck is going on 
here.' 

'Zakalwe,' Sma said, through the scout missile. 'It's complicated, 
but...' 

'But I'm in here with a gang of homosexual priests who think I'm 
going to solve all their military problems.' 

'Cheradenine,' Sma said, in her winning voice. 'These people have 
successfully incorporated a belief in your martial prowess into their 

religion; how can you deny them?' 

'Believe me; it would be easy.' 

'Like it or not, Cheradenine, you've become a legend to these people. 
They think you can do things.' 

'So what am I supposed to do?' 

'Guide them. Be their General.' 

'That's what they expect me to be, I think. But what should I really 
do?' 

'Just that,' Sma's voice said. 'Lead them. Meanwhile Beychae's in the 
Station; Murssay Station. That counts as neutral territory for now, 
and he's making the right noises. Don't you see, Zakalwe?' Sma's 
voice sounded tense, exultant. 'We've got them! Beychae's doing just 
what we wanted, and all you have to do is...' 

'What?' 

'... Just be yourself; operate for these guys!' 

He shook his head. 'Sma; spell it out for me. What am I supposed to 
do?' 

He heard Sma sigh. 'Win their war, Zakalwe. We're putting our weight 
behind the forces you're working with. Maybe if they can win this, and 
Beychae gets behind the winning side here, we can - perhaps - swing 
the Cluster.' He heard her take another deep breath. 'Zakalwe; we 
need this. To a degree, our hands are tied, but we need you to make 
the whole thing settle out. Win their war for them, and we might just 
be able to get it all together. Seriously.' 

'Fine, seriously,' he said to the scout missile. 'But I've already had a 
quick look at their maps, and these guys are in deep shit. If they're 
going to win this war they're going to need a real miracle.' 

'Just try, Cheradenine. Please.' 

'Do I get any help?' 

'Um... how do you mean?' 

'Intelligence, Sma; if you could keep an eye on what the enemy's -' 

'Ah, no, Cheradenine, I'm sorry we can't.' 

'What?' he said loudly, sitting up in the bed. 

'I'm sorry, Zakalwe; really I am, but we've had to agree to that. This 
is a really delicate deal here, and we're having to keep strictly out of 
it. This missile shouldn't even be here; and it'll have to leave soon.' 

'So I'm on my own?' 

'I'm sorry,' Sma said. 

'You're sorry!' he said, collapsing back dramatically on the bed. 

then, compared to the other societies on Murssay, which were 
decades ahead in technology, and - arguably - several centuries 
ahead morally and politically. Before they'd been contacted, the 
natives had the crossbow and the muzzle-loading cannon. Now, a 
century later, they had tanks. Lots of tanks. Tanks and artillery and 
trucks and a few very inefficient aircraft. Each side also had one 
prestige system, partially bought from but mostly just donated by 
some of the Cluster's more advanced societies. The Hegemonarchy 
had its single sixth- or seventh-hand spacecraft; the Empire had a 
clutch of missiles which were generally reckoned to be inoperable, 
and probably were politically unusable anyway because they were 
supposed to be nuclear-tipped. Public opinion in the Cluster could 
tolerate the technologically enhanced continuation of a pointless war 
so long as men, women and children died in relatively small, regular 
batches, but the thought of a million or so being incinerated at once, 
nuked in a city, was not to be tolerated. 

The Empire was winning a conventional war, then, being waged 
across two impoverished countries which left to themselves would 
probably just be harnessing steam power. Instead refugee peasants 
filled the roads, carts loaded with whole households swayed between 
hedgerows, while the tanks ploughed the crop fields and the droning 
planes dropping bombs took care of slum-clearance. 

The Hegemonarchy was retreating across the plains and into the 
mountains as its beleaguered forces fell back before the Empire's 
motorised cavalry. 

The officers seemed to know more about the disposition of their 
enemy's forces than they did about the feelings of their own men. 

He nodded to himself, scanned all the maps, then left for breakfast 
with Napoerea and the rest of the priests. He dragged them all back 
down into the map room afterwards - they would normally have 
returned to their own apartments for contemplation - and asked even 
more questions. 

'And I want a uniform like these guys,' he said, pointing at one of the 
junior regular army officers in the map room. 

'But, Sir Zakalwe,' Napoerea said, looking worried. 'Those would 
demean you!' 

'And these will slow me down,' he said, indicating the long, heavy 
robes he was wearing. 'I want to take a look at the front myself.' 

'But, sir, this is the holy citadel; all our intelligence comes here, all 
our people's prayers are directed here.' 

'Napoerea,' he said, putting his hand on the other man's shoulder. 'I 
know; but I need to see things for myself. I only just got here, 
remember?' He looked round the unhappy faces of the other high 
priests. 'I'm sure your ways work when circumstances are as they 
have been in the past,' he told them, straight-faced. 'But I'm new, 
and so I have to use new ways to discover what you probably already 
know.' He turned back to Napoerea. 'I want my own plane; a modified 
reconnaissance aircraft should do. Two fighters as an escort.' 

The priests had thought it the height of daring unorthodoxy to 
venture out to the space port, thirty kilometres away, by train and 
truck; they thought he was mad to want to start flying all over the 
sub-continent. 

It was what he did for the next few days, however. There was a lull 
of sorts in the fighting just at that point - as the Hegemonarchy's 
forces fled and the Empire's consolidated - which made his task a 
little easier. He wore a plain uniform, without even the half-dozen or 
so medal ribbons that even the most junior officer seemed to warrant 

just for existing. He spoke to the mostly dull, demoralised and 
thoroughly hidebound field generals and colonels, to their staff, and 
to the foot soldiers and tank crews, as well as to the cooks and the 
supply teams and the orderlies and doctors. Most of the time he 
needed an interpreter; only the top brass spoke the Cluster's common 
tongue, but even so he suspected the troops felt closer to somebody 
who spoke a different language but asked them questions than they 
did to somebody who shared their language and only ever used it to 
give orders. 

'You'll get the temples back once we've won the war, and probably 
lots of new treasure to put inside them. They're going to fall whether 
we try to hold there or not, and they'll probably be damaged if not 
destroyed in the fighting. This way, they'll survive intact. And it 
stretches their supply lines like crazy. Look; the rains start in, what? 
A month? By the time we're ready to counter-attack, they'll have even 
worse supply problems; the wet lands behind them mean they can't 
bring stuff that way, and they can't retreat there once we do attack. 

Nappy; old son; this is beautiful, believe me. If I was a commander 
on the other side and I saw this area being offered, I wouldn't go 
within a million klicks of it, but the Imperial Army boys are going to 
have to because the Court won't let them do anything else. But they'll 
know it's a trap. Terrible for the morale.' 

'I don't know, I don't know...' Napoerea shook his head, both his 
hands at his mouth, massaging his lower lip while he looked worriedly 
at the map. 

(No, you don't know, he thought to himself, watching the man's 
nervous body-language. You lot haven't known anything very useful 
for generations, chum.) 'It must be done,' he said. 'The withdrawal 
should start today.' He turned to another map. 'Aircraft; stop the 
bombing and strafing of the roads. Give the pilots two days' rest, then 
raid the oil refineries, here.' He pointed. 'A mass raid; use everything 
with the range that'll fly.' 

'But if we stop attacking the roads...' 

'They'll fill with even more refugees,' he told the man. 'That'll slow 
the Imperial Army down more than our planes. I do want some of 
these bridges taken out.' He tapped a couple of river crossings. He 
looked mystified at Napoerea. 'You guys sign some sort of agreement 
not to bomb bridges or something?' 

'It has always been felt that destroying bridges would hinder a 
counter-attack, as well as being... wasteful,' the priest said, 
unhappily. 

'Well, these three have to go, anyway.' He tapped the surface of the 
map. 'That and the refinery raid should put some sand in their fuel-
lines,' he said, clapping his hands together and rubbing them. 

'But we believe the Imperial Army has great reserves of fuel,' 
Napoerea said, looking very unhappy. 

'Even if they have,' he told the high-priest, 'Commanders will move 
more cautiously knowing supplies have been interrupted; they're 
careful guys. But I bet they never did have the supplies you thought; 

they probably think you have bigger supplies than you do, and with 
the advance they've had to fund recently... believe me; they may 
panic a little if the refinery raid comes off the way I hope it will.' 

Napoerea looked downcast, rubbed his chin while he gazed forlornly 
at the maps. 'It all sounds very...' he began.'... very... adventurous.' 

The high-priest invested the word with a degree of loathing and 
contempt that might have been amusing in other circumstances. 

He visited the retreating soldiers and the main airfields that would 
take part in the refinery raid. Then he took a couple of days travelling 
the mountains by truck, inspecting the defences. There was a valley 
with a dam at its head that might also provide an effective trap if the 
Imperial Army made it that far (he remembered the concrete island, 
the snivelling girl and the chair). While he was driven along the rough 
roads between the hill forts, he saw a hundred or more aircraft drone 
overhead, heading out across the still peaceful looking plains, their 
wings loaded with bombs. 

The refinery raid was expensive; almost a quarter of the planes never 
came back. But the Imperial Army's advance halted a day later. He 
had hoped they would keep on coming for a bit - their supplies hadn't 
been supplied straight from the refinery, so they could have kept 
going for a week or so - but they'd done the sensible thing, and 
stopped for the moment. 

He flew to the spaceport, where the lumbering spaceship - it looked 
even more dangerous and dilapidated in daylight - was being slowly 
patched up and repaired in case it was ever wanted again. He talked 
to the technicians, took a look round the ancient device. The ship had 
a name, he discovered; the Hegemonarchy Victorious. 

The priests looked puzzled. 'With what, Sir Zakalwe? A commando 
force? The Victorious is only able to hold...' 

'No no,' he said. 'When I say drop it, I mean we bomb them with it. 
We put it into space and then bring it back in, down on top of the 
Lake Palace. It's a good four hundred tonnes; even travelling at only 
ten times the speed of sound it'll hit like a small nuke going off; we'll 
get the entire Court and the general staff in one go. We offer peace 
to the commoners' parliament immediately. With any luck at all we 
cause immense civil disturbance; probably the commoners' 
parliament will see this as their chance to grab real power; the army 
will want to take up the reigns itself, and may even have to turn round 
and fight a civil war. Junior aristos filing competing claims should 
complicate the situation nicely.' 

'But,' Napoerea said, 'this means destroying the Victorious, does it 
not?' The other priests were shaking their heads. 

'Well, impacting at four or five kilometres a second wouldn't leave it 
totally undented, I suspect.' 

'But Zakalwe!' Napoerea roared, doing a reasonable impression of a 
small nuclear explosion himself, 'That's absurd! You can't do it! 
The Vktorious is a symbol of... it's our hope! All the people look at 
our...' 

He smiled, letting the priest ramble on for a little while. He was fairly 
certain the priests looked on the Hegemonarchy Victorious as their 
escape route if things went badly in the end. 

He waited until Napoerea had almost finished, then said, 'I 

understand; but the craft is on its last legs already, gentlemen. I've 
talked to the technicians and the pilots; it's a death-trap. It was more 
luck than anything else that it got me here safely.' He paused, 
watching the men with the blue circles on their foreheads look wide-
eyed at each other. The muttering increased. He wanted to 
smile. That had put the fear of god into them. 'I'm sorry, but this is 
the one thing the Victorious is good for.' He smiled. 'And it could 
indeed produce Victory.' 

He left them to mull over the concepts of high-hypersonic dive-
bombing (no, no suicide mission required; the craft's computers were 
perfectly capable of taking it up and bringing it straight down), 
symbol-trashing (a lot the peasants and factory workers would care 
about their piece of high-tech baublery getting junked), and 
Decapitation (probably the most worrying idea of the lot for the high-
priests; what if the Empire thought of doing it to them?) He assured 
them the Empire would be in no state to retaliate; and when they 
offered peace, the priests would hint heavily they had used a missile 
of their own, not the spacecraft, and pretend there were more where 
that came from. Even though this would not be difficult to disprove, 
especially if one of the world's more sophisticated societies chose to 
tell the Empire what had really happened, it would still 
be worrying for whoever was trying to work out what to do on the 
other side. Besides, they could always just get out of the city). 
Meanwhile he went to visit more army units. 

The Imperial Army started its advance again, though slower than 
before. He had drawn his troops back almost to the foothills of the 
mountains, burning the few unharvested fields and razing the towns 
behind them. Whenever they abandoned an airfield they planted 
bombs under the runways with days-long time delays, and dug plenty 
of other holes that looked like they might contain bombs. 

In the foothills he supervised much of the lay-out of their defensive 
lines himself, and kept up his visits to airfields, regional headquarters 
and operational units. He kept up, too, the pressure on the high 
priests at least to consider using the spacecraft for a decapitation 
strike. 

He was busy, he realised one day, as he lay down to sleep in an old 

castle that had become operational HQ for this section of the front 
(the sky had bloomed with light on the tree-lined horizon, and the air 
shaken with the sound of a bombardment, just after dusk). Busy and 
- he had to admit, as he put the last reports on the floor under the 
camp bed, and put the light out and was almost instantly asleep - 
happy. 

The defences grew; the Hegemonarchy's soldiers dug and built, but 
were mostly not under fire, and the Imperial Army gradually lapped 
against the foothills and paused. He had the Air Force harry the 
supply lines and the front line units, and pound the nearest airfields. 

'There are far too many troops stationed here, round the city. The 
best troops should be at the front. The attack will come soon, and if 
we're 
to 
counter-attack 
successfully 
- 
and 
it 
could 

be very successfully, if they're tempted to go for a knockout; they've 
little left in reserve - then we need those elite squads where they can 
do some good.' 

'There is the problem of civil unrest,' Napoerea said. He looked old 
and tired. 

'Keep a few units here, and keep them in the streets, so people don't 
forget they're here, but dammit, Napoerea, most of these guys spend 
all their time in barracks. They're needed at the front. I have just the 
place for them, look...' 

Actually he wanted to tempt the Imperial Army to go for the knock-
out, and the city was to be the bait. He sent the crack troops into the 
mountain passes. The priests looked at how much territory they'd 
now lost, and tentatively gave the go-ahead for preparing for 
decapitation; the Hegemonarchy Victorious would be readied for its 
final flight, though not used unless the situation appeared genuinely 
desperate. He promised he would try to win the war conventionally 
first. 

The attack came; forty days after he had arrived on Murssay, the 
Imperial Army crashed into the foothill forests. The priests began to 
panic. He had the Air Force attack the supply lines the majority of the 
time, not the front. The defensive lines gradually gave way; units 
retreated, bridges were blown. Gradually, as the foothills led into the 
mountains, the Imperial Army was concentrated, funnelled into the 
valleys. The trick with the dam didn't work this time; the charges 
placed under it just didn't go off. He had to move fast to shift two 
elite units to cover the pass above that valley. 

the wind blowing down from the mountains to the city, the sound of 
distant artillery had been audible. 

'They'll try to take Balzeit City if they think they can,' he said. 'It's a 
symbol. Well fine, but it doesn't actually have much military 
importance. They'll grab at it. We let just so many through, then we 
close the passes; here,' he said, tapping the map. The priests shook 
their heads. 

'Gents, we are not in disarray! We are falling back. But they are in 
much worse shape than we are, taking far heavier casualties; each 
metre is costing them blood. And, all the time, their supply lines get 
longer. We must take them to the point where they start to think 
about pulling back, then present them with the possibility - the 
seeming possibility - of a knock-out blow. But it won't knock us out; 
it knocks them out.' He looked round them. 'Believe me; it'll work. 
You may have to leave the citadel for a while, but when you return, I 
guarantee it will be in triumph.' 

They did not look convinced, but - possibly because they were just 
too stunned to fight - they let him have his way. 

The General radioed the Court High Command. The order to advance 
on the city was given the following day. 

He watched the terminally worried-looking priests leave from the 
train station under the citadel. In the end he had to dissuade them 
from ordering the decapitation attack. Let me try this first, he'd told 
them. 

They could not understand each other. 

The priests looked at the territory they had lost, and the fraction they 
had left, and thought it was all over for them. He looked at his 
relatively unscathed divisions, his fresh units, his crack squads, all 
positioned just where they should be, knives laid against and inside 
the body of an over-extended, worn-out enemy, just ready to cut... 
and thought it was all over for the Empire. 

The train pulled out, and - unable to resist - he waved cheerily. The 
high priests would be better out of the way, in one of their great 
monasteries in the next mountain range. He ran back upstairs to the 
map room, to see how things were going. 

The passes stayed with the Hegemonarchy, and slowly they pushed 

down from them again, so that it must have seemed to the Imperial 
soldiers that they were forever shooting up-hill, and that while 
advancing had been a heavy, dangerous slog, retreating was only too 
easy. 

The retreat became a rout in valley after valley. He insisted on 
keeping the counter-attack going; the priests cabled that more forces 
ought to be deployed to stop the advance of the two Imperial divisions 
on the capital. He ignored them. There was barely enough left of the 
two tattered divisions to make one whole one, and they were being 
gradually eroded further all the time. It was possible they might make 
it to the city, but after that they would have nowhere to go. He 
thought it might be satisfying to accept their eventual surrender per-
sonally. 

The rains came on the far side of the mountains, and as the 
bedraggled Imperial forces made their way through the dripping 
forests, their Air Force was all too often grounded by bad weather, 
while the Hegemonarchy's planes bombed and strafed then with 
impunity. 

People fled to the city; artillery duels thundered nearby. The 
remnants of the two divisions that had broken through the mountains 
fought desperately on towards their goal. On the distant plains on the 
far side of the mountains, the rest of the Imperial Army was 
retreating as fast as it could. The divisions trapped in Shenastri 
Province, unable to retreat through the quagmire behind them, 
surrendered en masse. 

The Imperial Court signalled its desire for peace the day what was 
left of its two divisions entered Balzeit City. They had a dozen tanks 
and a thousand men, but they left their artillery in the fields, bereft 
of ammunition. The few thousand people left in the city sought refuge 
in the wide parade grounds of the citadel. He watched them stream 
in through the gates in the high walls, far in the distance. 

He'd been going to quit the citadel that day - the priests had been 
screaming at him to do so for days, and most of the general staff had 
already left - but now he held the transcript of the message they'd 
just received from the Imperial Court. 

Two Hegemonarchy divisions were, anyway, on their way out of the 
mountains, coming to the aid of the city. 

He radioed the priests. They decided to accept a truce; fighting would 
stop immediately, if the Imperial Army withdrew to the positions it 
had held before the war. There were a few more radio exchanges; he 
left the priests and the Imperial Court to sort it all out. He took off 
his uniform and for the first time since he'd arrived, dressed as a 
civilian. He went to a high tower with some field glasses, and watched 
the tiny specks that were enemy tanks as they rolled down a street, 
far away. The citadel gates were closed. 

A truce was declared at midday. The weary Imperial soldiers outside 
the citadel gates billeted themselves in the bars and hotels nearby. 

'Zakalwe?' 

He turned. His eyes widened in surprise. 'Skaffen-Amtiskaw! This is 
an unexpected honour. Sma letting you out alone these days, or is 
she about too?' He looked the length of the citadel's long gallery. 

'Good day, Cheradenine,' the drone said, floating towards him. 'Ms 
Sma is on her way, in a module.' 

'And how is Dizzy?' He sat down on a small bench set against the wall 
which faced the long line of white-curtained windows. 'What's the 
news?' 

'I believe it is mostly good,' Skaffen-Amtiskaw said, floating level with 
his face. 'Mr Beychae is on his way to the Impren Habitats, where a 
summit conference between the Cluster's two main tendencies is to 
be held. It would appear the danger of war is lessening.' 

'Well, isn't this all very wonderful,' he said, sitting back with his hands 
behind his neck. 'Peace here; peace out there.' He squinted at the 
drone, his head to one side. 'And yet, drone, somehow you do not 
seem to be overflowing with joy and happiness. You seem - dare I 
say it? - positively sombre. What's the matter? Batteries low?' 

The machine was silent for a second or two. Then it said, 'I believe 
Ms Sma's module is about to land; shall we go to the roof?' 

He looked puzzled for a moment, then nodded, stooa smartly and 
clapped his hands once, indicating the way forward. 'Certainly; let's 
go.' 

'What's the problem, Dizzy?' he asked, pouring her a drink. She was 
pacing up and down in front of the room's shuttered windows. She 
took the drink from him, but didn't seem interested in it. She turned 
to face him, her long, oval face looking... he wasn't sure. But there 
was a cold feeling somewhere in his guts. 

'You have to leave, Cheradenine,' she told him. 

'Leave? When?' 

'Now; tonight. Tomorrow morning at the latest.' 

He looked confused, then laughed. 'Okay; I confess; the catamites 
were starting to look attractive, but...' 

'No,' Sma said. 'I'm serious, Cheradenine. You have to go.' 

He shook his head. 'I can't. There's no guarantee the truce will hold. 
They might need me.' 

'The truce isn't going to hold,' Sma told him, looking away. 'Not on 
one side, anyway.' She put her glass down on a shelf. 

'Eh?' he said. He glanced at the drone, which was looking non-
committal. 'Diziet, what are you talking about?' 

'Zakalwe,' she said, eyes blinking rapidly; she tried to look at him, 'A 
deal's been done; you have to leave.' 

He stared at her. 

'What's the deal, Dizzy?' he said softly. 

'There was some... fairly low-level help being given to the Empire by 
the Humanist faction,' she told him, walking towards one wall, then 
returning, talking not to him but to the tile and carpet floor. 'They 
had... face invested in what's been happening here. The whole 
delicate structure of the deal did rather depend on the Empire 
triumphing here.' She stopped, glanced at the drone, looking away 
again. 'Which is what everybody agreed was going to happen, up until 
a few days ago.' 

'So,' he said slowly, putting aside his own drink, sitting down in a 
great chair that looked like a throne. 'I messed things up by turning 
the game against the Empire, did I?' 

'Yes,' Sma said, swallowing. 'Yes, you did. I'm sorry. And I know it's 
crazy, but that's the way things are here, the way the people are 
here; the Humanists are divided at the moment, and there are 
factions within them that would use any excuse to argue for getting 
out of the deal, however insignificant that excuse might be. They 
might just be able to pull the whole thing down. We can't take that 
risk. The Empire has to win.' 

He sat, looking at a small table in front of him. He sighed. 'I see. And 

all I have to do is leave?' 

'Yes; come with us.' 

'What happens after that?' 

'The high priests will be kidnapped by an Imperial commando squad 
brought in by Humanist controlled aircraft. The citadel here will be 
taken over by the troops outside; there are raids planned on the field 
HQs; 
they 
should 
be 
pretty 
bloodless. 
If 
necessary, 
the 

Hegemonarchy planes, tanks, artillery pieces and trucks will be put 
out of action, should the armed forces ignore the call put out by the 
high priesthood to surrender their arms. Once they've seen a few 
planes and tanks laser-blasted from space, it's expected the fight will 
go out of the army.' 

Sma stopped pacing, came to stand in front of him, on the far side of 
the little table. 'It all happens at dawn tomorrow. It should be fairly 
bloodless, really, Zakalwe. You might as well leave now; it would be 
best.' He heard her exhale. 'You've done... brilliantly, Cheradenine. 
It's worked; you did it; brought Beychae out, got him... motivated or 
whatever. We're grateful. We're very grateful, and it's not easy...' 

He raised one hand to stop her. He heard her sigh. He looked up from 
the small table, up to her face. 'I can't leave right away. There are a 
few things I have to do. I'd rather you left now and then came back. 
Pick me up tomorrow; at dawn.' He shook his head. 'I won't desert 
them until then.' 

Sma opened her mouth, then closed it, glanced at the drone. 'All 
right; we'll be back tomorrow. Zakalwe, I -' 

'It's all right, Diziet,' he interrupted calmly, and slowly stood up. He 
looked into her eyes; she had to look away. 'It'll be as you say. Good-
bye.' He didn't hold out his hand. 

Sma walked to the door; the drone followed her. 

The woman looked back. He nodded once; she hesitated, seemed to 
think the better of saying anything, and went out. 

The drone stopped there too. 'Zakalwe,' it said. 'I just want to add -' 

'Out!' he screamed, and in one movement turned, swooped, caught 
the small table between the legs and threw it with all his might at the 
floating machine. The table bounced off an invisible field and clattered 
to the floor; the drone swept out and the door closed. 

He stood staring at it for some time. 

He was younger then. The memories were still fresh. He discussed 
them with the frozen, seemingly sleeping people sometimes, on his 
wanderings through the cold, dark ship, and wondered, in its silence, 
if he really was mad. 

The experience of being frozen and of then being woken up had done 
nothing to dull his memories; they remained keen and bright. He had 
rather hoped that the claims they made for freezing were over-
optimistic, and the brain did indeed lose at least some of its 
information; 
he'd 
secretly 
desired 
that 
attrition, 
but 
been 

disappointed. The process of warming and revival was actually rather 
less traumatic and confusing than coming round after being knocked 
unconscious, something that had happened to him a few times in his 
life. Revival was smoother, took longer, and was really quite 
pleasant; in truth quite like waking up after a good night's sleep. 

They left him alone for a couple of hours after they'd run the medical 
checks and pronounced him fit and well. He sat, wrapped in a big 
thick towel, on the bed, and - like somebody probing a diseased tooth 
with tongue or finger, unable to stop checking that it really does hurt 
every now and again - he called up his memories, going through the 
roll-call of those old and recent adversaries he'd hoped he might have 
lost somewhere in the darkness and the cold of space. 

All his past was indeed present, and everything that had been wrong 
present too, and correct. 

This seemed undignified, to him. To be treated so was to become 
cargo. 

The two other people on duty when he was woken were Ky and Erens. 
Erens had been supposed to return to the ranks of the frozen people 
five years earlier, after a few months of duty on the ship, but had 
decided to stay awake until they arrived at their destination. Ky had 
been revived three years later and should also have gone back to 
sleep, to be replaced after a few months by the next person on the 
crew rota, but by then Erens and Ky had started to argue, and neither 
wanted to be the first to return to the stasis of the freeze; there had 
been stalemate for two and a half years while the great slow ship 
moved, quiet and cold, past the distant pinprick lights that were the 
stars. Finally they'd woken him up, at last, because he was next on 
the rota and they wanted somebody else to talk to. As a rule, 
however, he just sat in the crew section and listened to the two of 
them argue. 

'There's still fifty years to go,' Ky reminded Erens. 

Eren waved a bottle. 'I can wait. It isn't forever.' 

Ky nodded at the bottle. 'You'll kill yourself with that stuff, and all the 
other junk you take. You'll never make it. You'll never see real 
sunlight again, or taste rain. You won't last one year let alone fifty; 

you should go back to sleep.' 

'It isn't sleep.' 

'You should go back to it, whatever you want to call it; you should let 
yourself be frozen again.' 

'And it isn't literally frozen... freezing, either.' Erens looked annoyed 
and puzzled at the same time. 

The man they'd woken up wondered how many hundreds of times the 
two had been through this argument. 

'You should go back into your little cold cubicle like you were 
supposed to, five years ago, and get them to treat you for your 
addictions when they revive you,' Ky said. 

'The ship already treats me,' Erens told Ky, with a kind of slow 
drunken dignity. 'I am in a state of grace with my enthusiasms; 
sublimely tensioned grace.' So saying, Erens tipped the bottle back 
and drained it. 

'You'll kill yourself.' 

'It's my life.' 

'You might kill us all; everybody on the whole ship, sleepers too.' 

'The ship looks after itself,' Erens sighed, looking round the Crew 
Lounge. It was the only dirty place on the ship. Everywhere else, the 
ship's robots tidied, but Erens had worked out how to delete the Crew 
Lounge from the craft's memory, and so the place could look good 
and scruffy. Erens stretched, kicking a couple of small recyclable cups 
off the table. 

'Huh,' Ky said. 'What if you've damaged it with all your messing 
around?' 

'I have not been "messing around" with it,' Erens said, with a small 
sneer. 'I have altered a few of the more basic housekeeping 
programs; it doesn't talk to us anymore, and it lets us keep this place 

looking lived-in; that's about it. Nothing that's going to make the ship 
wander into a star or start thinking it's human and what are these 
intestinal parasites doing in there. But you wouldn't understand. No 
technical background. Livu, here; he might understand, eh?' Erens 
stretched out further, sliding down the grubby seat, boots scraping 
on the filthy surface of the table. 'You understand, don't you, Darac?' 

'I don't know,' he admitted (he was used to answering to Darac, or 
Mr Livu, or just Livu, by now). 'I suppose if you know what you're 
doing, there's no real harm.' Erens looked pleased. 'On the other 
hand, a lot of disasters have been caused by people who thought they 
knew what they were doing.' 

'Amen,' Ky said, looking triumphant, and leant aggressively-towards 
Erens. 'See?' 

'As our friend said,' Erens pointed out, reaching for another bottle. 
'He doesn't know.' 

'You should go back with the sleepers,' Ky said. 

'They're not sleeping.' 

'You're not supposed to be up right now; there's only supposed to be 
two people up at any point.' 

'You go back then.' 

'It isn't my turn. You were up first.' 

He left them to argue. 

with the un-dead. 

He walked the cold, dark corridors, looking from side to side at the 
sleeper units. They looked like drawers in a filing cabinet; each was 
the head-end of something very like a coffin. A little red light glowed 
faintly on each one, so that standing in one of the gently spiralling 
corridors, with his own suit lights switched off, those small and steady 
sparks curved away in a ruby lattice folded over the darkness, like 
some infinite corridor of red giant suns set up by some obsessively 
tidy-minded god. 

Spiralling gradually upwards, moving away from the living unit at 
what he always thought of as the head of the ship, he walked up 
through its quiet, dark body. Usually he took the outermost corridor, 
just to appreciate the scale of the vessel. As he ascended, the pull of 
the ship's fake gravity gradually decreased. Eventually, walking 
became a series of skidding leaps in which it was always easier to hit 
the ceiling than make any forward progress. There were handles on 
the coffin-drawers; he used them once walking became too 
inefficient, pulling himself along towards the waist of the ship, which 
- as he approached it - turned one wall of coffin-drawers to a floor 
and the other to a ceiling, in places. Standing under a radial corridor, 
he leapt up, floated towards what was now the ceiling with the radial 
corridor a chimney up through it. He caught a coffin-drawer handle, 
and used a succession of them as rungs, climbing into the centre of 
the ship. 

Running through the centre of the Absent Friends there was an 
elevator shaft that extended from living unit to drive unit. In the very 
centre of the whole ship, he would summon the elevator, if it wasn't 
already waiting there from last time. 

When it came, he would enter it, floating inside the squat, yellow-lit 
cylinder. He would take out a pen, or a small torch, and place it in 
the centre of the elevator car, and just float there, watching the pen 
or torch, waiting to see if he had stationed it so exactly in the centre 
of the whole slowly spinning mass of the ship that it would stay where 
he'd left it. 

He got very good at doing this, eventually, and could spend hours 

sitting there, with the suit lights and the elevator lights on sometimes 
(if it was a pen) or off (if it was a torch), watching the little object, 
waiting for his own dexterity to prove greater than his patience, 
waiting for - in other words, he could admit to himself - one part of 
his obsession to win over the other. 

If the pen or torch moved and eventually connected with the walls or 
floor or ceiling of the elevator car, or drifted through the open door, 
then he had to float, climb (down) and then pull and walk back the 
way he had come. If it stayed still in the centre of the car, he was 
allowed to take the elevator back to the living unit. 

'I don't want to talk about it.' He turned up the ventilation to get rid 
of Eren's drug fumes. They were in the viewing carousel, the one 
place in the ship where you could get a direct view of the stars. He 
came up here every now and again, opened the shutters and watched 
the stars spin slowly overhead. Sometimes he tried to read poetry. 

Erens still visited the carousel alone as well, but Ky no longer did; 
Erens reckoned Ky got homesick, seeing the silent nothingness out 
there, and the lonely specks that were other suns. 

'Why not?' Erens said. 

He shook his head and sat back in the couch, looking out into the 
darkness. 'It isn't any of your business.' 

'I'll tell you why I came along if you tell me why you did,' Erens 
grinned, making the words sound childish, conspiratorial. 

'Get lost, Erens.' 

'Mine is an interesting story; you'd be fascinated.' 

'I'm sure,' he sighed. 

'But I won't tell you unless you tell me first. You're missing a lot; mm-
hmm.' 

'Well, I'll just have to live with that,' he said. He turned down the 
lighting in the carousel until the brightest thing in it was Erens' face, 
glowing red with reflected light on each draw of the pipe. He shook 
his head when Erens offered him the drug. 

'You need to loosen up, my friend,' Erens told him, slumping back in 
the other seat. 'Get high; share your problems.' 

'What problems?' 

He saw Erens' head shake in the darkness. 'Nobody on this ship hasn't 
got problems, friend. Nobody out here not running away from 
something.' 

'Ah; ship psychiatrist now are we?' 

'Hey, come on; nobody's going back, are they? Nobody on here's ever 
going back home. Half the people we know are probably dead already, 
and the ones that aren't will be, by the time we get where we're 
going. So if we can't ever see the people we used to know again, and 
probably never see home again, it has to be something pretty damn 
important and pretty damn bad, pretty damn evil to make a body up 
and leave like that. We all got to be running from something, whether 
it's something we did or something we had done to us.' 

'Maybe some people just like travelling.' 

'That's crap; nobody likes travelling that much.' 

He shrugged. 'Whatever.' 

'Aw, Darac, come on; argue, dammit.' 

'I don't believe in argument,' he said, looking out into the darkness 
(and saw a towering ship, a capital ship, ringed with its layers and 
levels of armament and armour, dark against the dusk light, but not 

dead). 

'You don't?' Erens said, genuinely surprised. 'Shit, and I thought I 
was the cynical one.' 

'It's not cynicism,' he said flatly. 'I just think people overvalue 
argument because they like to hear themselves talk.' 

'Oh well, thank you.' 

'It's comforting, I suppose.' He watched the stars wheel, like absurdly 
slow shells seen at night; rising, peaking, falling... (And reminded 
himself that the stars too would explode, perhaps, one day.) 'Most 
people are not prepared to have their minds changed,' he said. 'And 
I think they know in their hearts that other people are just the same, 
and one of the reasons people become angry when they argue is that 
they realise just that, as they trot out their excuses.' 

'Excuses, eh? Well, if this ain't cynicism, what is?' Erens snorted. 

'Yes, excuses,' he said, with what Erens thought might just have been 
a trace of bitterness. 'I strongly suspect the things people believe in 
are usually just what they instinctively feel is right; the excuses, the 
justifications, the things you're supposed to argue about, come later. 
They're the least important part of the belief. That's why you can 
destroy them, win an argument, prove the other person wrong, and 
still they believe what they did in the first place.' He looked at Erens. 
'You've attacked the wrong thing.' 

'So what do you suggest one does, Professor, if one is not to indulge 
in this futile... arguing stuff?' 

'Agree to disagree,' he said. 'Or fight.' 

'Fight?' 

He shrugged. 'What else is left?' 

'Negotiate?' 

'Negotiation is a way to come to a conclusion; it's the type of 

conclusion that I'm talking about.' 

'Which basically is disagree or fight?' 

'If it comes to it.' 

Erens was silent for a while, drawing on the pipe until its red glow 
faded, then saying, 'You have a military background, at all, yeah?' 

He sat and watched the stars. Eventually he turned his head and 
looked at Erens. 'I think the war gave us all a military background, 
don't you?' 

'Hmm,' Erens said. They both studied the slowly moving star-field. 

He stopped on the long, spiralling outer corridor, about halfway to 
the waist of the ship, where he felt very light on his feet, and his face 
was a little flushed with effects of normal blood pressure working 
against the reduced pull. He hadn't intended to look at any of the 
stored people - the truth was, he never really thought about them in 
any but the most abstract way - but suddenly he wanted to see 
something more of a sleeper than just a little red light. He stopped at 
one of the coffin-drawers. 

He had been shown how to work them after he'd volunteered to act 
as crew, and had another, rather perfunctory, run through the 
procedures shortly after being revived. He turned the suit lights on, 
flipped out the drawer's control pad, and carefully - using one bulky, 
gloved finger - keyed in the code that Erens said turned off the ship's 
monitoring system. A little blue light came on. The red light stayed 
steady; if it flashed the ship knew there was something wrong. 

He unlocked the cabinet, drew the whole device sliding out. 

He looked at the woman's name, printed on a plastic strip stuck to 
the head-unit. No-one he knew, anyway, he thought. He opened the 
inner cover. 

He looked in at the woman's calm, deathly pale face. His lights 
reflected on the crinkled transparent plastic wrapping covering her 
like something you'd buy in a shop. Tubes in her nose and mouth, 
leading away beneath her. A small screen flashed on above her tied-
up hair, on the head-unit. He looked; she seemed in good shape, for 
somebody so nearly completely dead. Her hands were crossed across 
the chest of the paper tunic she wore. He looked at her finger-nails, 
like Erens had said. Quite long, but he'd seen people grow them 
longer. 

He looked at the control pad again, entered another code. Lights 
flashed all over the control surface; the red light did not start flashing, 
but almost everything else did. He opened a little red and green door 
set in the top of the head-unit. Out of it he took a small sphere of 
what looked like fine green wires, containing an ice blue cube. A 
compartment alongside gave access to a covered switch. He pushed 
the cover back, put his finger down to the switch. 

He held the woman's recorded brain patterns, backed-up onto the 
little blue cube. Easily crushable. His other hand, finger resting on the 
small switch, could turn off her life. 

He wondered if he would do it, and seemed to wait for a while, as if 
expecting some part of his own mind to assume control from him. A 
couple of times it seemed to him that he felt the start of the impulse 
to throw the switch, and could have started to do so just an instant 
later, but each time suppressed the urge. He left his finger there, 
looked at the small cube inside its protective cage. He thought how 
remarkable and at the same time how oddly sad it was that all of a 
human mind could be contained in something so small. Then he 
reflected that a human brain was not so very much bigger than the 
little blue cube, and used resources and techniques far more ancient, 
and so was no less impressive (and still as sad). 

He closed the woman up again in her chill sleep, and continued on his 
slow-motion walk to the centre of the ship. 

'Everybody knows stories,' Ky told him. 

'I don't. Not proper stories.' 

'What's a "proper" story?' Ky sneered. They sat in the Crew Lounge, 
surrounded by their debris. 

He shrugged. 'An interesting one. One people want to listen to.' 

'People want to listen to different things. What one person would call 
a proper story might not please somebody else.' 

'Well, I can only go by what I think would be a proper story, and I 
don't have any. Not stories that I want to tell, anyway.' He grinned 
coldly at Ky. 

'Ah; that's different,' Ky nodded. 

'Indeed it is.' 

'Well, tell me what you believe in, then,' Ky said, leaning towards 
him. 

'Why should I?' 

'Why shouldn't you? Tell me because I asked.' 

'No.' 

'Don't be so stand-offish. We're the only three people for billions of 
kilometres and the ship's a bore; who else is there to talk to?' 

'Nothing.' 

'Exactly. Nothing and nobody.' Ky looked pleased. 

'No; I meant that's what I believe in; nothing.' 

'At all?' 

He nodded. Ky sat back, thoughtful, nodding. 'They must have hurt 
you bad.' 

'Who?' 

'Whoever robbed you of whatever it was you used to believe in.' 

He shook his head slowly. 'Nobody ever robbed me of anything,' he 
said. Ky was silent for a while, so he sighed and said, 'So, Ky, what 
do you believe in?' 

Ky looked at the blank screen that covered most of one wall of the 
lounge. 'Something other than nothing.' 

'Anything with a name is other than nothing,' he said. 

'I believe in what's around us,' Ky said, arms crossed, sitting back in 
the seat. 'I believe in what you can see from the carousel, what we'd 
see if that screen was on, although what you'd see wouldn't be the 
only sort of what I believe in that I believe in.' 

'In a word, Ky,' he said. 

'Emptiness,' Ky said with a flickering, jittery smile. 'I believe in 
emptiness.' 

He laughed. 'That's pretty close to nothing.' 

'Not really,' Ky said. 

'Looks it to most of us.' 

'Let me tell you a sort of story.' 

'Must you?' 

'No more than you must listen.' 

'Yeah... okay, then. Anything to pass the time.' 

'The story is this. It's a true story, by the way, not that that matters. 
There is a place where the existence or non-existence of souls is taken 
very seriously indeed. Many people, whole seminaries, colleges, 
universities, cities and even states devote almost all their time to the 
contemplation and disputation of this matter and related topics. 

'About a thousand years ago, a wise philosopher-king who was 
considered the wisest man in the world announced that people spent 
too much time discussing these things, and could, if the matter was 
settled, apply their energies to more practical pursuits which would 
benefit everybody. So he would end the argument once and for all. 

'He summoned the wisest men and women from every part of the 
world, and of every known persuasion, to discuss the matter. 

'It took many years to assemble every single person who wished to 
take part, and the resulting debates, papers, tracts, books, intrigues 
and even fights and murders took even longer. 

'The philosopher-king took himself off to the mountains to spend 
these years alone, emptying his mind of everything so that he would 
be able, he hoped, to come back once the process of argument was 
ended and pronounce the final decision. 

'After many years they sent for the king, and when he felt ready he 
listened to everyone who thought they had something to say on the 
existence of souls. When they had all said their piece, the king went 
away to think. 

'After a year, the king announced he had come to his decision. He 
said that the answer was not quite so simple as everybody had 
thought, and he would publish a book, in several volumes, to explain 
the answer. The king set up two publishing houses, and each 
published a great and mighty volume. One repeated the sentences, 
"Souls do exist. Souls do not exist," time after time, part after part, 
page after page, section after section, chapter after chapter, book 
after book. The other repeated the words, "Souls do not exist. Souls 
do exist," in the same fashion. In the language of the kingdom, I 

might add, each sentence had the same number of words, even the 
same number of letters. These were the only words to be found 
beyond the title page in all the thousands of pages in each volume. 
The king had made sure that the books began and finished printing 
at the same time, and were published at the same time, and that 
exactly the same number were published. Neither of the publishing 
houses had any perceivable superiority or seniority over the other. 

'People searched the volumes for clues; they looked for a single 
repetition, buried deep in the volumes, where a sentence or even a 
letter had been missed out or altered, but they found none. They 
turned to the king himself, but he had taken a vow of silence, and 
bound up his writing hand. He would still nod or shake his head in 
reply to questions concerning the governing of his kingdom, but on 
the subject of the two volumes, and the existence or otherwise of 
souls, the king would give no sign. 

'Furious disputes arose, many books were written; new cults began. 
Then a half-year after the two volumes had been published, two more 
appeared, and this time the house that had published the volume 
beginning, "Souls do not exist," published the volume which began, 
"Souls do exist." The other publisher followed suit, so that theirs now 
began, "Souls do not exist." This became the pattern. 

'The king lived to be very old, and saw several dozen volumes 
published. When he was on his death bed, the court philosopher 
placed copies of the book on either side of him, hoping the king's 
head would fall to one side or the other at the moment of death, so 
indicating by the first sentence of the appropriate volume which 
conclusion he had really come to... but he died with his head straight 
on the pillow and with his eyes, under the eyelids, looking straight 
ahead. 

'That was a thousand years ago,' Ky said. 'The books are published 
still; they have become an entire industry, an entire philosophy, a 
source of un-ending argument and -' 

'Is there an ending to this story?' he asked, holding up one hand. 

'No,' Ky smiled smugly. 'There is not. But that is just the point.' 

He shook his head, got up and left the Crew Lounge. 

'But just because something does not have an ending,' Ky shouted, 
'doesn't mean it doesn't have a...' 

The man closed the elevator door, outside in the corridor; Ky rocked 
forward in the seat and watched the lift-level indicator ascend to the 
middle of the ship. '... conclusion,' Ky said, quietly. 

He was in the elevator car, watching a torch he had left in the centre 
of the car as it slowly spun. He had left the torch switched on, and 
put out all the other lights. He watched the tiny spot of light move 
slowly around the circular wall of the car, slow as any clock hand. 

He remembered the search lights of the Staberinde, and wondered 
how far they were away from it now. So far that even the sun itself 
must be weaker than a searchlight seen from space. 

He did not know why that made him think of just taking off the 
helmet, but found himself starting to do it, nevertheless. 

He stopped. It was quite a complicated procedure to open the suit 
while in vacuum. He knew each of the steps, but it would take some 
time. He looked at the white spot of light which the torch was shining 
on the wall of the lift, not far from his head. The white spot was 
gradually coming closer as the torch spun. He would start to ready 
the suit to take the helmet off; if the torch beam hit his eye - no, his 
face, any part of his head - before that, then he would stop, and go 
back as though nothing had happened. Otherwise, if the spot of light 
did not strike his face in time, he would take the helmet off and die. 

He allowed himself the luxury of letting the memories wash over him, 
while his hands slowly began the sequence that would end, unless 
interrupted, with the helmet being blasted off his shoulders by the air 

pressure. 

Staberinde, the great metal ship stuck in stone (and a stone ship, a 
building stuck in water), and the two sisters. Darckense; Livueta (and 
of course he'd realised at the time that he was taking their names, or 
something like their names, in making the one he masqueraded under 
now). And Zakalwe, and Elethiomel. Elethiomel the terrible, 
Elethiomel the Chairmaker... 

The suit beeped at him, trying to warn him he was doing something 
very dangerous. The spot of light was a few centimetres from his 
head. 

Zakalwe; he tried to ask himself what the name meant to him. What 
did it mean to anybody? Ask them all back home; what does this 
name mean to you? War, perhaps, in the immediate aftermath; a 
great family, if your memory was long enough; a kind of tragedy. If 
you knew the story. 

He saw the chair again. Small and white. He closed his eyes, tasting 
bitterness in this throat. 

He opened his eyes. Three final clips to go, then one quick twist... he 
looked at the spot of light. It was invisible, so close to the helmet, so 
close to his head. The torch in the centre of the elevator car was 
facing almost straight at him, its lens bright. He undid one of the 
three final helmet clips. There was a tiny hiss, barely noticeable. 

Dead, he thought, seeing the girl's pale face. He undid another clip. 
The hiss grew no louder. 

There was a sense of brightness at the side of the helmet, where the 
light would be shining. 

Metal ship, stone ship, and the unconventional chair. He felt tears 
come to his eyes, and one hand - the one not undoing the third 
helmet clip - went to his chest, where, under the many synthetic 
layers of the suit, beneath the fabric of the under-suit, there was a 
small puckered mark on the skin just over his heart; a scar that was 
two decades old, or seven decades old, depending how you measured 

time. 

The torch swung, and just as the final clip came undone, and the spot 
of light started to leave the inside edge of the suit, to shine on his 
face, the torch flickered and went out. 

He stared. It was almost totally dark. There was the hint of light from 
outside the car; the faintest of red glows, produced by all the near-
dead people and the quietly watching equipment. 

Out. The torch had gone out; charge exhausted or just a fault, it 
didn't matter. It had gone out. It hadn't shone on his face. The suit 
beeped again, plaintive above the quiet hiss of escaping air. 

He looked down, at the hand that lay over his chest. 

He looked back up at where the torch must be, unseen in the centre 
of the car in the centre of the ship, in the middle of its journey. 

How do I die now? he thought. 

He ended up in another lo-tech war, learning to fly (because he knew 
now that aircraft would always win against a battleship), and flying 
the frosty vortices of air above the vast white islands that were the 
colliding tabular icebergs. 

Where they lay, the discarded robes looked like the just-shed skin of 
some exotic reptile. He had been going to wear those, but then 
changed his mind. He would wear the clothes he had come here in. 

He stood in the bathroom, in its steams and smells, stopping the razor 
again, then putting it to his head, slowly and carefully as though 
pulling a comb through his hair in slow motion. The razor scraped 
through the foam on his skin, catching a last few stubbly hairs. He 
swept the razor past the tops of his ears, then took up a towel, wiped 
the gleaming skin of his skull, inspecting the baby-smooth landscape 
he had revealed. The long dark hair lay scattered on the floor, like 
plumage scattered during a fight. 

He looked out to the citadel parade grounds, where a few weak fires 
glowed. Above the mountains, the sky was just starting to become 
light. 

From the window, he could see a few craggy levels of the citadel's 
curbed wall and jutting towers. In that first outlining light, it looked, 
he thought - though trying hard not to feel maudlin - poignant, even 
noble, now that he knew it was doomed. 

He turned from the sight and went to put on his shoes. The air moved 
over his shaven skull, feeling very strange. He missed the feel and 
sweep of his hair on the nape of his neck. He sat on the bed, pulled 
on the shoes and clasped them, then looked at the telephone sitting 
on the bedside cabinet. He lifted the device. 

He recalled (he seemed to remember) contacting the space port last 
night, after Sma and Skaffen-Amtiskaw had gone. He had been 
feeling bad, dissociated and remote somehow, and he was not at all 
certain he really did remember calling the technicians there, but he 
thought he probably had. He'd told them to ready the ancient space 
craft, for the Decapitation strike, sometime that morning. Or he 
hadn't. One of the two. Maybe he had been dreaming. 

He heard the citadel operator asking him who he wanted. He asked 
for the space port. 

He talked to the technicians. The chief flight engineer sounded tense, 
excited. The craft was ready, fuelled up, coordinates locked in; it 
could be launched within a few minutes as soon as he gave the word. 

He nodded to himself as he listened to the man. He heard the chief 

flight engineer pause. The question was unasked, but there. 

He watched the skies outside the window. They still looked dark, from 
inside here. 'Sir?' the chief flight engineer said. 'Sir Zakalwe? What 
are your orders, sir?' 

He saw the little blue cube, the button; he heard the whisper of 
escaping air. There was a shudder, just then. He thought it was his 
own body, reacting involuntarily, but it was not; the shudder ran 
through the fabric of the citadel, through the walls of the room, 
through the bed beneath him. Glass rattled in the room. The noise of 
the explosion rumbled through the air beyond the thick windows, low 
and unsettling. 

'Sir?' the man said. 'Are you still there?' 

They would probably intercept the spacecraft; the Culture itself - 
the Xenophobe, probably - would use effectors on it... the 
decapitation strike was bound to fail... 

'What should we do, sir?' 

But there was always a possibility... 

'Hello? Hello, sir?' 

Another explosion shook the citadel. He looked at the handset he 
held. 'Sir, do we go ahead?' he heard a man say, or remembered a 
man saying, from long ago and far away... And he had said yes, and 
taken on a terrible cargo of memories, and all the names that might 
bury him... 

'Stand down,' he said quietly. 'We won't need the strike now,' he said. 
He put the handset down, and left the room quickly, taking the rear 
stairs, away from the main entrance to his apartments, where he 
could already hear a commotion building. 

More explosions shook the citadel, dislodging dust around him as the 
curtain wall was breached and breached again. He wondered how it 
would be with the regional headquarters, how they would fall, and 

whether the raid to capture the high priests would be as bloodless as 
Sma had hoped. But he realised even as he thought about it all that 
he no longer really cared. 

He left the citadel via a postern and entered the great square that 
was the parade ground. The small fires still burned outside the tents 
of the refugees. In the distance, great clouds of dust and smoke 
floated slowly into the grey dawn sky above the curtain wall. He could 
see a couple of gaps in the wall from here. The people in the tents 
were starting to wake up and come out. From the citadel walls at his 
back and above him, he could hear the crackle of gunfire. 

A heavier gun fired from the breached walls, and a huge explosion 
shook the ground, ripping a great hole in the cliff that was the citadel; 
an avalanche of stone thundered into the parade ground, burying a 
dozen tents. He wondered what sort of ammunition the tank was 
firing; not a type they'd had until this morning, he suspected. 

He walked on through the tent city, as the people appeared, blinking, 
from their sleep. Scattered firing continued from the citadel; the vast 
cloud of dust rolled over the parade ground from the great tumbled 
breach in the towering walls. Another shot from near the curtain 
walls; another ground-quaking detonation that brought a whole side 
of the citadel down, the stones bursting from the wall as though with 
relief, falling and tumbling in their own rolling dust; released, 
returning to the earth. 

There was less firing from the citadel ramparts now, as the dust 
drifted and the sky slowly lightened and the frightened people 
clutched at each other outside their tents. More firing came from the 
breached curtain walls, and from inside the parade ground, within the 
tent city. 

He walked on. Nobody stopped him; few people really seemed to 
notice him. He saw a soldier fall from the curtain wall to his right, 
tumbling into the dust. He saw the people running this way and that. 
He saw the Imperial Army soldiers, in the distance, riding on a tank. 

He walked through the clustered tents, avoiding people running, 
stepping over a couple of the smouldering fires. The huge breaches 

in the curtain wall and the citadel itself smoked in the increasing grey 
light, which was just starting to take on colour as the sky burned pink 
and blue. 

Sometimes, as the people milled and streamed around him, running 
past, clutching babies, dragging children, he thought he saw people 
he recognised, and several times was on the point of turning and 
talking to them, putting out his hand to stop the snowfall effaces 
rushing past him, shouting after them... 

Suddenly aircraft screamed overhead, tearing through the air over 
the curtain wall, dropping long canisters into the tents, which erupted 
in flame and black, black smoke. He saw burning people, heard the 
screams, smelled the roasting flesh. He shook his head. 

Terrified people jostled him, bumped into him, once knocked him 
down so that he had to pick himself up, dust himself down, and suffer 
the knocks and the shouts and screams and curses. The aircraft came 
back, strafing, and he was the only one who stayed upright, walking 
while the rest fell to the ground; he watched the puffs and bursts of 
dust fountain in lines around him, saw the clothing of a few of the 
fallen people suddenly jerk and flap as a round hit home. 

It was getting lighter as he encountered the first troops. He dodged 
behind a tent and rolled as a trooper fired at him, then got back on 
his feet and ran round the rear of a tent, almost bumping into another 
soldier, who swung his carbine round too late. He kicked it away. The 
soldier drew a knife. He let him lunge and took the knife, throwing 
the soldier to the ground. He looked at the blade he held in his hand, 
and shook his head. He threw the knife away, looked at the soldier - 
lying on the ground staring fearfully up at him - then shrugged and 
walked away. 

Still people rushing past; soldiers shouting. He saw one take aim at 
him, and could not see anywhere to go for cover. He raised his hand 
to explain, to say there was really no need, but the man shot him 
anyway. 

Not a very good shot, considering the range, he thought as he was 
kicked back and spun round by the force of the impact. 

Upper chest near the shoulder. No lung damage, and possibly not 
even a chipped rib, he thought as the shock and pain burst through 
him, and he fell. 

He lay still in the dust, near the staring face of a dead city guardsman. 
As he'd spun round, he'd seen the Culture module; a clear shape 
hovering uselessly over the remains of his apartments high in the 
ruined citadel. 

Somebody kicked him, turning him over and bursting a rib at the 
same time. He tried not to react to the stab of pain, but looked 
through cracked eyes. He waited for the coup-de-grace, but it did not 
come. 

The shadow-figure above him, dark against light, passed on. 

He lay a while longer, then got up. It wasn't too difficult to walk at 
first, but then the planes came back again, and though he didn't get 
hit by a bullet, something splintered somewhere nearby, as he passed 
by some tents that shook and rippled as the bullets hit them, and he 
wondered if the sharp, puncturing pain in his thigh was a bit of wood 
or stone, or even bone, from somebody in one of the tents. 'No,' he 
muttered to himself as he limped away, heading for the biggest 
breach in the wall. 'No; not funny. Not bone. Not funny.' 

An explosion blew him off his feet, into and through a tent. He got 
up, head buzzing. He looked round and up at the citadel, its summit 
starting to glow with the first direct sunlight of the day. He couldn't 
see the module any more. He took a shattered wooden tent pole to 
use as a crutch; his leg was hurting. 

Dust wrapped him, screams of engines and aircraft and human voices 
pierced him; the smells of burning and stone-dust and exhaust fumes 
choked him. His wounds talked to him in the languages of pain and 
damage, and he had to listen to them, but paid them no further heed. 
He was shaken and pummelled and tripped and stumbled and drained 
and fell to his knees, and thought perhaps he was hit by more bullets, 
but was no longer sure. 

Eventually, near the breach, he fell, and thought he might just lie 

here for a while. The light was better, and he felt tired. The dust 
drifted like pale shrouds. He looked up at the sky, pale blue, and 
thought how beautiful it was, even through all this dust, and, listening 
to the tanks as they came crunching up through the slope of wrecked 
stones, reflected that, like tanks everywhere, they squeaked more 
than they roared. 

'Gentlemen,' (he whispered to the rabid blue sky) 'I am reminded of 
something the worshipful Sma said to me once, on the subject of 
heroism, which was something like: "Zakalwe, in all the human 
societies we have ever reviewed, in every age and every state, there 
has seldom if ever been a shortage of eager young males prepared 
to kill and die to preserve the security, comfort and prejudices of their 
elders, and what you call heroism is just an expression of this simple 
fact; there is never a scarcity of idiots."' He sighed. 'Well, no doubt 
she didn't say every age and every state, because the Culture just 
loves there to be exceptions to everything, but... that was the gist of 
it... I think...' 

He rolled over, away from the achingly blue sky, to stare at the 
blurred dust. 

Eventually, reluctantly, he pushed himself over, and then half up, 
then to his knees, then clutched at the tent-pole crutch and forced 
down on it, and got to his feet, ignoring all the pestering aches and 
pains, and staggered for the piled wreckage of the walls, and 
somehow dragged and hauled and scraped his way to the top, where 
the walls ran smooth and wide for a way, like roadways in the sky, 
and the bodies of a dozen or so soldiers lay, blood pooling, the 
ramparts around them scarred with bullet holes and grey with dust. 

He staggered towards them, as though anxious to be one of their 
number. He scanned the skies for the module. 

It was some time before they spotted the "Z" sign he made from the 
bodies on the top of the walls, but in that language it was a 
complicated letter, and he kept getting mixed up. 

I 

No lights burned on the Staberinde. It sat squat against the grey 
leechings of the false dawn, its dim silhouette a piled cone which only 
hinted at the concentric loops and lines of its decks and guns. Some 
effect of the marsh mists between him and the ziggurat of the ship 
made it look as though its black shape was not attached to the land 
at all, but floated over it, poised like some threatening dark cloud. 

He watched with tired eyes, stood on tired feet. This close to the city 
and the ship, he could smell the sea, and - nose this close to the 
concrete of the bunker - a limey scent, acrid and bitter. He tried to 
remember the garden and the smell of flowers, the way he sometimes 
did whenever the fighting started to seem just too futile and cruel to 
have any point whatsoever, but for once he could not conjure up that 
faintly-remembered, beguilingly poignant perfume, or recall anything 
good that had come out of that garden (instead he saw again those 
sun-tanned hands on his sister's pale hips, the ridiculous little chair 
they'd chosen for their fornication... and he remembered the last time 
he had seen the garden, the last time he'd been to the estate; with 
the tank corps, and he'd seen the chaos and ruin Elethiomel had 
visited upon the place that had been the cradle for both of them; the 
great house gutted, the stone boat wrecked, the woods burned... and 
his last glimpse of the hateful little summer house where he'd found 
them, as he took his own retaliatory action against the tyranny of 
memory; the tank rocking beneath him, the already flare-lit clearing 
whiting out with bright flame, his ears ringing with a sound that was 
no sound, and the little house... was still there; the shot had gone 
right through, exploded somewhere in the woods behind, and he'd 
wanted to weep and scream and tear it all down with his own hands... 
but then had remembered the man who had sat there, and thought 
how he might treat something like this, and so had gathered the 
strength to laugh at it, and ordered the gunner to aim at the top step 
beneath the little house, and saw it all finally lift and burst into the 
air. The debris fell around the tank, sprinkling him with earth and 
wood and ripped bundles of thatch). 

The night beyond the bunker was warm and oppressive, the land's 
day-time heat trapped and pressed to the ground by the weight of 

clouds above, sticking against the skin of the land like some sweat-
soaked shirt. Perhaps the wind changed then, for he thought he 
detected the smell of the grass and the hay in the air, swept hundreds 
of kilometres from the great prairies inland by some wind since spent, 
the old fragrance going stale now. He closed his eyes and leant his 
forehead against the rough concrete of the bunker wall, beneath the 
slit he'd been looking through; his fingers splayed out lightly on the 
hard, grainy surface, and he felt the warm material press into his 
flesh. 

Sometimes all he wanted was for it all to be over, and the way of it 
did not really seem to matter. Cessation was all, simple and 
demanding and seductive, and worth almost anything. That was when 
he had to think of Darckense, trapped on the ship, held captive by 
Elethiomel. He knew she didn't love their cousin any more; that had 
been something brief and juvenile, something she'd used in her 
adolescence to get back at the family for some imagined slight, some 
favouring of Livueta over her. It might have seemed like love at the 
time, but he suspected even she knew it was not, now. He believed 
that Darckense really was an unwilling hostage; many people had 
been taken by surprise when Elethiomel attacked the city; just the 
speed of the advance had trapped half the population, and Darckense 
had been unlucky to be discovered trying to leave from the chaos of 
the airport; Elethiomel had had agents out looking for her. 

So for her he had to go on fighting, even if he had almost worn away 
the hate in his heart for Elethiomel, the hate that had kept him 
fighting these last years, but now was running out, just worn down 
by the abrading course of the long war. 

How could Elethiomel do it? Even if he didn't still love her (and the 
monster claimed that Livueta was his real desire), how could he use 
her like another shell stored in the battleship's cavernous magazines? 

And what was he supposed to do in reply? Use Livueta against 
Elethiomel? Attempt the same level of cunning cruelty? 

Already Livueta blamed him, not Elethiomel, for all that had 
happened. What was he supposed to do? Surrender? Barter sister for 
sister? Mount some mad, doomed rescue attempt? Simply attack? 

He had tried to explain that only a prolonged siege guaranteed 
success, but argued about it so often now that he was starting to 
wonder if he was right. 

'Sir?' 

He turned, looked at the dim figures of the commanders behind him. 
'What?' he snapped. 

'Sir,' - it was Swaels - 'Sir, perhaps we should be setting off now, 
back to headquarters. The cloud is breaking from the east, and it will 
be dawn soon... we shouldn't be caught in range.' 

'I know that,' he said. He glanced out at the dark outline of 
the Staberinde, and felt himself flinch a little, as though he expected 
its huge guns to belch flame right there and then, straight at him. He 
drew a metal shutter across the concrete slit. It was very dark in the 
bunker for a second, then somebody switched on the harsh yellow 
lights and they all stood there, blinking in the glare. 

'Sir,' Swaels said, exchanging looks with the other two commanders. 
'The other commanders and I have discussed -' 

'You are going to tell me that we should attack; bomb and shell 
the Staberinde until it is a flaming hulk and then storm it with troop 
hovers,' he said, holding up one hand, 'I know what you've been 
discussing and I know what... decisions you think you've arrived at. 

They do not interest me.' 

'Sir, we all realise the strain you are under because your sister is held 
on the ship, but -' 

'That has nothing to do with it, Swaels,' he told the other man. 'You 
insult me by implying that I even consider that a reason for holding 
off. My reasons are sound military reasons, and foremost of those is 
that the enemy has succeeded in creating a fortress that is, at the 
moment, almost impregnable. We must wait until the winner floods, 
when the fleet can negotiate the estuary and the channel, and engage 
the Staberinde on equal terms; to send in aircraft or attempt to 
engage in an artillery duel would be the height of folly.' 

'Sir,' Swaels said. 'Much as we are distressed at having to disagree 
with you, we nevertheless -' 

'You will be silent, Commander Swaels,' he said icily. The other man 
swallowed. 'I have sufficient matters to worry about without having 
to concern myself with the drivel that passes for serious military 
planning between my senior officers, or, I might add, with replacing 
any of those senior officers.' 

For a while there was only the distant grumbling noise of the car 
engine. Swaels looked shocked; the other two commanders were 
staring at the rug floor. Swaels' face looked shiny. He swallowed 
again. The voice of the labouring car seemed to emphasize the silence 
in the rear compartment as the four men were jostled and shaken; 
then the car found a metalled road, and roared off, pressing him back 
in the seat, making the other three sway towards him before sitting 
back again. 

'Sir, I am ready to lea -' 

'Must this go on?' he complained, hoping to stop Swaels. 'Can't you 
lift even this small burden from me? All I ask is that you do as you 
ought. Let there be no disagreement; let us fight the enemy, not 
amongst ourselves.' 

'... to leave your staff, if you so wish,' Swaels continued. 

Now it was as though the noise of the engine did not intrude inside 
the passenger cell at all; a frozen silence - held not in the air, but in 
the expression of Swaels' face and the still, tensed bodies of the other 
two commanders - seemed to settle over the four, like some prescient 
breath of a winter that was still half a year away. He wanted to close 
his eyes, but could not show such weakness. He kept his gaze fixed 
on the man directly across from him. 

'Sir, I have to tell you that I disagree with the course you are 
pursuing, and I am not alone. Sir, please believe me that I and the 
other commanders love you as we love our country; with all our 
hearts. But because of that love, we cannot stand by while you throw 
away everything you stand for and all we believe in trying to defend 
a mistaken decision.' 

He saw Swaels' hands knit together, as though in supplication. No 
gentleman of breeding, he thought, almost dreamily, ought to begin 
a sentence with the unfortunate word "but"... 

'Sir, believe me I wish that I was wrong. I and the other commanders 
have done everything to try to accommodate your views, but we 
cannot. Sir, if you have any love for any of your commanders, we 
beseech you; think again. Remove me if you feel you must, sir, for 
having spoken like this; court-martial me, demote me, execute me, 
forbid my name, but, sir; reconsider, while there is still time.' 

They sat still, as the car hummed along the road, swerving 
occasionally for corners, jiggling left-right or right-left to avoid 
craters, and... and we must all look, he thought, as we sit here, frozen 
in the weak yellow light, like the stiffening dead. 

'Stop the car,' he heard himself saying. His finger was already 
depressing the intercom button. The car rumbled down through the 
gears and came to a halt. He opened the door. Swaels' eyes were 
closed. 

'Get out,' he told him. 

Swaels looked suddenly like an old man hit by the first of many blows. 
It was as though he had shrunk, collapsed inside. A warm gust of 

wind threatened to close the door again; he held it open with one 
hand. 

Swaels bent forward and get slowly out of the car. He stood by the 
dark roadside for a moment; the cone of light thrown out by the staff 
car's interior lights swept across his face, then disappeared. 

Zakalwe locked the door, 'Drive on,' he told the driver. 

They raced away from the dawn and the Staberinde, before its guns 
could find and destroy them. 

He found that almost amusing. 

The Staberinde was not really impregnable (though it was, now, quite 
literally unsinkable); it could be taken, but it would exact a terrible 
price in the taking. 

And of course, having had their breathing space, and time to re-
equip, perhaps the forces in and around the ship and the city would 
break out; that possibility had been discussed, too, and Elethiomel 

was quite capable of it. 

But whatever he thought about it, however he approached the 
problem, it always came back to him. The men would do as he asked; 
the commandrs would too, or he'd have them replaced; the politicians 
and the church had given him a free hand and would back him in 
anything he did. He felt secure in that; as secure as any commander 
ever could. But what was he to do? 

He had expected to inherit a perfectly drilled peace-time army, 
splendid and impressive, and eventually to hand that over to some 
other young scion of the Court in the same creditable condition, so 
that the traditions of honour and obedience and duty could be 
continued. Instead he found himself at the head of an army going to 
furious war against an enemy he knew was largely made up of his 
own countrymen, and commanded by a man he had once thought of 
as a friend as well as almost a brother. 

So he had to give orders that meant men died, and sometimes 
sacrifice hundreds, thousands of them, knowingly sending them to 
their near-certain deaths, just to secure some important position or 
goal, or protect some vital position. And always, whether they liked 
it or not, the civilians suffered too; the very people they both claimed 
to be fighting for made up perhaps the bulk of the casualties in their 
bloody struggle. 

He had tried to stop it, tried to bargain, from the beginning, but 
neither side wanted peace on anything except its own terms, and he 
had no real political power, and so had had to fight. His success had 
amazed him, as it had others, probably not least Elethiomel, but now, 
poised on the brink of victory - perhaps - he just did not know what 
to do. 

More than anything else now, though, he wanted to save Darckense. 
He had seen too many dead, dry eyes, too much air-blackened blood, 
too much fly-blown flesh, to be able to relate such ghastly truths to 
the nebulous ideas of honour and tradition that people claimed they 
were fighting for. Only the well-being of one loved person seemed 
really worth fighting for now; it was all that seemed real, all that could 
save his sanity. To acknowledge the interest millions of other people 

had in whatever happened here was to place too great a burden on 
him; it would be to admit, by implication, that he was at least partially 
responsible for the deaths already of hundreds of thousands, even if 
nobody else could have fought more humanely. 

So he waited; held back the commanders and the squadron leaders, 
and waited for Elethiomel to reply to his signals. 

The two other commanders said nothing. He put out the lights in the 
car, un-shuttered the doors, and looked out at the dark mass of the 
forest, racing past under dull dawn skies the colour of steel. 

They moved past dim bunkers, dark trenches, still figures, stopped 
trucks, sunken tanks, taped windows, hooded guns, raised poles, 
grey clearings, wrecked buildings and slitted lamps; all the 
paraphernalia of the outskirts of the headquarters camp. He watched 
it all and wished - as they moved closer to the centre, to the old castle 
that had become his home in all but name over the last couple of 
months - he wished that he did not have to stop, and could just go 
on driving through the dawn and the day and the night again forever, 
cleaving the finally unyielding trees towards nothing and nowhere and 
no-one - even if it was in an icy silence - secure in the nadir of his 
sufferings, perversely content that at least now they could grow no 
worse; just to go on and on and never have to stop and make 
decisions that would not wait but which might mean he would commit 
mistakes he could never forget and would never be forgiven for... 

The car reached the castle courtyard and he got out. Surrounded by 
aides, he swept into the grand old house that had, once, been 
Elethiomel's HQ. 

They pestered him with a hundred details of logistics and intelligence 
reports and skirmishes and small amounts of ground lost or gained; 
there were requests from civilians and the foreign press for this and 
that. He dismissed them all, told the junior commanders to deal with 
them. He took the stairs to his offices two at a time, handed his jacket 
and cap to his ADC, and closed himself in his darkened study, his 
eyes closed, his back against the double doors, the brass handles still 
clutched in his hands at the small of his back. The quiet, dark room 
was a balm. 

'Been out to gaze upon the beast, have you?' 

He started, then recognized Livueta's voice. He saw her by the 
windows, a dark figure. He relaxed. 'Yes,' he said. 'Close the drapes.' 

He turned on the room lights. 

'What are you going to do?' she said, walking slowly closer, her arms 
folded, her dark hair gathered up, her face troubled. 

'I don't know,' he admitted, going to the desk and sitting. He put his 
face in his hands and rubbed it. 'What would you have me do?' 

'Talk with him,' she said, sitting on the corner of the desk, arms still 
crossed. She was dressed in a long dark skirt, dark jacket. She was 
always in dark clothes now-days. 

'He won't talk to me,' he said, sitting back in the ornate chair he knew 
the junior officers called his throne. 'I can't make him reply.' 

'You can't be saying the right things,' she said. 

'I don't know what to say, then,' he said, closing his eyes again. 'Why 
don't you compose the next message?' 

'You wouldn't let me say what I'd want to say, or if you let me say it, 
you wouldn't live up to it.' 

'We can't just all lay down our weapons, Livvy, and I don't think 
anything else would work; he wouldn't pay any attention.' 

'You could meet face to face; that might be the way to settle things.' 

'Livvy; the first messenger we sent personally came back without his 
SKIN!' He screamed the last word, suddenly losing all patience and 
control. Livueta flinched, and stepped away from the desk. She sat in 
an ornamental winged couch, her long fingers rubbing at the gold 
thread sewn into an arm. 

'I'm sorry,' he said quietly. 'I didn't mean to shout.' 

'She's our sister, Cheradenine. There must be more we can do.' 

He looked about the room, as though for some fresh inspiration, 
'Livvy; we have been over this and over this and over this; don't 
you... can't I get it through? Isn't it clear?' He slapped both hands on 
the desk. 'I am doing all I can. I want her out of there as much as 
you do, but while he has her, there is just nothing more I can do; 
except attack, and that probably would be the death of her.' 

She shook her head. 'What is it between you two?' she asked. 'Why 
won't you talk to each other? How can you forget everything from 
when we were children?' 

He shook his head, pushed himself up from the desk, turned to the 
book-lined wall behind, gaze running over the hundreds of titles 
without really seeing them. 'Oh,' he said tiredly, 'I haven't forgotten, 
Livueta.' He felt a terrible sadness then, as though the extent of what 
he felt they had all lost only became real to him when there was 
somebody else there to acknowledge it. 'I haven't forgotten 
anything.' 

'There must be something else you can do,' she insisted. 

'Livueta, please believe me; there isn't.' 

'I believed you when you told me she was safe and well,' the woman 
said, looking down at the arm of the couch, where her long nails had 
started to pick at the precious thread. Her mouth was a tight line. 

'You were ill,' he sighed. 

'What difference does that make?' 

'You might have died!' he said. He went to the curtains and began 
straightening them. 'Livueta; I couldn't have told you they had 
Darckle; the shock -' 

'The shock for this poor, weak woman,' Livueta said, shaking her 
head, still tearing at the threads on the couch arm. 'I'd rather you 
spared me that insulting nonsense than spare me the truth about my 

own sister.' 

'I was only trying to do what was best,' he told her, starting towards 
her, then stopping, retreating to the corner of the desk where she 
had sat. 

'I'm sure,' she said laconically. 'The habit of taking responsibility 
comes with your exalted position, I suppose. I am expected to be 
grateful, no doubt.' 

'Livvy, please, must you -?' 

'Must I what?' She looked at him, eyes sparkling. 'Must I make life 
difficult for you? Yes?' 

'All I want,' he said slowly, trying to control himself. 'Is for you to 
try... and understand. We need to... to stick together, to support each 
other right now.' 

'You mean I have to support you even though you won't support 
Darckle,' Livueta said. 

'Dammit, Livvy!' he shouted. 'I am doing my best! There isn't just 
her; there's a lot of other people I have to worry about. All my men; 
the civilians in the city; the whole damn country!' He went forward to 
her, knelt in front of the winged couch, put his hand on the same arm 
that her long-nailed hand picked at. 'Livueta; please. I am doing all 
it is possible to do. Help me in this. Back me up. The other 
commanders want to attack; I'm all there is between Darckense and 
-' 

'Maybe you should attack,' she said suddenly. 'Maybe that's the one 
thing he isn't expecting.' 

He shook his head. 'He has her in the ship; we'd have to destroy that 
before we can take the city.' He looked her in the eye. 'Do you trust 
him not to kill her, even if she isn't killed in the attack?' 

'Yes,' Livueta said. 'Yes, I do.' 

He held her gaze for a while, certain that she would recant or at least 

look away, but she just kept looking straight back at him. 'Well,' he 
said eventually, 'I can't take that risk.' He sighed, closing his eyes, 
resting his head against the arm of the couch. 'There's so much... 
pressure on me.' He tried to take her hand, but she pulled it away. 
'Livueta, don't you think I feel? Don't you think I care about what 
happens to Darckle? Do you think that I'm not still the brother you 
knew as well as the soldier they made me? Do you think that because 
I have an army to do my bidding, and ADCs and junior officers to 
obey every whim, I don't get lonely?' 

She stood up suddenly, without touching him. 'Yes,' she said, looking 
down at him, while he looked at the threads of gold on the couch arm. 
'You are lonely, and I am lonely, and Darckense is lonely, and he is 
lonely, and everybody is lonely!' 

She turned quickly, the long skirt briefly belling, and walked to the 
door and out. He heard the doors slam, and stayed where he was, 
kneeling in front of the abandoned couch like some rejected suitor. 
He pushed his smallest finger through a loop in the gold thread 
Livueta had teased from the couch arm, and pulled at it until it burst. 

He got up slowly, walked to the window, slipped through the drapes 
and stood looking out at the grey dawn. Men and machines moved 
through the vague wisps of mist, grey skeins like nature's own gauzy 
camouflage nets. 

He envied the men he could see. He was sure most of them envied 
him, in return; he was in control, he had the soft bed and did not 
have to tread through trench mud, or deliberately stub his toes 
against rocks to keep awake on guard duty... But he envied them, 
nevertheless, because they only had to do what they were told. And 
- he admitted to himself - he envied Elethiomel. 

Would that he were more like him, he thought, all too often. To have 
that ruthless cunning, that extemporising guile; he wanted that. 

He slunk back through the drapes, guilty at the thought. At the desk 
he turned the room lights off and sat back in the seat. His throne, he 
thought and, for the first time in days, laughed a little, because it was 
such an image of power and he felt so utterly powerless. 

He heard a truck draw up outside the window, where it was not 
supposed to. He sat still, suddenly thinking; a massive bomb, just out 
there... and was suddenly terrified. He heard a sergeant barking, 
some talk, and then the truck moved a little way off, though he could 
still hear its engine. 

After a while, he heard raised voices in the hall stair-well. There was 
something about the tone of the voices that chilled him. He tried to 
tell himself he was being foolish, and turned all the lights back on, 
but he could still hear them. Then there was something like a scream, 
cut-off abruptly. He shook. He unholstered his pistol, wishing he had 
something more lethal than this slim little dress-uniform gun. He 
went to the door. The voices sounded odd; some were raised, while 
some people were apparently trying to keep theirs quiet. He opened 
the door a crack, then went through; his ADC was at the far door, 
onto the stairs, looking down. 

He put the pistol back in his holster. He walked out to join the ADC, 
and followed his gaze, down into the hall. He saw Livueta, staring 
wide-eyed back up at him; there were a few other soldiers, one of 
the other commanders. They stood round a small white chair. He 
frowned; Livueta looked upset.He went quickly down the steps; 
Livueta suddenly came bounding up to meet him, skirt hem flying. 
She pushed into him, both hands against his chest. He staggered 
back, amazed. 

'No,' she said. Her eyes were bright and staring; her face looked more 
pale than he'd ever seen before. 'Go back,' she said. Her voice 
sounded thick, like it was not her own. 

'Livueta...' he said, annoyed, and pushed himself away from the wall, 
trying to glance round her at whatever was happening in the hall 
round the little white chair. 

She pushed him again. 'Go back,' the thick, strange voice said. 

He took her wrists in his hands, 'Livueta,' he said, voice low, eyes 
flicking to indicate the people standing beneath in the hall. 

'Go back,' the strange, terrifying voice said. 

He pushed her away, annoyed at her, tried to go past her. She 
attempted to grab him from behind. 'Back!' she gasped. 

'Livueta, stop this!' he shook her off, embarrassed now. He clattered 
quickly down the steps before she could grab him again. 

Still she threw herself down after him, clutched at his waist. 
'Go back!' she wailed. 

He turned round. 'Get off me! I want to see what's going on!' He was 
stronger than her; he tore her arms free, threw her down on the 
stairs. He went down, walked across the flagstones to where the silent 
group of men stood round the little white chair. 

It was very small; it looked so delicate that an adult might have 
broken it. It was small and white, and as he took a couple of more 
paces forwards, as the rest of the people and the hall and the castle 
and the world and the universe disappeared into the darkness and 
the silence and he came closer and slowly closer to the chair, he saw 
that it had been made out of the bones of Darckense Zakalwe. 

Femora formed the back legs, tibiae and some other bones the front. 
Arm bones made the seat frame; the ribs were the back. Beneath 
them was the pelvis; the pelvis that had been shattered years earlier, 
in the stone boat, its bone fragments rejoined; the darker material 
the surgeons had used quite visible too. Above the ribs, there was 
the collar bone, also broken and healed, memoir of a riding accident. 

They had tanned her skin and made a little cushion out of it; a tiny 
plain button in her navel, and at one corner, just the hint, the start 
of some dark but slightly red-tinged hair. 

He tasted blood in his mouth, looked down at his right hand. He 
seemed to recall having punched Livueta on his way up the stairs. 
What a terrible thing to do to one's own sister. 

He looked about, distracted, for a moment. Everything looked 
blurred. 

Intending to rub his eyes, he raised one hand and found the pistol in 
it. 

He put it to his right temple. 

This was, of course, he realised, exactly what Elethiomel wanted him 
to do, but then, what chance did one have against such a monster? 
There was only so much a man could take, after all. 

He smiled at the doors (somebody was thumping on them, calling out 
a word that might have been his name; he couldn't remember now). 
So silly. Doing the Right Thing; the Only Way Out. The Honourable 
Exit. What a load of nonsense. Just despair, just the last laugh to 
have, opening a mouth through the bone to confront the world direct; 
here. 

But such consummate skill, such ability, such adaptability, such 
numbing ruthlessness, such a use of weapons when anything could 
become weapon... 

His hand was shaking. He could see the doors starting to give way; 
somebody must be hitting them very hard. He supposed he must 
have locked them; there was nobody else in the room. He ought to 
have chosen a bigger gun, he realised; this one might not be big 
enough to do the job. 

His mouth was very dry. 

He pressed the gun hard against his temple and pulled the trigger. 

The besieged forces round the Staberinde broke out within the hour, 
while the surgeons were still fighting for his life. It was a good battle, 
and they nearly won. 

'Zakalwe...' 

'No.' 

Still the same refusal. They stood in a park, at the edge of a large, 
neatly mown lawn, under some tall, pollarded trees. The warm breeze 
carried the ocean scent and a hint of flowers, whispering through the 
copse. The clearing morning mist still veiled two suns. Sma shook her 
head in exasperation, and walked off a little way. 

He leant against a tree, clutching at his chest, breathing with 
difficulty. Skaffen-Amtiskaw hovered nearby, keeping a watch on the 
man, but playing with an insect on the trunk of another tree. 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw thought the man was mad; certainly he was weird. 
He had never really explained why he'd gone wandering through the 
mayhem of the citadel-storming. When Sma and the drone had finally 
found him and picked him up, bullet-riddled, half-dead and raving 
from the top of the curtain wall, he had insisted they stabilise his 
condition; no more. He did not want to be made well. He would not 
listen to sense, and still the Xenophobe - when it had picked them all 
up - had refused to pronounce the man insane and incapable of 
making up his own mind, and so had dutifully put him into a low-
metabolism sleep for the fifteen day journey to the planet where the 
women called Livueta Zakalwe now lived. 

He'd come out of his slow-sleep as ill as he'd gone into it. The man 
was a walking mess and there were still two bullets inside him, but 
he refused to accept any treatment until he'd seen this woman. 
Bizarre, Skaffen-Amtiskaw thought, using an extended field to block 
the path of a small insect as it felt and picked its way up the trunk of 
the tree. The insect changed direction, feelers waving. There was 
another type of insect further up the trunk, and Skaffen-Amtiskaw 

was trying to get them to meet, to see what would happen. 

Bizarre, and even - indeed - perverse. 

'Okay.' He coughed (one lung, the drone knew, filling up with blood). 
'Let's go.' He pushed himself away from the tree. Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
abandoned its game with the two insects regretfully. The drone felt 
odd, being here; the planet was known about but had not yet been 
fully investigated by Contact. It had been discovered through 
research rather than physical exploration, and - while there was 
nothing obviously outlandish about the place, and a very rudimentary 
survey had been carried out - technically it was still terra incognita, 
and Skaffen-Amtiskaw was on a relatively high state of alert, just in 
case the place held any nasty surprises. 

Sma went to the bald-headed man and put her arm round his waist, 
helping to support him. Together they walked up the small slope of 
lawn towards a low ridge. Skaffen-Amtiskaw watched them go, from 
the cover of the tree tops, then swooped slowly down towards them 
as they walked to the summit of the gentle slope. 

The man staggered when he saw what was on the far side, in the 
distance. The drone suspected he would have fallen to the grass if 
Sma hadn't been there to hold him up. 

'Shiiit,' he breathed, and tried to straighten, blinking in a sudden slant 
of sunlight as the mists continued to evaporate. 

He stumbled another couple of steps, shook Sma off, and turned 
round once, taking in the parkland; shaped trees and manicured 
lawns, ornamental walls and delicate pergolas, stone-bordered ponds 
and shady paths through quiet groves. And, in the distance, set 
amongst mature trees, the tattered black shape of the Staberinde. 

'They've made a fucking park out of it,' he breathed, and stood, 
swaying, bent slightly at the waist, looking at the battered silhouette 
of the old warship. Sma walked to his side. He seemed to sag a little, 
and she put her arm round his waist again. He grimaced with pain; 
they walked on, down towards a path which led to the ship. 

'Why did you want to see this, Cheradenine?' Sma said quietly as they 
crunched along the gravel. The drone floated behind and above. 

'Hmm?' the man said, taking his eyes off the ship for a second. 

'Why did you want to come here, Cheradenine?' Sma asked. 'She isn't 
here. This isn't where she is.' 

'I know,' he breathed. 'I know that.' 

'So why do you want to see this wreck?' 

He was silent for a little while. It was as though he hadn't heard, but 
then he took a deep breath - flinching with pain as he did so - and 
shook his sweat-sheened head as he said, 'Oh; just for... old times' 
sake...' They passed through another copse of trees. He shook his 
shaved head again as they came out of the grove, and saw the ship 
better. 'I just didn't think... they'd do this to it,' he said. 

'Do what?' Sma asked. 

'This.' He nodded at the blackened hulk. 

'What have they done, Cheradenine?' Sma said patiently. 

'Made it.' He began, then stopped, coughed, body tense with pain. 
'Made the damn thing... an ornament. Preserved it.' 

'What, the ship?' 

He looked at her as though she were crazy. 'Yes,' he said. 'Yes; the 
ship.' 

Just a big old battleship hulk cemented into a dock, as far as Skaffen-
Amtiskaw could see. It contacted the Xenophobe, which was passing 
the time by making a detailed map of the planet. 

- Hello, ship. This ship-ruin in the park; Zakalwe seems very 
interested. Just wondering why. Care to do some research? 

- In a while; I've still got one continent, the deep sea beds and the 

sub-surface to do. 

- They'll still be there later; this could prove interesting now. 

- Patience, Skaffen-Amtiskaw. 

Pedant, thought the drone, breaking off. 

The two humans walked down twisty paths past litter bins and 
benches, picnic tables and information points. Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
activated one of the old information points as it passed. A slow and 
crackly tape started up; "The vessel you see before you..." This was 
going to take ages, Skaffen-Amtiksaw thought. It used its effector to 
speed the machine up, winding the voice up into a high-pitched 
warble. The tape broke. Skaffen-Amtiskaw delivered the effector 
equivalent of an annoyed slap, and left the information machine 
smoking and dripping burning plastic onto the gravel beneath, as the 
two humans walked into the shadow of the battered ship. 

The ship had been left as it was; bombed, shelled, strafed, blasted 
and ripped but not destroyed. Where hands could not reach and rain 
did not strike, traces of the original soot from flames two centuries 
old still marked the armour plate. Gun turrets lay peeled open like tin 
cans; gun barrels and range-finders bristled askew all over the 
mounting levels of deck; tangled stays and fallen aeriels lay strewn 
over shattered search lights and lop-sided radar dishes; the single 
great funnel looked tipped and subsided, metal pitted and flayed. 

A little awning-covered stairway led up to the ship's main deck; they 
followed a couple with two young children. Skaffen-Amtiskaw floated, 
almost invisible, ten metres away, rising slowly with them. One of the 
toddlers cried when she saw the hobbling, bald-headed man with the 
staring eyes behind her. Her mother lifted her up and carried her. 

He had to stop and rest when they got to the deck. Sma guided him 
to a bench. He sat doubled up for a while, then looked at the ship 
above, taking in the blackened rusted wreckage all around. He shook 
his shaven head, muttered to himself once, then ended up laughing 
quietly, holding his chest and coughing. 

'Museum,' he said. 'A museum...' Sma put her hand on his damp 
brow. She thought he looked terrible, and the baldness didn't suit 
him. The simple dark clothes they'd found him wearing when they 
picked him up from the citadel's curtain wall had been torn and 
crusted with blood; they'd been cleaned and repaired on 
the Xenophobe but they looked out of place here, where everybody 
seemed to be dressed in bright colours. Even Sma's culottes and 
jacket were sombre compared to the gaily decorated dresses and 
smocks most of the people were wearing. 

'This an old haunt of yours, Cheradenine?' she asked him. 

He nodded. 'Yes,' he breathed, looking up at a last few tendrils of 
mist flowing and disappearing like gaseous pennants from the tilted 
main mast. 'Yes,' he repeated. 

Sma looked round at the park behind and the city off to one side. 
'This where you came from?' 

He seemed not to hear. After a while, he stood slowly, and looked, 
distracted, into Sma's eyes. She felt herself shiver, and tried to 
remember exactly how old Zakalwe was. 'Let's go, Da -... Diziet.' He 
smiled a watery sort of smile. 'Take me to her, please?' 

Sma shrugged and supported the man by one shoulder. They went 
back to the steps that led back down to the ground. 

'Drone?' Sma said to a brooch on her lapel. 

'Yep?' 

'Our lady still where we last heard?' 

'Indeed,' said the drone's voice. 'Want to take the module?' 

'No,' he said, stumbling down a stair, until Sma caught him. 'Not the 
module. Let's... take a train, or a cab or...' 

'You sure?' Sma said. 

'Yes; sure.' 

'Zakalwe,' Sma sighed. 'Please accept some treatment.' 

'No,' the man said, as they reached the ground. 

'There's an underground station right and right again,' the drone told 
Sma. 'Alight Central Station; platform eight for trains to Couraz.' 

'Okay,' Sma said reluctantly, glancing at him. He was looking down 
at the gravel path as though concentrating on working out which foot 
to put in front of another. He swung his head as they passed under 
the stem of the ruined battleship, squinting up at the tall curving V of 
the bows. Sma watched the expression on his sweating face, and 
could not decide whether it was awe, disbelief, or something like 
terror. 

The Maglev train drew in, disgorged its passengers; they boarded 
with a few other people. 

'You going to make it, Cheradenine?' Sma asked him. He was slumped 
in the seat, resting his arms on the table in a way that somehow 
made them look as though they were broken, or paralysed. He stared 
at the seat across from him, ignoring the cityscape as it slid by, the 
train accelerating along viaducts towards the suburbs and the 
countryside. 

He nodded. 'I'll survive.' 

'Yes, but for how much longer?' said the drone, sitting on the table in 
front of Sma. 'You are in terrible shape, Zakalwe.' 

'Better than looking like a suitcase,' he said, glancing at the machine. 

'Oh, how droll,' the machine said. 

- You finished drawing things yet? it asked the Xenophobe. 

- No. 

- Can't you devote just a little of your supposedly bogglingly fast Mind 
to finding out why he was so interested in that ship? 

- Oh, I suppose so, but - 

- Wait a minute; what have we here? Listen to this: 

'... You'll find out, I suppose. Past time I told you,' he said, looking 
out of the window but talking to Sma. The city slid by beyond, bright 
in the sunlight. His eyes were wide, pupils dilated, and somehow Sma 
got the impression he was looking at one city, but seeing another, or 
seeing the same one but long ago, as though in some time-polarised 
light only his distressed, enfevered eyes could see. 

'This is where you come from?' 

'Long time ago, now,' he said, coughing, doubling up, holding one 
arm tight to his side. He took a long slow breath. 'I was born here...' 

The woman listened. The drone listened. The ship listened. 

While he told them the story, of the great house that lay halfway 
between the mountains and the sea, upstream from the great city. 
He told them about the estate surrounding the house, and the 
beautiful gardens, and about the three, later four, children who were 
brought up in the house, and who played in the garden. He told them 
about the summerhouses and the stone boat and the maze and the 
fountains and the lawns and the ruins and the animals in the woods. 
He told them about the two boys and the two girls, and the two 
mothers, and the one strict father and the one unseen father, 
imprisoned in the city. He told them about the visits to the city, which 
the children always thought lasted too long, and about the time when 
they were no longer allowed to go into the garden without guards to 

escort them, and about how they stole a gun, one day, and were 
going to take it out into the estate to shoot it, but only got as far as 
the stone boat, and surprised an assassination squad come to kill the 
family, and saved the day by alerting the house. He told them about 
the bullet that hit Darckense, and the sliver of her bone that 

pierced him almost to his heart. 

He started to dry up, voice croaking. Sma saw a waiter pushing a 
trolley into the far end of the coach. She bought a couple of soft 
drinks; he gulped at first, but coughed painfully, and then just sipped 
his. 

'And the war did start,' he said, looking at but not seeing the last of 
the suburbs flow past; the countryside was a green blur as they 
accelerated again. 'And the two boys, that had become men... ended 
up on different sides.' 

- Fascinating, the Xenophobe communicated to Skaffen-Amtiskaw. I 
think I will do a little quick research. 

- About time too, the drone sent back, listening to the man talk at 
the same time. 

He told them about the war, and the siege that involved 
the Staberinde, and the besieged forces breaking out... and he told 
them about the man, the boy who'd played in the garden who, in the 
depths of one terrible night, had caused the thing to be done which 
led to him being called the Chairmaker, and the dawn when 
Darckense's sister and brother had found what Elethiomel had done, 
and the brother trying to take his own life, giving up his generalship, 
abandoning the armies and his sister in the selfishness of despair. 

And he told them about Livueta, who had never forgiven, and had 
followed him - though he did not know it at the time - on another cold 
ship, for a century through the intractable calm slowness of real 
space, to a place where the icebergs swirled round a continental pole, 
forever calving and crashing and shrinking... But then she had lost 
him, the trail gone appropriately cold, and she had stayed there, 
searching, for years, and could not have known that he had left for 

another life entirely, taken away by the tall lady who walked through 
the blizzard as though it wasn't there, a small space ship at her back 
like a faithful pet. 

And so Livueta Zakalwe gave up, and took another long journey, to 
get away from the burden of her memories, and where she had ended 
up - (the ship quizzed the drone for the location; Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
gave it the name of the planet and the system, a few decades away) 
- that had been where she'd finally been tracked down, after his last 
job for them. 

Skaffen-Amtiskaw remembered. The grey-haired woman, in her early 
late-years, working in a clinic in the slums, a delicate shanty town 
strewn like trash across the mud and tree-lined slopes above a 
tropical city looking out across sparkling lagoons and golden sandbars 
to the rollers of a vast ocean. Thin, marks under her eyes, a pot-
bellied child on each hip when they first went to see her, standing in 
the middle of the crowded room, wailing children tugging at her 
hems. 

The drone had learned to appreciate the full range of pan-human 
facial expression, and thought that, in witnessing the one that 
appeared on Livueta Zakalwe's face when she saw Zakalwe, it had 
experienced something close to unique. Such surprise; but such 
hatred! 

'Cheradenine...' Sma said tenderly, gently laying one hand on his. 
She put her other hand to the nape of his neck, stroking him there as 
his head bent lower to the table. He turned and watched the prairie 
stream past like a sea of gold. 

He put one hand up, smoothing it slowly over his brow and shaved 
scalp, as though through long hair. 

forests as the world and its continents shifted and the climate altered. 
Later it became a desert, but then suffered something beyond the 
capacity of the globe itself to provide. An asteroid the size of a 
mountain hit the isthmus, like a bullet striking flesh. 

It burst into the granite heart of the land, ringing the planet like a 
bell. Two oceans met for the first time; the dust of the immense 
explosion blocked out the sun, started a small ice age, wiped out 
thousands of species. The ancestors of the species that later came to 
rule the planet took their initial opportunity from that cataclysm. 

The crater became a dome as the planet reacted over the millennia; 
the oceans were separated again when the rocks - even the 
seemingly solid layers flowing and warping, over those great scales 
of time and distance - pushed back, like an aeons late bruise forming 
on the skin of the world. 

Sma had found the information brochure in a seat pocket. She looked 
up from it for a moment at the man in the seat beside her. He'd fallen 
asleep. His face looked drawn and grey and old. She could not 
remember ever having seen him look so ancient and ill. Dammit, he'd 
looked healthier when he'd been beheaded. 'Zakalwe,' she whispered, 
shaking her head. 'What's wrong with you?' 

'Death-wish,' 
the 
drone 
muttered, 
quietly. 
'With 
extrovert 

complications.' 

Sma shook her head and went back to the brochure. The man slept 
fitfully and the drone monitored him. 

Reading about Couraz, Sma suddenly recalled the great fortress she 
had been picked up from by the Xenophobe's module, on a sunny day 
that now seemed as long ago as it was far away. She looked up, 
sighing, from a photograph of the isthmus taken from space, and 
thought back to the house under the dam, and felt home-sick... 
Couraz had been a fortified town, a prison, a fortress, a city, a target. 
Now - perhaps appropriately, Sma thought, looking at the injured, 
shivering man at her side - the great dome of rock held a small city 
that was mostly taken up with the biggest hospital in the world. 

The train hurtled into a tunnel carved from naked rock. 

They passed through the station, took an elevator to one of the 
hospital reception levels. They sat on a couch, surrounded by potted 
plants and soft music, while the drone, sitting on the floor at their 
feet, plundered the nearest computer work station for information. 

'Got her,' it announced quietly. 'Go to the receptionist and tell her 
your name; I've ordered you a pass; no verification required.' 

'Come on, Zakalwe.' Sma rose, collected her pass, and helped him to 
his feet. He staggered. 'Look,' she said, 'Cheradenine, let me at -' 

'Just take me to her.' 

'Let me talk to her first.' 

'No; take me to her. Now.' 

The ward was up another few levels, in the sunlight. The light came 
through clear, high windows. The sky was white with scudding cloud 
outside, and way in the distance, beyond the dappkd fields and 
woodland, the ocean was a line of blue haze beneath the sky. 

Old men lay quietly in the broad, partitioned ward. Sma helped him 
towards the far end, where the drone said Livueta must be. They 
entered a short, broad corridor. Livueta came out of a side room. She 
stopped when she saw them. 

Livueta Zakalwe looked older; white-haired, skin soft and lined with 
age. Her eyes were undulled. She drew herself up a little. She was 
holding a deep-sided tray full of little boxes and bottles. 

Livueta looked at them; the man, the woman, the little pale suitcase 
that was the drone. 

Sma glanced to one side, hissed, 'Zakalwe!' She hauled him more 
upright. 

His eyes had been shut. They blinked open and he squinted 
uncertainly at the woman standing in front of them. He appeared not 

to recognise her at first, then, slowly, understanding seemed to filter 
through. 

'Livvy?' he said, blinking quickly, squinting at her. 'Livvy?' 

'Hello, Ms Zakalwe,' Sma said, when the woman did not reply. 

Livueta Zakalwe turned contemptuous eyes from the man half-
hanging from Sma's right arm. She looked at Sma and shook her 
head, so that just for an instant, Sma thought she was going to say 
no, she wasn't Livueta. 

'Why do you keep doing this?' Livueta Zakalwe said softly. Her voice 
was still young, the drone thought, just as the Xenophobe came back 
with some fascinating information it had gleaned from historical 
records. 

(- Really? the drone signalled. Dead?) 

'Why do you do this?' she said. 'Why do you do this... to him; to me... 
why? Can't you just leave us all alone?' 

Sma shrugged, a little awkwardly. 

'Livvy...' he said. 

'I'm sorry, Ms Zakalwe,' Sma said. 'It's what he wanted; we 
promised.' 

'Livvy; please; talk to me; let me ex -' 

'You shouldn't do this,' Livueta told Sma. Then she turned her gaze 
to the man, who was rubbing one hand over his shaved scalp, 
grinning inanely at her, blinking. 'He looks sick,' she said flatly. 

'He is,' Sma said. 

'Bring him in here.' Livueta Zakalwe opened another door; a room 
with a bed. Skaffen-Amtiskaw, still wondering exactly what was going 
on in the light of the information it had just received from the ship, 
still found the time to be mildly surprised that the woman was taking 

it all so calmly this time. Last time she'd tried to kill the fellow and it 
had had to move in smartly. 

'I don't want to lie down,' he protested, when he saw the bed. 

'Then just sit, Cheradenine,' Sma said. Livueta Zakalwe made a 
snaking motion with her head, muttered something even the drone 
could not make out. She placed the tray of drugs down on a table, 
stood in one corner of the room, arms crossed, while the man sat 
down on the bed. 

'I'll leave you alone,' Sma said to the woman. 'We'll be just outside.' 

Close enough for me to hear, thought the drone, and to stop her 
trying to murder you again, if that's what she decides to do. 

'No,' the woman said, shaking her head, looking with an odd 
dispassion at the man on the bed. 'No; don't leave. There's nothing -
' 

'But I want them to leave,' he said, and coughed, doubling over and 
almost falling off the bed. Sma went to help him, and pulled him a 
little further on to the bed. 

'What can't you say in front of them?' Livueta Zakalwe asked. 'What 
don't they know?' 

'I just want to have a... a talk in private, Livvy, please,' he said, 
looking up at her. 'Please...' 

'I have nothing to say to you. And there is nothing you can say to 
me.' 

The drone heard somebody in the corridor outside; there was a knock 
at the door. Livueta opened it. A young female nurse, who called 
Livueta Sister, told her that it was time to prepare one of the patients. 

Livueta Zakalwe looked at her watch. 'I have to go,' she told them. 

'Livvy! Livvy, please!' He leant forward on the bed, both elbows tight 
by his sides, both hands clawed out, palm up, in front of him. 'Please!' 

There were tears in his eyes. 

'This is pointless,' the old woman shook her head. 'And you are a 
fool.' She looked at Sma. 'Don't bring him to me again.' 

'LIVVY!' He collapsed on the bed, curled up and quivering. The drone 
sensed heat from the shaven head, could see blood vessels throb on 
his neck and hands. 

'Cheradenine, it's all right,' Sma said, going to the bed and down on 
one knee, taking his shoulders in her hands. 

There was a crack as one of Livueta Zakalwe's hands thumped down 
into the top of a table she stood beside. The man wept, shaking. The 
drone sensed odd brain-wave patterns. Sma looked up at the woman. 

'Don't call him that,' Livueta Zakalwe said. 

'Don't call him what?' Sma said. 

Sma could be pretty thick, the drone thought. 

'Don't call him Cheradenine.' 

'Why not?' 

'It isn't his name.' 

'It isn't?' Sma looked mystified. The drone monitored the man's brain 
activity and blood flow and thought there was trouble coming. 

'No, it isn't.' 

'But...' Sma began. She shook her head suddenly. 'He's your brother; 
he's Cheradenine Zakalwe.' 

'No, Ms Sma,' Livueta Zakalwe said, taking the drug-tray up again 
and opening the door with one hand. 'No, he isn't.' 

'Aneurysm!' the drone said quickly, and slipped through the air, past 
Sma to the bed, where the man was shaking spastically. It scanned 

him more thoroughly; found a massive blood vessel leakage pouring 
into the man's brain. 

It whirled him round, straightened him out, using its effector to make 
him unconscious. Inside his brain, the blood continued to pump 
through the tear into the surrounding tissue, invading the cortex. 

'Sorry about this, ladies,' the drone said. It produced a cutting field 
and sliced through his skull. He stopped breathing. Skaffen-Amtiskaw 
used another aspect of its force field to keep his chest moving in and 
out, while its effector gently persuaded the muscles that opened his 
lungs to work again. It took the top of his skull off; a quick low-
powered CREW blast, mirrored off another field component, 
cauterised all the appropriate blood vessels. It held his skull to one 
side. Blood was already visible, welling through the folded grey 
geography of the man's brain tissue. His heart stopped; the drone 
kept it going with its effector. 

Both women had stopped, fascinated and appalled at the actions of 
the machine. 

It stripped away the layers of the man's brain with its own senses; 
cortex, limbic, thalamus/cerebellum, it moved through his defences 
and armaments, down his thoroughfares and ways, through the 
stores and the lands of his memories, searching and mapping and 
tapping and searing. 

'What do you mean?' Sma said, in an almost dream-like way to the 
elderly woman just about to quit the room. 'What do you mean, "no"? 
What do you mean he isn't your brother?' 

'I mean he is not Cheradenine Zakalwe,' Livueta sighed, watching the 
drone's bizarre operation upon the man. 

She was... She was... She was... 

Sma found herself frowning into the woman's face. 'What? Then...' 

Go back; go right back. What was I to do? Go back. The point is to 
win. Go back! Everything must bend to that truth. 

'Cheradenine Zakalwe, my brother,' Livueta Zakalwe said, 'died 
nearly two hundred years ago. Died not long after he received the 
bones of our sister made into a chair.' 

The drone sucked the blood from the man's brain, teasing a hollow 
field-filament through the broken tissue, collecting the red fluid in a 
little transparent bulb. A second filament tube spun-knit the torn 
tissue back together. It sucked more blood to decrease the man's 
blood pressure, used its effector to alter the settings in the 
appropriate glands, so that the pressure would not grow so great 
again for a while. It sent a narrow tube of field over to a small sink 
under the window, jetting the excess blood down the drain hole, then 
briefly turning on the tap. The blood flushed away, gurgling. 

'The man you know as Cheradenine Zakalwe -' 

Facing it by facing it, that's all I ever did; Staberinde, Zakalwe; the 
names hurt, but how else could I- 

'- is the man who took my brother's name just as he took my brother's 
life, just as he took my sister's life -' 

But she- 

'- He was the commander of the Staberinde. He is the Chairmaker. 
He is Elethiomel.' 

Livueta Zakalwe walked out, closing the door behind her. 

Sma turned, face almost bloodless, to look at the body of the man 
lying on the bed... while Skaffen-Amtiskaw worked on, engrossed in 
its struggle to make good. 

times he thought it might rain. The old man disagreed and said the 
clouds over the mountains were deceptive. They drove on through 
the deserted lands, past blackened fields and the shells of cottages 
and the ruins of farms and the burned villages and the still smoking 
towns, until they came to the abandoned city. In the city they drove 
resoundingly through the wide empty streets, and once took the 
vehicle crashing and careering up a narrow alley crammed with bare 
market stalls and rickety poles supporting tattered shade-cloths, 
demolishing it all in a fine welter of splintering wood and wildly 
flapping fabric. 

They chose the Royal Park as the best place to plant the bomb, 
because the troops could be comfortably accommodated in the Park's 
wide spaces, and the high command would likely take to the grand 
pavilions. The old man thought that they'd want to occupy the Palace, 
but the young man was convinced that in their hearts the invaders 
were desert people, and would prefer the spaces of the Park to the 
clutter of the Citadel. 

So they planted the bomb in the Great Pavilion, and armed it, and 
then argued about whether they'd done the right thing. They argued 
about where to wait things out, and what to do if the army ignored 
the city altogether and just went on by, and whether after the 
prospective Event the other armies would retire in terror, or split up 
into smaller units to continue the invasion, or know the weapon used 
had been unique, and so maintain their steady progress, doubtless in 
an even more ruthless spirit of vengeance than before. They argued 
about whether the invaders would bombard the city first, or send in 
scouts, and - if they did shell - where they would target. They had a 
bet on that. 

About the only thing they agreed on was that what they were doing 
was a waste of the one nuke their side - indeed either side - 
possessed, because even if they had guessed correctly, and the 
invaders behaved as they'd anticipated, the most they could hope to 
do was wipe out one army, and that would still leave three more, any 
one of which could probably complete the invasion. So the warhead, 
like the lives, would be wasted. 

They radioed their superiors and with a code-word told them what 

they had done. After a little while they received the blessing of the 
high command, in the form of another single word. Their masters 
didn't really believe the weapon would work. 

The older man was called Cullis, and he won the argument about 
where they ought to wait, and so they settled into their high, grand 
citadel, and found lots of weapons and wine and got drunk and talked 
and told jokes and swapped outrageous stories of derring-do and 
conquest, and at one point one of them asked the other what 
happiness was, and received a fairly flippant reply, but later neither 
could remember which one had asked and which one had answered. 

They slept and they woke and they got drunk again and they told 
more jokes and lies, and a light shower of rain blew softly over the 
city at one point, and sometimes the young man would move his hand 
over his shaved head, through long, thick hair that was not there any 
more. 

Still they waited, and when the first shells started to fall they found 
they'd picked the wrong place to wait, and so went scrambling out of 
it, down the steps and into the courtyard and into the half-track and 
then away, out into the desert and the wasteland beyond, where they 
camped at dusk and got drunk again and stayed up specially that 
night, to watch the flash. 

You leant against the window, 
Gazing at nothing. 
 
When are we going to leave? 
We could get stuck here, 
Caught 
If we try to stay too long. (turning) 
Why don't we leave? 
 
I said nothing, 
Stroked a cracked glass, 
Exclusive knowledge in the silence; 
 
The bomb lives only as it is falling. 
 

- Shias 
Engin. 

Complete 
Collected 
Works 
(Posthumous 
Edition). 

Month 18, 355th Great Year (Shtaller, Prophetican calendar). 
Volume IX: 'Juvenilia and Discarded Drafts' 

He lifted the basket out of his lap and balanced it on the retaining 
wall, took the cutters from his jacket pocket and looked carefully at 
the selection of small plants, trying to gauge which cuttings had fared 
best since their planting. He hadn't chosen the first one when some 
movement up-slope attracted his attention. 

He looked through the high fence, to the dark green forest. The 
distant peaks were white against the blue sky above. At first he 
thought it was an animal, then the figure moved out of the trees and 
walked over the frost-whitened grass towards the gate in the fence. 

The woman opened the gate, closed it behind her; she wore a thin-
looking coat and trousers. He was mildly surprised to see that she 
didn't have a rucksack. Perhaps she had walked up through the 
grounds of the institute earlier, and was now returning. A visiting 
doctor, maybe. He had been going to wave, if she looked at him as 
she took the steps down to the institute buildings, but she left the 
gate and walked straight towards him. She was tall; dark hair and a 
light brown face under a curious looking fur hat. 

'Mr Escoerea,' she said, extending a hand. He put down the cutters, 
shook her hand. 

'Good morning, Ms...?' 

She didn't reply, but sat down on the wall, clapped ungloved hands 
together, looked around the valley, at the mountains and the forest, 
the river, and the institute buildings down-slope. 'How are you, Mr 
Escoerea? Are you well?' 

He looked down at what was left of his legs, amputated above the 
knees. 'What is left of me is well, ma'am.' It had become his usual 
reply. He knew it might sound bitter to some people, but really it was 
his way of showing he did not want to pretend that there was nothing 
wrong with him. 

She looked at the trousered stumps with a frankness he had only 
known before from children. 'It was a tank, wasn't it?' 

'Yes,' he said, taking up the clippers again. 'Tried to trip it up on the 
way to Balzeit City; didn't work.' He leant over, took a cutting and 
placed it in the basket. He made a note of which plant he'd taken it 
from, and attached it to the twig. 'Excuse me...' He moved the 
wheelchair along a little, and the woman got out of his way as he took 
another cutting. 

She stepped round in front of him again. 'Story I heard said you were 
dragging one of your comrades out of its -' 

'Yes,' he interrupted. 'Yes, that's the story. Of course I didn't know 
then the price of charity is developing extremely strong arm muscles.' 

'You get your medal yet?' She squatted down on her haunches, 
putting one of her hands on a wheel of his chair. He looked at the 
hand, then at her face, but she just grinned. 

He opened his quilted jacket, showed the uniform tunic underneath, 
with all its ribbons. 'Yes, I got my medal.' He ignored her hand, 
pushed the chair along again. 

The woman rose, squatted down again, beside him. 'Impressive 
display for one so young. Surprised you weren't promoted faster; is 
it true you didn't show the right attitude to your superiors? That why 
-' 

He threw the clippers down in the basket, wheeled the chair round to 
face her. 'Yeah, lady,' he sneered. 'I said the wrong things, my family 
were never very well-connected even when they were alive and now 
they're not even that, thanks to the Imperial Glaseen Air Force, 
and these...' He clutched at the chest of the tunic, hauling at the 
medal ribbons, brandishing them. 'These I'd trade you; all of them 
for a pair of shoes I could wear. Now,' he leant forward at her, took 
up the clippers. 'I have work to do. There's a guy down in the institute 
who stepped on a mine; he hasn't got any legs at all and he lost an 
arm. Maybe you'd find it even more fun to go and patronise him. 
Excuse me.' 

He whirled the chair around, moved off a few metres, and took a 
couple of cuttings, tearing at two plants almost at random. He heard 
the woman on the path behind him, and put his hands on the wheels, 
pushing himself away. 

She stopped him. Her hand held the back of the wheelchair and she 
was stronger than she looked. His arms strained against the wheels; 
the rubber buzzed against the stone path, wheels turning but not 
propelling him anywhere. He relaxed, looked up at the sky. She came 

round in front of him, squatted down again. 

He sighed. 'What exactly do you want, lady?' 

'You, Mr Escoerea.' The woman smiled her beautiful smile. She 
nodded at the stumps. 'By the way; the deal with the medals and the 
shoes; fair enough.' She shrugged. 'Except you can keep the medals.' 
She reached into the basket, took out the clippers and stuck them 
into the earth under the plants, then put her hands, clasped, on the 
front of the seat. 'Now, Mr Escoerea,' Sma said, shivering. 'How would 
you like a proper job?' 

END 

