PENGUIN BOOKS
 

WATERSHIP DOWN

‘From blood and the thump of fear to the pleasure of good feeding, the discovery
of new surroundings or the texture of the day, we are immersed in the rabbits’
world … one might, at the same time, be reading some gripping escape story, the
rabbit characters are so totally credible’ – The Times Literary Supplement
 

An impressive, immensely readable story, held together over pages by a
powerful imagination that soon forbids disbelief – New Statesman
 

‘This beautifully written and intensely moving story is the work of an
extraordinary imagination … a classic of animal literature’ – Sunday Telegraph
 

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
 

Richard Adams was born in Berkshire in 1920 and studied history at Bradfield
and Worcester College, Oxford. He served in the Second World War and in 1948
joined the Civil Service. In the mix-sixties he completed his first novel,
Watership Down, the story of which he originally told to his children to while
away a long car journey. Watership Down was awarded both the Carnegie Medal
and the Guardian award for children’s fiction for 1972.
 

In 1974 he retired from the Civil Service to devote himself to writing, and in that
year he published Shardik, his second novel. His subsequent novels are The
Plague Dogs (1977), The Girl in a Swing (1980), Maia (1984) and Traveller
(1988), and his other books include The Iron Wolf and Other Stories, The
Bureaucats, A Nature Diary, Voyage through the Antarctic (in collaboration with
Ronald Lockley) and Tales from Watership Down, a companion volume that is
also published by Penguin. He collaborated on Nature through the Seasons and
Nature Day and Night (with Max Hooper and David A. Goddard). He wrote the
poetry for The Tyger Voyage, illustrated by Nicola Bayley, and The Ship’s Cat,
illustrated by Alan Aldridge, and edited an anthology of modern poetry entitled
Occasional Poets. He has also written a volume of autobiography, The Day
Gone By.
 

Richard Adams lives in the south of England with his wife Elizabeth, who is an
expert on English ceramic history, and has two grown-up daughters, Juliet and
Rosamond. His enthusiasms are English literature, music, chess, beer and shove-
ha’penny, bird-song, folk-song and country walking.
 

RICHARD ADAMS
 

WATERSHIP DOWN

PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN BOOKS
 
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Putnam Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria
3124, Australia Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New
Delhi – 110 017, India Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne
Roads, Albany, Auckland, New Zealand Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty)
Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank 2196, South Africa Penguin Books Ltd,
Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

www.penguin.com
 
First published by Rex Collings 1972
Published in Puffin Books 1973
Penguin edition published 1974

Copyright © Richard Adams, 1972
All rights reserved

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or
otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition
including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser

ISBN: 978-0-14-193764-9
 

Master Rabbit I saw
 

WALTER DE LA MARE
 

To Juliet and Rosamond, remembering the road to Stratford-on-Avon
 

Acknowledgements

 
I acknowledge with gratitude the help I have received not only from my family
but also from my friends Reg Sones and Hal Summers, who read the book
before publication and made valuable suggestions.

I also wish to thank warmly Mrs Margaret Apps and Miss Miriam Hobbs, who

took pains with the typing and helped me very much.

I am indebted, for a knowledge of rabbits and their ways, to Mr R. M.

Lockley’s remarkable book, The Private Life of the Rabbit. Anyone who wishes
to know more about the migrations of yearlings, about pressing chin glands,
chewing pellets, the effects of over-crowding in warrens, the phenomenon of re-
absorption of fertilized embryos, the capacity of buck rabbits to fight stoats, or
any other features of Lapine life, should refer to that definitive work.

Note

 
Nuthanger Farm is a real place, like all the other places in the book. But Mr and
Mrs Cane, their little girl Lucy and their farmhands are fictitious and bear no
intentional resemblance to any persons known to me, living or dead.

Contents

1. The Notice Board

2. The Chief Rabbit

3. Hazel’s Decision

4. The Departure

5. In the Woods

6. The Story of the Blessing of El-ahrairah

7. The Lendri and the River

8. The Crossing

9. The Crow and the Beanfield

10. The Road and the Common

11. Hard Going

12. The Stranger in the Field

13. Hospitality

14. ‘Like Trees in November’

15. The Story of the King’s Lettuce

16. Silverweed

17. The Shining Wire

PART II ON WATERSHIP DOWN

19. Fear in the Dark

20. A Honeycomb and a Mouse

21. ‘For El-ahrairah to Cry’

22. The Story of the Trial of El-ahrairah

23. Kehaar

24. Nuthanger Farm

25. The Raid

26. Fiver Beyond

27. ‘You Can’t Imagine it Unless You’ve been There’

28. At the Foot of the Hill

29. Return and Departure

PART III EFRAFA

31. The Story of El-ahrairah and the Black Rabbit of Inlé

32. Across the Iron Road

33. The Great River

34. General Woundwort

35. Groping

36. Approaching Thunder

37. The Thunder Builds Up

38. The Thunder Breaks

PART IV HAZEL-RAH

40. The Way Back

41. The Story of Rowsby Woof and the Fairy Wogdog

42. News at Sunset

43. The Great Patrol

44. A Message from El-ahrairah

45. Nuthanger Farm Again

46. Bigwig Stands his Ground

47. The Sky Suspended

48. Dea ex Machina

49. Hazel Comes Home

50. And Last

Epilogue

PART I
 
1. The story opens
2. The Enborne crossing
3. The Heather
4. Cowslip’s Warren

PART II
 
5. The N.E. corner of the Beech Hanger on Watership Down
6. Nuthanger Farm

PART III
 
7. The combe where Bigwig met the fox
8. Where they crossed the railway line
9. The upper bridge on the Test

10. Where the punt was lying
11. Efrafa. The Crixa

12. The roadless railway arch

PART IV
 

13. The lower bridge and the weed pool
14. The copse where the fox struck

PART I THE JOURNEY

 
CHORUS:      Why do you cry out thus, unless at some vision of horror?
CASSANDRA: The house reeks of death and dripping blood.
CHORUS:      How so? ’Tis but the odour of the altar sacrifice.
CASSANDRA: The stench is like a breath from the tomb.

Aeschylus Agamemnon

The May sunset was red in clouds, and there was still half an hour to twilight.

The dry slope was dotted with rabbits – some nibbling at the thin grass near their
holes, others pushing farther down to look for dandelions or perhaps a cowslip
that the rest had missed. Here and there one sat upright on an ant-heap and
looked about, with ears erect and nose in the wind. But a blackbird, singing
undisturbed on the outskirts of the wood, showed that there was nothing
alarming there and in the other direction, along the brook, all was plain to be
seen, empty and quiet. The warren was at peace.

At the top of the bank, close to the wild cherry where the blackbird sang, was

a little group of holes almost hidden by brambles. In the green half-light, at the
mouth of one of these holes, two rabbits were sitting together side by side. At
length, the larger of the two came out, slipped along the bank under cover of the
brambles and so down into the ditch and up into the field. A few moments later

the other followed.

movements of his hind-leg. Although he was a yearling and still below full
weight, he had not the harassed look of most ‘outskirters’ – that is, the rank-and-
file of ordinary rabbits in their first year who, lacking either aristocratic
parentage or unusual size and strength, get sat on by their elders and live as best
they can – often in the open – on the edge of their warren. He looked as though
he knew how to take care of himself. There was a shrewd, buoyant air about him
as he sat up, looked round and rubbed both front paws over his nose. As soon as
he was satisfied that all was well, he laid back his ears and set to work on the
grass.

a way of raising and turning his head which suggested not so much caution as a
kind of ceaseless, nervous tension. His nose moved continually and when a
bumble-bee flew humming to a thistle bloom behind him, he jumped and spun
round with a start that sent two nearby rabbits scurrying for holes before the
nearest, a buck with black-tipped ears, recognized him and returned to feeding.

‘Oh, it’s only Fiver,’ said the black-tipped rabbit, ‘jumping at blue-bottles

again. Come on, Buckthorn, what were you telling me?’

‘Fiver?’ said the other rabbit. ‘Why’s he called that?’
‘Five in the litter, you know: he was the last – and the smallest. You’d wonder

nothing had got him by now. I always say a man couldn’t see him and a fox
wouldn’t want him. Still, I admit he seems to be able to keep out of harm’s
way.’*

The small rabbit came closer to his companion, lolloping on long hind legs.
‘Let’s go a bit further, Hazel,’ he said. ‘You know, there’s something queer

about the warren this evening, although I can’t tell exactly what it is. Shall we go
down to the brook?’

‘All right,’ answered Hazel, ‘and you can find me a cowslip. If you can’t find

one, no one can.’

He led the way down the slope, his shadow stretching behind him on the

grass. They reached the brook and began nibbling and searching close beside the
wheel-ruts of the track.

It was not long before Fiver found what they were looking for. Cowslips are a

delicacy among rabbits, and as a rule there are very few left by late May in the
neighbourhood of even a small warren. This one had not bloomed and its flat
spread of leaves was almost hidden under the long grass. They were just starting
on it when two larger rabbits came running across from the other side of the
near-by cattle-wade.

added, as Fiver hesitated. ‘You heard me, didn’t you?’

‘Fiver found it, Toadflax,’ said Hazel.
‘And we’ll eat it,’ replied Toadflax. ‘Cowslips are for Owsla* – don’t you

know that? If you don’t, we can easily teach you.’

Fiver had already turned away. Hazel caught him up by the culvert.
‘I’m sick and tired of it,’ he said. ‘It’s the same all the time. “These are my

claws, so this is my cowslip.” “These are my teeth, so this is my burrow.” I’ll tell
you, if ever I get into the Owsla, I’ll treat outskirters with a bit of decency.’

‘Well, you can at least expect to be in the Owsla one day,’ answered Fiver.

‘You’ve got some weight coming and that’s more than I shall ever have.’

‘You don’t suppose I’ll leave you to look after yourself, do you?’ said Hazel.

‘But to tell you the truth, I sometimes feel like clearing out of this warren
altogether. Still, let’s forget it now and try to enjoy the evening. I tell you what –
shall we go across the brook? There’ll be fewer rabbits and we can have a bit of
peace. Unless you feel it isn’t safe?’ he added.

The way in which he asked suggested that he did in fact think that Fiver was

likely to know better than himself, and it was clear from Fiver’s reply that this
was accepted between them.

‘No, it’s safe enough,’ he answered. ‘If I start feeling there’s anything

dangerous I’ll tell you. But it’s not exactly danger that I seem to feel about the
place. It’s – oh, I don’t know – something oppressive, like thunder: I can’t tell
what; but it worries me. All the same, I’ll come across with you.’

They ran over the culvert. The grass was wet and thick near the stream and

they made their way up the opposite slope, looking for drier ground. Part of the
slope was in shadow, for the sun was sinking ahead of them, and Hazel, who
wanted a warm, sunny spot, went on until they were quite near the lane. As they
approached the gate he stopped, staring.

‘Fiver, what’s that? Look!’
A little way in front of them, the ground had been freshly disturbed. Two piles

of earth lay on the grass. Heavy posts, reeking of creosote and paint, towered up
as high as the holly trees in the hedge, and the board they carried threw a long
shadow across the top of the field. Near one of the posts, a hammer and a few
nails had been left behind.

The two rabbits went up to the board at a hopping run and crouched in a patch

of nettles on the far side, wrinkling their noses at the smell of a dead cigarette-
end somewhere in the grass. Suddenly Fiver shivered and cowered down.

‘Oh, Hazel! This is where it comes from! I know now – something very bad!

Some terrible thing – coming closer and closer.’

He began to whimper with fear.
‘What sort of thing – what do you mean? I thought you said there was no

danger?’

‘I don’t know what it is,’ answered Fiver wretchedly. ‘There isn’t any danger

here, at this moment. But it’s coming – it’s coming. Oh, Hazel, look! The field!
It’s covered with blood!’

‘Don’t be silly, it’s only the light of the sunset. Fiver, come on, don’t talk like

this, you’re frightening me!’

him and to find out what it could be that had suddenly driven him beside
himself. If he was terrified, why did he not run for safety, as any sensible rabbit
would? But Fiver could not explain and only grew more and more distressed. At
last Hazel said,

back to the burrow.’

won’t! I tell you, the field’s full of blood –’

‘Now stop it,’ said Hazel firmly. ‘Just let me look after you for a bit. Whatever

the trouble is, it’s time we got back.’

delay, for Fiver – surrounded on all sides by the quiet summer evening – became
helpless and almost paralysed with fear. When at last Hazel had got him back to
the ditch, he refused at first to go underground and Hazel had almost to push him
down the hole.

of rain, and in less than an hour it was dark. All colour had faded from the sky:
and although the big board by the gate creaked slightly in the night wind (as
though to insist that it had not disappeared in the darkness, but was still firmly
where it had been put), there was no passer-by to read the sharp, hard letters that
cut straight as black knives across its white surface. They said:

THIS IDEALLY SITUATED ESTATE, COMPRISING SIX ACRES OF

EXCELLENT BUILDING LAND, IS TO BE DEVELOPED WITH HIGH

CLASS MODERN RESIDENCES BY SUTCH AND MARTIN,

LIMITED, OF NEWBURY BERKS.

2. The Chief Rabbit

Henry Vaughan The World

moment. Wake up!’

He held him down. Fiver struggled and woke.
‘Oh, Hazel! I was dreaming. It was dreadful. You were there. We were sitting

on water, going down a great, deep stream, and then I realized we were on a
board – like that board in the field – all white and covered with black lines.
There were other rabbits there – bucks and does. But when I looked down, I saw
the board was all made of bones and wire; and I screamed and you said, “Swim
– everybody swim”; and then I was looking for you everywhere and trying to
drag you out of a hole in the bank. I found you, but you said, “The Chief Rabbit
must go alone,” and you floated away down a dark tunnel of water.’

‘Well, you’ve hurt my ribs, anyway. Tunnel of water, indeed! What rubbish!

Can we go back to sleep now?’

us. Don’t tell me to forget about it and go to sleep. We’ve got to go away before
it’s too late.’

‘Go away? From here, you mean? From the warren?’
‘Yes. Very soon. It doesn’t matter where.’
‘Just you and I?’
‘No, everyone.’
‘The whole warren? Don’t be silly. They won’t come. They’ll say you’re out

of your wits.’

Believe me, something very bad is close upon us and we ought to go away.’

about it. Or I’ll try to. But I don’t expect he’ll like the idea at all.’

Hazel led the way down the slope of the run and up towards the bramble

curtain. He did not want to believe Fiver, and he was afraid not to.

mostly asleep. Hazel and Fiver went a short way above ground and then into a
wide, open hole in a sand patch and so down, by various runs, until they were
thirty feet into the wood, among the roots of an oak. Here they were stopped by a
large, heavily-built rabbit – one of the Owsla. He had a curious, heavy growth of
fur on the crown of his head, which gave him an odd appearance, as though he
were wearing a kind of cap. This had given him his name, Thlayli, which means,
literally, ‘Furhead’, or as we might say, ‘Bigwig’.

roots. ‘It is Hazel, isn’t it? What are you doing here? And at this time of day?’
He ignored Fiver, who was waiting farther down the run.

you help us?’

‘We?’ said Bigwig. ‘Is he going to see him too?’
‘Yes, he must. Do trust me, Bigwig. I don’t usually come and talk like this, do

I? When did I ever ask to see the Chief Rabbit before?’

‘Well, I’ll do it for you, Hazel, although I’ll probably get my head bitten off.

I’ll tell him I know you’re a sensible fellow. He ought to know you himself, of
course, but he’s getting old. Wait here, will you?’

burrow. After speaking a few words that Hazel could not catch, he was evidently
called inside. The two rabbits waited in silence, broken only by the continual
nervous fidgeting of Fiver.

The Chief Rabbit’s name and style was Threarah, meaning ‘Lord Rowan

Tree’. For some reason he was always referred to as ‘The Threarah’ – perhaps
because there happened to be only one threar, or rowan, near the warren, from
which he took his name. He had won his position not only by strength in his
prime, but also by level-headedness and a certain self-contained detachment,
quite unlike the impulsive behaviour of most rabbits. It was well-known that he
never let himself become excited by rumour or danger. He had coolly – some
even said coldly – stood firm during the terrible onslaught of the myxomatosis,
ruthlessly driving out every rabbit who seemed to be sickening. He had resisted
all ideas of mass emigration and enforced complete isolation on the warren,
thereby almost certainly saving it from extinction. It was he, too, who had once
dealt with a particularly troublesome stoat by leading it down among the

pheasant coops and so (at the risk of his own life) on to a keeper’s gun. He was
now, as Bigwig said, getting old, but his wits were still clear enough. When
Hazel and Fiver were brought in, he greeted them politely. Owsla like Toadflax
might threaten and bully. The Threarah had no need.

‘Ah, Walnut. It is Walnut, isn’t it?’
‘Hazel,’ said Hazel.
‘Hazel, of course. How very nice of you to come and see me. I knew your

mother well. And your friend –’

‘My brother.’
‘Your brother,’ said the Threarah, with the faintest suggestion of ‘Don’t

correct me any more, will you?’ in his voice. ‘Do make yourselves comfortable.
Have some lettuce?’

away across the fields. Outskirters seldom or never saw lettuce. Hazel took a
small leaf and nibbled politely. Fiver refused, and sat blinking and twitching
miserably.

help you.’

‘Well, sir,’ said Hazel rather hesitantly, ‘it’s because of my brother – Fiver

here. He can often tell when there’s anything bad about, and I’ve found him right
again and again. He knew the flood was coming last autumn and sometimes he
can tell where a wire’s been set. And now he says he can sense a bad danger
coming upon the warren.’

anything but upset. ‘Now what sort of danger, I wonder?’ He looked at Fiver.

‘I don’t know,’ said Fiver. ‘B-but it’s bad. It’s so b-bad that – it’s very bad,’ he

concluded miserably.

and what ought we to do about it, I wonder?’

must all go away.’

The Threarah waited again. Then, in an extremely understanding voice, he

said, ‘Well, I never did! That’s rather a tall order, isn’t it? What do you think
yourself?’

‘Well, sir,’ said Hazel, ‘my brother doesn’t really think about these feelings he

gets. He just has the feelings, if you see what I mean. I’m sure you’re the right
person to decide what we ought to do.’

fellows, let’s just think about this a moment, shall we? It’s May, isn’t it?

Everyone’s busy and most of the rabbits are enjoying themselves. No elil for
miles, or so they tell me. No illness, good weather. And you want me to tell the
warren that young – er – young – er – your brother here has got a hunch and we
must all go trapesing across country to goodness knows where and risk the
consequences, eh? What do you think they’ll say? All delighted, eh?’

‘They’d take it from you,’ said Fiver suddenly.
‘That’s very nice of you,’ said the Threarah again. ‘Well, perhaps they would,

perhaps they would. But I should have to consider it very carefully indeed. A
most serious step, of course. And then –’

like a wire round my neck – like a wire – Hazel, help!’ He squealed and rolled
over in the sand, kicking frantically, as a rabbit does in a snare. Hazel held him
down with both forepaws and he grew quieter.

He’ll be all right in a minute.’

rest. Yes, you’d better take him along now. Well, it’s really been extremely good
of you to come and see me, Walnut. I appreciate it very much indeed. And I shall
think over all you’ve said most carefully, you can be quite sure of that. Bigwig,
just wait a moment, will you?’

As Hazel and Fiver made their way dejectedly down the run outside the

Threarah’s burrow, they could just hear, from inside, the Chief Rabbit’s voice
assuming a rather sharper note, interspersed with an occasional ‘Yes, sir,’ ‘No,
sir.’

Bigwig, as he had predicted, was getting his head bitten off.

3. Hazel’s Decision

Xenophon The Anabasis

It was evening once more and Hazel and Fiver were feeding outside the wood

with two friends. Blackberry, the rabbit with tipped ears who had been startled
by Fiver the night before, had listened carefully to Hazel’s description of the
notice board, remarking that he had always felt sure that men left these things
about to act as signs or messages of some kind, in the same way that rabbits left
marks on runs and gaps. It was another neighbour, Dandelion, who had now
brought the talk back to the Threarah and his indifference to Fiver’s fear.

‘I don’t know what I expected,’ said Hazel. ‘I’d never been near the Chief

Rabbit before. But I thought, “Well, even if he won’t listen, at least no one can
say afterwards that we didn’t do our best to warn him”.’

‘You’re sure, then, that there’s really something to be afraid of?’
‘I’m quite certain. I’ve always known Fiver, you see.’
Blackberry was about to reply when another rabbit came noisily through the

thick dog’s mercury in the wood, blundered down into the brambles and pushed
his way up from the ditch. It was Bigwig.

‘Hullo, Bigwig,’ said Hazel. ‘You’re off duty?’
‘Off duty,’ said Bigwig, ‘and likely to remain off duty.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘I’ve left the Owsla, that’s what I mean.’
‘Not on our account?’
‘You could say that. The Threarah’s rather good at making himself unpleasant

when he’s been woken up at ni-Frith for what he considers a piece of trivial
nonsense. He certainly knows how to get under your skin. I dare say a good
many rabbits would have kept quiet and thought about keeping on the right side
of the Chief, but I’m afraid I’m not much good at that. I told him that the
Owsla’s privileges didn’t mean all that much to me in any case and that a strong
rabbit could always do just as well by leaving the warren. He told me not to be

impulsive and think it over, but I shan’t stay. Lettuce-stealing isn’t my idea of a
jolly life, nor sentry-duty in the burrow. I’m in a fine temper, I can tell you.’

‘No one will steal lettuces soon,’ said Fiver quietly.
‘Oh, that’s you, Fiver, is it?’ said Bigwig, noticing him for the first time.

‘Good, I was coming to look for you. I’ve been thinking about what you said to
the Chief Rabbit. Tell me, is it a sort of tremendous hoax to make yourself
important, or is it true?’

‘It is true,’ said Fiver. ‘I wish it weren’t.’
‘Then you’ll be leaving the warren?’
They were all startled by the bluntness with which Bigwig went to the point.

Dandelion muttered, ‘Leave the warren, Frithrah!’ while Blackberry twitched
his ears and looked very intently, first at Bigwig and then at Hazel.

It was Hazel who replied. ‘Fiver and I will be leaving the warren tonight,’ he

said deliberately.’ I don’t know exactly where we shall go, but we’ll take anyone
who’s ready to come with us.’

‘Right,’ said Bigwig, ‘then you can take me.’
The last thing Hazel had expected was the immediate support of a member of

the Owsla. It crossed his mind that although Bigwig would certainly be a useful
rabbit in a tight corner, he would also be a difficult one to get on with. He
certainly would not want to do what he was told – or even asked – by an
outskirter. ‘I don’t care if he is in the Owsla,’ thought Hazel. ‘If we get away
from the warren, I’m not going to let Bigwig run everything, or why bother to
go?’ But he answered only, ‘Good. We shall be glad to have you.’

at himself. It was Blackberry who spoke next.

‘I think I’ll come,’ he said. ‘I don’t quite know whether it’s you who’ve

persuaded me, Fiver. But anyway, there are too many bucks in this warren, and
it’s pretty poor fun for any rabbit that’s not in the Owsla. The funny thing is that
you feel terrified to stay and I feel terrified to go. Foxes here, weasels there,
Fiver in the middle, begone dull care!’

could; for all his instincts were warning him of the dangers in the unknown
country beyond the warren.

‘If we believe Fiver,’ said Hazel, ‘it means that we think no rabbits at all ought

to stay here. So between now and the time when we go, we ought to persuade as
many as we can to join us.’

Bigwig. ‘If I can talk them over, they’ll be with me when I join you tonight. But
they won’t come because of Fiver. They’ll be juniors, discontented fellows like

me. You need to have heard Fiver yourself to be convinced by him. He’s
convinced me. It’s obvious that he’s been sent some kind of message, and I
believe in these things. I can’t think why he didn’t convince the Threarah.’

‘Because the Threarah doesn’t like anything he hasn’t thought of for himself,’

answered Hazel. ‘But we can’t bother with him any more now. We’ve got to try
to collect some more rabbits and meet again here, fu Inlé. And we’ll start fu Inlé,
too: we can’t wait longer. The danger’s coming closer all the time – whatever it
is – and besides, the Threarah isn’t going to like it if he finds out that you’ve
been trying to get at rabbits in the Owsla, Bigwig. Neither is Captain Holly, I
dare say. They won’t mind odds-and-ends like us clearing off, but they won’t
want to lose you. If I were in your place, I’d be careful whom I picked to talk
to.’

4. The Departure

Shakespeare Hamlet

It was actually about an hour after moonrise and a good while before midnight

when Hazel and Fiver once more came out of their burrow behind the brambles
and slipped quietly along the bottom of the ditch. With them was a third rabbit,
Hlao – Pipkin – a friend of Fiver. (Hlao means any small concavity in the grass
where moisture may collect, e.g. the dimple formed by a dandelion or thistle-
cup.) He too was small, and inclined to be timid, and Hazel and Fiver had spent

the greater part of their last evening in the warren in persuading him to join
them. Pipkin had agreed rather hesitantly. He still felt extremely nervous about
what might happen once they left the warren and had decided that the best way
to avoid trouble would be to keep close to Hazel and do exactly what he said.

The three were still in the ditch when Hazel heard a movement above. He

looked up quickly.

‘Who’s there?’ he said, ‘Dandelion?’
‘No, I’m Hawkbit,’ said the rabbit who was peering over the edge. He jumped

down among them, landing rather heavily.’ Do you remember me, Hazel? We
were in the same burrow during the snow last winter. Dandelion told me you
were going to leave the warren tonight. If you are, I’ll come with you.’

five snow-bound days underground had been distinctly tedious. Still, he thought,
this was no time to pick and choose. Although Bigwig might succeed in talking
over one or two, most of the rabbits they could expect to join them would not
come from the Owsla. They would be outskirters who were getting a thin time
and wondering what to do about it. He was running over some of these in his
mind when Dandelion appeared.

‘The sooner we’re off the better, I reckon,’ said Dandelion. ‘I don’t much like

the look of things. After I’d persuaded Hawkbit here to join us, I was just
starting to talk to a few more, when I found that Toadflax fellow had followed
me down the run. “I want to know what you’re up to,” he said, and I don’t think
he believed me when I told him I was only trying to find out whether there were
any rabbits who wanted to leave the warren. He asked me if I was sure I wasn’t
working up some kind of plot against the Threarah and he got awfully angry and
suspicious. It put the wind up me, to tell you the truth, so I’ve just brought
Hawkbit along and left it at that.’

knock you over first and ask questions afterwards. All the same, let’s wait a little
longer. Blackberry ought to be here soon.”

Time passed. They crouched in silence while the moon shadows moved

northward in the grass. At last, just as Hazel was about to run down the slope to
Blackberry’s burrow, he saw him come out of his hole, followed by no less than
three rabbits. One of these, Buckthorn, Hazel knew well. He was glad to see
him, for he knew him for a tough, sturdy fellow, who was considered certain to
get into the Owsla as soon as he reached full weight.

‘But I dare say he’s impatient,’ thought Hazel, ‘or he may have come off worst

in some scuffle over a doe and taken it hard. Well, with him and Bigwig, at least
we shan’t be too badly off if we run into any fighting.’

names – Speedwell and Acorn – he was none the wiser. But this was not
surprising, for they were typical outskirters – thin-looking six-monthers, with the
strained, wary look of those who are only too well used to the thin end of the
stick. They looked curiously at Fiver. From what Blackberry had told them, they
had been almost expecting to find Fiver foretelling doom in a poetic torrent.
Instead, he seemed more calm and normal than the rest. The certainty of going
had lifted a weight from Fiver.

More time went slowly by. Blackberry scrambled up into the fern and then

returned to the top of the bank, fidgeting nervously and half-inclined to bolt at
nothing. Hazel and Fiver remained in the ditch, nibbling half-heartedly at the
dark grass. At last Hazel heard what he was listening for; a rabbit – or was it
two? – approaching from the wood.

looking rabbit, something over twelve months old. He was well-known by sight
to all the warren, for his fur was entirely grey, with patches of near-white that
now caught the moonlight as he sat scratching himself without speaking. This
was Silver, a nephew of the Threarah, who was serving his first month in the
Owsla.

quiet, straightforward fellow, who had not yet really found his feet among the
veterans. When Bigwig had spoken earlier of sounding out the Owsla, Hazel had
been in two minds. It was only too likely that they would encounter dangers
beyond the warren and that they would stand in need of some good fighters.
Again, if Fiver was right and the whole warren was in imminent peril, then of
course they ought to welcome any rabbit who was ready to join them. On the
other hand, there seemed no point in taking particular pains to get hold of rabbits
who were going to behave like Toadflax.

that Pipkin and Fiver aren’t sat on and cuffed around until they’re ready to run
any risk just to get away. But is Bigwig going to see it like that?’

‘You know Silver, don’t you?’ asked Bigwig, breaking in on his thoughts.

‘Apparently some of the younger fellows in the Owsla have been giving him a
thin time – teasing him about his fur, you know, and saying he only got his place
because of the Threarah. I thought I was going to get some more, but I suppose
nearly all the Owsla feel they’re very well off as they are.’

He looked about him. ‘I say, there aren’t many here, are there? Do you think

it’s really worth going on with this idea?’

Silver seemed about to speak when suddenly there was a pattering in the

undergrowth above and three more rabbits came over the bank from the wood.
Their movement was direct and purposeful, quite unlike the earlier, haphazard
approach of those who were now gathered in the ditch. The largest of the three
newcomers was in front and the other two followed him, as though under orders.
Hazel, sensing at once that they had nothing in common with himself and his
companions, started and sat up tensely. Fiver muttered in his ear, ‘Oh, Hazel,
they’ve come to –’ but broke off short. Bigwig turned towards them and stared,
his nose working rapidly. The three came straight up to him.

‘Thlayli?’ said the leader.
‘You know me perfectly well,’ replied Bigwig, ‘and I know you, Holly. What

do you want?’

‘You’re under arrest.’
‘Under arrest? What do you mean? What for?’
‘Spreading dissension and inciting to mutiny. Silver, you’re under arrest too,

for failing to report to Toadflax this evening and causing your duty to devolve on
a comrade. You’re both to come with me.’

His followers closed in, looking for an opening to join the fight and pin Bigwig
down. Suddenly, from the top of the bank, Buckthorn flung himself headlong
into the scuffle, knocked one of the guards flying with a kick from his back legs
and then closed with the other. He was followed a moment later by Dandelion,
who landed full on the rabbit whom Buckthorn had kicked. Both guards broke
clear, looked round for a moment and then leapt up the bank into the wood.
Holly struggled free of Bigwig and crouched on his haunches, scuffling his front
paws and growling, as rabbits will when angry. He was about to speak when
Hazel faced him.

‘Go,’ said Hazel, firmly and quietly, ‘or we’ll kill you.’
‘Do you know what this means?’ replied Holly. ‘I am Captain of Owsla. You

know that, don’t you?’

‘Go,’ repeated Hazel, ‘or you will be killed.’
‘It is you who will be killed,’ replied Holly. Without another word he too went

back up the bank and vanished into the wood.

Dandelion was bleeding from the shoulder. He licked the wound for a few

moments and then turned to Hazel.

to turn out the Owsla, and then we’ll be for it right enough.’

‘We ought to go at once,’ said Fiver.
‘Yes, the time’s come now all right,’ replied Hazel. ‘Come on, down to the

stream. Then we’ll follow the bank – that’ll help us to keep together.’

‘If you’ll take my advice –’ began Bigwig.
‘If we stay here any longer I shan’t be able to,’ answered Hazel.
With Fiver beside him, he led the way out of the ditch and down the slope. In

less than a minute the little band of rabbits had disappeared into the dim, moonlit
night.

5. In The Woods

R. M. Lockley The Private Life of the Rabbit

Rabbits avoid close woodland, where the ground is shady, damp and grassless

and they feel menaced by the undergrowth. Hazel did not care for the look of the
trees. Still, he thought, Holly would no doubt think twice before following them
into a place like that, and to keep beside the brook might well prove safer than
wandering about the fields in one direction and another, with the risk of finding
themselves, in the end, back at the warren. He decided to go straight into the
wood without consulting Bigwig, and to trust that the rest would follow.

‘If we don’t run into any trouble and the brook takes us through the wood,’ he

thought, ‘we really shall be clear of the warren and then we can look for
somewhere to rest for a bit. Most of them still seem to be more or less all right,
but Fiver and Pipkin will have had as much as they can stand before long.’

From the moment he entered it the wood seemed full of noises. There was a

smell of damp leaves and moss, and everywhere the splash of water went
whispering about. Just inside, the brook made a little fall into a pool and the
sound, enclosed among the trees, echoed as though in a cave. Roosting birds
rustled overhead; the night breeze stirred the leaves; here and there a dead twig
fell. And there were more sinister, unidentified sounds, from further away;
sounds of movement.

To rabbits, everything unknown is dangerous. The first reaction is to startle,

the second to bolt. Again and again they startled, until they were close to
exhaustion. But what did these sounds mean and where, in this wilderness, could

they bolt to?

they lost the course of the brook, slipping across the moonlit patches as fugitives
and halting in the bushes with raised ears and staring eyes. The moon was low
now and the light, wherever it slanted through the trees, seemed thicker, older
and more yellow.

From a thick pile of dead leaves beneath a holly tree, Hazel looked down a

narrow path, lined on either side with fern and sprouting fire-weed. The fern
moved slightly in the breeze, but along the path there was nothing to be seen
except a scatter of last year’s fallen acorns under an oak. What was in the
bracken? What lay round the further bend? And what would happen to a rabbit
who left the shelter of the holly tree and ran down the path? He turned to
Dandelion beside him.

run into trouble, get the others away.’

seconds brought him to the oak. He paused a moment, staring about him, and
then ran on to the bend. Beyond, the path was the same – empty in the darkening
moonlight and leading gently downhill into the deep shadow of a grove of ilex
trees. Hazel stamped, and a few moments later Dandelion was beside him in the
bracken. Even in the midst of his fear and strain it occurred to him that
Dandelion must be very fast: he had covered the distance in a flash.

ahrairah?’*

Hazel gave him a quick, friendly glance. It was warm praise and cheered him.

What Robin Hood is to the English and John Henry to the American Negroes,
Elil-Hrair-Rah, or El-ahrairah – The Prince with a Thousand Enemies – is to
rabbits. Uncle Remus might well have heard of him, for some of El-ahrairah’s
adventures are those of Brer Rabbit. For that matter, Odysseus himself might
have borrowed a trick or two from the rabbit hero, for he is very old and was
never at a loss for a trick to deceive his enemies. Once, so they say, he had to get
home by swimming across a river in which there was a large and hungry pike.
El-ahrairah combed himself until he had enough fur to cover a clay rabbit, which
he pushed into the water. The pike rushed at it, bit it and left it in disgust. After a
little, it drifted to the bank and El-ahrairah dragged it out and waited a while
before pushing it in again. After an hour of this, the pike left it alone and when it
had done so for the fifth time, El-ahrairah swam across himself and went home.
Some rabbits say he controls the weather, because the wind, the damp and the
dew are friends and instruments to rabbits against their enemies.

crouching bodies of the others. ‘I know it’s not a good place, but Fiver and this
other half-sized fellow you’ve got here – they’re pretty well all in. They won’t
be able to go on if we don’t rest.’

lives in the same place and never run more than a hundred yards at a stretch.
Even though they may live and sleep above ground for months at a time, they
prefer not to be out of distance of some sort of refuge that will serve for a hole.
They have two natural gaits – the gentle, lolloping, forward movement of the
warren on a summer evening and the lightning dash for cover that every human
has seen at some time or other. It is difficult to imagine a rabbit plodding steadily
on: they are not built for it. It is true that young rabbits are great migrants and
capable of journeying for miles, but they do not take to it readily.

Hazel and his companions had spent the night doing everything that came

unnaturally to them, and this for the first time. They had been moving in a group,
or trying to: actually, they had straggled widely at times. They had been trying to
maintain a steady pace, between hopping and running, and it had come hard.
Since entering the wood they had been in severe anxiety. Several were almost
tharn – that is, in that state of staring, glazed paralysis that comes over terrified
or exhausted rabbits, so that they sit and watch their enemies – weasels or
humans – approach to take their lives. Pipkin sat trembling under a fern, his ears
drooping on either side of his head. He held one paw forward in an awkward,
unnatural way and kept licking it miserably. Fiver was little better off. He still
looked cheerful, but very weary. Hazel realized that until they were rested they
would all be safer where they were than stumbling along in the open, with no
strength left to run from an enemy. But if they lay brooding, unable to feed or go
underground, all their troubles would come crowding into their hearts, their fears
would mount and they might very likely scatter, or even try to return to the
warren. He had an idea.

‘Yes, all right, we’ll rest here,’ he said. ‘Let’s go in among this fern. Come on,

Dandelion, tell us a story. I know you’re handy that way. Pipkin here can’t wait
to hear it.’

him to do. Choking back his own fear of the desolate, grassless woodland, the
before-dawn-returning owls that they could hear some way off and the
extraordinary, rank animal smell that seemed to come from somewhere rather
nearer, he began.

6. The Story of the Blessing of El-ahrairah

W. B. Yeats A Woman Toung and Old

‘Now El-ahrairah was among the animals in those days and he had many

wives. He had so many wives that there was no counting them and the wives had
so many young that even Frith could not count them and they ate the grass and
the dandelions and the lettuces and the clover and El-ahrairah was the father of
them all.’ (Bigwig growled appreciatively.) ‘And after a time,’ went on
Dandelion, ‘after a time the grass began to grow thin and the rabbits wandered
everywhere, multiplying and eating as they went.

‘Then Frith said to El-ahrairah, “Prince Rabbit, if you cannot control your

people, I shall find ways to control them. So mark what I say.” But El-ahrairah
would not listen and he said to Frith, “My people are the strongest in the world,
for they breed faster and eat more than any of the other people. And this shows
how much they love Lord Frith, for of all the animals they are the most
responsive to his warmth and brightness. You must realize, my lord, how
important they are and not hinder them in their beautiful lives.”

‘Frith could have killed El-ahrairah at once, but he had a mind to keep him in

the world, because he needed him to sport and jest and play tricks. So he
determined to get the better of him not by means of his own great power but by
means of a trick. He gave out that he would hold a great meeting and that at that
meeting he would give a present to every animal and bird, to make each one

different from the rest. And all the creatures set out to go to the meeting-place.
But they all arrived at different times, because Frith made sure that it would
happen so. And when the blackbird came, he gave him his beautiful song, and
when the cow came, he gave her sharp horns and the strength to be afraid of no
other creature. And so in their turn came the fox and the stoat and the weasel.
And to each of them Frith gave the cunning and the fierceness and the desire to
hunt and slay and eat the children of El-ahrairah. And so they went away from
Frith full of nothing but hunger to kill the rabbits.

was going to Frith’s meeting to receive a great gift. And at last he set out for the
meeting-place. But as he was going there, he stopped to rest on a soft, sandy
hillside. And while he was resting, over the hill came flying the dark Swift,
screaming as he went,” News! News! News!” For you know, this is what he has
said ever since that day. So El-ahrairah called up to him and said, “What news?”
“Why,” said the Swift, “I would not be you, El-ahrairah. For Frith has given the
fox and the weasel cunning hearts and sharp teeth and to the cat he has given
silent feet and eyes that can see in the dark and they are gone away from Frith’s
place to kill and devour all that belongs to El-ahrairah.” And he dashed on over
the hills. And at that moment El-ahrairah heard the voice of Frith calling,
“Where is El-ahrairah? For all the others have taken their gifts and gone and I
have come to look for him.”

‘Then El-ahrairah knew that Frith was too clever for him and he was

frightened. He thought that the fox and the weasel were coming with Frith and
he turned to the face of the hill and began to dig. He dug a hole, but he had dug
only a little of it when Frith came over the hill alone. And he saw El-ahrairah’s
bottom sticking out of the hole and the sand flying out in showers as the digging
went on. When he saw that, he called out, “My friend, have you seen El-
ahrairah, for I am looking for him to give him my gift?” “No,” answered El-
ahrairah, without coming out, “I have not seen him. He is far away. He could not
come.” So Frith said, “Then come out of that hole and I will bless you instead of
him.” “No, I cannot,” said El-ahrairah, “I am busy. The fox and the weasel are
coming. If you want to bless me you can bless my bottom, for it is sticking out
of the hole.” ’

draught moved down the warren passages and the icy wet lay in the pits of the
runs below their burrows; and on summer evenings, in the grass under the red
may and the sweet, carrion-scented elder bloom. Dandelion was telling it well
and even Pipkin forgot his weariness and danger, and remembered instead the
great indestructibility of the Rabbits. Each one of them saw himself as El-

ahrairah, who could be impudent to Frith and get away with it.

because of his resourcefulness, and because he would not give up even when he
thought the fox and the weasel were coming. And he said, “Very well, I will
bless your bottom as it sticks out of the hole. Bottom, be strength and warning
and speed for ever and save the life of your master. Be it so!” And as he spoke,
El-ahrairah’s tail grew shining white and flashed like a star: and his back legs
grew long and powerful and he thumped the hillside until the very beetles fell off
the grass-stems. He came out of the hole and tore across the hill faster than any
creature in the world. And Frith called after him, “El-ahrairah, your people
cannot rule the world, for I will not have it so. All the world will be your enemy,
Prince with a Thousand Enemies, and whenever they catch you, they will kill
you. But first they must catch you, digger, listener, runner, prince with the swift
warning. Be cunning and full of tricks and your people shall never be
destroyed.” And El-ahrairah knew then that although he would not be mocked,
yet Frith was his friend. And every evening, when Frith has done his day’s work
and lies calm and easy in the red sky, El-ahrairah and his children and his
children’s children come out of their holes and feed and play in his sight, for
they are his friends and he has promised them that they can never be destroyed.’

7. The Lendri and the River

Napoleon Bonaparte

‘A lendri,’ he muttered as he passed through them. ‘It may be dangerous and it

may not, but I’m taking no chances with it. Let’s get away.’

They, followed him through the fern and very soon came upon another,

parallel path. Bigwig turned into it and broke into a run. Dandelion overtook him
and the two disappeared among the ilex trees. Hazel and the others followed as
best they could, with Pipkin limping and staggering behind, his fear driving him
on in spite of the pain in his paw.

Hazel came out on the farther side of the ilexes and followed the path round a

bend. Then he stopped dead and sat back on his haunches. Immediately in front
of him, Bigwig and Dandelion were staring out from the sheer edge of a high
bank, and below the bank ran a stream. It was in fact the little river Enborne,
twelve to fifteen feet wide and at this time of year two or three feet deep with
spring rain, but to the rabbits it seemed immense, such a river as they had never
imagined. The moon had almost set and the night was now dark, but they could
see the water faintly shining as it flowed and could just make out, on the further
side, a thin belt of nut-trees and alders. Somewhere beyond, a plover called three

or four times and was silent.

One by one, most of the others came up, stopped at the bank and looked at the

water without speaking. A chilly breeze was moving and several of them
trembled where they sat.

expecting this when you took us into the wood?’

was certainly no coward, but he was likely to remain steady only as long as he
could see his way clear and be sure of what to do. To him, perplexity was worse
than danger; and when he was perplexed he usually grew angry. The day before,
Fiver’s warning had troubled him, and he had spoken in anger to the Threarah
and left the Owsla. Then, while he was in an uncertain mood about the idea of
leaving the warren, Captain Holly had appeared in capital time to be attacked
and to provide a perfect reason for their departure. Now, at the sight of the river,
Bigwig’s assurance was leaking again and unless he, Hazel, could restore it in
some way, they were likely to be in for trouble. He thought of the Threarah and
his wily courtesy.

‘I don’t know what we should have done without you just now, Bigwig,’ he

said. ‘What was that animal? Would it have killed us?’

‘A lendri,’ said Bigwig. ‘I’ve heard about them in the Owsla. They’re not

really dangerous. They can’t catch a rabbit that runs, and nearly always you can
smell them coming. They’re funny things: I’ve heard of rabbits living almost on
top of them and coming to no harm. But they’re best avoided, all the same.
They’ll dig out rabbit kittens and they’ll kill an injured rabbit if they find one.
They’re one of the Thousand, all right. I ought to have guessed from the smell,
but it was new to me.’

blood on its lips.’

might have been quicker. Still, fortunately we did the right thing. We really came
out of it very well,’ said Bigwig.

at the sight of the river.

‘What do you think we ought to do now, Fiver?’ asked Hazel.
Fiver looked down at the water and twitched his ears.
‘We shall have to cross it,’ he said. ‘But I don’t think I can swim, Hazel. I’m

worn out, and Pipkin’s a good deal worse than I am.’

want to cross it for? I never heard such nonsense.’

when it suits them. Rabbits have been known to live on the edge of a wood and
regularly swim a brook to feed in the fields beyond. But most rabbits avoid
swimming and certainly an exhausted rabbit could not swim the Enborne.

‘I don’t want to jump in there,’ said Speedwell.
‘Why not just go along the bank?’ asked Hawkbit.
Hazel suspected that if Fiver felt they ought to cross the river, it might be

dangerous not to. But how were the others to be persuaded? At this moment, as
he was still wondering what to say to them, he suddenly realized that something
had lightened his spirits. What could it be? A smell? A sound? Then he knew.
Near-by, across the river, a lark had begun to twitter and climb. It was morning.
A blackbird called one or two deep, slow notes and was followed by a wood-
pigeon. Soon they were in grey twilight and could see that the stream bordered
the farther edge of the wood. On the other side lay open fields.

8. The Crossing

The Acts of the Apostles, Chapter 27

go and feed.’

They scrambled down the bank and set to nibbling beside the water. Between

them and the stream itself stood half-grown clumps of purple loosestrife and
fleabane, which would not flower for nearly two months yet. The only blooms
were a few early meadow-sweet and a patch of pink butter-bur. Looking back at
the face of the bank, they could see that it was in fact dotted thickly with
martins’ holes. There was a narrow foreshore at the foot of the little cliff and this
was littered with the rubbish of the colony – sticks, droppings, feathers, a broken
egg and a dead nestling or two. The martins were now coming and going in
numbers over the water.

feeding as he went. When they were a little way off, and half-concealed by a
patch of reeds, he said, ‘Are you sure we’ve got to cross the river, Fiver? What

about going along the bank one way or the other?’

‘No, we need to cross the river, Hazel, so that we can get into those fields –

and on beyond them too. I know what we ought to be looking for – a high,
lonely place with dry soil, where rabbits can see and hear all round and men
hardly ever come. Wouldn’t that be worth a journey?’

‘Yes, of course it would. But is there such a place?’
‘Not near a river – I needn’t tell you that. But if you cross a river you start

going up again, don’t you? We ought to be on the top – on the top and in the
open.’

say all this and yet you say you’re too tired to swim?’

‘I can rest, Hazel, but Pipkin’s in a pretty bad way. I think he’s injured. We

may have to stay here half the day.’

‘Well, let’s go and talk to the others. They may not mind staying. It’s crossing

they’re not going to fancy, unless something frightens them into it.’

the bushes at the edge of the path.

‘I was wondering where you’d got to,’ he said to Hazel. ‘Are you ready to

move on?’

Frith. That’ll give everyone a chance to rest and then we can swim across to
those fields.’

Bigwig was about to reply, but Blackberry spoke first.
‘Bigwig,’ he said, ‘why don’t you swim over now, and then go out into the

field and have a look round? The’wood may not stretch very far one way or the
other. You could see from there; and then we might know which would be the
best way to go.’

‘Oh well,’ said Bigwig rather grudgingly, ‘I suppose there’s some sense in

that. I’ll swim the embleer* river as many times as you like. Always glad to
oblige.’

Without the slightest hesitation, he took two hops to the water, waded in and

swam across the deep, still pool. They watched him pull himself out beside a
flowering clump of figwort, gripping one of the tough stems in his teeth, shake a
shower of drops out of his fur and scutter into the alder bushes. A moment later,
between the nut-trees, they saw him running off into the field.

‘I’m glad he’s with us,’ said Hazel to Silver. Again he thought wryly of the

Threarah. ‘He’s the fellow to find out all we need to know. Oh, I say, look, he’s
coming back already.’

Bigwig was racing back across the field, looking more agitated than he had at

any time since the encounter with Captain Holly. He ran into the water almost
headlong and paddled over fast, leaving an arrow-head ripple on the calm, brown
surface. He was speaking as he jerked himself out on the sandy foreshore.

‘Well, Hazel, if I were you I shouldn’t wait until ni-Frith. I should go now. In

fact, I think you’ll have to.’

‘Why?’asked Hazel.
‘There’s a large dog loose in the wood.’
Hazel started. ‘What?’ he said. ‘How do you know?’
‘When you get into the field you can see the wood sloping down to the river.

Parts of it are open. I saw the dog crossing a clearing. It was trailing a chain, so
it must have broken loose. It may be on the lendri’s scent, but the lendri will be
underground by now. What do you think will happen when it picks up our scent,
running from one side of the wood to the other, with dew on it? Come on, let’s
get over quickly.’

single-minded – the very picture of decision. At his shoulder was Fiver, silent
and twitching. He saw Blackberry watching him intently, waiting for his lead
and disregarding Bigwig’s. Then he looked at Pipkin, huddled into a fold of
sand, more panic-stricken and helpless than any rabbit he had ever seen. At this
moment, up in the wood, there broke out an excited yelping and a jay began to
scold.

then,’ he said, ‘and anyone else who wants to. Personally, I’m going to wait until
Fiver and Pipkin are fit to tackle it.’

‘You silly blockhead!’ cried Bigwig.’ We’ll all be finished! We’ll –’
‘Don’t stamp about,’ said Hazel. ‘You may be heard. What do you suggest

then?’

‘Suggest? There’s no suggesting to be done. Those who can swim, swim. The

others will have to stay here and hope for the best. The dog may not come.’

‘I’m afraid that won’t do for me. I got Pipkin into this and I’m going to get

him out.’

‘Well, you didn’t get Fiver into it, did you? He got you into it.’
Hazel could not help noticing, with reluctant admiration, that although Bigwig

had lost his temper, he was apparently in no hurry on his own account and
seemed less frightened than any of them. Looking round for Blackberry, he saw
that he had left them and was up at the top of the pool, where the narrow beach
tailed away into a gravel spit. His paws were half-buried in the wet gravel and he
was nosing at something large and flat on the water-line. It looked like a piece of
wood.

‘Blackberry,’ he said, ‘can you come back here a moment?’
Blackberry looked up, tugged out his paws and ran back.
‘Hazel,’ he said quickly, ‘that’s a piece of flat wood – like that piece that

closed the gap by the Green Loose above the warren – you remember? It must
have drifted down the river. So it floats. We could put Fiver and Pipkin on it and
make it float again. It might go across the river. Can you understand?’

Hazel had no idea what he meant. Blackberry’s flood of apparent nonsense

only seemed to draw tighter the mesh of danger and bewilderment. As though
Bigwig’s angry impatience, Pipkin’s terror and the approaching dog were not
enough to contend with, the cleverest rabbit among them had evidently gone out
of his mind. He felt close to despair.

Hazel, don’t wait! Come on, and bring Pipkin!’

to limp the few yards to the gravel spit. The piece of wood, hardly bigger than a
large rhubarb leaf, was lightly aground. Blackberry almost drove Pipkin on to it
with his claws. Pipkin crouched shivering and Fiver followed him aboard.

‘Who’s strong?’ said Blackberry. ‘Bigwig! Silver! Push it out!’
No one obeyed him. All squatted, puzzled and uncertain. Blackberry buried

his nose in the gravel under the landward edge of the board and raised it,
pushing. The board tipped. Pipkin squealed and Fiver lowered his head and
splayed his claws. Then the board righted itself and drifted out a few feet into the
pool with the two rabbits hunched upon it, rigid and motionless. It rotated slowly
and they found themselves staring back at their comrades.

‘Frith and Inlé!’ said Dandelion. “They’re sitting on the water! Why don’t

they sink?’

‘They’re sitting on the wood and the wood floats, can’t you see?’ said

Blackberry. ‘Now we swim over ourselves. Can we start, Hazel?’

was ever to come. He had been at his wits’ end, with no reply to Bigwig’s
scornful impatience except his readiness to risk his own life in company with
Fiver and Pipkin. He still could not understand what had happened, but at least
he realized that Blackberry wanted him to show authority. His head cleared.

‘Swim,’ he said. ‘Everybody swim.’
He watched them as they went in. Dandelion swam as well as he ran, swiftly

and easily. Silver, too, was strong. The others paddled and scrambled over
somehow and as they began to reach the other side, Hazel plunged. The cold
water penetrated his fur almost at once. His breath came short and as his head
went under he could hear a faint grating of gravel along the bottom. He paddled

across awkwardly, his head tilted high out of the water, and made for the figwort.
As he pulled himself out, he looked round among the sopping rabbits in the
alders.

‘Where’s Bigwig?’ he asked.
‘Behind you,’ answered Blackberry, his teeth chattering.
Bigwig was still in the water, on the other side of the pool. He had swum to

the raft, put his head against it and was pushing it forward with heavy thrusts of
his back legs.’ Keep still,’ Hazel heard him say in a quick, gulping voice. Then
he sank. But a moment later he was up again and had thrust his head over the
back of the board. As he kicked and struggled, it tilted and then, while the
rabbits watched from the bank, moved slowly across the pool and grounded on
the opposite side. Fiver pushed Pipkin on to the stones and Bigwig waded out
beside them, shivering and breathless.

‘I got the idea once Blackberry had shown us,’ he said. ‘But it’s hard to push it

when you’re in the water. I hope it’s not long to sunrise. I’m cold. Let’s get on.’

field to the first hedgerow. Most of them had not understood Blackberry’s
discovery of the raft and at once forgot it. Fiver, however, came over to where
Blackberry was lying against the stem of a blackthorn in the hedge.

‘You saved Pipkin and me, didn’t you?’ he said. ‘I don’t think Pipkin’s got any

idea what really happened; but I have.’

come in handy again some time.’

9. The Crow and the Beanfield

Robert Browning De Gustibus

He came to a wide gap which had been trodden into mud by cattle. He could

see them grazing in the next field, further up the slope. He went cautiously out
into the field, squatted down against a clump of thistles and began to smell the
wind. Now that he was clear of the hawthorn scent of the hedge and the reek of
cattle dung, he became fully aware of what had already been drifting into his
nostrils while he was lying among the thorn. There was only one smell on the
wind and it was new to him: a strong, fresh, sweet fragrance that filled the air. It
was healthy enough. There was no harm in it. But what was it and why was it so
strong? How could it exclude every other smell, in open country on a south
wind? The source must be close by. Hazel wondered whether to send one of the
rabbits to find out. Dandelion would be over the top and back almost as fast as a
hare. Then his sense of adventure and mischief prompted him. He would go
himself and bring back some news before they even knew that he had gone. That
would give Bigwig something to bite on.

He ran easily up the meadow towards the cows. As he came they raised their

heads and gazed at him, all together, for a moment, before returning to their
feeding. A great, black bird was flapping and hopping a little way behind the
herd. It looked rather like a large rook but, unlike a rook, it was alone. He
watched its greenish, powerful beak stabbing the ground but could not make out
what it was doing. It so happened that Hazel had never seen a crow. It did not

occur to him that it was following the track of a mole, in the hope of killing it
with a blow of its beak and then pulling it out of its shallow run. If he had
realized this, he might not have classed it light-heartedly as a ‘Not-hawk’ – that
is, anything from a wren to a pheasant – and continued on his way up the slope.

wave of scent that struck him powerfully – as the scent of orange-blossom in the
Mediterranean strikes a traveller who smells it for the first time. Fascinated, he
ran to the crest. Near-by was another hedgerow and beyond, moving gently in
the breeze, stood a field of broad beans in full flower.

Hazel squatted on his haunches and stared at the orderly forest of small,

glaucous trees with their columns of black-and-white bloom. He had never seen
anything like this. Wheat and barley he knew, and once he had been in a field of
turnips. But this was entirely different from any of those and seemed, somehow,
attractive, wholesome, propitious. True, rabbits could not eat these plants: he
could smell that. But they could lie safely among them for as long as they liked,
and they could move through them easily and unseen. Hazel determined then
and there to bring the rabbits up to the beanfield to shelter and rest until the
evening. He ran back and found the others where he had left them. Bigwig and
Silver were awake, but all the rest were still napping uneasily.

‘Not asleep, Silver?’ he said.
‘It’s too dangerous, Hazel,’ replied Silver. ‘I’d like to sleep as much as

anyone, but if we all sleep and something comes, who’s going to spot it?’

‘I know. I’ve found a place where we can sleep safely for as long as we like.’
‘A burrow?’
‘No, not a burrow. A great field of scented plants that will cover us, sight and

smell, until we’re rested. Come out here and smell it, if you like.’

his ears to catch the distant rustling of the beans.

‘Yes, they’re only just over the top. Come on, let’s get the others moving

before a man comes with a hrududu * or they’ll scatter all over the place.’

Silver roused the others and began to coax them into the field. They stumbled

out drowsily, responding with reluctance to his repeated assurance that it was’
only a little way’.

They became widely separated as they struggled up the slope. Silver and

Bigwig led the way, with Hazel and Buckthorn a short distance behind. The rest
idled along, hopping a few yards and then pausing to nibble or to pass droppings
on the warm, sunny grass. Silver was almost at the crest when suddenly, from
half-way up, there came a high screaming – the sound a rabbit makes, not to call
for help or to frighten an enemy, but simply out of terror. Fiver and Pipkin,

limping behind the others, and conspicuously undersized and tired, were being
attacked by the crow. It had flown low along the ground. Then, pouncing, it had
aimed a blow of its great bill at Fiver, who just managed to dodge in time. Now
it was leaping and hopping among the grass tussocks, striking at the two rabbits
with terrible darts of its head. Crows aim at the eyes and Pipkin, sensing this,
had buried his head in a clump of rank grass and was trying to burrow farther in.
It was he who was screaming.

Hazel covered the distance down the slope in a few seconds. He had no idea

what he was going to do and if the crow had ignored him he would probably
have been at a loss. But by dashing up he distracted its attention and it turned on
him. He swerved past it, stopped and, looking back, saw Bigwig come racing in
from the opposite side. The crow turned again, struck at Bigwig and missed.
Hazel heard its beak hit a pebble in the grass with a sound like a snail-shell when
a thrush beats it on a stone. As Silver followed Bigwig, it recovered itself and
faced him squarely. Silver stopped short in fear and the crow seemed to dance
before him, its great, black wings flapping in a horrible commotion. It was just
about to stab when Bigwig ran straight into it from behind and knocked it
sideways, so that it staggered across the turf with a harsh, raucous cawing of
rage.

‘Keep at it!’ cried Bigwig. ‘Come in behind it! They’re cowards! They only

attack helpless rabbits.’

They watched it clear the farther hedge and disappear into the wood beyond the
river. In the silence there was a gentle, tearing sound as a grazing cow moved
nearer.

Bigwig strolled over to Pipkin, muttering a ribald Owsla lampoon.

‘Hoi, hoi u embleer Hrair,

M’ saion ulé hraka vair.’*

day, aren’t we?’

He turned away and Pipkin tried to follow him. Hazel remembered that Fiver

had said he thought he was injured. Now, as he watched him limping and
staggering up the slope, it occurred to him that he might actually be wounded in
some way. He kept trying to put his near-side front paw to the ground and then
drawing it up again, hopping on three legs.

‘I’ll have a look at him as soon as they’re settled under cover,’ he thought.

‘Poor little chap, he won’t be able to get much further like that.’

At the top of the slope Buckthorn was already leading the way into the

beanfield. Hazel reached the hedge, crossed a narrow turf verge on the other side
and found himself looking straight down a long, shadowy aisle between two
rows of beans. The earth was soft and crumbling, with a scattering of the weeds
that are found in cultivated fields – fumitory, charlock, pimpernel and mayweed,
all growing in the green gloom under the bean leaves. As the plants moved in the
breeze, the sunlight dappled and speckled back and forth over the brown soil, the
white pebbles and weeds. Yet in this ubiquitous restlessness there was nothing
alarming, for the whole forest took part in it and the only sound was the soft,
steady movement of the leaves. Far along the bean-row, Hazel glimpsed
Buckthorn’s back and followed him into the depths of the field.

Soon after, all the rabbits had come together in a kind of hollow. Far around,

on all sides, stood the orderly rows of beans, securing them against hostile
approach, roofing them over and covering their scent. They could hardly have
been safer underground. Even a little food could be had at a pinch, for here and
there were a few pale twists of grass and here and there a dandelion.

‘We can sleep here all day,’ said Hazel. ‘But I suppose one of us ought to stay

awake; and if I take the first turn it’ll give me a chance to have a look at your
paw, Hlao-roo. I think you’ve got something in it.’

over and stretched out his front paw, underside turned upwards. Hazel peered
closely into the thick, coarse hair (a rabbit’s foot has no pads) and after a few
moments saw what he had expected – the oval shank of a snapped-off thorn
sticking out through the skin. There was a little blood and the flesh was torn.

We’ll have to get it out.’

Getting the thorn out was not easy, for the foot had become so tender that

Pipkin winced and pulled away even from Hazel’s tongue. But after a good deal
of patient effort Hazel succeeded in working out enough of the stump to get a
grip with his teeth. The thorn came out smoothly and the wound bled. The spine
was so long and thick that Hawkbit, who happened to be close by, woke
Speedwell to have a look at it.

‘Frith above, Pipkin!’ said Speedwell, sniffing at the thorn where it lay on a

pebble. ‘You’d better collect a few more like that: then you can make a notice
board and frighten Fiver. You might have poked the lendri’s eye out for us, if
you’d only known.’

‘Lick the place, Hlao,’ said Hazel. ‘Lick it until it feels better and then go to

sleep.’

10. The Road and the Common

John Bunyan The Pilgrim’s Progress

The sun was beginning to set when Hazel woke to see Acorn listening and

sniffing in the silence, between two white-skinned flints. The light was thicker,
the breeze had dropped and the beans were still. Pipkin was stretched out a little
way away. A yellow-and-black burying beetle, crawling across the white fur of
his belly, stopped, waved its short, curved antennae and then moved on again.
Hazel grew tense with sudden misgiving. He knew that these beetles come to
dead bodies, on which they feed and lay their eggs. They will dig away the earth
from under the bodies of small creatures, such as shrew-mice and fallen
fledglings, and then lay their eggs on them before covering them with soil.
Surely Pipkin could not have died in his sleep? Hazel sat up quickly. Acorn
started and turned towards him and the beetle scurried away over the pebbles as
Pipkin moved and woke.

‘How’s the paw?’ said Hazel. Pipkin put it to the ground. Then he stood on it.
‘It feels much better,’ he said. ‘I think I shall be able to go as well as the others

now. They won’t leave me behind, will they?’

Hazel rubbed his nose behind Pipkin’s ear. ‘No one’s going to leave anyone

else behind,’ he said. ‘If you had to stay, I’d stay with you. But don’t pick up any
more thorns, Hlao-roo, because we may have to go a long way.’

The next moment all the rabbits leapt up in panic. From close at hand the

sound of a shot tore across the fields. A peewit rose screaming. The echoes came
back in waves, like a pebble rolling round a box, and from the wood across the
river came the clattering of wood-pigeons’ wings among the branches. In an
instant the rabbits were running in all directions through the bean-rows, each one
tearing by instinct towards holes that were not there.

Hazel stopped short on the edge of the beans. Looking about him, he could see

none of the others. He waited, trembling, for the next shot: but there was silence.
Then he felt, vibrating along the ground, the steady tread of a man going away
beyond the crest over which they had come that morning. At that moment Silver
appeared, pushing his way through the plants close by.

‘I hope it’s the crow, don’t you?’ said Silver.
‘I hope no one’s been silly enough to bolt out of this field,’ answered Hazel.

‘They’re all scattered. How can we find them?’

They’ll come in time.’

It was in fact a long time before all the rabbits had come back to the hollow in

the middle of the field. As he waited, Hazel realized more fully than ever how
dangerous was their position, without holes, wandering in country they did not
know. The lendri, the dog, the crow, the marksman – they had been lucky to
escape them. How long would their luck hold? Would they really be able to
travel on as far as Fiver’s high place – wherever it might be?

‘I’d settle for any decent, dry bank, myself,’ he thought, ‘as long as there was

some grass and no men with guns. And the sooner we can find one the better.’

looked cautiously out from among the beans and then darted into the hedgerow.
The wind, as he stopped to sniff it, was reassuring, carrying only the scents of
evening dew, may and cow-dung. He led the way into the next field, a pasture:
and here they all fell to feeding, nibbling their way over the grass as easily as
though their warren were close by.

When he was half-way across the field, Hazel became aware of a hrududu

approaching very fast on the other side of the further hedge. It was small and less
noisy than the farm tractor which he had sometimes watched from the edge of
the primrose wood at home. It passed in a flash of man-made, unnatural colour,
glittering here and there and brighter than a winter holly tree. A few moments
later came the smell of petrol and exhaust. Hazel stared, twitching his nose. He
could not understand how the hrududu could move so quickly and smoothly
through the fields. Would it return? Would it come through the fields faster than
they could run, and hunt them down?

As he paused, wondering what was best to be done, Bigwig came up.

won’t it?’

know?’

‘Well, how do you suppose a hrududu can go that fast? Besides, can’t you

smell it?’

The smell of warm tar was now plain on the evening air.
‘I’ve never smelt that in my life,’ said Hazel with a touch of irritation.
‘Ah,’ said Bigwig,’ but then you were never sent out stealing lettuces for the

Threarah, were you? If you had been, you’d have learned about roads. There’s
nothing to them, really, as long as you let them alone by night. They’re elil then,
all right.’

‘You’d better teach me, I think,’ said Hazel. ‘I’ll go up with you and we’ll let

the others follow.’

They ran on and crept through the hedge. Hazel looked down at the road in

astonishment. For a moment he thought that he was looking at another river –
black, smooth and straight between its banks. Then he saw the gravel embedded
in the tar and watched a spider running over the surface.

‘But that’s not natural,’ he said, sniffing the strange, strong smells of tar and

oil. ‘What is it? How did it come there?’

‘It’s a man-thing,’ said Bigwig. ‘They put that stuff there and then the hrududil

run on it – faster than we can; and what else can run faster than we?’

‘It’s dangerous then? They can catch us?’
‘No, that’s what’s so odd. They don’t take any notice of us at all. I’ll show

you, if you like.’

The other rabbits were beginning to reach the hedge as Bigwig hopped down

the bank and crouched on the verge of the road. From beyond the bend came the
sound of another approaching car. Hazel and Silver watched tensely. The car
appeared, flashing green and white, and raced down towards Bigwig. For an
instant it filled the whole world with noise and fear. Then it was gone; and
Bigwig’s fur was blowing in the whack of wind that followed it down the
hedges. He jumped back up the bank among the staring rabbits.

they’re alive at all. But I must admit I can’t altogether make it out.’

As on the river bank, Blackberry had moved away and was already down on

the road on his own account, sniffing out towards the middle, half-way between
Hazel and the bend. They saw him start and jump back to the shelter of the bank.

‘What is it?’ said Hazel.
Blackberry did not answer and Hazel and Bigwig hopped towards him along

the verge. He was opening and shutting his mouth and licking his lips, much as a
cat does when something disgusts it.

must be, for all that.’

white fur, with small, black feet and snout crushed round the edges. The flies
crawled upon it and here and there the sharp points of gravel pressed up through
the flesh.

and beetles? And what can eat a yona?’

‘It must have come at night,’ said Bigwig.
‘Yes, of course. The yonil always hunt by night. If you see them by day

they’re dying.’

‘I know. But what I’m trying to explain is that at night the hrududil have great

lights, brighter than Frith himself. They draw creatures towards them and if they
shine on you, you can’t see or think which way to go. Then the hrududu is quite
likely to crush you. At least, that’s what we were taught in the Owsla. I don’t
intend to try it.’

‘Well, it will be dark soon,’ said Hazel. ‘Come on, let’s get across. As far as I

can see, this road’s no good to us at all. Now that I’ve learnt about it, I want to
get away from it as soon as I can.’

By moonrise they had made their way through Newtown churchyard, where a

little brook runs between the lawns and under the path. Wandering on, they
climbed a hill and came to Newtown Common – a country of peat, gorse and
silver birch. After the meadows they had left, this was a strange, forbidding land.
Trees, herbage, even the soil – all were unfamiliar. They hesitated among the
thick heather, unable to see more than a few feet ahead. Their fur became soaked
with the dew. The ground was broken by rifts and pits of naked, black peat,
where water lay and sharp, white stones, some as big as a pigeon’s, some as a
rabbit’s skull, glimmered in the moonlight. Whenever they reached one of these
rifts the rabbits huddled together, waiting for Hazel or Bigwig to climb the
further side and find a way forward. Everywhere they came upon beetles, spiders
and small lizards which scurried away as they pushed through the fibrous,
resistant heather. Once Buckthorn disturbed a snake, and leapt into the air as it
whipped between his paws to vanish down a hole at the foot of a birch.

The very plants were unknown to them – pink lousewort with its sprays of

hooked flowers, bog asphodel and the thin-stemmed blooms of the sun-dews,
rising above their hairy, fly-catching mouths, all shut fast by night. In this close
jungle all was silence. They went more and more slowly, and made long halts in

the peat-cuts. But if the heather itself was silent, the breeze brought distant
night-sounds across the open common. A cock crowed. A dog ran barking and a
man shouted at it. A little owl called ‘Kee-wik, kee-wik’ and something – a vole
or a shrew – gave a sudden squeal. There was not a noise but seemed to tell of
danger.

they were crouching to a little bank above. As he was wondering whether to
climb up to it, to see whether he could get a clear view ahead, he heard a
movement behind him and turned to find Hawkbit at his shoulder. There was
something furtive and hesitant about him and Hazel glanced at him sharply,
wondering for a moment whether he could have sickness or poison on him.

cliff.’ I – er – that is to say we – er – feel that we – well, that we can’t go on like
this. We’ve had enough of it.’

He stopped. Hazel now saw that Speedwell and Acorn were behind him,

listening expectantly. There was a pause.

‘Go on, Hawkbit,’ said Speedwell, ‘or shall I?’
‘More than enough,’ said Hawkbit, with a kind of foolish importance.
‘Well, so have I,’ answered Hazel,’ and I hope there won’t be much more.

Then we can all have a rest.’

far.’

‘It gets worse and worse the further we go,’ said Acorn. ‘Where are we going

and how long will it be before some of us stop running for good and all?’

‘It’s the place that worries you,’ said Hazel. ‘I don’t like it myself, but it won’t

go on for ever.’

Hawkbit looked sly and shifty. ‘We don’t believe you know where we are

going,’ he said. ‘You didn’t know about the road, did you? And you don’t know
what there is in front of us.’

you what I think about it.’

‘We want to go back,’ said Acorn. ‘We think Fiver was wrong.’
‘How can you go back through all we’ve come through?’ replied Hazel. ‘And

probably get killed for wounding an Owsla officer, if you ever do get back? Talk
sense, for Frith’s sake.’

‘It wasn’t we who wounded Holly,’ said Speedwell.
‘You were there and Blackberry brought you there. Do you think they won’t

remember that? Besides –’

Hazel stopped as Fiver approached, followed by Bigwig.

‘Hazel,’ said Fiver,’ could you come up on the bank with me for a few

moments? It’s important.’

‘And while you’re there,’ said Bigwig, scowling round at the others from

under the great sheaf of fur on his head, ‘I’ll just have a few words with these
three. Why don’t you get washed, Hawkbit? You look like the end of a rat’s tail
left in a trap. And as for you, Speedwell –’

Hazel did not wait to hear what Speedwell looked like. Following Fiver, he

scrambled up the lumps and shelves of peat to the overhang of gravelly earth and
thin grass that topped them. As soon as Fiver had found a place to clamber out,
he led the way along the edge to the bank which Hazel had been looking at
before Hawkbit spoke to him. It stood a few feet above the nodding, windy
heather and was open and grassy at the top. They climbed it and squatted down.
To their right the moon, smoky and yellow in thin night cloud, stood over a
clump of distant pine trees. They looked southward across the dismal waste.
Hazel waited for Fiver to speak, but he remained silent.

‘What was it you wanted to say to me?’ asked Hazel at last.
Fiver made no reply and Hazel paused in perplexity. From below, Bigwig was

just audible.

‘And you, Acorn, you dog-eared, dung-faced disgrace to a gamekeeper’s

gibbet; if I only had time to tell you –’

The moon sailed free of the cloud and lit the heather more brightly, but neither

Hazel nor Fiver moved from the top of the bank. Fiver was looking far out
beyond the edge of the common. Four miles away, along the southern skyline,
rose the seven hundred and fifty-foot ridge of the downs. On the highest point,
the beech trees of Cottington’s Clump were moving in a stronger wind than that
which blew across the heather.

‘Look!’ said Fiver suddenly. ‘That’s the place for us, Hazel. High, lonely hills,

where the wind and the sound carry and the ground’s as dry as straw in a barn.
That’s where we ought to be. That’s where we have to get to.’

them was out of the question. It might well prove to be all they could do to find
their way across the heather to some quiet field or copse-bank like those they
had been used to. It was lucky that Fiver had not come out with this foolish
notion in front of any of the others, especially as there was trouble enough
already. If only he could be persuaded to drop it here and now, there would be no
harm done – unless indeed he had already said anything to Pipkin.

‘No, I think that’s altogether too far, Fiver,’ he said. ‘Think of the miles of

danger. Everyone’s frightened and tired as it is. What we need is to find a safe
place soon, and I’d rather succeed in doing what we can than fail to do what we

can’t.’

Fiver gave no sign of having heard him. He seemed to be lost in his own

thoughts. When he spoke again, it was as though he were talking to himself.
‘There’s a thick mist between the hills and us. I can’t see through it, but through
it we shall have to go. Or into it, anyway.’

‘A mist?’ said Hazel. ‘What do you mean?’
‘We’re in for some mysterious trouble,’ whispered Fiver, ‘and it’s not elil. It

feels more like – like mist. Like being deceived and losing our way.’

There was no mist around them. The May night was clear and fresh. Hazel

waited in silence and after a time Fiver said, slowly and expressionlessly, ‘But
we must go on, until we reach the hills.’ His voice sank and became that of a
sleep-talker. ‘Until we reach the hills. The rabbit that goes back through the gap
will run his head into trouble. That running – not wise. That running – not safe.
Running – not –’ He trembled violently, kicked once or twice and became quiet.

bunch of mole-snouted, muck-raking, hutch-hearted sheep-ticks, get out of my
sight sharp. Otherwise I’ll –’ He became inaudible again.

Hazel looked once more at the faint line of the hills. Then, as Fiver stirred and

muttered beside him, he pushed him gently with one fore-paw and nuzzled his
shoulder.

Fiver started. ‘What was I saying, Hazel?’ he asked.’ I’m afraid I can’t

remember. I meant to tell you –’

‘Never mind,’ answered Hazel. ‘We’ll go down now. It’s time we were getting

them on again. If you have any more queer feelings like that, keep close to me.
I’ll look after you.’

11. Hard Going

Malory Le Morte d’ Arthur

‘Hullo,’ said Hazel. ‘What’s happened? Where are the others?’
‘Over there,’ answered Blackberry. ‘There’s been a fearful row. Bigwig told

Hawkbit and Speedwell that he’d scratch them to pieces if they didn’t obey him.
And when Hawkbit said he wanted to know who was Chief Rabbit, Bigwig bit
him. It seems a nasty business. Who is Chief Rabbit, anyway – you or Bigwig?’

was no need to go biting Hawkbit: he couldn’t have gone back if he’d tried. He
and his friends would have seen that if they’d been allowed to talk for a bit. Now
Bigwig’s put their backs up, and they’ll think they’ve got to go on because he
makes them. I want them to go on because they can see it’s the only thing to do.
There are too few of us for giving orders and biting people. Frith in a fog! Isn’t
there enough trouble and danger already?’

Buckthorn under an overhanging broom. Near-by, Pipkin and Dandelion were
pretending to feed on a patch of scrub. Some way away, Acorn was making a
great business of licking Hawkbit’s throat, while Speedwell watched.

overheard. ‘Just let me clean the blood out. Steady, now!’ Hawkbit winced in an
exaggerated manner and backed away. As Hazel came up, all the rabbits turned
and stared at him expectantly.

‘Look,’ said Hazel, ‘I know there’s been some trouble, but the best thing will

be to try to forget it. This is a bad place, but we’ll soon get out of it.’

‘Do you really think we will?’ asked Dandelion.
‘If you’ll follow me now,’ replied Hazel desperately, ‘I’ll have you out of it by

sunrise.’

‘If I don’t,’ he thought, ‘they’ll very likely tear me to bits: and much good

may it do them.’

The weary, frightening journey began again, broken only by alarms. Once a
white owl swept silently overhead, so low that Hazel saw its dark eyes looking
into his own. But either it was not hunting or he was too big to tackle, for it
disappeared over the heather; and although he waited motionless for some time,
it did not return. Once Dandelion struck the smell of a stoat and they all joined
him, whispering and sniffing over the ground. But the scent was old and after a
time they went on again. In this low undergrowth their disorganized progress and
uneven, differing rhythms of movement delayed them still more than in the
wood. There were continual stampings of alarm, pausing, freezing to the spot at
the sound of movement real or imagined. It was so dark that Hazel seldom knew
for certain whether he was leading or whether Bigwig or Silver might not be
ahead. Once, hearing an unaccountable noise in front of him, which ceased on
the instant, he kept still for a long time; and when at last he moved cautiously
forward, found Silver crouching behind a tussock of cock’s-foot for fear of the
sound of his own approach. All was confusion, ignorance, clambering and
exhaustion. Throughout the bad dream of the night’s journey, Pipkin seemed to
be always close beside him. Though each of the others vanished and reappeared
like fragments floating round a pool, Pipkin never left him; and his need for
encouragement became at last Hazel’s only support against his own weariness.

‘Not far now, Hlao-roo, not far now,’ he kept muttering, until he realized that

what he said had become meaningless, a mere refrain. He was not speaking to
Pipkin or even to himself. He was talking in his sleep, or something very near it.

At last he saw the first of the dawn, like light faintly perceived round a corner

at the far end of an unknown burrow; and in the same moment a yellow-hammer
sang. Hazel’s feelings were like those which might pass through the mind of a
defeated general. Where were his followers exactly? He hoped, not far away. But
were they? All of them? Where had he led them? What was he going to do now?
What if an enemy appeared at this moment? He had answers to none of these
questions and no spirit left to force himself to think about them. Behind him,
Pipkin shivered in the damp and he turned and nuzzled him; much as the
general, with nothing left to do, might fall to considering the welfare of his
servant, simply because the servant happened to be there.

was an open track of bare gravel. He limped out of the heather, sat on the stones
and shook the wet from his fur. He could see Fiver’s hills plainly now, greenish-
grey and seeming close in the rain-laden air. He could even pick out the dots of
furze bushes and stunted yew trees on the steep slopes. As he gazed at them, he

heard an excited voice farther down the track.

‘He’s done it! Didn’t I tell you he’d do it?’
Hazel turned his head and saw Blackberry on the path. He was bedraggled and

exhausted, but it was he who was speaking. Out of the heather behind him came
Acorn, Speedwell and Buckthorn. All four rabbits were now staring straight at
him. He wondered why. Then, as they approached, he realized that they were
looking not at him, but past him at something farther off. He turned round. The
gravel track led downhill into a narrow belt of silver birch and rowan. Beyond
was a thin hedge; and beyond that, a green field between two copses. They had
reached the other side of the common.

I was so tired and confused, I actually began to wonder whether you knew where
you were going. I could hear you in the heather, saying “Not far now” and it was
annoying me. I thought you were making it up. I should have known better.
Frithrah, you’re what I call a Chief Rabbit!’

‘Well done, Hazel-rah!’ said Buckthorn. ‘Well done!’
Hazel did not know what to reply. He looked at them in silence and it was

Acorn who spoke next.

‘Come on!’ he said. ‘Who’s going to be first into that field? I can still run.’ He

was off, slowly enough, down the slope, but when Hazel stamped for him to stop
he did so at once.

‘Where are the others?’ said Hazel. ‘Dandelion? Bigwig?’
At that moment Dandelion appeared out of the heather and sat on the path,

looking at the field. He was followed first by Hawkbit and then by Fiver. Hazel
was watching Fiver as he took in the sight of the field, when Buckthorn drew his
attention back to the foot of the slope.

‘Look, Hazel-rah,’ he said, ‘Silver and Bigwig are down there. They’re

waiting for us.’

Hazel could not see Bigwig until he sat up and ran towards them.

‘Is everybody here, Hazel?’ he asked.
‘Of course they are,’ answered Blackberry. ‘I tell you, he’s what I call a Chief

Rabbit. Hazel-rah, shall we –’

day I call you Chief Rabbit, Hazel, that’ll be the day, that will! I’ll stop fighting
that day.’

It did indeed prove a momentous day – and a momentous speech as well: but

it lay in a future that none could foresee, and for the moment all that poor Hazel
could do was to turn aside with the disappointed feeling that after all, his part in

the crossing of the heather had not really been a very important one.

‘Come on, then, Acorn,’ he said. ‘You want to run – I’ll run with you.’
A few moments later they were under the silver birches and as the sun rose,

striking flashes of red and green from the drops on ferns and twigs, they
scrambled through the hedge, across a shallow ditch and into the thick grass of
the meadow.

12. The Stranger in the Field

R. M. Lockley The Private Life of the Rabbit

Here is a boy who was waiting to be punished. But then, unexpectedly, he

finds that his fault has been overlooked or forgiven and at once the world
reappears in brilliant colours, full of delightful prospects. Here is a soldier who
was waiting, with a heavy heart, to suffer and die in battle. But suddenly the luck
has changed. There is news! The war is over and everyone bursts out singing!
He will go home after all! The sparrows in the ploughland were crouching in
terror of the kestrel. But she has gone; and they fly pell-mell up the hedgerow,
frisking, chattering and perching where they will. The bitter winter had all the
country in its grip. The hares on the down, stupid and torpid with cold, were
resigned to sinking further and further into the freezing heart of snow and
silence. But now – who would have dreamt it? – the thaw is trickling, the great
tit is ringing his bell from the top of a bare lime tree, the earth is scented; and the
hares bound and skip in the warm wind. Hopelessness and reluctance are blown
away like a fog and the dumb solitude where they crept, a place desolate as a
crack in the ground, opens like a rose and stretches to the hills and the sky.

The tired rabbits fed and basked in the sunny meadow as though they had

come no further than from the bank at the edge of the near-by copse. The heather
and the stumbling darkness were forgotten as though the sunrise had melted
them. Bigwig and Hawkbit chased each other through the long grass. Speedwell
jumped over the little brook that ran down the middle of the field and when
Acorn tried to follow him and fell short, Silver joked with him as he scrambled
out and rolled him in a patch of dead oak leaves until he was dry. As the sun rose
higher, shortening the shadows and drawing the dew from the grass, most of the
rabbits came wandering back to the sun-flecked shade among the cow-parsley
along the edge of the ditch. Here, Hazel and Fiver were sitting with Dandelion

under a flowering wild cherry. The white petals spun down around them,
covering the grass and speckling their fur, while thirty feet above a thrush sang
‘Cherry dew, cherry dew. Knee deep, knee deep, knee deep.’

‘Well, this is the place all right, isn’t it, Hazel?’ said Dandelion lazily.’ I

suppose we’d better start having a look along the banks soon, although I must
say I’m in no particular hurry. But I’ve got an idea it may be going to rain before
much longer.’

Fiver looked as though he were about to speak, but then shook his ears and

turned to nibbling at a dandelion.

‘That looks a good bank, along the edge of the trees up there,’ answered

Hazel. ‘What do you, say, Fiver? Shall we go up there now or shall we wait a bit
longer?’

Fiver hesitated and then replied, ‘Just as you think, Hazel.’
‘Well, there’s no need to do any serious digging, is there?’ said Bigwig. ‘That

sort of thing’s all right for does, but not for us.’

Something to give us shelter at a pinch. Let’s go up to the copse and look round.
We might as well take our time and make quite sure where we’d like to have
them. We don’t want to have to do the work twice.’

Silver and Buckthorn here and have a run down the fields beyond, just to get the
lie of the land and make sure there isn’t anything dangerous.’

The three explorers set off beside the brook, while Hazel led the other rabbits

across the field and up to the edge of the woodland. They went slowly along the
foot of the bank, pushing in and out of the clumps of red campion and ragged
robin. From time to time one or another would begin to scrape in the gravelly
bank, or venture a little way in among the trees and nut-bushes to scuffle in the
leaf-mould. After they had been searching and moving on quietly for some time,
they reached a place from which they could see that the field below them
broadened out. Both on their own side and opposite, the wood-edges curved
outwards, away from the brook. They also noticed the roofs of a farm, but some
distance off. Hazel stopped and they gathered round him.

said.’ It’s all good, so far as I can see. Not the slightest trace of elil – no scent or
tracks or droppings. That seems unusual, but it may be just that the home warren
attracted more elil than other places. Anyway, we ought to do well here. Now I’ll
tell you what seems the right thing to me. Let’s go back a little way, between the
woods, and have a scratch near that oak tree there – just by that white patch of
stitchwort. I know the farm’s a long way off, but there’s nc point in being nearer

to it than we need. And if we’re fairly close to the wood opposite, the trees will
help to break the wind a bit in winter.’

‘Splendid,’ said Blackberry. ‘It’s going to cloud over, do you see? Rain before

sunset and we’ll be in shelter. Well, let’s make a start. Oh, look! There’s Bigwig
coming back along the bottom, and the other two with him.’

seen Hazel and the others. They passed below them, into the narrower part of the
field between the two copses, and it was not until Acorn had been sent half-way
down the slope to attract their attention that they turned and came up to the ditch.

‘The farm’s a good way away and the fields between don’t show any signs of elil
at all. There’s a man-track – in fact, there are several – and they look as though
they were used a good deal. Scent’s fresh and there are the ends of those little
white sticks that they burn in their mouths. But that’s all for the best, I reckon.
We keep away from the men and the men frighten the elil away.’

‘Why do the men come, do you suppose?’ asked Fiver.
‘Who knows why men do anything? They may drive cows or sheep in the

fields, or cut wood in the copses. What does it matter? I’d rather dodge a man
than a stoat or a fox.’

‘Well, that’s fine,’ said Hazel. ‘You’ve found out a lot, Bigwig, and all to the

good. We were just going to make some scrapes along the bank there. We’d
better start. The rain won’t be long now, if I know anything about it.’

Buck rabbits on their own seldom or never go in for serious digging. This is

the natural job of a doe making a home for her litter before they are born, and
then her buck helps her. All the same, solitary bucks – if they can find no
existing holes to make use of – will sometimes scratch out short tunnels for
shelter, although it is not work that they tackle at all seriously. During the
morning the digging proceeded in a light-hearted and intermittent way. The bank
on each side of the oak tree was bare and consisted of a light, gravelly soil.
There were several false starts and fresh choices, but by ni-Frith they had three
scrapes of a sort. Hazel, watching, lent help here and there and encouraged the
others. Every so often he slipped back to look out over the field and make sure
that all was safe. Only Fiver remained solitary. He took no part in the digging but
squatted on the edge of the ditch, fidgeting backwards and forwards, sometimes
nibbling and then starting up suddenly as though he could hear some sound in
the wood. After speaking to him once or twice and receiving no reply, Hazel
thought it best to let him alone. The next time he left the digging he kept away
from Fiver and sat looking at the bank, as though entirely concerned with the
work.

and they could smell rain approaching from the west. The blue-tit that had been
swinging on a bramble, singing ‘Heigh, ho, go-and-get-another-bit-of-moss,’
stopped his acrobatics and flew into the wood. Hazel was just wondering
whether it would be worth while starting a side-passage to link Bigwig’s hole to
Dandelion’s, when he felt a stamp of warning from somewhere close by. He
turned quickly. It was Fiver who had stamped and he was now staring intently
across the field.

sitting and gazing at them. Its ears were erect and it was evidently giving them
the full attention of sight, smell and hearing. Hazel rose on his hind legs, paused,
and then sat back on his haunches, in full view. The other rabbit remained
motionless. Hazel, never taking his eyes off it, heard three or four of the others
coming up behind him. After a moment he said,

‘Blackberry?’
‘He’s down the hole,’ replied Pipkin.
‘Go and get him.’
Still the strange rabbit made no move. The wind rose and the long grass began

to flutter and ripple in the dip between them. From behind, Blackberry said,

‘You wanted me, Hazel?’
‘I’m going over to speak to that rabbit,’ said Hazel. ‘I want you to come with

me.’

‘Can I come?’ asked Pipkin.
‘No, Hlao-roo. We don’t want to frighten him. Three’s too many.’
‘Be careful,’ said Buckthorn, as Hazel and Blackberry set off down the slope.

‘He may not be the only one.’

At several points the brook was narrow – not much wider than a rabbit-run.

They jumped it and went up the opposite slope.

be a trap and anyway we can always run.’

As they approached, the other rabbit kept still and watched them intently.

They could see now that he was a big fellow, sleek and handsome. His fur shone
and his claws and teeth were in perfect condition. Nevertheless, he did not seem
aggressive. On the contrary, there was a curious, rather unnatural gentleness
about the way in which he waited for them to come nearer. They stopped and
looked at him from a little distance.

‘I don’t think he’s dangerous,’ whispered Blackberry.’ I’ll go up to him first if

you like.’

‘We’ll both go,’ replied Hazel. But at this moment the other rabbit came

towards them of his own accord. He and Hazel touched their noses together,
sniffing and questioning silently. The stranger had an unusual smell, but it was
certainly not unpleasant. It gave Hazel an impression of good feeding, of health
and of a certain indolence, as though the other came from some rich, prosperous
country where he himself had never been. He had the air of an aristocrat and as
he turned to gaze at Blackberry from his great, brown eyes, Hazel began to see
himself as a ragged wanderer, leader of a gang of vagabonds. He had not meant
to be the first to speak, but something in the other’s silence compelled him.

‘We’ve come over the heather,’ he said.
The other rabbit made no reply, but his look was not that of an enemy. His

demeanour had a kind of melancholy which was perplexing.

‘Do you live here?’ asked Hazel, after a pause.
‘Yes,’ replied the other rabbit; and then added, ‘We saw you come.’
‘We mean to live here too,’ said Hazel firmly.
The other rabbit showed no concern. He paused and then answered, ‘Why

not? We supposed you would. But I don’t think there are enough of you, are
there, to live very comfortably on your own?’

Hazel felt puzzled. Apparently the stranger was not worried by the news that

they meant to stay. How big was his warren? Where was it? How many rabbits
were concealed in the copse and watching them now? Were they likely to be
attacked? The stranger’s manner told nothing. He seemed detached, almost
bored, but perfectly friendly. His lassitude, his great size and beautiful, well-
groomed appearance, his unhurried air of having all he wanted and of being
unaffected by the newcomers one way or the other – all these presented Hazel
with a problem unlike anything he had had to deal with before. If there was some
kind of trick, he had no idea what it might be. He decided that he himself, at any
rate, would be perfectly candid and plain.

enemies, but if we meet with any kind of interference –’

you’re going back now, I’ll come over with you: that is, unless you have any
objection.’

for a moment, caught him up and went beside him. He moved easily, without
haste and showed less caution than they in crossing the field. Hazel felt more
mystified than ever. The other rabbit evidently had no fear that they might set
upon him, hrair to one, and kill him. He was ready to go alone among a crowd of
suspicious strangers, but what he stood to gain from this risk it was impossible to
guess. Perhaps, thought Hazel wryly, teeth and claws would make no impression

on that great, firm body and shining pelt.

watching their approach. Hazel stopped in front of them but did not know what
to say. If the stranger had not been there, he would have given them an account
of what had happened. If Blackberry and he had driven the stranger across the
field by force, he could have handed him over for safe-keeping to Bigwig or
Silver. But to have him sitting beside him, looking his followers over in silence
and courteously waiting for someone else to speak first – this was a situation
beyond Hazel’s experience. It was Bigwig, straightforward and blunt as always,
who broke the tension.

‘Who is this, Hazel?’ he said. ‘Why has he come back with you?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Hazel, trying to look frank and feeling foolish. ‘He

came of his own accord.’

came close to the stranger and sniffed, as Hazel had done. He, too, was evidently
affected by the peculiar smell of prosperity, for he paused as though in
uncertainty. Then, with a rough, abrupt air, he said, ‘Who are you and what do
you want?’

‘My name is Cowslip,’ said the other. ‘I don’t want anything. I hear you’ve

come a long way.’

‘Perhaps we have,’ said Bigwig. ‘We know how to defend ourselves, too.’
‘I’m sure you “do,” said Cowslip, looking round at the mudstained,

bedraggled rabbits with an air of being too polite to comment. ‘But it can be hard
to defend oneself against the weather. There’s going to be rain and I don’t think
your scrapes are finished.’ He looked at Bigwig, as though waiting for him to ask
another question. Bigwig seemed confused. Clearly, he could make no more of
the situation than Hazel. There was silence except for the sound of the rising
wind. Above them, the branches of the oak tree were beginning to creak and
sway. Suddenly, Fiver came forward.

clear. Can we trust you? Are there many other rabbits here? Those are the things
we want to know.’

Cowslip showed no more concern at Fiver’s tense manner than he had at

anything that had gone before. He drew a fore-paw down the back of one ear and
then replied,

‘I think you’re puzzling yourselves unnecessarily. But if you want the answers

to your questions, then I’d say yes, you can trust us: we don’t want to drive you
away. And there is a warren here, but not as big a one as we should like. Why
should we want to hurt you? There’s plenty of grass, surely?’

rather ashamed.

‘We’ve been through a lot of danger,’ he said. ‘Everything new seems like

danger to us. After all, you might be afraid that we were coming to take your
does or turn you out of your holes.’

Cowslip listened gravely. Then he answered,
‘Well, as to the holes, that was something I thought I might mention. These

scrapes aren’t very deep or comfortable, are they? And although they’re facing
out of the wind now, you ought to know that this isn’t the usual wind we get
here. It’s blowing up this rain from the south. We usually have a west wind and
it’ll go straight into these holes. There are plenty of empty burrows in our warren
and if you want to come across you’ll be welcome. And now if you’ll excuse
me, I won’t stay any longer. I hate the rain. The warren is round the corner of the
wood opposite.’

the further copse and disappear through the green bracken. The first scatters of
rain were beginning to fall, pattering into the oak leaves and pricking the bare,
pink skin inside their ears.

‘Fine, big fellow, isn’t he?’ said Buckthorn. ‘He doesn’t look as though he had

much to bother about, living here.’

‘What should we do, Hazel, do you think?’ asked Silver. ‘It’s true what he

said, isn’t it? These scrapes – well, we can crouch in them out of the weather, but
no more than that. And as we can’t all get into one, we shall have to split up.’

talk about what he said. Fiver, Bigwig and Blackberry, can you come with me?
The rest of you split how you like.’

to pass. Four were like beans in a pod. For the first time, Hazel began to realize
how much they had left behind. The holes and tunnels of an old warren become
smooth, reassuring and comfortable with use. There are no snags or rough
corners. Every length smells of rabbits – of that great, indestructible flood of
Rabbitry in which each one is carried along, sure-footed and safe. The heavy
work has all been done by countless great-grandmothers and their mates. All the
faults have been put right and everything in use is of proved value. The rain
drains easily and even the wind of mid-winter cannot penetrate the deeper
burrows. Not one of Hazel’s rabbits had ever played any part in real digging. The
work they had done that morning was trifling and all they had to show for it was
rough shelter and little comfort.

There is nothing like bad weather to reveal the shortcomings of a dwelling,

particularly if it is too small. You are, as they say, stuck with it and have leisure
to feel all its peculiar irritations and discomforts. Bigwig, with his usual brisk
energy, set to work. Hazel, however, returned and sat pensive at the lip of the
hole, looking out at the silent, rippling veils of rain that drifted across and across
the little valley between the two copses. Closer, before his nose, every blade of
grass, every bracken frond was bent, dripping and glistening. The smell of last
year’s oak leaves filled the air. It had turned chilly. Across the field the bloom of
the cherry tree, under which they had sat that morning, hung sodden and spoiled.
While Hazel gazed, the wind slowly veered round into the west, as Cowslip had
said it would, and brought the rain driving into the mouth of the hole. He backed
down and rejoined the others. The pattering and whispering of the rain sounded
softly but distinctly outside. The fields and woods were shut in under it, emptied
and subdued. The insect life of the leaves and grass was stilled. The thrush
should have been singing, but Hazel could heai no thrush. He and his
companions were a muddy handful of scratchers, crouching in a narrow,
draughty pit in lonely country. They were not out of the weather. They were
waiting, uncomfortably, for the weather to change.

‘Blackberry,’ said Hazel, ‘what did you think of our visitor and how would

you like to go to his warren?’

‘Well,’ replied Blackberry, ‘what I think is this. There’s no way of finding out

whether he’s to be trusted except to try it. He seemed friendly. But then, if a lot
of rabbits were afraid of some newcomers and wanted to deceive them – get
them down a hole and attack them – they’d start – wouldn’t they? – by sending
someone who was plausible. They might want to kill us. But then again, as he
said, there’s plenty of grass and as for turning them out or taking their does, if
they’re all up to his size and weight they’ve nothing to fear from a crowd like us.
They must have seen us come. We were tired. Surely that was the time to attack
us? Or while we were separated, before we began digging? But they didn’t. I
reckon they’re more likely to be friendly than otherwise. There’s only one thing
beats me. What do they stand to get from asking us to join their warren?’

his whiskers and blowing through his long front teeth. ‘And we’re fools until
we’ve learnt to live here. Safer to teach us, perhaps. I don’t know – give it up.
But I’m not afraid to go and find out. If they do try any tricks, they’ll find I
know a few as well. I wouldn’t mind taking a chance, to sleep somewhere more
comfortable than this. We haven’t slept since yesterday afternoon.’

‘Fiver?’
‘I think we ought to have nothing to do with that rabbit or his warren. We

ought to leave this place at once. But what’s the good of talking?’

Cold and damp, Hazel felt impatient. He had always been accustomed to rely

on Fiver and now, when he really needed him, he was letting them down.
Blackberry’s reasoning had been first-rate and Bigwig had at least shown which
way any sound-hearted rabbit would be likely to lean. Apparently the only
contribution Fiver could make was this beetle-spirited vapouring. He tried to
remember that Fiver was under-sized and that they had had an anxious time and
were all weary. At this moment the soil at the far end of the burrow began to
crumble inwards: then it fell away and Silver’s head and front paws appeared.

and Buckthorn’s through next door. But what I’d like to know is, how about
What’s-His-Name? Gowpat – no – Cowslip? Are we going to his warren or not?
Surely we’re not going to sit cowering in this place because we’re frightened to
go and see him. Whatever will he think of us?’

‘I’ll tell you,’ said Dandelion, from over his shoulder.’ If he’s not honest, he’ll

know we’re afraid to come: and if he is, he’ll think we’re suspicious, cowardly
skulkers. If we’re going to live in these fields, we’ll have to get on terms with his
lot sooner or later, and it goes against the grain to hang about and admit we
daren’t visit them.’

crowd. Anyhow, I hate the idea of just keeping away. How long have rabbits
been elil? Old Cowslip wasn’t afraid to come into the middle of us, was he?’

‘Very well,’ said Hazel. ‘That’s how I feel myself. I just wanted to know

whether you did. Would you like Bigwig and me to go over there first, by
ourselves, and report back?’

‘No,’ said Silver. ‘Let’s all go. If we’re going at all, for Frith’s sake let’s do it

as though we weren’t afraid. What do you say, Dandelion?’

‘I think you’re right.’
“Then we’ll go now,’ said Hazel. ‘Get the others and follow me.’
Outside, in the thickening light of the late afternoon, with the rain trickling

into his eyes and under his scut, he watched them as they joined him. Blackberry,
alert and intelligent, looking first up and then down the ditch before he crossed
it. Bigwig, cheerful at the prospect of action. The steady, reliable Silver.
Dandelion, the dashing story-teller, so eager to be off that he jumped the ditch
and ran a little way into the field before stopping to wait for the rest. Buckthorn,
perhaps the most sensible and staunch of them all. Pipkin, who looked round for
Hazel and then came over to wait beside him. Acorn, Hawkbit and Speedwell,
decent enough rank-and-filers as long as they were not pushed beyond their
limits. Last of all came Fiver, dejected and reluctant as a sparrow in the frost. As
Hazel turned from the hole, the clouds in the west broke slightly and there was a

sudden dazzle of watery, pale-gold light.

know them as well as you know us. Let it be the right thing that I’m doing.’

wetter every moment.’

few seconds and then flew away down the field. Hazel followed, leaving a dark
track behind him over the silvered grass.

13. Hospitality

Tennyson The Lotus-Eaters

‘Sky above us!’ said Bigwig. ‘Every living creature for miles must know that’s

there! Look at all the tracks in the grass, too! Do you think they sing in the
morning, like the thrushes?’

‘Perhaps they’re too secure to bother about concealing themselves,’ said

Blackberry. ‘After all, the home warren was fairly plain to be seen.’

‘Yes, but not like that! A couple of hrududil could go down some of those

holes.’

‘So could I,’ said Dandelion.’ I’m getting dreadfully wet.’
As they approached, a big rabbit appeared over the edge of the ditch, looked at

them quickly and vanished into the bank. A few moments later two others came
out and waited for them. They, too, were sleek and unusually large.

‘A rabbit called Cowslip offered us shelter here,’ said Hazel. ‘Perhaps you

know that he came to see us?’

Both rabbits together made a curious, dancing movement of the head and front

paws. Apart from sniffing, as Hazel and Cowslip had done when they met,
formal gestures – except between mating rabbits – were unknown to Hazel and
his companions. They felt mystified and slightly ill-at-ease. The dancers paused,

evidently waiting for some acknowledgement or reciprocal gesture, but there
was none.

to follow us there?’

‘How many of us?’ asked Hazel.
‘Why, all of you,’ answered the other, surprised. ‘You don’t want to stay out in

the rain, do you?’

see the Chief Rabbit – who would probably not be Cowslip, since Cowslip had
come to see them unattended – in his burrow, after which they would all be
given different places to go to. It was this separation of which he had been
afraid. He now realized with astonishment that there was apparently a part of the
warren underground which was big enough to contain them all together. He felt
so curious to visit it that he did not stop to make any detailed arrangements about
the order in which they should go down. However, he put Pipkin immediately
behind him. ‘It’ll warm his little heart for once,’ he thought, ‘and if the leaders
do get attacked, I suppose we can spare him easier than some.’ Bigwig he asked
to bring up the rear.’ If there’s any trouble, get out of it,’ he said, ‘and take as
many as you can with you.’ Then he followed their guides into one of the holes
in the bank.

The run was broad, smooth and dry. It was obviously a highway, for the other

runs branched off it in all directions. The rabbits in front went fast and Hazel had
little time to sniff about as he followed. Suddenly he checked. He had come into
an open place. His whiskers could feel no earth in front and none was near his
sides. There was a good deal of air ahead of him – he could feel it moving – and
there was a considerable space above his head. Also, there were several rabbits
near him. It had not occurred to him that there would be a place underground
where he would be exposed on three sides. He backed quickly and felt Pipkin at
his tail. ‘What a fool I was!’ he thought. ‘Why didn’t I put Silver there?’ At this
moment he heard Cowslip speaking. He jumped, for he could tell that he-was
some way away. The size of the place must be immense.

We’re glad you’ve come.’

No human beings, except the courageous and experienced blind, are able to

sense much in a strange place where they cannot see, but with rabbits it is
otherwise. They spend half their lives underground in darkness or near-darkness
and touch, smell and hearing convey as much or more to them than sight. Hazel
now had the clearest knowledge of where he was. He would have recognized the
place if he had left at once and come back six months later. He was at one end of

the largest burrow he had ever been in; sandy, warm and dry, with a hard, bare
floor. There were several tree-roots running across the roof and it was these that
supported the unusual span. There was a great number of rabbits in the place –
many more than he was bringing. All had the same rich, opulent smell as
Cowslip.

was waiting for him to reply. His own companions were still coming out of the
entrance burrow one by one and there was a good deal of scrabbling and
shuffling. He wondered if he ought to be very formal. Whether or not he could
call himself a Chief Rabbit, he had no experience of this sort of thing. The
Threarah would no doubt have risen to the occasion perfectly. He did not want to
appear at a loss or to let his followers down. He decided that it would be best to
be plain and friendly. After all, there would be plenty of time, as they settled
down in the warren, to show these strangers that they were as good as
themselves, without risking trouble by putting on airs at the start.

happiest in a crowd. When you came over to see us in the field, Cowslip, you
said your warren wasn’t large, but judging by the holes we saw along the bank, it
must be what we’d reckon a fine, big one.’

they were all together again. The stranger rabbits seemed slightly disconcerted
by his little speech and he felt that for some reason or other he had not struck the
right note in complimenting them on their numbers. Perhaps there were not very
many of them after all? Had there been disease? There was no smell or sign of it.
These were the biggest and healthiest rabbits he had ever met. Perhaps their
fidgeting and silence had nothing to do with what he had said? Perhaps it was
simply that he had not spoken very well, being new to it, and they felt that he
was not up to their fine ways? ‘Never mind,’ he thought. ‘After last night I’m
sure of my own lot. We wouldn’t be here at all if we weren’t handy in a pinch.
These other fellows will just have to get to know us. They don’t seem to dislike
us, anyway.’

There were no more speeches. Rabbits have their own conventions and

formalities, but these are few and short by human standards. If Hazel had been a
human being he would have been expected to introduce his companions one by
one and no doubt each would have been taken in charge as a guest by one of
their hosts. In the great burrow, however, things happened differently. The
rabbits mingled naturally. They did not talk for talking’s sake, in the artificial
manner that human beings – and sometimes even their dogs and cats – do. But
this did not mean that they were not communicating; merely that they were not

communicating by talking. All over the burrow, both the newcomers and those
who were at home were accustoming themselves to each other in their own way
and their own time; getting to know what the strangers smelt like, how they
moved, how they breathed, how they scratched, the feel of their rhythms and
pulses. These were their topics and subjects of discussion, carried on without the
need of speech. To a greater extent than a human in a similar gathering each
rabbit, as he pursued his own fragment, was sensitive to the trend of the whole.
After a time, all knew that the concourse was not going to turn sour or break up
in a fight. Just as a battle begins in a state of equilibrium between the two sides,
which gradually alters one way or the other, until it is clear that the balance has
tilted so far that the issue can no longer be in doubt – so this gathering of rabbits
in the dark, beginning with hesitant approaches, silences, pauses, movements,
crouchings side-by-side and all manner of tentative appraisals, slowly moved,
like a hemisphere of the world into summer, to a warmer, brighter region of
mutual liking and approval, until all felt sure that they had nothing to fear.
Pipkin, some way away from Hazel, crouched at his ease between two huge
rabbits who could have broken his back in a second, while Buckthorn and
Cowslip started a playful scuffle, nipping each other like kittens and then
breaking off to comb their ears in a comical pretence of sudden gravity. Only
Fiver sat alone and apart. He seemed either ill or very much depressed, and the
strangers avoided him instinctively.

The knowledge that the gathering was safely round the corner came to Hazel

in the form of a recollection of Silver’s head and paws breaking through gravel.
At once he felt warm and relaxed. He had already crossed the whole length of
the hall and was pressed close to two rabbits, a buck and doe, each of whom was
fully as large as Cowslip. When both together took a few slow hops down one of
the runs near-by, Hazel followed and little by little they all three moved out of
the hall. They came to a smaller burrow, deeper underground. Evidently this
belonged to the couple, for they settled down as though at home and made no
objection when Hazel did the same. Here, while the mood of the great hall
slowly passed from them, all three were silent for a time.

‘Is Cowslip the Chief Rabbit?’ asked Hazel at length.
The other replied with a question. ‘Are you called Chief Rabbit?’
Hazel found this awkward to answer. If he replied that he was, his new friends

might address him so for the future, and he could imagine what Bigwig and
Silver would have to say about that. As usual, he fell back on plain honesty.

‘We’re only a few,’ he said.’ We left our warren in a hurry to escape from bad

things. Most stayed behind and the Chief Rabbit was one of them. I’ve been
trying to lead my friends, but I don’t know whether they’d care to hear me called

Chief Rabbit.’

‘That’ll make him ask a few questions,’ he thought. ‘ “Why did you leave?

Why didn’t the rest come? What were you afraid of?” And whatever am I going
to say?’

When the other rabbit spoke, however, it was clear that either he had no

interest in what Hazel had said, or else he had some other reason for not
questioning him.

‘We don’t call anyone Chief Rabbit,’ he said. ‘It was Cowslip’s idea to go and

see you this afternoon, so he was the one who went.’

parties and so on?’

homba last winter, but the man who comes through the fields, he shot it with his
gun.’

Hazel stared. ‘But men won’t shoot a homba.’
‘Well, he killed this one, anyway. He kills owls too. We never need to dig. No

one’s dug in my lifetime. A lot of the burrows are lying empty, you know: rats
live in one part, but the man kills them as well, when he can. We don’t need
expeditions. There’s better food here than anywhere else. Your friends will be
happy living here.’

oddly perplexed. ‘Where does the man –’ he began. But he was interrupted.

‘I’m called Strawberry. This is my doe, Nildro-hain.* Some of the best empty

burrows are quite close. I’ll show you, in case your friends want to settle into
them. The great burrow is a splendid place, don’t you think? I’m sure there can’t
be many warrens where all the rabbits can meet together underground. The
roof’s all tree-roots, you know, and of course the tree outside keeps the rain from
coming through. It’s a wonder the tree’s alive, but it is.’

Hazel suspected that Strawberry’s talking had the real purpose of preventing

his own questions. He was partly irritated and partly mystified.

‘Never mind,’ he thought. ‘If we all get as big as these chaps we shall do

pretty well. There must be some good food round here somewhere. His doe’s a
beautiful creature, too. Perhaps there are some more like her in the warren.’

Strawberry moved out of the burrow and Hazel followed him into another run,

leading deeper down below the wood. It was certainly a warren to admire.
Sometimes, when they crossed a run that led upwards to a hole, he could hear
the rain outside, still falling in the night. But although it had now been raining
for several hours, there was not the least damp or cold either in the deep runs or
in the many burrows that they passed. Both the drainage and the ventilation were

better than he had been accustomed to. Here and there other rabbits were on the
move. Once they came upon Acorn, who was evidently being taken on a tour of
the same kind. ‘Very friendly, aren’t they?’ he said to Hazel as they passed one
another.’ I never dreamt we’d reach a place like this. You’ve got wonderful
judgement, Hazel.’ Strawberry waited politely for him to finish speaking and
Hazel could not help feeling pleased that he must have heard.

distinct smell of rats, they halted in a kind of pit. A steep tunnel led up into the
air. Rabbit-runs tend to be bow-shaped; but this was straight, so that above them,
through the mouth of the hole, Hazel could see leaves against the night sky. He
realized that one wall of the pit was convex and made of some hard substance.
He sniffed at it uncertainly.

‘Don’t you know what those are?’ said Strawberry. ‘They’re bricks; the stones

that men make their houses and barns out of. There used to be a well here long
ago, but it’s filled up now – the men don’t use it any more. That’s the outer side
of the well-shaft. And this earth-wall here is completely flat because of some
man-thing fixed behind it in the ground, but I’m not sure what.’

‘There’s something stuck on it,’ said Hazel.’ Why, they’re stones, pushed into

the surface! But what for?’

‘Do you like it?’ asked Strawberry.
Hazel puzzled over the stones. They were all the same size, and pushed at

regular intervals into the soil. He could make nothing of them.

‘What are they for?’ he asked again.
‘It’s El-ahrairah,’ said Strawberry. ‘A rabbit called Laburnum did it, some time

ago now. We have others, but this is the best. Worth a visit, don’t you think?’

Hazel was more at a loss than ever. He had never seen a laburnum and was

puzzled by the name, which in Lapine is ‘Poison-tree’. How could a rabbit be
called Poison? And how could stones be El-ahrairah? What, exactly, was it that
Strawberry was saying was El-ahrairah? In confusion he said, ‘I don’t
understand.’

‘It’s what we call a Shape,’ explained Strawberry. ‘Haven’t you seen one

before? The stones make the shape of El-ahrairah on the wall. Stealing the
King’s lettuce. You know?’

raft beside the Enborne. Obviously, the stones could not possibly be anything to
do with El-ahrairah. It seemed to him that Strawberry might as well have said
that his tail was an oak tree. He sniffed again and then put a paw up to the wall.

Never mind. We’ll come again some other time.’

‘But where are –’ Hazel was beginning, when Strawberry once more

interrupted him.

I’m certain of that, but we can feed underground here, you know. And then you
can sleep in the great burrow, or in my place if you prefer. We can go back more
quickly than we came. There’s a run that goes almost straight. Actually, it passes
across –’

to Hazel that these desperate interruptions seemed to follow any question
beginning’ Where?’ He thought he would put this to the proof. After a while
Strawberry ended by saying, ‘We’re nearly at the great burrow now, but we’re
coming in by a different way.’

‘And where –’ said Hazel. Instantly Strawberry turned into a side run and

called,’ Kingcup? Are you coming down to the great burrow?’ There was silence.
‘That’s odd!’ said Strawberry, returning and once more leading the way. ‘He’s
generally there about this time. I often call for him, you know.’

Hazel, hanging back, made a quick search with nose and whiskers. The

threshold of the burrow was covered with a day-old fall of soft soil from the roof
above. Strawberry’s prints had marked it plainly and there were no others
whatsoever.

14. ‘Like Trees in November’

The Earl of Chesterfield Letters to his Son

‘Yes, we did,’ said Hazel.’ It’s something quite strange to me, I’m afraid. But

I’d rather admire you and your friends than stones on a wall.’

As he said this, he noticed that Cowslip had joined them and that Strawberry

was talking to him quietly. He caught the words – ‘Never been near a Shape’ –
and a moment later Cowslip replied, ‘Well, it makes no difference from our point
of view.’

Hazel suddenly felt tired and depressed. He heard Blackberry behind

Cowslip’s sleek, heavy shoulder and went across to him.

‘Come out into the grass,’ he said quietly. ‘Bring anyone else who’ll come.’
At that moment Cowslip turned to him and said, ‘You’ll be glad of something

to eat now. I’ll show you what we’ve got down here.’

‘One or two of us are just going to silflay,’* said Hazel.
‘Oh, it’s still raining much too hard for that,’ said Cowslip, as though there

could be no two ways about it. ‘We’ll feed you here.’

‘I should be sorry to quarrel over it,’ said Hazel firmly, ‘but some of us need

to silflay. We’re used to it, and rain doesn’t bother us.’

Cowslip seemed taken aback for a moment. Then he laughed.
The phenomenon of laughter is unknown to animals; though it is possible that

dogs and elephants may have some inkling of it. The effect on Hazel and
Blackberry was overwhelming. Hazel’s first idea was that Cowslip was showing
the symptom of some kind of disease. Blackberry clearly thought that he might
be going to attack them and backed away. Cowslip said nothing, but his eerie
laughter continued. Hazel and Blackberry turned and scuttled up the nearest run

as though he had been a ferret. Half-way up they met Pipkin, who was small
enough first to let them pass and then to turn round and follow them.

The rain was still falling steadily. The night was dark and for May, cold. They

all three hunched themselves in the grass and nibbled, while the rain ran off their
fur in streams.

terrible! I was just going to eat whatever it is they have and then go to sleep.
What’s the idea?’

your company. I can see what’s troubling Fiver; though he’ll get over it, I dare
say. There is something strange about these rabbits. Do you know they push
stones into the wall?’

‘They do what?’
Hazel explained. Blackberry was as much at a loss as he had been himself.

‘But I’ll tell you another thing,’ he said. ‘Bigwig wasn’t so far wrong. They do
sing like the birds. I was in a burrow belonging to a rabbit called Betony. His doe
has a litter and she was making a noise over them rather like a robin in autumn.
To send them to sleep, she said. It made me feel queer, I can tell you.’

‘And what do you think of them, Hlao-roo?’ asked Hazel.
‘They’re very nice and kind,’ answered Pipkin, ‘but I’ll tell you how they

strike me. They all seem terribly sad. I can’t think why, when they’re so big and
strong and have this beautiful warren. But they put me in mind of trees in
November. I expect I’m being silly though, Hazel. You brought us here and I’m
sure it must be a fine, safe place.’

They all seem to have something on their minds.’

‘But after all,’ said Blackberry, ‘we don’t know why they’re so few. They

don’t fill the warren, anything like. Perhaps they’ve had some sort of trouble
that’s left them sad.’

‘We don’t know because they don’t tell us. But if we’re going to stay here

we’ve got to learn to get on with them. We can’t fight them: they’re too big. And
we don’t want them fighting us.’

they don’t seem like fighters to me. Not like Bigwig and Silver.’

‘You notice a lot, don’t you, Hlao-roo?’ said Hazel. ‘Do you notice it’s raining

harder than ever? I’ve got enough grass in my stomach for a bit. We’ll go down
again now, but let’s keep to ourselves for a while.’

dropping.’

They returned down a different hole and soon found a dry, empty burrow,

where they curled up together and slept in the warmth of their own tired bodies.

sunrise, by the smell of it. The scent of apple blossom was plain enough. Then
he picked up the fainter smells of buttercups and horses. Mingled with these
came another. Although it made him uneasy, he could not tell for some moments
what it was. A dangerous smell, an unpleasant smell, a totally unnatural smell –
quite close outside: a smoke smell – something was burning. Then he
remembered how Bigwig, after his reconnaissance on the previous day, had
spoken of the little white sticks in the grass. That was it. A man had been
walking over the ground outside. That must have been what had awakened him.

could smell the man. The man could not smell him. All the man could smell was
the nasty smoke he was making. He fell to thinking of the shape in the well-pit,
and then dropped into a drowsy half-dream, in which El-ahrairah said that it was
all a trick of his to disguise himself as Poison-tree and put the stones in the wall,
to engage Strawberry’s attention while he himself was getting acquainted with
Nildro-hain.

groundsel nice, mother?’) and Hazel, touched to think that he must be dreaming
of old days, rolled over on his side to give him room to settle again. At that
moment, however, he heard a rabbit approaching down some run close by.
Whoever it was, he was calling – and stamping as well, Hazel noticed – in an
unnatural way. The sound, as Blackberry had said, was not unlike bird-song As
he came closer, Hazel could distinguish the word.

‘Flayrah! Flayrah!’
The voice was Strawberry’s. Pipkin and Blackberry were waking, more at the

stamping than the voice, which was thin and novel, not striking through their
sleep to any deep instinct. Hazel slipped out of the burrow into the run and at
once came upon Strawberry busily thumping a hind leg on the hard earth floor.

said Hazel. ‘Why do you stamp underground?’

you know. We generally sleep right through the early morning if it’s rough
weather. But it’s turned fine now.’

‘Why actually wake everybody, though?’
‘Well, the man’s gone by and Cowslip and I thought the flayrah ought not to

lie about for long. If we don’t go and get it the rats and rooks come and I don’t
like fighting rats. I expect it’s all in a day’s work to an adventurous lot like you.’

‘I don’t understand.’
‘Well, come along with me. I’m just going back along this run for Nildro-hain.

We haven’t got a litter at present, you see, so she’ll come out with the rest of us.’

Other rabbits were making their way along the run and Strawberry spoke to

several of them, more than once remarking that he would enjoy taking their new
friends across the field. Hazel began to realize that he liked Strawberry. On the
previous day he had been too tired and bewildered to size him up. But now that
he had had a good sleep, he could see that Strawberry was really a harmless,
decent sort of fellow. He was touchingly devoted to the beautiful Nildro-hain;
and he evidently had moods of gaiety and a great capacity for enjoyment. As
they came up into the May morning he hopped over the ditch and skipped into
the long grass as blithe as a squirrel. He seemed quite to have lost the
preoccupied air that had troubled Hazel the night before. Hazel himself paused
in the mouth of the hole, as he always had behind the bramble curtain at home,
and looked out across the valley.

westwards across the field. The wet grass glittered and near-by a nut-tree
sparkled iridescent, winking and gleaming as its branches moved in the light
wind. The brook was swollen and Hazel’s ears could distinguish the deeper,
smoother sound, changed since the day before. Between the copse and the brook,
the slope was covered with pale lilac lady’s smocks, each standing separately in
the grass, a frail stalk of bloom above a spread of cressy leaves. The breeze
dropped and the little valley lay completely still, held in long beams of light and
enclosed on either side by the lines of the woods. Upon this clear stillness, like
feathers on the surface of a pool, fell the calling of a cuckoo.

used to taking a good look round when you silflay, but here we generally go
straight out.’

Hazel did not mean to alter his ways or take instructions from Cowslip.

However, no one had pushed him and there was no point in bickering over
trifles. He hopped across the ditch to the farther bank and looked round him
again. Several rabbits were already running down the field towards a distant
hedge dappled white with great patches of may-bloom. He saw Bigwig and
Silver and went to join them, flicking the wet off his front paws step by step, like
a cat.

‘I hope your friends have been looking after you as well as these fellows have

looked after us, Hazel,’ said Bigwig.’ Silver and I really feel at home again. If
you ask me, I reckon we’ve all made a big change for the better. Even if Fiver’s
wrong and nothing terrible has happened back at the old warren, I’d still say

we’re better off here. Are you coming along to feed?’

‘What is this business about going to feed, do you know?’ asked Hazel.
‘Haven’t they told you? Apparently there’s flayrah to be had down the fields.

Most of them go every day.’

lettuce or carrots, for which they will make an expedition or rob a garden, is
flayrah.)

glancing at the distant roofs of the farm behind the trees.

‘No, no,’ said one of the warren rabbits, who had overheard him. ‘The

flayrah’s left in the field, usually near the place where the brook rises. We either
eat it there or bring it back – or both. But we’ll have to bring some back today.
The rain was so bad last night that no one went out and we ate almost everything
in the warren.’

After the rain the edges were a swamp, with water standing in every hoof-print.
The rabbits gave them a wide berth and came through by another gap farther up,
close to the gnarled trunk of an old crab-apple tree. Beyond, surrounding a
thicket of rushes, stood an enclosure of posts and rails half as high as a man.
Inside it, the king-cups bloomed and the brook whelmed up from its source.

On the pasture near-by Hazel could see scattered, russet-and-orange-coloured

fragments, some with feathery, light-green foliage showing up against the darker
grass. They gave off a pungent, horsey smell, as if freshly, cut. It attracted him.
He began to salivate and stopped to pass hraka. Cowslip, coming up near-by,
turned towards him with his unnatural smile. But now Hazel, in his eagerness,
paid no attention. Powerfully drawn, he ran out of the hedgerow towards the
scattered ground. He came to one of the fragments, sniffed it and tasted it. It was
carrot.

carrot, when a cart-horse had spilt a nose-bag near the home warren. These were
old carrots, some half-eaten already by mice or fly. But to the rabbits they were
redolent with luxury, a feast to drive all other feelings out of mind. Hazel sat
nibbling and biting, the rich, full taste of the cultivated roots filling him with a
wave of pleasure. He hopped about the grass, gnawing one piece after another,
eating the green tops along with the slices. No one interrupted him. There
seemed to be plenty for all. From time to time, instinctively, he looked up and
sniffed the wind, but his caution was half-hearted. ‘If elil come, let them,’ he
thought. ‘I’ll fight the lot. I couldn’t run, anyway. What a country! What a
warren! No wonder they’re all as big as hares and smell like princes!’ ‘Hullo,

Pipkin! Fill yourself up to the ears! No more shivering on the banks of streams
for you, old chap!’

‘He won’t know how to shiver in a week or two,’ said Hawkbit, with his

mouth full. ‘I feel so much better for this! I’d follow you anywhere, Hazel. I
wasn’t myself in the heather that night. It’s bad when you know you can’t get
underground. I hope you understand.’

‘It’s all forgotten,’ answered Hazel. ‘I’d better ask Cowslip what we’re

supposed to do about taking some of this stuff back to the warren.’

washing his face with his front paws.

‘Are there roots here every day?’ asked Hazel.’ Where –’ He checked himself

just in time.’ I’m learning,’ he thought.

noticed. I suppose the remains are being cleared out. It may be anything – roots,
green stuff, old apples: it all depends. Sometimes there’s nothing at all,
especially in good summer weather. But in hard weather, in winter, there’s nearly
always something. Big roots, usually, or kale, or sometimes corn. We eat that
too, you know.’

‘Food’s no problem, then. The whole place ought to be full of rabbits. I

suppose –’

take your time – you could try carrying. It’s easy with these roots – easier than
anything except lettuce. You simply bite on one, take it back to the warren and
put it in the great burrow. I generally take two at a time, but then I’ve had a lot of
practice. Rabbits don’t usually carry food, I know, but you’ll learn. It’s useful to
have a store. The does need some for their young when they’re getting bigger;
and it’s particularly convenient for all of us in bad weather. Come back with me
and I’ll help if you find the carrying difficult at first.’

It took Hazel some trouble to learn to grip half a carrot in his mouth and carry

it, like a dog, across the field and back to the warren. He had to put it down
several times. But Cowslip was encouraging and he was determined to keep up
his position as the resourceful leader of the newcomers. At his suggestion they
both waited at the mouth of one of the larger holes to see how his companions
were shaping. They all seemed to be making an effort and doing their best,
although the smaller rabbits – especially Pipkin – clearly found the task an
awkward one.

tonight. Anyway, I’m sure Fiver must find it as hard as you: he’s just as small.’

‘I don’t know where he is,’ said Pipkin. ‘Have you seen him?’

as he returned across the field with Cowslip, did his best to explain something of
Fiver’s peculiar temperament. ‘I do hope he’s all right,’ he said. ‘I think perhaps
I’ll go and look for him when we’ve carried this next lot. Have you any idea
where he might be?’

Cowslip said,’ Look, do you see those jackdaws hanging round the carrots?
They’ve been a nuisance for several days now. I must get someone to try to keep
them off until we’ve finished carrying. But they’re really too big for a rabbit to
tackle. Now sparrows –’

‘What’s that got to do with Fiver?’ asked Hazel sharply.
‘In fact,’ said Cowslip, breaking into a run, ‘I’ll go myself.’
But he did not engage the jackdaws and Hazel saw him pick up another carrot

and start back with it. Annoyed, he joined Buckthorn and Dandelion and the
three of them returned together. As they came up to the warren bank he suddenly
caught sight of Fiver. He was sitting half-concealed under the low spread of a
yew tree on the edge of the copse, some way from the holes of the warren.
Putting down his carrot, Hazel ran across, scrambled up the bank and joined him
on the bare ground under the low, close boughs. Fiver said nothing and
continued to stare over the field.

‘Aren’t you coming to learn to carry, Fiver?’ asked Hazel at length. ‘It’s not

too difficult once you get the hang of it.’

‘I’ll have nothing to do with it,’ answered Fiver in a low voice. ‘Dogs – you’re

like dogs carrying sticks.’

‘Fiver! Are you trying to make me angry? I’m not going to get angry because

you call me stupid names. But you’re letting the others do all the work.’

‘I’m the one who ought to get angry,’ said Fiver. ‘But I’m no good at it, that’s

the trouble. Why should they listen to me? Half of them think I’m mad. You’re
to blame, Hazel, because you know I’m not and still you won’t listen.’

‘So you don’t like this warren any better even now? Well, I think you’re

wrong. Everyone makes mistakes sometimes. Why shouldn’t you make a
mistake, like everybody else? Hawkbit was wrong in the heather and you’re
wrong now.’

“Those are rabbits down there, trotting along like a lot of squirrels with nuts.

How can that be right?’

‘Well, I’d say they’ve copied a good idea from the squirrels and that makes

them better rabbits.’

has a kind heart? What’s he up to?’

‘He’s just throwing away rubbish. How many rabbits have had a good meal

off men’s rubbish heaps? Shot lettuces, old turnips? You know we all do, when
we can. It’s not poisoned, Fiver, I can tell you that. And if he wanted to shoot
rabbits he’s had plenty of chances this morning. But he hasn’t done it.’

‘I’m a fool to try to argue,’ he said miserably.’ Hazel – dear old Hazel – it’s
simply that I know there’s something unnatural and evil twisted all round this
place. I don’t know what it is, so no wonder I can’t talk about it. I keep getting
near it, though. You know how you poke your nose against wire netting and push
it up against an apple tree, but you still can’t bite the bark because of the wire.
I’m close to this – whatever it is – but I can’t grip it. If I sit here alone I may
reach it yet.’

‘Fiver, why not do as I say? Have a meal on those roots and then go

underground and sleep. You’ll feel all the better for it.’

underground, I’d rather go back over the heather. The roof of that hall is made of
bones.’

‘No, no – tree roots. But after all, you were underground all night.’
‘I wasn’t,’ said Fiver.
‘What? Where were you then?’
‘Here.’
‘All night?’
‘Yes. A yew tree gives good shelter, you know.’
Hazel was now seriously worried. If Fiver’s horrors had kept him above

ground all night in the rain, oblivious of cold and prowling elil, then clearly it
was not going to be easy to talk him out of them. He was silent for some time. At
last he said, ‘What a shame! I still think you’d do better to come and join us. But
I’ll let you alone now and come and see how you’re feeling later. Don’t go
eating the yew tree, either.’

Fiver made no reply and Hazel went back to the field.
The day was certainly not one to encourage foreboding. By ni-Frith it was so

hot that the lower part of the field was humid. The air was heavy with thick,
herbal smells, as though it were already late June; the water-mint and marjoram,
not yet flowering, gave off scent from their leaves and here and there an early
meadow-sweet stood in bloom. The chiff-chaff was busy all morning, high in a
silver birch near the abandoned holes across the dip; and from deep in the copse,
somewhere by the disused well, came the beautiful song of the blackcap. By
early afternoon there was a stillness of heat, and a herd of cows from the higher
fields slowly grazed their way down into the shade. Only a few of the rabbits

remained above ground. Almost all were asleep in the burrows. But still Fiver
sat alone under the yew tree.

the copse behind the warren. At first they moved cautiously, but before long they
grew confident at finding no trace of any creature larger than a mouse.

us no more than the truth. There really aren’t any elil here. Different from that
wood where we crossed the river. I don’t mind telling you, Hazel, I was scared
stiff that night, but I wasn’t going to show it.’

completely clear. If we –’

the middle of which was a rabbit-hole that led up from one of the warren
passages below. The ground was soft and damp, with old leaves thick in the
mould. Where Bigwig had stopped there were signs of commotion. The rotten
leaves had been thrown up in showers. Some were hanging on the brambles and
a few flat, wet clots were lying well out in open ground beyond the clump. In the
centre the earth had been laid bare and was scored with long scratches and
furrows, and there was a narrow, regular hole, about the same size as one of the
carrots they had carried that morning. The two rabbits sniffed and stared, but
could make nothing of it.

‘The funny thing is there’s no smell,’ said Bigwig.
‘No – only rabbit, and that’s everywhere, of course. And man – that’s

everywhere too. But that smell might very well have nothing to do with it. All it
tells us is that a man walked through the wood and threw a white stick down. It
wasn’t a man that tore up this ground.’

‘Well, these mad rabbits probably dance in the moonlight or something.’
‘I wouldn’t be surprised,’ said Hazel. ‘It would be just like them. Let’s ask

Cowslip.’

‘That’s the only silly thing you’ve said so far. Tell me, since we came here has

Cowslip answered any question you’ve asked him?’

‘Well, no – not many.’
‘Try asking him where he dances in the moonlight. Say “Cowslip, where –” ’
‘Oh, you’ve noticed that too, have you? He won’t answer “Where” anything.

Neither will Strawberry. I think they may be nervous of us. Pipkin was right
when he said they weren’t fighters. So they’re keeping up a mystery to stay even
with us. It’s best just to put up with it. We don’t want to upset them and it’s
bound to smooth itself out in time.’

‘There’s more rain coming tonight,’ said Bigwig. ‘Soon, too, I think. Let’s go

underground and see if we can get them to talk a bit more freely.’

‘I think that’s something we can only wait for. But I agree about going

underground now. And for goodness’ sake let’s get Fiver to come with us. He
troubles me. Do you know he was out all night in the rain?’

morning. They found him under the yew tree and after a rather stormy scene,
during which Bigwig grew rough and impatient, he was bullied rather than
persuaded into going down with them into the great burrow.

It was crowded, and as the rain began to fall more rabbits came down the runs.

They pushed about, cheerful and chattering. The carrots which had been brought
in were eaten between friends or carried away to does and families in burrows all
over the warren. But when they were finished the hall remained full. It was
pleasantly warm with the heat of so many bodies. Gradually the talkative groups
settled into a contented silence, but no one seemed disposed to go to sleep.
Rabbits are lively at nightfall, and when evening rain drives them underground
they still feel gregarious. Hazel noticed that almost all his companions seemed to
have become friendly with the warren rabbits. Also, he found that whenever he
moved into one group or another, the warren rabbits evidently knew who he was
and treated him as the leader of the newcomers. He could not find Strawberry,
but after a time Cowslip came up to him from the other end of the hall.

from somebody. We’re hoping one of your people would like to tell one, but we
can begin ourselves, if you’d prefer.’

rabbit can no more refuse to tell a story than an Irishman can refuse to fight.
Hazel and his friends conferred. After a short time Blackberry announced,
‘We’ve asked Hazel to tell you about our adventures: how we made our journey
here and had the good luck to join you.’

Blackberry, dismayed, turned back to Hazel and Bigwig.

‘What’s the matter?’ he asked in a low voice. ‘Surely there’s no harm in that?’
‘Wait,’ replied Hazel quietly. ‘Let them tell us if they don’t like it. They have

their own ways here.’

However, the silence continued for some time, as though the other rabbits did

not care to mention what they thought was wrong.

‘It’s no good,’ said Blackberry at last. ‘You’ll have to say something yourself,

Hazel. No, why should you? I’ll do it.’ He spoke up again.’ On second thoughts,
Hazel remembers that we have a good story-teller among us. Dandelion will tell
you a story of El-ahrairah. That can’t go wrong, anyway,’ he whispered.

‘Which one, though?’ said Dandelion.
Hazel remembered the stones by the well-pit. ‘The King’s Lettuce,’ he

answered. ‘They think a lot of that, I believe.’

in the wood. ‘I’ll tell the story of the King’s Lettuce,’ he said aloud.

‘We shall enjoy that,’ replied Cowslip immediately.
‘He’d better,’ muttered Bigwig.
Dandelion began.

15. The Story of the King’s Lettuce

Lorenzo da Ponte Cost fan Tutte

‘One day, when Prince Rainbow was coming through the marshes, El-ahrairah

went up to him and said, “Prince Rainbow, my people are cold and cannot get
underground because of the wet. Their food is so dull and poor that they will be
ill when the bad weather comes. Why do you keep us here against our will? We
do no harm.”

‘ “El-ahrairah,” replied Prince Rainbow, “all the animals know that you are a

thief and a trickster. Now your tricks have caught up with you and you have to
live here until you can persuade us that you will be an honest rabbit.”

‘ “Then we shall never get out,” said El-ahrairah, “for I would be ashamed to

tell my people to stop living on their wits. Will you let us out if I can swim
across a lake full of pike?”

‘ “No,” said Prince Rainbow, “for I have heard of that trick of yours, El-

ahrairah, and I know how it is done.”

‘ “Will you let us go if I can steal the lettuces from King Darzin’s garden?”

asked El-ahrairah.

‘Now King Darzin ruled over the biggest and richest of the animal cities in the

world at that time. His soldiers were very fierce and his lettuce garden was

surrounded by a deep ditch and guarded by a thousand sentries day and night. It
was near his palace, on the edge of the city where all his followers lived. So
when El-ahrairah talked of stealing King Darzin’s lettuces, Prince Rainbow
laughed and said,

everywhere and no one will be able to keep them out of a vegetable garden from
now till the end of the world. But what will really happen is that you will be
killed by the soldiers and the world will be rid of a smooth, plausible rascal.”

‘ “Very well,” said El-ahrairah. “We shall see.”
‘Now Yona the hedgehog was near-by, looking for slugs and snails in the

marshes, and he heard what passed between Prince Rainbow and El-ahrairah. He
slipped away to the great palace of King Darzin and begged to be rewarded for
warning him against his enemies.

steal your lettuces and he is coming to trick you and get into the garden.”

‘King Darzin hurried down to the lettuce garden and sent for the captain of the

guard.

‘ “You see these lettuces?” he said. “Not one of them has been stolen since the

seed was sown. Very soon now they will be ready and then I mean to hold a
great feast for all my people. But I have heard that that scoundrel El-ahrairah
means to come and steal them if he can. You are to double the guards: and all the
gardeners and weeders are to be examined every day. Not one leaf is to go out of
the garden until either I or my chief taster gives the order.”

of the marshes of Kelfazin and went secretly up to the great ditch. With him was
his trusty Captain of Owsla, Rabscuttle. They squatted in the bushes and
watched the doubled guards patrolling up and down. When the morning came
they saw all the gardeners and weeders coming up to the wall and every one was
looked at by three guards. One was new and had come instead of his uncle who
was ill, but the guards would not let him in because they did not know him by
sight and they nearly threw him into the ditch before they would even let him go
home. El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle came away in perplexity and that day, when
Prince Rainbow came walking through the marshes, he said, “Well, well, Prince
with the Thousand Enemies, where are the lettuces?”

too many to carry.” Then he and Rabscuttle went secretly down one of their few
holes where there was no water, put a sentry outside and thought and talked for a
day and a night.

‘On the top of the hill near King Darzin’s palace there was a garden and here

his many children and his chief followers’ children used to be taken to play by
their mothers and nursemaids. There was no wall round the garden. It was
guarded only when the children were there: at night it was empty, because there
was nothing to steal and no one to be hunted. The next night Rabscuttle, who
had been told by El-ahrairah what he had to do, went to the garden and dug a
scrape. He hid in the scrape all night; and the next morning, when the children
were brought to play, he slipped out and joined them. There were so many
children that each one of the mothers and nursemaids thought that he must
belong to somebody else, but as he was about the same size as the children and
not much different to look at, he was able to make friends with some of them.
Rabscuttle was full of tricks and games and quite soon he was running and
playing just as if he had been one of the children himself. When the time came
for the children to go home, Rabscuttle went too. They came up to the gate of the
city and the guards saw Rabscuttle with King Darzin’s son. They stopped him
and asked which was his mother, but the King’s son said, “You let him alone.
He’s my friend,” and Rabscuttle went in with all he others.

went into one of the dark burrows; and here he hid all day. But in the evening he
came out and made his way to the royal store-rooms, where the food was being
got ready for the king and his chief followers and wives. There were grasses and
fruits and roots and even nuts and berries, for King Darzin’s people went
everywhere in those days, through the woods and fields. There were no soldiers
in the store-rooms and Rabscuttle hid there in the dark. And he did all he could
to make the food bad, except what he ate himself.

lettuces were ready. The chief taster said that several of them were excellent and
that he had already had some brought into the stores.

‘ “Good,” said the king. “We will have two or three tonight.”
‘But the next morning the king and several of his people were taken ill with

bad stomachs. Whatever they ate they kept on getting ill, because Rabscuttle was
hiding in the store-rooms and spoiling the food as fast as it was brought in. The
king ate several more lettuces but he got no better. In fact, he got worse.

to El-ahrairah. When he heard that the king was ill and that Rabscuttle had done
all he wanted, El-ahrairah set to work to disguise himself. He clipped his white
tail and made Rabscuttle nibble his fur short and stain it with mud and
blackberries. Then he covered himself all over with trailing strands of goose-
grass and big burdocks and he even found ways to alter his smell. At last even
his own wives could not recognize him, and El-ahrairah told Rabscuttle to

follow some way behind and off he went to King Darzin’s palace. But Rabscuttle
waited outside, on the top of the hill.

guard. “You are to take me to the King,” he said. “Prince Rainbow has sent me.
He has heard that the King is ill and he has sent for me, from the distant land
beyond Kelfazin, to find the cause of his sickness. Be quick! I am not
accustomed to be kept waiting.”

‘ “How do I know this is true?” asked the captain of the guard.
‘ “It is all one to me,” replied El-ahrairah. “What is the sickness of a little king

to the chief physician of the land beyond the golden river of Frith? I will return
and tell Prince Rainbow that the king’s guard were foolish and gave me such
treatment as one might expect from a crowd of flea-bitten louts.”

‘He turned and began to go away, but the captain of the guard became

frightened and called him back. El-ahrairah allowed himself to be persuaded and
the soldiers took him to the king.

suspicious of someone who said that Prince Rainbow had sent him to make him
better. He begged El-ahrairah to examine him and promised to do all he said.

eyes and his ears and his teeth and his droppings and the ends of his claws and
he inquired what he had been eating. Then he demanded to see the royal store-
rooms and the lettuce-garden. When he came back he looked very grave and
said, “Great king, I know well what sorry news it will be to you, but the cause of
your sickness is those very lettuces by which you set such store.”

good, healthy seed and guarded day and night.”

‘ “Alas!” said El-ahrairah,-“I know it well! But they have been infected by the

dreaded Lousepedoodle, that flies in ever-decreasing circles through the Gunpat
of the Cludge – a deadly virus – dear me, yes! – isolated by the purple Awago
and maturing in the grey-green forests of the Okey Pokey. This, you understand,
is to put the matter for you in simple terms, insofar as I can. Medically speaking,
there are certain complexities with which I will not weary you.”

‘ “I cannot believe it,” said the king.
“The simplest course,” said El-ahrairah, “will be to prove it to you. But we

need not make one of your subjects ill. Tell the soldiers to go out and take a
prisoner.”

‘The soldiers went out and the first creature they found was Rabscuttle,

grazing on the hill-top. They dragged him through the gates and into the king’s
presence.

‘ “Ah, a rabbit,” said El-ahrairah. “Nasty creature! So much the better.

Disgusting rabbit, eat that lettuce!”

kicked in convulsions and rolled his eyes. He gnawed at the floor and frothed at
the mouth.

one. Or else, which is more probable, the infection is particularly deadly to
rabbits. But in any event, let us be thankful it was not Your Majesty. Well, he has
served our purpose. Throw him out! I would strongly advise Your Majesty,”
went on El-ahrairah, “not to leave the lettuces where they are, for they will shoot
and flower and seed. The infection will spread. I know it is disappointing, but
you must get rid of them.”

‘At that moment, as luck would have it, in came the captain of the guard, with

Yona the hedgehog.

‘ “Your Majesty,” he cried, “this creature returns from the marshes of

Kelfazin. The people of El-ahrairah are mustering for war. They say they are
coming to attack Your Majesty’s garden and steal the royal lettuces. May I have
your Majesty’s order to take out the soldiers and destroy them?”

‘ “Aha!” said the king, “I have thought of a trick worth two of that.

‘Particularly deadly to rabbits.’ Well! Well! Let them have all the lettuces they
want. In fact, you are to take a thousand down to the marshes of Kelfazin and
leave them there. Ho! Ho! What a joke! I feel all the better for it!”

‘ “Ah, what deadly cunning!” said El-ahrairah. “No wonder Your Majesty is

ruler of a great people. I believe you are already recovering. As with many
illnesses, the cure is simple, once perceived. No, no, I will accept no reward. In
any case, there is nothing here that would be thought of value in the shining land
beyond the golden river of Frith. I have done as Prince Rainbow required. It is
sufficient. Perhaps you will be so good as to tell your guards to accompany me
to the foot of the hill?” He bowed, and left the palace.

‘Later that evening, as El-ahrairah was urging his rabbits to growl more

fiercely and run up and down in the marshes of Kelfazin, Prince Rainbow came
over the river.

‘ “El-ahrairah,” he called, “am I bewitched?”
‘ “It is quite possible,” said El-ahrairah. “The dreaded Lousepedoodle –”
‘ “There are a thousand lettuces in a pile at the top of the marsh. Who put

them there?”

expect my people, weak and hungry as they are, to carry them all the way from
King Darzin’s garden. However, they will soon recover now, under the treatment

that I shall prescribe. I am a physician, I may say, and if you have not heard as
much, Prince Rainbow, you may take it that you soon will, from another quarter.
Rabscuttle, go out and collect the lettuces.”

that he himself must keep his promise too. He let the rabbits out of the marshes
of Kelfazin and they multiplied everywhere. And from that day to this, no power
on earth can keep a rabbit out of a vegetable garden, for El-ahrairah prompts
them with a thousand tricks, the best in the world.’

16. Silverweed

Sidney Keyes Four Postures of Death

raises your spirits just to hear him.’

‘That’s put their ears flat for them,’ whispered Bigwig. ‘Let’s just see them

find a story-teller to beat him.’

They were all in no doubt that Dandelion had done them credit. Ever since

their arrival most of them had felt out of their depth among these magnificent,
well-fed strangers, with their detached manners, their shapes on the wall, their
elegance, their adroit evasion of almost all questions – above all, their fits of un-
rabbit-like melancholy. Now, their own story-teller had shown that they were no
mere bunch of tramps. Certainly, no reasonable rabbit could withhold
admiration. They waited to be told as much, but after a few moments realized
with surprise that their hosts were evidently less enthusiastic.

‘Very nice,’ said Cowslip. He seemed to be searching for something more to

say, but then repeated, ‘Yes, very nice. An unusual tale.’

‘But he must know it, surely?’ muttered Blackberry to Hazel.
‘I always think these traditional stories retain a lot of charm,’ said another of

the rabbits, ‘especially when they’re told in the real, old-fashioned spirit.’

‘Yes,’ said Strawberry. ‘Conviction, that’s what it needs. You really have to

believe in El-ahrairah and Prince Rainbow, don’t you? Then all the rest follows.’

‘Don’t say anything, Bigwig,’ whispered Hazel: for Bigwig was scuffling his

paws indignantly. ‘You can’t force them to like it if they don’t. Let’s wait and see
what they can do themselves.’ Aloud, he said,’ Our stories haven’t changed in
generations, you know. After all, we haven’t changed ourselves. Our lives have
been the same as our fathers’ and their fathers’ before them. Things are different
here. We realize that, and we think your new ideas and ways are very exciting.
We’re all wondering what kind of things you tell stories about.’

poems are mostly about our own lives here. Of course, that Shape of Laburnum
that you saw – that’s old-fashioned now. El-ahrairah doesn’t really mean much to
us. Not that your friend’s story wasn’t very charming,’ he added hastily.

tricks.’

‘No,’ said a new voice from the further end of the hall, beyond Cowslip.

‘Rabbits need dignity and above all, the will to accept their fate.’

‘We think Silverweed is one of the best poets we’ve had for many months,’

said Cowslip.’ His ideas have a great following. Would you like to hear him
now?’

‘Yes, yes,’said voices from all sides.‘Silverweed!’
‘Hazel,’ said Fiver suddenly,’ I want to get a clear idea of this Silverweed, but

I daren’t go closer by myself. Will you come with me?’

‘Why, Fiver, whatever do you mean? What is there to be afraid of?’
‘Oh, Frith help me!’ said Fiver, trembling, ‘I can smell him from here. He

terrifies me.’

‘Oh, Fiver, don’t be absurd! He just smells the same as the rest of them.’
‘He smells like barley rained down and left to rot in the fields. He smells like

a wounded mole that can’t get underground.’

come with you.’

When they had edged their way through the crowd to the far end of the

burrow, Hazel was surprised to realize that Silverweed was a mere youngster. In
the Sandleford warren no rabbit of his age would have been asked to tell a story,
except perhaps to a few friends alone. He had a wild, desperate air and his ears
twitched continually. As he began to speak, he seemed to grow less and less
aware of his audience and continually turned his head, as though listening to
some sound, audible only to himself, from the entrance tunnel behind him. But
there was an arresting fascination in his voice, like the movement of wind and
light on a meadow, and as its rhythm entered into his hearers the whole burrow
became silent.

The wind is blowing, blowing over the grass.
It shakes the willow catkins; the leaves shine silver.
Where are you going, wind? Far, far away
Over the hills, over the edge of the world.
Take me with you, wind, high over the sky.
I will go with you, I will be rabbit-of-the-wind,
Into the sky, the feathery sky and the rabbit.

The stream is running, running over the gravel,
Through the brooklime, the kingcups, the blue and gold of spring.
Where are you going, stream? Far, far away
Beyond the heather, sliding away all night.
Take me with you, stream, away in the starlight.
I will go with you, I will be rabbit-of-the-stream,
Down through the water, the green water and the rabbit.

In autumn the leaves come blowing, yellow and brown.
They rustle in the ditches, they tug and hang on the hedge.
Where are you going, leaves? Far, far away
Into the earth we go, with the rain and the berries.
Take me, leaves, O take me on your dark journey.
I will go with you, I will be rabbit-of-the-leaves,
In the deep places of the earth, the earth and the rabbit.

Frith lies in the evening sky. The clouds are red about him.
I am here, Lord Frith, I am running through the long grass.
O take me with you, dropping behind the woods,
Far away, to the heart of light, the silence.
For I am ready to give you my breath, my life,
The shining circle of the sun, the sun and the rabbit.

Fiver, as he listened, had shown a mixture of intense absorption and

incredulous horror. At one and the same time he seemed to accept every word
and yet to be stricken with fear. Once he drew in his breath, as though startled to
recognize his own half-known thoughts: and when the poem was ended he
seemed to be struggling to come to himself. He bared his teeth and licked his
lips, as Blackberry had done before the dead hedgehog on the road.

A rabbit in fear of an enemy will sometimes crouch stock-still, either

fascinated or else trusting to its natural inconspicuousness to remain unnoticed.
But then, unless the fascination is too powerful, there comes the point when
keeping still is discarded and the rabbit, as though breaking a spell, turns in an
instant to its other resource – flight. So it seemed to be with Fiver now. Suddenly
he leapt up and began to push his way violently across the great burrow. Several
rabbits were jostled and turned angrily on him, but he took no notice. Then he
came to a place where he could not push between two heavy warren bucks. He
became hysterical, kicking and scuffling, and Hazel, who was behind him, had
difficulty in preventing a fight.

‘My brother’s a sort of poet too, you know,’ he said to the bristling strangers.

“Things affect him very strongly sometimes and he doesn’t always know why.’

One of the rabbits seemed to accept what Hazel had said, but the other replied,

‘Oh, another poet? Let’s hear him, then. That’ll be some return for my shoulder,

anyway. He’s scratched a great tuft of fur out.’

Fiver was already beyond them and thrusting towards the farther entrance

tunnel. Hazel felt that he must follow him. But after all the trouble that he
himself had taken to be friendly, he felt so cross at the way in which Fiver had
antagonized their new friends that as he passed Bigwig, he said, ‘Come and help
me to get some sense into him. The last thing we want is a fight now.’ He felt
that Fiver really deserved a short touch of Bigwig.

They followed Fiver up the run and overtook him at the entrance. Before

either of them could say a word, he turned and began to speak as though they
had asked him a question.

‘You felt it, then? And you want to know whether I did? Of course I did.

That’s the worst part of it. There isn’t any trick. He speaks the truth. So long as
he speaks the truth it can’t be folly – that’s what you’re going to say, isn’t it? I’m
not blaming you, Hazel. I felt myself moving towards him like one cloud drifting
into another. But then at the last moment I drifted wide. Who knows why? It
wasn’t my own will; it was an accident. There was just some little part of me that
carried me wide of him. Did I say the roof of that hall was made of bones? No!
It’s like a great mist of folly that covers the whole sky: and we shall never see to
go by Frith’s light any more. Oh, what will become of us? A thing can be true
and still be desperate folly, Hazel.’

‘What on earth’s all this?’ said Hazel to Bigwig in perplexity.
‘He’s talking about that lop-eared nitwit of a poet down there,’ answered

Bigwig. ‘I know that much. But why he seems to think we should want to have
anything to do with him and his fancy talk – that’s more than I can imagine. You
can save your breath, Fiver. The only thing that’s bothering us is the row you’ve
started. As for Silverweed, all I can say is, I’ll keep Silver and he can be just
plain Weed.’

head. ‘You think that,’ he said.‘You believe that. But each of you, in his own
way, is thick in that mist. Where is the –’

that I didn’t follow you up here to speak angrily. You’ve endangered our good
start in this warren –’

‘Endangered?’ cried Fiver. ‘Endangered? Why, the whole place –’
‘Be quiet. I was going to be angry, but you’re obviously so much upset that it

would be pointless. But what you are going to do now is to come underground
with the two of us and sleep. Come on! And don’t say any more for the
moment.’

One respect in which rabbits’ lives are less complicated than those of humans

is that they are not ashamed to use force. Having no alternative, Fiver
accompanied Hazel and Bigwig to the burrow where Hazel had spent the
previous night. There was no one there and they lay down and slept.

17. The Shining Wire

W. H. Auden The Witnesses

Hazel woke. He was in the burrow. He shivered. Why was there no warmth of

rabbit bodies lying close together? Where was Fiver? He sat up. Near by, Bigwig
was stirring and twitching in his sleep, searching for warmth, trying to press
against another rabbit’s body no longer there. The shallow hollow in the sandy
floor where Fiver had lain was not quite cold: but Fiver was gone.

‘Fiver!’ said Hazel in the dark.
As soon as he had spoken he knew there would be no reply. He pushed

Bigwig with his nose, butting urgently. ‘Bigwig! Fiver’s gone! Bigwig!’

Bigwig was wide awake on the instant and Hazel had never felt so glad of his

sturdy readiness.

‘What did you say? What’s wrong?’

‘Fiver’s gone.’
‘Where’s he gone?’
‘Silf – outside. It can only be silf. You know he wouldn’t go wandering about

in the warren. He hates it.’

‘He’s a nuisance, isn’t he? He’s left this burrow cold, too. You think he’s in

danger, don’t you? You want to go and look for him?’

‘Yes, I must. He’s upset and over-wrought and it’s not light yet. There may be

elil, whatever Strawberry says.’

Bigwig listened and sniffed for a few moments.
‘It’s very nearly light,’ he said. ‘There’ll be light enough to find him by. Well,

I’d better come with you, I suppose. Don’t worry – he can’t have gone far. But
by the King’s Lettuce! I won’t half give him a piece of my mind when we catch
him.’

‘I’ll hold him down while you kick him, if only we can find him. Come on!’
They went up the run to the mouth of the hole and paused together. ‘Since our

friends aren’t here to push us,’ said Bigwig, ‘we may as well make sure the place
isn’t crawling with stoats and owls before we go out.’

At that moment a brown owl’s call sounded from the opposite wood. It was

the first call, and by instinct they both crouched motionless, counting four heart-
beats until the second followed.

‘It’s moving away,’ said Hazel.
‘How many field-mice say that every night, I wonder! You know the call’s

deceptive. It’s meant to be.’

after him. You were right, anyway. It is light-just.’

‘Shall we look under the yew tree first?’
But Fiver was not under the yew tree. The light, as it grew, began to show the

upper field, while the distant hedge and brook remained dark, linear shapes
below. Bigwig jumped down from the bank into the field and ran in a long curve
across the wet grass. He stopped almost opposite the hole by which they had
come up, and Hazel joined him.

down towards the brook. He won’t be far away.’

When raindrops are lying it is easy to see where grass has recently been

crossed. They followed the line down the field and reached the hedge beside the
carrot-ground and the source of the brook. Bigwig had been right when he said
the line was fresh. As soon as they had come through the hedge they saw Fiver.
He was feeding, alone. A few fragments of carrot were still lying about near the
spring, but he had left these untouched and was eating the grass not far from the

gnarled crab-apple tree. They approached and he looked up.

he had brought Bigwig. In the darkness before morning and the first shock of
discovering that Fiver was gone, Bigwig had been a comfort and a stand-by. But
now, as he saw Fiver, small and familiar, incapable of hurting anyone or of
concealing what he felt, trembling in the wet grass, either from fear or from cold,
his anger melted away. He felt only sorry for him and sure that, if they could stay
alone together for a while, Fiver would come round to an easier state of mind.
But it was probably too late to persuade Bigwig to be gentle: he could only hope
for the best.

Contrary to his fears, however, Bigwig remained as silent as himself.

Evidently he had been expecting Hazel to speak first and was somewhat at a
loss. For some time all three moved on quietly over the grass, while the shadows
grew stronger and the wood-pigeons clattered among the distant trees. Hazel was
beginning to feel that all would be well and that Bigwig had more sense than he
had given him credit for, when Fiver sat up on his hind legs, cleaned his face
with his paws and then, for the first time, looked directly at him.

‘I’m going now,’ he said.’ I feel very sad. I’d like to wish you well, Hazel, but

there’s no good to wish you in this place. So just good-bye.’

‘But where are you going, Fiver?’
‘Away. To the hills, if I can get there.’
‘By yourself, alone? You can’t. You’d die.’
‘You wouldn’t have a hope, old chap,’ said Bigwig. ‘Something would get you

before ni-Frith.’

‘No,’ said Fiver very quietly. ‘You are closer to death than I.’
‘Are you trying to frighten me, you miserable little lump of chattering

chickweed?’ cried Bigwig.’ I’ve a good mind –’

‘Wait, Bigwig,’ said Hazel. ‘don’t speak roughly to him.’
‘Why, you said yourself –’ began Bigwig.
‘I know. But I feel differently now. I’m sorry, Bigwig. I was going to ask you

to help me to make him come back to the warren. But now – well, I’ve always
found that there was something in what Fiver had to say. For the last two days
I’ve refused to listen to him and I still think he’s out of his senses. But I haven’t
the heart to drive him back to the warren. I really believe that for some reason or
other the place is frightening him out of his wits. I’ll go with him a little way and
perhaps we can talk. I can’t ask you to risk it too. Anyway, the others ought to
know what we’re doing and they won’t unless you go and tell them. I’ll be back
before ni-Frith. I hope we both shall.’

Bigwig stared. Then he turned furiously on Fiver. ‘You wretched little black

beetle,’ he said. ‘You’ve never learnt to obey orders, have you? It’s me, me, me
all the time.“Oh, I’ve got a funny feeling in my toe, so we must all go and stand
on our heads!” And now we’ve found a fine warren and got into it without even
having to fight, you’ve got to do your best to upset everyone! And then you risk
the life of one of the best rabbits we’ve got, just to play nursey while you go
wandering about like a moon-struck field-mouse. Well, I’m finished with you,
I’ll tell you plain. And now I’m going back to the warren to make sure everyone
else is finished with you as well. And they will be – don’t make any mistake
about that.’

He turned and dashed back through the nearest gap in the hedge. On the

instant, a fearful commotion began on the farther side. There were sounds of
kicking and plunging. A stick flew into the air. Then a flat, wet clot of dead
leaves shot clean through the gap and landed clear of the hedge, close to Hazel.
The brambles thrashed up and down. Hazel and Fiver stared at each other, both
fighting against the impulse to run. What enemy was at work on the other side of
the hedge? There were no cries – no spitting of a cat, no squealing of a rabbit –
only the crackling of twigs and the tearing of the grass in violence.

By an effort of courage against all instinct, Hazel forced himself forward into

the gap, with Fiver following. A terrible sight lay before them. The rotten leaves
had been thrown up in showers. The earth had been laid bare and was scored
with long scratches and furrows. Bigwig was lying on his side, his back legs
kicking and struggling. A length of twisted copper wire, gleaming dully in the
first sunlight, was looped round his neck and ran taut across one fore-paw to the
head of a stout peg driven into the ground. The running knot had pulled tight and
was buried in the fur behind his ear. The projecting point of one strand had
lacerated his neck and drops of blood, dark and red as yew berries, welled one
by one down his shoulder. For a few moments he lay panting, his side heaving in
exhaustion. Then again began the struggling and fighting, backwards and
forwards, jerking and falling, until he choked and lay quiet.

Bigwig’s eyes were closed and his lips pulled back from the long front teeth in a
fixed snarl. He had bitten his lower lip and from this, too, the blood was running.
Froth covered his jaws and chest.

‘Thlayli!’ said Hazel, stamping. ‘Thlayli! Listen! you’re in a snare – a snare!

What did they say in the Owsla? Come on – think. How can we help you?’

There was a pause. Then Bigwig’s back legs began to kick once more, but

feebly. His ears drooped. His eyes opened unseeing and the whites showed
blood-shot as the brown irises rolled one way and the other. After a moment his
voice came thick and low, bubbling out of the bloody spume in his mouth.

‘Owsla – no good – biting wire. Peg – got to – dig out.’
A convulsion shook him and he scrabbled at the ground, covering himself in a

mask of wet earth and blood. Then he was still again.

Silver. Be quick! He’ll die.’

what was needed. What was the peg? How was he to dig it out? He looked down
at the foul mess before him. Bigwig was lying across the wire, which came out
under his belly and seemed to disappear into the ground. Hazel struggled with
his own incomprehension. Bigwig had said, ‘Dig.’ That at least he understood.
He began to scratch into the soft earth beside the body, until after a time his
claws scraped against something smooth and firm. As he paused, perplexed, he
found Blackberry at his shoulder.

“Dig out the peg.” What does that mean? What have we got to do?’

‘Wait a moment,’ said Blackberry. ‘Let me think, and try not to be impatient.’
Hazel turned his head and looked down the course of the brook. Far away,

between the two copses, he could see the cherry tree where two days before he
had sat with Blackberry and Fiver in the sunrise. He remembered how Bigwig
had chased Hawkbit through the long grass, forgetting the quarrel of the previous
night in the joy of their arrival. He could see Hawkbit running towards him now
and two or three of the others – Silver, Dandelion and Pipkin. Dandelion, well in
front, dashed up to the gap and checked, twitching and staring.

‘What is it, Hazel? What’s happened? Fiver said –’
‘Bigwig’s in a wire. Let him alone till Blackberry tells us. Stop the others

crowding round.’

Dandelion turned and raced back as Pipkin came up.
‘Is Cowslip coming?’ said Hazel. ‘Perhaps he knows –’
‘He wouldn’t come,’ replied Pipkin. ‘He told Fiver to stop talking about it.’
‘Told him what?’ asked Hazel incredulously. But at that moment Blackberry

spoke and Hazel was beside him in a flash.

‘This is it,’ said Blackberry. ‘The wire’s on a peg and the peg’s in the ground –

there, look. We’ve got to dig it out. Come on – dig beside it.’

Hazel dug once more, his fore-paws throwing up the soft, wet soil and

slipping against the hard sides of the peg. Dimly, he was aware of the others
waiting near-by. After a time he was forced to stop, panting. Silver took his
place, and was followed by Buckthorn. The nasty, smooth, clean, man-smelling
peg was laid bare to the length of a rabbit’s ear, but still it did not come loose.
Bigwig had not moved. He lay across the wire, torn and bloody, with closed

eyes. Buckthorn drew his head and paws out of the hole and rubbed the mud off
his face.

‘The peg’s narrower down there,’ he said. ‘It tapers. I think it could be bitten

through, but I can’t get my teeth to it.’

‘Send Pipkin in,’ said Blackberry. ‘He’s smaller.’
Pipkin plunged into the hole. They could hear the wood splintering under his

teeth – a sound like a mouse in a shed wainscot at midnight. He came out with
his nose bleeding.

‘The splinters prick you and its hard to breathe, but the peg’s nearly through.’
‘Fiver go in,’ said Hazel.
Fiver was not long in the hole. He, too, came out bleeding.
‘It’s broken in two. It’s free.’
Blackberry pressed his nose against Bigwig’s head. As he nuzzled him gently

the head rolled sideways and back again.

‘Bigwig,’ said Blackberry in his ear, ‘the peg’s out.’
There was no response. Bigwig lay still as before. A great fly settled on one of

his ears. Blackberry thrust at it angrily and it flew up, buzzing, into the sunshine.

‘I think he’s gone,’ said Blackberry. ‘I can’t feel his breathing.’
Hazel crouched down by Blackberry and laid his nostrils close to Bigwig’s,

but a light breeze was blowing and he could not tell whether there was breath or
not. The legs were loose, the belly flaccid and limp. He tried to think of what
little he had heard of snares. A strong rabbit could break his neck in a snare. Or
had the point of a sharp wire pierced the wind-pipe?

‘Bigwig,’ he whispered, ‘we’ve got you out. you’re free.’
Bigwig did not stir. Suddenly it came to Hazel that if Bigwig was dead – and

what else could hold him silent in the mud? – then he himself must get the others
away before the dreadful loss could drain their courage and break their spirit – as
it would if they stayed by the body. Besides, the man would come soon. Perhaps
he was already coming, with his gun, to take poor Bigwig away. They must go;
and he must do his best to see that all of them – even he himself – put what had
happened out of mind, for ever.

said to Blackberry, quoting a rabbit proverb.

‘If only it were not Bigwig,’ said Blackberry. ‘What shall we do without him?’
‘The others are waiting,’ said Hazel. ‘We have to stay alive. There has to be

something for them to think about. Help me, or it will be more than I can do.’

He turned away from the body and looked for Fiver among the rabbits behind

him. But Fiver was nowhere to be seen and Hazel was afraid to ask for him, in
case to do so should seem like weakness and a need for comfort.

‘Pipkin,’ he snapped, ‘why don’t you clean up your face and stop the

bleeding? The smell of blood attracts elil. You know that, don’t you?’

‘Yes, Hazel. I’m sorry. Will Bigwig –’
‘And another thing,’ said Hazel desperately. ‘What was it you were telling me

about Cowslip? Did you say he told Fiver to be quiet?’

‘Yes, Hazel. Fiver came into the warren and told us about the snare, and that

poor Bigwig –’

‘Yes, all right. And then Cowslip –?’
‘Cowslip and Strawberry and the others pretended not to hear. It was

ridiculous, because Fiver was calling out to everybody. And then as we were
running out Silver said to Cowslip, “Surely you’re coming?” And Cowslip
simply turned his back. So then Fiver went up and spoke to him very quietly, but
I heard what Cowslip answered. He said, “ Hills or Inlé, it’s all one to me where
you go. You hold your tongue.” And then he struck at Fiver and scratched his
ear.’

‘I’ll kill him,’ gasped a low, choking voice behind them. They all leapt round.

Bigwig had raised his head and was supporting himself on his fore-paws alone.
His body was twisted and his hind-parts and back legs still lay along the ground.
His eyes were open, but his face was such a fearful mask of blood, foam, vomit
and earth that he looked more like some demon-creature than a rabbit. The
immediate sight of him, which should have filled them with relief and joy,
brought only terror. They cringed away and none said a word.

clotted fur. ‘Help me, rot you! Can’t anyone get this stinking wire off me?’ He
struggled, dragging his hind-legs. Then he fell again and crawled forward,
trailing the wire through the grass with the broken peg snickering behind it.

him.’ Do you want to kill him? Let him rest! Let him breathe!’

immediately struggled up on his fore-paws as before. ‘It’s my back legs. ‘Won’t
move. That Cowslip! I’ll kill him!’

are they? They left Bigwig to die. You all heard Cowslip in the burrow. They’re
cowards. Let’s drive them out – kill them! Take the warren and live there
ourselves!’

‘Yes! Yes!’ they all answered. ‘Come on! Back to the warren! Down with

Cowslip! Down with Silverweed! Kill them!’

‘O embleer Frith!’ cried a squealing voice in the long grass.
At this shocking impiety, the tumult died away. They looked about them,

wondering who could have spoken. There was silence. Then, from between two
great tussocks of hair-grass came Fiver, his eyes blazing with a frantic urgency.
He growled and gibbered at them like a witch-hare and those nearest to him fell
back in fear. Even Hazel could not have said a word for his life. They realized
that he was speaking.

but a death-hole! The whole place is one foul elil’s larder! It’s snared –
everywhere, every day! That explains everything: everything that’s happened
since we came here.’

grass.

‘Listen, Dandelion. you’re fond of stories, aren’t you? I’ll tell you one – yes,

one for El-ahrairah to cry at. Once there was a fine warren on the edge of a
wood, overlooking the meadows of a farm. It was big, full of rabbits. Then one
day the white blindness came and the rabbits fell sick and died. But a few
survived, as they always do. The warren became almost empty. One day the
farmer thought, “I could increase those rabbits: make them part of my farm –
their meat, their skins. Why should I bother to keep rabbits in hutches? They’ll
do very well where they are.” He began to shoot all elil – lendri, homba, stoat,
owl. He put out food for the rabbits, but not too near the warren. For his purpose
they had to become accustomed to going about in the fields and the wood. And
then he snared them – not too many: as many as he wanted and not as many as
would frighten them all away or destroy the warren. They grew big and strong
and healthy, for he saw to it that they had all of the best, particularly in winter,
and nothing to fear – except the running knot in the hedge-gap and the wood-
path. So they lived as he wanted them to live and all the time there were a few
who disappeared. The rabbits became strange in many ways, different from other
rabbits. They knew well enough what was happening. But even to themselves
they pretended that all was well, for the food was good, they were protected,
they had nothing to fear but the one fear; and that struck here and there, never
enough at a time to drive them away. They forgot the ways of wild rabbits. They
forgot El-ahrairah, for what use had they for tricks and cunning, living in the
enemy’s warren and paying his price? They found out other marvellous arts to
take the place of tricks and old stories. They danced in ceremonious greeting.
They sang songs like the birds and made shapes on the walls; and though these
could help them not at all, yet they passed the time and enabled them to tell
themselves that they were splendid fellows, the very flower of Rabbitry, cleverer
than magpies. They had no Chief Rabbit – no, how could they? – for a Chief
Rabbit must be El-ahrairah to his warren and keep them from death: and here

there was no death but one, and what Chief Rabbit could have an answer to that?
Instead, Frith sent them strange singers, beautiful and sick like oak-apples, like
robins’ pin-cushions on the wild rose. And since they could not bear the truth,
these singers, who might in some other place have been wise, were squeezed
under the terrible weight of the warren’s secret until they gulped out fine folly –
about dignity and acquiescence, and anything else that could make believe that
the rabbit loved the shining wire. But one strict rule they had; oh yes, the
strictest. No one must-ever ask where another rabbit was and anyone who asked,
“Where?” – except in a song or a poem – must be silenced. To say “ Where? “
was bad enough, but to speak openly of the wires – that was intolerable. For that
they would scratch and kill.’

He stopped. No one moved. Then, in the silence, Bigwig lurched to his feet,

swayed a moment, tottered a few steps towards Fiver and fell again. Fiver paid
him no heed but looked from one to another among the rabbits. Then he began
speaking again.

‘And then we came, over the heather in the night. Wild rabbits, making

scrapes across the valley. The warren rabbits didn’t show themselves at once.
They needed to think what was best to be done. But they hit on it quite soon. To
bring us into the warren and tell us nothing. Don’t you see? The farmer only sets
so many snares at a time and if one rabbit dies, the others will live that much
longer. You suggested that Hazel should tell them our adventures, Blackberry,
but it didn’t go down well, did it? Who wants to hear about brave deeds when
he’s ashamed of his own, and who likes an open, honest tale from someone he’s
deceiving? Do you want me to go on? I tell you, every single thing that’s
happened fits like a bee in a foxglove. And kill them, you say, and help ourselves
to the great burrow? We shall help ourselves to a roof of bones, hung with
shining wires! Help ourselves to misery and death!’

Fiver sank down into the grass. Bigwig, still trailing his horrible, smooth peg,

staggered up to him and touched his nose with his own.

‘I’m still alive, Fiver,’ he said. ‘So are all of us. You’ve bitten through a bigger

peg than this one I’m dragging. Tell us what to do.’

‘Do?’ replied Fiver. ‘Why, go – now. I told Cowslip we were going before I

left the burrow.’

‘Where?’ said Bigwig. But it was Hazel who answered.
‘To the hills,’ he said.
South of them, the ground rose gently away from the brook. Along the crest

was the line of a cart-track and beyond, a copse. Hazel turned towards it and the
rest began to follow him up the slope in ones and twos.

‘What about the wire, Bigwig?’ said Silver.’ The peg will catch and tighten it

again.’

neck.’

‘Try,’ said Silver. ‘You won’t get far otherwise.’
‘Hazel,’ said Speedwell suddenly,’ there’s a rabbit coming down from the

warren. Look!’

you. Make a good job of it while you’re at it.’

who was coming was running in a curious, headlong manner. Once he ran
straight into a thick-stemmed thistle, knocking himself sideways and rolling over
and over. But he got up and came blundering on towards them.

‘Is it the white blindness?’ said Buckthorn. ‘He’s not looking where he’s

going.’

‘Frith forbid!’ said Blackberry. ‘Shall we run away?’
‘No, he couldn’t run like that with the white blindness,’ said Hazel. ‘Whatever

ails him, it isn’t that.’

‘It’s Strawberry!’ cried Dandelion.
Strawberry came through the hedge by the crab-apple tree, looked about him

and made his way to Hazel. All his urbane self-possession had vanished. He was
staring and trembling and his great size seemed only to add to his air of stricken
misery. He cringed before them in the grass as Hazel waited, stern and
motionless, with Silver at his side.

‘Hazel,’ said Strawberry, ‘are you going away?’
Hazel made no answer, but Silver said sharply, ‘What’s that to you?’
‘Take me with you.’ There was no reply and he repeated, ‘Take me with you.’
‘We don’t care for creatures who deceive us,’ said Silver. ‘Better go back to

Nildro-hain. No doubt she’s less particular.’

Strawberry gave a kind of choking squeal, as though he had been wounded.

He looked from Silver to Hazel and then to Fiver. At last, in a pitiful whisper, he
said,

‘The wires.’
Silver was about to answer, but Hazel spoke first.
‘You can come with us,’ he said. ‘Don’t say any more. Poor fellow.’
A few minutes later the rabbits had crossed the cart-track and vanished into

the copse beyond. A magpie, seeing some light-coloured object conspicuous on
the empty slope, flew closer to look. But all that lay there was a splintered peg
and a twisted length of wire.

PART II ON WATERSHIPDOWN

William Blake The Marriage of Heaven and Hell

the low branches of two or three spindle-trees. Since the previous morning they
had journeyed nearly three miles. Their luck had been good, for everyone who
had left the warren was still alive. They had splashed through two brooks and

wandered fearfully in the deep woodlands west of Ecchinswell. They had rested
in the straw of a Starveall, or lonely barn, and woken to find themselves attacked
by rats. Silver and Buckthorn, with Bigwig helping them, had covered the retreat
until, once all were together outside, they had taken to flight. Buckthorn had
been bitten in the foreleg and the wound, in the manner of a rat-bite, was irritant
and painful. Skirting a small lake, they had stared to see a great, grey fisher-bird
that stabbed and paddled in the sedge, until a flight of wild duck had frightened
them away with their clamour. They had crossed more than half a mile of open
pasture without a trace of cover, expecting every moment some attack that did
not come. They had heard the unnatural humming of a pylon in the summer air;
and had actually gone beneath it, on Fiver’s assurance that it could do them no
harm. Now they lay under the spindle-trees and sniffed in weariness and doubt at
the strange, bare country round them.

Since leaving the warren of the snares they had become warier, shrewder, a

tenacious band who understood each other and worked together. There was no
more quarrelling. The truth about the warren had been a grim shock. They had
come closer together, relying on and valuing each other’s capacities. They knew
now that it was on these and on nothing else that their lives depended, and they
were not going to waste anything they possessed between them. In spite of
Hazel’s efforts beside the snare, there was not one of them who had not turned
sick at heart to think that Bigwig was dead and wondered, like Blackberry, what
would become of them now. Without Hazel, without Blackberry, Buckthorn and
Pipkin – Bigwig would have died. Without himself he would have died, for
which else, of them all, would not have stopped running after such punishment?
There was no more questioning of Bigwig’s strength, Fiver’s insight,
Blackberry’s wits or Hazel’s authority. When the rats came, Buckthorn and
Silver had obeyed Bigwig and stood their ground. The rest had followed Hazel
when he roused them and, without explanation, told them to go quickly outside
the barn. Later, Hazel had said that there was nothing for it but to cross the open
pasture and under Silver’s direction they had crossed it, with Dandelion running
ahead to reconnoitre. When Fiver said the iron tree was harmless they believed
him.

and he was ashamed of the part he had played at the warren. He was soft and
more used than he dared admit to indolence and good food. But he made no
complaint and it was plain that he was determined to show what he could do and
not to be left behind. He had proved useful in the woodland, being better
accustomed to thick woods than any of the others. ‘He’ll be all right, you know,
if we give him a chance,’ said Hazel to Bigwig by the lake. ‘So he darned well

ought to be,’ replied Bigwig, ‘the great dandy’ – for by their standards,
Strawberry was scrupulously clean and fastidious. ‘Well, I won’t have him brow-
beaten, Bigwig, mind. That won’t help him.’ This Bigwig had accepted, though
rather sulkily. Yet he himself had become less overbearing. The snare had left
him weak and overwrought. It was he who had given the alarm in the barn, for
he could not sleep and at the sound of scratching had started up at once. He
would not let Silver and Buckthorn fight alone, but he had felt obliged to leave
the worst of it to them. For the first time in his life, Bigwig had found himself
driven to moderation and prudence.

Hazel came out from under the branches and looked carefully round the lower
slope. Then he stared upwards over the ant-hills, to the open down rising above.
Fiver and Acorn followed him out and fell to nibbling at a patch of sainfoin. It
was new to them, but they did not need to be told that it was good and it raised
their spirits. Hazel turned back and joined them among the big, rosy-veined,
magenta flower-spikes.

‘Fiver,’ he said, ‘let me get this right. You want us to climb up this place,

however far it is, and find shelter on the top. Is that it?’

‘Yes, Hazel.’
‘But the top must be very high. I can’t even see it from here. It’ll be open and

cold.’

‘Not in the ground: and the soil’s so light that we shall be able to scratch some

shelter easily when we find the right place.’

tired out. I’m sure it’s dangerous to stay here. We’ve nowhere to run to. We don’t
know the country and we can’t get underground. But it seems out of the question
for everybody to climb up there tonight. We should be even less safe.’

open as that heather we crossed, and the trees won’t hide us from anything
hunting on four feet.’

‘It would have been the same any time we came,’ said Fiver.
‘I’m not saying anything against it, Fiver,’ replied Acorn, ‘but we need holes.

It’s a bad place not to be able to get underground.’

it’s like. I’m going up myself to have a look round. I’ll be as quick as I can and
you’ll have to hope for the best until I get back. You can rest and feed anyway.’

‘You’re not going alone,’ said Fiver firmly.
Since each one of them was ready to go with him in spite of their fatigue,

Hazel gave in and chose Dandelion and Hawkbit, who seemed less weary than

the others. They set out up the hillside, going slowly, picking their way from one
bush and tussock to another and pausing continually to sniff and stare along the
great expanse of grass, which stretched on either side as far as they could see.

A man walks upright. For him it is strenuous to climb a steep hill, because he

has to keep pushing his own vertical mass upwards and cannot gain any
momentum. The rabbit is better off. His forelegs support his horizontal body and
the great back legs do the work. They are more than equal to thrusting uphill the
light mass in front of them. Rabbits can go fast uphill. In fact, they have so much
power behind that they find going downhill awkward, and sometimes, in flight
down a steep place, they may actually go head over heels. On the other hand the
man is five or six feet above the hillside and can see all round. To him the
ground may be steep and rough but on the whole it is even; and he can pick his
direction easily from the top of his moving, six-foot tower. The rabbits’ anxieties
and strain in climbing the down were different, therefore, from those which you,
reader, will experience if you go there. Their main trouble was not bodily
fatigue. When Hazel had said that they were all tired out, he had meant that they
were feeling the strain of prolonged insecurity and fear.

Rabbits above ground, unless they are in proved, familiar surroundings close

to their holes, live in continual fear. If it grows intense enough they can become
glazed and paralysed by it – tharn, to use their own word. Hazel and his
companions had been on the jump for nearly two days. Indeed, ever since they
had left their home warren, five days before, they had faced one danger after
another. They were all on edge, sometimes starting at nothing and again, lying
down in any patch of long grass that offered. Bigwig and Buckthorn smelt of
blood and everyone else knew they did. What bothered Hazel, Dandelion and
Hawkbit was the openness and strangeness of the down and their inability to see
very far ahead. They climbed not over but through the sun-red grass, among the
awakened insect movement and the light ablaze. The grass undulated about
them. They peered over ant-hills and looked cautiously round clumps of teazle.
They could not tell how far away the ridge might be. They topped each short
slope only to find another above it. To Hazel, it seemed a likely place for a
weasel: or the white owl, perhaps, might fly along the escarpment at twilight,
looking inwards with its stony eyes, ready to turn a few feet sideways and pick
off the shelf anything that moved. Some elil wait for their prey, but the white owl
is a seeker and he comes in silence.

As Hazel still went up, the south wind began to blow and the June sunset

reddened the sky to the zenith. Hazel, like nearly all wild animals, was
unaccustomed to look up at the sky. What he thought of as the sky was the
horizon, usually broken by trees and hedges. Now, with his head pointing

upwards, he found himself gazing at the ridge, as over the sky-line came the
silent, moving, red-tinged cumuli. Their movement was disturbing, unlike that of
trees or grass or rabbits. These great masses moved steadily, noiselessly and
always in the same direction. They were not of his world.

the west, ‘are you sending us to live among the clouds? If you spoke truly to
Fiver, help me to trust him.’ At this moment he saw Dandelion, who had run well
ahead, squatting on an ant-hill clear against the sky. Alarmed, he dashed
forward.

‘Dandelion, get down!’ he said.’ Why are you sitting up there?’
‘Because I can see,’ replied Dandelion, with a kind of excited joy. ‘Come and

look! You can see the whole world.’

Hazel came up to him. There was another ant-hill nearby and he copied

Dandelion, sitting upright on his hind legs and looking about him. He realized
now that they were almost on level ground. Indeed, the slope was no more than
gentle for some way back along the line by which they had come; but he had
been preoccupied with the idea of danger in the open and had not noticed the
change. They were on top of the down. Perched above the grass, they could see
far in every direction. Their surroundings were empty. If anything had been
moving they would have seen it immediately: and where the turf ended, the sky
began. A man, a fox – even a rabbit – coming over the down would be
conspicuous. Fiver had been right. Up here, they would have clear warning of
any approach.

self-heal. The solitude seemed like a release and a blessing. The height, the sky
and the distance went to their heads and they skipped in the sunset.’ O Frith on
the hills!’ cried Dandelion. ‘He must have made it for us!’

till we get him up here! Fiver-rah!’

‘Where’s Hawkbit?’ said Dandelion suddenly.
Although the light was still clear, Hawkbit was not to be seen anywhere on the

upland. After staring about for some time, they ran across to a little mound some
way away and looked again. But they saw nothing except a field-mouse, which
came out of its hole and began furricking in a patch of seeded grasses.

‘He must have gone down,’ said Dandelion.
‘Well, whether he has or not,’ said Hazel, ‘we can’t go on looking for him.

The others are waiting and they may be in danger. We must go down ourselves.’

Fiver’s hills without losing anyone. He’s such a duffer; we shouldn’t have

brought him up. But how could anything have got hold of him here, without our
seeing?’

him? I hope he won’t bite him again. We’d better get on.’

‘Are you going to bring them up tonight?’ asked Dandelion.
‘I don’t know,’ said Hazel. ‘It’s a problem. Where’s the shelter to be found?’
They made for the steep edge. The light was beginning to fail. They picked

their direction by a clump of stunted trees which they had passed on their way
up. These formed a kind of dry oasis – a little feature common on the downs.
Half a dozen thorns and two or three elders grew together above and below a
bank. Between them the ground was bare and the naked chalk showed a pallid,
dirty white under the cream-coloured elder bloom. As they approached, they
suddenly saw Hawkbit sitting among the thorn trunks, cleaning his face with his
paws.

‘We’ve been looking for you,’ said Hazel.“Where in the world have you

been?’

I thought they might be some good to us.’

on the ground, between the thick, gnarled roots. They could see no foot-marks
and no droppings. The holes were clearly deserted.

‘Have you been down?’ asked Hazel, sniffing round.
‘Yes, I have,’ said Hawkbit. ‘Three of them, anyway. They’ re shallow and

rather rough, but there’s no smell of death or disease and they’ re perfectly
sound. I thought they might do for us – just for the moment, anyway.’

In the twilight a swift flew screaming overhead and Hazel turned to

Dandelion.

‘News! News!’ he said. ‘Go and get them up here.’
Thus it fell to one of the rank-and-file to make a lucky find that brought them

at last to the downs: and probably saved a life or two; for they could hardly have
spent the night in the open, either on or under the hill, without being attacked by
some enemy or other.

19. Fear in the Dark

Thomas Hardy Who’s in the Next Room?

The short June darkness slipped by in a few hours. The light returned early to

the high down but the rabbits did not stir. Well after dawn they were still
sleeping, undisturbed in a silence deeper than they had ever known. Nowadays,
among fields and woods, the noise level by day is high – too high for some kinds
of animal to tolerate. Few places are far from human noise – cars, buses, motor-
cycles, tractors, lorries. The sound of a housing estate in the morning is audible a
long way off. People who record bird-song generally do it very early – before six
o’clock – if they can. Soon after that, the invasion of distant noise in most
woodland becomes too constant and too loud. During the last fifty years the
silence of much of the country has been destroyed. But here, on Watership
Down, there floated up only faint traces of the daylight noise below.

The sun was well up, though not yet as high as the down, when Hazel woke.

With him in the burrow were Buckthorn, Fiver and Pipkin. He was nearest to the
mouth of the hole and did not wake them as he slipped up the run. Outside, he
stopped to pass hraka and then hopped through the thorn patch to the open grass.
Below, the country was covered with early morning mist which was beginning to
clear. Here and there, far off, were the shapes of trees and roofs, from which
streamers of mist trailed down like broken waves pouring from rocks. The sky
was cloudless and deep blue, darkening to mauve along the whole rim of the
horizon. The wind had dropped and the spiders had already gone well down into
the grass. It was going to be a hot day.

Hazel rambled about in the usual way of a rabbit feeding – five or six slow,

rocking hops through the grass; a pause to look round, sitting up with ears erect;
then busy nibbling for a short time, followed by another move of a few yards.
For the first time for many days he felt relaxed and safe. He began to wonder
whether they had much to learn about their new home.

‘Fiver was right,’ he thought. ‘This is the place for us. But we shall need to get

used to it and the fewer mistakes we make the better. I wonder what became of
the rabbits who made these holes? Did they stop running or did they just move
away? If we could only find them they could tell us a lot.’

from himself. It was Blackberry. He, too, passed hraka, scratched himself and
then hopped into the full sunlight and combed his ears. As he began to feed
Hazel came up and fell in with him, nibbling among the grass tussocks and
wandering on wherever his friend pleased. They came to a patch of milkwort – a
blue as deep as that of the sky – with long stems creeping through the grass and
each minute flower spreading its two upper petals like wings. Blackberry sniffed
at it, but the leaves were tough and unappetizing.

‘What is this stuff, do you know?’ he asked.
‘No, I don’t,’ said Hazel, ‘I’ve never seen it before.’
‘There’s a lot we don’t know,’ said Blackberry. ‘About this place, I mean. The

plants are new, the smells are new. We’re going to need some new ideas
ourselves.’

you tell me.’

‘But you go in front and take the risks first,’ answered Blackberry. ‘We’ve all

seen that. And now our journey’s over, isn’t it? This place is as safe as Fiver said
it would be. Nothing can get near us without our knowing: that is, as long as we
can smell and see and hear.’

‘We can all do that.’

‘Not when we’re asleep: and we can’t see in the dark.’
‘It’s bound to be dark at night,’ said Hazel, ‘and rabbits have got to sleep.’
‘In the open?’
‘Well, we can go on using these holes if we want to, but I expect a good many

will lie out. After all, you can’t expect a bunch of bucks to dig. They might make
a scrape or two – like that day after we came over the heather – but they won’t
do more than that.’

‘That’s what I’ve been thinking about,’ said Blackberry. ‘Those rabbits we left

– Cowslip and the rest – a lot of the things they did weren’t natural to rabbits –
pushing stones into the earth and carrying food underground and Frith knows
what.’

‘The Threarah’s lettuce was carried underground, if it comes to that.’
‘Exactly. Don’t you see, they’d altered what rabbits do naturally because they

thought they could do better? And if they altered their ways, so can we if we
like. You say buck rabbits don’t dig. Nor they do. But they could, if they wanted
to. Suppose we had deep, comfortable burrows to sleep in? To be out of bad
weather and underground at night? Then we would be safe. And there’s nothing
to stop us having them, except that buck rabbits won’t dig. Not can’t – won’t.’

‘What’s your idea, then?’ asked Hazel, half-interested and half-reluctant. ‘Do

you want us to try to turn these holes into a regular warren?’

little way down and you come to this hard, white stuff that no one can dig. They
must be bitterly cold in winter. But there’s a wood just over the top of the hill. I
got a glimpse of it last night when we came. Suppose we go up higher now, just
you and I, and have a look at it?’

south-east, on the far side of a grassy track that ran along the ridge.

up the ground pretty deep. We could dig holes and be as well off as ever we were
in the old warren. But if Bigwig and the others won’t dig or say they can’t –
well, it’s bare and bleak here. That’s why it’s lonely and safe, of course; but
when bad weather comes we shall be driven off the hills for sure.’

‘It never entered my head to try to make a lot of bucks dig regular holes,’ said

Hazel doubtfully, as they returned down the slope. ‘Rabbit kittens need holes, of
course; but do we?’

said Blackberry. ‘We’re used to holes and not one of us has ever helped to dig
one. And if ever there was a new one, who dug it? A doe. I’m quite sure, myself,
that if we don’t change our natural ways we shan’t be able to stay here very long.

Somewhere else, perhaps; but not here.’

‘It’ll mean a lot of work.’
‘Look, there’s Bigwig come up now and some of the others with him. Why

not put it to them and see what they say?’

During silflay, however, Hazel mentioned Blackberry’s idea to no one but

Fiver. Later on, when most of the rabbits had finished feeding and were either
playing in the grass or lying in the sunshine, he suggested that they might go
across to the hanger – ‘just to see what sort of a wood it is’. Bigwig and Silver
agreed at once and in the end no one stayed behind.

It was different from the meadow copses they had left: a narrow belt of trees,

four or five hundred yards long but barely fifty wide; a kind of wind-break
common on the downs. It consisted almost entirely of well-grown beeches. The
great, smooth trunks stood motionless in their green shade, the branches
spreading flat, one above another in crisp, light-dappled tiers. Between the trees
the ground was open and offered hardly any cover. The rabbits were perplexed.
They could not make out why the wood was so light and still and why they could
see so far between the trees. The continuous, gentle rustling of the beech leaves
was unlike the sounds to be heard in a copse of nut-bushes, oak and silver birch.

north-east corner. Here there was a bank from which they looked out over the
empty stretches of grass beyond. Fiver, absurdly small beside the hulking
Bigwig, turned to Hazel with an air of happy confidence.

‘I’m sure Blackberry’s right, Hazel,’ he said. ‘We ought to do our best to make

some holes here. I’m ready to try, anyway.’

of the bank and soon two or three more began scratching at the light soil. The
digging was easy and although they often broke off to feed or merely to sit in the
sun, before midday Hazel was out of sight and tunnelling between the tree-roots.

cover from the sky: and kestrels, they soon realized, were common in this
solitude. Although kestrels seldom prey on anything bigger than a rat, they will
sometimes attack young rabbits. No doubt this is why most grown rabbits will
not remain under a hovering kestrel. Before long, Acorn spotted one as it flew up
from the south. He stamped and bolted into the trees, followed by the other
rabbits who were in the open. They had not long come out and resumed digging
when they saw another – or perhaps the same one – hovering some way off, high
over the very fields that they had crossed the previous morning. Hazel placed
Buckthorn as a sentry while the day’s haphazard work went on, and twice more
during the afternoon the alarm was given. In the early evening they were

disturbed by a horseman cantering along the ridge-track that passed the north
end of the wood. Otherwise they saw nothing larger than a pigeon all day.

After the horseman had turned south near the summit of Watership and

disappeared in the distance, Hazel returned to the edge of the wood and looked
out northwards towards the bright, still fields and the dim pylon-line stalking
away into the distance north of Kingsclere. The air was cooler and the sun was
beginning once more to reach the north escarpment.

down to the bottom of the hill and find some really good grass. This stuff’s all
right in its way but it’s rather thin and dry. Does anyone feel like coming with
me?’

Bigwig, Dandelion and Speedwell were ready, but the others preferred to

graze their way back to the thorn-trees and go underground with the sun. Bigwig
and Hazel picked the line that offered most cover and, with the others following,
set out on the four or five hundred yards to the foot of the hill. They met no
trouble and were soon feeding in the grass at the edge of the wheat-field, the
very picture of rabbits in an evening landscape. Hazel, tired though he was, did
not forget to look for somewhere to bolt if there should be an alarm. He was
lucky enough to come upon a short length of old, overgrown ditch, partly fallen
in and so heavily overhung with cow-parsley and nettles that it was almost as
sheltered as a tunnel; and all four of them made sure that they could reach it
quickly from the open.

‘That’ll be good enough at a pinch,’ said Bigwig, munching clover and

sniffing at the fallen bloom from a wayfaring tree. ‘My goodness, we’ve learnt a
few things since we left the old warren, haven’t we? More than we’d have learnt
in a life-time back there. And digging! It’ll be flying next, I suppose. Have you
noticed that this soil’s quite different from the soil in the old wan en? It smells
differently and it slides and falls quite differently too.’

‘That reminds me,’ said Hazel. ‘I meant to ask you. There was one thing at

that terrible warren of Cowslip’s that I admired very much – the great burrow.
I’d like to copy it. It’s a wonderful idea to have a place underground where
everybody can be together – talk and tell stories and so on. What do you think?
Could it be done?’

roof starts falling in. So if you want a place like that you’ll need something to
hold the roof up. What did Cowslip have?’

‘Tree roots.’
‘Well, there are those where we’re digging. But are they the right sort?’
‘We’d better get Strawberry to tell us what he knows about the great burrow;

but it may not be much. I’m sure he wasn’t alive when it was dug.’

‘He may not be dead when it falls in either. That warren’s tharn as an owl in

daylight. He was wise to leave when he did.’

Twilight had fallen over the cornfield, for although long, red rays still lit the

upper down, the sun had set below. The uneven shadow of the hedge had faded
and disappeared. There was a cool smell of moisture and approaching darkness.
A cockchafer droned past. The grasshoppers had fallen silent.

‘Owls’ll be out,’ said Bigwig. ‘Let’s go up again.’
At this moment, from out in the darkening field, there came the sound of a

stamp on the ground. It was followed by another, closer to them, and they caught
a glimpse of a white tail. They both immediately ran to the ditch. Now that they
had to use it in earnest, they found it even narrower than they had thought. There
was just room to turn round at the far end and as they did so Speedwell and
Dandelion tumbled in behind them.

‘What is it?’ asked Hazel. ‘What did you hear?’
‘There’s something coming up the line of the hedge,’ replied Speedwell. ‘An

animal. Making a lot of noise, too.’

‘Did you see it?’
‘No, and I couldn’t smell it either. It’s down-wind. But I heard it plainly

enough.’

anyway – moving clumsily but trying to keep concealed, or so it seemed to me.’

‘Homba?’
‘No, that we should have smelt,’ said Bigwig, ‘wind or no wind. From what

you say, it sounds like a cat. I hope it’s not a stoat. Hoi, hoi, u embleer hrair!
What a nuisance! We’d better sit tight for a bit. But get ready to bolt if it spots
us.’

They waited. Soon it grew dark. Only the faintest light came through the

tangled summer growth above them. The far end of the ditch was so much
overgrown that they could not see out of it, but the place where they had come in
showed as a patch of sky – an arc of very dark blue. As the time passed, a star
crept out from among the overhanging grasses. It seemed to pulsate in a rhythm
as faint and uneven as that of the wind. At length Hazel turned his eyes away
from watching it.

‘Well, we can snatch some sleep here,’ he said. ‘The night’s not cold.

Whatever it was you heard, we’d better not risk going out.’

‘Listen,’ said Dandelion. ‘What’s that?’
For a moment Hazel could hear nothing. Then he caught a distant but clear

sound – a kind of wailing or crying, wavering and intermittent. Although it did

not sound like any sort of hunting call, it was so unnatural that it filled him with
fear. As he listened, it ceased.

hackling between his ears.

‘A cat?’ said Speedwell, wide-eyed.
‘That’s no cat!’ said Bigwig, his lips drawn back in a stiffened, unnatural

grimace. ‘That’s no cat! Don’t you know what it is? Your mother –’ He broke
off. Then he said, very low, ‘Your mother told you, didn’t she?’

‘No!’ cried Dandelion, ‘No! It’s some bird – some rat – wounded –’
Bigwig stood up. His back was arched and his head nodded on his stiffened

neck.

‘The Black Rabbit of Inlé,’ he whispered. ‘What else – in a place like this?’
‘Don’t talk like that!’ said Hazel. He could feel himself trembling, and braced

his legs against the sides of the narrow cut.

What they heard was the voice of a rabbit, but changed out of all recognition. It
might have come from the cold spaces of the dark sky outside, so unearthly and
desolate was the sound. At first there was only a wailing. Then, distinct and
beyond mistaking, they heard – they all heard – words.

‘Zorn! Zorn!’* cried the dreadful, squealing voice. ‘All dead! 0 zorn!’
Dandelion whimpered. Bigwig was scuffling into the ground.
‘Be quiet!’ said Hazel, ‘and stop kicking that earth over me! I want to listen.’
At that moment, quite distinctly, the voice cried, ‘Thlayli! O Thlayli!’
At this, all four rabbits felt the trance of utter panic. They grew rigid. Then

Bigwig, his eyes set in a fixed, glazed stare, began to jerk his way up the ditch
towards the opening. ‘You have to go,’ he muttered, so thickly that Hazel could
hardly catch the words. ‘You have to go when he calls you.’

Hazel felt so much frightened that he could no longer collect his wits. As on

the river bank, his surroundings became unreal and dream-like. Who – or what –
was calling Bigwig by name? How could any living creature in this place know
his name? Only one idea remained to him – Bigwig must be prevented from
going out, for he was helpless. He scrambled past him, pressing him against the
side of the ditch.

‘Stay where you are,’ he said, panting. ‘Whatever sort of rabbit it is, I’m going

to see for myself.’ Then, his legs almost giving way beneath him, he pulled
himself out into the open.

For a few moments he could see little or nothing; but the smells of dew and

elder-bloom were unchanged and his nose brushed against cool grass-blades. He
sat up and looked about him. There was no creature near-by.

‘Who’s there?’ he said.
There was silence, and he was about to speak again when the voice replied,

‘Zorn! O zorn!’

sound and in a few moments made out, under a clump of hemlock, the hunched
shape of a rabbit. He approached it and said, ‘Who are you?’ but there was no
reply. As he hesitated, he heard a movement behind him.

‘I’m here, Hazel,’ said Dandelion, in a kind of choking gasp.
Together they went closer. The figure did not move as they came up. In the

faint starlight they both saw a rabbit as real as themselves: a rabbit in the last
stages of exhaustion, its back legs trailing behind its flattened rump as though
paralysed: a rabbit that stared, white-eyed, from one side to the other, seeing
nothing, yet finding no respite from its fear, and then fell to licking wretchedly at
one ripped and bloody ear that drooped across its face: a rabbit that suddenly
cried and wailed as though entreating the Thousand to come from every quarter
to rid it of a misery too terrible to be borne.

It was Captain Holly of the Sandleford Owsla.

20. A Honeycomb and a Mouse

The Epic of Gilgamesh

In the first moments after they had recognized the poor creature under the

hemlock, Hazel and Dandelion felt completely stupefied, as though they had
come upon a squirrel underground or a stream that flowed uphill. They could not
trust their senses. The voice in the dark had proved not to be supernatural, but
the reality was frightening enough. How could Captain Holly be here, at the foot
of the down? And what could have reduced him – of all rabbits – to this state?

Hazel pulled himself together. Whatever the explanation might be, the

immediate need was to take first things first. They were in open country, at night,
away from any refuge but an overgrown ditch, with a rabbit who smelt of blood,
was crying uncontrollably and looked as though he could not move. There might
very well be a stoat on his trail at this moment. If they were going to help him
they had better be quick.

‘Go and tell Bigwig who it is,’ he said to Dandelion, ‘and come back with

him. Send Speedwell up the hill to the others and tell him to make it clear that no
one is to come down. They couldn’t help and it would only add to the risk.’

Dandelion had no sooner gone than Hazel became aware that something else

was moving in the hedge. But he had no time to wonder what it might be, for

almost immediately another rabbit appeared and limped to where Holly was
lying.

and my master’s ill. Can we get underground here?’

Hazel recognized him as one of the rabbits who had come to arrest Bigwig,

but he did not know his name.

asked.

the captain to move. I thought you were elil and there was no point in staying to
be killed. I don’t think I could fight a field-mouse.’

and Bigwig came out of the darkness. Bigwig stared at Holly for a moment and
then crouched before him and touched noses.

‘Holly, this is Thlayli,’ he said. ‘You were calling me.’
Holly did not answer, but only stared fixedly back at him. Bigwig looked up.

‘Who’s that who came with him?’ he said. ‘Oh, it’s you, Bluebell. How many
more of you?’

‘No more,’ said Bluebell. He was about to go on when Holly spoke.
‘Thlayli,’ he said. ‘So we have found you.’
He sat up with difficulty and looked round at them.
‘You’re Hazel, aren’t you?’ he asked. ‘And that’s – oh, I should know, but I’m

in very poor shape, I’m afraid.’

can’t stay here. We’re in danger. Can you come with us to our holes?’

‘Captain,’ said Bluebell, ‘do you know what the first blade of grass said to the

second blade of grass?’

Hazel looked at him sharply, but Holly replied, ‘Well?’
‘It said, “Look, there’s a rabbit! We’re in danger!” ’
‘This is no time –’ began Hazel.
‘Don’t silence him,’ said Holly. ‘We wouldn’t be here at all without his blue-

tit’s chatter. Yes, I can go now. Is it far?’

‘Not too far,’ said Hazel, thinking it all too likely that Holly would never get

there.

It took a long time to climb the hill. Hazel made them separate, himself

remaining with Holly and Bluebell, while Bigwig and Dandelion went out to
either side. Holly was forced to stop several times and Hazel, full of fear, had
hard work to suppress his impatience. Only when the moon began to rise – the
edge of its great disc growing brighter and brighter on the skyline below and

behind them – did he at last beg Holly to hurry. As he spoke he saw, in the white
light, Pipkin coming down to meet them.

down.’

‘It isn’t Speedwell’s fault,’ said Pipkin. ‘You stood by me at the river, so I

thought I’d come and look for you, Hazel. Anyway, the holes are just here. Is it
really Captain Holly you’ve found?’

Bigwig and Dandelion approached.
‘I’ll tell you what,’ said Bigwig. ‘These two will need to rest for a good long

time. Suppose Pipkin here and Dandelion take them to an empty burrow and stay
with them as long as they want? The rest of us had better keep away until they
feel better.’

‘Yes, that’s best,’ said Hazel. ‘I’ll go up with you now.’
They ran the short distance to the thorn-trees. All the other rabbits were above

ground, waiting and whispering together.

‘Shut up,’ said Bigwig, before anyone had asked a question. ‘Yes, it is Holly,

and Bluebell is with him – no one else. They’re in a bad way and they’re not to
be troubled. We’ll leave this hole empty for them. Now I’m going underground
myself and so will you if you’ve got any sense.’

that ditch down there instead of me, didn’t you, Hazel? I shan’t forget that.’

Hazel remembered Buckthorn’s leg and took him down with him. Speedwell

and Silver followed them.

Holly would never leave the Threarah.’

‘I don’t know,’ replied Hazel, ‘and neither does anyone else yet. We’ll have to

wait until tomorrow. Holly may stop running but I don’t think Bluebell will.
Now let me alone to do this leg of Buckthorn’s.’

The wound was a great deal better and soon Hazel fell asleep.
The next day was as hot and cloudless as the last. Neither Pipkin nor

Dandelion were at morning silflay; and Hazel relentlessly took the others up to
the beech hanger to go on with the digging. He questioned Strawberry about the
great burrow and learned that its ceiling, as well as being vaulted with a tangle of
fibres, was strengthened by roots going vertically down into the floor. He
remarked that he had not noticed these.

of the load. If it weren’t for those roots the ceiling would fall after heavy rain.
On stormy nights you could sense the extra weight in the earth above, but there
was no danger.’

Hazel and Bigwig went underground with him. The beginnings of the new

warren had been hollowed out among the roots of one of the beech trees. It was
still no more than a small, irregular cave with one entrance. They set to work to
enlarge it, digging between the roots and tunnelling upwards to make a second
run that would emerge inside the wood. After a time Strawberry stopped digging
and began moving about between the roots, sniffing, biting and scuffling in the
soil with his front paws. Hazel supposed that he was tired and pretending to be
busy while he had a rest, but at length he came back to them and said that he had
some suggestions.

‘It’s this way,’ he explained. ‘There isn’t a big spread of fine roots above here.

That was a lucky chance in the great burrow and I don’t think we can expect to
find it again. But all the same, we can do pretty well with what we’ve got.’

‘And what have we got?’ asked Blackberry, who had come down the run

while he was talking.

were in the great burrow. The best thing will be to dig round them and leave
them. They shouldn’t be gnawed through and taken out. We shall need them if
we’re going to have a hall of any size.’

‘Then our hall will be full of these thick, vertical roots?’ asked Hazel. He felt

disappointed.

worse for that. We can go in and out among them and they won’t hinder anyone
who’s talking or telling a story. They’ll make the place warmer and they’ll help
to conduct sound from above, which might be useful some time or other.’

The excavation of the hall (which came to be known among them as the

Honeycomb) turned out to be something of a triumph for Strawberry. Hazel
contented himself with organizing the diggers and left it to Strawberry to say
what was actually to be done. The work went on in shifts and the rabbits took it
in turns to feed, play and lie in the sun above ground. Throughout the day the
solitude remained unbroken by noise, men, tractors or even cattle, and they
began to feel still more deeply what they owed to Fiver’s insight. By the late
afternoon the big burrow was beginning to take shape. At the north end, the
beech roots formed a kind of irregular colonnade. This gave way to a more open,
central space: and beyond, where there were no supporting roots, Strawberry left
blocks of the earth untouched, so that the south end consisted of three or four
separate bays. These narrowed into low-roofed runs that led away into sleeping
burrows.

was going to turn out, was sitting with Silver in the mouth of the run, when

suddenly there was a stamping of ‘Hawk! Hawk!’ and a dash for cover by the
rabbits outside. Hazel, safe where he was, remained looking out past the shadow
of the wood to the open, sunlit grass beyond. The kestrel sailed into view and
took up station, the black-edged flange of its tail bent down and its pointed
wings beating rapidly as it searched the down below.

recommence its poised fluttering. ‘Surely it’s too small?’

there and start feeding?’

‘I’d like to try standing up to some of these elil,’ said Bigwig, who had come

up the run behind them. ‘We’re afraid of too many. But a bird from the air would
be awkward, especially if it came fast It might get the better of even a big rabbit
if it took him by surprise.’

‘See the mouse?’ said Silver suddenly.’ There, look. Poor little beast.’
They could all see the field-mouse, which was exposed in a patch of smooth

grass. It had evidently strayed too far from its hole and now could not tell what
to do. The kestrel’s shadow had not passed over it, but the rabbits’ sudden
disappearance had made it uneasy and it was pressed to the ground, looking
uncertainly this way and that. The kestrel had not yet seen it, but could hardly
fail to do so as soon as it moved.

‘Any moment now,’ said Bigwig callously.
On an impulse, Hazel hopped down the bank and went a little way into the

open grass. Mice do not speak Lapine, but there is a very simple, limited lingua
franca of the hedgerow and woodland. Hazel used it now.

‘Run,’ he said. ‘Here; quick.’
The mouse looked at him but did not move. Hazel spoke again and the mouse

began suddenly to run towards him as the kestrel turned and slid sideways and
downwards. Hazel hastened back to the hole. Looking out, he saw the mouse
following him. When it had almost reached the foot of the bank it scuttered over
a fallen twig with two or three green leaves. The twig turned, one of the leaves
caught the sunlight slanting through the trees and Hazel saw it flash for an
instant. Immediately the kestrel came lower in an oblique glide, closed its wings
and dropped.

Before Hazel could spring back from the mouth of the hole, the mouse had

dashed between his front paws and was pressed to the ground between his back
legs. At the same moment the kestrel, all beak and talons, hit the loose earth
immediately outside like a missile thrown from the tree above. It scuffled
savagely and for an instant the three rabbits saw its round, dark eyes looking
straight down the run. Then it was gone. The speed and force of the pounce, not

a length away, were terrifying and Hazel leapt backwards, knocking Silver off
his balance. They picked themselves up in silence.

‘Let me know when. I’ll come and watch.’

that? Are you going in for protecting every mole and shrew that can’t get
underground?’

level with their heads and outlined against the light. Hazel could see it watching
him.

‘Perhaps hawk not gone,’ he said. ‘You stay now. Go later.’
Bigwig was about to speak again when Dandelion appeared in the mouth of

the hole. He looked at the mouse, pushed it gently aside and came down the run.

much better this evening, but he had a very bad night and so did we. Every time
he seemed to be going to sleep, he kept starting up and crying. I thought he was
going out of his mind. Pipkin kept talking to him – he was first-rate – and he
seems to set a lot of store by Bluebell. Bluebell kept on making jokes. He was
worn out before the morning and so were the lot of us – we’ve been sleeping all
day. Holly’s been more or less himself since he woke up this afternoon, and he’s
been up to silflay. He asked where you and the others would be tonight and as I
didn’t know I came to ask.’

‘Is he fit to talk to us, then?’ asked Bigwig.
‘I think so. It would be the best thing for him, if I’m any judge: and if he was

with all of us together he’d be less likely to have another bad night.’

‘Well, where are we going to sleep?’ said Silver.
Hazel considered. The Honeycomb was still rough-dug and half-finished, but

it would probably be as comfortable as the holes under the thorn-trees. Besides,
if it proved otherwise, they would have all the more inducement to improve it.
To know that they were actually making use of their day’s hard work would
please everybody and they were likely to prefer this to a third night in the chalk
holes.

‘I should think here,’ he said. ‘But we’ll see how the others feel.’
‘What’s this mouse doing in here?’ asked Dandelion.
Hazel explained. Dandelion was as puzzled as Bigwig had been.
‘Well, I’ll admit I hadn’t any particular idea when I went out to help it,’ said

Hazel. ‘I have now, though, and I’ll explain later what it is. But first of all,
Bigwig and I ought to go and talk to Holly. And Dandelion, you go and tell the
rest what you told me, will you, and see what they want to do tonight?’

Dandelion had first looked over the down. Holly was sniffing at a purple orchis.
The head of mauve blooms rocked gently on its stem as he pushed his nose
against it.

‘Don’t frighten it, master,’ said Bluebell. ‘It might fly away. After all, it’s got a

lot of spots to choose from. Look at them all over the leaves.’

‘Oh, get along with you, Bluebell,’ answered Holly good-humouredly. ‘We

need to learn about the ground here. Half the plants are strange to me. This isn’t
one to eat, but at least there’s plenty of burnet and that’s always good.’ A fly
settled on his wounded ear and he winced and shook his head.

say that he hoped he felt well enough to join the others, but Holly soon
interrupted him with questions.

‘Are there many of you?’ he asked.
‘Hrair,’ said Bigwig.
‘All that left the warren with you?’
‘Every one,’ replied Hazel proudly.
‘No one hurt?’
‘Oh, several have been hurt, one way and another.’
‘Never a dull moment, really,’ said Bigwig.
‘Who’s this coming? I don’t know him.’
Strawberry came running down from the hanger and as he joined them began

to make the same curious, dancing gesture of head and fore-paws which they had
first seen in the rainy meadow before they entered the great burrow. He checked
himself in some confusion and, to forestall Bigwig’s rebuke, spoke to Hazel at
once.

to stay in the new warren tonight: and they’re all hoping that Captain Holly will
feel able to tell them what’s happened and how he came here.’

‘Well, naturally, we all want to know,’ said Hazel to Holly. ‘This is

Strawberry. He joined us on our journey and we’ve been glad to have him. But
do you think you can manage it?’

‘I can manage it,’ said Holly. ‘But I must warn you that it will strike the frost

into the heart of every rabbit that hears it.’

and after a few moments all six rabbits made their way up the slope in silence.
When they reached the corner of the wood, they found the others feeding or
basking in the evening sun on the north side of the beech trees. After a glance
round among them Holly went up to Silver, who was feeding with Fiver in a

patch of yellow trefoil.

‘I’m glad to see you here, Silver,’ he said. ‘I hear you’ve had a rough time.’
‘It hasn’t been easy,’ answered Silver. ‘Hazel’s done wonders and we owe a

lot to Fiver here as well.’

‘I’ve heard of you,’ said Holly, turning to Fiver. ‘You’re the rabbit who saw it

all coming. You talked to the Threarah, didn’t you?’

‘He talked to me,’ said Fiver.
‘If only he’d listened to you! Well, it can’t be changed now, till acorns grow

on thistles. Silver, there’s something I want to say and I can say it more easily to
you than to Hazel or Bigwig. I’m not out to make any trouble here – trouble for
Hazel, I mean. He’s your Chief Rabbit now, that’s plain. I hardly know him, but
he must be good or you’d all be dead; and this is no time to be squabbling. If any
of the other rabbits are wondering whether I might want to alter things, will you
let them know that I shan’t?’

‘Yes, I will,’ said Silver.
Bigwig came up. ‘I know it’s not owl-time yet,’ he said, ‘but everyone’s so

eager to hear you, Holly, that they want to go underground at once. Will that suit
you?’

‘Underground?’ replied Holly. ‘But how can you all hear me underground? I

was expecting to talk here.’

‘Come and see,’ said Bigwig.
Holly and Bluebell were impressed by the Honeycomb.
‘This is something quite new,’ said Holly. ‘What keeps the roof up?’
‘It doesn’t need to be kept up,’ said Bluebell. ‘It’s right up the hill already.’
‘An idea we found on the way,’ said Bigwig.
‘Lying in a field,’ said Bluebell.’ It’s all right, master, I’ll be quiet while

you’re speaking.’

‘Yes, you must,’ said Holly. ‘Soon no one will want jokes.’
Almost all the rabbits had followed them down. The Honeycomb, though big

enough for everybody, was not so airy as the great burrow and on this June
evening it seemed somewhat close.

great burrow they used to open tunnels for the summer and close them for the
winter. We can dig another run on the evening side tomorrow and pick up the
breeze.’

Hazel was just going to ask Holly to begin when Speedwell came down the

eastern run. ‘Hazel,’ he said, ‘your – er – visitor – your mouse. He wants to
speak to you.’

‘Oh, I’d forgotten him,’ said Hazel. ‘Where is he?’

‘Up the run.’
Hazel went up. The mouse was waiting at the top.
‘You go now?’ said Hazel. ‘You think safe?’
‘Go now,’ said the mouse. ‘No wait owl. But a what I like a say. You ’elp a

mouse. One time a mouse ’elp a you. You want ’im, ’e come.’

brothers and sisters. I dare say the place’ll be crawling. Why don’t you ask them
to dig us a burrow or two, Hazel?’

Honeycomb and settled down near Holly, who had just begun to speak.

21. ‘For El-ahrairah to Cry’

Dostoevsky The Brothers Karamazov

W. H. Auden The Ascent of F.6

‘Nothing unusual happened the next day. There was a certain amount of talk

about Fiver and the rabbits who’d gone with him. Everyone knew that Fiver had
said that something bad was going to happen and all sorts of rumours started. A
lot of rabbits said there was nothing in it, but some thought that Fiver might have
foreseen men with guns and ferrets. That was the worst thing anyone could think
of – that or the white blindness.

‘Willow and I talked things over with the Threarah. “These rabbits,” he said,

“who claim to have the second sight – I’ve known one or two in my time. But
it’s not usually advisable to take much notice of them. For one thing, many are
just plain mischievous. A weak rabbit who can’t hope to get far by fighting
sometimes tries to make himself important by other means and prophecy is a
favourite. The curious thing is that when he turns out to be wrong, his friends
seldom seem to notice, as long as he puts on a good act and keeps talking. But
then again, you may get a rabbit who really has this odd power, for it does exist.
He foretells a flood perhaps, or ferrets and guns. All right; so a certain number of
rabbits will stop running. What’s the alternative? To evacuate a warren is a
tremendous business. Some refuse to go. The Chief Rabbit leaves with as many
as will come. His authority is likely to be put to the most severe test and if he
loses it he won’t get it back in a hurry. At the best, you’ve got a big bunch of
hlessil trailing round in the open, probably with does and kittens tacked on. Elil

appear in hordes. The remedy’s worse than the disease. Almost always, it’s
better for the warren as a whole if rabbits sit tight and do their best to dodge their
dangers underground”.’

‘Of course, I never sat down and thought,’ said Fiver. ‘It would take the

Threarah to think all that out. I simply had the screaming horrors. Great golden
Frith, I hope I never have them like that again! I shall never forget it – that and
the night I spent under the yew-tree. There’s terrible evil in the world.’

Frith moves them as he moves us. They live on the earth and they need food.
Men will never rest till they’ve spoiled the earth and destroyed the animals. But
I’d better go on with this tale of mine.

‘The next day in the afternoon, it began to rain.
(‘Those scrapes we dug in the bank,’ whispered Buckthorn to Dandelion.)
‘Everyone was underground, just chewing pellets or sleeping. I’d gone up for

a few minutes to pass hraka. I was on the edge of the wood, quite near the ditch,
when I saw some men come through the gate at the top. of the opposite slope, up
by that board thing. I don’t know how many there were – three or four, I
suppose. They had long, black legs and they were burning white sticks in their
mouths. They didn’t seem to be going anywhere. They began walking slowly
about in the rain, looking at the hedges and the brook. After a time they crossed
the brook and came clumping up towards the warren. Whenever they came to a
rabbit-hole, one of them would prod at it; and they kept talking all the time. I
remember the smell of the elder bloom in the rain and the smell of the white
sticks. Later, when they came closer, I slipped underground again. I could hear
them for some time, thumping about and talking. I kept thinking, “Well, they’ve
got no guns and no ferrets.” But somehow I didn’t like it.’

‘What did the Threarah say?’ asked Silver.
‘I’ve no idea. I didn’t ask him and neither did anyone else as far as I know. I

went to sleep and when I woke there was no sound up above. It was evening and
I decided to silflay. The rain had settled in, but I pottered round and fed for a
while all the same. I couldn’t see that anything was altered, except that here and
there the mouth of a hole had been poked in.

‘The next morning was clear and fine. Everyone was out for silflay as usual. I

remember Nightshade told the Threarah that he ought to be careful not to tire
himself now that he was getting on in years: and the Threarah said he’d show
him who was getting on in years and cuffed him and pushed him down the bank.
It was all quite good-humoured, you know, but he did it just to show Nightshade
that the Chief Rabbit was still a match for him. I was going out for lettuces that
morning and for some reason or other I’d decided to go alone.’

‘Three’s the usual number for a lettuce-party,’ said Bigwig.
‘Yes, I know three used to be the usual number, but there was some special

reason why I went alone that day. Oh yes, I remember – I wanted to see if there
were any early carrots – I thought they might just be ready – and I reckoned that
if I was going hunting about in a strange part of the garden I’d be better off by
myself. I was out most of the morning and it can’t have been long before ni-Frith
when I came back through the wood. I was coming down Silent Bank – I know
most rabbits preferred the Green Loose, but I nearly always went by Silent Bank.
I’d got into the open part of the wood, where it comes down towards the old
fence, when I noticed a hrududu in the lane at the top of the opposite slope. It
was standing at the gate by the board and a lot of men were getting out. There
was a boy with them and he had a gun. They took down some big, long things –
I don’t know how to describe them to you – they were made of the same sort of
stuff as a hrududu and they must have been heavy, because it took two men to
carry one of them. The men carried these things into the field and the few rabbits
who were above ground went down. I didn’t. I’d seen the gun and I thought they
were probably going to use ferrets and perhaps nets. So I stayed where I was and
watched. I thought, “As soon as I’m sure what they’re up to, I’ll go and warn the
Threarah.”

‘There was more talking and more white sticks. Men never hurry, do they?

Then one of them got a spade and began filling in the mouths of all the holes he
could find. Every hole he came to, he cut out the turf above and pushed it into
the hole. That puzzled me, because with ferrets they want to drive the rabbits
out. But I was expecting that they’d leave a few holes open and net them:
although that would have been a foolish way to ferret, because a rabbit that went
up a blocked run would be killed underground and then the man wouldn’t get his
ferret back very easily, you know.’

‘Don’t make it too grim, Holly,’ said Hazel, for Pipkin was shuddering at the

thought of the blocked run and the pursuing ferret.

to go away?’ No one moved and after a few moments he continued.

got words for all these men-things, but they were something like lengths of very
thick bramble. Each of the men took one and put it on one of the heavy things.
There was a kind of hissing noise and – and – well, I know you must find this
difficult to understand, but the air began to turn bad. For some reason I got a
strong scent of this stuff that came out of the bramble-things, even though I was
some way off: and I couldn’t see or think. I seemed to be falling. I tried to jump
up and run, but I didn’t know where I was and I found I’d run down to the edge

of the wood, towards the men. I stopped just in time. I was bewildered and I’d
lost all idea of warning the Threarah. After that I just sat where I was.

happened for a while. And then I saw Scabious – you remember Scabious? He
came out of a hole along the hedge – one they hadn’t noticed. I could see at once
that he’d smelt this stuff. He didn’t know what he was doing. The men didn’t see
him for a few moments and then one of them stuck out his arm to show where he
was and the boy shot him. He didn’t kill him – Scabious began to scream – and
one of the men went over and picked him up and hit him. I really believe he may
not have suffered very much, because the bad air had turned him silly: but I wish
I hadn’t seen it. After that, the man stopped up the hole that Scabious had come
out of.

burrows underground. I can imagine what it must have been like –’

– ‘You can’t,’ said Bluebell. Holly stopped and after a pause Bluebell went on.
‘I heard the commotion beginning before I smelt the stuff myself. The does

seemed to get it first and some of them began trying to get out. But the ones who
had litters wouldn’t leave the kittens and they were attacking any rabbit who
came near them. They wanted to fight – to protect the kittens, you know. Very
soon the runs were crammed with rabbits clawing and clambering over each
other. They went up the runs they were accustomed to use and found them
blocked. Some managed to turn round, but they couldn’t get back because of the
rabbits coming up. And then the runs began to be blocked lower down with dead
rabbits and the live rabbits tore them to pieces.

‘I shall never know how I got away with what I did. It was a chance in a

thousand. I was in a burrow near one of the holes that the men were using. They
made a lot of noise putting the bramble thing in and I’ve got an idea it wasn’t
working properly. As soon as I picked up the smell of the stuff I jumped out of
the burrow, but I was still fairly clearheaded. I came up the run just as the men
were taking the bramble out again. They were all looking at it and talking and
they didn’t see me. I turned round, actually in the mouth of the hole, and went
down again.

in our lifetime – it was so very deep and it didn’t lead anywhere in particular. No
one knows even who made it. Frith must have guided me, for I went straight
down into the Slack Run and began creeping along it. I was actually digging at
times. It was all loose earth and fallen stones. There were all sorts of forgotten
shafts and drops that led in from above, and down those were coming the most
terrible sounds – cries for help, kittens squealing for their mothers, Owsla trying

to give orders, rabbits cursing and fighting each other. Once a rabbit came
tumbling down one of the shafts and his claws just scratched me, like a horse-
chestnut burr falling in autumn. It was Celandine and he was dead. I had to tear
at him before I could get over him – the place was so low and narrow – and then
I went on. I could smell the bad air, but I was so deep down that I must have
been beyond the worst of it.

‘Suddenly I found there was another rabbit with me. He was the only one I

met in the whole length of the Slack Run. It was Pimpernel and I could tell at
once that he was in a bad way. He was spluttering and gasping, but he was able
to keep going. He asked if I was all right, but all I said was, “Where do we get
out?” “I can show you that,” he said, “if you can help me along.” So I followed
him and every time he stopped – he kept forgetting where we were – I shoved
him hard. I even bit him once. I was terrified that he was going to die and block
the run. At last we began to come up and I could smell fresh air. We found we’d
got into one of those runs that led out into the wood.’

about the wood holes or they couldn’t be bothered to come and block them.
Almost every rabbit that came up in the field was shot, but I saw two get away.
One was Nose-in-the-Air, but I don’t remember who the other was. The noise
was very frightening and I would have run myself, but I kept waiting to see
whether the Threarah would come. After a while I began to realize that there
were a few other rabbits in the wood. Pine-needles was there, I remember, and
Butterbur and Ash. I got hold of all I could and told them to sit tight under cover.

holes and the boy put the bodies on a stick –’

Holly stopped and pressed his nose under Bigwig’s flank.
‘Well, never mind about that bit,’ said Hazel in a steady voice. ‘Tell us how

you came away.’

the lane. It wasn’t the one the men came in. It was very noisy and it was yellow
– as yellow as charlock: and in front there was a great silver, shining thing that it
held in its huge front paws. I don’t know how to describe it to you. It looked like
Inlé, but it was broad and not so bright. And this thing – how can I tell you? – it
tore the field to bits. It destroyed the field.’

He stopped again.
‘Captain,’ said Silver, ‘we all know you’ve seen things bad beyond telling.

But surely that’s not quite what you mean?’

pushed great masses of earth in front of it until the field was destroyed. The

whole place became like a cattle-wade in winter, and you could no longer tell
where any part of the field had been, between the wood and the brook. Earth and
roots and grass and bushes it pushed before it and – and other things as well,
from underground.

collecting other rabbits, but there were three who joined me all the same –
Bluebell here and Pimpernel and young Toadflax. Toadflax was the only
member of the Owsla I’d seen and I asked him about the Threarah, but he
couldn’t talk any kind of sense. I never found out what happened to the
Threarah. I hope he died quickly.

‘Pimpernel was light-headed – chattering nonsense – and Bluebell and I

weren’t much better. For some reason all I could think of was Bigwig. I
remembered how I’d gone to arrest him – to kill him, really – and I felt I had to
find him and tell him I’d been wrong: and this idea was all the sense I had left.
The four of us went wandering away and we must have gone almost in a half-
circle, because after a long time we came to the brook, below what had been our
field. We followed it down into a big wood; and that night, while we were still in
the wood, Toadflax died. He was clearheaded for a short time before and I
remember something he said. Bluebell had been saying that he knew the men
hated us for raiding their crops and gardens and Toadflax answered, “That
wasn’t why they destroyed the warren. It was just because we were in their way.
They killed us to suit themselves.” Soon after that he went to sleep and a little
later, when we were alarmed by some noise or other, we tried to wake him and
realized he was dead.

needn’t describe it because I know you were all there. It was morning by this
time. We thought you might be somewhere near and we began to go along the
bank, upstream, looking for you. It wasn’t long before we found the place where
you must have crossed. There were tracks – a great many – in the sand under a
steep bank, and hraka about three days old. The tracks didn’t go upstream or
downstream so I knew you must have gone over. I swam across and found more
tracks on the other side: so then the others came over too. The river was high. I
suppose you must have had it easier, before all the rain.

‘I didn’t like the fields on the other side of the river. There was a man with a

gun who kept walking everywhere. I took the other two on, across a road, and
soon we came to a bad place – all heather and soft, black earth. We had a hard
time there, but again I came upon hraka about three days old and no sign of
holes or rabbits, so I thought there was a chance that they were yours. Bluebell
was all right, but Pimpernel was feverish and I was afraid he was going to die

too.

‘Then we had a bit of luck – or so we thought at the time. That night we fell in

with a hlessi on the edge of the heather – an old, tough rabbit with his nose all
scratched and scarred – and he told us that there was a warren not far off and
showed us which way to go. We came to woods and fields again, but we were so
much exhausted that we couldn’t start looking for the warren. We crept into a
ditch and I hadn’t the heart to tell one of the others to keep awake. I tried to keep
awake myself, but I couldn’t.’

‘When was this?’ asked Hazel.
‘The day before yesterday (said Holly), early in the morning. When I woke it

was still some time before ni-Frith. Everything was quiet and all I could smell
was rabbit, but I felt at once that something was wrong. I woke Bluebell and I
was just going to wake Pimpernel when I realized that there was a whole bunch
of rabbits all round us. They were great, big fellows and they had a very odd
smell. It was like – well, like –’

‘We know what it was like,’ said Fiver.
‘I thought you probably did. Then one of them said, “My name’s Cowslip.

Who are you and what are you doing here?” I didn’t like the way he spoke, but I
couldn’t see that they had any reason to wish us harm, so I told him that we’d
had a bad time and come a long way and that we were looking for some rabbits
from our warren – Hazel, Fiver and Bigwig. As soon as I said those names this
rabbit turned to the others and cried, “I knew it! Tear them to pieces!” And they
all set on us. One of them got me by the ear and ripped it up before Bluebell
could pull him off. We were fighting the lot of them. I was so much taken by
surprise that I couldn’t do a great deal at first. But the funny thing was that
although they were so big and yelling for our blood, they couldn’t fight at all:
they obviously didn’t know the first thing about fighting. Bluebell knocked
down a couple twice his size and although my ear was pouring with blood I was
never really in danger. All the same they were too many for us, and we had to
run. Bluebell and I had just got clear of the ditch when we realized that
Pimpernel was still there. He was ill, as I told you, and he didn’t wake in time.
So after all he’d been through, poor Pimpernel was killed by rabbits. What do
you think of that?’

‘I think it was a damned shame,’ said Strawberry, before anyone else could

speak.

Some of these rabbits were still chasing us and suddenly I thought. “Well, I’ll
have one of them anyway.” I didn’t care for the idea of doing nothing more than
just run away to save our skins – not after Pimpernel. I saw that this Cowslip

was ahead of the others and out on his own, so I let him catch me up and then I
suddenly turned and went for him. I had him down and I was just going to rip
him up when he squealed out, “I can tell you where your friends have gone.”
“Hurry up, then,” I said, with my back legs braced in his stomach. “They’ve
gone to the hills,” he panted. “The high hills you can see away over there. They
went yesterday morning.” I pretended not to believe him and acted as though I
was going to kill him. But he didn’t alter his story, so I scratched him and let him
go and away we came. It was clear weather and we could see the hills plainly
enough.

and chatter we’d have stopped running for certain.’

‘Hraka one end, jokes the other,’ said Bluebell. ‘I used to roll a joke along the

ground and we both followed it. That was how we kept going.’

terribly painful and all the time I kept thinking that Pimpernel’s death was my
fault. If I hadn’t gone to sleep he wouldn’t have died. Once we tried to sleep
again, but my dreams were more than I could bear. I was out of my mind, really.
I had only this one idea – to find Bigwig and tell him that he’d been right to
leave the warren.

caring – we came over the flat, open land at owl-time. I don’t know what I’d
been expecting. You know how you let yourself think that everything will be all
right if you can only get to a certain place or do a certain thing. But when you
get there you find it’s not that simple. I suppose I’d had some sort of foolish
notion that Bigwig would be waiting to meet us. We found the hills were
enormous – bigger than anything we’d ever seen. No woods, no cover, no
rabbits: and night setting in. And then everything seemed to go to pieces. I saw
Scabious, as plain as grass – and heard him crying too: and I saw the Threarah
and Toadflax and Pimpernel. I tried to talk to them. I was calling Bigwig, but I
didn’t really expect him to hear because I was sure he wasn’t there. I can
remember coming out from a hedge into the open and I know I was really
hoping that the elil would come and make an end of me. But when I came to my
senses, there was Bigwig. My first thought was that I must be dead, but then I
began to wonder whether he was real or not. Well, you know the rest. It’s a pity I
frightened you so much. But if I wasn’t the – the Black Rabbit, there’s hardly a
living creature that can ever have been closer to him than we have.’

After a silence, he added, ‘You can imagine what it means to Bluebell and me

to find ourselves underground, among friends. It wasn’t I who tried to arrest you,
Bigwig – that was another rabbit, long, long ago.’

22. The Story of the Trial of El-ahrairah

Congreve Love for Love

Even before Holly had finished his story, Hazel had fallen to sniffing at his

wounded ear. He had not previously been able to get a good look at it, but now
that he did, he realized that terror and fatigue had probably not been the principal
causes of Holly’s collapse. He was badly wounded – worse than Buckthorn. He

must have lost a lot of blood. His ear was in ribbons and there was any amount
of dirt in it. Hazel felt annoyed with Dandelion. As several of the rabbits began
to silflay, attracted by the mild June night and the full moon, he asked
Blackberry to wait. Silver, who had been about to leave by the other run,
returned and joined them.

Hazel to Holly. ‘It’s a pity they didn’t clean you up as well. That dirt’s
dangerous.’

‘Well, you see –’ began Bluebell, who had remained beside Holly.
‘Don’t make a joke,’ said Hazel. ‘You seem to think –’
‘I wasn’t going to,’ said Bluebell. ‘I was only going to say that I wanted to

clean the captain’s ear, but it’s too tender to be touched.’

‘He’s quite right,’ said Holly. ‘I’m afraid I made them neglect it, but do as you

think best, Hazel. I’m feeling much better now.’

Hazel began on the ear himself. The blood had caked black and the task

needed patience. After a while the long, jagged wounds bled again as they
slowly became clean. Silver took over. Holly, bearing it as well as he could,
growled and scuffled and Silver cast about for something to occupy his attention.

you’d explain it later. How about trying it out on us now?’

‘Well,’ said Hazel, ‘the idea is simply that in our situation, we can’t afford to

waste anything that might do us good. We’re in a strange place we don’t know
much about and we need friends. Now elil can’t do us good, obviously, but there
are many creatures that aren’t elil – birds, mice, yonil and so on. Rabbits don’t
usually have much to do with them, but their enemies are our enemies for the
most part. I think we ought to do all we can to make these creatures friendly. It
might turn out to be well worth the trouble.’

‘I can’t say I fancy the idea myself,’ said Silver, wiping Holly’s blood out of

his nose. ‘These small animals are more to be despised than relied upon, I
reckon. What good can they do us? They can’t dig for us, they can’t get food for
us, they can’t fight for us. They’d say they were friendly, no doubt, as long as we
were helping them; but that’s where it would stop. I heard that mouse tonight –
“You want ’im, ’e come.” You bet he will, as long as there’s any grub or warmth
going, but surely we’re not going to have the warren over-run with mice and –
and stag-beetles, are we?’

about looking for field-mice and inviting them to join us. They wouldn’t thank
us for that, anyway. But that mouse tonight – we saved his life –’

‘You saved his life,’ said Blackberry.

‘Well, his life was saved. He’ll remember that.’
‘But how’s it going to help us?’ asked Bluebell.
‘To start with, he can tell us what he knows about the place –’
– ‘What mice know. Not what rabbits need to know.’
‘Well, I admit a mouse might or might not come in handy,’ said Hazel. ‘But

I’m sure a bird would, if we could only do enough for it. We can’t fly, but some
of them know the country for a long way round. They know a lot about the
weather, too. All I’m saying is this. If anyone finds an animal or bird, that isn’t
an enemy, in need of help, for goodness’ sake don’t miss the opportunity. That
would be like leaving carrots to rot in the ground.’

‘What do you think?’ said Silver to Blackberry.
‘I think it’s a good idea, but real opportunities of the kind Hazel has in mind

aren’t likely to come very often.’

‘I think that’s about right,’ said Holly, wincing as Silver resumed licking. ‘The

idea’s all right as far as it goes, but it won’t come to a great deal in practice.’

‘I’m ready to give it a try,’ said Silver. ‘I reckon it’ll be worth it, just to see

Bigwig telling bed-time stories to a mole.’

‘El-ahrairah did it once,’ said Bluebell, ‘and it worked. Do you remember?’
‘No,’ said Hazel, ‘I don’t know that story. Let’s have it.’
‘Let’s silflay first,’ said Holly. ‘This ear’s had all I can stand for the time

being.’

‘Well, at least it’s clean now,’ said Hazel. ‘But I’m afraid it’ll never be as good

as the other, you know. You’ll have a ragged ear.’

‘Never mind,’ said Holly. ‘I’m still one of the lucky ones.’
The full moon, well risen in a cloudless eastern sky, covered the high solitude

with its light. We are not conscious of daylight as that which displaces darkness.
Daylight, even when the sun is clear of clouds, seems to us simply the natural
condition of the earth and air. When we think of the downs, we think of the
downs in daylight, as we think of a rabbit with its fur on. Stubbs may have
envisaged the skeleton inside the horse, but most of us do not: and we do not
usually envisage the downs without daylight, even though the light is not a part
of the down itself as the hide is part of the horse itself. We take daylight for
granted. But moonlight is another matter. It is inconstant. The full moon wanes
and returns again. Clouds may obscure it to an extent to which they cannot
obscure daylight. Water is necessary to us, but a waterfall is not. Where it is to
be found it is something extra, a beautiful ornament. We need daylight and to
that extent it is utilitarian, but moonlight we do not need. When it comes, it
serves no necessity. It transforms. It falls upon the banks and the grass,
separating one long blade from another; turning a drift of brown, frosted leaves

from a single heap to innumerable, flashing fragments; or glimmering
lengthways along wet twigs as though light itself were ductile. Its long beams
pour, white and sharp, between the trunks of trees, their clarity fading as they
recede into the powdery, misty distance of beech-woods at night. In moonlight,
two acres of coarse bent-grass, undulant and ankle-deep, tumbled and rough as a
horse’s mane, appear like a bay of waves, all shadowy troughs and hollows. The
growth is so thick and matted that even the wind does not move it, but it is the
moonlight that seems to confer stillness upon it. We do not take moonlight for
granted. It is like snow, or like the dew on a July morning. It does not reveal but
changes what it covers. And its low intensity – so much lower than that of
daylight – makes us conscious that it is something added to the down, to give it,
for only a little time, a singular and marvellous quality that we should admire
while we can, for soon it will be gone again.

As the rabbits came up by the hole inside the beech-wood, a swift gust of

wind passed through the leaves, checkering and dappling the ground beneath,
stealing and giving light under the branches. They listened, but beyond the rustle
of the leaves, there came from the open down outside no sound except the
monotonous tremolo of a grasshopper warbler, far off in the grass.

‘What a moon!’ said Silver. ‘Let’s enjoy it while it’s here.’
As they went over the bank they met Speedwell and Hawkbit returning.
‘Oh, Hazel,’ said Hawkbit, ‘we’ve been talking to another mouse. He’d heard

about the kestrel this evening and was very friendly. He told us about a place just
the other side of the wood where the grass has been cut short – something to do
with horses, he said. “You like a nice a grass? ’E very fine grass.” So we went
there. It’s first rate.’

The gallop turned out to be a good forty yards wide, mown to less than six

inches. Hazel, with a delightful sense of having been proved right by events, set
to work on a patch of clover. They all munched for some time in silence.

you, we’d have found the place ourselves sooner or later, but not as soon as this.’

Hazel could have pressed his chin-glands for satisfaction, but he replied

merely, ‘We shan’t need to go down the hill so much after all.’ Then he added,
‘But Holly, you smell of blood, you know. It may be dangerous, even here. Let’s
go back to the wood. It’s such a beautiful night that we can sit near the holes to
chew pellets and Bluebell can tell us his story.’

They found Strawberry and Buckthorn on the bank; and when everyone was

comfortably chewing, with ears laid flat, Bluebell began.

 
‘Dandelion was telling me last night about Cowslip’s warren and how he told the
story of the King’s Lettuce. That’s what put me in mind of this tale, even before
Hazel explained his idea. I used to hear it from my grandfather and he always
said that it happened after El-ahrairah had got his people out of the marshes of
Kelfazin. They went to the meadows of Fenlo and there they dug their holes. But
Prince Rainbow had his eye on El-ahrairah; and he was determined to see that he
didn’t get up to any more of his tricks.

‘Now one evening, when El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle were sitting on a sunny

bank, Prince Rainbow came through the meadows and with him was a rabbit that
El-ahrairah had never seen before.

‘ “Good evening, El-ahrairah,” said Prince Rainbow. “This is a great

improvement on the marshes of Kelfazin. I see all your does are busy digging
holes along the bank. Have they dug a hole for you?”

‘ “Yes,” said El-ahrairah. “This hole here belongs to Rabscuttle and myself.

We liked the look of this bank as soon as we saw it.”

‘ “A very nice bank,” said Prince Rainbow. “But I am afraid I have to tell you,

El-ahrairah, that I have strict orders from Lord Frith himself not to allow you to
share a hole with Rabscuttle.”

‘ “Not share a hole with Rabscuttle?” said El-ahrairah. “Why ever not?”
‘ “El-ahrairah,” said Prince Rainbow, “we know you and your tricks: and

Rabscuttle is nearly as slippery as you are. Both of you in one hole would be
altogether too much of a good thing. You would be stealing the clouds out of the
sky before the moon had changed twice. No – Rabscuttle must go and look after
the holes at the other end of the warren. Let me introduce you. This is Hufsa. I
want you to be his friend and look after him.”

‘ “Where does he come from?” asked El-ahrairah. “I certainly haven’t seen

him before.”

‘ “He comes from another country,” said Prince Rainbow, “but he is no

different from any other rabbit. I hope you will help him to settle down here.
And while he is getting to know the place, I’m sure you will be glad to let him
share your hole.”

‘El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle felt desperately annoyed that they were not to be

allowed to live together in their hole. But it was one of El-ahrairah’s rules never
to let anyone see when he was angry and besides, he felt sorry for Hufsa because
he supposed that he was feeling lonely and awkward, being far away from his
own people. So he welcomed him and promised to help him settle down. Hufsa
was perfectly friendly and seemed anxious to please everyone; and Rabscuttle
moved down to the other end of the warren.

going wrong with his plans. One night, in the spring, when he had taken some of
his people to a cornfield to eat the green shoots, they found a man with a gun
walking about in the moonlight and were lucky to get away without trouble.
Another time, after El-ahrairah had reconnoitred the way to a cabbage garden
and scratched a hole under the fence, he arrived the next morning to find it
blocked with wire, and he began to suspect that his plans were leaking out to
people who were not intended to learn them.

who was at the bottom of the trouble. He showed him a path across the fields
and told him that it led to a lonely barn full of swedes and turnips: and he went
on to say that he and Rabscuttle meant to go there the next morning. In fact El-
ahrairah had no such plans and took care not to say anything about the path or
the barn to anyone else. But next day, when he went cautiously along the path,
he found a wire set in the grass.

‘This made El-ahrairah really angry, for any of his people might have been

snared and killed. Of course he did not suppose that Hufsa was setting wires
himself, or even that he had known that a wire was going to be set. But evidently
Hufsa was in touch with somebody who did not stick at setting a wire. In the
end, El-ahrairah decided that probably Prince Rainbow was passing on Hufsa’s
information to a farmer or a gamekeeper and not bothering himself about what
happened as a result. His rabbits’ lives were in danger because of Hufsa – to say
nothing of all the lettuces and cabbages they were missing. After this, El-
ahrairah tried not to tell Hufsa anything at all. But it was difficult to prevent him
from hearing things because, as you all know, rabbits are very good at keeping
secrets from other animals, but no good at keeping secrets from each other.
Warren life doesn’t make for secrecy. He considered killing Hufsa. But he knew
that if he did, Prince Rainbow would come and they would end in more trouble.
He felt decidedly uneasy even about keeping things from Hufsa, because he
thought that if Hufsa realized that they knew he was a spy, he would tell Prince
Rainbow and Prince Rainbow would probably take him away and think of
something worse.

‘El-ahrairah thought and thought. He was still thinking the next evening, when

Prince Rainbow paid one of his visits to the warren.

Rainbow. “If you are not careful, people will begin to trust you. Since I was
passing by, I thought I would just stop to thank you for your kindness in looking
after Hufsa. He seems quite at home with you.”

‘ “Yes, he does, doesn’t he?” said El-ahrairah. “We grow in beauty side by

side; we fill one hole with glee. But I always say to my people, ‘Put not your
trust in princes, nor in any –’ “

trust you. And to prove it, I have decided that I will grow a nice crop of carrots
in the field behind the hill. It is an excellent bit of ground and I am sure they will
do well. Especially as no one would dream of stealing them. In fact, you can
come and watch me plant them, if you like.”

‘ “I will,” said El-ahrairah. “That will be delightful.”
‘El-ahrairah, Rabscuttle, Hufsa and several other rabbits accompanied Prince

Rainbow to the field behind the hill; and they helped him to sow it with long
rows of carrot seed. It was a light, dry sort of soil – just the thing for carrots –
and the whole business infuriated El-ahrairah, because he was certain that Prince
Rainbow was doing it to tease him and to show that he felt sure that he had
clipped his claws at last.

course, I know that no one would dream of stealing my carrots. But if they did –
if they did steal them, El-ahrairah – I should be very angry indeed. If King
Darzin stole them, for instance, I feel sure that Lord Frith would take away his
kingdom and give it to someone else.”

‘El-ahrairah knew that Prince Rainbow meant that if he caught him stealing

the carrots he would either kill him or else banish him and put some other rabbit
over his people: and the thought that the other rabbit would probably be Hufsa
made him grind his teeth. But he said, “Of course, of course. Very right and
proper.” And Prince Rainbow went away.

went to look at the carrots. No one had thinned them out and the tops were thick
and green. El-ahrairah judged that most of the roots would be a little thinner than
a fore-paw. And it was while he was looking at them in the moonlight that his
plan came to him. He had become so cautious about Hufsa – and indeed no one
ever knew where Hufsa would be next – that on the way back he and Rabscuttle
made for a hole in a lonely bank and went down it to talk together. And there El-
ahrairah promised Rabscuttle not only that he would steal Prince Rainbow’s
carrots, but also that between them they would see the back of Hufsa into the
bargain. They came out of the hole and Rabscuttle went to the farm to steal some
seed corn. El-ahrairah spent the rest of the night gathering slugs; and a nasty
business it was.

‘The next evening El-ahrairah went out early and after a little while found

Yona the hedgehog pottering along the hedge.

‘ “Yona,” he said, “would you like a whole lot of nice, fat slugs?”

You’d know that if you were a hedgehog.”

all. But I can give you a great many more if you will do what I say and ask no
questions. Can you sing?”

‘ “Sing, El-ahrairah? No hedgehog can sing.”
‘ “Good,” said El-ahrairah. “Excellent. But you will have to try if you want

those slugs. Ah! There is an old, empty box, I see, that the farmer has left in the
ditch. Better and better. Now you listen to me.”

‘Meanwhile, in the wood, Rabscuttle was talking to Hawock the pheasant.
‘ “Hawock,” he said, “can you swim?”
‘ “I never go near water if I can avoid it, Rabscuttle,” said Hawock. “I dislike

it very much. But I suppose if I had to, I could make shift to keep afloat for a
little while.”

you know how scarce it is at this time of year – and you can have it all, if only
you will do a little swimming in the pond on the edge of the wood. Just let me
explain as we go down there.” And off they went through the wood.

“Ah, Hufsa, you’re here,” he said. “That’s fine. I can’t trust anyone else, but
you’ll come with me, won’t you? Just you and I – no one else must know.”

‘ “Why, what’s to be done, El-ahrairah?” asked Hufsa.
‘ “I’ve been looking at those carrots of Prince Rainbow’s,” replied El-

ahrairah. “I can’t stand it any longer. They’re the best I’ve ever seen. I’m
determined to steal them – or most of them, anyway. Of course, if I took a lot of
rabbits on an expedition of this kind we’d soon be in trouble. Things would leak
out and Prince Rainbow would be sure to get to hear. But if you and I go alone,
no one will ever know who did it.”

would give him time to tell Prince Rainbow.

‘ “No,” said El-ahrairah, “I’m going now. At once.”
‘He wondered whether Hufsa would try to turn him against this idea, but when

he looked at him he could see that Hufsa was thinking that this would be the end
of El-ahrairah and that he himself would be made king of the rabbits.

‘They set out together in the moonlight.
‘They had gone a good way along the hedge when they came upon an old box

lying in the ditch. Sitting on top of the box was Yona the hedgehog. His prickles
were stuck all over with dog-rose petals and he was making an extraordinary
squeaking, grunting noise and waving his black paws. They stopped and looked

at him.

‘ “Whatever are you doing, Yona?” asked Hufsa in astonishment.
‘ “Singing to the moon,” answered Yona. “All hedgehogs have to sing to the

moon to make the slugs come. Surely you know that?

O Slug-a-Moon, O Slug-a-Moon,
O grant thy faithful hedgehog’s boon!”

quickly before he brings all the elil round us,” And on they went.

‘After a time they drew near the pond on the edge of the wood. As they

approached it they heard a squawking and splashing and then they saw Hawock
the pheasant scuttering about in the water, with his long tail feathers floating out
behind him.

‘ “Whatever has happened?” said Hufsa. “Hawock, have you been shot?”
‘ “No, no,” replied Hawock. “I always go swimming in the full moon. It

makes my tail grow longer and besides, my head wouldn’t stay red, white and
green without swimming. But you must know that, Hufsa, surely? Everyone
knows that.”

‘ “The truth is, he doesn’t like other animals to catch him at it,” whispered El-

ahrairah. “Let’s go on.”

‘A little farther on they came to an old well by a big oak tree. The farmer had

filled it up long ago, but the mouth looked very deep and black in the moonlight.

‘ “Let’s have a rest,” said El-ahrairah, “just for a short time.”
‘As he spoke, a most curious-looking creature came out of the grass. It looked

something like a rabbit, but even in the moonlight they could see that it had a red
tail and long green ears. In its mouth it was carrying the end of one of the white
sticks that men burn. It was Rabscuttle, but not even Hufsa could recognize him.
He had found some sheep-dip powder at the farm and sat in it to make his tail
red. His ears were festooned with trails of bryony and the white stick was
making him feel ill.

‘ “Frith preserve us!” said El-ahrairah. “What can it be? Let’s only hope it

isn’t one of the Thousand!” He leapt up, ready to run. “Who are you?” he asked,
trembling.

‘Rabscuttle spat out the white stick.
‘ “So!” he said commandingly. “So you have seen me, El-ahrairah! Many

rabbits live out their lives and die, but few see me. Few or none! I am one of the
rabbit messengers of Lord Frith, who go about the earth secretly by day and

return nightly to his golden palace! He is even now awaiting me on the other
side of the world and I must go to him swiftly, through the heart of the earth!
Farewell, El-ahrairah!”

darkness below.

voice. “How dreadful is this place! Let us go quickly!”

‘They hurried on and presently they came to Prince Rainbow’s field of carrots.

How many they stole I cannot say; but of course, as you know, El-ahrairah is a
great prince and no doubt he used powers unknown to you and me. But my
grandfather always said that before morning the field was stripped bare. The
carrots were hidden down a deep hole in the bank beside the wood and El-
ahrairah and Hufsa made their way home. El-ahrairah collected two or three
followers and stayed underground with them all day, but Hufsa went out in the
afternoon without saying where he was going.

‘That evening, as El-ahrairah and his people began to silflay under a fine red

sky, Prince Rainbow came over the fields. Behind him were two great, black
dogs.

‘ “El-ahrairah,” he said, “you are under arrest.”
‘ “What for?” asked El-ahrairah.
‘ “You know very well what for,” said Prince Rainbow. “Let me have no more

of your tricks and insolence, El-ahrairah. Where are the carrots?”

‘ “If I am under arrest,” said El-ahrairah, “may I be told what for? It is not fair

to tell me I am under arrest and then to ask me questions.”

time. Tell me where the carrots are and I will only send you to the great North
and not kill you.”

I am under arrest?”

ahrairah, you shall have the full process of law. You are under arrest for stealing
my carrots. Are you seriously asking for a trial? I warn you that I have direct
evidence and it will go ill with you.”

dared for the dogs. Only Rabscuttle was nowhere to be seen. He had spent the
whole day moving the carrots to another, secret hole and he was now hiding,
because he could not get his tail white again.

‘ “Yes, I would like a trial,” said El-ahrairah, “and I would like to be judged

by a jury of animals. For it is not right, Prince Rainbow, that you should both

accuse me and be the judge as well.”

‘ “A jury of animals you shall have,” said Prince Rainbow. “A jury of elil, El-

ahrairah. For a jury of rabbits would refuse to convict you, in spite of the
evidence.”

‘To everyone’s surprise El-ahrairah immediately replied that he would be

content with a jury of elil: and Prince Rainbow said that he would bring them
that night. El-ahrairah was sent down his hole and the dogs were put on guard
outside. None of his people was allowed to see him, although many tried.

trial for his life and that Prince Rainbow was going to bring him before a jury of
elil. Animals came crowding in. Fu Inlé, Prince Rainbow returned with the elil –
two badgers, two foxes, two stoats, an owl and a cat. El-ahrairah was brought up
and placed between the dogs. The elil sat staring at him and their eyes glittered
in the moon. They licked their lips: and the dogs muttered that they had been
promised the task of carrying out the sentence. There were a great many animals
– rabbits and others – and every one of them felt sure that this time it was all up
with El-ahrairah.

‘ “Now,” said Prince Rainbow, “let us begin. It will not take long. Where is

Hufsa?”

‘Then Hufsa came out, bowing and bobbing his head, and he told the elil that

El-ahrairah had come the night before, when he was quietly chewing pellets, and
terrified him into going with him to steal Prince Rainbow’s carrots. He had
wanted to refuse but he had been too much frightened. The carrots were hidden
in a hole that he could show them. He had been forced to do what he did, but the
next day he had gone as quickly as possible to tell Prince Rainbow, whose loyal
servant he was.

‘ “We will recover the carrots later,” said Prince Rainbow. “Now, El-ahrairah,

have you any evidence to call or anything to say? Make haste.”

elil agreed that this was only fair.

‘ “Now, Hufsa,” said El-ahrairah, “can we hear a little more about this journey

that you and I are supposed to have made? For really I can remember nothing
about it at all. You say we went out of the hole and set off in the night. What
happened then?”

‘ “Why, El-ahrairah,” said Hufsa, “you can’t possibly have forgotten. We

came along the ditch, and don’t you remember that we saw a hedgehog sitting on
a box singing a song to the moon?”

‘ “A hedgehog doing what?” said one of the badgers.
‘ “Singing a song to the moon,” said Hufsa eagerly. “They do that, you know,

to make the slugs come. He had rose petals stuck all over him and he was
waving his paws and –”

anything you don’t mean. Poor fellow,” he added to the jury,” he really believes
these things he says, you know. He doesn’t mean any harm, but –”

moon! O grant –’ “

inclined to wonder what is. Well, all right. We saw a hedgehog covered with
roses, singing a song on a box. What happened then?”

‘ “Well,” said Hufsa, “then we went on and came to the pond, where we saw a

pheasant.”

‘ “Pheasant, eh?” said one of the foxes. “I wish I’d seen it. What was it

doing?”

‘ “It was swimming round and round in the water –” said Hufsa.
‘ “Wounded, eh?” said the fox.
“No, no,” said Hufsa. “They all do that, to make their tails grow longer. I’m

surprised you don’t know.”

‘ “To make what?” said the fox.
‘ “To make their tails grow longer,” said Hufsa sulkily. “He said so himself.”
‘ “You’ve only had this stuff for a very short time,” said El-ahrairah to the elil.

“It takes a bit of getting used to. Look at me. I’ve been forced to live with it for
the last two months, day in and day out. I’ve been as kind and understanding as I
can, but apparently just to my own harm.”

‘A silence fell. El-ahrairah, with an air of fatherly patience, turned back to the

witness.

‘ “My memory is so bad,” he said. “Do go on.”
‘ “Well, El-ahrairah,” said Hufsa, “you’re pretending very cleverly, but even

you won’t be able to say you’ve forgotten what happened next. A huge,
terrifying rabbit, with a red tail and green ears, came out of the grass. He had a
white stick in his mouth and he plunged into the ground down a great hole. He
told us he was going through the middle of the earth to see Lord Frith on the
other side.”

“This time not one of the elil said a word. They were staring at Hufsa and

shaking their heads.

beasts. They’ll say anything when they’re cornered. But this one is the worst
I’ve ever heard. How much longer have we got to stay here? I’m hungry.”

‘Now El-ahrairah had known beforehand that while elil detest all rabbits, they

would dislike most the one who looked the biggest fool. That was why he had
agreed to a jury of elil. A jury of rabbits might have tried to get to the bottom of
Hufsa’s story; but not the elil, for they hated and despised the witness and
wanted to be off hunting as soon as they could.

roses, singing a song: and then we saw a perfectly healthy pheasant swimming
round and round the pond: and then we saw a rabbit with a red tail, green ears
and a white stick, and he jumped straight down a deep well. Is that right?”

‘ “Yes,” said Hufsa.
‘ “And then we stole the carrots?”
‘ “Yes.”
‘ “Were they purple with green spots?”
‘ “Were what purple with green spots?”
‘ “The carrots.”
‘ “Well, you know they weren’t, El-ahrairah. They were the ordinary colour.

They’re down the hole!” shouted Hufsa desperately, “Down the hole! Go and
look!”

no carrots and returned.

‘ “I’ve been underground all day,” said El-ahrairah,” and I can prove it. I

ought to have been asleep, but it’s very difficult when m’learned friend – well,
never mind. I simply mean that obviously I couldn’t have been out moving
carrots or anything else. If there ever were any carrots,” he added. “But I’ve
nothing more to say.”

can possibly say that it’s been proved that that rabbit took your carrots. The
witness is obviously out of his mind – mad as the mist and snow – and the
prisoner will have to be released.” They all agreed.

your hole, El-ahrairah, before I hurt you myself.”

‘ “I will, my lord,” said El-ahrairah. “But may I beg you to remove that rabbit

you sent among us, for he troubles us with his foolishness?”

‘So Hufsa went away with Prince Rainbow and El-ahrairah’s people were left

in peace, apart from indigestion brought on by eating too many carrots. But it
was a long time before Rabscuttle could get his tail white again, so my
grandfather always said.’

23. Kehaar

Robinson Jeffers Hurt Hawks

It was early morning and the rabbits were beginning to silflay, coming up into

clear, grey silence. The air was still chilly. There was a good deal of dew and no
wind. Five or six wild duck flew overhead in a swiftly-moving V, intent on some
far-off destination. The sound made by their wings came down distinctly,
diminishing as they went away southwards. The silence returned. With the
melting of the last of the twilight there grew a kind of expectancy and tension, as
though it were thawing snow about to slide from a sloping roof. Then the whole
down and all below it, earth and air, gave way to the sunrise. As a bull, with a
slight but irresistible movement, tosses its head from the grasp of a man who is
leaning over the stall and idly holding its horn, so the sun entered the world in
smooth, gigantic power. Nothing interrupted or obscured its coming. Without a
sound, the leaves shone and the grass coruscated along the miles of the
escarpment.

Outside the wood, Bigwig and Silver combed their ears, sniffed the air and

hopped away, following their own long shadows to the grass of the gallop. As
they moved over the short turf – nibbling, sitting up and looking round them –
they approached a little hollow, no more than three feet across. Before they
reached the edge Bigwig, who was ahead of Silver, checked and crouched,
staring. Although he could not see into the hollow, he knew that there was some
creature in it – something fairly big. Peering through the blades of grass round
his head, he could see the curve of a white back. Whatever the creature was, it

was nearly as big as himself. He waited, stock-still, for some little time, but it
did not move.

‘What has a white back, Silver?’ whispered Bigwig.
Silver considered. ‘A cat?’
‘No cats here.’
‘How do you know?’
At that moment they both heard a low, breathy hissing from the hollow. It

lasted for a few moments. Then there was silence once more.

were the only survivors of the Sandleford Owsla and they knew that their
comrades looked up to them. The encounter with the rats in the barn had been no
joke and had proved their worth. Bigwig, who was generous and honest, had
never for a moment resented Hazel’s courage on the night when his own
superstitious fear had got the better of him. But the idea of going back to the
Honeycomb and reporting that he had glimpsed an unknown creature in the grass
and left it alone was more than he could swallow. He turned his head and looked
at Silver. Seeing that he was game, he took a final look at the strange, white back
and then went straight up to the edge of the hollow. Silver followed.

It was no cat. The creature in the hollow was a bird – a big bird, nearly a foot

long. Neither of them had ever seen a bird like it before. The white part of its
back, which they had glimpsed through the grass, was in fact only the shoulders
and neck. The lower back was light grey and so were the wings, which tapered
to long, black-tipped primaries folded together over the tail. The head was very
dark brown – almost black – in such sharp contrast to the white neck that the
bird looked as though it were wearing a kind of hood. The one dark-red leg that
they could see ended in a webbed foot and three powerful, taloned toes. The
beak, hooked slightly downwards at the end, was strong and sharp. As they
stared it opened, disclosing a red mouth and throat. The bird hissed savagely and
tried to strike, but still it did not move.

‘It’s hurt,’ said Bigwig.
‘Yes, you can tell that,’ replied Silver. ‘But it’s not wounded anywhere that I

can see. I’ll go round –’

‘Look out!’ said Bigwig. ‘He’ll have you!’
Silver, as he started to move round the hollow, had come closer to the bird’s

head. He jumped back just in time to avoid a quick, darting blow of the beak.

‘That would have broken your foot,’ said Bigwig.
As they squatted, looking at the bird – for they both sensed intuitively that it

would not rise – it suddenly burst into loud, raucous cries – ‘Yark! Yark! Yark!’ –
a tremendous sound at close quarters – that split the morning and carried far

across the down. Bigwig and Silver turned and ran.

a more dignified approach to the bank. Hazel came to meet them in the grass.
There was no mistaking their wide eyes and dilated nostrils.

‘Elil?’ asked Hazel.
‘Well, I’m blest if I know, to tell you the truth,’ replied Bigwig. ‘There’s a

great bird out there, like nothing I’ve ever seen.’

‘How big? As big as a pheasant?’
‘Not quite so big,’ admitted Bigwig, ‘but bigger than a wood-pigeon: and a lot

fiercer.’

‘Is that what cried?’
‘Yes. It startled me all right. We were actually beside it. But for some reason

or other it can’t move.’

‘Dying?’
‘I don’t think so.’
‘I’ll go and have a look at it,’ said Hazel.
‘It’s savage. For goodness’ sake be careful.’
Bigwig and Silver returned with Hazel. The three of them squatted outside the

bird’s reach as it looked sharply and desperately from one to the other. Hazel
spoke in the hedgerow patois.

‘You hurt? You no fly?’
The answer was a harsh gabbling which they all felt immediately to be exotic.

Wherever the bird came from, it was somewhere far away. The accent was
strange and guttural, the speech distorted. They could catch only a word here and
there.

‘Come keel – kah! kah! – you come keel – yark! – t’ink me finish – me no

finish – ‘urt you dam’ plenty –’ The dark brown head flickered from side to side.
Then, unexpectedly, the bird began to drive its beak into the ground. They
noticed for the first time that the grass in front of it was torn and scored with
lines. For some moments it stabbed here and there; then gave up, lifted its head
and watched them again.

‘I believe it’s starving,’ said Hazel. ‘We’d better feed it. Bigwig, go and get

some worms or something, there’s a good fellow.’

‘Er – what did you say, Hazel?’
‘Worms.’
‘Me dig for worms?’
‘Didn’t the Owsla teach – oh, all right, I’ll do it,’ said Hazel. ‘You and Silver

wait here.’

After a few moments, however, Bigwig followed Hazel back to the ditch and

began to join him in scratching at the dry ground. Worms are not plentiful on the
downs and there had been no rain for days. After a time Bigwig looked up.

‘What about beetles? Woodlice? Something like that?’
They found some rotten sticks and carried them back. Hazel pushed one

forward cautiously.

‘Insects.’
The bird split the stick three ways in as many seconds and snapped up the few

insects inside. Soon there was a small pile of debris in the hollow as the rabbits-
brought anything from which it could get food. Bigwig found some horse-dung
along the track, dug the worms out of it, overcame his disgust and carried them
one by one. When Hazel praised him, he muttered something about ‘the first
time any rabbit’s done this and don’t tell the blackbirds’. At last, long after they
had all grown weary, the bird stopped feeding and looked at Hazel.

‘Finish eat.’ It paused. ‘Vat for you do?’
‘You hurt?’ said Hazel.
The bird looked crafty. ‘No hurt. Plenty fight. Stay small time, den go.’
‘You stay there you finish,’ said Hazel. ‘Bad place. Come homba, come

kestrel.’

‘Damn de lot. Fight plenty.’
‘I bet it would, too,’ said Bigwig, looking with admiration at the two-inch

beak and thick neck.

‘We no want you finish,’ said Hazel. ‘You stay here you finish. We help you

maybe.’

‘Piss off!’
‘Come on,’ said Hazel immediately to the others. ‘Let it alone.’ He began to

lollop back to the wood.’ Let it try keeping the kestrels off for a bit.’

‘What’s the idea, Hazel?’ said Silver. ‘That’s a savage brute. You can’t make a

friend out of that.’

‘You may be right,’ said Hazel. ‘But what’s the good of a blue-tit or a robin to

us? They don’t fly any distance. We need a big bird.’

‘But why do you want a bird so particularly?’
‘I’ll explain later,’ said Hazek ‘I’d like Blackberry and Fiver to hear as well.

But let’s go underground now. If you don’t want to chew pellets, I do.’

During the afternoon Hazel organized more work on the warren. The

Honeycomb was as good as finished – though rabbits are not methodical and are
never really certain when anything is finished – and the surrounding burrows and
runs were taking shape. Quite early in the evening, however, he made his way
once more to the hollow. The bird was still there. It looked weaker and less alert,
but snapped feebly as Hazel came up.

‘Still here?’ said Hazel. ‘You fight hawk?’
‘No fight,’ answered the bird. ‘No fight, but vatch, vatch, alvays vatch. Ees no

good.’

‘Hungry?’
The bird made no reply.
‘Listen,’ said Hazel. ‘Rabbits not eat birds. Rabbits eat grass. We help you.’
‘Vat for ’elp me?’
‘Never mind. We make you safe. Big hole. Food too.’
The bird considered. ‘Legs fine. Ving no good. ’E bad.’
‘Well, walk then.’
‘You ’urt me, I ‘urt you like dam’.’
Hazel turned away. The bird spoke again.
‘Ees long vay?’
‘No, not far.’
‘Come den.’
It got up with a good deal of difficulty, staggering on its strong, blood-red

legs. Then it opened its wings high above its body and Hazel jumped back,
startled by the great, arching span. But at once it closed them again, grimacing
with pain.

‘Ving no good. I come.’
It followed Hazel docilely enough across the grass, but he was careful to keep

out of its reach. Their arrival outside the wood caused something of a sensation,
which Hazel cut short with a peremptory sharpness quite unlike his usual
manner.

‘Come on, get busy,’ he said to Dandelion and Buckthorn. ‘This bird’s hurt

and we’re going to shelter it until it’s better. Ask Bigwig to show you how to get
it some food. It eats worms and insects. Try grasshoppers, spiders – anything.
Hawkbit! Acorn! Yes, and you too, Fiver – come out of that rapt trance, or
whatever you’re in. We need an open, wide hole, broader than it’s deep, with a
flat floor a little below the level of the entrance: by nightfall.’

‘We’ve been digging all the afternoon, Hazel –’
‘I know. I’ll come and help you,’ said Hazel, ‘in just a little while. Only get

started. The night’s coming.’

The astonished rabbits obeyed him, grumbling. Hazel’s authority was put to

something of a test, but held firm with the support of Bigwig. Although he had
no idea what Hazel had in mind, Bigwig was fascinated by the strength and
courage of the bird and had already accepted the idea of taking it in, without
troubling himself about the reason. He led the digging while Hazel explained to
the bird, as well as he could, how they lived, their ways of protecting themselves

from their enemies and the kind of shelter they could provide. The amount of
food the rabbits produced was not very large, but once inside the wood the bird
clearly felt safer and was able to hobble about and do some foraging for itself.

the entrance to one of the runs leading down from the wood. They lined the floor
with beech twigs and leaves. As darkness began to fall the bird was installed. It
was still suspicious, but seemed to be in a good deal of pain. Evidently, since it
could not think of any better plan for itself, it was ready to try a rabbit hole to
save its life. From outside, they could see its dark head alert in the gloom, the
black eyes still watchful. It was not asleep when they themselves finished a late
silflay and went underground.

and feed, chatter and fight all day long. Solitude and reticence are unnatural to
them. They move southwards in the breeding-season and at such times a
wounded one is only too likely to find itself deserted. The gull’s savagery and
suspicion had been due partly to pain and partly to the unnerving knowledge that
it had no companions and could not fly. By the following morning its natural
instincts to mix with a flock and to talk were beginning to return. Bigwig made
himself its companion. He would not hear of the gull going out to forage. Before
ni-Frith the rabbits had managed to produce as much as it could eat – for a time
at all events – and were able to sleep through the heat of the day. Bigwig,
however, remained with the gull, making no secret of his admiration, talking and
listening to it for several hours. At the evening feed he joined Hazel and Holly
near the bank where Bluebell had told his story of El-ahrairah.

‘How’s the bird now?’ asked Hazel.
‘A good deal better, I think,’ replied Bigwig. ‘He’s very tough, you know. My

goodness, what a life he’s had! You don’t know what you’re missing! I could sit
and listen to him all day.’

‘How was it hurt?’
‘A cat jumped on him in a farmyard. He never heard it until the last moment.

It tore the muscle of one of his wings, but apparently he gave it something to
remember before he made off. Then he got himself up here somehow or other
and just collapsed. Think of standing up to a cat! I can see now that I haven’t
really started yet. Why shouldn’t a rabbit stand up to a cat? Let’s just suppose
that –’

‘But what is this bird?’ interrupted Holly.
‘Well, I can’t quite make out,’ answered Bigwig. ‘But if I understand him

properly – and I’m not at all sure that I do – he says that where he comes from
there are thousands of his kind – more than we can possibly imagine. Their

flocks make the whole air white and in the breeding season their nests are like
leaves in a wood – so he says.’

‘But where? I’ve never seen one, even.’
‘He says,’ said Bigwig, looking very straight at Holly,’he says that a long way

from here the earth stops and there isn’t any more.’

‘Well, obviously it stops somewhere. What is there beyond?’
‘Water.’
‘A river, you mean?’
‘No,’ said Bigwig, ‘not a river. He says there’s a vast place of water, going on

and on. You can’t see to the other side. There isn’t another side. At least there is,
because he’s been there. Oh, I don’t know – I must admit I can’t altogether
understand it.’

‘Was it telling you that it’s been outside the world and come back again? That

must be untrue.’

‘I don’t know,’ said Bigwig, ‘but I’m sure he’s not lying. This water,

apparently, moves all the time and keeps breaking against the earth: and when he
can’t hear that, he misses it. That’s his name – Kehaar. It’s the noise the water
makes.’

The others were impressed in spite of themselves.
‘Well, why’s it here?’ asked Hazel.
‘He shouldn’t be. He ought to have been off to this Big Water place a long

time ago, to breed. Apparently a lot of them come away in winter, because it gets
so cold and wild. Then they go back in summer. But he’s been hurt once already
this spring. It was nothing much, but it held him up. He rested and hung around a
rookery for a bit. Then he got stronger and left them, and he was coming along
when he stopped in the farmyard and met this foul cat.’

‘So when it’s better it’ll go on again?’ said Hazel.
‘Yes.’
‘We’ve been wasting our time, then.’
‘Why, Hazel, what is it you have in mind?’
‘Go and get Blackberry and Fiver: we’d better have Silver too. Then I’ll

explain.’

ridge, the grass tussocks threw shadows twice as long as themselves and the cool
air smelt of thyme and dog roses, was something which they had all come to
enjoy even more than former evenings in the meadows of Sandleford. Although
they could not know it, the down was more lonely than it had been for hundreds
of years. There were no sheep, and villagers from Kingsclere and Sydmonton no
longer had any occasion to walk over the hills, either for business or for

pleasure. In the fields of Sandleford the rabbits had seen men almost every day.
Here, since their arrival, they had seen one and him on a horse. Looking round
the little group that gathered on the grass, Hazel saw that all of them – even
Holly – were looking stronger, sleeker and in better shape than when they had
first come to the down. Whatever might lie ahead, at least he could feel that he
had not failed them so far.

bunch of hlessil any more. But all the same, there’s something on my mind. I’m
surprised, as a matter of fact, that I should be the first one of us to start thinking
about it. Unless we can find the answer, then this warren’s as good as finished, in
spite of all we’ve done.’

‘Why, how can that be, Hazel?’ said Bigwig.
‘Do you remember Nildro-hain?’ asked Hazel.
‘She stopped running. Poor Strawberry.’
‘I know. And we have no does – not one – and no does means no kittens and

in a few years no warren.’

It may seem incredible that the rabbits had given no thought to so vital a

matter. But men have made the same mistake more than once – left the whole
business out of account, or been content to trust to luck and the fortune of war.
Rabbits live close to death and when death comes closer than usual, thinking
about survival leaves little room for anything else. But now, in the evening
sunshine on the friendly, empty down, with a good burrow at his back and the
grass turning to pellets in his belly, Hazel knew that he was lonely for a doe. The
others were silent and he could tell that his words had sunk in.

The rabbits grazed or lay basking in the sun. A lark went twittering up into the

brighter sunshine above, soared and sang and came slowly down, ending with a
sideways, spread-wing glide and a wagtail’s run through the grass. The sun
dipped lower. At last Blackberry said, ‘What’s to be done? Set out again?’

some does and bring them here.’

‘Where from?’
‘Another warren.’
‘But are there any on these hills? How do we find out? The wind never brings

the least smell of rabbits.’

‘I’ll tell you how,’ said Hazel. ‘The bird. The bird will go and search for us.’
‘Hazel-rah,’ cried Blackberry, ‘what a marvellous idea! That bird could find

out in a day what we couldn’t discover for ourselves in a thousand! But are you
certain it can be persuaded to do it? Surely as soon as it gets better, it’ll simply
fly away and leave us?’

‘I can’t tell,’ answered Hazel. ‘All we can do is feed it and hope for the best.

But Bigwig, since you seem to be getting on with it so well, perhaps you can
explain to it how much this means to us. It has only to fly over the downs and let
us know what it sees.’

‘You leave him to me,’ said Bigwig. ‘I think I know how to do it.’
Hazel’s anxiety and the reason for it were soon known to all the rabbits and

there was not one who did not realize what they were up against. There was
nothing very startling in what he had said. He was simply the one – as a Chief
Rabbit ought to be – through whom a strong feeling, latent throughout the
warren, had come to the surface. But his plan to make use of the gull excited
everyone and was seen as something that not even Blackberry could have hit
upon. Reconnaissance is familiar to all rabbits – indeed it is second nature – but
the idea of making use of a bird, and one so strange and savage, convinced them
that Hazel, if he could really do it, must be as clever as El-ahrairah himself.

Pipkin, boasting that they were the best insect-catchers in the warren, brought in
great numbers of beetles and grasshoppers. At first the gull’s principal hardship
was lack of water. He suffered a good deal and was reduced to tearing at the
stems of the long grasses for moisture. However, during his third night in the
warren it rained for three or four hours and puddles formed on the track. A
cluttery spell set in, as it often does in Hampshire when hay-time approaches.
High winds from the south laid the grass flat all day, turning it to a dull,
damascene silver. The great branches of the beeches moved little but spoke
loudly. There were squalls of rain on the wind. The weather made Kehaar
restless. He walked about a good deal, watched the flying clouds and snapped up
everything the foragers brought. Searching became harder, for in the wet the
insects burrowed into the deep grass and had to be scratched out.

was woken by Bigwig to be told that Kehaar had something to say to him. He
made his way to Kehaar’s lobby without coming above ground. The first thing
he noticed was that the gull’s head was moulting and turning white, though a
dark-brown patch remained behind each eye. Hazel greeted him and was
surprised to be answered in a few words of halting, broken Lapine. Evidently
Kehaar had prepared a short speech.

‘Meester ’Azel, ees rabbits vork ’ard,’ said Kehaar. ‘I no finish now. Soon I go

fine.’

‘That’s good news,’ said Hazel. ‘I’m glad.’
Kehaar relapsed into hedgerow vernacular.
‘Meester Pigvig, ’e plenty good fella.’

‘Yes, he is.’
‘ ’E say you no getting mudders. Ees finish mudders. Plenty trouble for you.’
‘Yes, that’s true. We don’t know what to do. No mothers anywhere.’
‘Listen. I get peeg, fine plan. I go fine now. Ving, ’e better. Vind finish, den I

fly. Fly for you. Find plenty mudders, tell you vere dey are, ya?’

very fine bird.’

‘Ees finish mudders for me dis year. Ees too late. All mudders sitting on nest

now. Eggs come.’

‘I’m sorry.’
“Nudder time I get mudder. Now I fly for you.’
‘We’ll do everything we possibly can to help you.’
The next day the wind dropped and Kehaar made one or two short flights.

However, it was not until three days later that he felt able to set out on his
search. It was a perfect June morning. He was snapping up numbers of the little,
white-shelled, downland snails from the wet grass and cracking them in his great
beak, when he suddenly turned to Bigwig and said,

‘Now I fly for you.’
He opened his wings. The two-foot span arched above Bigwig, who sat

perfectly still while the white feathers beat the air round his head in a kind of
ceremonious farewell. Laying his ears flat in the fanned draught, he stared up at
Kehaar as the gull rose, rather heavily, into the air. When he flew his body, so
long and graceful on the ground, took on the appearance of a thick, stumpy
cylinder, from the front of which his red beak projected between his round, black
eyes. For a few moments he hovered, his body rising and falling between his
wings. Then he began to climb, sailed sideways over the grass and disappeared
northwards below the edge of the escarpment. Bigwig returned to the hanger
with the news that Kehaar had set out.

could not help wondering whether he really would return, for he knew that
Kehaar, like themselves, felt the mating urge and he thought it quite likely that
after all he would be off to the Big Water and the raucous, teeming gull-colonies
of which he had spoken with such feeling to Bigwig. As far as he was able he
kept his anxiety to himself, but one day when they were alone, he asked Fiver
whether he thought Kehaar would return.

‘He will return,’ said Fiver unhesitatingly.
‘And what will he bring with him?’
‘How can I tell?’ replied Fiver. But later, when they were underground, silent

and drowsy, he said suddenly, ‘The gifts of El-ahrairah. Trickery; great danger;

and blessing for the warren.’ When Hazel questioned him again, he seemed to be
unaware that he had spoken and could add nothing more.

was inclined to be surly and short and once, when Bluebell remarked that he
thought Meester Pigvig’s fur cap was moulting in sympathy for absent friends,
he showed a flash of his old sergeant-major spirit and cuffed and abused him
twice round the Honeycomb, until Holly intervened to save his faithful jester
from further trouble.

drifting up from the fields of Sydmonton, when Bigwig came hurtling down into
the Honeycomb to announce that Kehaar was back. Hazel suppressed his
excitement and told everyone to keep out of the way while he went to see him
alone. On second thoughts, however, he took Fiver and Bigwig with him.

messy and malodorous. Rabbits will not excrete underground and Kehaar’s habit
of fouling his own nest had always disgusted Hazel. Now, in his eagerness to
hear his news, the guano smell seemed almost welcome.

‘Glad to see you back, Kehaar,’ he said. ‘Are you tired?’
‘Ving ’e still go tired. Fly liddle bit, stop liddle bit, everyt’ing go fine.’
‘Are you hungry? Shall we get you some insects?’
‘Fine. Fine. Good fellas. Plenty beetle.’ (All insects were ‘beetle’ to Kehaar.)
Clearly, he had missed their attentions and was ready to enjoy being back.

Although he no longer needed to have food brought to the lobby, he evidently
felt that he deserved it. Bigwig went to get his foragers and Kehaar kept them
busy until sunset. At last he looked shrewdly at Fiver and said,

‘Eh, Meester Liddle Von, you know vat I pring, ya?’
‘I’ve no idea,’ replied Fiver, rather shortly.
‘Den I tell. All dis peeg ’ill, I go along ’im, dis vay, dat vay, vere sun come up,

vere sun go down. Ees no rabbits. Ees nodings, nodings.’

He stopped. Hazel looked at Fiver apprehensively.
‘Den I go down, go down in bottom. Ees farm vid peeg trees all round, on

liddle hill. You know?’

‘No, we don’t know it. But go on.’
‘I show you. ’E not far. You see ’im. Und here ees rabbits. Ees rabbits live in

box; live vid men. You know?’

‘Live with men? Did you say “Live with men?” ‘
‘Ya, ya, live vid men. In shed; rabbits live in box in shed. Men pring food.

You know?’

‘I know this happens,’ said Hazel. ‘I’ve heard of it. That’s fine, Kehaar.

You’ve been very thorough. But it can’t help us, can it?’

‘I t’ink ees mudders. In peeg box. But else ees no rabbits; not in fields, not in

voods. No rabbits. Anyvays I no see ’em.’

‘That sounds bad.’
‘Vait. I tell more. Now you ’ear. I go flying, oder vay, vere sun go middle of

day. You know, dis vay ees Peeg Vater.’

‘Did you go to the Big Water, then?’ asked Bigwig.
‘Na, na, not near so far. But out dis vay ees river, you know?’
‘No, we haven’t been so far.’
‘Ees river,’ repeated Kehaar. ‘Und here ees town of rabbits.’
‘On the other side of the river?’
‘Na, na. You go dat vay, ees peeg fields all de vay. Den after long vay ees

come to town of rabbits, ver’ big. Und after dat ees iron road und den river.’

‘Iron road?’ asked Fiver.
‘Ya, ya, iron road. You not seen heem – iron road? Men make heem.’
Kehaar’s speech was so outlandish and distorted at the best of times that it

was only too common for the rabbits to be unsure what he meant. The vernacular
words which he used now for ‘iron’ and ‘road’ (familiar enough to seagulls), his
listeners had scarcely ever heard. Kehaar was quick to impatience and now, as
often, they felt at a disadvantage in the face of his familiarity with a wider world
than their own. Hazel thought quickly. Two things were clear. Kehaar had
evidently found a big warren some way off to the south: and whatever the iron
road was, the warren was on this side both of it and of a river. If he had
understood rightly, it seemed to follow that the iron road and the river could be
ignored for their purposes.

‘Kehaar,’ he said,’ I want to be certain. Can we get to the rabbits’ town without

bothering about the iron road and the river?’

Plenty mudders.’

‘How long would it take to go from here to the – to the town?’
‘It’ink two days. Ees long vay.’
‘Good for you, Kehaar. You’ve done everything we hoped. You rest now.

We’ll feed you as long as you want.’

‘Sleep now. Tomorrow plenty beetle, ya, ya.’
The rabbits made their way back to the honeycomb. Hazel told Kehaar’s news

and a long, disorderly, intermittent discussion began. This was their way of
reaching a conclusion. The fact that there was a warren two or three day’s
journey to the south flickered and oscillated down among them as a penny
wavers down through deep water, moving one way and the other, shifting,

vanishing, reappearing, but always sinking towards the firm bottom. Hazel let
the talk run on as long as it would, until at last they dispersed and slept.

The next morning they went about their lives as usual, feeding Kehaar and

themselves, playing and digging. But all this time, just as a drop of water slowly
swells until it is heavy enough to fall from a twig, the idea of what they meant to
do was becoming clear and unanimous. By the following day Hazel saw it plain.
It so happened that the time for speaking came when he was sitting on the bank
at sunrise, with Fiver and three or four others. There was no need to summon a
general gathering. The thing was settled. When it reached them, those who were
not there would accept what he had said without having heard him at all.

‘This warren that Kehaar found,’ said Hazel,’ he said it was big.’
‘So we can’t take it by force,’ said Bigwig.
‘I don’t think I want to go and join it,’ said Hazel. ‘Do you?’
‘And leave here?’ replied Dandelion. ‘After all our work? Besides, I reckon

we’d have a thin time. No, I’m sure none of us wants to do that.’

‘Will that be difficult, do you think?’

and some of the rabbits can’t get enough to eat. The young does get edgy and
nervous and some of them don’t have any kittens on that account. At least, the
kittens begin to grow inside them and then they melt away again into their
bodies. You know this?’

‘I didn’t know,’ said Strawberry.
‘That’s because you’ve never been overcrowded. But our warren – the

Threarah’s warren – was overcrowded a year or two back and a lot of the
younger does were re-absorbing their litters before they were born. The Threarah
told me that long ago, El-ahrairah made a bargain with Frith. Frith promised him
that rabbits were not to be born dead or unwanted. If there’s little chance of a
decent life for them, it’s a doe’s privilege to take them back into her body
unborn.’

discontented does? That’s hopeful. We’re agreed, then, that we ought to send an
expedition to this warren and that there’s a good chance of being successful
without fighting. Do you want everyone to go?’

‘I’d say not,’ said Blackberry. ‘Two or three days’ journey; and we’re all in

danger, both going and coming. It would be less dangerous for three or four
rabbits than for hrair. Three or four can travel quickly and aren’t conspicuous:
and the Chief Rabbit of this warren would be less likely to object to a few
strangers coming with a civil request.’

explain how we come to be in this difficulty and ask to be allowed to persuade
some does to come back with them. I don’t see that any Chief Rabbit can object
to that. I wonder which of us would be the best to send?’

‘Hazel-rah, you mustn’t go,’ said Dandelion. ‘You’re needed here and we

don’t want to risk you. Everyone’s agreed on that.’

a disappointment, but nevertheless he felt that they were right. The other warren
would have little opinion of a Chief Rabbit who ran his own errands. Besides, he
was not particularly impressive in appearance or as a speaker. This was a job for
someone else.

‘All right,’ he said. ‘I knew you wouldn’t let me go. I’m not the right fellow

anyway – Holly is. He knows everything about moving in the open and he’ll be
able to talk well when he gets there.’

No one contradicted this. Holly was the obvious choice, but to select his

companions was less easy. Everyone was ready to go, but the business was so
important that at last they considered each rabbit in turn, discussing who would
be the most likely to survive the long journey, to arrive in good shape and to go
down well in a strange warren. Bigwig, rejected on the grounds that he might
quarrel in strange company, was inclined to be sulky at first, but came round
when he remembered that he could go on looking after Kehaar. Holly himself
wanted to take Bluebell but as Blackberry said, one funny joke at the expense of
the Chief Rabbit might ruin everything. Finally they chose Silver, Buckthorn and
Strawberry. Strawberry said little but was obviously very much pleased. He had
suffered a good deal to show that he was no coward and now he had the
satisfaction of knowing that he was worth something to his new friends.

They started early in the morning, in the grey light. Kehaar had undertaken to

fly out later in the day, to make sure they were going in the right direction and
bring back news of their progress. Hazel and Bigwig went with them to the
southern end of the hanger and watched as they slipped away, heading to the
west of the distant farm. Holly seemed confident and the other three were in high
spirits. Soon they were lost to sight in the grass and Hazel and Bigwig turned
back into the wood.

‘Well, we’ve done the best we can,’ said Hazel. ‘The rest’s up to them and to

El-ahrairah, now. But surely it ought to be all right?’

forward to a nice doe and a litter of kittens in my burrow. Lots of little Bigwigs,
Hazel! Think of that, and tremble!’

24. Nuthanger Farm

Beside him stod a gret-hedid munke,
I pray to God woo he be!
Fful sone he knew gode Robyn,
As sone as he hym se.

Child, No. 119 Robin Hood and the Monk

A spirit of happy mischief entered into Hazel. He felt as he had on the

morning when they crossed the Enborne and he had set out alone and found the
beanfield. He was confident and ready for adventure. But what adventure?
Something worth telling to Holly and Silver on their return. Something to – well,
not to diminish what they were going to do. No, of course not – but just to show
them that their Chief Rabbit was up to anything that they were up to. He thought
it over as he hopped down the bank and sniffed out a patch of salad burnet in the
grass. What, now, would be likely to give them just a little, not unpleasant
shock? Suddenly he thought, ‘Suppose, when they got back, that there were one
or two does here already?’ And in the same moment he remembered what
Kehaar had said about a box full of rabbits at the farm. What sort of rabbits
could they be? Did they ever come out of their box? Had they ever seen a wild

rabbit? Kehaar had said that the farm was not far from the foot of the down, on a
little hill. So it could easily be reached in the early morning, before its men were
about. Any dogs would probably be chained, but the cats would be loose. A
rabbit could outrun a cat as long as he kept in the open and saw it coming first.
The important thing was not to be stalked unawares. He should be able to move
along the hedgerows without attracting elil, unless he was very unlucky.

But what did he intend to do exactly? Why was he going to the farm? Hazel

finished the last of the burnet and answered himself in the starlight. ‘I’ll just
have a look round,’ he said, ‘and if I can find those box rabbits I’ll try to talk to
them; nothing more than that. I’m not going to take any risks – well, not real
risks – not until I see whether it’s worth it, anyway.’

but not more than one. They must not attract attention. Who would be best?
Bigwig? Dandelion? Hazel rejected them. He needed someone who would do as
he was told and not start having ideas of his own. At once he thought of Pipkin.
Pipkin would follow him without question and do anything he asked. At this
moment he was probably asleep in the burrow which he shared with Bluebell
and Acorn, down a short run leading off the Honeycomb.

Hazel was lucky. He found Pipkin close to the mouth of the burrow and

already awake. He brought him out without disturbing the other two rabbits and
led him up by the run that gave on the bank. Pipkin looked about him
uncertainly, bewildered and half-expecting some danger.

‘It’s all right, Hlao-roo,’ said Hazel. ‘There’s nothing to be afraid of. I want

you to come down the hill and help me to find a farm I’ve heard about. We’re
just going to have a look round it.’

‘Round a farm, Hazel-rah? What for? Won’t it be dangerous? Cats and dogs

and –’

else. I’ve got a secret plan; you mustn’t tell the others – for the time being
anyway. I particularly want you to come and no one else will do.’

This had exactly the effect that Hazel intended. Pipkin needed no further

persuasion and they set off together, over the grass track, across the turf beyond
and down the escarpment. They went through the narrow belt of trees and came
into the field where Holly had called Bigwig in the dark. Here Hazel paused,
sniffing and listening. It was the time before dawn when owls return, usually
hunting as they go. Although a full-grown rabbit is not really in danger from
owls, there are few who take no account of them. Stoats and foxes might be
abroad also, but the night was still and damp and Hazel, secure in his mood of
gay confidence, felt sure that he would either smell or hear any hunter on four

feet.

opposite edge of the field. He set off at an easy pace, with Pipkin close behind.
Moving quietly in and out of the hedgerow up which Holly and Bluebell had
come and passing, on their way, under the cables humming faintly in the
darkness above, they took only a few minutes to reach the road.

has played a fine innings will say afterwards that he felt he could not miss the
ball and a speaker or an actor, on his lucky day, can sense his audience carrying
him as though he were swimming in miraculous, buoyant water. Hazel had this
feeling now. All round him was the quiet, summer night, luminous with starlight
but paling to dawn on one side. There was nothing to fear and he felt ready to
skip through a thousand farmyards one after the other. As he sat with Pipkin on
the bank above the tar-smelling road, it did not strike him as particularly lucky
when he saw a young rat scuttle across from the opposite hedge and disappear
into a clump of fading stitchwort below them. He had known that some guide or
other would turn up. He scrambled quickly down the bank and found the rat
nosing in the ditch.

‘The farm,’ said Hazel, ‘where’s the farm – near here, on a little hill?’
The rat stared at him with twitching whiskers. It had no particular reason to be

friendly, but there was something in Hazel’s look that made a civil answer
natural.

‘Over road. Up lane.’
The sky was growing lighter each moment. Hazel crossed the road without

waiting for Pipkin, who caught him up under the hedge bordering the near side
of the little lane. From here, after another listening pause, they began to make
their way up the slope towards the northern skyline.

Watership Down and about half a mile from each, there is a broad knoll, steeper
on the north side but falling gently on the south – like the down ridge itself.
Narrow lanes climb both slopes and come together in a great ring of elm trees
which encircles the flat summit. Any wind – even the lightest – draws from the
height of the elms a rushing sound, multifoliate and powerful. Within this ring
stands the farmhouse, with its barns and outbuildings. The house may be two
hundred years old or it may be older, built of brick, with a stone-faced front
looking south towards the down. On the east side, in front of the house, a barn
stands clear of the ground on staddle-stones; and opposite is the cow-byre.

As Hazel and Pipkin reached the top of the slope, the first light showed clearly

the farmyard and buildings. The birds singing all about them were those to

which they had been accustomed in former days. A robin on a low branch
twittered a phrase and listened for another that answered him from beyond the
farmhouse. A chaffinch gave its little falling song and farther off, high in an elm,
a chiff-chaff began to call. Hazel stopped and then sat up, the better to scent the
air. Powerful smells of straw and cow-dung mingled with those of elm-leaves,
ashes and cattle-feed. Fainter traces came to his nose as the overtones of a bell
sound in a trained ear. Tobacco, naturally: a good deal of cat and rather less dog
and then, suddenly and beyond doubt, rabbit. He looked at Pipkin and saw that
he too had caught it.

While these scents reached them they were also listening. But beyond the light

movements of birds and the first buzzing of the flies immediately around them,
they could hear nothing but the continual susurration of the trees. Under the
northern steep of the down the air had been still, but here the southerly breeze
was magnified by the elms, with their myriads of small, fluttering leaves, just as
the effect of sunlight on a garden is magnified by dew. The sound, coming from
the topmost branches, disturbed Hazel because it suggested some huge approach
– an approach that was never completed: and he and Pipkin remained still for
some time, listening tensely to this loud yet meaningless vehemence high
overhead.

just glimpse the dog asleep inside – a large, smooth-haired, black dog, with head
on paws. Hazel could not see a chain; but then, after a moment, he noticed the
line of a thin rope that came out through the kennel door and ended in some sort
of fastening on the roof. ‘Why a rope?’ he wondered and then thought, ‘Because
a restless dog cannot rattle it in the night.’

The two rabbits began to wander among the outbuildings. At first they took

care to remain in cover and continually on the watch for cats. But they saw none
and soon grew bolder, crossing open spaces and even stopping to nibble at
dandelions in the patches of weeds and rough grass. Guided by scent, Hazel
made his way to a low-roofed shed. The door was half open and he went through
it with scarcely a pause at the brick threshold. Immediately opposite the door, on
a broad wooden shelf – a kind of platform – stood a wire-fronted hutch. Through
the mesh he could see a brown bowl, some greenstuff and the ears of two or
three rabbits. As he stared, one of the rabbits came close to the wire, looked out
and saw him.

Beside the platform, on the near side, was an up-ended bale of straw. Hazel

jumped lightly on it and from there to the thick planks, which were old and soft-
surfaced, dusty and covered with chaff. Then he turned back to Pipkin, waiting
just inside the door.

keep watching for cats or we may be trapped. Stay at the door and if you see a
cat outside, tell me at once.’

‘Right, Hazel-rah,’ said Pipkin. ‘It’s all clear at the moment.’
Hazel went up to the side of the hutch. The wired front projected over the

edge of the shelf so that he could neither reach it nor look in, but there was a
knot-hole in one of the boards facing him and on the far side he could see a
twitching nose.

me?’

The answer was in slightly strange but perfectly intelligible Lapine.
‘Yes, we understand you. My name is Boxwood. Where do you come from?’
‘From the hills. My friends and I live as we please, without men. We eat the

grass, lie in the sun and sleep underground. How many are you?’

‘Four. Bucks and does.’
‘Do you ever come out?’
‘Yes, sometimes. A child takes us out and puts us in a pen on the grass.’
‘I have come to tell you about my warren. We need more rabbits. We want

you to run away from the farm and join us.’

‘There’s a wire door at the back of this hutch,’ said Boxwood. ‘Come down

there: we can talk more easily.’

The door was made of wire netting on a wooden frame, with two leather

hinges nailed to the uprights and a hasp and staple fastened with a twist of wire.
Four rabbits were crowded against the wire, pressing their noses through the
mesh. Two – Laurel and Clover – were short-haired black Angoras. The others,
Boxwood and his doe Haystack, were black and white Himalayans.

Hazel began to speak about the life of the downs and the excitement and

freedom enjoyed by wild rabbits. In his usual straight-forward way he told about
the predicament of his warren in having no does and how he had come to look
for some. ‘But,’ he said, ‘we don’t want to steal your does. All four of you are
welcome to join us, bucks and does alike. There’s plenty for everyone on the
hills.’ He went on to talk of the evening feed in the sunset and of early morning
in the long grass.

The hutch rabbits seemed at once bewildered and fascinated. Clover, the

Angora doe – a strong, active rabbit – was clearly excited by Hazel’s description
and asked several questions about the warren and the downs. It became plain that
they thought of their life in the hutch as dull but safe. They had learned a good
deal about elil from some source or other and seemed sure that few wild rabbits
survived for long. Hazel realized that although they were glad to talk to him and

welcomed his visit because it brought a little excitement and change into their
monotonous life, it was not within their capacity to take a decision and act on it.
They did not know how to make up their minds. To him and his companions,
sensing and acting were second nature; but these rabbits had never had to act to
save their lives or even to find a meal. If he was going to get any of them as far
as the down they would have to be urged. He sat quiet for a little, nibbling a
patch of bran spilt on the boards outside the hutch. Then he said,

come one night and when we do, believe me, we shall open your hutch as easily
as the farmer does: and then, any of you who wish will be free to come with us.’

Boxwood was about to reply when suddenly Pipkin spoke from the floor.

‘Hazel, there’s a cat in the yard outside!’

open.’ Trying to appear unhurried, he went back to the floor by way of the straw-
bale and crossed over to the door. Pipkin was looking through the hinge. He was
plainly frightened.

‘I think it’s smelt us, Hazel,’ he said.’ I’m afraid it knows where we are.’
‘Don’t stay there, then,’ said Hazel.’ Follow me close and run when I do.’

Without waiting to look out through the hinge, he went round the half-open door
of the shed and stopped on the threshold.

The cat, a tabby with white chest and paws, was at the farther end of the little

yard, walking slowly and deliberately along the side of a pile of logs. When
Hazel appeared in the doorway it saw him at once and stood stock-still, with
staring eyes and twitching tail. Hazel hopped slowly across the threshold and
stopped again. Already sunlight was slanting across the yard and in the stillness
the flies buzzed about a patch of dung a few feet away. There was a smell of
straw and dust and hawthorn.

‘You look hungry,’ said Hazel to the cat. ‘Rats getting too clever, I suppose?’
The cat made no reply. Hazel sat blinking in the sunshine. The cat crouched

almost flat on the ground, thrusting its head forward between its front paws.
Close behind, Pipkin fidgeted and Hazel, never taking his eyes from the cat,
could sense that he was trembling.

‘Don’t be frightened, Hlao-roo,’ he whispered. ‘I’ll get you away, but you

must wait till it comes for us. Keep still.’

The cat began to lash its tail. Its hindquarters lifted and wagged from side to

side in mounting excitement.

scraper –’

The cat flung itself across the yard and the two rabbits leapt into flight with

great thrusts of their hind legs. The cat came very fast indeed and although both
of them had been braced ready to move on the instant, they were barely out of
the yard in time. Racing up the side of the long barn, they heard the Labrador
barking in excitement as it ran to the full extent of its rope. A man’s voice
shouted to it. From the cover of the hedge beside the lane they turned and looked
back. The cat had stopped short and was licking one paw with a pretence of
nonchalance.

hadn’t charged at us like that it would have followed us much farther and
probably called up another as well. And somehow you can’t make a dash unless
they do it first. It’s a good thing you saw it coming, Hlao-roo.’

the rabbits in the box?’

‘I’ll tell you all about it later on. Let’s go into the field now, and feed; then we

can make our way home as slowly as you like.’

25. The Raid

Mary Renault The King Must Die

Waking, he found Fiver beside him as usual. It was some time before dawn.

The earth floor felt pleasantly dry and snug and he was about to go back to sleep
when Fiver spoke.

‘You’ve been wet through, Hazel.’
‘Well, what about it? The grass is wet, you know.’
‘You didn’t get so wet on silflay. You were soaked. You weren’t here at all

yesterday, were you?’

‘Oh, I went foraging down the hill.’
‘Eating swedes: and your feet smell of farmyard – hens’ droppings and bran.

But there’s some other funny thing besides – something I can’t smell. What
happened?’

‘Well, I had a bit of a brush with a cat, but why worry?’

‘Because you’re concealing something, Hazel. Something dangerous.’
‘It’s Holly that’s in danger, not I. Why bother about me?’
‘Holly?’ replied Fiver in surprise. ‘But Holly and the others reached the big

warren early yesterday evening. Kehaar told us. Do you mean to say you didn’t
know?’

it.’

from a cat. And whatever you were up to, it was so much on your mind that you
forgot to ask about Holly last night.’

‘Well, all right, Fiver – I’ll tell you all about it. I took Pipkin and went to that

farm that Kehaar told us about, where there are rabbits in a hutch. I found the
rabbits and talked to them and I’ve taken a notion to go back one night and get
them out, to come and join us here.’

‘What for?’
‘Well, two of them are does, that’s what for.’
‘But if Holly’s successful we shall soon have plenty of does: and from all I’ve

ever heard of hutch rabbits, they don’t take easily to wild life. The truth is,
you’re just trying to be clever.’

‘Trying to be clever?’ said Hazel. ‘Well, we’ll just see whether Bigwig and

Blackberry think so.’

‘Risking your life and other rabbits’ lives for something that’s of little or no

value to us,’ said Fiver. ‘Oh yes, of course the others will go with you. You’re
their Chief Rabbit. You’re supposed to decide what’s sensible and they trust you.
Persuading them will prove nothing, but three or four dead rabbits will prove
you’re a fool, when it’s too late.’

‘Oh, be quiet,’ answered Hazel. ‘I’m going to sleep.’
During silflay next morning, with Pipkin for a respectful chorus, he told the

others about his visit to the farm. As he had expected, Bigwig jumped at the idea
of a raid to free the hutch rabbits.

‘It can’t go wrong,’ he said. ‘It’s a splendid idea, Hazel! I don’t know how you

open a hutch, but Blackberry will see to that. What annoys me is to think you ran
from that cat. A good rabbit’s a match for a cat, any day. My mother went for
one once and she fairly gave it something to remember, I can tell you: scratched
its fur out like willow-herb in autumn! Just leave the farm cats to me and one or
two of the others!’

Blackberry took a little more convincing: but he, like Bigwig and Hazel

himself, was secretly disappointed not to have gone on the expedition with
Holly: and when the other two pointed out that they were relying on him to tell

them how to get the hutch open, he agreed to come.

‘Do we need to take everyone?’ he asked. ‘You say the dog’s tied up and I

suppose there can’t be more than three cats. Too many rabbits will only be a
nuisance in the dark: someone will get lost and we shall have to spend time
looking for him.’

‘Well, Dandelion, Speedwell and Hawkbit then,’ said Bigwig, ‘and leave the

others behind. Do you mean to go tonight, Hazel-rah?’

‘Yes, the sooner the better,’ said Hazel.’ Get hold of those three and tell them’.

Pity it’s going to be dark – we could have taken Kehaar: he’d have enjoyed it.’

before dusk, settling in on a northwest wind and carrying up the hill the sweet-
sour smell of flowering privet from cottage hedges below. Hazel sat on the bank
until the light had quite faded. At last, when it was clear that the rain was going
to stay for the night, he joined the others in the Honeycomb. They had persuaded
Kehaar to come down out of the wind and wet, and one of Dandelion’s tales of
El-ahrairah was followed by an extraordinary story, that left everyone mystified
but fascinated, about a time when Frith had to go away on a journey, leaving the
whole world to be covered with rain. But a man built a great, floating hutch that
held all the animals and birds until Frith returned and let them out.

‘It won’t happen tonight, will it, Hazel-rah?’ asked Pipkin, listening to the rain

in the beech leaves outside. ‘There’s no hutch here.’

‘Kehaar’ll fly you up to the moon, Hlao-roo,’ said Bluebell, ‘and you can

come down on Bigwig’s head like a birch branch in the frost. But there’s time to
go to sleep first.’

Before Fiver slept, however, he talked again to Hazel about the raid.
‘I suppose it’s no good asking you not to go?’ he said.
‘Look here,’ answered Hazel, ‘have you got one of your bad turns about the

farm? If you have, why not say so straight out? Then we’d all know where we
were.’

‘I’ve no feelings about the farm one way or the other,’ said Fiver. ‘But that

doesn’t necessarily mean it’s all right. The feelings come when they will – they
don’t always come. Not for the lendri, not for the crow. If it comes to that, I’ve
no idea what’s happening to Holly and the others. It might be good or bad. But
there’s something that frightens me about you yourself, Hazel: just you, not any
of the others. You’re all alone, sharp and clear, like a dead branch against the
sky.’

‘Well, if you mean you can see trouble for me and not for any of the others,

tell them and I’ll leave it to them to decide whether I ought to keep out of it. But
that’s giving up a lot, Fiver, you know. Even with your word for it, someone’s

bound to think I’m afraid.’

back? That’s all we have to do.’

‘I’ll be snared if I wait for Holly. Can’t you see that the very thing I want is to

have these does here when he comes back? But look, Fiver, I’ll tell you what.
I’ve come to trust you so much that I’ll take the greatest care. In fact, I won’t
even go into the farmyard myself. I’ll stay outside, at the top of the lane: and if
that’s not meeting your fears halfway, then I don’t know what is.’

he foresaw of getting the hutch rabbits to go the distance back to the warren.

The next day was bright and dry, with a fresh wind that cleared up what

remained of the wet. The clouds came racing over the ridge from the south as
they had on the May evening when Hazel first climbed the down. But now they
were higher and smaller, settling at last into a mackerel sky like a beach at low
tide. Hazel took Bigwig and Blackberry to the edge of the escarpment, whence
they could look across to Nuthanger on its little hill. He described the approach
and went on to explain how the rabbit-hutch was to be found. Bigwig was in
high spirits. The wind and the prospect of action excited him and he spent some
time with Dandelion, Hawkbit and Speedwell, pretending to be a cat and
encouraging them to attack him as realistically as they could. Hazel, whose talk
with Fiver had somewhat clouded him, recovered as he watched them tussling
over the grass and ended by joining in himself, first as an attacker and then as
the cat, staring and quivering for all the world like the Nuthanger tabby.

‘I shall be disappointed if we don’t meet a cat after all this,’ said Dandelion, as

he waited for his turn to run at a fallen beech branch from one side, claw it twice
and dash out again. ‘I feel a really dangerous animal.’

the grass near-by. ‘Meester Pigvig, ’e vant you t’ink all vun peeg yoke; make
you prave. Cat ’e no yoke. You no see ’im, you no ’ear ’im. Den yomp! ’E
come.’

‘But we’re not going there to eat, Kehaar,’ said Bigwig. ‘That makes all the

difference. We shan’t stop watching for cats the whole time.’

That ought to improve the warren stock no end.’

Hazel and Bigwig had decided that the raid should be carried out as soon after

dark as the farm was quiet. This meant that they would cover the half mile to the
outlying sheds at sunset, instead of risking the confusion of a night journey over
ground that only Hazel knew. They could steal a meal among the swedes, halt till
darkness and cover the short distance to the farm after a good rest. Then –

provided they could cope with the cats – there would be plenty of time to tackle
the hutch; whereas if they were to arrive at dawn they would be working against
time before men came on the scene. Finally, the hutch rabbits would not be
missed until the following morning.

get to the down. We shall have to be patient with them. I’d rather do that in
darkness, elil or no elil. We don’t want to be messing about in broad daylight.’

bolt. Elil take the hindmost, don’t they? I know it’s tough, but if there’s real
trouble we ought to save our own rabbits first. Let’s hope that doesn’t happen,
though.’

for he had been afraid that Fiver might say something that would lower their
spirits. But there was nothing worse to contend with than Pipkin’s
disappointment at being left behind; and this was dispelled when Hazel assured
him that the only reason was that he had already done his bit. Bluebell, Acorn
and Pipkin came with them to the foot of the hill and watched them down the
hedgerow.

unbroken by owls and so quiet that they could plainly hear the intermittent,
monotonous ‘Chug chug chug’ of a nightingale in the distant woods. Two rats
among the swedes showed their teeth, thought better of it and left them alone.
When they had foraged, they rested comfortably in the straw until the western
light was quite gone.

Rabbits do not name the stars, but nevertheless Hazel was familiar with the

sight of Capella rising; and he watched it now until it stood gold and bright in
the dark north-eastern horizon to the right of the farm. When it reached a certain
point which he had fixed, beside a bare branch, he roused the others and led
them up the slope towards the elms. Near the top he slipped through the hedge
and brought them down into the lane.

Hazel had already told Bigwig of his promise to Fiver to keep out of danger;

and Bigwig, who had changed much since the early days, had no fault to find.

suit us. You stay outside the farm in a safe place and we’ll bring the rabbits out
to you: then you can take over and get us all away.’ What Hazel had not said was
that the idea that he should remain in the lane was his own suggestion, and that
Fiver had acquiesced only because he could not persuade him to give up the idea
of the raid altogether.

Crouching under a fallen branch on the verge of the lane, Hazel watched the

others as they followed Bigwig down towards the farmyard. They went slowly,
rabbit-fashion, hop, step and pause. The night was dark and they were soon out
of sight, though he could hear them moving down the side of the long barn. He
settled down to wait.

Bigwig’s hopes of action were fulfilled almost at once. The cat that he met as

he reached the far end of the barn was not Hazel’s tabby, but another; ginger,
black and white (and therefore a female); one of those slim, trotting, quick-
moving, tail-twitching cats that sit on farm window-sills in the rain or keep
watch from the tops of sacks on sunny afternoons. It came briskly round the
corner of the barn, saw the rabbits and stopped dead.

been the beech branch on the down. But quicker even than he Dandelion ran
forward, scratched it and leapt clear. As it turned, Bigwig threw his full weight
upon it from the other side. The cat closed with him, biting and scratching, and
Bigwig rolled over on the ground. The others could hear him swearing like a cat
himself and struggling for a hold. Then he sank one back leg into the cat’s side
and kicked backwards rapidly, several times.

Anyone who is familiar with cats knows that they do not care for a determined

assailant. A dog that tries to make itself pleasant to a cat may very well get
scratched for its pains. But let that same dog rush in to the attack and many a cat
will not wait to meet it. The farm cat was bewildered by the speed and fury of
Bigwig’s charge. It was no weakling and a good ratter, but it had the bad luck to
be up against a dedicated fighter who was spoiling for action. As it scrabbled out
of Bigwig’s reach, Speedwell cuffed it across the face. This was the last blow
struck, for the wounded cat made off across the yard and disappeared under the
fence of the cow-byre.

hind leg. The others gathered round, praising him, but he cut them short, looking
round the dark yard as he tried to get his bearings.

hutch – where do we go?’

It was Hawkbit who found the little yard. Hazel had been anxious in case the

shed door might be shut; but it stood just ajar and the five of them slipped in one
after the other. In the thick gloom they could not make out the hutch, but they
could both smell and hear the rabbits.

You other three, keep watching. If another cat comes, you’ll have to take it on
yourselves.’

‘Fine,’ said Dandelion. ‘Just leave it to us.’

Bigwig and Blackberry found the straw bale and climbed on the planks. As

they did so, Boxwood spoke from the hutch.

‘Who’s that? Hazel-rah, have you come back?’
‘Hazel-rah has sent us,’ answered Blackberry. ‘We’ve come to let you out.

Will you come with us?’

‘Yes, let us out.’

frame, the hasp and the staple. It took him some time to realize that the leather
hinges were soft enough to bite. Then he found that they lay so smooth and flush
with the frame that he could not get his teeth to them. Several times he tried to
find a grip and at last sat back on his haunches, at a loss.

there’s some other way?’

front paws high on the wire. Beneath his weight the top of the door was pressed
slightly outwards and the upper of the two leather hinges gave slightly where the
outer nail held it to the body of the hutch itself. As Boxwood dropped back on
all fours, Blackberry saw that the hinge had buckled and risen just clear of the
wood.

‘Try it now,’ he said to Bigwig.
Bigwig got his teeth to the hinge and pulled. It tore a very little.
‘By Frith, that’ll do,’ said Blackberry, for all the world like the Duke of

Wellington at Salamanca. ‘We just need time, that’s all.’

The hinge had been well made and did not give way until they had put it to a

great deal more tugging and biting. Dandelion grew nervous and twice gave a
false alarm. Bigwig, realizing that the sentries were on the jump from watching
and waiting with nothing to do, changed places with him and sent Speedwell up
to take over from Blackberry. When at last Dandelion and Speedwell had pulled
the leather strip off the nail, Bigwig came back to the hutch himself. But they did
not seem much nearer to success. Whenever one of the rabbits inside stood up
and rested its fore-paws on the upper part of the wire, the door pivoted lightly on
the axis of the staple and the lower hinge. But the lower hinge did not tear.
Blowing through his whiskers with impatience, Bigwig brought Blackberry back
from the threshold. ‘What’s to be done?’ he said. ‘We need some magic, like that
lump of wood you shoved into the river.’

upright of the frame pressed tight against the lower strip of leather, but it held
smooth and firm, offering no purchase for teeth.

that rabbit inside to get down.’

When Bigwig stood up and pushed the top of the door inwards, the frame

immediately pivoted much farther than before, because there was no sill along
the bottom of the outer side to stop it. The leather hinge twisted and Bigwig
nearly lost his balance. If it had not been for the metal water staple arresting the
pivoting, he might actually have fallen inside the hutch. Startled, he jumped
back, growling.

‘Well, you said magic, didn’t you?¡’ said Blackberry with satisfaction. ‘Do it

again.’

No strip of leather, held by only one broad-headed nail at each end, can stand

up for long to repeated twisting. Soon one of the nail-heads was almost out of
sight under the frayed edges.

‘Careful now,’ said Blackberry. ‘If it gives way suddenly you’ll go flying. Just

pull it off with your teeth.’

Two minutes later the door hung sagging on the staple alone. Clover pushed

the hinge side open and came out, followed by Boxwood.

When several creatures – men or animals – have worked together to overcome

something offering resistance and have at last succeeded there follows often a
pause – as though they felt the propriety of paying respect to the adversary who
has put up so good a fight. The great tree falls, splitting, cracking, rushing down
in leaves to the final, shuddering blow along the ground. Then the foresters are
silent, and do not at once sit down. After hours, the deep snowdrift has been
cleared and the lorry is ready to take the men home out of the cold. But they
stand a while, leaning on their spades and only nodding unsmilingly as the car-
drivers go through, waving their thanks. The cunning hutch door had become
nothing but a piece of wire netting, tacked to a frame made from four strips of
half-by-half; and the rabbits sat on the planks, sniffing and nosing it without
talking. After a little while the other two occupants of the hutch, Laurel and
Haystack, came hesitantly out and looked about them.

‘Where is Hazel-rah?’ asked Laurel.
‘Not far away,’ said Blackberry. ‘He’s waiting in the lane.’
‘What is the lane?’
‘The lane?’ said Blackberry in surprise. ‘Surely –’
He stopped as it came over him that these rabbits knew neither lane nor

farmyard. They had not the least idea of their most immediate surroundings. He
was reflecting on what this meant when Bigwig spoke.

‘We mustn’t wait about now,’ he said. ‘Follow me, all of you.’
‘But where?’ said Boxwood.

‘Well, out of here, of course,’ said Bigwig impatiently.
Boxwood looked about him. ‘I don’t know –’ he began.
‘Well, I do,’ said Bigwig. ‘Just come with us. Never mind anything else.’
The hutch rabbits looked at each other in bewilderment. It was plain that they

were afraid of the great, bristling buck, with his strange shock of fur and his
smell of fresh blood. They did not know what to do or understand what was
expected of them. They remembered Hazel; they had been excited by the forcing
of the door and curious to come through it once it was open. Otherwise, they had
no purpose whatever and no means of forming one. They had no more idea of
what was involved than a small child who says he will accompany the climbers
up the fell.

Blackberry’s heart sank. What was to be done with them? Left to themselves,

they would hop slowly about the shed and the yard until the cats got them. Of
their own accord they could no more run to the hills than fly to the moon. Was
there no simple, plain idea that might get them – or some of them – on the
move? He turned to Clover.

better than by day. Let’s all go and have some, shall we?’

‘Oh yes,’ said Clover, ‘I’d like that. But will it be safe? We’re all very much

afraid of the cats, you know. They come and stare at us sometimes through the
wire and it makes us shiver.’

This showed at least the beginnings of sense, thought Blackberry.
‘The big rabbit is a match for any cat,’ he replied. ‘He nearly killed one on the

way here tonight.’

‘And he doesn’t want to fight another if he can help it,’ said Bigwig briskly.’

So if you do want to eat grass by moonlight, let’s go to where Hazel’s waiting
for us.’

that he had beaten, watching from the woodpile. Cat-like, it was fascinated by
the rabbits and could not leave them alone, but it evidently had no stomach for
another fight and as they crossed the yard it stayed where it was.

The pace was frighteningly slow. Boxwood and Clover seemed to have

grasped that there was some sort of urgency and were clearly doing their best to
keep up, but the other two rabbits, once they had hopped into the yard, sat up
and looked about them in a foolish manner, completely at a loss. After a good
deal of delay, during which the cat left the woodpile and began to move
stealthily round towards the side of the shed, Blackberry managed to get them
out into the farmyard. But here, finding themselves in an even more open place,
they settled into a kind of static panic, like that which sometimes comes upon

inexperienced climbers exposed on a sheer face. They could not move, but sat
blinking and staring about them in the darkness, taking no notice of Blackberry’s
coaxing or Bigwig’s orders. At this moment a second cat – Hazel’s tabby – came
round the farther end of the farmhouse and made towards them. As it passed the
kennel the Labrador woke and sat up, thrusting out its head and shoulders and
looking first to one side and then the other. It saw the rabbits, ran to the length of
its rope and began to bark.

‘Come on!’ said Bigwig. ‘We can’t stay here. Up the lane, everybody, and

quickly too.’ Blackberry, Speedwell and Hawkbit ran at once, taking Boxwood
and Clover with them into the darkness under the barn. Dandelion remained
beside Haystack, begging her to move and expecting every moment to feel the
cat’s claws in his back. Bigwig leapt across to him.

‘Dandelion,’ he said in his ear, ‘get out of it, unless you want to be killed!’
‘But the –’ began Dandelion.
‘Do as I say!’ said Bigwig. The noise of barking was fearful and he himself

was close to panic. Dandelion hesitated a moment longer. Then he left Haystack
and shot up the lane, with Bigwig beside him.

They found the others gathered round Hazel, under the bank. Boxwood and

Clover were trembling and seemed exhausted. Hazel was talking to them
reassuringly, but broke off as Bigwig appeared out of the dark. The dog stopped
barking and there was quiet.

‘We’re all here,’ said Bigwig. ‘Shall we go, Hazel?’
‘But there were four hutch-rabbits,’ said Hazel. ‘Where are the other two?’
‘In the farmyard,’ said Blackberry. ‘We couldn’t do anything with them: and

then the dog began to bark.’

‘Yes, I heard it. You mean they’re loose?’
‘They’ll be a lot looser soon,’ said Bigwig angrily. ‘The cats are there.’
‘Why did you leave them, then?’
‘Because they wouldn’t move. It was bad enough before the dog started.’
‘Is the dog tied?’ asked Hazel.
‘Yes, it’s tied. But do you expect any rabbit to stand his ground a few feet

from an angry dog?’

just telling me, before you came, that you gave one of the cats such a beating
that it was afraid to come back for more. Now look, do you think you and
Blackberry, with Speedwell here and Hawkbit, can get these two rabbits back to
the warren? I’m afraid you may need most of the night. They can’t go very fast
and you’ll have to be patient with them. Dandelion, you come with me, will
you?’

‘Where, Hazel-rah?’
‘To fetch the other two,’ said Hazel. ‘You’re the fastest, so it won’t be so

dangerous for you, will it? Now, don’t hang about, Bigwig, there’s a good
fellow. I’ll see you tomorrow.’

Before Bigwig could reply he had disappeared under the elms. Dandelion

remained where he was, looking at Bigwig uncertainly.

‘Are you going to do what he says?’ asked Bigwig.
‘Well, are you?’ said Dandelion.
It took Bigwig no more than a moment to realize that if he said he was not,

complete disorganization would follow. He could not take all the others back
into the farm, and he could not leave them alone. He muttered something about
Hazel being too embleer clever by half, cuffed Hawkbit off a sow-thistle he was
nibbling and led his five rabbits over the bank into the field. Dandelion, left
alone, set off after Hazel into the farmyard.

near the doe Haystack. Neither of the hutch rabbits had moved from where he
and Bigwig had left them. The dog had returned to its kennel; but although it
was not to be seen, he felt that it was awake and watchful. He came cautiously
out of the shadow and approached Hazel.

that we’ve got a little way to go. Do you think you could hop across to Laurel
and get him to join us?’

trembling of his front paws. He himself was now sensing something peculiar – a
kind of luminosity – in the air. There seemed to be a curious vibration
somewhere in the distance. He looked round for the cats and saw that, as he
feared, both were crouching in front of the farmhouse a little way off. Their
reluctance to come closer could be attributed to Bigwig: but they would not go
away. Looking across the yard at them, Dandelion felt a sudden clutch of horror.

green like that? Look!’

Hazel sat up quickly and as he did so Dandelion leapt back in real terror, for

Hazel’s eyes were shining a deep, glowing red in the dark. At that moment the
humming vibration grew louder, quenching the rushing of the night breeze in the
elms. Then all four rabbits sat as though transfixed by the sudden, blinding light
that poured over them like a cloud-burst. Their very instinct was numbed in this
terrible glare. The dog barked and then became silent once more. Dandelion tried
to move but could not. The awful brightness seemed to cut into his brain.

The car, which had driven up the lane and over the brow under the elms, came

on a few more yards and stopped.

‘Lucy’s rabbits is out, look!’
‘Ah! Best get ’un in quick. Leave loights on!’
The sound of men’s voices, from somewhere beyond the fierce light, brought

Hazel to his senses. He could not see, but nothing, he realized, had happened to
his hearing or his nose. He shut his eyes and at once knew where he was.

‘Dandelion! Haystack! Shut your eyes and run,’ he said. A moment later he

smelt the lichen and cool moisture of one of the staddle-stones. He was under the
barn. Dandelion was hear him and a little farther away was Haystack. Outside
the men’s boots scraped and grated over the stones.

‘That’s it! Get round be’ind ’un.’
‘ ’E won’t go far!’
‘Pick ’n up then!’
Hazel moved across to Haystack. ‘I’m afraid we’ll have to leave Laurel,’ he

said. ‘Just follow me.’

Keeping under the raised floor of the barn, they all three scuttled back towards

the elm trees. The men’s voices were left behind. Coming out into the grass near
the lane, they found the darkness behind the headlights full of the fumes of
exhaust – a hostile, choking smell that added to their confusion. Haystack sat
down once more and could not be persuaded to move.

won’t hurt her – they’ve caught Laurel and taken him back to the hutch.’

‘If it was a buck, I’d say yes,’ said Hazel. ‘But we need this doe. That’s what

we came for.’

At this moment they caught the smell of burning white sticks and heard the

men returning up the farmyard. There was a metallic bumping as they rummaged
in the car. The sound seemed to rouse Haystack. She looked round at Dandelion.

‘I don’t want to go back to the hutch,’ she said.
‘You’re sure?’ asked Dandelion.
‘Yes. I’ll go with you.’
Dandelion immediately turned for the hedgerow. It was only when he crossed

it and reached the ditch beyond that he realized that he was on the opposite side
of the lane from that on which they had first approached. He was in a strange
ditch. However, there seemed to be nothing to worry about – the ditch led down
the slope and that was the way home. He moved slowly along it, waiting for
Hazel to join them.

Behind him, he heard the men moving away from the hrududu. As he topped the
bank, the beam of a torch shone up the lane and picked out his red eyes and

white tail disappearing into the hedge.

‘There’s ol’ woild rabbit, look!’
‘Ah! Reckon rest of ours ain’t s’ far off. Got up there with ’un, see? Best go’n

’ave a look.’

In the ditch, Hazel overtook Haystack and Dandelion under a clump of

brambles.

‘Get on quickly if you can,’ he said to Haystack. ‘The men are just behind.’
‘We can’t get on, Hazel,’ said Dandelion, ‘without leaving the ditch. It’s

blocked.’

by a pile of earth, weeds and rubbish. They would have to come into the open.
Already the men were over the bank and the torch-light was flickering up and
down the hedgerow and through the brambles above their very heads. Then, only
a few yards away, footfalls vibrated along the edge of the ditch. Hazel turned to
Dandelion.

‘Listen,’ he said, ‘I’m going to run across the corner of the field, from this

ditch to the other one, so that they see me. They’ll try to shine that light on me
for sure. While they’re doing that, you and Haystack climb the bank, get into the
lane and run down to the swede-shed. You can hide there and I’ll join you.
Ready?’

There was no time to argue. A moment later Hazel broke almost under the

men’s feet and ran across the field.

‘There’e goes!’
‘Keep torch on ’un, then. Noice and steady!’
Dandelion and Haystack scrambled over the bank and dropped into the lane.

Hazel, with the torch-beam behind him, had almost reached the other ditch when
he felt a sharp blow on one of his hind legs and a hot, stinging pain along his
side. The report of the cartridge sounded an instant later. As he somersaulted into
a clump of nettles in the ditch-bottom, he remembered vividly the scent of bean-
flowers at sunset. He had not known that the men had a gun.

the men would shine their torch on him and pick him up. He stumbled along the
inner wall of the ditch, feeling the blood flowing over his foot. Suddenly he was
aware of a draught against one side of his nose, a smell of damp, rotten matter
and a hollow, echoing sound at his very ear. He was beside the mouth of a land-
drain which emptied into the ditch – a smooth, cold tunnel, narrower than a
rabbit-hole, but wide enough. With flattened ears and belly pressed to the wet
floor he crawled up it, pushing a little pile of thin mud in front of him, and lay
still as he felt the thud of boots coming nearer.

‘I don’ roightly know, John, whether you ’it ’e er not.’
‘Ah, I ’it ’un all roight. That’s blood down there, see?’
‘Ah well, but that don’t signify. ’E might be a long ways off be now. I reckon

you’ve lost ’e.’

‘I reckon ’e’s in them nettles.’
‘ ’Ave a look then.’
‘No ’e ain’t.’
‘Well, us can’t go beggarin’ up and down ’ere ’alf bloody night. We got to

catch them as got out th’utch. Didn’t ought ’ave fired be roights, John.
Froightened they off, see? You c’n ’ave a look for ’im tomorrow, if ’e’s ’ere.’

The silence returned, but still Hazel lay motionless in the whispering chill of

the tunnel. A cold lassitude came over him and he passed into a dreaming, inert
stupor, full of cramp and pain. After a time, a thread of blood began to trickle
over the lip of the drain into the trampled, deserted ditch.

 
Bigwig, crouched close to Blackberry in the straw of the cattle-shed, leapt to
flight at the sound of the shot two hundred yards up the lane. He checked himself
and turned to the others.

‘Don’t run!’ he said quickly. ‘Where do you want to run to, anyway? No holes

here.’

‘Farther away from the gun,’ replied Blackberry, white-eyed.
‘Wait!’ said Bigwig, listening. ‘They’re running down the lane. Can’t you hear

them?’

‘I can hear only two rabbits,’ answered Blackberry, after a pause, ‘and one of

them sounds exhausted.’

They looked at each other and waited. Then Bigwig got up again.
‘Stay here, all of you,’ he said. ‘I’ll go and bring them in.’
Out on the verge he found Dandelion urging Haystack, who was lamed and

spent.

‘Come in here quickly,’ said Bigwig. ‘For Frith’s sake, where’s Hazel?’
‘The men have shot him,’ replied Dandelion.
They reached the other five rabbits in the straw. Dandelion did not wait for

their questions.

‘They’ve shot Hazel,’ he said.’ They’d caught that Laurel and put him back in

the hutch. Then they came after us. The three of us were at the end of a blocked
ditch. Hazel went out of his own accord, to distract their attention while we got
away. But we didn’t know they had a gun.’

‘Are you sure they killed him?’ said Speedwell.

‘I didn’t actually see him hit, but they were very close to him.’
‘We’d better wait,’ said Bigwig.
They waited a long time. At last Blackberry and Bigwig went cautiously back

up the lane. They found the bottom of the ditch trampled by boots and streaked
with blood, and returned to tell the others.

weary hours. All were dejected and wretched. When at last they reached the foot
of the down Bigwig told Blackberry, Speedwell and Hawkbit to leave them and
go on to the warren. They approached the wood just at first light and a rabbit ran
to meet them through the wet grass. It was Fiver. Blackberry stopped and waited
beside him while the other two went on in silence.

‘Fiver,’ he said, ‘there’s bad news. Hazel –’
‘I know,’ replied Fiver. ‘I know now.’
‘How do you know?’ asked Blackberry, startled.
‘As you came through the grass just now,’ said Fiver, very low, ‘there was a

fourth rabbit behind you, limping and covered with blood. I ran to see who it
was, and then there were only three of you, side by side.’

He paused and looked across the down, as though still seeking the bleeding

rabbit who had vanished in the half-light. Then, as Blackberry said nothing
more, he asked, ‘Do you know what happened?’

When Blackberry had told his news, Fiver returned to the warren and went

underground to his empty burrow. A little later, Bigwig brought the hutch rabbits
up the hill and at once called everyone to meet in the Honeycomb. Fiver did not
appear.

cheerful word. Dandelion was inconsolable to think that he might have stopped
Hazel breaking from the ditch. The meeting came to an end in a dreary silence
and a half-hearted silflay.

Later that morning Holly came limping into the warren. Of his three

companions, only Silver was alert and unharmed. Buckthorn was wounded in the
face and Strawberry was shivering and evidently ill from exhaustion. There were
no other rabbits with them.

26. Fiver Beyond

Uno Harva, quoted by Joseph Campbell in The Hero with a Thousand Facts

In the burrow, Fiver slept and woke uneasily through the heat of the day,

fidgeting and scratching as the last traces of moisture dried out of the earth
above him. Once, when a trickle of powdery soil fell from the roof, he leapt out
of sleep and was in the mouth of the run before he came to himself and returned
to where he had been lying. Each time he woke, he remembered the loss of
Hazel and suffered once more the knowledge that had pierced him as the
shadowy, limping rabbit disappeared in the first light of morning on the down.
Where was that rabbit now? Where had it gone? He began to follow it among the
tangled paths of his own thoughts, over the cold, dew-wet ridge and down into
the dawn-mist of the fields below.

The mist swirled round Fiver as he crept through thistles and nettles. Now he

could no longer see the limping rabbit ahead. He was alone and afraid, yet
perceiving old, familiar sounds and smells – those of the field where he was
born. The thick weeds of summer were gone. He was under the bare ash boughs
and the flowering blackthorn of March. He was crossing the brook, going up the
slope towards the lane, towards the place where Hazel and he had come upon the
notice board. Would the board still be there? He looked timidly up the slope. The
view was blotted with mist, but as he neared the top he saw a man busy over a
pile of tools – a spade, a rope and other, smaller implements, the use of which he
did not know. The notice board lay flat on the ground. It was smaller than he

remembered and fixed to a single, long, square post, sharpened at the farther end
to put into the earth. The surface of the board was white, just as he had seen it
before, and covered with the sharp, black lines like sticks. Fiver came hesitantly
up the slope and stopped close to the man, who stood looking down into a deep,
narrow hole sunk in the ground at his feet. The man turned to Fiver with the kind
of amiability that an ogre might show to a victim whom they both know that he
will kill and eat as soon as it suits him to do so.

‘Ah! An’ what am I doin’, eh?’ asked the man.
‘What are you doing?’ answered Fiver, staring and twitching with fear.
‘I’m just putt’n up this ’ere ol’ board,’ said the man. ‘And I s’pose you wants

t’know what for, eh?’

‘Yes,’ whispered Fiver.
‘It’s fer that there old ’Azel,’ said the man. ‘On’y where ’t’is, see, we got t’ put

up a bit of a notice, like, on ‘is account. And what d’you reckon it says, eh?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Fiver. ‘How – how can a board say anything?’
‘Ah, but it do, see?’ replied the man. ‘That’s where we knows what you don’t.

That’s why we kills you when we ’as a mind to. Now you wants take a good
look at that there board and then very likely you’ll know more ’n what you
knows now.’

In the livid, foggy twilight, Fiver stared at the board. As he stared, the black

sticks flickered on the white surface. They raised their sharp, wedge-shaped little
heads and chattered together like a nestful of young weasels. The sound,
mocking and cruel, came faintly to his ears, as though muffled by sand or
sacking. ‘In memory of Hazel-rah! In memory of Hazel-rah! In memory of
Hazel-rah! Ha ha ha ha ha ha!’

‘Well, that’s where ’t’is, see?’ said the man. ‘And I’ve got t’ang ’im up on this

’ere board. That’s t’ say, soon’s I gets it stood up proper. Same as you’d ’ang up
jay, like, or old stoat. Ah! Gon’ ’ang ’im up.’

‘No!’ cried Fiver. ‘No, you shan’t!’
‘On’y I ain’t got ’im, see?’ went on the man. ‘That’s why I can’t get done. I

can’t ’ang ’im up, ’cos ’e’ve gone down th’ bloody ’ole, that’s where ’e’ve gone.
’E’ve gone down th’ bloody ’ole, just when I’d got ’n lined an’ all, and I can’t
get ’n out.’

Fiver crept up to the man’s boots and peered into the hole. It was circular, a

cylinder of baked earthenware that disappeared vertically into the ground. He
called, ‘Hazel! Hazel!’ Far down in the hole, something moved and he was about
to call again. Then the man bent down and hit him between the ears.

saying, ‘Steady, Fiver, steady!’ He sat up. There was soil in his eyes, his ears and

nostrils. He could not smell. He shook himself and said, ‘Who is it?’

‘It’s Blackberry. I came to see how you were. It’s all right; a bit of the roof’s

fallen, that’s all. There’ve been falls all over the warren today – it’s the heat.
Anyway, it woke you from a nightmare, if I know anything. You were thrashing
about and calling out for Hazel. Poor Fiver! What a miserable thing it is to have
happened! We must try to bear it as best we can. We’ve all got to stop running
one day, you know. They say Frith knows all the rabbits, every one.’

‘Is it evening?’ asked Fiver.
‘Not yet, no. But it’s a fair time after ni-Frith. Holly and the others have come

back. Strawberry’s very ill and they haven’t any does with them – not one.
Everything’s as bad as it could be. Holly’s still asleep – he was completely
exhausted. He said he’d tell us what happened this evening. When we told him
about poor Hazel, he said – Fiver, you’re not listening. I expect you’d rather I
kept quiet.’

‘Blackberry,’ said Fiver, ‘do you know the place where Hazel was shot?’
‘Yes, Bigwig and I went and looked at the ditch before we came away. But

you mustn’t –’

‘Could you go there with me now?’
‘Go back there? Oh no. It’s a long way, Fiver, and what would be the good?

The risk, and this fearful heat, and you’d only make yourself wretched.’

‘Hazel isn’t dead,’ said Fiver.
‘Yes, the men took him away. Fiver, I saw the blood.’
‘Yes, but you didn’t see Hazel, because he isn’t dead, Blackberry, you must do

what I ask.’

‘You’re asking too much.’
‘Then I shall have to go alone. But what I’m asking you to do is to come and

save Hazel’s life.’

When at last Blackberry had reluctantly given in and they had set out down

the hill, Fiver went almost as fast as though he were running for cover. Again
and again he urged Blackberry to make haste. The fields were empty in the glare.
Every creature bigger than a blue-bottle was sheltering from the heat. When they
reached the outlying sheds beside the lane, Blackberry began to explain how he
and Bigwig had gone back to search; but Fiver cut him short.

‘We have to go up the slope, I know that: but you must show me the ditch.’
The elms were still. There was not the least sound in the leaves. The ditch was

thick with cow-parsley, hemlock and long trails of green-flowering bryony.
Blackberry led the way to the trampled patch of nettles and Fiver sat still among
them, sniffing and looking about him in the silence. Blackberry watched him
disconsolately. A faint breath of wind stole across the fields and a blackbird

began to sing from somewhere beyond the elms. At last Fiver began to move
along the bottom of the ditch. The insects buzzed round his ears and suddenly a
little cloud of flies flew up, disturbed from a projecting stone. No, not a stone. It
was smooth and regular – a circular lip of earthenware. The brown mouth of a
drain, stained black at the lower edge by a thin, dried thread of blood: of rabbit’s
blood.

‘The bloody hole!’ whispered Fiver. ‘The bloody hole!’
He peered into the dark opening. It was blocked. Blocked by a rabbit. That

was plain to be smelt. A rabbit whose faint pulse could just be heard, magnified
in the confined tunnel.

‘Hazel?’ said Fiver.
Blackberry was beside him at once. ‘What is it, Fiver?’
‘Hazel’s in that hole,’ said Fiver, ‘and he’s alive.’

27. ‘You Can’t Imagine it Unless You’ve been There’

Signor Piozzi, quoted by Cecilia Thrale

Holly, gaunt, his staring pelt full of goose-grass and fragments of burdock,

was talking with the three hutch rabbits and reassuring them as best he could. No
one could say now that Hazel had thrown away his life in a foolhardy prank. The
two does were the only gain that anyone had made; the warren’s only asset. But
they were plainly so ill-at-ease in their new surroundings that Holly was already
contending against his own belief that there was little to be hoped for from them.
Does who are upset and on edge tend to be infertile; and how were these does to
make themselves at home in strange conditions and a place where everyone was
lost so poorly in his thoughts? They would die, perhaps, or wander away. He
buckled once more to the task of explaining that he was sure better times lay
ahead; and as he did so, felt himself the least convinced of any.

Bigwig had sent Acorn to see whether there was anyone still to come. Acorn

returned to say that Strawberry felt too ill and that he could find neither
Blackberry nor Fiver.

‘Well, leave Fiver,’ said Bigwig. ‘Poor fellow, he’ll feel better by himself for a

time, I dare say.’

‘He’s not in his burrow, though,’ said Acorn.
‘Never mind,’ said Bigwig. But the thought came to him, ‘Fiver and

Blackberry? Could they have left the warren without telling anyone? If they
have, what will happen when the others get to know?’ Should he ask Kehaar to
go and look for them while there was still light? But if Kehaar found them, what
then? They could not be compelled to return. Or if they were, what good would
that do, if they wanted to be gone? At that moment Holly began to speak and
everyone became quiet.

‘We all know we’re in a mess,’ said Holly,’ and I suppose before long we shall

have to talk about what’s best to be done. But I thought that first of all I ought to
tell you how it is that we four – Silver, Buckthorn, Strawberry and I – have come
back without any does. You don’t have to remind me that when we set out,
everyone thought it was going to be straightforward. And here we are, one rabbit
sick, one wounded and nothing to show for it. You’re all wondering why.’

‘No one’s blaming you, Holly,’ said Bigwig.
‘I don’t know whether I’m to blame or not,’ replied Holly. ‘But you’ll tell me

that when you’ve heard the story.

we all felt there was no hurry. It was cool, I remember, and looked as if it would
be some time before the day got really bright and cloudless. There’s a farm not
far away from the other end of this wood, and although there were no men about
so early, I didn’t fancy going that way, so we kept up on high ground on the
evening side. We were all expecting to come to the edge of the down, but there
isn’t any steep edge as there is on the north. The upland just goes on and on,
open, dry and lonely. There’s plenty of cover for rabbits – standing corn, hedges
and banks – but no real woodland: just great, open fields of light soil with big,
white flintstones. I was hoping that we might find ourselves in the sort of
country we used to know – meadows and woods – but we didn’t. Anyhow, we
found a track with a good, thick hedge along one side and we decided to follow
that. We took it easy and stopped a good deal, because I was taking care to avoid
running into elil. I’m sure it’s bad country for stoats as well as foxes, and I
hadn’t much idea what we were going to do if we met one.’

‘I’m pretty certain we did pass close to a weasel,’ said Silver. ‘I could smell it.

But you know how it is with elil – if they’re not actually hunting they often take
no notice of you. We left very little scent, and buried our hraka as though we
were cats.’

wood running right across the way we were going. These downland woods are
queer, aren’t they? This was no thicker than the one above us now, but it

stretched as far as we could see either way, in a dead straight line. I don’t like
straight lines: men make them. And sure enough, we found a road beside this
wood. It was a very lonely, empty road, but all the same, I didn’t want to hang
about there, so we went straight through the wood and out the other side. Kehaar
spotted us in the fields beyond and told us to alter our direction. I asked him how
we were getting on and he said we were about half-way, so I thought we might
as well start looking for somewhere to lie up for the night. I didn’t fancy the
open and in the end we made scrapes in the bottom of a kind of little pit we
found. Then we had a good feed and passed the night very well.

just after the morning feed and there was a nasty, cold wind with it, so we stayed
where we were until after ni-Frith. It brightened up then and we went on. The
going wasn’t very nice because of the wet, but by early evening I reckoned we
ought to be near the place. I was looking round when a hare came through the
grass and I asked him whether he knew of a big warren close by.

‘ “Efrafa?” he asked. “Are you going to Efrafa?”*

‘ “If that’s what it’s called,” I answered.
‘ “Do you know it?”
‘ “No,” I said, “we don’t. We want to know where it is.”
‘ “Well,” he said, “my advice to you is to run, and quickly.”
‘I was just wondering what to make of that, when suddenly three big rabbits

come over the bank, just the way I did that night when I came to arrest you,
Bigwig: and one of them said, “Can I see your marks?”

‘ “Marks?” I said. “What marks? I don’t understand.”
‘ “You’re not from Efrafa?”
‘ “No,” I said, “we’re going there. We’re strangers.”
‘ “Will you come with me?” No “Have you come far?” or “Are you wet

through?” or anything like that.

‘So then these three rabbits took us off down the bank and that was how we

came to Efrafa, as they call it. And I’d better try and tell you something about it,
so that you’ll know what a dirty little bunch of snivelling hedge-scrapers we are
here.

‘Efrafa is a big warren – a good deal bigger than the one we came from – the

Threarah’s, I mean. And the one fear of every rabbit in it is that men are going to
find them and infect them with the white blindness. The whole warren is
organized to conceal its existence. The holes are all hidden and the Owsla have
every rabbit in the place under orders. You can’t call your life your own: and in
return you have safety – if it’s worth having at the price you pay.

‘As well as the Owsla, they have what they call a Council, and each of the

Council rabbits has some special thing he looks after. One looks after feeding:
another’s responsible for the ways in which they keep hidden: another looks
after breeding, and so on. As far as the ordinary rabbits are concerned, only a
certain number can be above ground at one time. Every rabbit is marked when
he’s a kitten: they bite them, deep, under the chin or in a haunch or fore-paw.
Then they can be told by the scar for the rest of their lives. You mustn’t be found
above ground unless it’s the right time of day for your Mark.’

‘Who’s to stop you?’ growled Bigwig.
‘That’s the really frightening part. The Owsla – well, you can’t imagine it

unless you’ve been there. The Chief is a rabbit named Woundwort: General
Woundwort, they call him. I’ll tell you more about him in a minute. Then under
him there are captains – each one in charge of a Mark – and each captain has his
own officers and sentries. There’s a Mark captain with his band on duty at every
time of the day and night. If a man happens to come anywhere near, which isn’t
often, the sentries give warning long before he comes close enough to see
anything. They give warning of elil too. They prevent anyone dropping hraka
except in special places in the ditches, where it’s buried. And if they see any
rabbit above ground whom they don’t recognize as having the right to be there,
they ask to see his mark. Frith knows what happens if he can’t explain himself –
but I can guess pretty well. Rabbits in Efrafa quite often go days at a time
without the sight of Frith. If their Mark’s on night silflay then they feed by night,
wet or fine, warm or cold. They’re all used to talking, playing and mating in the
burrows underground. If a Mark can’t silflay at their appointed time for some
reason or other – say there was a man working somewhere near – that’s just too
bad. They miss their turn till next day.’

‘But surely it alters them very much, living like that?’ asked Dandelion.
‘Very much indeed,’ replied Holly. ‘Most of them can’t do anything but what

they’re told. They’ve never been out of Efrafa and never smelt an enemy. The
one aim of every rabbit in Efrafa is to get into the Owsla, because of the
privileges: and the one aim of everyone in the Owsla is to get into the Council.
The Council have the best of everything. But the Owsla have to keep very strong
and tough. They take it in turn to do what they call Wide Patrol. They go out
over the country – all round the place – living in the open for days at a time. It’s
partly to find out anything they can, and partly to train them and make them
tough and cunning. Any hlessil they find they pick up and bring back to Efrafa.
If they won’t come, they kill them. They reckon hlessil a danger, because they
may attract the attention of men. The Wide Patrols report back to General
Woundwort and the Council decide what to do about anything new that they
think may be dangerous.’

‘They missed you on the way in, then?’ said Bluebell.
‘Oh no, they didn’t I We learned later that some time after we’d been brought

in by this rabbit – Captain Campion – a runner arrived from a Wide Patrol to say
that they’d picked up the track of three or four rabbits coming towards Efrafa
from the north; and were there any orders? He was sent back to say that we were
safely under control.

‘Anyway, this Captain Campion took us down to a hole in the ditch. The

mouth of the hole was a bit of old earthenware pipe and if a man had pulled it
out, the opening would have fallen in and showed no trace of the run inside. And
there he handed us over to another Captain – because he had to go back above
ground for the rest of his spell of duty, you see. We were taken to a big burrow
and told to make ourselves at home.

asking questions that I learnt most of what I’ve been telling you. We got talking
to some of the does and I made friends with one called Hyzenthlay.* I told her
about our problem here and why we’d come, and then she told us about Efrafa.
When she’d finished I said, “It sounds terrible. Has it always been like this?”
She said no, her mother had told her that in years gone by the warren had been
elsewhere and much smaller: but when General Woundwort came, he had made
them move to Efrafa and then he’d worked out this whole system of
concealment and perfected it until rabbits in Efrafa were as safe as stars in the
sky. “Most rabbits here die of old age, unless the Owsla kill them off,” she said.
“But the trouble is, there are more rabbits now than the warren can hold. Any
fresh digging that’s allowed has to be done under Owsla supervision and they do
it terribly slowly and carefully. It all has to be hidden, you see. We’re
overcrowded and a lot of rabbits don’t get above ground as much as they need
to. And for some reason there are not enough bucks and too many does. A lot of
us have found we can’t produce litters, because of the overcrowding, but no one
is ever allowed to leave. Only a few days ago, several of us does went to the
Council and asked whether we could form an expedition to start a new warren
somewhere else. We said we’d go far, far away – as far away as they liked. But
they wouldn’t hear of it – not on any account. Things can’t go on like this – the
system’s breaking down. But it doesn’t do to be heard talking about it.”

‘Well, I thought, this sounds hopeful. Surely they won’t object to our

proposals? We only want to take a few does and no bucks. They’ve got more
does than there’s room for and we want to take them farther away than anyone
here can ever have been.

‘A little later another Captain came and said we were to come with him to the

Council meeting.

good as this Honeycomb of ours, because they’ve got no tree-roots to make a
wide roof. We had to wait outside while they were talking about all sorts of other
things. We were just one piece of daily Council business: “Strangers
apprehended.” There was another rabbit waiting and he was under special guard
– Owslafa, they call them: the Council police. I’ve never been near anyone so
frightened in my life – I thought he’d go mad with fear. I asked one of these
Owslafa what was the matter and he said that this rabbit, Blackavar, had been
caught trying to run away from the warren. Well, they took him inside and first
of all we heard the poor fellow trying to explain himself, and then he was crying
and begging for mercy: and when he came out they’d ripped both his ears to
shreds, worse than this one of mine. We were all sniffing at him, absolutely
horror-stricken; but one of the Owslafa said, “You needn’t make such a fuss.
He’s lucky to be alive.” So while we were chewing on that, someone came out
and said the Council were ready for us.

and he really is a grim customer. I don’t think even you’d match up to him,
Bigwig. He’s almost as big as a hare and there’s something about his mere
presence that frightens you, as if blood and fighting and killing were all just part
of the day’s work to him. I thought he’d begin by asking us some questions
about who we were and what we wanted, but he didn’t do anything like that. He
said, “I’m going to explain the rules of the warren and the conditions on which
you’ll live here. You must listen carefully, because the rules are to be kept and
any breaking of them will be punished.” So then I spoke up at once and said that
there was a misunderstanding. We were an embassy, I said, come from another
warren to ask for Efrafa’s goodwill and help. And I went on to explain that all
we wanted was their agreement to our persuading a few does to come back with
us. When I’d finished, General Woundwort said that it was out of the question:
there was nothing to discuss. I replied that we’d like to stay with them for a day
or two and try to persuade them to change their mind.

‘ “Oh yes,” he said, “you’ll stay. But there’ll be no further occasion for you to

take up the Council’s time – for the next few days at any rate.”

was just going to ask them to consider one or two things from our point of view,
when another of the Councillors – a very old rabbit – said, “You seem to think
you’re here to argue with us and drive a bargain. But we’re the ones to say what
you’re going to do.”

if it was smaller than theirs. We thought of ourselves as their guests. And it was

only when I’d said that, that I realized with a horrible shock that they thought of
us as their prisoners: or as good as prisoners, whatever they might call it.

all he could to help me. He spoke very well about the decency and comradeship
natural to animals. “Animals don’t behave like men,” he said. “If they have to
fight, they fight; and if they have to kill, they kill. But they don’t sit down and
set their wits to work to devise ways of spoiling other creatures’ lives and
hurting them. They have dignity and animality.”

Council can’t spare any more time for you now, and I shall have to leave it to
your Mark Captain to tell you the rules. You’ll join the Right Flank Mark under
Captain Bugloss. Later, we shall see you again and you’ll find us perfectly
friendly and helpful to rabbits who understand what’s expected of them.”

‘So then the Owsla took us out to join the Right Flank Mark. Apparently

Captain Bugloss was too busy to see us and I took care to keep out of his way,
because I thought he might want to start marking us then and there. But soon I
began to understand what Hyzenthlay had meant when she said the system
wasn’t working properly any more. The burrows were overcrowded – at least by
our standards. It was easy to escape attention. Even in one Mark the rabbits don’t
all know each other. We found places in a burrow and tried to get some sleep,
but early in the night we were woken and told to silflay. I thought there might be
a chance to run for it in the moonlight, but there seemed to be sentries
everywhere. And besides the sentries, the Captain kept two runners with him,
whose job was to rush off at once in any direction from which an alarm might be
given.

‘When we’d fed we went underground again. Nearly all the rabbits were very

subdued and docile. We avoided them, because we meant to escape if we could
and we didn’t want to get known. But try as I would, I couldn’t think of a plan.

‘We fed again some time before ni-Frith the next day, and then it was back

underground. The time dragged terribly. At last – it must have been as evening
was coming on – I joined a little group of rabbits listening to a story. And do you
know, it was “The King’s Lettuce”? The rabbit who was telling it was nowhere
near as good as Dandelion, but I listened all the same, just for something to do.
And it was when he got to the bit where El-ahrairah dresses up and pretends to
be the doctor at King Darzin’s palace, that I suddenly had an idea. It was a very
risky one, but I thought there was a chance that it might work, simply because
every rabbit in Efrafa usually does what he’s told without question. I’d been
watching Captain Bugloss and he struck me as a nice enough fellow,
conscientious and a bit weak and rather harassed by having more to do than he

could really cope with.

‘That night, when we were called to silflay, it was pitch dark and raining; but

you don’t bother about a little thing like that in Efrafa – you’re only too glad to
get out and get some food. All the rabbits trooped up; and we waited until the
very last. Captain Bugloss was out on the bank, with two of his sentries. Silver
and the others went out in front of me and then I came up to him panting as if I’d
been running.

‘ “Captain Bugloss?”
‘ “Yes?” he said. “What is it?”
‘ “You’re wanted by the Council, at once.”
‘ “Why, what do you mean?” he asked. “What for?”
‘ “No doubt they’ll tell you that when they see you,” I answered. “I shouldn’t

keep them waiting if I were you.”

‘ “Who are you?” he said. “You’re not one of the Council runners. I know

them all. What Mark are you?”

them you won’t come?”

‘He looked doubtful at that and I made as if I were going. But then, all of a

sudden, he said, “Very well” – he looked awfully frightened, poor fellow – “but
who’s to take over here while I’m gone?”

want to hang about half the night doing your job.” He scuttled off. I turned to the
other two and said, “Stay here: and look alive, too. I’m going round the
sentries.”

‘Well, then the four of us ran off into the dark and sure enough after we’d

gone a little way two sentries popped up and tried to stop us. We all piled
straight into them. I thought they’d run, but they didn’t. They fought like mad
and one of them tore Buckthorn all down the nose. But of course there were four
of us; and in the end we broke past them and simply tore across the field. We had
no idea which way we were going, what with the rain and the night: we just ran.
I think the reason why the pursuit was a bit slow off the mark was because poor
old Bugloss wasn’t there to give the orders. Anyway, we had a fair start. But
presently we could hear that we were being followed: and what was worse, we
were being overtaken.

strength and there’s nothing they don’t know about moving in wet and darkness.
They’re all so much afraid of the Council that they’re not afraid of anything else.
It wasn’t long before I knew we were in trouble. The patrol that was after us
could actually follow us in the dark and rain faster than we could run away and

before long they were close behind. I was just going to tell the others that there
was nothing for it but to turn and fight when we came to a great, steep bank that
seemed to slope almost straight up into the air. It was steeper than this hillside
below us here, and the slope seemed to be regular, as if men had made it.

‘Well, there was no time to think about it, so up we went. It was covered with

rough grass and bushes. I don’t know how far it was to the top exactly, but I
should guess it was as high as a well-grown rowan tree – perhaps a bit higher.
When we got to the top we found ourselves on small, light stones that shifted as
we ran on them. That gave us away completely. Then we came upon broad, flat
pieces of wood and two great, fixed bars of metal that made a noise – a kind of
low, humming noise in the dark. I was just saying to myself, “This is men’s work
all right,” when I fell over the other side. I hadn’t realized that the whole top of
the bank was only a very short distance across and the other side was just as
steep. I went head over heels down the bank in the dark and fetched up against
an elder bush: and there I lay.’

last he said,

all four of us were there, we don’t understand it ourselves. But what I’m going to
say now is the cold truth. Lord Frith sent one of his great Messengers to save us
from the Efrafan Owsla. Each one of us had fallen over the edge of the bank in
one place or another. Buckthorn, who was half-blinded with his own blood, went
down almost to the bottom. I’d picked myself up and was looking back at the
top. There was just enough light in the sky to see the Efrafans if they came over.
And then – then an enormous thing – I can’t give you any idea of it – as big as a
thousand hrududil – bigger – came rushing out of the night. It was full of fire
and smoke and light and it roared and beat on the metal lines until the ground
shook beneath it. It drove in between us and the Efrafans like a thousand
thunderstorms with lightning. I tell you, I was beyond being afraid. I couldn’t
move. The flashing and the noise – they split the whole night apart. I don’t know
what happened to the Efrafans: either they ran away or it cut them down. And
then suddenly it was gone and we heard it disappearing, rattle and bang, rattle
and bang, far away in the distance. We were completely alone.

‘For a long time I couldn’t move. At last I got up and found the others, one by

one, in the dark. None of us said a word. At the bottom of the slope we
discovered a kind of tunnel that went right through the bank from one side to the
other. We crept into it and came out on the side where we’d gone up. Then we
went a long way through the fields, until I reckoned we must be well clear of
Efrafa. We crawled into a ditch and slept there, all four of us, until morning.

There was no reason why anything shouldn’t have come and killed us, and yet
we knew we were safe. You may think it’s a wonderful thing to be saved by Lord
Frith in his power. How many rabbits has that happened to, I wonder? But I tell
you, it was far more frightening than being chased by the Efrafans. Not one of us
will forget lying on that bank in the rain, while the fire-creature went by above
our heads. Why did it come on our account? That’s more than we shall ever
know.

‘The next morning I cast around a bit and soon I knew which was the right

direction. You know how you always do. The rain had stopped and we set out.
But it was a very hard journey back. We were exhausted long before the end – all
except Silver: I don’t know what we’d have done without him. We went on for a
day and a night without any real rest at all. We all felt that the only thing we
wanted to do was to get back here as soon as we could. When I reached the
wood this morning I was just limping along in a bad dream. I’m not really much
better than poor old Strawberry, I’m afraid. He never complained, but he’ll need
a long rest and I rather think I shall too. And Buckthorn – that’s the second bad
wound he’s had. But that’s not the worst now, is it? We’ve lost Hazel: the worst
thing that could have happened. Some of you asked me earlier this evening if I
would be Chief Rabbit. I’m glad to know you trust me, but I’m completely done
in and I can’t possibly take it on yet. I feel as dry and empty as an autumn puff-
ball – as though the wind could blow my fur away.’

28. At the Foot of the Hill

Walter de la Mare The Pilgrim

‘Just before we silflay,’ said Bigwig, ‘can I tell you, Holly, that I don’t believe

anyone else could have brought himself and three other rabbits safely back out
of a place like that?’

‘Frith meant us to get back,’ replied Holly. ‘That’s the real reason why we’re

here.’

As he turned to follow Speedwell up the run that led into the wood, he found

Clover beside him. ‘You and your friends must find it strange to go outside and
eat grass,’ he said. ‘You’ll get used to it, you know. And I can promise you that
Hazel-rah was right when he told you it’s a better life here than in a hutch. Come
with me and I’ll show you a patch of nice, short tail-grass, if Bigwig hasn’t had
it all while I’ve been away.’

Holly had taken to Clover. She seemed more robust and less timid than

Boxwood and Haystack and was evidently doing her best to adapt herself to
warren life. What her stock might be he could not tell, but she looked healthy.

‘I like it underground all right,’ said Clover, as they came up into the fresh air.

‘The closed space is really very much like a hutch, except that it’s darker. The
difficult thing for us is going to be feeding in the open. We’re not used to being
free to go where we like and we don’t know what to do. You all act so quickly
and half the time I don’t know why. I’d prefer not to feed very far from the hole,
if you don’t mind.’

They moved slowly across the sunset grass, nibbling as they went: Clover was

soon absorbed in feeding, but Holly stopped continually to sit up and sniff about
him at the peaceful, empty down. When he noticed Bigwig, a little way off,
staring fixedly to the north, he at once followed his gaze.

‘What is it?’ he asked.

‘It’s Blackberry,’ replied Bigwig. He sounded relieved.
Blackberry came hopping rather slowly down from the sky-line. He looked

tired out, but as soon as he saw the other rabbits he came on faster and made his
way to Bigwig.

‘Where have you been?’ asked Bigwig. ‘And where’s Fiver? Wasn’t he with

you?’

hard to tell how badly – but he won’t die.’

The other three rabbits looked at him speechlessly. Blackberry waited,

enjoying the effect.

‘Hazel’s alive?’ said Bigwig. ‘Are you sure?’
‘Quite sure,’ said Blackberry. ‘He’s at the foot of the hill at this very moment,

in that ditch where you were the night Holly and Bluebell arrived.’

‘I can hardly believe it,’ said Holly. ‘If it’s true, it’s the best news I’ve ever

heard in my life. Blackberry, you really are sure? What happened? Tell us.’

way back to the farm: then he went along the ditch and found Hazel gone to
ground up a land-drain. He was very weak from loss of blood and he couldn’t
get out of the drain by himself. We had to drag him by his good hind leg. He
couldn’t turn round, you see.’

‘But how on earth did Fiver know?’
‘How does Fiver know what he knows? You’d better ask him. When we’d got

Hazel into the ditch, Fiver looked to see how badly he was hurt. He’s got a nasty
wound in one hind leg, but the bone isn’t broken: and he’s torn all along one
side. We cleaned up the places as well as we could and then we started out to
bring him back. It’s taken us the whole evening. Can you imagine it – daylight,
dead silence and a lame rabbit reeking of fresh blood? Luckily, it’s been the
hottest day we’ve had this summer – not a mouse stirring. Time and again we
had to take cover in the cow-parsley and rest. I was all on the jump, but Fiver
was like a butterfly on a stone. He sat in the grass and combed his ears. “Don’t
get upset,” he kept saying. “There’s nothing to worry about. We can take our
time.” After what I’d seen, I’d have believed him if he’d said we could hunt
foxes. But when we got to the bottom of the hill Hazel was completely finished
and he couldn’t go any further. He and Fiver have taken shelter in the overgrown
ditch and I came on to tell you. And here I am.’

said, ‘Will they stay there tonight?’

hill until he’s a good deal stronger.’

comfortable, and probably Fiver will be able to do with someone else to help to
look after Hazel.’

soon.’

‘Hah!’ said Bigwig. ‘If I meet a stoat, it’d better look out, that’s all. I’ll bring

you one back tomorrow, shall I?’ He raced off and disappeared over the edge.

have to tell the whole thing, from the beginning.’

the hill, had cost Hazel more pain and effort than anything in his life. If Fiver
had not found him, he would have died in the drain. When Fiver’s urging had
penetrated his dark, ebbing stupor, he had at first actually tried not to respond. It
was so much easier to remain where he was, on the far side of the suffering he
had undergone. Later, when he found himself lying in the green gloom of the
ditch, with Fiver searching his wounds and assuring him that he could stand and
move, still he could not face the idea of setting out to return. His torn side
throbbed and the pain in his leg seemed to have affected his senses. He felt dizzy
and could not hear or smell properly. At last, when he understood that Fiver and
Blackberry had risked a second journey to the farm, in the broadest of daylight,
solely to find him and save his life, he forced himself to his feet and began to
stumble down the slope to the road. His sight was swimming and he had to stop
again and again. Without Fiver’s encouragement he would have lain down once
more and given up. In the road, he could not climb the bank and had to limp
along the verge until he could crawl under a gate. Much later, as they came
under the pylon line, he remembered the overgrown ditch at the foot of the hill
and set himself to reach it. Once there, he lay down and at once returned to the
sleep of total exhaustion.

in the long grass. It was out of the question to disturb Hazel by digging and they
spent the night crouched beside him on the narrow floor.

Kehaar, foraging between the elders. He stamped to attract his attention and
Kehaar sailed across to him with one beat of his wings and a long glide.

‘Meester Pigvig, you find Meester ’Azel?’
‘Yes,’ said Bigwig, ‘he’s in the ditch here.’
‘ ’E not dead?’
‘No, but he’s wounded and very weak. The farm men shot him with a gun,

you know.’

‘You get black stones out?’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Alvays vid gun ees coming liddle black stones. You never see?’
‘No, I don’t know about guns.’
‘Take out black stones, ’e get better. ’E come now, ya?’
‘I’ll see,’ said Bigwig. He went down to Hazel and found him awake and

talking to Fiver. When Bigwig told him that Kehaar was outside he dragged
himself up the short run and into the grass.

‘Dis dam’ gun,’ said Kehaar. ‘ ’E put liddle stones for ’urt you. I look, ya?’
‘I suppose you’d better,’ said Hazel. ‘My leg’s still very bad, I’m afraid.’
He lay down and Kehaar’s head flicked from side to side as though he were

looking for snails in Hazel’s brown fur. He peered closely up the length of the
torn flank.

Maybe ’urt you, not long.’

Two shot-gun pellets were buried in the muscle of the haunch. Kehaar

detected them by smell and removed them exactly as he might have picked
spiders out of a crack. Hazel had barely time to flinch before Bigwig was
sniffing at the pellets in the grass.

‘Now ees more bleed,’ said Kehaar. ‘You stay, vait maybe vun, two day. Den

goot like before. Dose rabbits up dere, all vait, vait for Meester ’Azel. I tell dem
’e come.’ He flew off before they could reply.

weather continued and for much of the time he sat under the elder branches,
dozing above ground like some solitary hlessi and feeling his strength returning.
Fiver stayed with him, keeping the wounds clean and watching his recovery.
Often, they would say nothing for hours together, lying in the rough, warm grass
while the shadows moved to evening, until at last the local blackbird cocked its
tail and tuck-tucked away to roost. Neither spoke of Nuthanger Farm, but Hazel
showed plainly enough that for the future Fiver, when he gave advice, would
have no hard task to get him to accept it.

‘Hrair-roo,’ said Hazel one evening, ‘what would we have done without you?

We’d none of us be here, would we?’

‘You’re sure we are here, then?’ asked Fiver.
‘That’s too mysterious for me,’ replied Hazel. ‘What do you mean?’
‘Well, there’s another place – another country – isn’t there? We go there when

we sleep: at other times too; and when we die. El-ahrairah comes and goes
between the two as he wants, I suppose, but I never could quite make that out,
from the tales. Some rabbits will tell you it’s all easy there, compared with the

waking dangers that they understand. But I think that only shows they don’t
know much about it. It’s a wild place, and very unsafe. And where are we really
– there or here?’

‘Our bodies stay here – that’s good enough for me. You’d better go and talk to

that Silverweed fellow – he might know more.’

He terrified me and yet I knew that I understood him better than anyone else in
that place. He knew where he belonged, and it wasn’t here. Poor fellow, I’m sure
he’s dead. They’d got him all right – the ones in that country. They don’t give
their secrets away for nothing, you know. But look! Here come Holly and
Blackberry, so we’d better feel sure we’re here just for the moment anyway.’

tell again the story of his escape from Efrafa. When he had spoken of his
deliverance by the great apparition in the night, Fiver had listened attentively
and asked one question,’ Did it make a noise?’ Later, when Holly had gone back,
he told Hazel that he felt sure there was some natural explanation, though he had
no idea what it could be. Hazel, however, had not been greatly interested. For
him, the important thing was their disappointment and the reason for it. Holly
had achieved nothing and this was entirely due to the unexpected unfriendliness
of the Efrafan rabbits. This evening, as soon as they had begun to feed, Hazel
returned to the matter.

‘Holly,’ he said, ‘we’re hardly any nearer to solving our problem, are we?

You’ve done wonders and got nothing to show for it, and the farm raid was only
a silly lark, I’m afraid – and an expensive one for me, at that. The real hole has
still got to be dug.’

‘Well,’ said Holly, ‘you say it was only a lark, Hazel, but at least it gave us

two does: and they’re the only two we’ve got.’

‘Are they any good?’
The kind of ideas that have become natural to many male human beings in

thinking of females – ideas of protection, fidelity, romantic love and so on – are,
of course, unknown to rabbits, although rabbits certainly do form exclusive
attachments much more frequently than most people realize. However, they are
not romantic and it came naturally to Hazel and Holly to consider the two
Nuthanger does simply as breeding stock for the warren. This was what they had
risked their lives for.

‘Well, it’s hard to say, yet,’ replied Holly. ‘They’re doing their best to settle

down with us – Clover particularly. She seems very sensible. But they’re
extraordinarily helpless, you know – I’ve never seen anything like it – and I’m
afraid they may turn out to be delicate in bad weather. They might survive next

winter and then again they might not. But you weren’t to know that, when you
got them out of the farm.’

‘With a bit of luck, they might each have a litter before the winter,’ said Hazel.

‘I know the breeding season’s over, but everything’s so topsy-turvy with us here
that there’s no saying.’

precious little to be the only thing between us and the end of everything we’ve
managed to do so far. I think they may very well not have any kittens for some
time, partly because this isn’t the season and partly because the life’s so strange
to them. And when they do, the kittens will very likely have a lot of this man-
bred hutch-stock in them. But what else is there to hope for? We must do the best
we can with what we’ve got.’

‘Has anyone mated with them yet?’ asked Hazel.
‘No, neither of them has been ready so far. But I can see some fine old fights

breaking out when they are.’

‘That’s another problem. We can’t go on with nothing but these two does.’
‘But what else can we do?’
‘I know what we’ve got to do,’ said Hazel, ‘but I still can’t see how. We’ve got

to go back and get some does out of Efrafa.’

afraid I can’t have given you a very clear description of Efrafa.’

‘Oh yes, you have – the whole idea scares me stiff. But we’re going to do it.’
‘It can’t be done.’
‘It can’t be done by fighting or fair words, no. So it will have to be done by

means of a trick.’

‘There’s no trick will get the better of that lot, believe me. There are far more

of them than there are of us: they’re very highly organized: and I’m only telling
the truth when I say that they can fight, run and follow a trail every bit as well as
we can and a lot of them, much better.’

‘The trick,’ said Hazel, turning to Blackberry, who all this time had been

nibbling and listening in silence, ‘the trick will have to do three things. First, it
will have to get the does out of Efrafa and secondly it will have to put paid to the
pursuit. For a pursuit there’s bound to be and we can’t expect another miracle.
But that’s not all. Once we’re clear of the place, we’ve got to become impossible
to find – beyond the reach of any Wide Patrol.’

‘Yes,’ said Blackberry doubtfully. ‘Yes, I agree. To succeed we should have to

manage all those things.’

‘Yes. And this trick, Blackberry, is going to be devised by you.’
The sweet, carrion scent of dogwood filled the air; in the evening sunshine the

insects hummed around the dense, white cymes hanging low above the grass. A
pair of brown and orange beetles, disturbed by the feeding rabbits, took off from
a grass-stem and flew away, still coupled together.

trick to put us right once and for all.’

‘I can see how to do the first thing,’ said Blackberry. ‘At least, I think I can.

But it’s dangerous. The other two I can’t see at all yet and I’d like to talk it over
with Fiver.’

leg’s good enough now, but all the same I think we’ll leave it for tonight. Good
old Holly, will you tell them that Fiver and I will come early tomorrow morning?
It worries me to think that Bigwig and Silver may start fighting about Clover at
any moment.’

‘Hazel,’ said Holly, ‘listen. I don’t like this idea of yours at all. I’ve been in

Efrafa and you haven’t. You’re making a bad mistake and you might very well
get us all killed.’

It was Fiver who replied. ‘It ought to feel like that, I know,’ he said, ‘but

somehow it doesn’t: not to me. I believe we can do it. Anyway, I’m sure Hazel’s
right when he says it’s the only chance we’ve got. Suppose we go on talking
about it for a bit?’

‘Not now,’ said Hazel. ‘Time for underground down here – come on. But if

you two race up the hill, you’ll probably be in time for some more sunshine at
the top. Good night.’

29. Return and Departure

Shakespeare Henry V

Just before sunrise Pipkin and Speedwell saw Fiver coming through the wet

grass near the summit of the down. They ran out to meet him and waited with
him until Hazel came up to them. Hazel was limping and had evidently found
the climb a strain, but after resting and feeding for a short time he was able to
run down to the warren almost as fast as the others. The rabbits crowded round.
Everyone wanted to touch him. He was sniffed and tussled with and rolled over
in the grass until he felt almost as though he were being attacked. Human beings,
on occasions of this kind, are usually full of questions, but the rabbits expressed
their delight simply by proving to themselves through their senses that this was
really Hazel-rah. It was all he could do to stand up to the rough play.’ I wonder
what would happen if I lay down under it?’ he thought. ‘They’d kick me out, I
dare say. They wouldn’t have a crippled Chief Rabbit. This is a test as well as a
welcome, even though they don’t know it themselves. I’ll test them, the rascals,
before I’m done.’

He pushed Buckthorn and Speedwell off his back and broke away to the edge

of the wood. Strawberry and Boxwood were on the bank and he joined them and
sat washing and combing himself in the sunrise.

‘We can do with a few well-behaved fellows like you,’ he said to Boxwood.

‘Look at that rough lot out there – they nearly finished me off! What on earth do
you make of us and how are you settling down?’

Strawberry here has been helping me a great deal. We were just seeing how
many smells I could tell on the wind, but that’s something that’ll only come
slowly. The smells are awfully strong on a farm, you know, and they don’t mean
much when you live behind wire. As far as I can make out, you all live by
smell.’

– don’t go out alone – all that sort of thing. And how about you, Strawberry? Are
you better?’

‘More or less,’ answered Strawberry, ‘as long as I sleep a lot and sit in the sun,

Hazel-rah. I’ve been terrified half out of my wits – that’s the bottom of it. I’ve
had the shivers and the horrors for days. I kept thinking I was back in Efrafa.’

‘What was it like in Efrafa?’ asked Hazel.
‘I’d rather die than go back to Efrafa,’ said Strawberry, ‘or risk going

anywhere near it. I don’t know which was worse, the boredom or the fear. All
the same,’ he added after a few moments,’ there are rabbits there who’d be the
same as we are if they could only live naturally, like us. Several would be glad to
leave the place if they only could.’

expected, they were disappointed over the failure at Efrafa and full of
indignation at the ill-treatment of Holly and his companions. More than one
thought, like Holly, that the two does were likely to give rise to trouble.

other’s throats, you know – I don’t see how it’s to be helped.’

Late in the afternoon Hazel called everyone into the Honeycomb.
‘I’ve been thinking things over,’ he said. ‘I know you must all have been

really disappointed not to have got rid of me at Nuthanger Farm the other day, so
I’ve decided to go a bit further next time.’

‘Where?’ asked Bluebell.
‘To Efrafa,’ replied Hazel, ‘if I can get anyone to come with me: and we shall

bring back as many does as the warren needs.’

There were murmurs of astonishment, and then Speedwell asked, ‘How?’
‘Blackberry and I have got a plan,’ said Hazel, ‘but I’m not going to explain it

now, for this reason. You all know that this is going to be a dangerous business.

If any of you get caught and taken into Efrafa, they’ll make you talk all right.
But those who don’t know a plan can’t give it away. I’ll explain it later on, at the
proper time.’

I hear, the whole lot of us wouldn’t be enough to fight the Efrafans.’

possibility. Anyway, it’ll be a long journey home with the does, and if by any
chance we meet a Wide Patrol on the way, there have got to be enough of us to
deal with them.’

‘Would we have to go into Efrafa?’ asked Pipkin timidly.
‘No,’ said Hazel, ‘we shall –’
‘I never thought, Hazel,’ interrupted Holly, ‘I never thought that the time

would come when I should feel obliged to speak against you. But I can only say
again that this is likely to be a complete disaster. I know what you think – you’re
counting on General Woundwort not having anyone as clever as Blackberry and
Fiver. You’re quite right – I don’t think he has. But the fact remains that no one
can get a bunch of does away from that place. You all know that I’ve spent my
life patrolling and tracking in the open. Well, there are rabbits in the Efrafan
Owsla who are better at it than I am – I’m admitting it: and they’ll hunt you
down with your does and kill you. Great Frith! We all have to meet our match
some time or other! I know you want only to help us all, but do be sensible and
give this scheme up. Believe me, the best thing to do with a place like Efrafa is
to stay as far away from it as possible.’

be torn to pieces?’ ‘That rabbit with the mutilated ears –’ ‘Well, but Hazel-rah
must know what he’s doing.’ ‘It’s too far.’ ‘I don’t want to go.’

Hazel waited patiently for quiet. At last he said, ‘It’s like this. We can stay

here and try to make the best of things as they are: or we can put them right once
and for all. Of course there’s a risk: anyone knows that who’s heard what
happened to Holly and the others. But haven’t we faced one risk after another, all
the way from the warren we left? What do you mean to do? Stay here and
scratch each other’s eyes out over two does, when there are plenty in Efrafa that
you’re afraid to go and get, even though they’d be only too glad to come and
join us?’

Someone called out, ‘What does Fiver think?’
‘I’m certainly going,’ said Fiver quietly. ‘Hazel’s perfectly right and there’s

nothing the matter with his plan. But I promise you this, all of you. If I do come,
later on, to feel any kind of misgiving, I shan’t keep it to myself.’

‘And if that happens, I shan’t ignore it,’ said Hazel.

There was silence. Then Bigwig spoke.
‘You may as well all know that I’m going,’ he said, ‘and we shall have Kehaar

with us, if that appeals to you at all.’

There was a buzz of surprise.
‘Of course, there are some of us who ought to stay here,’ said Hazel. ‘The

farm rabbits can’t be expected to go: and I’m not asking anyone who went the
first time to go back again.’

with all my guts and if we’re really going to make fools of them I want to be
there, as long as I don’t have to go back inside the place – that I couldn’t face.
But after all, you’re going to need someone who knows the way.’

what’s –’ He became confused. ‘Anyway, I’ll come,’ he repeated, in a very
nervous voice.

There was a scuffling in the run that led down from the wood and Hazel

called, ‘Who’s that?’

‘It’s I, Hazel-rah – Blackberry.’
‘Blackberry!’ said Hazel. ‘Why, I thought you’d been here all the time. Where

have you been?’

‘Sorry not to have come before,’ said Blackberry. ‘I’ve been talking to Kehaar,

as a matter of fact, about the plan. He’s improved it a good deal. If I’m not
mistaken, General Woundwort’s going to look remarkably silly before we’ve
finished. I thought at first that it couldn’t be done, but now I feel sure it can.’

‘Come where the grass is greener,’ said Bluebell,
‘And the lettuces grow in rows,
‘And a rabbit of free demeanour
‘Is known by his well-scratched nose.’
‘I think I shall have to come, just to satisfy my curiosity. I’ve been opening

and shutting my mouth like a baby bird to know about this plan and no one puts
anything in. I suppose Bigwig’s going to dress up as a hrududu and drive all the
does across the field.’

Hazel turned on him sharply. Bluebell sat up on his hind legs and said, ‘Please

General Woundwort, sir, I’m only a little hrududu and I’ve left all my petrol on
the grass, so if you wouldn’t mind eating the grass, sir, while I just give this lady
a ride –’

‘Bluebell,’ said Hazel, ‘shut up!’
‘I’m sorry, Hazel-rah,’ replied Bluebell in surprise. ‘I didn’t mean any harm. I

was only trying to cheer everyone up a bit. After all, most of us feel frightened at
the idea of going to this place and you can’t blame us, can you? It sounds

horribly dangerous.’

‘Well, look here,’ said Hazel, ‘we’ll finish this meeting now. Let’s wait and

see what we decide – that’s the rabbits’ way. No one has to go to Efrafa who
doesn’t want to, but it’s clear enough that some of us mean to go. Now I’m off to
talk to Kehaar myself.’

at a foul-smelling piece of flaking, brown flesh, which seemed to be hanging
from a tracery of bones. He wrinkled his nose in disgust at the odour, which
filled the wood around and was already attracting ants and blue-bottles.

‘What on earth is that, Kehaar?’ he asked. ‘It smells appalling!’
‘You not know? Heem feesh, feesh, come from Peeg Vater. Ees goot.’
‘Come from Big Water? (Ugh!) Did you find it there?’
‘Na, na. Men have heem. Down to farm ees plenty peeg rubbish place, all

t’ings dere. I go for food, find heem, all smell like Peeg Vater, pick heem up,
pring heem back: make me t’ink all about Peeg Vater.’ He began to tear again at
the half-eaten kipper. Hazel sat choking with nausea and disgust as Kehaar lifted
it entire and beat it against a beech-root, so that small fragments flew round
them. He collected himself and made an effort.

the mothers out of the big warren.’

‘Ya, ya, I come for you. Meester Pigvig, ’e need me for ’elp ’im. Ven ’e dere,

’e talk to me, I not rabbit. Ees goot, ya?’

‘Yes, rather. It’s the only possible way. You’re a good friend to us, Kehaar.’
‘Ya, ya, ’elp you for get mudders. But now ees dis, Meester ’Azel. Alvays I

vant Peeg Vater now – alvays, alvays. Ees hearing Peeg Vater, vant to fly to Peeg
Vater. Now soon you go for get mudders, I ’elp you, ’ow you like. Den, ven you
getting mudders, I leave you dere, fly avay, no come back. But I come back
anudder time, ya? Come in autumn, in vinter I come live ’ere vid you, ya?’

‘We shall miss you, Kehaar. But when you come back we’ll have a fine

warren here, with lots of mothers. You’ll be able to feel proud of all you did to
help us.’

vait for go Peeg Vater. Ees hard now for stay, you know? Dis vat you do, do
heem queek, ya?’

Bigwig came up the run, put his head out of the hole and stopped in horror.
‘Frith up a tree!’ he said. ‘What a fearful smell! Did you kill it, Kehaar, or did

it die under a stone?’

‘You like, Meester Pigvig? I pring you nice liddle pit, ya?’
‘Bigwig,’ said Hazel, ‘can you go and tell all the others that we’re setting off

at day-break tomorrow? Holly will look after things here until we get back and
Buckthorn, Strawberry and the farm rabbits are to stay with him. Anyone else
who wants to stay will be perfectly free to do so.’

‘Don’t worry,’ said Bigwig, from the hole. ‘I’ll send them all up to silflay with

Kehaar. They’ll go anywhere you like before a duck can dive.’

PART III EFRAFA

Company Prospectus of the South Sea Bubble

the danger. ‘Send news by Kehaar when he reaches you,’ he said, ‘and come
back soon.’

Nevertheless, as Silver guided them southwards along higher ground to the

west of the farm, almost all, now that they were actually committed to the
adventure, felt dread and apprehension. They had heard enough about Efrafa to
daunt the stoutest heart. But before reaching it – or where-ever they were going
– they had to expect two days on the open down. Foxes, stoats, weasels – any of
these might be encountered, and the only recourse would be flight above ground.
Their progress was straggling and broken, slower than that which Holly had
made with his picked band of three. Rabbits strayed, took alarm, stopped to rest.
After a time Hazel divided them into groups, led by Silver, Bigwig and himself.
Yet still they moved slowly, like climbers on a rock-face, first some and then
others taking their turn to cross the same piece of ground.

But at least the cover was good. June was moving towards July and high

summer. Hedgerows and verges were at their rankest and thickest. The rabbits
sheltered in dim-green, sun-flecked caves of grass, flowering marjoram and cow-
parsley: peered round spotted hairy-stemmed clumps of viper’s bugloss,
blooming red and blue above their heads: pushed between towering stalks of
yellow mullein. Sometimes they scuttled along open turf, coloured like a
tapestry meadow with self-heal, centaury and tormentil. Because of their anxiety
about elil and because they were nose-to-ground and unable to see far ahead, the
way seemed long.

Had their journey been made in years gone by, they would have found the

downs far more open, without standing crops, grazed close by sheep; and they
could hardly have hoped to go far unobserved by enemies. But the sheep were
long gone and the tractors had ploughed great expanses for wheat and barley.
The smell of the green, standing corn was round them all day. The mice were
numerous and so were the kestrels. The kestrels were disturbing, but Hazel had
been right when he guessed that a healthy, full-grown rabbit was too large a
quarry for them. At all events, no one was attacked from above.

Some time before ni-Frith, in the heat of the day, Silver paused in a little patch

of thorn. There was no breeze and the air was full of the sweet, chrysanthemum-
like smell of the flowering compositae of dry uplands – corn-chamomile, yarrow
and tansy. As Hazel and Fiver came up and squatted beside him, he looked out
across the open ground ahead.

‘There, Hazel-rah,’ he said, ‘that’s the wood that Holly didn’t like.’
Two or three hundred yards away and directly across their line, a belt of trees

ran straight across the down, stretching in each direction as far as they could see.
They had come to the line of the Portway – only intermittently a road – which

runs from north of Andover, through St Mary Bourne with its bells and streams
and watercress beds, through Bradley Wood, on across the downs and so to
Tadley and at last to Sil-chester – the Romans’ Calleva Atrebatum. Where it
crosses the downs, the line is marked by Caesar’s Belt, a strip of woodland as
straight as the road, narrow indeed but more than three miles long. In this hot
noon-day the trees of the Belt were looped and netted with darkest shadow. The
sun lay outside, the shadows inside the trees. All was still, save for the
grasshoppers and the falling finch-song of the yellow-hammer on the thorn.
Hazel looked steadily for a long time, listening with raised ears and wrinkling
his nose in the unmoving air.

‘I can’t see anything wrong with it,’ he said at last. ‘Can you, Fiver?’
‘No,’ replied Fiver. ‘Holly thought it was a strange kind of wood and so it is,

but there don’t seem to be any men there. All the same, someone ought to go and
make sure, I suppose. Shall I?’

The third group had come up while Hazel had been gazing at the Belt, and

now all the rabbits were either nibbling quietly or resting, with ears laid flat, in
the light green sun-and-shade of the thorn thicket.

‘Is Bigwig there?’ asked Hazel.
Throughout the morning Bigwig had seemed unlike himself – silent and

preoccupied, with little attention for what was going on around him. If his
courage had not been beyond question, it might have been thought that he was
feeling nervous. During one long halt Bluebell had overheard him talking with
Hazel, Fiver and Blackberry and later had told Pipkin that it sounded for all the
world as though Bigwig were being reassured. ‘Fighting, yes, anywhere,’ he had
heard him say, ‘but I still reckon that this game is more in someone else’s line
than mine.’ ‘No,’ replied Hazel, ‘you’re the only one that can do it: and
remember, this isn’t sport, if the farm raid was. Everything depends on it.’ Then,
realizing that Bluebell could hear him, he added, ‘Anyway, keep on thinking
about it and try to get used to the idea. We must get on now.’ Bigwig had gone
moodily down the hedgerow to collect his group.

Now, he came out of a near-by clump of mugwort and flowering thistle and

joined Hazel under the thorn.

‘What do you want?’ he asked abruptly.
‘King of cats,’ (pfeffa-rah) answered Hazel, ‘would you like to go and have a

look in those trees: and if you find any cats or men or anything like that, just
chase them off, would you, and then come and tell us it’s all right?’

When Bigwig had slipped away, Hazel said to Silver, ‘Have you any idea how

far the Wide Patrols go out? Are we inside their range yet?’

‘I don’t know, but I’d guess that we are,’ said Silver. ‘As I understand it, the

range is up to the patrol. Under a pushing sort of captain, a patrol may go out a
long way, I believe.’

‘I see,’ said Hazel. ‘Well, I don’t want to meet a patrol if it can possibly be

helped, and if we do, not one of them must get back to Efrafa. That’s one reason
why I brought so many of us. But by way of avoiding them, I’m going to try to
make use of this wood. Perhaps they don’t fancy it any more than Holly did.’

‘But surely it doesn’t run the way we want to go?’ said Silver.
‘We’re not going to Efrafa, though,’ said Hazel. ‘We’re going to find

somewhere to hide, as near to it as we can safely get. Any ideas?’

Efrafa safely and I don’t know how you can begin to look for somewhere to
hide. And then the patrol – if there is one – they’ll be cunning brutes. They
might very well spot us and not show themselves at all – simply go and report.’

Good – let’s get them into the wood and go down the length of it a little way.
Then we must slip out on the other side and make sure that Kehaar finds us. He’s
coming to look for us this afternoon and at all costs we mustn’t miss him.’

Less than half a mile to the west, they came upon a spinney adjoining the

southern edge of Caesar’s Belt. To the west again was a shallow, dry downland
combe, perhaps four hundred yards across and overgrown with weeds and rough,
yellowing summer tussocks. There, well before sunset, Kehaar, flying westwards
down the Belt, spotted the rabbits lying up, all among the nettles and goose-
grass. He sailed down and alighted near Hazel and Fiver.

‘How’s Holly?’ asked Hazel.
‘ ’E sad,’ said Kehaar. ‘ ’E say you no come back.’ Then he added, ‘Mees

Clover, she ready for mudder.’

‘That’s good,’ said Hazel. ‘Is anyone doing anything about it?’
‘Ya, ya, ees all to fight.’
‘Oh well, I suppose it’ll sort itself out.’
‘Vat you do now, Meester ’Azel?’
‘This is where you start helping, Kehaar. We need a place to hide, as near the

big warren as we can safely get – somewhere where those other rabbits won’t
find us. If you know the country well enough, perhaps you can suggest
something.’

‘Meester ’Azel, ’ow close you vant?’
‘Well, no further away than Nuthanger Farm is from the Honeycomb. In fact,

that’s really about the limit.’

you.’

‘Over the river? You mean we swim across?’
‘Na, na, rabbit no sveem dis river. Ees peeg, ees deep, go queek. But ees

pridge, den udder side plenty place for hide. Ees close to varren, like you say.’

‘And you think that’s the best we can do?’
‘Ees plenty trees und ees river. Udder rabbits no find you.’
‘What do you think?’ said Hazel to Fiver.
‘It sounds better than I’d hoped for,’ said Fiver. ‘I hate to say it, but I think we

ought to go straight there as fast as we can, even if it makes everyone exhausted.
We’re in danger all the time we’re on the down, but once we get off it we can
rest.’

before – but they must feed and rest first. Start fu Inlé? There’ll be a moon.’

‘Oh, how I’ve come to loathe those words “start” and “fu Inlé”,’ said

Blackberry.

However, the evening feed was peaceful and cool and after a time everyone

felt refreshed. As the sun was sinking, Hazel brought them all together, under
close cover, to chew pellets and rest. Although he did his best to appear
confident and cheerful, he could feel that they were on edge, and after parrying
one or two questions about the plan, he began to wonder how he could distract
their thoughts and get them to relax until they were ready to set off again. He
remembered the time, on the first night of his leadership, when they had been
forced to rest in the wood above the Enborne. At least it was good to see that no
one was exhausted now: they were as tough a bunch of hlessil as ever raided a
garden. Not a blade of grass to choose between them, thought Hazel: Pipkin and
Fiver looked as fresh as Silver and Bigwig. Still, a little entertainment would be
all to the good and raise their spirits. He was just going to speak up when Acorn
saved him the trouble.

‘Will you tell us a story, Dandelion?’ he asked.
‘Yes! yes!’ said several others. ‘Come on! Make it a stunner while you’re at

it!’

‘All right,’ said Dandelion. ‘How about “El-ahrairah and the Fox in the

Water”?’

‘Let’s have “The Hole in the Sky”,’ said Hawkbit.
‘No, not that,’ said Bigwig suddenly. He had spoken very little all the evening

and everyone looked round. ‘If you’re going to tell a story, there’s only one I
want,’ he went on. ‘ “El-ahrairah and the Black Rabbit of Inlé.” ’

‘Perhaps not that one,’ said Hazel. Bigwig rounded on him, snarling.
‘If there’s going to be a story, don’t you think I’ve got as good a right as

anyone to choose it?’ he asked.

Hazel did not reply and after a pause, during which no one else spoke,

Dandelion, with a rather subdued manner, began.

31. The Story of El-ahrairah and the Black Rabbit of
Inlé

Robert Browning Prospice

‘Now late one afternoon in February, Rabscuttle led some of the rabbits out to

a rubbish heap on the edge of a garden, some way away from the warren. The
evening came on cold and misty and well before twilight a fog came down thick.
They set off for home but they got lost: and then they had trouble with an owl
and became confused over their direction. Anyway, Rabscuttle got separated
from the others and after wandering about for some time, he strayed into the
guards’ quarters outside King Darzin’s city: and they caught him and took him
up to the king.

‘King Darzin saw his chance to spite El-ahrairah. He put Rabscuttle into a

special prison-hole and every day he was brought out and made to work,
sometimes in the frost, digging and tunnelling. But El-ahrairah swore he would
get him out somehow. And so he did, for he and two of his does spent four days
digging a tunnel from the wood into the back of the bank where Rabscuttle had
been set to work. And in the end this tunnel came near to the hole in the bank
down which Rabscuttle had been sent. He was supposed to be digging to turn the
hole into a store-room and the guards were watching outside while he worked.
But El-ahrairah reached him, for he could hear him scratching in the dark: and
they all slipped away down the tunnel and escaped through the wood.

‘When the news reached King Darzin, he became very angry indeed: and he

determined that this time he would start a war and finish El-ahrairah once and
for all. His soldiers set out in the night and went to the meadows of Fenlo; but
they couldn’t get down the rabbit-holes. Some tried, to be sure, but they soon
came out again, because they met El-ahrairah and the other rabbits. They were
not used to fighting in narrow places in the dark and they got bitten and
scratched until they were glad to come out tail-first.

‘But they didn’t go away: they sat outside and waited. Whenever any of the

rabbits tried to silflay they found their enemies ready to jump on them. King
Darzin and his soldiers couldn’t watch all the holes – there were too many – but
they were quick enough to dash off wherever they saw a rabbit show his nose.
Very soon El-ahrairah’s people found that it was all they could do to snatch a
mouthful or two of grass – just enought to keep alive – before they had to bolt
underground again. El-ahrairah tried every trick he could think of, but he
couldn’t be rid of King Darzin or get his own people away. The rabbits began to
become thin and miserable underground and some of them fell ill.

‘At last El-ahrairah felt quite desperate and one night, when he had been

risking his life again and again to bring down a few mouthfuls of grass for a doe
and her family whose father had been killed the day before, he called out, “Lord
Frith! I would do anything to save my people! I would drive a bargain with a
stoat or a fox – yes, or with the Black Rabbit of Inlé!”

‘Now as soon as he had said this, El-ahrairah realized in his heart that if there

was one creature anywhere who might have the will and certainly had the power
to destroy his enemies, it was the Black Rabbit of Inlé. For he was a rabbit and
yet more powerful than King Darzin a thousand times over. But the thought
made El-ahrairah sweat and shudder, so that he had to crouch down where he
was in the run. After a time he went to his own burrow and began to think of
what he had said and what it meant.

‘Now as you all know, the Black Rabbit of Inlé is fear and everlasting

darkness. He is a rabbit, but he is that cold, bad dream from which we can only
entreat Lord Frith to save us today and tomorrow. When the snare is set in the
gap, the Black Rabbit knows where the peg is driven; and when the weasel
dances, the Black Rabbit is not far off. You all know how some rabbits seem just
to throw their lives away between two jokes and a theft: but the truth is that their
foolishness comes from the Black Rabbit, for it is by his will that they do not
smell the dog or see the gun. The Black Rabbit brings sickness too. Or again, he
will come in the night and call a rabbit by name: and then that rabbit must go out
to him, even though he may be young and strong to save himself from any other
danger. He goes with the Black Rabbit and leaves no trace behind. Some say that

the Black Rabbit hates us and wants our destruction. But the truth is – or so they
taught me – that he too serves Lord Frith and does no more than his appointed
task – to bring about what must be. We come into the world and we have to go:
but we do not go merely to serve the turn of one enemy or another. If that were
so, we would all be destroyed in a day. We go by the will of the Black Rabbit of
Inlé and only by his will. And though that will seems hard and bitter to us all, yet
in his way he is our protector, for he knows Frith’s promise to the rabbits and he
will revenge any rabbit who may chance to be destroyed without the consent of
himself. Anyone who has seen a game-keeper’s gibbet knows what the Black
Rabbit can bring down on elil who think they will do what they will.

‘El-ahrairah spent the night alone in his burrow and his thoughts were terrible.

As far as he knew, no rabbit had ever tried to do what he had in mind. But the
more he thought about it – as well as he could for hunger and fear and the trance
that comes upon rabbits face-to-face with death – the more it seemed to him that
there was at least a chance of success. He would seek out the Black Rabbit and
offer him his own life in return for the safety of his people. But if, when he
offered his life, he did not mean the offer to be accepted, it would be better not to
go near the Black Rabbit at all. The Black Rabbit might not accept his life: yet
still, perhaps, he might get a chance to try something else. Only, there could be
no cheating the Black Rabbit. If his people’s safety were to be had, by whatever
means, the price would be his life. So unless he failed, he would not return. He
would therefore need a companion to bring back whatever it was that was going
to overthrow King Darzin and save the warren.

the day. Then he called his Owsla together and told them what he meant to do.

‘Later that evening, in the last of the twilight, the rabbits came out and

attacked King Darzin’s soldiers. They fought very bravely and some of them
were killed. The enemy thought they were trying to break out of the warren and
did everything they could to surround them and force them back into their holes.
But the truth was that all the fighting was simply to distract King Darzin’s
attention and keep his soldiers busy. As darkness set in, El-ahrairah and
Rabscuttle slipped out from the other end of the warren and made off down the
ditch, while the Owsla fell back and King Darzin’s soldiers jeered at them down
the holes. As for King Darzin, he sent a message to say that he was ready to talk
to El-ahrairah about terms of surrender.

I don’t know and no rabbit knows. But I always remember what old Feverfew –
d’you remember him? – used to say when he told this story. “They didn’t take
long,” he said. “They took no time at all. No. They limped and stumbled through

a bad dream to that terrible place they were bound for. Where they were
travelling, the sun and moon mean nothing and winter and summer less. But you
will never know” – and then he used to look all round at us – “you will never
know and neither do I, how far El-ahrairah went on his journey into the dark.
You see the top of a great stone sticking out of the ground. How far is it to the
middle? Split the stone. Then you’ll know.”

upwards, over splinters of slate, among grey rocks bigger than sheep. Mist and
icy rain swirled about them and there was no sound but the trickling of water and
sometimes, from far above, the cry of some great, evil bird on the wing. And
these sounds echoed, for they were between black cliffs of stone, taller than the
tallest trees. The snow lay in patches all about, for the sun never shone to melt it.
The moss was slippery and whenever they pushed out a pebble, it rattled down
and down behind them in the gullies. But El-ahrairah knew the way and on he
went, until the mist grew so thick that they could see nothing. Then they kept
close to the cliff and little by little, as they went, it overhung them until it made a
dark roof above their backs. Where the cliff ended was the mouth of a tunnel,
like a huge rabbit hole. In the freezing cold and silence, El-ahrairah stamped and
flashed his tail to Rabscuttle. And then, as they were about to go into the tunnel,
they realized that what they had thought, in the gloom, to be a part of the rock
was not rock. It was the Black Rabbit of Inlé, close beside them, still as lichen
and cold as the stone.’

story. I know I’m not brave –’

himself seemed composed and even detached, which was more than could be
said for any other rabbit in the audience: but Pipkin was hardly to realize this.
‘Let’s go out there for a bit and watch the spiders catching moths, shall we?’ said
Fiver. ‘I think I can remember where I left a patch of vetch – it must be
somewhere this way.’ Still talking quietly, he led Pipkin out into the overgrown
combe. Hazel turned to make sure of the direction they had taken and as he did
so Dandelion hesitated, uncertain whether to resume.

‘Go on,’ said Bigwig, ‘and don’t leave anything out.’
‘I think many things are left out, if only the truth could be known (said

Dandelion), for no one can say what happens in that country where El-ahrairah
went of his own accord and we do not. But as I was told, when they first became
aware of the Black Rabbit, they fled down the tunnel – as needs they must, for
there was nowhere else to run. And this they did although they had come on
purpose to encounter him and all depended on their doing so. They did no

differently from all of us; and the end too, was no different, for when they had
done slipping and tripping and falling along the tunnel, they found themselves in
a vast, stone burrow. All was of stone: the Black Rabbit had dug it out of the
mountain with his claws. And there they found, waiting for them, him from
whom they had fled. There were others in that burrow also – shadows without
sound or smell. The Black Rabbit has his Owsla too, you know. I would not care
to meet them.

‘The Black Rabbit spoke with the voice of water that falls into pools in

echoing places in the dark.

‘ “El-ahrairah, why have you come here?”
‘ “I have come for my people,” whispered El-ahrairah.
‘The Black Rabbit smelt as clean as last year’s bones and in the dark El-

ahrairah could see his eyes, for they were red with a light that gave no light.

‘ “You are a stranger here, El-ahrairah,” said the Black Rabbit. “You are

alive.”

‘ “My lord,” replied El-ahrairah, “I have come to give you my life. My life for

my people.”

‘The Black Rabbit drew his claws along the floor.
‘ “Bargains, bargains, El-ahrairah,” he said. “There is not a day or a night but

a doe offers her life for her kittens, or some honest captain of Owsla his life for
his Chief Rabbit’s. Sometimes it is taken, sometimes it is not. But there is no
bargain, for here, what is, is what must be.”

my life. He would keep a promise, as Prince Rainbow kept his.”

‘ “You are my guest, El-ahrairah,” said the Black Rabbit. “Stay in my burrow

as long as you wish. You may sleep here. And you may eat here, and they are
few indeed who can do as much. Let him eat,” he said to the Owsla.

food which they gave him in that burrow, his secret thoughts would become
plain and there would be an end of tricks.

‘ “Then at least we must entertain you,’ said the Black Rabbit. ‘You must feel

at home, El-ahrairah, and make yourself comfortable. Come, let us play bob-
stones.”*

‘ “Very well,” said El-ahrairah, “and if I win, my lord, perhaps you will be so

good as to accept my life in return for my people’s safety.’

‘ “I will,” said the Black Rabbit. “But if I win, El-ahrairah, you shall give me

both your tail and your whiskers.”

‘The stones were brought and El-ahrairah sat down in the cold and the echoes

to play against the Black Rabbit of Inlé. Now as you may suppose, El-ahrairah

knew how to play bob-stones. He could play as well as any rabbit that ever
covered a cast. But there – in that dreadful place, with the Black Rabbit’s eyes
upon him and the Owsla who made no sound – try as he would, his wits deserted
him and even before he cast, he felt that the Black Rabbit knew what was down.
The Black Rabbit showed never the least haste. He played as the snow falls,
without sound or change, until at last El-ahrairah’s spirit failed him and he knew
that he could not win.

“and they will show you a burrow to sleep in. I shall return tomorrow and if you
are still here I will see you. But you are free to leave whenever you wish.”

whiskers: and when he came to himself, he was alone with Rabscuttle in a
hollow stone burrow, with an opening to the mountain outside.

go away. I can feel for both of us in the dark.”

‘ “Certainly not,” said El-ahrairah. He still hoped to get what he wanted from

the Black Rabbit somehow and he felt sure that they had been put into this
burrow so that they would be tempted to steal away. “Certainly not. I can make
do very well with some willow-herb and clematis. Go out and get some,
Rabscuttle, but make sure you come back before tomorrow evening. You had
better try to bring some food, too, if you can.”

very little, partly for the pain and partly for the fear that never left him; but
chiefly because he was still searching for some trick that would serve his turn.
The next day Rabscuttle returned with some pieces of turnip and after El-
ahrairah had eaten them, Rabscuttle helped him to patch himself up with a grey
tail and whiskers, made from the winter drift of clematis and ragwort. In the
evening he went to meet the Black Rabbit as though nothing had happened.

up and down when he sniffed, but thrust it forward, as a dog does – “my burrow
cannot be what you are used to: but perhaps you have done your best to make
yourself comfortable?”

‘ “I have, my lord,” said El-ahrairah. “I am glad that you allow me to stay.”
‘ “Perhaps we will not play bob-stones tonight,” said the Black Rabbit. “You

must understand, El-ahrairah, that I have no wish to make you suffer. I am not
one of the Thousand. I repeat, you may stay or leave as you please. But if you
are going to remain, perhaps you would care to hear a story; and to tell one
yourself, if you like.”

‘ “Certainly, my lord,” said El-ahrairah, “And if I can tell a story as good as

yours, perhaps you will accept my life and grant the safety of my people.”

‘ “I will,” said the Black Rabbit. “But if not, El-ahrairah, you will have to

forfeit your ears.” He waited to see whether El-ahrairah would refuse the wager,
but he did not.

‘Then the Black Rabbit told such a tale of fear and darkness as froze the hearts

of Rabscuttle and El-ahrairah where they crouched on the rock, for they knew
that every word was true. Their wits turned. They seemed to be plunged in icy
clouds that numbed their senses; and the Black Rabbit’s story crept into their
hearts like a worm into a nut, leaving them shrivelled and empty. When at last
that terrible story was ended, El-ahrairah tried to speak. But he could not collect
his thoughts and he stammered and ran about the floor, like a mouse when the
hawk glides low. The Black Rabbit waited silently, with no sign of impatience.
At last it was clear that there would be no story from El-ahrairah, and the Owsla
took him and put him into a deep sleep: and when he woke, his ears were gone
and only Rabscuttle was beside him in the stone burrow, crying like a kitten.

sake of Lord Frith and the green grass, let me take you home.”

‘ “Nonsense,” said El-ahrairah. “Go out and get me two good, big dock-

leaves. They will do very well for ears.”

‘ “They will wither, master,” said Rabscuttle, “and I am withered now.”
‘ “They will last long enough,” said El-ahrairah grimly, “for what I have to do.

But I cannot find the way.”

‘When Rabscuttle was gone, El-ahrairah forced himself to think clearly. The

Black Rabbit would not accept his life. Also, it was plain that he himself would
never be able to win any sort of wager against him: he might as well try to run a
race across a sheet of ice. But if the Black Rabbit did not hate him, why did he
inflict these sufferings upon him? To destroy his courage and make him give up
and go away. But why not simply send him away? And why wait, before hurting
him, till he himself proposed a wager and lost it? The answer came to him
suddenly. These shadows had no power either to send him away or to hurt him,
except with his own consent. They would not help him, no. They would seek
possession of his will and break it if they could. But supposing that he could find
among them something that would save his people, could they stop him from
taking it away?

maimed head with two dock-leaves in place of ears and after a while they slept.
But El-ahrairah kept dreaming of his starving rabbits waiting in the runs to push
back King Darzin’s soldiers and placing all their hopes on him: and at last he
woke, cold and cramped, and wandered out into the runs of the stone warren. As

he limped along, trailing the dock-leaves on either side of his head – for he could
not raise or move them like the ears he had lost – he came to a place from which
several narrow runs led down deeper into the ground: and here he found two of
the ghastly, shadowy Owsla moving about some dark business of their own.
They turned and stared, to make him afraid, but El-ahrairah was past being
afraid and he stared back at them, wondering what they had in mind to persuade
him to lose.

pit. You are alive; and have suffered much already.”

‘ “Not as much as my people,” replied El-ahrairah.
‘ “There is enough suffering here for a thousand warrens,” said the shadow.

“Do not be stubborn, El-ahrairah. In these holes lie all the plagues and diseases
that come to rabbits – fever and mange and the sickness of the bowels. And here,
too, in this nearest hole, lies the white blindness, that sends creatures hobbling
out to die in the fields, where even the elil will not touch their rotting bodies.
This is our task, to see that all these are ready for the use of Inlé-rah. For what is,
is what must be.”

‘Then El-ahrairah knew that he must give himself no time to think. He

pretended to go back, but suddenly turned, rushed upon the shadows and
plunged into the nearest hole faster than a raindrop into the ground. And there he
lay, while the shadows flickered and gibbered about the entrance, for they had no
power to move him, except by fear. After a time they went away and El-ahrairah
was left alone, wondering whether he would be able to reach King Darzin’s army
in time without the use of whiskers or ears.

be infected, El-ahrairah came out and began to make his way back along the run.
He did not know how soon the disease would appear or how long he would take
to die, but plainly he ought to return as quickly as he could – if possible, before
there was any sign of illness on him. Without going near Rabscuttle, he must tell
him to hurry ahead, reach the rabbits in the warren and warn them to block all
the holes and stay inside until King Darzin’s army was destroyed.

in any case he could feel little or nothing without his whiskers. At that moment a
quiet voice said, “El-ahrairah, where are you going?” He had heard nothing, but
he knew that the Black Rabbit was beside him.

‘ “I am going home, my lord,” he replied. “You said that I might go when I

wished.”

‘ “You have some purpose, El-ahrairah,” said the Black Rabbit. “What is it?”
‘ “I have been in the pit, my lord,” answered El-ahrairah. “I am infected with

the white blindness and I am going to save my people by destroying the enemy.”

is carried?”

‘A sudden misgiving seized upon El-ahrairah. He said nothing.
‘ “It is carried by the fleas in rabbits’ ears,” said the Black Rabbit. “They pass

from the ears of a sick rabbit to those of his companions. But El-ahrairah, you
have no ears and fleas will not go to dock-leaves. You can neither catch nor carry
the white blindness.”

to the ground. He tried to move, but his back legs dragged along the rock and he
could not get up. He scuffled and then lay still in the silence.

place for the living and no place at all for warm hearts and brave spirits. You are
a nuisance to me. Go home. I myself will save your people. Do not have the
impertinence to ask me when. There is no time here. They are already saved.”

the holes of the warren, confusion and terror came upon them in the falling
darkness. The fields seemed full of huge rabbits with red eyes, stalking among
the thistles. They turned and fled. They vanished in the night; and that is why no
rabbit who tells the tales of El-ahrairah can say what kind of creatures they were
or what they looked like. Not one of them has ever been seen, from that day to
this.

‘When at last El-ahrairah was able to rise to his feet, the Black Rabbit was

gone and Rabscuttle was coming down the run, looking for him. Together they
went out to the mountainside and made their way down the stone-rattling gully
in the mist. They did not know where they were going, except that they were
going away from the Black Rabbit’s warren. But after a time it became plain that
El-ahrairah was ill from shock and exhaustion. Rabscuttle dug a scrape and there
they stayed for several days.

not find their way back. They were confused in their wits and had to beg help
and shelter of other animals whom they met. Their journey home lasted three
months and many adventures they had. Some of these, as you know, are stories
in themselves. Once they lived with a lendri and found pheasants’ eggs for him
in the wood. And once they barely escaped from the middle of a hay-field when
the hay was cutting. All the time, Rabscuttle looked after El-ahrairah, brought
him fresh dock-leaves and kept the flies from his wounds until they healed.

‘At last, one day, they came back to the warren. It was evening, and as the sun

stretched out all the hills, they could see any number of rabbits at silflay,

nibbling in the grass and playing over the ant-heaps. They stopped at the top of
the field, sniffing the gorse and herb-robert on the wind.

‘ “Well, they look all right,” said El-ahrairah. “A healthy lot, really. Let’s just

slip in quietly and see whether we can find one or two of the Owsla captains
underground. We don’t want a lot of fuss.”

bearings, because apparently the warren had grown bigger and there were more
holes than before, both in the bank and in the field. They stopped to speak to a
group of smart young bucks and does sitting under the elder bloom.

burrow is?”

warren?”

‘ “Unless he’s dead,” said Rabscuttle. “But surely you must have heard of

Captain Loosestrife? He was an officer of the Owsla in the fighting.”

‘ “What fighting?” asked another buck.
‘ “The fighting against King Darzin,” replied Rabscuttle.
‘ “Here, do me a favour, old fellow, will you?” said the buck. “That fighting –

I wasn’t born when it finished.”

‘ “But surely you know the Owsla captains who were?” said Rabscuttle.
‘ “I wouldn’t be seen dead with them,” said the buck. “What, that white-

whiskered old bunch? What do we want to know about them?”

‘ “What they did,” said Rabscuttle.
‘ “That war lark, old fellow?” said the first buck. “That’s all finished now.

That’s got nothing to do with us.”

one of the does. “It’s not our business, is it?”

nobody fought in wars there wouldn’t be any, would there? But you can’t get old
rabbits to see that.”

‘ “My father was in it,” said the second buck. “He gets on about it sometimes.

I always go out quick. ‘They did this and then we did that’ and all that caper.
“Makes you curl up, honest. Poor old geezer, you’d think he’d want to forget
about it. I reckon he makes half of it up. And where did it get him, tell me that?”

ahrairah, “I’ll go and see if I can find Captain Loosestrife for you. I don’t
actually know him myself, but then it’s rather a big warren.”

now and I can manage by myself.”

bush, looking out across the fields. As the light began to fail, he suddenly
realized that Lord Frith was close beside him, among the leaves.

‘ “Are you angry, El-ahrairah?” asked Lord Frith.
‘ “No, my lord,” replied El-ahrairah, “I am not angry. But I have learned that

with creatures one loves, suffering is not the only thing for which one may pity
them. A rabbit who does not know when a gift has made him safe is poorer than
a slug, even though he may think otherwise himself.”

feed, and the stony bank where the rabbit scratches a hole in vain. But speaking
of gifts, I have brought a few trifles for you. A pair of ears, a tail and some
whiskers. You may find the ears slightly strange at first. I put a little starlight in
them, but it is really quite faint: not enough, I am sure, to give away a clever
thief like you. Ah, there is Rabscuttle coming back. Good, I have something for
him too. Shall we –” ’

‘Hazel! Hazel-rah!’ It was Pipkin’s voice from behind a clumb of burdock on

the edge of the little circle of listeners. ‘There’s a fox coming up the combe!’

32. Across the Iron Road

General Jourdan Mémoires Militaires

Neither Hazel nor any of the rabbits who had been listening to Dandelion’s

story had ever seen a fox. Nevertheless, they knew that a fox in the open, plain
to be seen, is not dangerous as long as it is spotted in time. Hazel realized that he
had been careless to allow everyone to gather round Dandelion and to have
failed to post even one sentry. What wind there was, was from the north-east and
the fox, coming up the combe from the west, might have broken in upon them
without warning. But from this danger they had been saved by Fiver and Pipkin
going into the open. Even in his flash of alarm as Pipkin spoke, it crossed
Hazel’s mind that Fiver, no doubt reluctant to advise him in front of the others,
had probably seized the opportunity provided by Pipkin’s fear to post himself as
a sentry.

Hazel thought quickly. If the fox were not too close, all they had to do was

run. There was woodland near-by and they could vanish into it, keeping more or
less together, and simply continue on their way. He pushed through the
burdocks.

‘How close is it?’ he asked. ‘And where’s Fiver?’
‘I’m here,’ replied Fiver, from a few yards away. He was squatting under the

long briars of a dog-rose and did not turn his head as Hazel came up beside him.
‘And there’s the fox,’ he added. Hazel followed his gaze.

The rough, weed-covered ground of the combe sloped away below them, a

long dip bounded on the north by Caesar’s Belt. The last of the setting sun shone
straight up it through a break in the trees. The fox was below them and still some
way off. Although it was almost directly downwind and therefore must be able
to smell them, it did not look as though it were particularly interested in rabbits.
It was trotting steadily up the combe like a dog, trailing its white-tipped brush. In
colour it was sandy brown, with dark legs and ears. Even now, though obviously
not hunting, it had a crafty, predatory look that made the watchers among the
dog-roses shiver. As it passed behind a patch of thistles and disappeared from
view, Hazel and Fiver returned to the others.

‘Come on,’ said Hazel. ‘If you’ve never seen a fox don’t bother to go and look

now. Just follow me.’

rabbit shouldered him roughly aside, pushed past Fiver and was gone into the
open. Hazel stopped and looked round in amazement.

‘Who was that?’ he asked.
‘Bigwig,’ answered Fiver, staring.
Together they went quickly back to the briars and once more looked into the

combe. Bigwig, in full view, was loping warily downhill, straight towards the
fox. They watched him aghast. He drew near, but still the fox paid no attention.

‘Hazel,’ said Silver from behind, ‘shall I –?’
‘No one is to move,’ said Hazel quickly. ‘Keep still, all of you.’
At about thirty yards’ distance the fox saw the approaching rabbit. It paused

for a moment and then continued to trot forwards. It was almost upon him before
Bigwig turned and began to limp up the north slope of the combe towards the
trees of the Belt. The fox hesitated again and then followed him.

‘What’s he up to?’ muttered Blackberry.
‘Trying to draw it off, I suppose,’ replied Fiver.
‘But he didn’t have to! We should have got away without that.’
‘Confounded fool!’ said Hazel. ‘I don’t know when I’ve been so angry.’
The fox had quickened its pace and was now some distance away from them.

It appeared to be overtaking Bigwig. The sun had set and in the failing light they
could just make him out as he entered the undergrowth. He disappeared and the
fox followed. For several moments all was quiet. Then, horribly clear across the
darkening, empty combe, there came the agonizing squeal of a stricken rabbit.

‘O Frith and Inlé!’ cried Blackberry, stamping. Pipkin turned to bolt. Hazel did

not move.

‘Shall we go, Hazel?’ asked Silver. ‘We can’t help him now.’
As he spoke, Bigwig suddenly broke out of the trees, running very fast.

Almost before they could grasp that he was alive, he had recrossed the entire
upper slope of the combe in a single dash and bolted in among them.

‘Come on,’ said Bigwig, ‘let’s get out of here!’
‘But what – what – are you wounded?’ asked Bluebell in bewilderment.
‘No,’ said Bigwig, ‘never better! Let’s go!’
‘You can wait until I’m ready,’ said Hazel in a cold, angry tone.’ You’ve done

your best to kill yourself and acted like a complete fool. Now hold your tongue
and sit down!’ He turned and, although it was rapidly becoming too dark to see
any distance, made as though he were still looking out across the combe. Behind
him, the rabbits fidgeted nervously. Several had begun to feel a dream-like sense
of unreality. The long day above ground, the close, overgrown combe, the
frightening story in which they had been absorbed, the sudden appearance of the
fox, the shock of Bigwig’s inexplicable adventure – all these, following one
upon another, had flooded their spirits and left them dull and bemused.

‘Get them out, Hazel,’ whispered Fiver, ‘before they all go tharn.’ Hazel

turned at once.

sake keep close together, because if anyone gets lost in the dark we may not find
him again. And remember, if we come upon any strange rabbits, you’re to attack
them at once and ask questions afterwards.’

combe and then, in ones and twos, slipped across the empty road beyond. Little
by little their spirits cleared. They found themselves in open farmland – indeed,
they could both smell and hear the farm, not far away on the evening side – and
the going was easy: smooth, wide pasture fields, sloping gently downhill and
divided not by hedges but by broad, low banks, each as wide as a lane and
overgrown with elder, dog-wood and spindle. It was true rabbit country,
reassuring after the Belt and the tangled, goose-grassed combe; and when they
had covered a good distance over the turf – halting continually to listen and sniff
and running, now one and now another, from each piece of cover to the next –
Hazel felt safe in giving them a rest. As soon as he had sent out Speedwell and
Hawkbit as sentries, he led Bigwig to one side.

able to do without and you have to go and run a silly risk like that. It wasn’t
necessary and it wasn’t even clever. What were you up to?’

‘I’m afraid I just lost my head, Hazel,’ replied Bigwig. ‘I’ve been strung up all

day, thinking about this business at Efrafa – ’got me really on edge. When I feel
like that I have to do something – you know, fight or run a risk. I thought if I
could make that fox look a fool I wouldn’t feel so worried about the other thing.

What’s more, it worked – I feel a lot better now.’

life away for nothing – we all thought you had. Don’t try it again, there’s a good
chap. You know everything’s going to depend on you. But tell me, whatever
happened in the trees? Why did you cry like that, if you were all right?’

afraid. I was going to lose the homba in the trees, you see, and then come back.
Well, I went into the undergrowth, and I’d just stopped limping and was starting
to run really fast, when suddenly I found myself face to face with a bunch of
rabbits – strangers. They were coming towards me, as if they were going out into
the open combe. Of course, I didn’t have time to get a good look at them, but
they seemed to be big fellows. “Look out – run!” I said as I dashed up to them,
but all they did was try to stop me. One of them said, “You stay here!” or
something like that, and then he got right in my way. So I knocked him down – I
had to – and raced off: and the next thing I heard was this dreadful squealing. Of
course, I went even faster then and I got clear of the trees and came back to you.’

‘So the homba got this other rabbit?’
‘It must have. After all, I led it right on to them, even though I didn’t mean to.

But I never saw what actually happened.’

‘What became of the others?’
‘I’ve no idea. They must have run, I suppose.’
‘I see,’ said Hazel thoughtfully. ‘Well, perhaps it’s all for the best. But look

here, Bigwig, no more fancy tricks until the proper time – there’s too much at
stake. You’d better stay near Silver and me – we’ll keep you in good heart.’

At that moment Silver came up to them.
‘Hazel,’ he said, ‘I’ve just realized where we are and it’s a lot too close to

Efrafa. I think we ought to make off as soon as we can.’

find the way to that iron road Holly told us about?’

completely exhausted. I can’t say I know the way, but I can tell the direction all
right.’

‘Well, we’ll just have to take the risk,’ said Hazel. ‘If only we can get there by

early morning, they can rest at the other end.’

of the fields under the dim light of a quarter-moon. The half-darkness was full of
sounds and movement. Once Acorn put up a plover, which flew round them,
calling shrilly, until at length they crossed a bank and left it behind. Soon after,
somewhere near them, they heard the unceasing bubbling of a night-jar; a

peaceful sound, without menace, which died gradually away as they pushed on.
And once they heard a corncrake calling as it crept among the long grass of a
path verge. (It makes a sound like a human finger-nail drawn down the teeth of a
comb). But elil they met none and although they were continually on the watch
for signs of an Efrafan patrol, they saw nothing but mice, and a few hedgehogs
hunting for slugs along the ditches.

At last, as the first lark rose towards the light that was still far up in the sky,

Silver, his pale fur sodden dark with dew, came limping back to where Hazel
was encouraging Bluebell and Pipkin.

iron road.’

‘I wouldn’t care about my spirits,’ said Bluebell, ‘if my legs weren’t so tired.

Slugs are lucky not to have legs. I think I’ll be a slug.’

‘Well, I’m a hedgehog,’ said Hazel, ‘so you’d better get on!’
‘You’re not,’ replied Bluebell. ‘You haven’t enough fleas. Now slugs don’t

have fleas, either. How comforting to be a slug, among the dandelions so snug –’

coming. But where is the iron road? Holly said a steep, overgrown bank. I can’t
make out anything like that.’

‘No, that’s away up by Efrafa. Down here, it runs in a sort of combe of its

own. Can’t you smell it?’

Hazel sniffed. In the cool damp, he picked up at once the unnatural smells of

metal, coal-smoke and oil. They went forward and in a very short time found
themselves looking down from among the bushes and undergrowth on the edge
of the railway cutting. All was quiet, but as they paused at the top of the bank, a
tussling pack of six or seven sparrows flew down to the line and began to peck
about between the sleepers. Somehow, the sight was reassuring.

‘Are we to cross, Hazel-rah?’ asked Blackberry.
‘Yes,’ said Hazel, ‘at once. Put it between us and Efrafa: then we’ll feed.’
They went rather hesitantly down into the cutting, half-expecting the fiery,

thundering angel of Frith to appear out of the twilight: but the silence remained
unbroken. Soon they were all feeding in the meadow beyond, too tired to pay
attention to concealment or to anything but the ease of resting their legs and
nibbling the grass.

his long, pale-grey wings.

‘Meester ’Azel, vat you do? You no stay ’ere?’
‘They’re tired out, Kehaar. They’ve got to have a rest.’
‘Ees not to rest ’ere. Ees rabbits come.’

‘Yes, but not just yet. We can –’
‘Ya, ya, ees coming for find you! Ees close!’
‘Oh, curse these confounded patrols!’ cried Hazel. ‘Come on, all of you, get

down the field into that wood! Yes, you too, Speedwell, unless you want to have
your ears chewed off in Efrafa. Come on, move!’

exhausted on flat, bare ground under fir trees. Hazel and Fiver consulted Kehaar
again.

been going all night, you know. We’ll have to sleep here today. Did you actually
see a patrol?’

‘Ya, ya, come all along by udder side iron road. Yoost in time you go.’
‘Well, then, you saved us. But look, Kehaar, could you go and see where they

are now? If they’re gone, I’m going to tell our lot to go to sleep – not that they
need telling: look at them!’

crossing the iron road. Then he offered to keep watch himself until the evening
and Hazel, greatly relieved, at once told the rabbits to sleep. One or two had
already fallen asleep, lying on their sides on the open ground. Hazel wondered
whether he ought to wake them and tell them to get under thicker cover, but as
he was thinking about it he fell asleep himself.

The day came on hot and still. Among the trees the wood-pigeons called

drowsily and from time to time a late cuckoo stammered. In the fields, nothing
moved except the constantly-swishing tails of the cows gathered flank to flank in
the shade.

33. The Great River

Kenneth Grahame The Wind in the Willows

Hazel passed hraka and began to feed in the field. He was disturbed to find

that his hind leg was troubling him. He had thought that it was healed, but the
forced journey over the downs had evidently proved too much for the muscle
torn by the shot-gun pellets. He wondered whether it was far to the river of
which Kehaar had spoken. If it was, he was in for trouble.

‘Hazel-rah,’ said Pipkin, coming up from among the soapwort, ‘are you all

right? Your leg looks queer – you’re dragging it.’

‘No, it’s all right,’ said Hazel. ‘Look, Hlao-roo, where’s Kehaar? I want to talk

to him.’

‘He’s flown out to see if there’s a patrol anywhere near, Hazel-rah. Bigwig

woke some time ago and he and Silver asked Kehaar to go. They didn’t want to
disturb you.’

Hazel felt irritated. It would have been better to be told at once which way to

go, rather than to wait while Kehaar looked for patrols. They were going to cross
a river and as far as he was concerned they could not do it too soon. Fretting, he
waited for Kehaar. Soon he had become as tense and nervous as he had ever
been in his life. He was beginning to believe that after all he might have been
rash. It was clear that Holly had not under-rated their danger near Efrafa. He had
little doubt that Bigwig, by sheer chance, had led the fox on to a Wide Patrol
which had been following their trail. Then, in the morning, again by luck and the
help of Kehaar, they had evidently just missed another at the crossing of the iron
road. Perhaps Silver’s fear was well-founded and a patrol had already spotted
and reported them without their knowing? Had General Woundwort got some
sort of Kehaar of his own? Perhaps a bat was at this moment talking to him?
How was one to foresee and guard against everything? The grass seemed sour,
the sunshine chilly. Hazel sat hunched under the firs, worrying dismally. He felt
less annoyed, now, with Bigwig: he could understand his feelings. Waiting was
bad. He fidgeted for some kind of action. Just as he had decided to wait no
longer, but to collect everyone and go immediately, Kehaar came flying from the
direction of the cutting. He flapped clumsily down among the firs, silencing the
bats.

road.’

‘Good. Is it far to the river, Kehaar?’
‘Na, na. Ees close, in vood.’
‘Splendid. We can find this crossing in daylight?’
‘Ya, ya. I show you pridge.’
The rabbits had gone only a short distance through the wood when they

sensed that they were already near the river. The ground became soft and damp.
They could smell sedge and water. Suddenly, the harsh, vibrating cry of a
moorhen echoed through the trees, followed by a flapping of wings and a watery
scuttering. The rustling of the leaves seemed also to echo, as though reflected
distantly from hard ground. A little further on, they could distinctly hear the
water itself – the low, continuous pouring of a shallow fall. A human being,
hearing from a distance the noise of a crowd, can form an idea of its size. The
sound of the river told the rabbits that it must be bigger than any they had known
before – wide, smooth and swift. Pausing among the comfrey and ground elder,
they stared at each other, seeking reassurance. Then they began to lollop
hesitantly forward into more open ground. There was still no river to be seen, but

in front they could perceive a flicker and dance of mirrored light in the air. Soon
afterwards Hazel, limping ahead with Fiver near him, found himself on a narrow,
green path that divided the wilderness from the river bank.

The path was almost as smooth as a lawn and clear of bushes and weeds, for it

was kept cut for fishermen. Along its farther side the riparian plants grew
thickly, so that it was separated from the river by a kind of hedge of purple
loosestrife, great willow-herb, fleabane, figwort and hemp agrimony, here and
there already in bloom. Two or three more of the rabbits emerged from the
wood. Peering through the plant-clumps, they could catch glimpses of the
smooth, glittering river, evidently much wider and swifter than the Enborne.
Although there was no enemy or other danger to be perceived, they felt the
apprehension and doubt of those who have come unawares upon some awe-
inspiring place, where they themselves are paltry fellows of no account. When
Marco Polo came at last to Cathay, seven hundred years ago, did he not feel –
and did his heart not falter as he realized – that this great and splendid capital of
an empire had had its being all the years of his life and far longer, and that he
had been ignorant of it? That it was in need of nothing from him, from Venice,
from Europe? That it was full of wonders beyond his understanding? That his
arrival was a matter of no importance whatever? We know that he felt these
things, and so has many a traveller in foreign parts who did not know what he
was going to find. There is nothing that cuts you down to size like coming to
some strange and marvellous place where no one even stops to notice that you
stare about you.

the water-smells in the cooling, sunset air: and moved closer together, each
hoping not to see in the others the nervousness he felt in himself. As Pipkin
reached the path a great, shimmering dragon-fly, four inches long, all emerald
and sable, appeared at his shoulder; hovered, droning and motionless, and was
gone like lightning into the sedge. Pipkin leapt back in alarm. As he did so there
came a shrill, vibrant cry and he caught sight, between the plants, of a brilliant,
azure bird flashing past over the open water. A few moments later there came,
from close behind the plant-hedge, the sound of a fairly heavy splash: but what
creature might have made it there was no telling.

Looking round for Hazel, Pipkin caught sight of Kehaar, a little way off,

standing in a patch of shallow water between two clumps of willow-herb. He
was stabbing and snapping at something in the mud and after a few moments
pulled out a six-inch leech and swallowed it whole. Beyond him, some distance
down the path, Hazel was combing the goose-grass out of his coat and evidently
listening to Fiver as they sat together under a rhododendron. Pipkin ran along the

bank and joined them.

danger here than anywhere else. Kehaar’s going to show us where to get across,
isn’t he? The thing to do is to get on with it before it gets dark.’

‘They’ll never stop here,’ replied Hazel. ‘We can’t stay and wait for Bigwig in

a place like this. It’s unnatural for rabbits.’

you, it’s better than one or two other places we’ve been in. Not all strange things
are bad. Would you like me to take them over? Say it’s because of your leg.’

‘Fine,’ said Hazel. ‘Hlao-roo, can you get everyone along here?’
When Pipkin had gone, he said, ‘I feel troubled, Fiver. I’m asking so much of

them, and there are so many risks in this plan.’

‘They’re a better lot than you give them credit for,’ replied Fiver. ‘If you were

to –’

Kehaar called raucously across, startling a wren out of the bushes.
‘Meester ’Azel, vat for you vait?’
‘To know where to go,’ answered Fiver.
‘Pridge near. You go on, you see.’
Where they were, the undergrowth stood close to the green path, but beyond –

downstream, as they all intuitively felt – it gave way to open parkland. Out into
this they went, Hazel following Fiver.

Hazel did not know what a bridge was. It was another of Kehaar’s unknown

words that he did not feel up to questioning. Despite his trust in Kehaar and his
respect for his wide experience, he felt still more disturbed as they came into the
open. Clearly, this was some sort of man-place, frequented and dangerous. A
short way ahead was a road. He could see the smooth, unnatural surface
stretching away over the grass. He stopped and looked at it. At length, when he
was sure that there were no men anywhere near, he went cautiously up to the
verge.

to Hazel that there was anything unusual in this. The idea of a bridge was
beyond him. He saw only a line of stout posts-and-rails on either side of the
road. Similarly, simple African villagers, who have never left their remote
homes, may not be particularly surprised by their first sight of an aeroplane: it is
outside their comprehension. But their first sight of a horse pulling a cart will set
them pointing and laughing at the ingenuity of the fellow who thought of that
one. Hazel saw without surprise the road crossing the river. What worried him
was that where it did so, there were only very narrow verges of short grass,
offering no cover. His rabbits would be exposed to view and unable to bolt,

except along the road.

‘Do you think we can risk it, Fiver?’ he asked.
‘I can’t see why you’re bothered,’ answered Fiver. ‘You went into the

farmyard and the shed where the hutch-rabbits were. This is much less
dangerous. Come on – they’re all watching while we hesitate.’

his way to the nearer end of the bridge. Hazel followed him along the verge,
keeping close beside the rail on the upstream side. Looking round, he saw Pipkin
close behind. In the middle of the bridge Fiver, who was perfectly calm and
unhurried, stopped and sat up. The other two joined him.

‘Let’s put on a bit of an act,’ said Fiver. ‘Make them inquisitive. They’ll

follow us just to see what we’re looking at.’

There was no sill along the edge of the bridge: they could have walked off it

into the water three feet below. From under the lowest rail they looked out,
upstream, and now, for the first time, saw the whole river plainly. If the bridge
had not startled Hazel, the river did. He remembered the Enborne, its surface
broken by gravel spits and plant growth. The Test, a weed-cut, carefully-tended
trout stream, seemed to him like a world of water. A good ten yards wide it was,
fast-flowing and smooth, spangling and dazzling in the evening sun. The tree-
reflections on the even current were unbroken as on a lake. There was not a reed
or a plant to be seen above the water. Close by, under the left bank, a bed of
crowfoot trailed downstream, the wheel-like leaves all submerged. Darker still,
almost black, were the mats of water-moss, their thick masses motionless on the
bed of the river and only the trailing fronds waving slowly from side to side.
Waving, too, were the wider expanses of pale-green cress-weed; but these
rippled with the current, lightly and quickly. The water was very clear, with a
bed of clean, yellow gravel, and even in the middle was hardly four feet deep. As
the rabbits stared down they could discern, here and there, a very fine scour, like
smoke – chalk and powdered gravel carried along by the river as dust is blown
on the wind. Suddenly, from under the bridge, with a languid movement of its
flat tail, swam a gravel-coloured fish as long as a rabbit. The watchers,
immediately above, could see the dark, vivid spots along its sides. Warily it hung
in the current below them, undulating from side to side. It reminded Hazel of the
cat in the yard. As they stared, it swam upwards with a lithe flicker and stopped
just below the surface. A moment later its blunt nose thrust clear of the stream
and they saw the open mouth, pure white inside. Rhythmically, without haste, it
sucked down a floating sedge-fly and sank back under water. A ripple spread
outwards in subsiding circles, breaking both the reflections and the transparency.
Gradually the stream grew smooth and once more they saw the fish below them

waving its tail as it held its place in the current.

in, Hlao-roo. Remember El-ahrairah and the pike.’

‘Would it eat me?’ asked Pipkin, staring.
‘There may be creatures in there that could,’ said Hazel. ‘How do we know?

Come on, let’s get across. What would you do if a hrududu came?’

‘Run,’ said Fiver simply, ‘like this.’ And he scurried off the farther end of the

bridge into the grass beyond.

extended almost down to the bridge. The ground was marshy but at least there
was plenty of cover. Fiver and Pipkin began at once on some scrapes, while
Hazel sat chewing pellets and resting his injured leg. Soon they were joined by
Silver and Dandelion, but the other rabbits, more hesitant even than Hazel,
remained crouching in the long grass on the right bank. At last, just before
darkness fell, Fiver re-crossed the bridge and coaxed them to follow him back.
Bigwig, to everyone’s surprise, showed considerable reluctance, and only
crossed in the end after Kehaar, returning from another flight over Efrafa, had
asked whether he would like him to go and fetch a fox.

Hazel, still conscious of being in man-country, was half-expecting either a dog
or a cat. But although they heard owls more than once, no elil attacked them and
by the morning they were in better spirits.

As soon as they had fed, Hazel set them to exploring the surroundings. It

became even more plain that the ground near the river was too wet for rabbits.
Indeed, in places it was almost bog. Marsh sedge grew there, pink, sweet-scented
valerian and the drooping water-avens. Silver reported that it was drier up in the
woodland away from the bank, and at first Hazel had the idea of picking a fresh
spot and digging again. But presently the day grew so hot and humid that all
activity was quenched. The faint breeze vanished. The sun drew up a torpid
moisture from the watery thickets. The smell of water-mint filled all the
hydrophanic air. The rabbits crept into the shade, under any cover that offered.
Long before ni-Frith, all were drowsing in the undergrowth.

suddenly, to find Kehaar beside him. The gull was strutting from side to side
with short, quick steps and pecking impatiently in the long grass. Hazel sat up
quickly.

‘What is it, Kehaar? Not a patrol?’
‘Na, na. Ees all fine for sleep like bloody owls. Maybe I go for Peeg Vater.

Meester ’Azel, you getting mudders now soon? Vat for vait now?’

‘No, you’re right, Kehaar, we must start now. The trouble is, I can see how to

start but not how to finish.’

happened to be Bluebell – and sent him to fetch Bigwig, Blackberry and Fiver.
When they came, he took them to join Kehaar on the short grass of the river
bank.

under the down that evening, I said we should have to do three things: get the
does out of Efrafa, break up the pursuit and then get right away so that they
wouldn’t find us. This plan you’ve thought up is clever. It’ll do the first two
things all right, I’m sure of that. But what about the last one? The Efrafan rabbits
are fast and savage. They’ll find us if we’re to be found and I don’t believe we
can run away faster than they can follow – especially with a lot of does who’ve
never been out of Efrafa. We couldn’t possibly stand and fight them to a finish –
we’re too few. And on top of that, my leg seems to be bad again. So what’s to be
done?’

‘I don’t know,’ answered Blackberry. ‘But obviously, we shall need to

disappear. Could we swim the river? No scent then, you know.’

‘It’s too swift,’ said Hazel. ‘We’d be carried away. But even if we did swim it,

we couldn’t count on not being followed. From what I’ve heard of these
Efrafans, they’d certainly swim the river if they thought we had. What it comes
to is that with Kehaar to help us, we can break up a pursuit while we’re getting
the does out, but they’ll know which way we’ve gone and they won’t leave it at
that. No, you’re right, we’ve got to vanish without a trace, so that they can’t even
track us. But how?’

and have a look at it? Perhaps there’s something we could use for a hiding-place.
Can you manage that with your leg?’

‘If we don’t go too far,’ replied Hazel.
‘Can I come, Hazel-rah?’ asked Bluebell, who had been waiting about, a little

way off.

‘Yes, all right,’ said Hazel good-naturedly, as he began to limp along the bank

upstream.

overgrown – denser than the nut copses and bluebell woods of Sandleford.
Several times they heard the drumming of a great woodpecker, the shyest of
birds. As Blackberry was suggesting that perhaps they might look for a hiding-
place somewhere in this jungle, they became aware of another sound – the
falling water which they had heard on their approach the day before. Soon they

reached a place where the river curved round in a bend from the east, and here
they came upon the broad, shallow fall. It was no more than a foot high – one of
those artificial falls, common on the chalk streams, made to attract trout. Several
were already rising to the evening hatch of fly. Just above the fall a plank
footbridge crossed the river. Kehaar flew up, circled the pool and perched on the
hand-rail.

Blackberry. ‘Perhaps we could make some use of it. You didn’t know about this
bridge, Kehaar, did you?’

‘Na, not know, not see heem. But ees goot pridge – no von come.’
‘I’d like to go across, Hazel-rah,’ said Blackberry.
‘Well, Fiver’s the rabbit for that,’ replied Hazel. ‘He simply loves crossing

bridges. You carry on. I’ll come behind, with Bigwig and Bluebell here.’

The five rabbits hopped slowly along the planks, their great, sensitive ears full

of the sound of the falling water. Hazel, who was not sure of his footing, had to
stop several times. When at length he reached the further side, he found that
Fiver and Blackberry had already gone a little way downstream below the fall,
and were looking at some large object sticking out from the bank. At first he
thought that it must be a fallen tree-trunk, but as he came closer he saw that
although it was certainly wooden, it was not round, but flat, or nearly flat, with
raised edges – some man-thing. He remembered how once, long ago, sniffing
over a farm rubbish-heap with Fiver, he had come upon a similar object – large,
smooth and flat. (That had, in fact, been an old, discarded door.) It had been of
no use to them and they had left it alone. His inclination was to leave this alone
too.

One end of the thing was pressed into the bank, but along its length it

diverged, sticking out slightly into the stream. There were ripples round it, for
under the banks the current was as swift as in mid-stream, on account of weed-
cutting and sound camp-sheeting. As Hazel came nearer, he saw that Blackberry
had actually scrambled on the thing. His claws made a faint hollow sound on the
wood, so there must be water underneath. Whatever it might be, the thing did not
extend downwards to the bottom: it was lying on the water.

‘What are you after, Blackberry?’ he said rather sharply.
‘Food,’ replied Blackberry. ‘Flayrah. Can’t you smell it?’
Kehaar had alighted on the middle of the thing, and was snapping away at

something white. Blackberry scuttered along the wood towards him and began to
nibble at some kind of green-stuff. After a little while Hazel also ventured out on
the wood and sat in the sunshine, watching the flies on the warm, varnished
surface and sniffing the strange river smells that came up from the water.

‘What is this man-thing, Kehaar?’ he asked. ‘Is it dangerous?’
‘Na, no dangerous. You not know? Ees poat. At Peeg Vater is many, many

poat. Men make dem, go on vater. Ees no harm.’

had finished the fragments of lettuce he had found, was sitting up and looking
over the very low side, watching a stone-coloured, black-spotted trout swim up
into the fall. The ‘boat’ was a miniature punt, used for reed-cutting – little more
than a raft, with a single thwart amidships. Even when it was unmanned, as now,
there were only a few inches of freeboard.

‘You know,’ said Fiver from the bank, ‘seeing you sitting there reminds me of

that other wooden thing you found, when the dog was in the wood and you got
Pipkin and me over the river. Do you remember?’

‘I remember shoving you along,’ said Bigwig. ‘It was jolly cold.’
‘What puzzles me,’ said Blackberry, ‘is why this boat-thing doesn’t go along.

Everything in this river goes along, and fast too – see there.’ He looked out at a
piece of stick floating down on the even, two-mile-an-hour current. ‘So what’s
stopping this thing from going?’

Kehaar had a ‘short way with landlubbers’ manner which he sometimes used

to those of the rabbits that he did not particularly like. Blackberry was not one of
his favourites : he preferred straightforward characters such as Bigwig,
Buckthorn and Silver.

‘Ees rope. You like bite heem, den you go damn’ queek, all de vay.’
‘Yes, I see,’ said Fiver. ‘The rope goes round that metal thing where Hazel’s

sitting: and the other end’s fixed on the bank here. It’s like the stalk of a big leaf.
You could gnaw it through and the leaf-the boat – would drop off the bank.’

we don’t seem to be any nearer to finding what we’re looking for, Kehaar. Can
you possibly wait until tomorrow? I had the idea that we might all move to
somewhere a bit drier before tonight – higher up in the wood, away from the
river.’

water-rabbit.’

‘A what?’ asked Bigwig.
‘A water-rabbit,’ repeated Bluebell. ‘Well, there are water-rats and water-

beetles and Pipkin says that last night he saw a water-hawk. So why not a water-
rabbit? I shall float merrily along –’

‘Great golden Frith on a hill!’ cried Blackberry suddenly. ‘Great jumping

Rabscuttle! That’s it! That’s it! Bluebell, you shall be a water-rabbit!’ He began
leaping and skipping aboug on the bank and cuffing Fiver with his front paws.

‘Don’t you see, Fiver? Don’t you see? We bite the rope and off we go: and
General Woundwort doesn’t know!’

must say, Blackberry, you’re a clever fellow. I remember now that after we’d
crossed that other river, you said that that floating trick might come in handy
again some time.’

Do you mind explaining?’

Then and there, while the black gnats settled on their ears, by the plank bridge

and the pouring waterfall, Blackberry and Fiver explained.

‘Could you just go and try the rope, Hazel-rah?’ added Blackberry, when he

had finished. ‘It may be too thick.’

They went back to the punt.
‘No, it’s not,’ said Hazel, ‘and it’s stretched tight, of course, which makes it

much easier to gnaw. I can gnaw that all right.’

somet’ing change. Man come, take poat – you know?’

‘There’s nothing more to wait for,’ said Hazel. ‘Go on, Bigwig, straight away:

and may El-ahrairah go with you. And remember, you’re the leader now. Send
word by Kehaar what you want us to do; we shall all be here, ready to back you
up.’

Afterwards, they all remembered how Bigwig had taken his orders. No one

could say that he did not practise what he preached. He hesitated a few moments
and then looked squarely at Hazel.

‘It’s sudden,’ he said. ‘I wasn’t expecting it tonight. But that’s all to the good –

I hated waiting. ’See you later.’

He touched his nose to Hazel’s, turned and hopped away into the

undergrowth. A few minutes later, guided by Kehaar, he was running up the open
pasture north of the river, straight for the brick arch in the overgrown railway
embankment and the fields that lay beyond.

34. General Woundwort

Clausewitz On War

Captain Chervil, one of the two officers of the Mark, had just returned from a

round of his sentries and was talking to some of the does near the centre of the
Mark ground, when he saw the General approaching. He looked quickly about to
see whether anything was at fault. Since all seemed to be well, he began nibbling
at a patch of sweet vernal with the best air of indifference that he could manage.

General Woundwort was a singular rabbit. Some three years before, he had

been born – the strongest of a litter of five – in a burrow outside a cottage garden
near Cole Henley. His father, a happy-go-lucky and reckless buck, had thought
nothing of living close to human beings, except that he would be able to forage
in their garden in the early morning. He had paid dearly for his rashness. After
two or three weeks of spoiled lettuces and nibbled cabbage-plants, the cottager
had lain in wait and shot him as he came through the potato-patch at dawn. The
same morning, the man set to work to dig out the doe and her growing litter.
Woundwort’s mother escaped, racing across the kale-field towards the downs,
her kittens doing their best to follow her. None but Woundwort succeeded. His
mother, bleeding from a shot-gun pellet, made her way along the hedges in broad
daylight, with Woundwort limping beside her.

It was not long before a weasel picked up the scent of the blood and followed

it. The little rabbit cowered in the grass while his mother was killed before his
eyes. He made no attempt to run, but the weasel, its hunger satisfied, left him

alone and made off through the bushes. Several hours later a kind old
schoolmaster from Overton, walking through the fields, came upon Woundwort
nuzzling the cold, still body and crying. He carried him home to his own kitchen
and saved his life, feeding him with milk from a nasal dropper until he was old
enough to eat bran and greenstuff. But Woundwort grew up very wild and, like
Cowper’s hare, would bite when he could. In a month he was big and strong and
had become savage. He nearly killed the schoolmaster’s cat, which had found
him at liberty in the kitchen and tried to torment him. One night, a week later, he
tore the wire from the front of his hutch and escaped to the open country.

have fallen victim at once to the elil: but not Woundwort. After a few days’
wandering, he came upon a small warren and, snarling and clawing, forced them
to accept him. Soon he had become Chief Rabbit, having killed both the
previous Chief and a rival named Fiorin. In combat he was terrifying, fighting
entirely to kill, indifferent to any wounds he received himself and closing with
his adversaries until his weight overbore and exhausted them. Those who had no
heart to oppose him were not long in feeling that here was a leader indeed.

and drove off a foraging Aberdeen puppy. He was impervious to the fascination
of the mustelidae and hoped some day to kill a weasel, if not a stoat. When he
had explored the limits of his own strength, he set to work to satisfy his longing
for still more power in the only possible way – by increasing the power of the
rabbits about him. He needed a bigger kingdom. Men were the great danger, but
this could be circumvented by cunning and discipline. He left the small warren,
taking his followers with him, and set out to look for a place suited to his
purpose, where the very existence of rabbits could be concealed and
extermination made very difficult.

Efrafa grew up round the crossing-point of two green bridle-paths, one of

which (the east-to-west) was tunnel-like, bordered on both sides by a thick
growth of trees and bushes. The immigrants, under Woundwort’s direction, dug
their holes between the roots of the trees, in the undergrowth and along the
ditches. From the first the warren prospered. Woundwort watched over them
with a tireless zeal that won their loyalty even while they feared him. When the
does stopped digging, Woundwort himself went on with their work while they
slept. If a man was coming, Woundwort spotted him half a mile away. He fought
rats, magpies, grey squirrels and once, a crow. When litters were kindled, he kept
an eye on their growth, picked out the strongest youngsters for the Owsla and
trained them himself. He would allow no rabbit to leave the warren. Quite early
on, three who tried to do so were hunted down and forced to return.

As the warren grew, so Woundwort developed his system to keep it under

control. Crowds of rabbits feeding at morning and evening were likely to attract
attention. He devised the Marks, each controlled by its own officers and sentries,
with feeding-times changed regularly to give all a share of early morning and
sunset – the favourite hours for silflay. All signs of rabbit life were concealed as
closely as possible. The Owsla had privileges in regard to feeding, mating and
freedom of movement. Any failure of duty on their part was liable to be
punished by demotion and loss of privileges. For ordinary rabbits, the
punishments were more severe.

was set up. Some of the members came from the Owsla, but others were selected
solely for their loyalty or their cunning as advisers. Old Snowdrop was growing
deaf, but no one knew more than he about organizing a warren for safety. On his
advice, the runs and burrows of the various Marks were not connected
underground, so that disease or poison, if they came, would spread less readily.
Conspiracy would also spread less readily. To visit the burrows of another Mark
was not allowed without an officer’s permission. It was on Snowdrop’s advice,
too, that Woundwort at length ordered that the warren was not to extend further,
on account of the risk of detection and the weakening of central control. He was
persuaded only with difficulty, for the new policy frustrated his restless desire of
power after power. This now needed another outlet and soon after the warren had
been stopped from growing, he introduced the Wide Patrols.

The Wide Patrols began as mere forays or raids, led by Woundwort, into the

surrounding country. He would simply pick four or five of the Owsla and take
them out to look for trouble. On the first occasion they were lucky enough to
find and kill a sick owl that had eaten a mouse that had eaten poison-dressed
seed-corn. On the next, they came upon two hlessil whom they compelled to
return with them to join the warren. Woundwort was no mere bully. He knew
how to encourage other rabbits and to fill them with a spirit of emulation. It was
not long before his officers were asking to be allowed to lead patrols.
Woundwort would give them tasks – to search for hlessil in a certain direction or
to find out whether a particular ditch or barn contained rats which could later be
attacked in force and driven out. Only from farms and gardens were they ordered
to keep clear. One of these patrols, led by a certain Captain Orchis, discovered a
small warren two miles to the east, beyond the Kingsclere-Overton road, on the
outskirts of Nutley Copse. The General led an expedition against it and broke it
up, the prisoners being brought back to Efrafa, where a few of them later rose to
be Owsla members themselves.

As the months went on, the Wide Patrols became systematic; during summer

and early autumn there were Usually two or three out at a time. There came to be
no other rabbits for a long way round Efrafa and any who might wander into the
neighbourhood by chance were quickly picked up. Casualties in the Wide Patrols
were high, for the elil got to know that they went out. Often, it would take all a
leader’s courage and skill to complete his task and bring his rabbits – or some of
his rabbits – back to the warren. But the Owsla were proud of the risks they ran:
and besides, Woundwort was in the habit of going out himself to see how they
were getting on. A patrol leader, more than a mile from Efrafa, limping up a
hedgerow in the rain, would come upon the General, squatting like a hare under
a tussock of darnel, and find himself required then and there to report what he
had been doing or why he was off his route. The patrols were the training-
grounds of cunning trackers, swift runners and fierce fighters, and the casualties
– although there might be as many as five or six in a bad month – suited
Woundwort’s purpose, for numbers needed keeping down and there were always
fresh vacancies in the Owsla, which the younger bucks did their best to be good
enough to fill. To feel that rabbits were competing to risk their lives at his orders
gratified Woundwort, although he believed – and so did his Council and his
Owsla – that he was giving the warren peace and security at a price which was
modest enough.

Captain Chervil, the General was feeling seriously concerned about several
things. It was less and less easy to keep the size of the warren under control.
Overcrowding was becoming a grave problem, and this despite the fact that
many of the does were reabsorbing their litters before birth. While their doing so
was all to the good in itself, some of them were growing restive and hard to
manage. Not long ago, a group of does had come before the Council and asked
to leave the warren. They had been peaceable at first, offering to go as far away
as the Council wished: but when it had become plain that their request was not
going to be granted on any terms, they had become first petulant and then
aggressive and the Council had had to take strong measures. There was still a
good deal of bad feeling over the business. Then in the third place, the Owsla
had lately lost a certain amount of respect among the rank-and-file.

from another warren – had been held and impressed into the Right Flank Mark.
He had intended, later, to find out where they had come from. But they had
succeeded in playing a very simple trick, bamboozling the Mark commander,
attacking his sentries and escaping by night. Captain Bugloss, the officer
responsible, had, of course, been demoted and expelled from the Owsla, but his
disgrace, though very proper, only added to the General’s difficulties. The truth

was that Efrafa had become, for the moment, short of good officers. Ordinary
Owsla – sentries – were not too hard to find, but officers were another matter
and he had lost three in less than a month. Bugloss was as good as a casualty: he
would never hold rank again. But worse, Captain Charlock – a brave and
resourceful rabbit – while leading the pursuit of the fugitives, had been run down
on the iron road by a train; a further proof, if any were needed, of the wicked
malice of men. Worst of all, only two nights ago a patrol which had been out to
the north had returned with the shocking news that its leader, Captain Mallow, an
officer of exceptional prestige and experience, had been killed by a fox. It was
an odd business. The patrol had picked up the scent of a fairly large party of
rabbits evidently coming towards Efrafa from the north. They had been
following it but had not yet sighted their quarry, when suddenly a strange rabbit
had burst in upon them as they were nearing the edge of some woodland. They
had, of course, tried to stop him and at that moment the fox, which had
apparently been following him closely, had come from the open combe beyond
and killed poor Mallow in an instant. All things considered, the patrol had come
away in good order and Groundsel, the second-in-command, had done well. But
nothing more had been seen of the strange rabbit; and the loss of Mallow, with
nothing to show for it, had upset and demoralized the Owsla a good deal.

that the rabbits from the north had crossed the iron road and disappeared
southwards. It was intolerable that they should have passed so close to Efrafa
and gone their way without being apprehended. Even now, they might possibly
be caught, if only there were a really enterprising officer to put in charge of the
search. It would certainly need an enterprising officer – Captain Campion
perhaps – for patrols seldom crossed the iron road and the wet country beyond –
the country near the river – was only partly known. He would have gone himself,
but with the recent disciplinary troubles in the warren he could not take the risk;
and Campion could hardly be spared just now. No – infuriating as it was, the
strangers were best forgotten for the moment. The first thing was to replace the
Owsla losses – and preferably with rabbits who knew how to deal ruthlessly with
any further signs of dissension. They would simply have to promote the best
they had got, draw their horns in for a time and concentrate on training until
things got back to normal.

the problem over in his mind.

them?’

‘They’re a good lot, sir,’ replied Chervil. ‘You know Marjoram: he’s been on

patrol with you as a runner. And I think you know Moneywort.’

‘Yes, I know them,’ said Woundwort, ‘but they wouldn’t make officers. We

need to replace Charlock and Mallow: that’s what I’m getting at.’

‘That’s difficult, sir,’ said Chervil. ‘That sort of rabbit doesn’t hop out of the

grass.’

think about it and tell me any ideas that occur to you. Anyway, I want to go
round your sentries now. Come with me, will you?’

Captain Campion himself. It was Campion’s principal duty to search the
outskirts of Efrafa at morning and evening and to report anything new – the tyre-
marks of a tractor in mud, the droppings of a sparrow-hawk or the spreading of
fertilizer on a field. An expert tracker, he missed little or nothing and was one of
the very few rabbits for whom Woundwort felt a genuine respect.

‘Do you want me?’ said Woundwort, pausing.
‘Well, I think so, sir,’ replied Campion. ‘We’ve picked up a hlessi and brought

him in.’

‘Where was he?’
‘Down by the arch, sir. Just this side of it.’
‘What was he doing?’
‘Well, sir, he says he’s come a long way on purpose to join Efrafa. That’s why

I thought you might like to see him.’

‘Wants to join Efrafa?’ asked Woundwort, puzzled.
‘That’s what he says, sir.’
‘Why can’t the Council see him tomorrow?’
‘Just as you like, sir, of course. But he strikes me as being a bit out of the

ordinary. I’d say, a distinctly useful rabbit.’

‘H’m,’ said Woundwort, considering. ‘Well, all right. I haven’t got long,

though. Where is he now?’

which was about fifty yards away, among the trees.) ‘Two of my patrol are with
him.’

Mark, remained where he was. Campion accompanied the General.

At this hour the Crixa was all green shade, with red gleams of sun that winked

through the moving leaves. The damp grass along the edges of the paths was
dotted with spikes of mauve bugle, and the sanicles and yellow archangels
flowered thickly. Under an elder bush, on the far side of the track, two Owslafa,
or Council police, were waiting; and with them was the stranger.

Woundwort saw at once what Campion had meant. The stranger was a big

rabbit, heavy but alert, with a rugged, seasoned appearance and the look of a
fighter. He had a curious, thick growth of fur – a kind of top-knot – on the crown
of his head. He stared at Woundwort with a detached, appraising air which the
General had not encountered for a very long time.

‘Who are you?’ said Woundwort.
‘My name is Thlayli,’ replied the stranger.
‘Thlayli, sir,’ prompted Campion. The stranger said nothing.
‘The patrol brought you in, I’m told. What were you doing?’
‘I’ve come to join Efrafa.’
‘Why?’
‘I’m surprised you ask. It’s your warren, isn’t it? Is there anything odd about

someone wanting to join?’

Woundwort was nonplussed. He was no fool and it was, he could not help

feeling, extremely odd that any right-minded rabbit should choose to walk into
Efrafa of his own accord. But he could hardly say so.

‘What can you do?’
‘I can run and fight and spoil a story telling it. I’ve been an officer in an

Owsla.’

‘Fight, can you? Could you fight him?’ said Woundwort, looking at Campion.
‘Certainly, if you wish.’ The stranger reared up and aimed a heavy cuff at

Campion, who leapt back just in time.

‘Don’t be a fool,’ said Woundwort. ‘Sit down. Where were you in an Owsla?’
‘Far off. The warren was destroyed by men, but I escaped. I’ve been

wandering some time. It won’t surprise you that I heard of Efrafa. I’ve come a
long way to join it. I thought you might have some use for me.’

‘Are you alone?’
‘I am now.’
Woundwort considered again. It was likely enough that this rabbit had been an

officer in an Owsla. Any Owsla would want him. If he was speaking the truth, he
had had wits enough to escape the destruction of his warren and survive a long
journey through open country. It must have been a very long journey, for there
was no warren within the normal range of the Efrafan patrols.

you, as you put it. Campion here will look after you tonight and tomorrow
morning you’ll come before the Council. Meanwhile, don’t start fighting, do you
see? We can give you plenty to do without that.’

‘Very well.’
The following morning, after the Council had discussed the predicament of

the warren due to the recent losses, General Woundwort proposed that for a start,
they might do worse than try the big newcomer as an officer in the Near Hind
Mark, under the instruction of Captain Chervil. The Council, having seen him,
agreed. By ni-Frith Thlayli, still bleeding from the Mark gash inflicted in his left
haunch, had taken up his duties.

35. Groping

Dr Johnson

‘But do they often try to run away?’ asked Bigwig. During the afternoon he

had been up and down the runs and crowded burrows with Chervil and Avens,
the other Mark officer, and had thought to himself that never in his life had he
seen such a cheerless, dispirited lot of rabbits. ‘They don’t strike me as a very
difficult bunch.’

‘Most of them are no trouble, it’s true,’ said Avens, ‘but you never know when

trouble’s coming. For instance, you’d have said there wasn’t a more docile lot in
Efrafa than the Right Flank. And then one day they get four hlessil wished on
them by the Council and the next evening Bugloss isn’t very quick in the uptake
for some reason; and suddenly these hlessil play a trick on him and bunk. And
that’s the end of him – to say nothing of poor old Charlock killed on the iron
road. When something like that happens, it happens like lightning and it isn’t
always planned: sometimes it’s more like a frenzy. A rabbit tears away on
impulse and if you don’t knock him over quick, the next thing you know three
more will be off after him. The only safe way is to watch all the time when
they’re above ground and do your own relaxing when you can. After all, that’s
what we’re here for – that and the patrols.’

‘Now, about burying hraka,’ said Chervil, ‘you can’t be too strict. If the

General finds any hraka in the fields he’ll stuff your tail down your throat. They
always try to dodge burying, though. They want to be natural, the anti-social
little beasts. They just don’t realize that everyone’s good depends on everyone’s
cooperation. What I do is to set three or four of them to dig a new trough in the

ditch every day, as a punishment. You can nearly always find someone to punish
if you try hard enough. Today’s squad fills up yesterday’s trough and digs
another. There are special runs leading into the bottom of the ditch and the Mark
have got to use those and no others when they go out to pass hraka. We keep a
hraka-sentry in the ditch to make sure they come back.’

‘How do you check them in after silflay?’ asked Bigwig.
‘Well, we know them all by sight,’ replied Chervil, ‘and we watch them go

down. There are only two entrance holes for the Mark and one of us sits at each
hole. Every rabbit knows which hole he has to use and I should certainly miss
any of mine who didn’t go down. The sentries come in last of all – I only call
them in when I’m quite sure that all the Mark are down. And once they’re down,
of course, they can’t very well get out, with a sentry at each hole. Digging I
should hear. You’re not allowed to dig in Efrafa without permission from the
Council. The only really dangerous time is when there’s an alarm – say, a man or
a fox. Then we all bolt for the nearest hole, of course. So far, it doesn’t seem to
have occurred to anyone that he could bolt the other way and have quite a long
start before he was missed. Still, no rabbit will bolt towards elil, and that’s the
real safeguard.’

secret task seemed to be even more hopeless than he had expected. ‘I’ll get the
hang of it all as soon as I can. When do we have the chance of a patrol?’

‘I expect the General will take you on patrol himself to begin with,’ said

Avens. ‘He did me. You may not be so keen when you’ve had a day or two with
him – you’ll be worn out. Still, I must admit, Thlayli, you’re a fine size, and if
you’ve been living rough for some time you’ll probably manage it all right.’

At this moment a rabbit with a white scar across his throat came down the run.
‘The Neck Mark’s just going down, Captain Chervil, sir,’ he said. ‘It’s a

beautiful evening: I should make the most of it.’

‘I was wondering when you were going to show up,’ replied Chervil. ‘Tell

Captain Sainfoin I’m bringing my Mark up at once.’

round the burrows and send everyone up for silflay.

join me on the nearer one. We’ll send four sentries out to the line to start with,
and when the Mark have all gone out, we’ll add four more and keep two in
reserve. I’ll see you in the usual place, by the big flint in the bank.’

Bigwig followed Chervil along the run, down which came the scents of warm

grass, clover and hop trefoil. He had found most of the runs closer and stuffier
than he was used to, no doubt because there were so few holes into the open air.

The prospect of an evening silflay, even in Efrafa, was pleasant. He thought of
the beech leaves rustling above the far-off Honeycomb, and sighed. ‘I wonder
how old Holly’s getting on,’ he thought, ‘and whether I’ll ever see him again: or
Hazel either, for the matter of that. Well, I’ll give these blighters something to
think about before I’ve finished. I do feel lonely, though. How hard it is to carry
a secret by yourself!’

They reached the mouth of the hole and Chervil went outside to look round.

When he returned he took up station at the top of the run. As Bigwig found a
place alongside, he noticed for the first time, in the opposite wall of the run, a
kind of recess like an open cave. In this, three rabbits were squatting. Those on
either side had the tough, stolid look of members of the Owslafa. But it was at
the one in the middle that he stared. This rabbit had very dark fur – almost black.
But this was not the most remarkable thing about him. He was dreadfully
mutilated. His ears were nothing but shapeless shreds, ragged at the edges,
seamed with ill-knit scars and beaded here and there with lumps of proud, bare
flesh. One eyelid was misshapen and closed askew. Despite the cool, exciting air
of the July evening, he seemed apathetic and torpid. He kept his gaze fixed on
the ground and blinked continually. After a time, he lowered his head and rubbed
his nose on his fore-paws in a listless manner. Then he scratched his neck and
settled down in his former, drooping position.

the run.

‘Who are you?’ he asked.
‘My name is Blackavar, sir,’ replied the rabbit. He did not look up and spoke

without expression, as though he had answered this question many times before.

‘Are you going to silflay?’ said Bigwig. No doubt, he thought, this was some

hero of the warren, wounded in a great fight and now infirm, whose past services
merited an honourable escort when he went out.

‘No, sir,’ answered the rabbit.
‘Why ever not?’ said Bigwig. ‘It’s a lovely evening.’
‘I don’t silflay at this time, sir.’
‘Then why are you here?’ asked Bigwig, with his usual directness.
‘The Mark that has the evening silflay, sir,’ began the rabbit. ‘The Mark that

has – they come – I –’ He hesitated and fell silent.

One of the Owslafa spoke. ‘Get on with it,’ he said.
‘I come here for the Mark to see me,’ said the rabbit in his low, drained voice.’

Every Mark should see how I have been punished as I deserve for my treachery
in trying to leave the warren. The Council were merciful – the Council were
merciful – the Council – I can’t remember it, sir, I really can’t,’ he burst out,

turning to the sentry who had spoken. ‘I can’t seem to remember anything.’

moments, rejoined Chervil.

‘He’s supposed to tell everybody who asks,’ said Chervil, ‘but he’s getting sort

of stupid after half a month of it. He tried to run away. Campion caught him and
brought him back and the Council ripped up his ears and said he had to be shown
at every morning and evening silflay, as an example to the others. But if you ask
me, he won’t last much longer. He’ll meet a blacker rabbit than himself one of
these nights.’

his own memories. The Mark were filing up now and he watched as they went
past, each darkening the entrance for a moment before hopping out under the
hawthorn. It was clear that Chevril prided himself on knowing his rabbits by
name. He spoke to most of them and was at pains to show that he had some
knowledge of their personal lives. It seemed to Bigwig that the answers he got
were not particularly warm or friendly, but he did not know whether to put that
down to dislike of Chervil or merely to the lack of spirit that seemed to be
common to the rank-and-file in Efrafa. He was closely on the watch – as
Blackberry had advised him to be – for any signs of disaffection or rebellion, but
he could see little grounds for hope in the expressionless faces that went by. At
the end came a little group of three or four does, talking among themselves.

‘Well, are you getting on all right with your new friends, Nelthilta?’ said

Chervil to the first, as she passed him.

and looked at him.

‘You’ll get on yourself one day, Captain, I dare say,’ she replied. ‘Like Captain

Mallow – he got on, you know. Why don’t you send some does on Wide Patrol?’

the does who followed Nelthilta out into the field.

‘What did she mean by that?’ asked Bigwig.
‘Well, there’s been trouble, you know,’ said Chervil. ‘A bunch of does in the

Near Fore started a row at a Council meeting. The General said they must be
broken up and we had a couple sent to us. I’ve been keeping an eye on them.
They’re no trouble themselves but Nelthilta’s taken up with them and it seems to
have made her cheeky and resentful: ’sort of thing you saw just now. I don’t
really mind that – it shows they feel the Owsla’s on top. If the young does
became quiet and polite I should be much more worried: I should wonder what
they were up to. All the same, Thlayli, I’d like you to do what you can to get to
know those particular does, and bring them a bit more into line.’

‘Right,’ said Bigwig. ‘By the way, what are the rules about mating?’
‘Mating?’ said Chervil. ‘Well, if you want a doe you have one – any doe in the

Mark, that is. We’re not officers for nothing, are we? The does are under orders
and none of the bucks can stop you. That just leaves you and me and Avens; and
we shall hardly quarrel. There are plenty of does, after all.’

‘I see,’ said Bigwig. ‘Well, I’ll silflay now. Unless you’ve got any other ideas,

I’ll go and talk to some of the Mark and then go round the sentries and get the lie
of the land. What about Blackavar?’

‘Leave him,’ said Chervil.’ He’s none of our business. The Owslafa will keep

him here until the Mark come back and after that they’ll take him away.’

Bigwig made his way into the field, conscious of the wary glances of the

rabbits he passed. He felt perplexed and apprehensive. How was he to begin his
dangerous task? Begin he must, in one way or another, for Kehaar had made it
clear that he was not ready to wait. There was nothing for it but to take a chance
and trust somebody. But whom? A warren like this must be full of spies.
Probably only General Woundwort knew who the spies were. Was there a spy
watching him now?

‘I shall just have to trust my feelings,’ he thought. ‘I’ll go round the place a bit

and see if I can make any friends. But I know one thing – if I do succeed in
getting any does out of here, I’ll take that poor wretched Blackavar with me as
well. Frith on a bridge! It makes me angry just to think of him being forced to sit
there like that. General Woundwort indeed! A gun’s too good for him.’

Nibbling and pondering, he moved slowly over the open meadow in the

evening sun. After a while he found that he was approaching a small hollow,
much like the one on Watership Down where he and Silver had found Kehaar. In
this hollow there were four does, with their backs to him. He recognized them as
the little group who had gone out last. They had evidently finished the hungry,
intent stage of feeding and were browsing and talking at leisure, and he could
see that one of them had the attention of the other three. Even more than most
rabbits, Bigwig loved a story and now he felt attracted by the prospect of hearing
something new in this strange warren. He moved quietly up to the edge of the
hollow just as the doe began to speak.

somewhere. The rapt air, the rhythmic utterance, the intent listeners – what was
it they recalled? Then he remembered the smell of carrots, and Silverweed
dominating the crowd in the great burrow. But these verses went to his heart as
Silverweed’s had not.

Long ago
The yellow-hammer sang, high on the thorn.
He sang near a litter that the doe brought out to play,
He sang in the wind and the kittens played below.
Their time slipped by all under the elder bloom.
But the bird flew away and now my heart is dark
And time will never play in the fields again.

Long ago
The orange beetles clung to the rye-grass stems.
The windy grass was waving. A buck and doe
Ran through the meadow. They scratched a hole in the bank,
They did what they pleased all under the hazel leaves.
But the beetles died in the Frost and my heart is dark;
And I shall never choose a mate again.

The frost is falling, the frost falls into my body.
My nostrils, my ears are torpid under the frost.
The swift will come in the spring, crying ‘News! News!
‘Does, dig new holes and flow with milk for your litters.’
I shall not hear. The embryos return
Into my dulled body. Across my sleep
There runs a wire fence to imprison the wind.
I shall never feel the wind blowing again.

The doe was silent and her three companions said nothing: but their stillness

showed plainly enough that she had spoken for all of them. A flock of starlings
passed overhead, chattering and whistling, and a liquid dropping fell into the
grass among the little group, but none moved or startled. Each seemed taken up
with the same melancholy thoughts – thoughts which, however sad, were at least
far from Efrafa.

Bigwig’s spirit was as tough as his body and quite without sentimentality, but

like most creatures who have experienced hardship and danger, he could
recognize and respect suffering when he saw it. He was accustomed to sizing up
other rabbits and deciding what they were good for. It struck him that these does
were not far from the end of their powers. A wild animal that feels that it no
longer has any reason to live, reaches in the end a point when its remaining
energies may actually be directed towards dying. It was this state of mind that
Bigwig had mistakenly attributed to Fiver in the warren of the snares. Since then
his judgement had matured. He felt that despair was not far from these does; and
from all that he had heard of Efrafa, both from Holly and from Chervil, he could
understand why. He knew that the effects of overcrowding and tension in a
warren show themselves first in the does. They become infertile and aggressive.
But if aggression cannot mend their troubles, then often they begin to drift

towards the only other way out. He wondered what point of this dismal path
these particular does had reached.

He hopped down into the hollow. The does, disturbed from their thoughts,

looked at him resentfully and drew back.

‘I know you’re Nelthilta,’ said Bigwig to the pretty young doe who had

retorted to Chervil in the run. ‘But what’s your name?’ he went on, turning to the
doe beside her.

After a pause, she answered reluctantly, ‘Thethuthinnang, sir.’*
‘And yours?’ said Bigwig, to the doe who had spoken the verses.
She turned to him a look of such wretchedness, so full of accusation and

suffering, that it was all he could do not to beg her then and there to believe that
he was her secret friend and that he hated Efrafa and the authority which he
represented. Nelthilta’s rejoinder to Chervil in the run had been full of hatred,
but this doe’s gaze spoke of wrongs beyond her power to express. As Bigwig
stared back at her, he suddenly recalled Holly’s description of the great yellow
hrududu that had torn open the earth above the destroyed warren. ‘That might
have met a look like this,’ he thought. Then the doe answered, ‘My name is
Hyzenthlay, sir.’

‘Hyzenthlay?’ said Bigwig, startled out of his self-possession. ‘Then it was

you who –’ He stopped. It might be dangerous to ask whether she remembered
speaking to Holly. But whether she did or not, here, evidently, was the rabbit
who had told Holly and his companions about the troubles of Efrafa and the
discontent of the does. If he remembered Holly’s story rightly, she had already
made some sort of attempt to leave the warren. ‘But,’ he thought, as he met once
more her desolate eyes, ‘what is she good for now?’

‘May we have permission to go, sir?’ asked Nelthilta. ‘The company of

officers absolutely overpowers us, you see: we find a little of it goes an awfully
long way.’

‘Oh – yes – certainly – by all means,’ replied Bigwig in confusion. He

remained where he was as the does hopped away, Nelthilta raising her voice to
remark, ‘What a great oaf!’ and half looking round in the evident hope that he
would take her up.

‘Oh well, there’s one of them with some spirit left, anyway,’ he thought, as he

made his way out to the sentries.

He spent some time talking to the sentries and learning how they were

organized. It was a depressingly efficient system. Each sentry could reach his
neighbour in a matter of moments; and the appropriate stamping signal – for
they had more than one – would bring out the officers and the reserves. If
necessary, the Owslafa could be alerted in almost no time at all and so could

Captain Campion, or whatever officer might be patrolling the outskirts of the
warren. Since only one Mark fed at a time, there could hardly be any confusion
about where to go if an alarm were given. One of the sentries, Marjoram, told
him about the attempted escape by Blackavar.

then he made a dash. He actually managed to knock down two sentries who tried
to stop him; and I doubt whether anyone on his own has ever done as much as
that. He ran like mad, but Campion had got the alarm, you see, and he simply
moved round and intercepted him further down the fields. Of course, if he hadn’t
smashed up the sentries the Council might have let him off more lightly.’

‘Do you like the warren life?’ asked Bigwig.
‘It’s not too bad now I’m in the Owsla,’ answered Marjoram, ‘and if I can get

to be an officer it’ll be better still. I’ve done two Wide Patrols now – they’re the
thing for getting yourself noticed. I can track and fight as well as most, but of
course they want more than that from an officer. I think our officers are a strong
bunch, don’t you?’

did not know that he himself was a newcomer to Efrafa. At any rate, he showed
neither jealousy nor resentment. Bigwig was beginning to realize that in this
place, nobody was told more than was good for him; or got to know much,
except what was before his nose. Marjoram probably supposed that he, Bigwig,
had been promoted out of another Mark.

the field with a patrol of three and Chervil ran out to meet him on the sentry-line.
Bigwig joined them and listened to the talk. He gathered that Campion had been
out as far as the iron road but had found nothing unusual.

‘Don’t you ever go beyond the iron road?’ he asked.
‘Not very often,’ answered Campion. ‘It’s wet, you know – bad rabbit country.

I have been there, but on these ordinary circuit patrols I’m really looking nearer
home. My job is partly to notice anything new that the Council ought to know
about, and partly to make sure we pick up anyone who bolts. Like that miserable
Blackavar – and he gave me a bite I shan’t forget, before I got him down. On a
fine evening like this, I generally go down as far as the bank of the iron road and
then work along this side of it. Or sometimes I go out in the other direction, as
far as the barn. It all depends what’s wanted. By the way, I saw the General
earlier this evening and I rather think he means to take you on patrol in two or
three days’ time, as soon as you’ve settled down and your Mark have come off
the dawn and evening silflay.’

‘Why wait for that?’ said Bigwig with all the enthusiasm he could assume.

‘Why not sooner?’

‘Well, a Mark generally keeps a full Owsla when it’s on dawn and evening

silflay. The rabbits are more lively at those times, you see, and need more
supervision. But a Mark that’s on ni-Frith and fu-Inlé silflay can generally spare
Owsla for a Wide Patrol. Now, I’ll leave you here. I’ve got to take my lot to the
Crixa and report to the General.’

As soon as the Mark had gone underground and Blackavar had been taken

away by his escort, Bigwig excused himself to Chervil and Avens and went to
his own burrow. Although the rank-and-file were cramped underground, the
sentries had two large, roomy burrows to themselves, while each officer had a
private burrow. By himself at last, Bigwig settled down to think over his
problem.

help he himself could escape from Efrafa whenever he wished. But how in the
world was he to bring a bunch of does out – supposing that any were ready to try
it? If he took it upon himself to call the sentries in during a silflay, Chervil would
see what he had done in a matter of moments. The only possibility, then, was to
make the breakout during the day: to wait until Chervil was asleep and then
order a sentry to leave his post at the mouth of one of the holes. Bigwig
considered. He could see no flaw in this idea. Then the thought came to him,
‘And what about Blackavar?’ Blackavar presumably spent the day under guard
in some special burrow. Probably hardly anyone knew where – no one knew
anything in Efrafa – and certainly no one would tell. So he would have to leave
Blackavar: no realistic plan could include him.

‘I’ll be jiggered if I leave him,’ muttered Bigwig to himself. ‘I know

Blackberry would say I was a fool. Still, he’s not here and I’m doing this myself.
But suppose I wreck the whole thing because of Blackavar? Oh, Frith in a barn!
What a business!’

fell asleep. When he woke, he could tell that it was moonlight outside, fine and
still. It occurred to him that perhaps he might start his venture from the other end
– by persuading some of the does to join him and working out a plan afterwards,
perhaps with their help. He went down the run until he came upon a young rabbit
sleeping as best he could outside an overcrowded burrow. He woke him.

‘Do you know Hyzenthlay?’ he asked.
‘Oh yes, sir,’ replied the rabbit, with a rather pathetic attempt to sound brisk

and ready.

else is to come with her. Do you understand?’

‘Yes, sir.’
When the youngster had scurried off, Bigwig returned to his burrow,

wondering whether there would be any suspicion. It seemed unlikely. From what
Chervil had said, it was common enough for Efrafan officers to send for does. If
he were questioned he had only to play up. He lay down and waited.

burrow. There was a pause.

‘Hyzenthlay?’ said Bigwig.
‘I am Hyzenthlay.’
‘I want to talk to you,’ said Bigwig.
‘I am in the Mark, sir, and under your orders. But you have made a mistake.’
‘No, I haven’t,’ replied Bigwig. ‘You needn’t be afraid. Come in here, close

beside me.’

were closed and her claws dug into the floor.

‘Hyzenthlay,’ whispered Bigwig in her ear, ‘listen carefully. You remember

that many days ago now, four rabbits came to Efrafa in the evening. One had
very pale grey fur and one had a healed rat-bite in his foreleg. You talked with
their leader – his name was Holly. I know what he told you.’

She turned her head in fear. ‘How do you know?’
‘Never mind. Only listen to me.’
Then Bigwig spoke of Hazel and Fiver; of the destruction of the Sandleford

warren and the journey to Watership Down. Hyzenthlay neither moved nor
interrupted.

‘The rabbits who talked to you that evening,’ said Bigwig, ‘who told you

about the warren that was destroyed and of how they had come to ask for does
from Efrafa – do you know what became of them?’

Hyzenthlay’s reply was no more than the faintest murmur in his ear.
‘I know what I heard. They escaped the next evening. Captain Charlock was

killed pursuing them.’

‘And was any other patrol sent after them, Hyzenthlay? The next day, I

mean?’

Charlock dead.’

Hazel and Fiver and several more. They are cunning and resourceful. They are
waiting for me to bring does out of Efrafa – as many as I can get to come. I shall
be able to send them a message tomorrow morning.’

‘How?’

‘By a bird – if all goes well.’ Bigwig told her about Kehaar. When he had

finished, Hyzenthlay made no reply and he could not tell whether she was
considering all that he had said or whether fear and disbelief had so troubled her
that she did not know what to say. Did she think he was a spy trying to trap her?
Did she perhaps wish only that he would let her go away? At last he said,

‘Do you believe me?’
‘Yes, I believe you.’
‘Might I not be a spy sent by the Council?’
‘You are not. I can tell.’
‘How?’
‘You spoke of your friend – the one who knew that that warren was a bad

place. He is not the only such rabbit. Sometimes I can tell these things too: but
not often now, for my heart is in the frost.’

‘Then will you join me – and persuade your friends as well? We need you:

Efrafa doesn’t need you.’

and faintly down the tunnel came the sound of some small creature pattering
through the grass outside. He waited quietly, knowing that it was vital that he
should not upset her.

At last she spoke again, so low in his ear that the words seemed barely more

than broken cadences of breathing.

‘We can escape from Efrafa. The danger is very great, but in that we can

succeed. It is beyond that I cannot see. Confusion and fear at nightfall – and then
men, men, it is all things of men! A dog – a rope that snaps like a dry branch. A
rabbit – no, it is not possible! – a rabbit that rides in a hrududu! Oh, I have
become foolish – tales for kittens on a summer evening. No, I cannot see as I did
once: it is like the shapes of trees beyond a field of rain.’

just like that, and I’ve come to trust him, so I trust you too. If you feel we’re
going to succeed, that’s fine. But what I’m asking is whether you’ll bring your
friends to join us.’

After another silence, Hyzenthlay said,
‘My courage – my spirit: it’s so much less than it was. I’m afraid to let you

rely on me.’

‘I can tell that. What is it that’s worn you down? Weren’t you the leader of the

does who went to the Council?’

‘There was myself and Thethuthinnang. I don’t know what’s happened to the

other does who were with us. We were all in the Right Fore Mark then, you
know. I’ve still got the Right Fore mark, but I’ve been marked again since.

Blackavar – you saw him?’

‘Yes, of course.’
‘He was in that Mark. He was our friend and encouraged us. Only a night or

two after the does went up to speak to the Council, he tried to run away, but he
was caught. You’ve seen what they did to him. That was the same evening that
your friends came: and the next night they escaped. After that, the Council sent
for us does once more. The General said that no one else would have the chance
to run away. We were to be split up among the Marks, no more than two to each
Mark. I don’t know why they left Thethuthinnang and me together. Perhaps they
didn’t stop to think. Efrafa’s like that, you know. The order was “Two to each
Mark”, so as long as the order was carried out it didn’t particularly matter which
two. Now I’m frightened and I feel the Council are always watching.’

‘Yes, but I’m here now,’ said Bigwig.
‘The Council are very cunning.’
‘They’ll need to be. We’ve got some rabbits who are far more cunning,

believe me. El-ahrairah’s Owsla, no less. But tell me – was Nelthilta with you
when you went to the Council?’

‘Oh no, she was born here, in the Near Hind. She’s got spirit, you know, but

she’s young and silly. It excites her to let everyone see that she’s a friend of
rabbits who are thought of as rebels. She doesn’t realize what she’s doing or
what the Council are really like. It’s all a kind of game to her – to cheek the
officers and so on. One day she’ll go too far and get us into trouble again. She
couldn’t be trusted with a secret, on any account.’

‘How many does in this Mark would be ready to join an escape?’
‘Hrair. There’s a great deal of discontent, you know. But Thlayli, they mustn’t

be told until a very short time before we run – not just Nelthilta, but all of them.
No one can keep a secret in a warren and there are spies everywhere. You and I
must make a plan ourselves and tell no one but Thethuthinnang. She and I will
get enough does to come with us when the time comes.’

Bigwig realized that he had stumbled, quite unexpectedly, upon what he

needed most of all: a strong, sensible friend, who would think on her own
account and help to bear his burden.

‘I’ll leave it to you to pick the does,’ he said. ‘I can make the chance to run if

you’ll have them ready to take it.’

‘When?’
‘Sunset will be best, and the sooner the better. Hazel and the others will meet

us and fight any patrol that follows. But the main thing is that the bird will fight
for us. Even Woundwort won’t be expecting that.’

Hyzenthlay was silent again and Bigwig realized with admiration that she was

going over what he had said and searching for flaws.

away? This is going to be a big breakout and make no mistake, Thlayli, the
General himself will be after us with the best rabbits he has. We can’t go on
running away for ever. They won’t lose track of us and sooner or later they’ll
overtake us.’

‘I told you our rabbits were more cunning than the Council. I don’t think

you’d really understand this part, however carefully I explained. Have you ever
seen a river?’

‘What is a river?’
‘Well, there you are. I can’t explain. But I promise you we shan’t have to run

far. We shall actually disappear before the Owsla’s eyes – if they’re there to see.
I must say I’m looking forward to that.’

we’re going to vanish. I’m not deceiving you.’

‘If you were wrong, those who died quickly would be the lucky ones.’
‘No one’s going to die. My friends have prepared a trick that El-ahrairah

himself would be proud of.’

‘If it is to be at sunset,’ she said, ‘it must be tomorrow or the next night. In two

days the Mark loses the evening silflay. You know that?’

‘Yes, I’d heard. Tomorrow then. Why wait longer? But there is one other

thing. We’re going to take Blackavar.’

‘Blackavar? How? He is guarded by Council police.’
‘I know. It adds very much to the risk, but I’ve decided that I can’t leave him

behind. What I mean to do is this. Tomorrow evening, when the Mark silflay,
you and Thethuthinnang must keep the does near you – as many as you’ve got
together – ready to run. I shall meet the bird a little way out in the meadow and
tell him to attack the sentries as soon as he sees me go back into the hole. Then I
shall come back and deal with Blackavar’s guards myself. They won’t be
expecting anything of the sort. I’ll have him out in a moment and join you.
There’ll be complete confusion and in that confusion we’ll run. The bird will
attack anyone who tries to follow us. Remember, we go straight down to the
great arch on the iron road. My friends will be waiting there. You’ve only to
follow me – I’ll lead the way.’

‘Captain Campion may be on patrol.’
‘Oh, I do hope he is,’ said Bigwig. ‘I really do.’
‘Blackavar may not run at once. He will be as startled as the guards.’
‘Is it possible to warn him?’
‘No. His guards never leave him and they take him out to silflay alone.’

‘For how long will he have to live like that?’
‘When he has been to every Mark in turn, the Council will kill him. We all

feel sure of that.’

‘Then that settles it. I won’t go without him.’
‘Thlayli, you are very brave. Are you cunning too? All our lives will depend

on you tomorrow.’

‘Well, can you see anything wrong with the plan?’
‘No, but I am only a doe who has never been out of Efrafa. Suppose

something unexpected happens?’

with us? Think of it!’

‘Oh, Thlayli! Shall we mate with whom we choose and dig our own burrows

and bear our litters alive?’

like it. It’s a fine life, I promise you.’

‘I’ll come! I’ll run any risk.’
‘What a stroke of luck that you should be in this Mark,’ said Bigwig. ‘Before

this talk with you tonight, I was at my wits’ end wondering whatever I was going
to do.’

bound to wonder why you sent for me. It’s not mating time with me, you see. If I
go now, we can say you made a mistake and were disappointed. Don’t forget to
say that.’

‘I won’t. Yes, go now, and have them ready at silflay tomorrow evening. I

shan’t fail you.’

in his mind that his friends were not far off and that he would see them again in
less than a day. But he knew that all Efrafa lay between himself and Hazel. His
thoughts broke up into the dismal fancies of anxiety. He fell into a half-dream, in
which Captain Campion turned into a seagull and flew screaming over the river,
until he woke in panic: and dozed again, to see Captain Chervil driving
Blackavar before him towards a shining wire in the grass. And over all, as big as
a horse in a field, aware of all that passed from one end of the world to the other,
brooded the gigantic figure of General Woundwort. At last, worn out with his
apprehensions, he passed into a deep sleep where even his fear could not follow,
and lay without sound or movement in the solitary burrow.

36. Approaching Thunder

Musk Hall Song

You’re a sound sleeper.’

‘I dare say,’ said Bigwig. ‘Well, I’m ready.’ He was about to lead the way

down the run, but Avens’ next words brought him to a halt.

‘Who’s Fiver?’ said Avens.
Bigwig grew tense. ‘What did you say?’
‘I said, Who’s Fiver?’
‘How should I know?’
‘Well, you were talking in your sleep. You kept saying, “Ask Fiver, ask Fiver.”

I wondered who he was.’

‘Oh, I see. A rabbit I knew once. He used to foretell the weather and so on.’
‘Well, he could do it now, then. Can you smell the thunder?’
Bigwig sniffed. Mixed with the scents of grass and cattle came the warm,

thick smell of a heavy cloud-mass, still far off. He perceived it uneasily. Almost
all animals are disturbed by the approach of thunder, which oppresses them with
its mounting tension and breaks the natural rhythm by which they live. Bigwig’s
inclination was to go back to his burrow, but he had little doubt that no mere
trifle like a thundery morning would be allowed to interfere with the time-table
of an Efrafan Mark.

He was right. Chervil was already at the entrance, squatting opposite

Blackavar and his escort. He looked round as his officers came up the run.

‘Come on, Thlayli,’ he said. ‘Sentries are out already. Does the thunder worry

you?’

‘It does rather,’ replied Bigwig.
‘It won’t break today,’ said Chervil. ‘It’s a long way off yet. I’d give it until

tomorrow evening. Anyway, don’t let the Mark see it affects you. Nothing’s to

be altered unless the General says so.’

doe in your burrow last night, Thlayli, wasn’t there?’

‘Oh, was there?’ said Chervil. ‘Which one?’
‘Hyzenthlay,’ replied Bigwig.
‘Oh, the marli tharn,’* said Chervil. ‘Funny, I didn’t think she was ready.’
‘She wasn’t,’ said Bigwig. ‘I made a mistake. But if you remember, you asked

me to do what I could to get to know the awkward squad and bring them a bit
more under control, so I kept her talking for a time, just the same.’

‘Get anywhere?’
‘Hard to say, really,’ said Bigwig, ‘but I’ll keep at it.’
He spent the time while the Mark went out in deciding upon the best and

quickest way to enter the hole and attack Blackavar’s escort. He would have to
put one of them out of action in no time at all and then go straight for the other,
who would be that much less unprepared. If he had to fight him, it would be
better to avoid doing it between Blackavar and the mouth of the hole, for
Blackavar would be as bewildered as the rest and might bolt back down the run.
If he was going to bolt anywhere he must bolt outwards. Of course, with any
luck, the second guard might make off underground without fighting at all, but
one could not count on that. Efrafan Owslafa were not given to running away.

As he went out into the field, he wondered whether he would be spotted by

Kehaar. The arrangement had been that Kehaar would find him whenever he
might come above ground on the second day.

He need not have worried. Kehaar had been over Efrafa since before dawn. As

soon as he saw the Mark come up, he alighted a little way out in the field, half-
way between the undergrowth and the sentry-line, and began pecking about in
the grass. Bigwig nibbled his way slowly towards him and then settled down to
feed without a glance in his direction. After a while, he sensed that Kehaar was
behind him, a little to one side.

‘Meester Pigvig, I t’ink ees not goot ve talk much. Meester ’Azel, ’e say vat

you do? Vat you vant?’

‘I want two things, Kehaar – both at sunset tonight. First, our rabbits must be

down by the big arch. I shall come through that arch with the does. If we’re
pursued, you and Hazel and the rest must be ready to fight. The boat-thing, is it
still there?’

‘Ya, ya, men no take heem. I tell Meester ’Azd vat you say.’
‘Good. Now listen, Kehaar, this is the second thing; and it’s terribly important.

You see those rabbits out beyond us, in the field? They’re the sentries. At sunset,
you meet me here. Then I shall run back to those trees and go down a hole. As

soon as you see me go in, attack the sentries – terrify them, drive them away. If
they won’t run, hurt them. They must be driven off. You’ll see me come out
again almost at once and then the does – the mothers – will start running with me
and we’ll go straight down to the arch. But we may very well be attacked on the
way. If that happens, can you pile in again?’

‘Ya, ya. I fly at dem – dey no stop you.’
‘Splendid. That’s it, then. Hazel and the others – are they all right?’
‘Fine – fine. Dey say you dam’ good fella. Meester Pluebell, ’e say to pring

one mudder for everyone else and two for ’im.’

Bigwig was trying to think of some appropriate reply to this when he saw

Chervil running across the grass towards him. At once, without speaking again
to Kehaar, he took a few hops in Chervil’s direction and began biting busily at a
patch of clover. As Chervil came up, Kehaar flew low above their heads and
disappeared over the trees.

Chervil looked after the flying gull and then turned to Bigwig.
‘Aren’t you afraid of those birds?’ he asked.
‘Not particularly,’ answered Bigwig.
‘They sometimes attack mice, you know, and rabbit kittens too,’ said Chervil.

‘You were taking a risk, feeding there. Why were you so careless?’

him over.

‘That’s why,’ he said. Chervil got up with a sulky air.
‘All right, so you’re heavier than I am,’ he said. ‘But you’ve got to learn,

Thlayli, that there’s more than weight to being an Efrafan officer. And it doesn’t
alter the fact that those birds can be dangerous. Anyway, it’s not the season for
them and that’s odd for a start. It’ll have to be reported.’

‘Whatever for?’
‘Because it’s unusual. Everything unusual has to be reported. If we don’t

report it and someone else does, nice fools we shall look when we have to say
we saw it. We couldn’t say we didn’t – several of the Mark have seen it. In fact, I
shall go and report it now. Silflay’s nearly over, so if I’m not back in time, you
and Avens had better see the Mark underground yourselves.’

As soon as Chervil had left him, Bigwig went to look for Hyzenthlay. He

found her in the hollow with Thethuthinnang. Most of the Mark did not appear
to be unduly affected by the thunder, which was still distant, as Chervil had said.
The two does, however, were subdued and nervous. Bigwig told them what he
had arranged with Kehaar.

‘But will this bird really attack the sentries?’ asked Thethuthinnang. ‘I’ve

never heard of anything like that.’

evening. When I come out with Blackavar, the sentries will be running for
cover.’

‘And which way do we run?’ asked Thethuthinnang.
Bigwig took them well out into the field, so that they could see the distant

arch in the embankment about four hundred yards away.

‘We’re bound to meet Campion,’ said Thethuthinnang. ‘You know that?’
‘I believe he had some trouble stopping Blackavar,’ replied Bigwig, ‘so I’m

sure he won’t be good enough for me and the bird. Look, there’s Avens bringing
in the sentries – we’ll have to go. Now, don’t worry. Chew your pellets and get
some sleep. If you can’t sleep, sharpen up your claws: you may need them.’

The Mark went underground and Blackavar was taken away by the escort.

Bigwig returned to his burrow and tried to put the coming evening out of his
mind. After some time he gave up the idea of spending the day alone. He made a
round of the lower burrows, joined a game of bob-stones, heard two stories and
told one himself, passed hraka in the ditch and then, on an impulse, went to
Chervil and obtained his consent to visit another Mark. He wandered across the
Crixa, found himself in the middle of the ni-Frith silflay with the Left Flank
Mark and went underground with them. Their officers shared a single large
burrow and here he met some experienced veterans and listened with interest to
their stories of Wide Patrols and other exploits. In the mid-afternoon he came
back to the Near Hind relaxed and confident, and slept until one of the sentries
woke him for silflay.

beside Chervil, Bigwig watched the Mark go out. Hyzenthlay and
Thethuthinnang passed him without a glance. They looked tense but steady.
Chervil followed the last rabbit.

Bigwig waited until he was sure that Chervil had had time to get well away

from the hole. Then, with a last, quick look to where Blackavar was sitting, he
went out himself. The bright sunset dazzled him and he sat up on his hind legs,
blinking and combing the fur along one side of his face as his eyes got
accustomed to the light. A few moments later, he saw Kehaar come flying across
the field.

‘This is it, then,’ he said to himself. ‘Here we go.’
At that moment a rabbit spoke from behind him.
‘Thlayli, I want a few words with you. Just come back under the bushes, will

you?’

Bigwig dropped on his front paws and looked round.
It was General Woundwort.

37. The Thunder Builds Up

Joel Chandler Harris Proverbs of Uncle Remus

‘You were out of the Near Hind burrows this afternoon?’ began Woundwort.
‘Yes, sir,’ replied Bigwig. He still disliked addressing Woundwort as ‘sir’, but

since he was supposed to be an Efrafan officer, he could not very well do
otherwise. However, he did not add that Chervil had given him permission. He
had not been accused of anything as yet.

‘Where did you go?’
Bigwig swallowed his annoyance. No doubt Woundwort knew perfectly well

where he had been.

‘I went to the Left Flank Mark, sir. I was in their burrows.’
‘Why did you go?’
‘To pass the time and learn something from listening to the officers.’
‘Did you go anywhere else?’
‘No, sir.’
‘You met one of the Left Flank Owsla – a rabbit named Groundsel.’
‘Very likely, I didn’t learn all their names.’
‘Have you ever seen that rabbit before?’
‘No, sir. How could I?’
There was a pause.
‘May I ask what this is all about, sir?’ said Bigwig.
‘I’ll ask the questions,’ said Woundwort. ‘Groundsel has seen you before. He

knew you by the fur on your head. Where do you think he saw you?’

‘I’ve no idea.’
‘Have you ever run from a fox?’
‘Yes, sir, a few days ago, while I was coming here.’

‘You led it on to some other rabbits and it killed one of them. Is that correct?’
‘I didn’t intend to lead it on to them. I didn’t know they were there.’
‘You didn’t tell us anything about this?’
‘It never occurred to me. There’s nothing wrong in running from a fox.’
‘You’ve caused the death of an Efrafan officer.’
‘Quite by accident. And the fox might have got him anyway, even if I’d not

been there.’

Foxes aren’t dangerous, to rabbits who know their business.’

‘I’m sorry the fox got him, sir. It was a stroke of very bad luck.’
Woundwort stared at him out of his great, pale eyes.
‘Then one more question, Thlayli. That patrol was on the track of a band of

rabbits – strangers. What do you know about them?’

‘I saw their tracks too, about that time. I can’t tell you any more than that.’
‘You weren’t with them?’
‘If I’d been with them, sir, would I have come to Efrafa?’
‘I told you I’d ask the questions. You can’t tell me where they might have

gone?’

‘I’m afraid I can’t, sir.’
Woundwort stopped staring and sat silent for some time. Bigwig felt that the

General was waiting for him to ask if that was all and whether he could now go.
He determined to remain silent himself.

the field this morning. You’re not afraid of these birds?’

‘No, sir. I’ve never heard of one hurting a rabbit.’
‘But they have been known to, for all your wide experience, Thlayli. Anyway,

why did you go near it?’

trying to make an impression on Captain Chervil.’

you’d better start with me. The day after tomorrow, I’m taking out a Wide Patrol
myself. It will cross the iron road and try to pick up traces of those rabbits – the
rabbits Mallow would have found if you hadn’t gone and blundered into him. So
you’d better come along and show us how good you are then.’

‘Very well, sir; I shall be glad to.’
There was another silence. This time Bigwig decided to make as if to go. He

did so, and immediately a fresh question stopped him short.

Near Hind Mark?’

‘Yes, sir.’
‘I’m not at all sure the trouble’s over there, Thlayli. Keep an eye on it. If she’ll

talk to you, so much the better. Perhaps those does are settling down and perhaps
they aren’t. I want to know.’

‘Very well, sir,’ said Bigwig.
‘That’s all,’ said Woundwort. ‘You’d better get back to your Mark now.’
Bigwig made his way into the field. The silflay was almost over, the sun had

set and it was growing dark. Heavy clouds dimmed the after-light. Kehaar was
nowhere to be seen. The sentries came in and the Mark began to go
underground. Sitting alone in the grass, he waited until the last rabbit had
disappeared. There was still no sign of Kehaar. He hopped slowly to the hole.
Entering, he knocked into one of the police escort, who was blocking the mouth
to make sure that Blackavar did not try to bolt as he was taken down.

‘Now go and report that,’ he added over his shoulder, as he went down to his
burrow.

hard, bare earth under the railway arch, came out on the north side and sat up to
listen. A few moments later Fiver joined him and they crept a little way into the
field, towards Efrafa. The air was close and warm and smelt of rain and ripening
barley. There was no sound close by, but behind and below them, from the
water-meadow on the nearer bank of the Test, came faintly the shrill, incessant
fussing of a pair of sandpipers. Kehaar flew down from the top of the
embankment.

‘You’re sure he said tonight?’ asked Hazel for the third time.
‘Ees bad,’ said Kehaar. ‘Maybe dey catch ‘im. Ees finish Meester Pigvig. You

t’ink?’

Hazel made no reply.
‘I can’t tell,’ said Fiver.’ Clouds and thunder. That place up the field – it’s like

the bottom of a river. Anything could be happening in there.’

‘Bigwig’s there. Suppose he’s dead? Suppose they’re trying to make him tell

them –’

‘Hazel,’ said Fiver. ‘Hazel-rah, you won’t help him by staying here in the dark

and worrying. Quite likely there’s nothing wrong. He’s just had to sit tight for
some reason. Anyway, he won’t come tonight – that’s certain now – and our
rabbits are in danger here. Kehaar can go up tomorrow at dawn and bring us
another message.’

‘I dare say you’re right,’ said Hazel, ‘but I hate to go. Just suppose he were to

come. Let Silver take them back and I’ll stay here.’

You’re trying to eat grass that isn’t there. Why don’t you give it a chance to
grow?’

them, they could hear the other rabbits stirring uneasily among the nettles.

back over the river now, before it’s completely dark.’

‘Hazel-rah,’ said Pipkin, as he slipped by, ‘it – it is going to be all right, isn’t

it? Bigwig will come tomorrow, won’t he?’

‘Of course he will,’ said Hazel, ‘and we’ll all be here to help him. And I’ll tell

you something else, Hlao-roo. If he doesn’t come tomorrow, I’m going into
Efrafa myself.’

‘I’ll come with you, Hazel-rah,’ said Pipkin.

trembling, but not with cold: the stuffy runs of the Mark were dense with
thunder: the air felt like a deep drift of leaves. Bigwig was close to utter nervous
exhaustion. Since leaving General Woundwort, he had become more and more
deeply entangled in all the age-old terrors of the conspirator. How much had
Woundwort discovered? Clearly, there was no information that failed to reach
him. He knew that Hazel and the rest had come from the north and crossed the
iron road. He knew about the fox. He knew that a gull, which should have been
far away at this time of year, was hanging round Efrafa and that he, Bigwig, had
deliberately been near it. He knew that Bigwig had made a friend of Hyzenthlay.
How long could it be before he took the final step of fitting all these things
together? Perhaps he had already done so and was merely waiting to arrest them
in his own time?

Woundwort had every advantage. He sat secure at the junction of all paths,

seeing clearly down each, while he, Bigwig, ludicrous in his efforts to measure
up to him as an enemy, clambered clumsily and ignorantly through the
undergrowth, betraying himself with every movement He did not know how to
get in touch with Kehaar again. Even if he managed to do so, would Hazel be
able to bring the rabbits a second time? Perhaps they had already been spotted by
Campion on patrol? To speak to Blackavar would be suspect. To go near Kehaar
would be suspect. Through more holes than he could possible stop, his secret
was leaking – pouring – out.

There was worse to come.
‘Thlayli,’ whispered Hyzenthlay, ‘do you think you and I and Thethuthinnang

could get away tonight? If we fought the sentry at the mouth of the run we might
be able to get clear before a patrol could start after us.’

‘Why?’ asked Bigwig. ‘What makes you ask that?’
‘I’m frightened. We told the other does, you see, just before the silflay. They

were ready to run when the bird attacked the sentries, and then nothing
happened. They all know about the plan – Nelthilta and the rest – and it can’t be
long before the Council find out. Of course we’ve told them that their lives
depend on keeping quiet and that you’re going to try again. Thethuthinnang’s
watching them now: she says she’ll do her best not to sleep. But no secret can be
kept in Efrafa. It’s even possible that one of the does is a spy, although Frith
knows we chose them as carefully as we could. We may all be arrested before
tomorrow morning.’

Bigwig tried to think clearly. He could certainly succeed in getting out with a

couple of resolute, sensible does. But the sentry – unless he could kill him –
would raise the alarm at once and he could not be sure of finding the way to the
river in the dark. Even if he did, it was possible that the pursuit might follow him
over the plank bridge and into the middle of his unprepared, sleeping friends.
And at the best he would have come out of Efrafa with no more than a couple of
does, because his nerve had failed. Silver and the others would not know what he
had had to endure. They would know only that he had run away.

‘No, we mustn’t give up yet,’ he said, as gently as he could. ‘It’s the thunder

and the waiting that make you feel so much upset. Listen, I promise you that by
this time tomorrow you’ll be out of Efrafa for ever and the others with you. Now
go to sleep here for a little while and then go back and help Thethuthinnang.
Keep thinking of those high downs and all that I told you. We’ll get there – our
troubles won’t last much longer.’

fulfil this promise and whether they would be woken by the Council police. ‘If
we are,’ he thought,’ I’ll fight until they tear me to bits. They’ll make no
Blackavar out of me.’

wondered whether Hyzenthlay had been arrested. Then he felt sure that the
Owslafa could not have removed her while he slept. She must have woken and
slipped back to Thethuthinnang without disturbing him.

It was a little before dawn, but the oppression in the air had not lessened. He

slipped up the run to the entrance. Moneywort, the sentry on duty, was peering
uneasily out of the mouth of the hole, but turned as he approached.

sour, but not much hope of it breaking before the evening, I’d say.’

‘Go and wake Captain Chervil. I’ll take your place here until the Mark come up.’

When Moneywort had gone, Bigwig sat in the mouth of the hole and sniffed

the heavy air. The sky seemed as close as the tops of the trees, covered with still
cloud and flushed on the morning side with a lurid, foxy glow. Not a lark was
up, not a thrush singing. The field before him was empty and motionless. The
longing to run came over him. In less than no time he could be down to the arch.
It was a safe bet that Campion and his patrol would not be out in weather like
this. Every living creature up and down the fields and copses must be muted,
pressed down as though under a great, soft paw. Nothing would be moving, for
the day was unpropitious and instincts were blurred and not to be trusted. It was
a time to crouch and be silent. But a fugitive would be safe. Indeed, he could not
hope for a better chance.

‘O Lord with the starlight ears, send me a sign!’ said Bigwig.
He heard movement in the run behind him. It was the Owslafa bringing up the

prisoner. In the thundery twilight, Blackavar looked more sick and dejected than
ever. His nose was dry and the whites of his eyes showed. Bigwig went out into
the field, pulled a mouthful of clover and brought it back.

‘Cheer up,’ he said to Blackavar, ‘Have some clover.’
‘That’s not allowed, sir,’ said one of the escort.
‘Oh, let him have it, Bartsia,’ said the other. ‘There’s no one to see. It’s hard

enough for everyone on a day like this, let alone the prisoner.’

Blackavar ate the clover and Bigwig took up his usual place as Chervil arrived

to watch the Mark go out.

to his usual brisk manner. He had little to say as they passed him. He let both
Thethuthinnang and Hyzenthlay go by in silence. Nelthilta, however, stopped of
her own accord and stared impudently at him.

‘Under the weather, Captain?’ she said. ‘Brace up, now. You may have a

surprise soon, who knows?’

‘What do you mean?’ answered Chervil sharply.
‘Does might grow wings and fly,’ said Nelthilta, ‘and before very much

longer, too. Secrets go faster than moles underground.’

though he were going to call her back.

think I’ve got a thorn in it.’

better there.’

But whether because he was still thinking about what Nelthilta had said, or for

some other reason, he did not make a particularly thorough search for the thorn:
which was perhaps as well, for there was no thorn there.

‘Oh, confound it!’ he said, looking up, ‘There’s that dratted white bird again.

What’s it keep coming here for?’

‘Why does it worry you?’ asked Bigwig. ‘It’s not doing any harm – only

looking for snails.’

quoting Woundwort. ‘And you keep away from it today, Thlayli, d’you see?
That’s an order.’

thought all rabbits knew that.’

beak as thick as my front paw?’

“Ladybird, ladybird, fly away home.” That works and so does this: or it always
used to with my mother.’

stem and then fly.’

bird and I’ve offered to get rid of it for you. We had a lot of these charms and
sayings in my old warren. I only wish we’d had one to get rid of men.’

‘Well, what is the charm?’ said Chervil.
‘You say,

O fly away, great bird so white,
And don’t come back until tonight.

 
‘Of course, you have to use hedgerow talk. No use expecting them to understand
Lapine. Let’s have a go, anyway. If it doesn’t work, we’re none the worse and if
it does, the Mark will think it was you who drove the bird away. Where’s it got
to? I can hardly see anything in this light. Oh, there it is, look, behind those
thistles. Well, you run like this. Now you have to hop to this side, then to the
other side, scratch with your legs – that’s right, splendid – cock your ears and
then go straight on until – ah! Here we are; now then:

O fly away, great bird so white,
And don’t come back until tonight

 
‘There you are, you see. It did work. I think there’s more than we know to some
of these old rhymes and spells. Of course, it might have been just going to fly
away anyway. But you must admit it’s gone.’

‘Probably all that prancing about as we came up to it,’ said Chervil sourly.

‘We must have looked completely mad. What on earth will the Mark think?
Anyway, now we’re out here, we may as well go round the sentries.’

‘I’ll stop and feed, if you don’t mind,’ said Bigwig. ‘I didn’t get much last

night, you know.’

he came upon a chance to talk to Blackavar alone. He had been through the
sweltering burrows, finding everywhere quick breathing and feverish pukes: and
he was just wondering whether he could not plausibly go and press Chervil to
ask the Council’s permission for the Mark to spend part of the day in the bushes
above ground – for that might very well bring some sort of opportunity with it –
when he began to feel the need to pass hraka. No rabbit passes hraka
underground: and like schoolchildren, who know that they cannot very well be
refused a request to go to the lavatory – as long as it is not too soon after the last
time – the Efrafan rabbits used to slip into the ditch for a breath of air and a
change of scene. Although they were not supposed to be allowed to go more
often than was necessary, some of the Owsla were easier than others. As Bigwig
approached the hole that led into the ditch, he found two or three young bucks
loitering in the run and as usual, set himself to act his part as convincingly as he
could.

‘Why are you hanging about here?’ he asked.
‘The prisoner’s escort are up at the hole and they turned us back sir,’ answered

one. ‘They’re not letting anyone out for the moment.’

‘Not to pass hraka?’ said Bigwig.
‘No, sir.’
Indignant, Bigwig made his way to the mouth of the hole. Here he found

Blackavar’s escort talking to the sentry on duty.

‘I’m afraid you can’t go out for the moment, sir,’ said Bartsia. ‘The prisoner’s

in the ditch, but he won’t be long.’

‘Neither shall I,’ said Bigwig. ‘Just get out of the way, will you?’ He pushed

Bartsia to one side and hopped into the ditch.

The day had become even more lowering and overcast. Blackavar was

squatting a little way off, under an overhanging plume of cow-parsley. The flies
were walking on his shreds of ears, but he seemed not to notice them. Bigwig
went along the ditch and squatted beside him.

‘Blackavar, listen,’ he said quickly. ‘This is the truth, by Frith and the Black

Rabbit. I am a secret enemy of Efrafa. No one knows this but you and a few of
the Mark does. I’m going to escape with them tonight and I’m going to take you
as well. Don’t do anything yet. When the time comes I’ll be there to tell you.
Just brace up and get yourself ready.’

Without waiting for an answer, he moved away as though to find a better spot.

Even so, he was back at the hole before Blackavar, who evidently meant to stay
outside for as long as the escort – clearly in no hurry themselves – would allow.

‘Sir,’ said Bartsia, as Bigwig came in, ‘that’s the third time, sir, that you’ve

disregarded my authority. Council police can’t be treated in this way. I’m afraid I
shall have to report it, sir.’

Bigwig made no reply and returned up the run.
‘Wait a bit longer if you can,’ he said as he passed the bucks. ‘I don’t suppose

that poor fellow will get out again today.’

be prudent to keep away from her. She knew what to do, and the less they were
seen together the better. His head ached in the heat and he wanted only to be
alone and quiet. He went back to his burrow and slept.

38. The Thunder Breaks

Shakespeare Julius Caesar

‘He told you he wanted you to attack the sentries while the rabbits were

feeding, didn’t he,’ he said to Kehaar, ‘and that he’d bring the mothers out in the
confusion?’

‘Ya, say dis, but not ‘appen. Den ‘e say go away, come again tonight.’
‘So that’s still what he means to do. The question is, when will they be

feeding? It’s getting dark already. Silver, what do you think?’

‘If I know them, they won’t alter anything they usually do,’ said Silver. ‘But if

you’re worried in case we’re not there in time, why not go now?’

‘Because they’re always patrolling. The longer we wait up there, the greater

the risk. If a patrol finds us before Bigwig comes, it won’t be just a matter of
getting ourselves away. They’ll realize we’re there for some purpose and give
the alarm: and that’ll be the end of any chance he’s got.’

‘Listen, Hazel-rah,’ said Blackberry. ‘We ought to reach the iron road at the

same time as Bigwig and not a moment before. Why don’t you take them all
over the river now and wait in the undergrowth, near the boat? Once Kehaar’s
attacked the sentries, he can fly back and tell us.’

‘Yes, that’s it,’ answered Hazel. ‘But once he’s told us, we must get up there in

no time at all. Bigwig’s going to need us as well as Kehaar.’

‘Well, you won’t be able to dash up to the arch,’ said Fiver, ‘with your leg.

The best thing you can do is to get on the boat and have the rope gnawed half
through by the time we come back. Silver can look after the fighting, if there’s
going to be any.’

Hazel hesitated. ‘But some of us are probably going to get hurt. I can’t stay

behind.’

‘Fiver’s right,’ said Blackberry. ‘You will have to wait on the boat, Hazel. We

can’t risk your being left to be picked up by the Efrafans. Besides, it’s very

important that the rope should be half-gnawed – that’s a job for someone
sensible. It mustn’t break too soon or we’re all finished.’

reluctant.

he is. Frith knows what may have happened already.’

with a multifoliate rustling through the sedges. They had just reached the plank
bridge when there came a rumble of thunder. In the intense, strange light, the
plants and leaves seemed magnified and the fields beyond the river very near.
There was an oppressive stillness.

ever gone looking for a doe.’

pouring rain. For goodness’ sake, all of you, don’t panic, or we’ll never see our
warren again. I think this is going to be a rough business,’ he added quietly to
Hazel. ‘I don’t like it much.’

Captain Chervil at once. I followed them up the run. When she got to Chervil’s
burrow, there were two Council police waiting just outside and one of them said
to Chervil, “Well, as quick as you can, and don’t be long.” And then they took
her straight out. They must have gone to the Council. Oh Thlayli, what shall we
do? She’ll tell them everything –’

‘Listen to me,’ said Bigwig. ‘There’s not a moment to lose. Go and get

Thethuthinnang and the others and bring them up to this burrow. I shan’t he here,
but you must wait quietly until I come back. It won’t be long. Quick now!
Everything depends on it.’

Hyzenthlay had hardly disappeared down the run when Bigwig heard another

rabbit approaching from the opposite direction.

‘Who’s there?’ he said, turning swiftly.

going to be a whole lot of trouble. Nelthilta’s been arrested by the Council. I was
sure she would be, after my report to Vervain this morning. Whatever it was she
was talking about, they’ll get it out of her. I dare say the General will be here
himself as soon as he knows what’s what. Now look here, I’ve got to go over to
the Council burrow at once. You and Avens are to stay here and get the sentries
on duty immediately. There’ll be no silflay and no one is to go outside for any
reason whatever. All the holes are to be double-guarded. Now, you understand
these orders, don’t you?’

‘Have you told Avens?’
‘I haven’t time to go looking for Avens; he’s not in his burrow. Go and alert

the sentries yourself. Send someone to find Avens and someone else to tell
Bartsia that Blackavar won’t be wanted this evening. Then sit on those holes –
and the hraka holes too – with every sentry you’ve got. For all I know there may
be some plot to make a break-out. We arrested Nelthilta as quietly as we could,
but the Mark are bound to realize what’s happened. If necessary you’re to get
rough, do you see? Now I’m off.’

‘Right,’ said Bigwig. ‘I’ll get busy at once.’
He followed Chervil to the top of the run. The sentry at the hole was

Marjoram. As he stood clear to let Chervil pass, Bigwig came up behind him and
looked out into the overcast.

weather. The orders are that we’re to get on with it at once.’

He waited for Marjoram’s reply. If Chervil had already told him that no one

was to go out, it would be necessary to fight him. But after a moment, Marjoram
said, ‘Have you heard any thunder yet?’

and the escort up, and be quick, too. We’ll need to get the Mark out immediately
if they’re to feed before the storm breaks.’

Marjoram went and Bigwig hurried back to his own burrow. Hyzenthlay had

lost no time. Three or four does were crammed into the burrow itself and near-
by, in a side run, Thethuthinnang was crouching with several more. All were
silent and frightened and one or two were close to the stupefaction of terror.

say. Listen, now. Blackavar and the police guards will be up directly. Marjoram
will probably come up behind them and you must find some excuse to keep him
talking. Soon after, you’ll hear fighting, because I’m going to attack the police
guards. When you hear that, come up as fast as you can and follow me out into
the field. Don’t stop for anything.’

As he finished speaking, he heard the unmistakable sound of Blackavar and

the guards approaching, Blackavar’s weary, dragging gait was like that of no
other rabbit. Without waiting for the does to reply, Bigwig returned to the mouth
of the run. The three rabbits came up in single file, Bartsia leading.

‘I’m afraid I’ve brought you up here for nothing,’ said Bigwig. ‘I’ve just been

told that silflay’s cancelled for this evening. Have a look outside and you’ll see
why.’

and Blackavar.

thought –’

‘Now, Blackavar!’ cried Bigwig, and leapt on Bartsia from behind.
Bartsia fell forwards out of the hole with Bigwig on top of him. He was not a

member of the Owslafa for nothing and was reckoned a good fighter. As they
rolled over on the ground, he turned his head and sunk his teeth in Bigwig’s
shoulder. He had been trained to get a grip at once and to hold it at all costs.
More than once in the past this had served him well. But in fighting a rabbit of
Bigwig’s strength and courage it proved a mistake. His best chance would have
been to keep clear and use his claws. He retained his hold like a dog and Bigwig,
snarling, brought both his own back legs forward, sank his feet in Bartsia’s side
and then, ignoring the pain in his shoulder, forced himself upwards. He felt
Bartsia’s closed teeth come tearing out through his flesh and then he was
standing above him as he fell back on the ground, kicking helplessly. Bigwig
leapt clear. It was plain that Bartsia’s haunch was injured. He struggled, but
could not get up.

you.’

He found Blackavar grappling with the other guard. Just beyond them,
Hyzenthlay was coming up the run with Thethuthinnang behind her. Bigwig
gave the guard a tremendous cuff on the side of the head, which knocked him
clear across the run and into the prisoner’s alcove. He picked himself up,
panting, and stared at Bigwig without a word.

are you all right?’

‘Yes, sir,’ said Blackavar, ‘but what do we do now?’
‘Follow me,’ said Bigwig, ‘all of you. Come on!’
He led the way out again. There was no sign of Bartsia, but as he looked back

to make sure that the others were following, he caught a glimpse of the

astonished face of Avens peering out of the other hole.

‘Captain Chervil wants you!’ he called, and dashed away into the field.
As he reached the clump of thistles where he had spoken to Kehaar that

morning, a long roll of thunder sounded from across the valley beyond. A few
great, warm drops of rain were falling. Along the western horizon the lower
clouds formed a single, purple mass, against which distant trees stood out minute
and sharp. The upper edges rose into the light, a far land of wild mountains.
Copper-coloured, weightless and motionless, they suggested a glassy fragility
like that of frost. Surely, when the thunder struck them again they would vibrate,
tremble and shatter, till warm shards, sharp as icicles, fell flashing down from
the ruins. Racing through the ochre light, Bigwig was impelled by a frenzy of
tension and energy. He did not feel the wound in his shoulder. The storm was his
own. The storm would defeat Efrafa.

He was well out into the great field and looking for a sight of the distant arch

when he felt along the ground the first stamping thuds of the alarm. He pulled up
and looked about him. There did not seem to be any stragglers. The does –
however many there were – were well up with him, but scattered to either side.
Rabbits in flight tend to keep away from each other and the does had opened out
as they left the hole. If there was a patrol between him and the iron road they
would not get past it without loss unless they came closer together. He would
have to collect them, despite the delay. Then another thought came to him. If
they could get out of sight, their pursuers might be puzzled, for the rain and the
failing light would make tracking difficult.

side, a hedge ran down the length of the field towards the iron road. He saw
Blackavar near-by and ran across to him.

some of them and bring them that way?’

Bigwig remembered that Blackavar knew nothing except that they were on

the’ run. There was no time to explain about Hazel and the river.

‘Go straight to that ash tree in the hedge,’ he said, ‘and take all the does you

can pick up on the way. Get through to the other side and I’ll be there as soon as
you are.’

At this moment Hyzenthlay and Thethuthinnang came running towards them,

followed by two or three other does. They were plainly confused and uncertain.

‘The stamping, Thlayli!’ panted Thethuthinnang. ‘They’re coming!’
‘Well, run, then,’ said Bigwig. ‘Keep near me, all of you.’
They were better runners than he had dared to hope. As they made for the ash

tree, more does fell in with them and it seemed to him that they ought now to be

a match for a patrol, unless it were a very strong one. Once through the hedge he
turned south and, keeping close beside it, led them down the slope. There, ahead
of him, was the arch in the overgrown embankment. But would Hazel be there?
And where was Kehaar?

Woundwort. ‘Make sure you tell us everything, because we know a good deal
already. Let her alone, Vervain,’ he added. ‘She can’t talk if you keep cuffing
her, you fool.’

‘Hyzenthlay said – oh! oh! – she said a big bird would attack the Owsla

sentries,’ gasped Nelthilta,’ and we would run away in the confusion. And then
–’

‘She said a bird would attack the sentries?’ interrupted Woundwort, puzzled.

‘Are you telling the truth? What sort of a bird?’

‘I don’t – I don’t know,’ panted Nelthilta. ‘The new officer – she said he had

told the bird –’

‘What do you know about a bird?’ said Woundwort, turning to Chervil.
‘I reported it, sir,’ replied Chervil. ‘You’ll not forget, sir, that I reported the

bird –’

There was a scuffling outside the crowded Council burrow and Avens came

pushing his way in.

‘The new officer, sir!’ he cried, ‘He’s gone! Taken a crowd of the Mark does

with him. Jumped on Bartsia and broke his leg, sir! Blackavar’s cut and run too.
We never had a chance to stop them. Goodness knows how many have joined
him. Thlayli – it’s Thayli’s doing!’

‘Thlayli?’ cried Woundwort. ‘Embleer Frith, I’ll blind him when I catch him!

Chervil, Vervain, Avens – yes and ‘you two as well – come with me. Which way
has he gone?’

‘He was going downhill, sir,’ answered Avens.
‘Lead the way you saw him take,’ said Woundwort.
As they came out from the Crixa, two or three of the Efrafan officers checked

at the sight of the murky light and increasing rain. But the sight of the General
was more alarming still. Pausing only to stamp the escape alarm, they set out
behind him towards the iron road.

Very soon they came upon traces of blood which the rain had not yet washed

away, and these they followed towards the ash tree in the hedge to the west of
the warren.

round him. There was no sign either of Hazel or of Kehaar. For the first time
since he had attacked Bartsia he began to feel uncertain and troubled. Perhaps,
after all, Kehaar had not understood his cryptic message that morning? Or had
some disaster overtaken Hazel and the rest? If they were dead – scattered – if
there was no one left alive to meet him? He and his does would wander about the
fields until the patrols hunted them down.

‘No, it shan’t come to that,’ said Bigwig to himself. ‘At the worst we can cross

the river and try to hide in the woodland. Confound this shoulder! It’s going to
be more nuisance than I thought. Well, I’ll try to get them down to the plank
bridge at least. If we’re not overtaken soon, perhaps the rain will discourage
whoever’s after us; but I doubt it.’

He turned back to the does waiting under the arch. Most of them looked

bewildered. Hyzenthlay had promised that they were to be protected by a great
bird and that the new officer was going to work a secret trick to evade the pursuit
– a trick which would defeat even the General. These things had not happened.
They were wet through. Runnels of water were trickling through the arch from
the uphill side, and the bare earth was beginning to turn into mud. Ahead of
them, there was nothing to be seen but a track leading through the nettles into
another wide and empty field.

‘Come on,’ said Bigwig. ‘It’s not far now and then we’ll all be safe. This way.’
All the rabbits obeyed him at once. There was something to be said for

Efrafan discipline, thought Bigwig grimly, as they left the arch and met the force
of the rain.

Along one side of the field, beside the elms, farm tractors had pounded a

broad, flat path downhill towards the water-meadow below – that same path up
which he had run three nights before, after he had left Hazel by the boat. It was
turning muddy now – unpleasant going for rabbits – but at least it led straight to
the river and was open enough for Kehaar to spot them if he should turn up.

He had just begun to run once more when a rabbit overtook him.
‘Stop, Thlayli! What are you doing here? Where are you going?’

Bigwig had been half-expecting Campion to appear and had made up his mind

to kill him if necessary. But now that he actually saw him at his side,
disregarding the storm and the mud, self-possessed as he led his patrol, no more
than four strong, into the thick of a pack of desperate runaways, he could feel
only what a pity it was that the two of them should be enemies and how much he
would have liked to have taken Campion with him out of Efrafa.

‘Go away,’ he said. ‘Don’t try to stop us, Campion. I don’t want to hurt you.’
He glanced to his other side. ‘Blackavar, get the does to close up. If there are

any stragglers the patrol will jump on them.’

‘You’d do better to give in now,’ said Campion, still running beside him. ‘I

shan’t let you out of my sight, wherever you go. There’s an escape patrol on the

way – I heard the signal. When they get here you won’t stand a chance. You’re
bleeding badly now.’

done.’

‘Can I fight him, sir?’ said Blackavar. ‘He won’t beat me a second time.’
‘No,’ answered Bigwig, ‘he’s only trying to delay us. Keep running.’
‘Thlayli!’ cried Thethuthinnang suddenly, from behind him. ‘The General!

The General! Oh, what shall we do?’

heart. Woundwort had come through the arch ahead of his followers and was
running towards them by himself, snarling with fury. Behind him came the
patrol. In one quick glance Bigwig recognized Chervil, Avens and Groundsel.
With them were several more, including a heavy, savage-looking rabbit whom he
guessed to be Vervain, the head of the Council police. It crossed his mind that if
he were to run, immediately and alone, they would probably let him go as he had
come, and feel glad to be so easily rid of him. Certainly the alternative was to be
killed. At this moment Blackavar spoke.

‘Never mind, sir,’ he said. ‘You did your very best and it nearly came off. We

may even be able to kill one or two of them before it’s finished. Some of these
does can fight well when they’re put to it.’

on his haunches as Woundwort came up to them.

‘You dirty little beast,’ said Woundwort. ‘I hear you’ve attacked one of the

Council police and broken his leg. We’ll settle with you here. There’s no need to
take you back to Efrafa.’

‘You crack-brained slave-driver,’ answered Bigwig. ‘I’d like to see you try.’
‘All right,’ said Woundwort, ‘that’s enough. Who have we got? Vervain,

Campion, put him down. The rest of you, start getting these does back to the
warren. The prisoner you can leave to me.’

‘Frith sees you!’ cried Bigwig.’ You’re not fit to be called a rabbit! May Frith

blast you and your foul Owsla full of bullies!’

At that instant a dazzling claw of lightning streaked down the length of the

sky. The hedge and the distant trees seemed to leap forward in the brilliance of
the flash. Immediately upon it came the thunder; a high, tearing noise, as though
some huge thing were being ripped to pieces close above, which deepened and
turned to enormous blows of dissolution. Then the rain fell like a waterfall. In a
few seconds the ground was covered with water and over it, to a height of
inches, rose a haze formed of a myriad minute splashes. Stupefied with the
shock, unable even to move, the sodden rabbits crouched inert, almost pinned to

the earth by the rain.

A small voice spoke in Bigwig’s mind.
‘Your storm, Thlayli-rah. Use it.’
Gasping, he struggled up and pushed Blackavar with his foot.
‘Come on,’ he said, ‘get hold of – Hyzenthlay. We’re going.’
He shook his head, trying to blink the rain out of his eyes. Then it was no

longer Blackavar who was crouching in front of him but Woundwort, drenched
in mud and rain, glaring and scrabbling in the silt with his great claws.

‘I’ll kill you myself,’ said Woundwort.
His long front teeth were bared like the fangs of a rat. Afraid, Bigwig watched

him closely. He knew that Woundwort, with all the advantage of weight, would
jump and try to close with him. He must try to avoid him and rely on his claws.
He shifted his ground uneasily and felt himself slipping in the mud. Why did
Woundwort not jump? Then he realized that Woundwort was no longer looking
at him, but staring over his head at something beyond, something that he himself
could not see. Suddenly, Woundwort leapt backwards and in the same moment,
through the all-enveloping sound of the rain, there sounded a raucous clamour.

‘Yark! Yark! Yark!’
Some big, white thing was striking at Woundwort, who was cowering and

guarding his head as best he could. Then it was gone, sailing upwards and
turning in the rain.

‘Meester Pigvig, ees rabbits come!’
Sights and feelings swirled through Bigwig as though in a dream. The things

that were happening no longer seemed connected by anything except his own
dazed senses. He heard Kehaar screaming as he dived again to attack Vervain.
He felt the rain pouring cold into the open gash in his shoulder. Through the
curtain of rain he glimpsed Woundwort dodging among his officers and urging
them back into the ditch on the edge of the field. He saw Blackavar striking at
Campion and Campion turning to run. Then someone beside him was saying,
‘Hullo, Bigwig. Bigwig! Bigwig! What do you want us to do?’ It was Silver.

‘Where’s Hazel?’ he said.
‘Waiting at the boat. I say, you’re wounded! What –’
‘Then get these does down there,’ said Bigwig.
All was confusion. In ones and twos the does, utterly bemused and scarcely

able to move or to understand what was said to them, were urged into getting up
and stumbling their way down the field. Other rabbits began to appear through
the rain; Acorn, clearly frightened, but determined not to run; Dandelion
encouraging Pipkin; Speedwell and Hawkbit making towards Kehaar – the only
creature visible above the ground-haze. Bigwig and Silver brought them together

as best they could and made them understand that they were to help to get the
does away.

three of our rabbits in different places to mark the way back,’ he explained to
Bigwig. ‘Blackberry’s first, then Bluebell, then Fiver – he’s quite near the river.’

‘And there is Blackberry,’ said Bigwig.
‘You did it then, Bigwig,’ said Blackberry, shivering. ‘Was it very bad? Good

heavens, your shoulder –’

‘It’s not finished yet,’ said Bigwig. ‘Has everyone passed you?’
‘You’re the last,’ said Blackberry. ‘Can we go? This storm’s terrifying me!’
Kehaar alighted beside them.
‘Meester Pigvig,’ he said, ‘I fly on dose dam’ rabbits, but dey no run, dey get

in ditch. I no catch ’em in dere. Dey coming all along beside you.’

before it’s done. There’s thick cover in the water-meadow – they’ll use that.
Acorn, come back, keep away from that ditch!’

to side.

eyed and ready to bolt.

come out of the ditch over there and slip across into the water-meadow. They’re
behind us now. One of them was the biggest rabbit I’ve ever seen.’

Acorn and two does with him. That’s everyone. Come on, quick as you can.’

rushes, the bushes and sedge and deep puddles, they found it next to impossible
to tell their direction. Expecting to be attacked at any moment, they scattered and
floundered through the undergrowth, finding here a doe and there one of their
own rabbits and forcing them on. Without Kehaar they would certainly have lost
all touch with each other and perhaps never reached the river. The gull kept
flying backwards and forwards along the direct line to the bank, only alighting
now and then to guide Bigwig towards some straggling doe whom he had
spotted going the wrong way.

‘Kehaar,’ said Bigwig, as they waited for Thethuthinnang to struggle up to

them through a half-flattened clump of nettles, ‘will you go and see whether you
can spot the Efrafans? They can’t be far away. But why haven’t they attacked
us? We’re all so scattered that they could easily do us a lot of harm. I wonder
what they’re up to?’

Kehaar was back in a very short time.
‘Dey hiding at pridge,’ he said, ‘all under pushes. I come down, dat peeg fella

‘e make for fight me.’

‘Did he?’ said Bigwig. ‘The brute’s got courage, I’ll give him that.’
‘Dey t’ink you got to cross river dere or else go all along pank. Dey not know

heem poat. You near poat now.’

Fiver came running through the undergrowth.
‘We’ve been able to get some of them on the boat, Bigwig,’ he said, ‘but most

of them won’t trust me. They just keep asking where you are.’

Bigwig ran behind him and came out on the green path by the bank. All the

surface of the river was winking and plopping in the rain. The level did not
appear to have risen much as yet. The boat was just as he remembered it – one
end against the bank, the other a little way out in the stream. On the raised part at
the near end Hazel was crouching, his ears drooping on either side of his head
and his flattened fur completely black with rain. He was holding the taut rope in
his teeth. Acorn, Hyzenthlay and two more were crouching near him on the
wood, but the rest were huddled here and there along the bank. Blackberry was
trying unsuccessfully to persuade them to get out on the boat.

‘Hazel’s afraid to leave the rope,’ he said to Bigwig. ‘Apparently he’s bitten it

very thin already. All these does will say is that you’re their officer.’

Bigwig turned to Thethuthinnang.
‘This is the magic trick now,’ he said. ‘Get them over there, where

Hyzenthlay’s sitting, do you see? All of them – quickly.’

Before she could reply, another doe gave a squeal of fear. A litde way

downstream, Campion and his patrol had emerged from the bushes and were
coming up the path. From the opposite direction Vervain, Chervil and Groundsel
were approaching. The doe turned and darted for the undergrowth immediately
behind her. Just as she reached it, Woundwort himself appeared in her way,
reared up and dealt her a great, raking blow across the face. The doe turned once
more and ran blindly across the path and on to the boat.

Bigwig realized that since the moment when Kehaar had attacked him in the

field, Woundwort had not only retained control over his officers but had actually
made a plan and put it into effect. The storm and the difficult going had upset the
fugitives and disorganized them. Woundwort, on the other hand, had taken his
rabbits into the ditch and then made use of it to get them down to the water-
meadow, unexposed to further attack from Kehaar. Once there, he must have
gone straight for the plank bridge – which he evidently knew about – and set an
ambush under cover. But as soon as he had grasped that for some reason the
runaways were not making for the bridge after all, he had instantly sent Campion

to make his way round through the undergrowth, regain the bank downstream
and cut them off: and Campion had done this without error or delay. Now
Woundwort meant to fight them, here on the bank. He knew that Kehaar could
not be everywhere and that the bushes and undergrowth provided enough cover,
at a pinch, to dodge him. It was true that the other side had twice his numbers,
but most of them were afraid of him and none was a trained Efrafan officer. Now
that he had them pinned against the river, he would split them up and kill as
many as possible. The rest could run away and come to grief as they might.

Bigwig began to understand why Woundwort’s officers followed him and

fought for him as they did.

‘He’s not like a rabbit at all,’ he thought. ‘Flight’s the last thing he ever thinks

of. If I’d known three nights ago what I know now, I don’t believe I’d ever have
gone into Efrafa. I suppose he hasn’t realized about the boat too? It wouldn’t
surprise me.’ He dashed across the grass and jumped on the planking beside
Hazel.

not. Every one of the does ran from the bank to the boat. Blackberry and Fiver
ran with them. Woundwort, following them close, reached the edge of the bank
and came face to face with Bigwig. As he stood his ground, Bigwig could hear
Blackberry just behind him, speaking urgently to Hazel.

‘Dandelion’s not here,’ said Blackberry. ‘He’s the only one.’
Hazel spoke for the first time. ‘We shall have to leave him,’ he answered. ‘It’s

a shame, but these fellows will be at us in a moment and we can’t stop them.’

Bigwig spoke without taking his eyes from Woundwort. ‘Just a few more

moments, Hazel,’ he said. ‘I’ll keep them off. We can’t leave Dandelion.’

me now. You’ll either go into the river or be torn to pieces here – the whole lot
of you. There’s nowhere left to run.’

Bigwig had caught sight of Dandelion looking out of the undergrowth

opposite. He was plainly at a loss.

‘Groundsel! Vervain!’ said Woundwort. ‘Come over here beside me. When I

give the word, we’ll go straight into them. As for that bird, it’s not dangerous –’

‘There it is!’ cried Bigwig. Woundwort looked up quickly and leapt back.

Dandelion shot out of the bushes, crossed the path in a flash and was on the boat
beside Hazel. In the same moment the rope parted and immediately the little
punt began to move along the bank in the steady current. When it had gone a few
yards, the stern swung slowly outwards, until it was broadside on to the stream.
In this position it drifted to the middle of the river and into the southward bend.

Looking back, the last thing Bigwig saw was the face of General Woundwort

staring out of the gap in the willow-herb where the boat had lain. It reminded
him of the kestrel on Watership Down, which had pounced into the mouth of the
hole and missed the mouse.

PART IV HAZEL-RAH

American Folk Song

Most of the rabbits had very little idea of what was happening. The Efrafan

does had never seen a river and it would certainly have been beyond Pipkin or
Hawkbit to explain to them that they were on a boat. They – and nearly all the
others – had simply trusted Hazel and done as they were told. But all – bucks
and does alike – realized that Woundwort and his followers had vanished.
Wearied by all they had gone through, the sodden rabbits crouched without
talking, incapable of any feeling but a dull relief and without even the energy to
wonder what was going to happen next.

That they should feel any relief – dull or otherwise – was remarkable in the

circumstances and showed both how little they understood their situation and
how much fear Woundwort could inspire, for their escape from him seemed to
be their only good fortune. The rain was still falling. Already so wet that they no
longer felt it, they were nevertheless shivering with cold and weighted with their
drenched fur. The punt was holding over half an inch of rainwater. There was

one small, slatted floorboard and this was floating. Some of the rabbits, in the
first confusion of boarding the punt, had found themselves in this water, but now
all had got clear of it – most either to bows or stern, though Thethuthinnang and
Speedwell were hunched on the narrow thwart, amidships. In addition to their
discomfort, they were exposed and helpless. Finally, there was no way of
controlling the punt and they did not know where they were going. But these last
were troubles beyond the understanding of everyone but Hazel, Fiver and
Blackberry.

Bigwig had collapsed beside Hazel and lay on his side, exhausted. The

feverish courage had gone which had brought him from Efrafa to the river and
his wounded shoulder had begun to hurt badly. In spite of the rain and the
throbbing pulse down his foreleg, he felt ready to sleep where he was, stretched
upon the planking. He opened his eyes and looked up at Hazel.

‘I couldn’t do it again, Hazel,’ he said.
‘You haven’t got to,’ replied Hazel.
‘It was touch and go, you know,’ said Bigwig. ‘A chance in a thousand.’
‘Our children’s children will hear a good story,’ answered Hazel, quoting a

rabbit proverb. ‘How did you get that wound? It’s a nasty one.’

‘I fought a member of the Council police,’ said Bigwig.
‘A what?’ The term ‘Owslafa’ was unknown to Hazel.
‘A dirty little beast like Hufsa,’ said Bigwig.
‘Did you beat him?’
‘Oh yes – or I shouldn’t be here. I should think he’ll stop running. I say,

Hazel, we’ve got the does. What’s going to happen now?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Hazel. ‘We need one of these clever rabbits to tell us. And

Kehaar – where’s he gone? He’s supposed to know about this thing we’re sitting
on.’

Dandelion, crouching beside Hazel, got up at the mention of ‘clever rabbits’,

made his way across the puddled floor and returned with Blackberry and Fiver.

‘We’re all wondering what to do next,’ said Hazel.
‘Well,’ said Blackberry, ‘I suppose we shall drift into the bank before long and

then we can get out and find cover. There’s no harm, though, in going a good
long way from those friends of Bigwig’s.’

‘There is,’ said Hazel. ‘We’re stuck here in full view and we can’t run. If a

man sees us we’re in trouble.’

‘Men don’t like rain,’ said Blackberry. ‘Neither do I, if it comes to that, but it

makes us safer just now.’

At this moment Hyzenthlay, sitting just behind him, started and looked up.
‘Excuse me, sir, for interrupting you,’ she said, as though speaking to an

officer in Efrafa, ‘but the bird – the white bird – it’s coming towards us.’

side of the punt. The does nearest to him backed away nervously.

‘Meester ’Azel,’ he said, ‘pridge come. You see ’im pridge?’
It had not occurred to any of the rabbits that they were floating beside the path

up which they had come earlier that evening before the storm broke. They were
on the opposite side of the hedge of plants along the bank and the whole river
looked different. But now they saw, not far ahead, the bridge which they had
crossed when they first came to the Test four nights before. This they recognized
at once, for it looked the same as it had from the bank.

‘Maybe you go under ’im, maybe not,’ said Kehaar. ‘But you sit dere, ees

trouble.’

The bridge stretched from bank to bank between two low abutments. It was

not arched. Its under-side, made of iron girders, was perfectly straight – parallel
with the surface and about eight inches above it. Just in time Hazel saw what
Kehaar meant. If the punt did pass under the bridge without sticking, it would do
so by no more than a claw’s breadth. Any creature above the level of the sides
would be struck and perhaps knocked into the river. He scuttered through the
warm bilge-water to the other end and pushed his way up among the wet,
crowded rabbits.

all of you. Never mind the water. You, and you – what’s your name? Oh,
Blackavar, is it? – get everyone into the bottom. Be quick.’

Like Bigwig, he found that the Efrafan rabbits obeyed him at once. He saw

Kehaar fly up from his perch and disappear over the wooden rails. The concrete
abutments projected from each bank, so that the narrowed river ran slightly
faster under the bridge. The punt had been drifting broadside on, but now one
end swung forward, so that Hazel lost his bearings and found that he was no
longer looking at the bridge but at the bank. As he hesitated, the bridge seemed
to come at him in a dark mass, like snow sliding from a bough. He pressed
himself into the bilge. There was a squeal and a rabbit tumbled on top of him.
Then a heavy blow vibrated along the length of the punt and its smooth
movement was checked. This was followed by a hollow sound of scraping. It
grew dark and a roof appeared, very low above him. For a moment Hazel had
the vague idea that he was underground. Then the roof vanished, the punt was
gliding on and he heard Kehaar calling. They were below the bridge and still
drifting downstream.

The rabbit who had fallen on him was Acorn. He had been struck by the

bridge and the blow had sent him flying. However, though dazed and bruised, he

seemed to have escaped injury.

‘I wasn’t quick enough, Hazel-rah,’ he said. ‘I’d better go to Efrafa for a bit.’
‘You’d be wasted,’ said Hazel. ‘But I’m afraid there’s someone at the other

end who hasn’t been so lucky.’

under the bridge had caught her across the back. It was plain that she was
injured, but how badly Hazel could not tell. He saw Hyzenthlay beside her and it
seemed to him that since there was nothing he could do to help, it would
probably be best to let them alone. He looked round at his bedraggled, shivering
comrades and then at Kehaar, spruce and brisk on the stern.

‘We ought to get back on the bank, Kehaar,’ he said. ‘How can we do it?

Rabbits weren’t meant for this, you know.’

‘You not stop poat. But again is nudder pridge more. ’E stop ’im.’
There was nothing to be done but wait. They drifted on and came to a second

bend, where the river curved westwards. The current did not slacken and the
punt came round the bend almost in the middle of the stream, revolving as it did
so. The rabbits had been frightened by what had happened to Acorn and to the
doe, and remained squatting miserably, half in and half out of the bilge. Hazel
crept back to the raised bow and looked ahead.

The river broadened and the current slackened. He realized that they had

begun to drift more slowly. The nearer bank was high and the trees stood close
and thick, but on the farther bank the ground was low and open. Grassy, it
stretched away, smooth as the mown gallops on Watership Down. Hazel hoped
that they might somehow drop out of the current and reach that side, but the punt
moved quietly on, down the very centre of the broad pool. The open bank
slipped by and now the trees towered on both sides. Downstream, the pool was
closed by the second bridge, of which Kehaar had spoken.

creeping mauve toadflax. Well out from either bank stood four low arches –
scarcely more than culverts, each filled by the stream to within a foot of the
apex. Through them, thin segments of daylight showed from the downstream
side. The piers did not project, but against each lay a little accumulation of
flotsam, from which driftweed and sticks continually broke away to be carried
through the bridge.

It was plain that the punt would drift against the bridge and be held there. As

it approached, Hazel dropped back into the bilge-water. But this time there was
no need. Broadside on, the punt struck gently against two of the piers and
stopped, pinned squarely across the mouth of one of the central culverts. It could
go no further.

They had floated not quite half a mile in just over fifteen minutes.
Hazel put his forepaws on the low side and looked gingerly over upstream.

Immediately below, a shallow ripple spread all along the water-line, where the
current met the woodwork. It was too far to jump to the shore and both banks
were steep. He turned and looked upwards. The brickwork was sheer, with a
projecting course half-way between him and the parapet. There was no
scrambling up that.

on the bow, with its ragged remnant of painter. ‘You got us on this thing. How do
we get off?’

‘I don’t know, Hazel-rah,’ replied Blackberry. ‘Of all the ways we could finish

up, I never thought of this. It looks as though we’ll have to swim.’

‘Swim?’ said Silver. ‘I don’t fancy it, Hazel-rah. I know it’s no distance, but

look at those banks. The current would take us down before we could get out:
and that means into one of these holes under the bridge.’

Hazel tried to look through the arch. There was very little to be seen. The dark

tunnel was not long – perhaps not much longer than the punt itself. The water
looked smooth. There seemed to be no obstructions and there was room for the
head of a swimming animal between the surface of the water and the apex of the
arch. But the segment was so narrow that it was impossible to see exactly what
lay on the other side of the bridge. The light was failing. Water, green leaves,
moving reflections of leaves, the splashing of the raindrops and some curious
thing that appeared to be standing in the water and to be made of vertical, grey
lines – these were all that could be made out. The rain echoed dismally up the
culvert. The hard, ringing noise from under the soffit, so much unlike any sound
to be heard in an earth tunnel, was disturbing. Hazel returned to Blackberry and
Silver.

‘This is as bad a fix as we’ve been in,’ he said. ‘We can’t stay here, but I can’t

see any way out.’

and dropped down to the punt.

‘Ees finish poat,’ he said. ‘Not vait more.’
‘But how can we get to the bank, Kehaar?’ said Hazel.
The gull was surprised. ‘Dog sveem, rat sveem. You no sveem?’
‘Yes, we can swim as long as it’s not very far. But the banks are too steep for

us, Kehaar. We wouldn’t be able to stop the current taking us down one of these
tunnels and we don’t know what’s at the other end.’

‘Ees goot – you get out fine.’
Hazel felt at a loss. What exactly was he to understand from this? Kehaar was

not a rabbit. Whatever the Big Water was like, it must be worse than this and
Kehaar was used to it. He never said much in any case and what he did say was
always restricted to the simplest, since he spoke no Lapine. He was doing them a
good turn because they had saved his life but, as Hazel knew, he could not help
despising them for timid, helpless, stay-at-home creatures who could not fly. He
was often impatient. Did he mean that he had looked at the river and considered
it as if he were a rabbit? That there was slack water immediately below the
bridge, with a low, shelving bank where they could get out easily? That seemed
too much to hope for. Or did he simply mean that they had better hurry up and
take a chance on being able to do what he himself could do without difficulty?
This seemed more likely. Suppose one of them did jump out of the boat and go
down with the current – what would that tell the others, if he did not come back?

Blackberry was fidgeting on and off the thwart, strung-up, able to feel only too
clearly all that Hazel felt himself. As he still hesitated, Kehaar let out a squawk.

‘Yark! Dam’ rabbits no goot. Vat I do, I show you.’
He tumbled clumsily off the raised bow. There was no gap between the punt

and the dark mouth of the culvert. Sitting low in the water like a mallard, he
floated into the tunnel and vanished. Peering after him, Hazel could at first see
nothing. Then he made out Kehaar’s shape black against the light at the far end.
It floated into daylight, turned sideways and passed out of the restricted view.

‘What does that prove?’ said Blackberry, his teeth chattering. ‘He may have

flown off the surface or put his great webbed feet down. It’s not he that’s soaked
through and shivering and twice as heavy with wet fur.’

Kehaar reappeared on the parapet above.
‘You go now,’ he said shortly.
Still the wretched Hazel hung back. His leg had begun to hurt again. The sight

of Bigwig – Bigwig of all rabbits – at the end of his tether, half-unconscious,
playing no part in this desperate exploit, lowered his courage still more. He
knew that he had not got it in him to jump into the water. The horrible situation
was beyond him. He stumbled on the slippery planking and as he sat up found
Fiver beside him.

‘I’ll go, Hazel,’ said Fiver quietly. ‘I think it’ll be all right.’
He put his front paws on the edge of the bow. Then, on the instant, all the

rabbits froze motionless. One of the does stamped on the puddled floor of the
punt. From above came the sounds of approaching footsteps and men’s voices,
and the smell of a burning white stick.

louder. They were on the bridge above, no farther away than the height of a

hedge. Every one of the rabbits was seized by the instinct to run, to go
underground. Hazel saw Hyzenthlay looking at him and returned her stare,
willing her with all his might to keep still. The voices, the smell of men’s sweat,
of leather, of white sticks, the pain in his leg, the damp, chuckling tunnel at his
very ear – he had known them all before. How could the men not see him? They
must see him. He was lying at their feet. He was wounded. They were coming to
pick him up.

Then the sound and smells were receding into the distance, the thudding of the

footsteps diminished. The men had crossed the bridge without looking over the
parapet. They were gone.

Hazel came to. ‘That settles it,’ he said. ‘Everyone’s got to swim. Come on,

Bluebell, you say you’re a water-rabbit. Follow me.’ He got on the thwart and
went along it to the side.

But it was Pipkin that he found next to him.
‘Quick, Hazel-rah,’ said Pipkin, twitching and trembling. ‘I’ll come too. Only

be quick.’

Hazel shut his eyes and fell over the side into the water.
As in the Enborne, there was an instant shock of cold. But more than this, and

at once, he felt the pull of the current. He was being drawn away by a force like
a high wind, yet smooth and silent. He was drifting helplessly down a
suffocating, cold run, with no hold for his feet. Full of fear, he paddled and
struggled, got his head up and took a breath, scrabbled his claws against rough
bricks underwater and lost them again as he was dragged on. Then the current
slackened, the run vanished, the dark became light and there were leaves and sky
above him once more. Still struggling, he fetched up against something hard,
bumped off it, struck it again and then for a moment touched soft ground. He
floundered forwards and found that he was dragging himself through liquid mud.
He was out on a clammy bank. He lay panting for several moments and then
wiped his face and opened his eyes. The first thing he saw was Pipkin, plastered
with mud, crawling to the bank a few feet away.

Full of elation and confidence, all his terrors forgotten, Hazel crawled over to

Pipkin and together they slipped into the undergrowth. He said nothing and
Pipkin did not seem to expect him to speak. From the shelter of a clump of
purple loosestrife they looked back at the river.

banks, trees and undergrowth grew close. There was a kind of swamp here and it
was hard to tell where water ended and woodland began. Plants grew in clumps
both in and out of the muddy shallows. The bottom was covered with fine silt
and mud that was half water and in this the two rabbits had made furrows as they

dragged themselves to shore. Running diagonally across the pool, from the
brickwork of the bridge near the opposite bank to a point a little below them on
their own side, was a grating of thin, vertical iron rods. In the cutting season the
river weed, drifting in tangled mats from the fishing reaches above, was held
against this grating and raked out of the pool by men in waders, who piled it to
be used as compost. The left bank was a great rubbish-heap of rotting weed
among the trees. It was a green, rank-smelling place, humid and enclosed.

‘Good old Kehaar!’ said Hazel, gazing with satisfaction round the foetid

solitude, ‘I should have trusted him.’

As he spoke, a third rabbit came swimming out from under the bridge. The

sight of him, struggling in the current like a fly in a spider’s web, filled them
both with fear. To watch another in danger can be almost as bad as sharing it.
The rabbit fetched up against the grating, drifted a little way along it, found the
bottom and crawled out of the turbid water. It was Blackavar. He lay on his side
and seemed unaware of Hazel and Pipkin when they came up to him. After a
little while, however, he began to cough, vomited some water and sat up.

‘Are you all right?’ asked Hazel.
‘More or less,’ said Blackavar. ‘But have we got to do much more tonight, sir?

I’m very tired.’

might already have gone under for all you knew.’

‘I thought you gave an order,’ replied Blackavar.
‘I see,’ said Hazel. ‘Well, at that rate you’re going to find us a sloppy lot, I’m

afraid. Was there anyone else who looked like coming when you jumped in?’

‘I think they’re a bit nervous,’ answered Blackavar. ‘You can’t blame them.’
‘No, but the trouble is that anything can happen,’ said Hazel, fretting. ‘They

may all go tharn, sitting there. The men may come back. If only we could tell
them it’s all right –’

‘I think we can, sir,’ said Blackavar. ‘Unless I’m wrong, it’s only a matter of

slipping up the bank there and down the other side. Shall I go?’

Hazel was disconcerted. From what he had gathered, this was a disgraced

prisoner from Efrafa – not even a member of the Owsla, apparently: and he had
just said that he felt exhausted. He was going to take some living up to.

With any luck, they’ll start coming through to you. Help them if you can.’

Hazel and Blackavar slipped through the dripping undergrowth. The grass

track which crossed the bridge ran above them, at the top of a steep bank. They
climbed the bank and looked out cautiously from the long grass at the verge. The
track was empty and there was nothing to be heard or smelt. They crossed it and

reached the end of the bridge on the upstream side. Here the bank dropped
almost sheer to the river, some six feet below. Blackavar scrambled down
without hesitation, but Hazel followed more slowly. Just above the bridge,
between it and a thorn-bush upstream, was a ledge of turf which overhung the
water. Out in the river, a few feet away, the punt lay against the weedy piers.

below the bridge. Get the does in first, if you can. There’s no time to lose. The
men may come back.’

It was no easy matter to rouse the torpid, bewildered does and make them

understand what they had to do. Silver went from one to another. Dandelion, as
soon as he saw Hazel on the bank, went at once to the bow and plunged in.
Speedwell followed, but as Fiver was about to go Silver stopped him.

‘If all our bucks go, Hazel,’ he said, ‘the does will be left alone and I don’t

think they’ll manage it.’

‘They’ll obey Thlayli, sir,’ said Blackavar, before Hazel could reply. ‘I think

he’s the one to get them started.’

they came to the first bridge. He seemed to be asleep, but when Silver nuzzled
him he raised his head and looked about in a dazed manner.

‘Oh, hullo, Silver,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid this shoulder of mine’s going to be a

bother. I feel awfully cold, too. Where’s Hazel?’

bleeding. He limped to the thwart and climbed on it.

jump in now. One by one, don’t you think? Then there’ll be no risk of them
scratching or hurting each other as they swim.’

left the boat. There were in fact ten does altogether – though none of the rabbits
knew the number – and although one or two responded to Bigwig’s patient
urging, several were so much exhausted that they remained huddled where they
were, or looked stupidly at the water until others were brought to take their
place. From time to time Bigwig would ask one of the bucks to give a lead and
in this way Acorn, Hawkbit and Bluebell all scrambled over the side. The
injured doe, Thrayonlosa, was clearly in a bad way and Blackberry and
Thethuthinnang swam through together, one in front of her and one behind.

bank of the pool below the bridge. The sky cleared and the oppression lifted as
the thunder moved away eastwards. But it was fu Inlé before Bigwig himself
came through the bridge with Silver and Fiver. It was much as ever he could

keep afloat and when he reached the grating he rolled over in the water, belly
uppermost, like a dying fish. He drifted into the shallows and, with Silver’s help,
pulled himself out. Hazel and several of the others were waiting for him, but he
cut them short with a flash of his old, bullying manner.

Frith help you if you say I’m not.’

get used to it after a bit. Now, let’s look for somewhere dry that no one else has
found and then perhaps we can sleep too.’

Every dry spot among the undergrowth seemed to be crowded with exhausted,

sleeping rabbits. After searching for a time they found a fallen tree-trunk, from
the under side of which the bark had pulled away. They crept beneath the twigs
and leaves, settled themselves in the smooth, curved trough – which soon took
on some of the warmth of their bodies – and slept at once.

40. The Way Back

Walter de la Mare Dame Hickory

The news depressed Hazel. He knew that they had been lucky to get so many

does out of Efrafa and to escape from Woundwort without having to stand and
fight. The plan had been a good one, but the storm and the frightening efficiency
of the Efrafans had nearly defeated it. For all the courage of Bigwig and of
Silver, they would have failed without Kehaar. Now Kehaar was going to leave
them. Bigwig was wounded and his own leg was none too good. With the does
to look after, they would not be able to travel in the open as fast or as easily as
they had on the way down from Watership. He would have liked to stay where
they were for a few days, so that Bigwig could recover his strength and the does
find their feet and get used to life outside a warren. But the place, he realized,
was hopelessly inhospitable. Although there was good cover, it was too wet for
rabbits. Besides, it was evidently close to a road busier than any they had known.
Soon after daylight they began to hear and smell hrududil passing, not so far
away as the breadth of a small field. There was continual disturbance and the
does in particular were startled and uneasy. Thrayonlosa’s death made matters
worse. Worried by the noise and vibration and unable to feed, the does kept
wandering downstream to look at the body and whisper together about the

strange and dangerous surroundings.

before men found the boat: then very likely several would be close by for some
time. This decided Hazel that they had better set out at once and try to reach
somewhere where they could rest more easily. He could hear and smell that the
swamp extended a long way downstream. With the road lying to the south, the
only way seemed to be northwards, over the bridge, which was in any case the
way home.

Taking Bigwig with him, he climbed the bank to the grass track. The first

thing they saw was Kehaar, picking slugs out of a clump of hemlock near the
bridge. They came up to him without speaking and began to nibble the short
grass nearby.

All go fine, eh?’

in time to save Bigwig last night.’

‘Dis bad rabbit, pig fella, ’e go fight me. Plenty clever too.’
‘Yes. He got a shock for once, though.’
‘Ya, ya. Meester ’Azel, soon is men come. Vat you do now?’
‘We’re going back to our warren, Kehaar, if we can get there.’
‘Ees finish here now for me. I go to Peeg Vater.’
‘Shall we see you again, Kehaar?’
‘You go back hills? Stay dere?’
‘Yes, we mean to get there. It’s going to be hard going with so many rabbits,

and there’ll be Efrafan patrols to dodge, I expect.’

‘You get dere, later on ees vinter, plenty cold, plenty storm on Peeg Vater.

Plenty bird come in. Den I come back, see you vere you live.’

‘Don’t forget, then, Kehaar, will you?’ said Bigwig. ‘We shall be looking out

for you. Come down suddenly, like you did last night.’

‘Ya, ya, frighten all mudders und liddle rabbits, all liddle Pigvigs run avay.’
Kehaar arched his wings and rose into the air. He flew over the parapet of the

bridge and upstream. Then he turned in a circle to the left, came back over the
grass track and flew straight down it, skimming just over the rabbits’ heads. He
gave one of his raucous cries and was gone to the southward. They gazed after
him as he disappeared above the trees.

could fly too. That Big Water! I wish I could see it.’

As they continued to look in the direction where Kehaar had gone, Hazel

noticed for the first time a cottage at the far end of the track, where the grass

sloped up to join the road. A man, taking care to keep still, was leaning over the
hedge and watching them intently. Hazel stamped and bolted into the
undergrowth of the swamp, with Bigwig hard on his heels.

vegetables in his garden.’

‘I know,’ replied Hazel. ‘And we shan’t be able to keep this lot away from

them once they get the idea into their heads. The quicker we push on the better.’

found that he was not up to a long journey. His wound was painful and the
shoulder muscle would not stand hard use. Hazel was still lame and the does,
though willing and obedient, showed that they knew little about the life of
hlessil. It was a trying time.

proved his worth again and again, until Hazel came to rely on him as much as on
any of his veterans. There was a great deal more to him than anyone could have
guessed. When Bigwig had determined not to come out of Efrafa without
Blackavar, he had been moved entirely by pity for a miserable, helpless victim of
Woundwort’s ruthlessness. It turned out, however, that Blackavar, when not
crushed by humiliation and ill-treatment, was a good cut above the ordinary. His
story was an unusual one. His mother had not been born an Efrafan. She had
been one of the rabbits taken prisoner when Woundwort attacked the warren at
Nutley Copse. She had mated with an Efrafan captain and had had no other
mate. He had been killed on Wide Patrol. Blackavar, proud of his father, had
grown up with the resolve to become an officer in the Owsla. But together with
this – and paradoxically – there had come to him from his mother a certain
resentment against Efrafa and a feeling that they should have no more of him
than he cared to give them. Captain Mallow, to whose Mark – the Right Fore –
he had been sent on trial, had praised his courage and endurance but had not
failed to notice the proud detachment of his nature. When the Right Flank
needed a junior officer to help Captain Chervil, it was Avens and not Blackavar
who had been selected by the Council. Blackavar, who knew his own worth, felt
convinced that his mother’s blood had prejudiced the Council against him. While
still full of his wrongs he had met Hyzenthlay and made himself a secret friend
and adviser of the discontented does in the Right Fore. He had begun by urging
them to try to get the Council’s consent to their leaving Efrafa. If they had
succeeded they would have asked for him to be allowed to go with them. But
when the does’ deputation to the Council failed, Blackavar turned to the idea of
escape. At first he had meant to take the does with him but his nerve, strained to
the limit, as Bigwig’s had been, by the dangers and uncertainties of conspiracy,

had given way and in the end he had simply made a dash on his own, to be
caught by Campion. Under the punishment inflicted by the Council his mercurial
spirit had fallen low and he had become the apathetic wretch the sight of whom
had so much shocked Bigwig. Yet at the whispered message in the hraka-pit this
spirit had flickered up again where another’s might well have failed to do so, and
he had been ready to set all on the hazard and have another shot. Now, free
among these easy-going strangers, he saw himself as a trained Efrafan, using his
skill to help them in their need. Although he did all that he was told, he did not
hesitate to make suggestions as well, particularly when it came to reconnoitring
and looking for signs of danger. Hazel, who was ready to accept advice from
anybody when he thought it was good, listened to most of what he said and was
content to leave it to Bigwig – for whom, naturally, Blackavar entertained a
tremendous respect – to see that he did not over-reach himself in his warm-
hearted, rather candid zeal.

they found themselves, late one afternoon, once more in sight of Caesar’s Belt,
but further west than before, close to a little copse at the top of some rising
ground. Everyone was tired and when they had fed – ‘Evening silflay every day,
just as you promised,’ said Hyzenthlay to Bigwig – Bluebell and Speedwell
suggested that it might be worth while to dig some scrapes in the light soil under
the trees and live there for a day or two. Hazel felt willing enough, but Fiver
needed persuasion.

rah,’ he said. ‘I suppose I’ve got to try to think why?’

time. One or two of these does are “ready for mudder”, as Kehaar would say, and
that’s the real reason why Bluebell and the rest are prepared to be at the trouble
of digging scrapes. Surely it’ll be all right at that rate, won’t it? You know what
they say – “Rabbit underground, rabbit safe and sound”.’

‘Well, you may be right,’ said Fiver. ‘That Vilthuril’s a beautiful doe. I’d like a

chance to get to know her better. After all, it’s not natural to rabbits, is it? – on
and on day after day.’

had undertaken on their own initiative, he came out more strongly against the
idea.

here. It’s fox country. We ought to try to get further before dark.’

he felt low and surly. It seemed to him that Blackavar was being clever at other

people’s expense. If he got his way they would have to go on, tired as they were,
until they came to somewhere which was suitable by Efrafan standards. There
they would be as safe – no more and no less – than they would have been if they
had stayed at this copse; but Blackavar would be the clever fellow who had
saved them from a fox that had never existed outside his own fancy. His Efrafan
scoutcraft act was getting to be a bore. It was time someone called his bluff.

‘There are likely to be foxes anywhere about the downs,’ said Bigwig sharply.

‘Why is this fox country more than anywhere else?’

now he made the worst possible reply.

‘I can’t exactly tell you why,’ he said. ‘I’ve formed a strong impression, but

it’s hard to explain quite what it’s based on.’

scent? Or was it just a message from little green mice singing under a toadstool?’

Blackavar felt hurt. Bigwig was the last rabbit he wanted to quarrel with.
‘Ye think I’m a fool, then,’ he answered, his Efrafan accent becoming more

marked. ‘No, there was neether hraka ner scent, but I still think that this is a
place where a fox comes. On these patrols we used to do, ye know, we –’

‘Did you see or smell anything?’ said Bigwig to Dandelion.
‘Er – well, I’m not really quite sure,’ said Dandelion. ‘I mean, Blackavar

seems to know an awful lot about patrolling and he asked me whether I didn’t
feel a sort of –’

that earlier this summer, before we had the benefit of your experience, we went
for days across every kind of country – fields, heather, woods, downs – and
never lost one rabbit?’

scrapes get noticed; and digging can be heard a surprisingly long way, ye know.’

him out of Efrafa to bully him. Look, Blackavar, I suppose I’ve got to decide
this. I think you’re probably right and there is a certain amount of risk. But we’re
at risk all the time until we get back to our warren and everyone’s so tired that I
think we might just as well stop here for a day or two. We shall be all the better
for it.’

Enough scrapes were finished by soon after sunset and next day, sure enough,

all the rabbits felt a great deal better for a night underground. As Hazel had
foreseen, there was some mating and a scuffle or two, but no one was hurt. By
the evening a kind of holiday spirit prevailed. Hazel’s leg was stronger and
Bigwig felt fitter than at any time since he went into Efrafa. The does, harassed

and bony two days before, were beginning to look quite sleek.

light wind was blowing straight into the north bank of the copse, where the
scrapes had been dug, and Bluebell, when he came up, swore he could smell
rabbits on it.

‘It’s old Holly pressing his chin glands for us, Hazel-rah,’ he said. ‘A rabbit’s

sneeze on the morning breeze sets homesick hearts aglow –’

replied Hazel.

‘That won’t do, Hazel-rah,’ said Bluebell. ‘He’s got two does up there.’
‘Only hutch-does,’ replied Hazel. ‘I dare say they’re fairly tough and fast by

now, but all the same they’ll never be quite like our own kind. Clover, for
instance – she’d never go far from the hole on silflay, because she knew she
couldn’t run as fast as we can. But these Efrafan does, you see – they’ve been
kept in by sentries all their lives. Yet now there aren’t any, they wander about
quite happily. Look at those two, right away under the bank there. They feel they
can – oh great Frith!’

As he spoke a tawny shape, dog-like, sprang out of the overhanging nut-

bushes as silently as light from behind a cloud. It landed between the two does,
grabbed one by the neck and dragged her up the bank in a flash. The wind
veered and the reek of fox came over the grass. With stamping and flashing of
tails every rabbit on the slope dashed for cover.

Hazel and Bluebell found themselves crouched with Blackavar. The Efrafan

was matter-of-fact and detached.

‘Poor little beast,’ he said. ‘You see, their instincts are weakened by life in the

Mark. Fancy feeding under bushes on the windward side of a wood! Never
mind, Hazel-rah, these things happen. But look, I tell you what. Unless there are
two hombil, which would be very bad luck, we’ve got till ni-Frith at least to get
away. That homba won’t be hunting any more for some time. I suggest we all
move on as soon as we can.’

made a scattered but swift run to the north-east, along the edge of a field of
ripening wheat. No one spoke of the doe. They had covered more than three-
quarters of a mile before Bigwig and Hazel halted to rest and to make sure that
no one had fallen behind. As Blackavar came up with Hyzenthlay, Bigwig said,

‘You told us how it would be, didn’t you? And I was the one who wouldn’t

listen.’

‘Told you?’ said Blackavar. ‘I don’t understand.’
‘That there was likely to be a fox.’

have known. Anyway, what’s a doe more or less?’

either to stress what he had said or to break off the talk, simply began to nibble
the grass. Bigwig, puzzled, moved away and himself began to feed a little
distance off, with Hyzenthlay and Hazel.

warned us, two nights ago, that there was likely to be a fox. I treated him badly.’

‘In Efrafa,’ said Hyzenthlay, ‘if a rabbit gave advice and the advice wasn’t

accepted, he immediately forgot it and so did everyone else. Blackavar thought
what Hazel decided; and whether it turned out later to be right or wrong was all
the same. His own advice had never been given.’

‘I can believe that,’ said Bigwig. ‘Efrafa! Ants led by a dog! But we’re not in

Efrafa now. Has he really forgotten that he warned us?’

he warned you or to listen while you told him he’d been right. He could no more
do that than pass hraka underground.’

‘But you’re an Efrafan. Do you think like that too?’
‘I’m a doe,’ said Hyzenthlay.

the first to recognize the place where Dandelion had told the story of the Black
Rabbit of Inlé.

‘It was the same fox, you know,’ he said to Hazel. ‘That’s almost certain. I

ought to have realized how likely it was that –’

‘Look here,’ said Hazel, ‘you know very well what we owe to you. The does

all think El-ahrairah sent you to get them out of Efrafa. They believe no one else
could have done it. As for what happened this morning, it was my fault as much
as yours. But I never supposed we would get home without losing some rabbits.
In fact we’ve lost two and that’s better than I expected. We can get back to the
Honeycomb tonight if we press on. Let’s forget about the homba now, Bigwig –
it can’t be altered – and try to – Hullo, who’s this?’

They were coming to a thicket of juniper and dog-roses, tangled at ground

level with nettles and trails of bryony on which the berries were now beginning
to ripen and turn red. As they stopped to pick a line into the undergrowth, four
big rabbits appeared out of the long grass and sat looking down at them. One of
the does, coming up the slope a little way behind, stamped and turned to bolt.
They heard Blackavar check her sharply.

‘Who am I?’

There was a pause. Then Hazel spoke.
‘I can see they’re Efrafans because they’re marked,’ he said. ‘Is that

Woundwort?’

‘No,’ said Blackavar, at his shoulder. ‘That’s Captain Campion.’
‘I see,’ said Hazel. ‘Well, I’ve heard of you, Campion. I don’t know whether

you mean us any harm, but the best thing you can do is to let well alone. As far
as we’re concerned our dealings with Efrafa are finished.’

doe behind you must come with us; and so must any others that are with you.’

As he spoke, Silver and Acorn appeared lower down the slope, followed by

Thethuthinnang. After a glance at the Efrafans, Silver spoke quickly to
Thethuthinnang, who slipped back through the burdocks. Then he came up to
Hazel.

‘I’ve sent for the white bird, Hazel,’ he said quietly.
As a piece of bluff it was effective. They saw Campion look upwards

nervously and another of the patrol glanced back to the cover of the bushes.

here and unless you’ve got more rabbits than I can see, we’re too many for you.’

He had seen Hazel and Bigwig approaching, with Blackavar and one doe behind
them. In his eagerness to have something really worthwhile to show on his return
to the Council, he had jumped to the conclusion that they were alone. The
Efrafans usually kept fairly close together in the open and it had not occurred to
Campion that other rabbits might straggle more widely. He had seen a golden
opportunity to attack – perhaps kill – the detestable Thlayli and Blackavar,
together with their one companion – who seemed to be lame – and bring the doe
back to the Council. This he could certainly have done; and he had decided to
confront rather than ambush them, in the hope that the bucks would surrender
without fighting. But now, as more rabbits began to appear in ones and twos, he
realized that he had made a mistake.

of you can go. Otherwise we shall kill you.’

‘Very well,’ said Hazel. ‘Bring your whole patrol into the open and we’ll do as

you say.’

Campion and his patrol looked at them in silence but made no move.

‘You’d better stay where you are,’ said Hazel at length. ‘If you try to interfere

with us it will be the worse for you. Silver and Blackberry, take the does and go
on. The rest of us will join you.’

They mustn’t report back to the General.’

the four Efrafans actually torn to pieces – for that was what it would mean – he
could not find it in his heart to do it. Like Bigwig, he felt a reluctant liking for
Campion. Besides, it would take some doing. Quite probably some of his own
rabbits would be killed – certainly wounded. They would not reach the
Honeycomb that night and they would leave a fresh blood trail wherever they
went. Apart from his dislike of the whole idea, there were disadvantages that
might be fatal.

‘No, we’ll let them alone,’ he replied firmly.
Blackavar was silent and they sat watching Campion as the last of the does

disappeared through the bushes.

come. Don’t speak – go.’

Campion and the patrol made off downhill and Hazel, relieved to be rid of

them so easily, hurried after Silver, with the others close behind.

Once through the Belt they made excellent progress. After the rest of a day

and a half the does were in good shape. The promise of an end to the journey
that night and the thought that they had escaped both the fox and the patrol made
them eager and responsive. The only cause of delay was Blackavar, who seemed
uneasy and kept hanging about in the rear. At last, in the late afternoon, Hazel
sent for him and told him to go ahead, on the line of the path they were
following, and look out for the long strip of the beech hanger in the dip on the
morning side. Blackavar had not been gone very long before he came racing
back.

there are two rabbits playing about on a patch of short grass just outside it.’

‘I’ll come and see,’ said Hazel. ‘Dandelion, you come too, will you?’
As they ran down the hill to the right of the track, Hazel fairly skipped to

recognize the beech hanger. He noticed one or two yellow leaves and a faint
touch of bronze here and there in the green boughs. Then he caught sight of
Buckthorn and Strawberry running towards them across the grass.

‘Hazel-rah!’ cried Buckthorn. ‘Dandelion! What happened? Where are the

others? Did you get any does? Is everyone all right?’

everyone who went has come back. This is Blackavar, who’s come out of

Efrafa.’

the wood every evening since you went. Holly and Boxwood are all right –
they’re back at the warren: and what do you think? Clover’s going to kindle.
That’s fine, isn’t it?’

can tell you. And so I will – what a story! – but it must wait a bit. Come on –
let’s go and bring the others in.’

the length of the beech hanger and reached the warren. They fed among the dew
and the long shadows, with twilight already fallen in the fields below. Then they
crowded down into the Honeycomb to hear Hazel and Bigwig tell the story of
their adventures to those who had waited so eagerly and so long to hear it.

As the last rabbits disappeared underground the Wide Patrol, which had

followed them from Caesar’s Belt with superlative skill and discipline, veered
away in a half-circle to the east and then turned for Efrafa. Campion was expert
at finding a night’s refuge in the open. He planned to rest until dawn and then
cover the three miles back by evening of the following day.

41. The Story of Rowsby Woof and the Fairy Wogdog

Psalm 59

Sixteen bucks and ten does made a happy enough society for a warren. There

was some bickering here and there, but nothing serious. As Bluebell said, any
rabbits who felt discontented could always go back to Efrafa: and the thought of
all that they had faced together was enough to take the sting out of anything that
might have made a real quarrel. The contentment of the does spread to everyone
else, until one evening Hazel remarked that he felt a perfect fraud as Chief
Rabbit, for there were no problems and hardly a dispute to be settled.

‘Have you thought about the winter yet?’ asked Holly.

Four or five of the bucks, with Clover, Hyzenthlay and Vilthuril, were feeding

along the sunny west side of the hanger about an hour before sunset. It was still
hot and the down was so quiet that they could hear the horses tearing the grass in
the paddock of Cannon Heath Farm, more than half a mile away. It certainly did
not seem a time to think of winter.

‘It’ll probably be colder up here than any of us have been used to,’ said Hazel.

‘But the soil’s so light and the roots break it up so much that we can dig a lot
deeper before the cold weather comes. I think we ought to be able to get below
the frost. As for the wind, we can block some of the holes and sleep warm. Grass
is poor in winter, I know: but anyone who wants a change can always go out
with Holly here and try his luck at pinching some green-stuff or cattle-roots. It’s
a time of year to be careful of the elil, though. Myself, I shall be quite happy to
sleep underground, play bob-stones and hear a few stories from time to time.’

missed the boat.” What about that?’

‘Oh, you mean “Woundwort Dismayed,” ’ said Dandelion. ‘That’s Bigwig’s

story – I wouldn’t presume to tell it. But it makes a change to be thinking about
winter on an evening like this. It reminds me of a story I’ve listened to but never
tried to tell myself. So some of you may know it and perhaps some won’t. It’s
the story of Rowsby Woof and the Fairy Wogdog.’

‘Off you go,’ said Fiver, ‘and lay it on thick.’
‘There was a big rabbit,’ said Dandelion. ‘There was a small rabbit. There was

El-ahrairah; and he had the frost in his fine new whiskers. The earth up and
down the runs of the warren was so hard that you could cut your paws on it and
the robins answered each other across the bare, still copses, “This is my bit here.
You go and starve in your own.”

and Rabscuttle limped trembling through the frozen grass, picking a bite here
and there to carry them on for another long night underground. The grass was as
brittle and tasteless as hay and although they were hungry, they had been making
the best of the miserable stuff so long that it was as much as they could do to get
it down. At last Rabscuttle suggested that they might take a risk for once in a
way and slip across the fields to the edge of the village, where there was a big
vegetable garden.

‘This particular garden was bigger than any of the others round about. The

man who worked in it lived in a house at one end and he used to dig or cut great
quantities of vegetables, put them into a hrududu and drive them away. He had
put wire all round the garden to keep rabbits out. All the same, El-ahrairah could
usually find a way in if he wanted to: but it was dangerous, because the man had

a gun and often shot jays and pigeons and hung them up.

‘ “It isn’t only the gun we’d be risking, either,” said El-ahrairah thinking it

over. “We’d have to keep an eye open for that confounded Rowsby Woof as
well.”

‘Now Rowsby Woof was the man’s dog; and he was the most objectionable,

malicious, disgusting brute that ever licked a man’s hand. He was a big, woolly
sort of animal with hair all over his eyes and the man kept him to guard the
vegetable garden, especially at night. Rowsby Woof, of course, did not eat
vegetables himself and anyone might have thought that he would be ready to let
a few hungry animals have a lettuce or a carrot now and then and no questions
asked. But not a bit of it. Rowsby Woof used to run loose from evening till dawn
the next day: and not content with keeping men and boys out of the garden, he
would go for any animals he found there – rats, rabbits, hares, mice, even moles
– and kill them if he could. The moment he smelt anything in the nature of an
intruder he would start barking and kicking up a shine, although very often it
was only this foolish noise which warned a rabbit and enabled him to get away
in time. Rowsby Woof was reckoned to be a tremendous ratter and his master
had boasted about this skill of his so often and showed him off so much, that he
had become revoltingly conceited. He believed himself to be the finest ratter in
the world. He ate a lot of raw meat (but not in the evening, because he was left
hungry at night to keep him active) and this made it rather easier to smell him
coming. But even so, he made the garden a dangerous place.

‘ “Well, let’s chance Rowsby Woof for once,” said Rabscuttle. “I reckon you

and I ought to be able to give him the slip if we have to.”

‘El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle made their way across the fields to the outskirts of

the garden. When they got there, the first thing they saw was the man himself,
with a white stick burning away in his mouth, cutting row after row of frosted
cabbages. Rowsby Woof was with him, wagging his tail and jumping about in a
ridiculous manner. After a time the man piled as many of the cabbages as he
could into a wheel-thing and pushed them away to the house. He came back
several times and when he had taken all the cabbages to the door of the house he
began carrying them inside.

‘ “What’s he doing that for?” asked Rabscuttle.
‘ “I suppose he wants to get the frost out of them tonight,” replied El-ahrairah,

“before he takes them away in the hrududu tomorrow.”

‘ “They’d be much better to eat with the frost out of them, wouldn’t they?”

said Rabscuttle. “I wish we could get at them while they’re in there. Still, never
mind. Now’s our chance. Let’s see what we can do up this end of the garden
while he’s busy down there.”

‘But hardly had they crossed the top of the garden and got among the

cabbages than Rowsby Woof had winded them and down he came, barking and
yelping, and they were lucky to get out in time.

‘ “Dirty little beasts,” shouted Rowsby Woof. “How – how! How-how dare

you come snou – snou – snouting round here? Get out – out! Out – out!”

‘ “Contemptible brute!” said El-ahrairah, as they scurried back to the warren

with nothing to show for all their trouble. “He’s really annoyed me. I don’t know
yet how it’s going to be done, but by Frith and Inlé! before this frost thaws, we’ll
eat his cabbages inside the house and make him look a fool into the bargain.”

away for a cabbage, after all we’ve done together.”

‘ “Well, I shall be watching my chance,” said El-ahrairah. “I shall just be

watching my chance, that’s all.”

beside the lane, when a hrududu came by. It had doors at the back and these
doors had somehow come open and were swinging about as the hrududu went
along. There were things wrapped up in bags like the ones men sometimes leave
about the fields; and as the hrududu passed Rabscuttle, one of these bags fell out
into the lane. When the hrududu had gone Rabscuttle, who hoped that the bag
might have something to eat inside, slipped down into the lane to have a sniff at
it. But he was disappointed to find that all it contained was some kind of meat.
Later, he told El-ahrairah about his disappointment.

‘ “Meat?” said El-ahrairah. “Is it still there?”
‘ “How should I know?” said Rabscuttle. “Beastly stuff.”
‘ “Come with me,” said El-ahrairah. “Quickly, too.”
‘When they got to the lane the meat was still there. El-ahrairah dragged the

bag into the ditch and they buried it.

‘ “But what good will this be to us, master?” said Rabscuttle.
‘ “I don’t know yet,” said El-ahriarah. “But some good it will surely be, if the

rats don’t get it. Come home now, though. It’s getting dark.”

‘As they were going home, they came on an old, black wheel-covering thrown

away from a hrududu, lying in the ditch. If you’ve ever seen these things, you’ll
know that they’re something like a huge fungus – smooth and very strong, but
pad-like and yielding too. They smell unpleasant and are no good to eat.

‘ “Come on,” said El-ahrairah immediately. “We have to gnaw off a good

chunk of this. I need it.”

‘Rabscuttle wondered whether his master was going mad, but he did as he was

told. The stuff had grown fairly rotten and before long they were able to gnaw
off a lump about as big as a rabbit’s head. It tasted dreadful, but El-ahrairah

carried it carefully back to the warren. He spent a lot of time that night nibbling
at it and after morning silflay the next day he continued. About ni-Frith he woke
Rabscuttle, made him come outside and put the lump in front of him.

look like?”

answered, “except that it’s dry.”

‘ “Splendid,” said El-ahrairah, and went to sleep.
‘It was still frosty – very clear and cold – that night, with half a moon, but fu

Inlé, when all the rabbits were keeping warm underground, El-ahrairah told
Rabscuttle to come with him. El-ahrairah carried the black nose himself and on
the way he pushed it well into every nasty thing he could find. He found a –’

‘Well, never mind,’ said Hazel. ‘Go on with the story.’
‘In the end (continued Dandelion), Rabscuttle kept well away from him, but

El-ahrairah held his breath and still carried the nose somehow, until they got to
the place where they had buried the meat.

‘ “Dig it up,” said El-ahrairah. “Come on.”
‘They dug it up and the paper came off. The meat was all bits joined together

in a kind of trail like a spray of bryony, and poor Rabscuttle was told to drag it
along to the bottom of the vegetable garden. It was hard work and he was glad
when he was able to drop it.

‘ “Now,” said El-ahrairah, “we’ll go round to the front.”
‘When they got to the front, they could tell that the man had gone out. For one

thing, the house was all dark but besides, they could smell that he had been
through the gate a little while before. The front of the house had a flower garden
and this was separated from the back and the vegetable garden by a high, close-
boarded fence that ran right across and ended in a big clump of laurels. Just the
other side of the fence was the back door that led into the kitchen.

through a crack in the fence. Rowsby Woof was sitting on the gravel path, wide
awake and shivering in the cold. He was so near that they could see his eyes
blink in the moonlight. The kitchen door was shut but near-by, along the wall,
there was a hole above the drain where a brick had been left out. The kitchen
floor was made of bricks and the man used to wash it with a rough broom and
sweep the water out through the hole. The hole was plugged up with an old cloth
to keep out the cold.

‘After a little while, El-ahrairah said in a low voice,
‘ “Rowsby Woof! O Rowsby Woof!”
‘Rowsby Woof sat up and looked about him, bristling.

‘ “Who’s there?” he said. “Who are you?”
‘ “O Rowsby Woof!” said El-ahrairah, crouching on the other side of the

fence, “Most fortunate, most blessed Rowsby Woof! Your reward is at hand! I
bring you the best news in the world!”

‘ “What?” said Rowsby Woof. “Who’s that? None of your tricks, now!”
‘ “Tricks, Rowsby Woof?” said El-ahrairah. “Ah, I see you do not know me.

But how should you? Listen, faithful, skilful hound. I am the Fairy Wogdog,
messenger of the great dog-spirit of the East, Queen Dripslobber. Far, far in the
East her palace lies. Ah, Rowsby Woof, if only you could see her mighty state,
the wonders of her kingdom! The carrion that lies far and wide upon the sands!
The manure, Rowsby Woof! The open sewers! Oh, how you would jump for joy
and run nosing all about!”

what to make of the voice, but he was suspicious.

“We know you – and honour you – as the greatest ratter in the world. That is
why I am here. But poor, bewildered creature! I see you are perplexed, and well
you may be. Come here, Rowsby Woof! Come close to the fence and know me
better!”

‘Rowsby Woof came up to the fence and El-ahrairah pushed the rubber nose

into the crack and moved it about. Rowsby Woof stood close, sniffing.

‘ “Noble rat-catcher,” whispered El-ahrairah, “it is indeed I, the Fairy

Wogdog, sent to honour you!”

‘ “Oh, Fairy Wogdog!” cried Rowsby Woof, dribbling and piddling all over

the gravel, “Ah, what elegance! What aristocratic distinction! Can that really be
decayed cat that I smell? With a delicate overtone of rotten camel! Ah, the
gorgeous East!” ’

(‘What on earth’s “camel”?’ said Bigwig.
‘I don’t know,’ replied Dandelion. ‘But it was in the story when I heard it, so I

suppose it’s some creature or other.’)

‘ “Happy, happy dog!” said El-ahrairah. “I must tell you that Queen

Dripslobber her very self has expressed her gracious wish that you should meet
her. But not yet, Rowsby Woof, not yet. First you must be found worthy. I am
sent to bring you both a test and a proof. Listen, Rowsby Woof. Beyond the far
end of the garden there lies a long rope of meat. Ay, real meat, Rowsby Woof,
for though we are fairy dogs yet we bring real gifts to noble, brave animals such
as you. Go now – find and eat that meat. Trust me, for I will guard the house
until you return. That is the test of your belief.”

‘Rowsby Woof was desperately hungry and the cold had got into his stomach,

but still he hesitated. He knew that his master expected him to guard the house.

‘ “Ah well,” said El-ahrairah, “Never mind. I will depart. In the next village

there lives a dog –”

you! I will go at once! Only guard the house and do not fail me!”

great Queen.”

‘Rowsby Woof went bounding away in the moonlight and El-ahrairah

watched him out of sight.

‘ “Are we to go into the house now, master?” asked Rabscuttle. “We shall

have to be quick.”

‘ “Certainly not,” said El-ahrairah. “How could you suggest such double-

dealing? For shame, Rabscuttle! We will guard the house.”

‘They waited silently and after a while Rowsby Woof returned, licking his lips

and grinning. He came sniffing up to the fence.

swiftly as though it had been a rat. The house is safe and all is well. Now hark. I
shall return to the Queen and tell her of all that has passed. It was her gracious
purpose that if you showed yourself worthy tonight, by trusting her messenger,
she would herself send for you and honour you. Tomorrow night she will be
passing through this land on her way to the Wolf Festival of the North and she
means to break her journey in order that you may appear before her. Be ready,
Rowsby Woof!”

‘ “Oh, Fairy Wogdog!” cried Rowsby Woof. “What joy it will be to grovel and

abase myself before the Queen! How humbly I shall roll upon the ground! How
utterly shall I make myself her slave! What menial cringing will be mine! I will
show myself a true dog!”

await my return!”

‘He withdrew the rubber nose and very quietly they crept away.
‘The following night was, if anything, still colder. Even El-ahrairah had to

pull himself together before he could set out over the fields. They had hidden the
rubber nose outside the garden and it took them some time to get it ready for
Rowsby Woof. When they had made sure that the man had gone out, they went
cautiously into the front garden and up to the fence. Rowsby Woof was padding
up and down outside the back door, his breath steaming in the frosty air. When
El-ahrairah spoke, he put his head on the ground between his front paws and
whined for joy.

‘ “The Queen is coming, Rowsby Woof,” said El-ahrairah from behind the

nose, “with her noble attendants, the fairies Postwiddle and Sniffbottom. And
this is her wish. You know the crossroads in the village, do you not?”

‘ “Yes, yes!” whined Rowsby Woof. “Yes, yes! O let me show how abject I

can be, dear Fairy Wogdog. I will –”

and await the Queen. She is coming on the wings of night. It is far that she must
come, but wait patiently. Only wait. Do not fail her and great blessing will be
yours.”

road. Her beggar am I, Fairy Wogdog! Her mendicant, her idiot, her –”

‘ “Quite right, most excellent,” said El-ahrairah. “Only make haste.”
‘As soon as Rowsby Woof had gone, El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle went quickly

through the laurels, round the end of the fence and along to the back door. El-
ahrairah pulled the cloth out of the hole above the drain with his teeth and led the
way into the kitchen.

vegetables ready for the hrududu in the morning – cabbages, brussels-sprouts
and parsnips. They were thawed out and the delicious smell was quite
overpowering. El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle began at once to make amends for the
past days of frozen grass and tree-bark.

‘ “Good, faithful fellow,” said El-ahrairah with his mouth full. “How grateful

he will be to the Queen for keeping him waiting. He will be able to show her the
full extent of his loyalty, won’t he? Have another parsnip, Rabscuttle.”

‘Meanwhile, down at the crossroads, Rowsby Woof waited eagerly in the

frost, listening for the coming of Queen Dripslobber. After a long time he heard
footsteps. They were not the steps of a dog but of a man. As they came near, he
realized that they were the steps of his own master. He was too stupid to run
away or hide, but merely remained where he was until his master – who was
returning home – came up to the crossroads.

‘ “Why, Rowsby Woof,” said his master, “What are you doing here?”
‘Rowsby Woof looked foolish and nosed about. His master was puzzled. Then

a thought came to him.

‘ “Why, good old chap,” he said, “you came to meet me, did you? Good

fellow, then! Come on, we’ll go home together.”

‘Rowsby Woof tried to slip away, but his master grabbed him by the collar,

tied him by a bit of string he had in his pocket and led him home.

cabbage that he heard nothing until the door-handle rattled. He and Rabscuttle
had only just time to slip behind a pile of baskets before the man came in,

leading Rowsby Woof. Rowsby Woof was quiet and dejected and did not even
notice the smell of rabbit, which anyway was all mixed up with the smell of the
fire and the larder. He lay on the mat while the man made some sort of drink for
himself.

the man, as he sat drinking and puffing away at a white stick, suddenly looked
round and got up. He had noticed the draught coming in through the open hole.
To the rabbits’ horror, he picked up a sack and plugged the hole up very tightly
indeed. Then he finished his drink, made up the fire and went away to sleep,
leaving Rowsby Woof shut in the kitchen. Evidently he thought it too cold to
turn him out for the night.

came back to the mat by the fire and lay down. El-ahrairah moved very quietly
along the wall until he was behind a big, metal box in the corner under the sink.
There were sacks and old papers here too and he felt fairly sure that Rowsby
Woof could not manage to see behind it. As soon as Rabscuttle had joined him,
he spoke.

‘ “O Rowsby Woof!” whispered El-ahrairah.
‘Rowsby Woof was up in a flash.
‘ “Fairy Wogdog!” he cried. “Is that you I hear?”
‘ “It is indeed,” said El-ahrairah. “I am sorry for your disappointment,

Rowsby Woof. You did not meet the Queen.”

‘ “Alas, no,” said Rowsby Woof: and he told what had happened at the

crossroads.

‘ “Never mind,” said El-ahrairah. “Do not be downhearted, Rowsby Woof.

There was good reason why the Queen did not come. She received news of
danger – ah, great danger, Rowsby Woof! – and avoided it in time. I myself am
here at the risk of my own safety to warn you. You are lucky indeed that I am
your friend, for otherwise your good master must have been stricken with mortal
plague.”

‘ “With plague?” cried Rowsby Woof. “Oh how, good fairy?”
‘ “Many fairies and spirits there are in the animal kingdoms of the East,” said

El-ahrairah. “Some are friends and there are those – may misfortune strike them
down – who are our deadly enemies. Worst of them all, Rowsby Woof, is the
great Rat-Spirit, the giant of Sumatra, the curse of Hamelin. He dares not openly
fight our noble Queen, but he works by stealth, by poison, by disease. Soon after
you left me, I learned that he has sent his hateful rat-goblins through the clouds,
carrying sickness. I warned the Queen; but still I remained here, Rowsby Woof,
to warn you. If the sickness falls – and the goblins are very near – it will harm

not you, but your master it will slay – and me too, I fear. You can save him and
you alone. I cannot.”

do, Fairy Wogdog?”

‘ “The sickness works by a spell,” said El-ahrairah. “But if a real dog, of flesh

and blood, could run four times round the house, barking as loudly as he could,
then the spell would be broken and the sickness would have no power. But alas!
I forgot! You are shut in, Rowsby Woof. What is to be done? I fear that all is
lost!”

‘ “No, no!” said Rowsby Woof. “I will save you, Fairy Wogdog, and my dear

master too. Leave it to me!”

‘Rowsby Woof began to bark. He barked to raise the dead. The windows

shook. The coal fell in the grate. The noise was terrifying. They could hear the
man upstairs, shouting and cursing. Still Rowsby Woof barked. The man came
stamping down. He flung open the window and listened for thieves, but he could
hear nothing, partly because there was nothing to hear and partly because of the
ceaseless barking. At last he picked up his gun, flung open the door and went
cautiously out to see what was the matter. Out shot Rowsby Woof, bellowing
like a bull, and tore round the house. The man followed him at a run, leaving the
door wide.

‘ “Quick!” said El-ahrairah. “Quicker than Wogdog from the Tartar’s bow!

Come on!”

‘El-ahrairah and Rabscuttle dashed into the garden and disappeared through

the laurels. In the field beyond they paused for a moment. From behind came the
sounds of yelping and woofing, mixed with shouts and angry cries of “Come
’ere, damn you!”

has saved us all. Let us go home and sleep sound in our burrow.”

‘For the rest of his life Rowsby Woof never forgot the night when he had

waited for the great Dog-Queen. True, it was a disappointment, but this, he felt,
was a small matter, compared with the recollection of his own noble conduct and
of how he had saved both his master and the good Fairy Wogdog from the
wicked Rat-Spirit.’

42. News at Sunset

Plato Euthyphro

‘Is a good a days, a hot a days. You like? Plenty for eata, keepa warm is a no

trouble. Down in a bottom a hill is a harvest. I go for a corn a but is a long a way.
I tink a you go away, is a not a long a you come a back, yes?’

‘Yes,’ said Hazel, ‘A lot of us went away, but we found what we were looking

for and now we’ve come back for good.’

‘Is a good. Is a lots of rabbits a now, keepa grass a short.’
‘What difference does it make to him if the grass is short?’ said Bigwig who,

with Blackavar, was lolloping and nibbling close by. ‘He doesn’t eat it.’

‘Is a good a for get about, you know?’ said the mouse in a familiar tone which

made Bigwig shake his ears with irritation. ‘Is a run along a queek – but is a no
seeds a from a short a grass. Now is a warren a here and now a today is a new a
rabbits a come, soon is another warren a more. New a rabbits is a your friends a
too?’

‘Yes, yes, all friends,’ said Bigwig, turning away. ‘There was something I

wanted to say, Hazel, about the new-born rabbits, when they’re ready to come
above ground.’

Hazel, however, had remained where he was, looking intently at the mouse.
‘Wait a moment, Bigwig,’ he said. ‘What did you say, mouse, about another

warren? Where is there going to be another warren?’

The mouse was surprised. ‘You not a know? Not a your friends?’

‘I don’t know until you tell me. What did you mean about new rabbits and

another warren soon?’

manner of his kind, began to say what he thought the rabbits would like to hear.

‘Maybe is a no warren. Is a plenty good a rabbits ’ere, is all a my friends. Is a

no more a rabbits. Not a for want other rabbits.’

‘But what other rabbits?’ persisted Hazel.
‘No sir, no sir, no other rabbits, is a not a go for soon a rabbits, all stay ’ere are

my friends, a save a me a very good a my life, zen ‘ow can I if a she mek me?’
twittered the mouse.

Hazel considered this lot briefly, but it beat him.
‘Oh, come on, Hazel,’ said Bigwig. ‘Let the poor little beast alone. I want to

talk to you.’

Hazel ignored him. Going close to the mouse, he bent his head and spoke

quietly and firmly.

‘You’ve often said you’re our friend,’ he said.’ If you are, tell me, and don’t be

afraid, what you know about other rabbits coming.’

The mouse looked confused. Then he said, ‘I not a see other rabbits, sir, but a

my brother ‘e say a yellow-hammer say is a new rabbits, plenty, plenty rabbits, a
come to combe over on a morning side. Maybe is a lots a rubbish. I tell you a
wrong, you no like a mouse for more, not a friend a more.’

‘No, that’s all right,’ said Hazel. ‘Don’t worry. Just tell me again. Where did

the bird say these new rabbits were?’

‘ ’E say is a come a justa now on a morning side. I not a see.’
‘Good fellow,’ said Hazel. ‘That’s very helpful.’ He turned back to the others.

‘What d’you make of this, Bigwig?’ he asked.

anything and change it five times a day. Ask him again fu Inlé – he’ll tell you
something else.’

‘If you’re right, then I’m wrong and we can all forget it,’ said Hazel. ‘But I’m

going to get to the bottom of this. Someone must go and see. I’d go myself, but
I’ve got no speed with this leg.’

‘Well, leave it for tonight, anyway,’ said Bigwig. ‘We can –’
‘Someone must go and see,’ repeated Hazel firmly. ‘A good patroller, too.

Blackavar, go and get Holly for me, will you?’

while Hazel was speaking. ‘What’s the trouble, Hazel-rah?’

Hazel, ‘and I wish I knew more. Can you and Blackavar run over that way – say

as far as the top of the combe – and find out what’s going on?’

‘Yes, of course, Hazel-rah,’ said Holly. ‘If there really are some other rabbits

there, we’d better bring them back with us, hadn’t we? We could do with a few
more.’

once, Holly, will you? Somehow it worries me not to know.’

Holly and Blackavar had hardly set off when Speedwell appeared above

ground. He had an excited, triumphant look which attracted everyone’s attention
immediately. He squatted in front of Hazel and looked round him in silence, to
make sure of his effect.

‘You’ve finished the hole?’ asked Hazel.
‘Never mind the hole,’ answered Speedwell. ‘I didn’t come up to say that.

Clover’s had her litter. All good, healthy kittens. Three bucks and three does, she
says.’

everybody knows! But tell them not to go crowding down disturbing her.’

want to see one – blind and deaf and no fur?’

know. But we don’t want Clover disturbed into eating them or anything
miserable like that.’

‘It looks as though we really are going to live a natural life again at last,

doesn’t it?’ said Bigwig, as they browsed their way along the bank. ‘What a
summer it’s been! What a – what a desperate lark! I keep dreaming I’m back in
Efrafa, you know; but it’ll pass off, I suppose. One thing I brought back out of
that place, though, and that’s the value of keeping a warren hidden. As we get
bigger, Hazel, we ought to take care of that. We’ll do better than Efrafa, though.
When we’ve reached the right size, rabbits can be encouraged to leave.’

the scruff of the neck. I’m relying on you to produce us a really good Owsla.’

young fellows across to the farm and chase the cats out of the barn to get an
appetite. Well, it’ll come. I say, this grass is as dry as horse-hair on barbed wire,
isn’t it? What about a run down the hill to the fields – just you and I and Fiver?
Corn’s been cut, you know, and there should be good pickings. I expect they’re
going to burn off the field, but they haven’t done it yet.’

‘No, we must wait a bit,’ said Hazel.’ I want to hear what Holly and Blackavar

have to say when they come in.’

‘That needn’t keep you long,’ replied Bigwig. ‘Here they come already, unless

I’m much mistaken. Straight down the open track, too! Not bothered about
keeping hidden, are they? What a rate they’re going!’

‘There’s something wrong,’ said Hazel, staring at the approaching rabbits.
Holly and Blackavar reached the long shadow of the wood at top speed, as

though they were being pursued. The watchers expected them to slow down as
they came to the bank, but they kept straight on and appeared actually to be
going to run underground. At the last moment Holly stopped, looked about him
and stamped twice. Blackavar disappeared down the nearest hole. At the
stamping, all the rabbits above ground ran for cover.

came across the grass. ‘Holly, what’s the alarm? Tell us something, instead of
stamping the place to pieces. What’s happened?’

not a moment to lose.’ His eyes rolled white and he panted foam over his chin.

us something and stop gibbering, there’s a good chap.’

‘It’ll have to be quick, then,’ said Holly. ‘That combe – it’s full of rabbits from

Efrafa.’

‘From Efrafa? Fugitives, do you mean?’
‘No,’ said Holly, ‘not fugitives. Campion’s there. We ran right into him and

three or four more that Blackavar recognized. I believe Woundwort’s there
himself. They’ve come for us – don’t make any mistake about that.’

‘You’re sure it’s more than a patrol?’
‘I’m certain,’ answered Holly. ‘We could smell them: and we heard them, too

– below us in the combe. We wondered what so many rabbits could be doing
there and we were going down to see when we suddenly came face to face with
Campion. We looked at him and he looked at us and then I realized what it must
mean and we turned and ran. He didn’t follow us – probably because he’d had
no orders. But how long will it take them to get here?’

Blackavar had returned from underground, bringing Silver and Blackberry.
‘We ought to leave at once, sir,’ he said to Hazel. ‘We might be able to get

quite a long way before they come.’

We made this warren ourselves and Frith only knows what we’ve been through
on account of it. I’m not going to leave it now.’

from Efrafa will come with me.’

There was a short silence.
‘Holly’s right to want to stop the holes,’ went on Hazel. ‘It’s the best thing to

do. We fill the holes in, good and thorough. Then they have to dig us out. The
warren’s deep. It’s under a bank, with tree roots all through it and over the top.
How long can all those rabbits stay on the down without attracting elil? They’ll
have to give it up.’

what happened at Nutley Copse. It would be better to go now.’

‘Well, go on then,’ answered Hazel. ‘I’m not stopping you. And I’m not

leaving this warren. It’s my home.’ He looked at Hyzenthlay, heavy with young,
who was sitting in the mouth of the nearest hole and listening to the talk. ‘How
far do you think she’ll get? And Clover – do we leave her or what?’

this Woundwort: and if he doesn’t, I’m not going back to Efrafa, I’ll tell you
that.’

‘Fill in the holes,’ said Hazel.
As the sun set, the rabbits fell to clawing and scrabbling in the runs. The sides

were hard with the hot weather. It was not easy to get started and when the soil
began to fall, it was light and powdery and did little to block the holes. It was
Blackberry who hit upon the idea of working outwards from inside the
Honeycomb itself, scratching down the ceilings of the runs where they came into
the meeting hall and blocking the holes by breaking the underground walls into
them. One run, leading up into the wood, was left open for coming and going. It
was the one where Kehaar used to shelter and the lobby at the mouth was still
cluttered with guano. As Hazel passed the place, it occurred to him that
Woundwort did not know that Kehaar had left them. He dug out as much of the
mess as he could and scattered it about. Then, as the work went on below, he
squatted on the bank and watched the darkening eastern sky-line.

His thoughts were very sad. Indeed, they were desperate. Although he had

spoken resolutely in front of the others, he knew only too well how little hope
there was of saving the warren from the Efrafans. They knew what they were
doing. No doubt they had their methods of breaking into a closed warren. It was
the faintest of chances that elil would disperse them. Most of the Thousand
hunted rabbits for food. A stoat or a fox took a rabbit and took no more until it
was ready to hunt again. But the Efrafans were accustomed to a death here and
there. Unless General Woundwort himself were killed, they would stay until the
job was done. Nothing would stop them, short of some unexpected catastrophe.

not just possibly be a chance of getting him to see sense? Whatever had
happened at Nutley Copse, the Efrafans could not fight to the finish against
rabbits like Bigwig, Holly and Silver without losing lives – probably a good

many lives. Woundwort must know this. Perhaps it might not be too late, even
now, to persuade him to agree to a new plan – a plan that would be as good for
one warren as the other.

and so I’m afraid the Chief Rabbit has got to take it. And since this savage brute
is probably not to be trusted, I suppose the Chief Rabbit must go alone.’

He returned to the Honeycomb and found Bigwig.
‘I’m off to talk to General Woundwort, if I can get hold of him,’ he said.

‘You’re Chief Rabbit until I come back. Keep them at it.’

‘But Hazel,’ said Bigwig, ‘wait a moment. It’s not safe –’
‘I shan’t be long,’ said Hazel. ‘I’m just going to ask him what he’s up to.’
A moment later he was down the bank and limping up the track, pausing from

time to time to sit up and look about him for an Efrafan patrol.

43. The Great Patrol

It is I.

I, this incessant snow,

This northern sky;

Soldiers, this solitude
Through which we go

Is I.

Walter de la Mare Napoleon

For a great part of that night Woundwort remained awake, considering what

was best to be done. The following day he called a Council meeting. He pointed
out that it would be no good taking an expedition down the river to look for
Thlayli unless it were strong enough to defeat him if it found him. That would
mean taking several officers and a number of the Owsla. There would be the risk
of trouble at home while they were away. There might be another break-out. The
odds were that they would not find Thlayli at all, for there would be no trail and
they did not know where to search for him. If they did not find him, they would
look even bigger fools when they came back.

‘And fools we look now,’ said Woundwort. ‘Make no mistake about that.

Vervain will tell you what the Marks are saying – that Campion was chased into

the ditch by the white bird and Thlayli called down lightning from the sky and
Frith knows what besides.’

possible. Let it blow over. They’ve got short memories.’

there was one place where we did find Thlayli and his gang, only nobody
realized it at the time. That was when Mallow was after them with his patrol, just
before he was killed by the fox. Something tells me that where they were once,
there they’ll be again, sooner or later.’

Groundsel, ‘and it would mean digging in and living there for some time.’

‘I agree with you,’ replied Woundwort. ‘A patrol will be stationed there

continuously until further notice. They’ll dig scrapes and live there. They’ll be
relieved every two days. If Thlayli comes, he’s to be watched and followed
secretly. When we know where he’s taken the does, then we may be able to deal
with him. And I’ll tell you this,’ he ended, glaring round at them with his great,
pale eyes. ‘If we do find out where he is, I shall be ready to go to a great deal of
trouble. I told Thlayli I’d kill him myself. He may have forgotten that, but I
haven’t.’

Woundwort led the first patrol in person, taking Groundsel to show him where

Mallow had picked up the strangers’ southward trail. They dug scrapes among
the scrub along the edge of Caesar’s Belt and waited. After two days their hopes
were lower. Vervain relieved Woundwort. He was relieved two days later by
Campion. By this time there were captains in the Owsla who said privately to
each other that the General was in the grip of an obsession. Some way would
have to be found of getting him to drop it before it went too far. At the Council
meeting the next evening it was suggested that the patrol should be discontinued
in two days’ time. Woundwort, snarling, told them to wait and see. An argument
began, behind which he sensed more opposition than he had ever encountered
before. In the middle of this, with a dramatic effect that could not have been
better timed from the General’s point of view, Campion and his patrol came in,
dead-beat, with the report that they had met Thlayli and his rabbits exactly where
Woundwort had said they would. Unseen, they had followed them to their
warren which, though a long way off, was not too distant to be attacked,
especially since no time would have to be spent in searching for it. It did not
appear to be very large and could probably be surprised.

The news put an end to all opposition and brought both Council and Owsla

back under Woundwort’s undisputed control. Several of the officers were for
starting at once but Woundwort, now that he was sure of his followers and his

enemy, took his time. Having learned from Campion that he had actually come
face to face with Thlayli, Blackavar and the rest, he decided to wait some little
while, in case they might be on their guard. Besides, he wanted time both to
reconnoitre the way to Watership and to organize the expedition. His idea was
that if possible they should make the journey in one day. This would forestall
any possible rumours of their approach. To satisfy himself that they could do this
and still be fit to fight when they arrived, he took Campion and two others, and
himself covered the three and a half miles to the down east of Watership. Here,
he grasped at once the best way to approach the beech hanger without being seen
or smelt. The prevailing wind was westerly, as at Efrafa. They would arrive at
evening and then assemble and rest in the combe south of Cannon Heath Down.
As soon as twilight fell and Thlayli and his rabbits had gone underground, they
would come along the ridge and attack the warren. With luck, there would be no
warning whatever. They would be safe for the night in the captured warren and
the following day he himself and Vervain would be able to return to Efrafa. The
remainder, under Campion, could have a day’s rest and then make their way
back with the does and any other prisoners there might be. The whole thing
could be finished in three days.

the distance and then fight would only be a nuisance. In the event, speed might
turn out to be everything. The slower the journey, the more dangerous it would
be and stragglers would attract elil and discourage the rest. Besides, as
Woundwort very well knew, his leadership was going to be vital. Every rabbit
would need to feel that he was close to the General; and if he felt himself one of
a picked band as well, that would be all to the good.

The rabbits to go were chosen most carefully. There were in fact about

twenty-six or seven of them, half Owsla and the rest promising youngsters
recommended by their Mark officers. Woundwort believed in emulation and he
let it be known that there would be plenty of chances to win rewards. Campion
and Chervil were kept busy taking out endurance patrols, and tussles and
training fights were organized at morning silflay. The members of the expedition
were excused all sentry duties and allowed to silflay whenever they wished.

They started before dawn one clear August morning, going due north in

groups along the banks and hedges. Before they had reached the Belt,
Groundsel’s party was attacked by a pair of stoats, one old and the other a
yearling. Woundwort, hearing the squealing from behind him, covered the
distance in a few moments and set upon the veteran stoat with slashing teeth and
great kicks from his needle-clawed back paws. With one of its forelegs ripped to
the shoulder, it turned and made off, the younger one following.

‘You ought to be able to see to these things yourself,’ said Woundwort to

Groundsel. ‘Stoats aren’t dangerous. Come on.’

three, one injured by a piece of glass. He stopped the bleeding, brought the three
up to rejoin their groups and then called a halt to rest and feed, himself keeping a
watch round about. It was very hot and some of the rabbits were showing signs
of exhaustion. Woundwort formed these into a separate group and took charge of
it himself.

By the early evening – about the same time as Dandelion was beginning the

story of Rowsby Woof – the Efrafans had skirted an enclosure of pigs east of
Cannon Heath Farm and were slipping into the combe south of Cannon Heath
Down. Many were tired and, in spite of their tremendous respect for Woundwort,
there was a certain feeling that they had come a long way from home. They were
ordered to take cover, feed, rest and wait for sunset.

about in the sun. Some of the rabbits went to sleep in the long grass. The slope
was already in shadow when Campion came running down with the news that he
had come face to face with Blackavar and Holly in the upper part of the combe.

Woundwort was annoyed. ‘What made them come trapesing over here, I

wonder?’ he said. ‘Couldn’t you have killed them? Now we’ve lost surprise.’

‘I’m sorry, sir,’ said Campion. ‘I wasn’t really alert at the time and I’m afraid

they were a bit too quick for me. I didn’t pursue them because I wasn’t sure
whether you’d want me to.’

they can do. But they’ll try to do something, I suppose, now they know we’re
here.’

As he went among his rabbits, looking them over and encouraging them,

Woundwort considered the situation. One thing was clear – there was no longer
the chance of catching Thlayli and the rest off their guard. But perhaps they were
already so much frightened that they would not fight at all? The bucks might
give up the does to save their own lives. Or they might already be on the run, in
which case they must be followed and caught at once, for they were fresh and his
own rabbits were tired and could not pursue them far. He ought to find out
quickly. He turned to a young rabbit of the Neck Mark, who was feeding close at
hand.

‘Your name’s Thistle, isn’t it?’ he asked.
‘Thistle, sir,’ answered the rabbit.
‘Well, you’re the very fellow I want,’ said Woundwort. ‘Go and find Captain

Campion and tell him to meet me up there, by that juniper – do you see where I

mean? – at once. You’d better come there too. Be quick: there’s no time to lose.’

As soon as Campion and Thistle had joined him, Woundwort took them up to

the ridge. He meant to see what was happening over at the beech hanger. If the
enemy were already in flight, Thistle could be sent back with a message to
Groundsel and Vervain to bring everyone up immediately. If they were not, he
would see what threats could do.

with some caution, since the sunset was in their eyes. The light west wind
carried a fresh smell of rabbits.

they are running: I think they’re still in their warren.’

track. He paused for a few moments and then moved towards them. He was
limping and had a strained, resolute look.

you.’

‘Did Thlayli send you?’ asked Woundwort.
‘I’m a friend of Thlayli,’ replied the rabbit.’ I’ve come to ask why you’re here

and what it is you want.’

‘Were you on the river bank in the rain?’ said Woundwort.
‘Yes, I was.’
‘What was left unfinished there will be finished now,’ said Woundwort. ‘We

are going to destroy you.’

than you brought. We should both do better to come to terms.’

does who ran from Efrafa and you will hand over the deserters Thlayli and
Blackavar to my Owsla.’

‘No, we can’t agree to that. I’ve come to suggest something altogether

different and better for us both. A rabbit has two ears; a rabbit has two eyes, two
nostrils. Our two warrens ought to be like that. They ought to be together – not
fighting. We ought to make other warrens between us – start one between here
and Efrafa, with rabbits from both sides. You wouldn’t lose by that, you’d gain.
We both would. A lot of your rabbits are unhappy now and it’s all you can do to
control them, but with this plan you’d soon see a difference. Rabbits have
enough enemies as it is. They ought not to make more among themselves. A
mating between free, independent warrens – what do you say?’

At that moment, in the sunset on Watership Down, there was offered to

General Woundwort the opportunity to show whether he was really the leader of

vision and genius which he believed himself to be, or whether he was no more
than a tyrant with the courage and cunning of a pirate. For one beat of his pulse
the lame rabbit’s idea shone clearly before him. He grasped it and realized what
it meant. The next, he had pushed it away from him. The sun dipped into the
cloud-bank and now he could see clearly the track along the ridge, leading to the
beech hanger and the bloodshed for which he had prepared with so much energy
and care.

position to bargain with us. There’s nothing more to be said. Thistle, go back and
tell Captain Vervain I want everyone up here at once.’

‘And this rabbit, sir,’ asked Campion. ‘Shall I kill him?’
‘No,’ replied Woundwort. ‘Since they’ve sent him to ask our terms, he’d better

take them back. – Go and tell Thlayli that if the does aren’t waiting outside your
warren, with him and Blackavar, by the time I get down there, I’ll tear the throat
out of every buck in the place by ni-Frith tomorrow.’

The lame rabbit seemed about to reply, but Woundwort had already turned

away and was explaining to Campion what he was to do. Neither of them
bothered to watch the lame rabbit as he limped back by the way he had come.

44. A Message from El-ahrairah

Robin Fedden Crusader Castles

his rabbits crouching among the tree roots and reached the higher shelf where
Speedwell lay listening for sounds from above. The Efrafans had reached the
hanger at early twilight and at once begun a search along the banks and among
the trees to find out how big the warren was and where its holes were. They had
been surprised to find so many holes in such a small area, for not many of them
had had experience of any warren but Efrafa, where very few holes served the
needs of many rabbits. At first they had supposed that there must be a large
number of rabbits underground. The silence and emptiness of the open beech-
wood made them suspicious, and most kept outside, nervous of an ambush.
Woundwort had to reassure them. Their enemies, he explained, were fools who
made more runs than any properly-organized warren needed. They would soon
discover their mistake, for every one would be opened, until the place became
impossible to defend. As for the droppings of the white bird, scattered in the
wood, it was plain that they were old. There were no signs whatever that the bird
was anywhere near. Nevertheless, many of the rank-and-file continued to look
cautiously about them. At the sudden cry of a peewit on the down, one or two
bolted and had to be brought back by their officers. The story of the bird which
had fought for Thlayli in the storm had lost nothing in the telling up and down
the burrows of Efrafa.

Woundwort told Campion to post sentries and keep a patrol round about,

while Vervain and Groundsel tackled the blocked holes. Groundsel set to work
along the bank, while Vervain went into the wood, where the mouths of the holes
lay between the tree roots. He came at once upon the open run. He listened, but
all was quiet. Vervain, (who was more used to dealing with prisoners than with
enemies) ordered two of his rabbits to make their way down it. The discovery of
the silent, open run gave him the hope that he might be able to seize the warren

by a sudden dash to the very centre. The wretched rabbits, obeying his orders,
were met by Silver and Buckthorn at a point where the run opened out. They
were cuffed and mauled and barely got out with their lives. The sight of them did
nothing to encourage Vervain’s party, who were reluctant to dig and made little
headway during the darkness before moonrise.

Groundsel, who felt that he ought to set an example, himself dug his way into

the loose, fallen soil of one of the bank runs. Ploughing over the soft earth like a
fly on summer butter and holding his head clear, he suddenly found himself face
to face with Blackavar, who sank his front teeth into his throat. Groundsel, with
no freedom to use his weight, screamed and kicked out as best he could.
Blackavar hung on and Groundsel – a heavy rabbit, like all the Efrafan officers –
dragged him forward a short distance before he could rid himself of his grip.
Blackavar spat out a mouthful of fur and jumped clear, clawing with his front
paws. But Groundsel had already gone. He was lucky not to have been more
severely wounded.

not impossible, to take the warren by attack down the defended runs. There
would be a good chance of success if several runs could be opened and then
tackled at the same time, but he doubted whether his rabbits would attempt it,
after what they had seen. He realized that he had not given enough thought,
earlier on, to what he would have to do if he lost surprise and had to force an
entry: he had better give it some thought now. As the moon rose, he called
Campion in and talked it over with him.

Campion’s suggestion was they should simply starve the warren out. The

weather was warm and dry and they could easily stay two or three days. This
Woundwort rejected impatiently. In his own mind, he was not altogether certain
that daylight might not bring the white bird down upon them. They ought to be
underground by dawn. But apart from this secret anxiety, he felt that his
reputation depended on a fighting victory. He had brought his Owsla to get at
these rabbits, knock them down and beat them. A siege would be a miserable
anticlimax. Also, he wanted to get back to Efrafa as soon as he could. Like most
war-lords, he was never very confident about what was going on behind his
back.

‘If I remember rightly,’ he said, ‘after the main part of the warren at Nutley

Copse was taken and the fighting was as good as over, there were a few rabbits
who shut themselves into a smaller burrow where it was difficult to get at them. I
said they were to be dealt with and then I went back to Efrafa with the prisoners.
How were they dealt with and who did it, do you know?’

‘Captain Mallow did it,’ said Campion. ‘He’s dead, of course: but I expect

there’s someone here who was with him. I’ll go and find out.’

He returned with a heavy, stolid Owsla sentry named Ragwort, who at first

had some difficulty in understanding what it was that the General wanted to
know. At last, however, he said that when he had been with Captain Mallow,
more than a year ago, the captain had told them to dig a hole straight down into
the ground. In the end the earth had given way under them and they had fallen
down among some rabbits whom they had fought and beaten.

‘And if we get them all on to it, relieving each other in shifts, we should have a
way into the place before dawn. You’d better get your sentries out again – not
more than two or three – and we’ll make a start at once.’

sounds of scratching above. It was not long before they realized that the digging
was going on at two points. One was at the north end of the Honeycomb, above
the place where the tree roots formed a kind of cloister in the burrow. Here the
roof, latticed through and through with fine roots, was very strong. The other
seemed to be more or less above the open centre of the Honeycomb, but rather
nearer to the south end, where the hall broke up into bays and runs with columns
of earth between. Beyond these runs lay several of the warren’s burrows. One,
lined with fur torn from her own belly, contained Clover and the pile of grass
and leaves, covered over with earth, in which her new-born litter were sleeping.

‘Well, we seem to be putting them to a great deal of trouble,’ said Hazel.

‘That’s all to the good. It’ll blunt their claws and I should think they’ll be tired
out before they’ve done. What do you make of it, Blackberry?’

‘I’m afraid it’s a bad look-out, Hazel-rah,’ replied Blackberry. ‘It’s true they’re

in trouble up at the top end. There’s a lot of ground above us there and the roots
will hold them up for a long time. But down this end it’s easier for them. They’re
bound to dig through fairly soon. Then the roof will come in; and I can’t see that
we can do anything to stop them.’

Hazel could feel him trembling as he spoke. As the sounds of digging

continued, he sensed fear spreading all through the burrow. ‘They’ll take us back
to Efrafa,’ whispered Vilthuril to Thethuthinnang. ‘The warren police –’

we? I’d rather be here now, as we are, than never have left Efrafa.’

It was bravely said, but Hazel was not the only one who could tell her

thoughts. Bigwig remembered the night in Efrafa when he had calmed her by
talking of the high downs and the certainty of their escape. In the dark, he
nuzzled Hazel’s shoulder and pressed him over to one side of the wide burrow.

‘Listen, Hazel,’ he said, ‘we’re not finished yet. Not by a long way. When the

roof breaks, they’ll come down into this end of the Honeycomb. But we can get
everybody back into the sleeping burrows behind and block the runs that lead to
them. They’ll be no better off.’

‘Well, if we do that it’ll last a bit longer,’ said Hazel. ‘But they’ll soon be able

to break into the sleeping burrows, once they’re in here.’

besides. I shouldn’t wonder if they didn’t decide to go home.’

With a kind of wry envy, Hazel realized that Bigwig was actually looking

forward to meeting the Efrafan assault. He knew he could fight and he meant to
show it. He was not thinking of anything else. The hopelessness of their chances
had no important place in his thoughts. Even the sound of the digging, clearer
already, only set him thinking of the best way to sell his life as dearly as he
could. But what else was there for any of them to do? At least Bigwig’s
preparations would keep the others busy and perhaps do something to dispel the
silent fear that filled all the warren.

‘You’re quite right, Bigwig,’ he said. ‘Let’s prepare a little reception. Will you

tell Silver and the others what you want and get them started?’

As Bigwig began to explain his plan to Silver and Holly, Hazel sent Speedwell

to the north end of the Honeycomb to listen to the digging and keep reporting
what he could make out about its progress. As far as he could see, it would make
little difference whether the roof-fall came there or in the centre, but at least he
ought to try to show the others that he was keeping his wits about him.

‘We can’t break these walls down to stop the run between, Bigwig,’ said

Holly. ‘They hold the roof up at this end, you know.’

burrows behind. They’ll need to be bigger anyway, if we’re all going to get in
there together. Then kick the loose earth back into the spaces between the
columns. Stop the whole thing right up.’

in good heart, the others set aside their fear as best they could and did as he told
them, enlarging the burrows beyond the south end of the Honeycomb and piling
up the soft earth in the entry runs until what had been a colonnade began to
become a solid wall. It was during a pause in this work that Speedwell reported
that the digging above the north end had stopped. Hazel went and crouched
beside him, listening for some time. There was nothing to be heard. He went
back to where Buckthorn sat guarding the foot of the single open run – Kehaar’s
run, as it was called.

‘You know what’s happened?’ he said. ‘They’ve realized they’re all among the

beech roots up there, so they’ve chucked it. They’ll be going harder at the other

end now.’

remember the rats in the barn? We got out of that all right, didn’t we? But I’m
afraid we shan’t get out of this. It’s a pity, after all we’ve done together.’

knew that if he stayed he would not be able to keep up the pretence. Buckthorn –
a decent, straightforward fellow if ever there was one – where would he be by
ni-Frith tomorrow? And he himself – where had he led them, with all his clever
schemes? Had they come over the common, among the shining wires, through
the thunderstorm, the culverts on the great river, to die at the claws of General
Wound wort? It was not the death they deserved; it was not the right end of the
clever track they had run. But what could stop Woundwort? What could save
them now? Nothing, he knew – unless some tremendous blow were to fall upon
the Efrafans from outside: and of that there was no chance. He turned away from
Buckthorn.

Scratch, scratch: scratch, scratch came the sound of the digging above.

Crossing the floor in the dark, Hazel found himself beside another rabbit, who
was crouching silently on the near side of the new-piled wall. He stopped,
sniffing. It was Fiver.

‘Aren’t you working?’ he asked listlessly.
‘No,’ replied Fiver. ‘I’m listening.’
‘To the digging, you mean?’
‘No, not the digging. There’s something I’m trying to hear – something the

others can’t hear. Only I can’t hear it either. But it’s close. Deep. Leaf-drift, deep.
I’m going away, Hazel – going away.’ His voice grew slow and drowsy. ‘Falling.
But it’s cold. Cold.’

limp body with his nose.

‘Cold,’ muttered Fiver. ‘How – how. How – how cold!’
There was a long silence.
‘Fiver?’ said Hazel. ‘Fiver? Can you hear me?’
Suddenly a terrible sound broke from Fiver; a sound at which every rabbit in

the warren leapt in dreadful fear; a sound that no rabbit had ever made, that no
rabbit had the power to make. It was deep and utterly unnatural. The rabbits
working on the far side of the wall crouched terrified. One of the does began to
squeal.

‘Dirty little beasts,’ yelped Fiver. ‘How – how dare you? Get out – out! Out –

out!’

Bigwig burst through the piled earth, twitching and panting.

‘In the name of Frith, stop him!’ he gasped. ‘They’ll all go mad!’
Shuddering, Hazel clawed at Fiver’s side.
‘Wake! Fiver, wake!’
But Fiver was lying in a deep stupor.
In Hazel’s mind, green branches were straining in the wind. Up and down they

swayed, thresh and ply. There was something – something he could glimpse
between them. What was it? Water he sensed; and fear. Then suddenly he saw
clearly, for an instant, a little huddle of rabbits on the bank of a stream at dawn,
listening to the sound of yelping in the wood above and the scolding of a jay.

‘If I were you, I shouldn’t wait until ni-Frith. I should go now. In fact, I think

you’ll have to. There’s a large dog loose in the wood. There’s a large dog loose
in the wood.’

He was in the Honeycomb, facing Bigwig in the dark, across the motionless
body of Fiver. The scratching from above was louder and closer.

hardly any time. Go and get Dandelion and Blackberry and bring them to me at
the foot of Kehaar’s run, quickly.’

Fiver’s cry, but his breath was short and his pulse very quick. He and the other
three rabbits gathered about Hazel without a word.

‘I’ve got a plan,’ said Hazel. ‘If it works, it’ll finish Woundwort for good and

all. But I’ve no time to explain. Every moment counts now. Dandelion and
Blackberry, you come with me. You’re to go straight up out of this run and
through the trees to the down. Then northwards, over the edge and down to the
fields. Don’t stop for anything. You’ll go faster than I shall. Wait for me by the
iron tree at the bottom.’

‘But, Hazel –’ said Blackberry.
‘As soon as we’ve gone,’ said Hazel, turning to Bigwig, ‘you’re to block this

run and get everyone back behind the wall you’ve made. If they break in, hold
them up as long as you can. Don’t give in to them on any account. El-ahrairah
has shown me what to do.’

‘But where are you going, Hazel?’ asked Bigwig.
‘To the farm,’ said Hazel, ‘to gnaw another rope. Now, you two, follow me up

the run: and don’t forget, you stop for nothing until you’re down the hill. If there
are rabbits outside, don’t fight – run.’

Without another word he dashed up the tunnel and out into the wood, with

Blackberry and Dandelion on his heels.

45. Nuthanger Farm Again

Shakespeare Julius Caesar

‘You weren’t put at the mouth of that run to listen,’ he said. ‘You were put

there to stop anyone breaking out. You had no business to leave it. Get back at
once.’

‘I give you my word, sir,’ said Thistle, querulously, ‘there’s some animal

down there that is not a rabbit. We both heard it.’

‘And did you smell it?’ asked Woundwort.
‘No, sir. No tracks or droppings either. But we both heard an animal and it was

no rabbit.’

Several of the diggers had left their work and were gathered nearby, listening.

A muttering began.

‘They had a homba that killed Captain Mallow. My brother was there. He saw

it.’

‘They had a great bird that turned into a shaft of lightning.’
‘There was another animal that took them away down the river.’
‘Why can’t we go home?’
‘Stop that!’ said Woundwort. He went up to the group. ‘Who said that? You,

was it? Very well, go home. Go on, hurry up. I’m waiting. That’s the way – over
there.’

The rabbit did not move. Woundwort looked slowly round.
‘Right,’ he said. ‘Anyone else who wants to go home can get on with it. It’s a

nice long way and you’ll have no officers, because they’ll all be busy digging,
including myself. Captain Vervain, Captain Groundsel, will you come with me?
You, Thistle, go out there and fetch Captain Campion. And you, Ragwort, get
back to the mouth of that run you had no business to leave.’

Very soon, the digging was resumed. The hole was deep now – deeper than

Woundwort had expected and still there was no sign of a fall. But all three
rabbits could sense that not far below them there lay a hollow space.

‘Keep at it,’ said Woundwort. ‘It won’t take long now.’
When Campion came in, he reported that he had seen three rabbits running

away over the down to the north. One appeared to be the lame rabbit. He had
been about to pursue them but had returned in response to the order brought by
Thistle.

we get in. What, you again?’ he snapped, as Ragwort appeared beside him.
‘What is it this time?’

below.’

‘Then you can start doing something useful,’ said Woundwort. ‘Get that root

out. No, that one, you fool.’

The digging continued, as the first streaks of light began to come into the east.

had not yet been burned and lay in long, pale rows upon the darker stubble,
tenting over the bristling stalks and the weeds of harvest – knot-grass and
pimpernel, fluellen and speedwell, heartsease and persicary – colourless and still
in the old moonlight. Between the lines of straw the expanse of stubble was as
open as the down.

‘Now,’ said Hazel, as they came out from the belt of hawthorn and dogwood

where the pylon stood, ‘are you both sure you understand what we’re going to
do?’

‘It’s a tall order, isn’t it, Hazel-rah?’ answered Dandelion. ‘But we’ve got to

try it, that’s certain. There’s nothing else that’ll save the warren now.’

‘Come on, then,’ said Hazel.’ The going’s easy, anyway – half as far now the

field’s been cut. Don’t bother about cover – just run in the open. Keep with me,
though. I’ll go as fast as I can.’

They crossed the field easily enough, Dandelion running ahead. The only

alarm came when they startled four partridges, which whirred away over the
hedge to the west and sailed down, spread-winged, into the field beyond. Soon
they reached the road and Hazel halted among the quickset on top of the nearer
bank.

‘Now, Blackberry,’ he said, ‘this is where we leave you. Lie close and don’t

move. When the time comes, don’t break too soon. You’ve got the best head of
any of us. Use it – and keep it, too. When you get back, go to ground in Kehaar’s
run and stay there till things are safe. Have you got your line clear?’

‘Yes, Hazel-rah,’ replied Blackberry. ‘But as far as I can see, I may have to run

from here to the iron tree without a check. There’s no cover.’

you’ll have to turn for the hedge and then keep popping in and out of it. Do
whatever you like. There’s no time for us to stay and work it out. Only make
sure you get back to the warren. It all depends on you.’

thorn. The other two crossed the road and made uphill towards the sheds beside
the lane.

hedge. ‘ ’Pity we’ve no time just now. When this is over we’ll have a nice, quiet
raid on the place.’

lane? What about cats?’

‘It’s the quickest way,’ said Hazel. ‘That’s all that matters now.’
By this time the first light was clear and several larks were up. As they

approached the great ring of elm trees, they heard once more the quick sighing
and rustling above them and one yellow leaf came spinning down to the edge of
the ditch. They reached the top of the slope and saw before them the barns and
the farmyard. Bird-song was breaking out all round and the rooks were calling
from high in the elms, but nothing – not even a sparrow – moved on the ground.
Straight in front, on the other side of the farmyard, close to the house, stood the
dog-kennel. The dog was not to be seen, but the rope, tied to the eye-bolt on the
flat roof, trailed over the edge and disappeared across the straw-covered
threshold.

‘We’re in time,’ said Hazel. ‘The brute’s still asleep. Now Dandelion, you

mustn’t make any mistake. You lie in the grass just there, opposite the kennel.
When the rope’s gnawed through you’ll see it fall. Unless the dog’s ill or deaf,
it’ll be alert by then; probably before, I’m afraid, but that’s my look-out. It’s up
to you to attract it and make it chase you all the way down to the road. You’re
very fast. Take care it doesn’t lose you. Use the hedges if you want to: but
remember it’ll be trailing the rope. Get it down to Blackberry. That’s all that
matters.’

grass verge, ‘we ought to have the makings of the best story ever.’

‘And you’ll be the chap to tell it,’ said Hazel.
He moved away in a half-circle to the morning side and reached the wall of

the farmhouse. Then he began to hop cautiously along the wall, in and out of the
narrow flowerbed. His head was a tumult of smells – phlox in bloom, ashes,
cow-dung, dog, cat, hens, stagnant water. He came to the back of the kennel,

reeking of creosote and of rank straw. A half-used bale of straw stood against it –
no doubt clean bedding which, in the dry weather, had not been put back under
cover. Here at least was one piece of luck, for he had expected to have trouble in
getting on the roof. He scrambled up the straw. Across part of the felted roof lay
a torn piece of old blanket, wet with dew. Hazel sat up, sniffing, and put his fore-
paws on it. It did not slip. He pulled himself up.

How much noise had he made? How strong was his scent over the tar and

straw and farmyard? He waited, tense to jump, expecting movement below.
There was no sound. In a terrible miasma of dog-smell, which gripped him with
fear and called ‘Run! Run!’ down every nerve, he crept forward to where the
eye-bolt was screwed into the roof. His claws scraped slightly and he stopped
again. Still there was no movement. He crouched down and began to nibble and
gnaw at the thick cord.

the cord on the punt, though about as thick. The punt-cord had been drenched
through with rain, pliant, slippery and fibrous. This, though dewy on the outside,
was dry-cored and light. In very little time the clean inside was showing. His
chisel-like fore-teeth bit steadily and he felt the dry strands rip. The cord was as
good as half through already.

At that moment he felt the heavy weight of the dog move beneath him. It

stretched, shuddered and yawned. The rope moved a little and the straw rustled.
The foul smell of it came strong, in a cloud.

‘It doesn’t matter if it hears me now,’ thought Hazel. ‘If only I can get the rope

bitten through quickly, it doesn’t matter. The dog’ll go to Dandelion, if only I
can be quick enough to make sure that the rope breaks when it begins to tug.’

He ripped at the cord again and sat back for a quick breath, looking across the

track to where Dandelion was waiting. Then he froze and stared. A short
distance behind Dandelion, in the grass, was the white-chested tabby, wide-eyed,
tail-lashing, crouching. It had seen both himself and Dandelion. As he watched,
it crept a length nearer. Dandelion was lying still, watching the front of the
kennel intently, as he had been told. The cat tensed itself to spring.

Before he knew what he was doing, Hazel stamped on the hollow roof. Twice

he stamped and then turned to leap to the ground and run. Dandelion, reacting
instantly, shot out of the grass to the open gravel. In the same moment, the cat
jumped and landed exactly where he had been lying. The dog gave two quick,
sharp barks and rushed out of the kennel. It saw Dandelion at once and ran to the
full extent of the rope. The rope went taut, held for an instant and then parted at
the point where Hazel had gnawed it to a thread. The kennel jerked forward,
tilted, fell back and struck the ground with a jolt. Hazel, already off balance,

clawed at the blanket, missed his footing and fell over the edge. He landed
heavily on his weak leg and lay kicking. The dog was gone.

Hazel stopped kicking and lay still. There was a spurt of pain along his

haunch but he knew that he could move. He remembered the raised floor of the
barn across the farmyard. He could limp the short distance, get under the floor
and then make his way to the ditch. He raised himself on his fore-legs.

was a light but sharp pricking beneath the fur across his back. He lashed out with
his hind legs but struck nothing. He turned his head. The cat was on him,
crouched half across his body. Its whiskers brushed his ear. Its great, green eyes,
the pupils contracted to vertical, black slits in the sunshine, were staring into his
own.

‘Can you run?’ hissed the cat. ‘I think not.’

46. Bigwig Stands his Ground

The Duke of Wellington (at Waterloo)

‘There’s nothing left to dig, sir,’ he said. ‘The bottom will fall in if anyone

goes down there now.’

‘Can you make out what’s below?’ asked Woundwort. ‘Is it a run or a burrow

we shall be into?’

‘I’m fairly sure it’s a burrow, sir,’ answered Groundsel. ‘In fact, it feels to me

as though there’s an unusually big space underneath.’

‘How many rabbits are in it, do you think?’
‘I couldn’t hear any at all. But they may be keeping quiet and waiting to attack

us when we break in.’

‘They haven’t done much attacking up to now,’ said Woundwort. ‘A poor lot,

I’d say – skulking underground, and some of them running away in the night. I
don’t fancy we’ll have much trouble.’

‘Unless, sir –’ said Groundsel.
Woundwort looked at him and waited.
‘Unless the – the animal attacks us, sir,’ said Groundsel. ‘Whatever it is. It’s

not like Ragwort to imagine anything. He’s very stolid. I’m only trying to think
ahead,’ he added, as Woundwort still said nothing.

‘Well,’ said Woundwort at last, ‘if there is an animal, it’ll find out that I’m an

animal too.’ He came out on the bank, where Campion and Vervain were waiting
with a number of the other rabbits.

‘We’ve done all the hard work now,’ he said. ‘We’ll be able to take our does

home as soon as we’ve finished down below. The way we’ll go about it is this.
I’m going to break the bottom of the hole in and go straight down into the
burrow underneath. I want only three others to follow, otherwise there’ll be
complete confusion and we shall all be fighting each other. Vervain, you come
behind me and bring two more. If there’s any trouble we’ll deal with it.
Groundsel, you follow. But you’re to stay in the shaft, understand? Don’t jump
down until I tell you. When we know where we are and what we’re doing, you

can bring a few more in.’

There was not a rabbit in the Owsla but had confidence in Woundwort. As

they heard him preparing to go first into the depths of the enemy warren as
calmly as though he were looking for dandelions, his officers’ spirits rose. It
seemed to them quite likely that the place would be given up without any
fighting at all. When the General had led the final assault at Nutley Copse he had
killed three rabbits underground and no more had dared to oppose him, although
there had been some hard tussles in the outer runs the day before.

‘Very well,’ said Woundwort. ‘Now, I don’t want anyone straying away.

Campion, you see to that. As soon as we get one of the blocked runs opened
from inside you can fill the place up. Keep them together here till I let you know
and then send them in fast.’

‘Best of luck, sir,’ said Campion.
Woundwort jumped into the pit, flattened his ears and went down the shaft. He

had already decided that he was not going to stop to listen. There was no point,
since he meant to break in at once whether there was anything to be heard or not.
It was more important that he should not seem to hesitate or cause Vervain to do
so; and that the enemy, if they were there, should have the shortest possible time
in which to hear him coming. Below, there would be either a run or a burrow.
Either he would have to fight immediately or else there would first be a chance
to look round and sense where he was. It did not matter. What mattered was
finding rabbits and killing them.

– brittle as ice on a puddle – chalk, pebbles and light soil. Woundwort scored it
across with his fore-claws. Slightly damp, it held a moment and then fell
inwards, crumbling. As it fell, Woundwort followed it.

in a burrow. As he landed he kicked out with his hind legs and then dashed
forward, partly to be out of Vervain’s way as he followed and partly to reach the
wall and face about before he could be attacked from behind. He found himself
against a pile of soft earth – evidently the end of a blocked run leading out of the
burrow – and turned. A moment later Vervain was beside him. The third rabbit,
whoever he was, seemed to be in difficulties. They could both hear him
scrabbling in the fallen soil.

‘Over here,’ said Woundwort sharply.
The rabbit, a powerful, heavy veteran by the name of Thunder, joined them,

stumbling.

‘What’s the matter?’ asked Woundwort.
‘Nothing, sir,’ answered Thunder, ‘only there’s a dead rabbit on the floor and

it startled me for a moment.’

‘A dead rabbit?’ said Woundwort. ‘Are you sure he’s dead? Where is he?’
‘Over there, sir, by the shaft.’
Woundwort crossed the burrow quickly. On the far side of the rubble that had

fallen in from the shaft was lying the inert body of a buck. He sniffed at it and
then pressed it with his nose.

you make of it, Vervain? Rabbits don’t die underground.’

‘It’s a very small buck, sir,’ answered Vervain. ‘ ’Didn’t fancy the idea of

fighting us, perhaps, and the others killed him when he said so.’

‘No, that won’t do. There’s not a scratch on him. Well, leave him, anyway.

We’ve got to get on, and a rabbit this size isn’t going to make any difference,
dead or alive.’

He began to move along the wall, sniffing as he went. He passed the mouths

of two blocked runs, came to an opening between thick tree-roots, and stopped.
The place was evidently very big – bigger than the Council burrow at Efrafa.
Since they were not being attacked, he could turn the space to his own advantage
by getting some more rabbits in at once. He went back quickly to the foot of the
shaft. By standing on his hind legs he could just rest his forepaws on the ragged
lip of the hole.

‘Groundsel?’ he said.
‘Yes, sir?’ answered Groundsel from above.
‘Come on,’ said Woundwort, ‘and bring four others with you. Jump to this

side’ – he moved slightly –’ there’s a dead rabbit on the floor – one of theirs.’

He was still expecting to be attacked at any moment, but the place remained

silent. He continued to listen, sniffing the close air, while the five rabbits
dropped one by one into the burrow. Then he took Groundsel over to the two
blocked runs along the eastern wall.

‘Get these open as quick as you can,’ he said, ‘and send two rabbits to find out

what’s behind the tree roots beyond. If they’re attacked you’re to go and join in
at once.’

‘You know, there’s something strange about the wall at the other end, sir,’ said

Vervain, as Groundsel began setting his rabbits to work.’ Most of it’s hard earth
that’s never been dug. But in one or two places there are piles of much softer
stuff. I’d say that runs leading through the wall have been filled up very recently
– probably since yesterday evening.’

Woundwort and Vervain went carefully along the south wall of the

Honeycomb, scratching and listening.

‘I believe you’re right,’ said Woundwort. ‘Have you heard any movement

from the other side?’

‘Yes, sir, just about here,’ said Vervain.
‘We’ll get this pile of soft earth down,’ said Woundwort. ‘Put two rabbits on it.

If I’m right and Thlayli’s on the other side, they’ll run into trouble before long.
That’s what we want – to force him to attack them.’

them, waiting.

could be only a matter of time before the Efrafans found the soft places in the
south wall and set to work to break through one of them. That would not take
long. Then he would have to fight – probably with Woundwort himself: and if
Woundwort closed with him and used his weight he would have little chance.
Somehow, he must manage to hurt him at the outset, before he expected it. But
how?

He put the problem to Holly.
‘The trouble is this warren wasn’t dug to be defended,’ said Holly. ‘That was

what the Slack Run was for, back at home, so the Threarah once told me. It was
made so that if we ever had to, we could get down beneath an enemy and come
up where he wasn’t expecting us.’

‘That’s it!’ cried Bigwig. ‘That’s the idea! Look, I’m going to dig myself into

the floor of the run just behind this blocked opening. Then you cover me with
earth. It won’t be noticed – there’s so much digging and mess in the place
already. I know it’s a risk, but it’ll be better than just trying to stand up in front
of a rabbit like Woundwort.’

‘But suppose they break through the wall somewhere else?’ said Holly.
‘You must try to make them do it here,’ replied Bigwig. ‘When you hear them

on the other side, make a noise – do a bit of scratching or something – just above
where I am. Anything to get them interested. Come on, help me to dig. And
Silver, get everyone back out of the Honeycomb now and close this wall
completely.’

‘Bigwig,’ said Pipkin, ‘I can’t wake Fiver. He’s still lying out there in the

middle of the floor. What’s to be done?’

‘I’m afraid there’s nothing we can do now,’ replied Bigwig. ‘It’s a great pity,

but we’ll have to leave him.’

‘Oh, Bigwig,’ cried Pipkin, ‘let me stay out there with him! You’ll never miss

me, and I can go on trying –’

‘Hlao-roo,’ said Holly as kindly as he could, ‘if we lose no one but Fiver

before this business is ended, then the Lord Frith himself will be fighting for us.
No, I’m sorry, old chap, not another word. We need you, we need everyone.
Silver, see that he goes back with the others.’

When Woundwort dropped through the roof of the Honeycomb, Bigwig was

already lying under a thin covering of soil on the other side of the south wall, not
far from Clover’s burrow.

an instant fall of earth and a gap opened where he had been digging. The soil no
longer reached to the roof. It was only a broad pile of soft earth, half-filling the
run. Woundwort, still waiting silently, could smell and hear a considerable
number of rabbits on the far side. He hoped that now they might come into the
open burrow and try to attack him. But they made no move.

When it came to fighting, Woundwort was not given to careful calculation.

Men, and larger animals such as wolves, usually have an idea of their own
numbers and those of the enemy and this affects their readiness to fight and how
they go about it. Woundwort had never had any need to think like this. What he
had learned from all his experience of fighting was that nearly always there are
those who want to fight and those who do not but feel they cannot avoid it. More
than once he had fought alone and imposed his will on crowds of other rabbits.
He held down a great warren with the help of a handful of devoted officers. It
did not occur to him now – and if it had, he would not have thought it mattered –
that most of his rabbits were still outside; that those who were with him were
fewer than those on the other side of the wall and that until Groundsel had got
the runs open they could not get out even if they wanted to. This sort of thing
does not count among fighting rabbits. Ferocity and aggression are everything.
What Woundwort knew was that those beyond the wall were afraid of him and
that on this account he had the advantage.

‘Groundsel,’ he said, ‘as soon as you’ve got those runs open, tell Campion to

send everyone down here. The rest of you, follow me. We’ll have this business
finished by the time the others get in to join us.’

Woundwort waited only for Groundsel to bring back the two rabbits who had

been sent to search among the tree roots at the north end of the burrow. Then,
with Vervain behind him, he climbed the pile of fallen earth and thrust his way
into the narrow run. In the dark he could hear and smell the rustling and
crowding of rabbits – both bucks and does – ahead of him. There were two
bucks directly in his path but they fell back as he ploughed through the loose
soil. He plunged forward and felt the ground suddenly turn beneath him. The

next moment a rabbit started up from the earth at his feet and sank his teeth in
the pit of his near foreleg, just where it joined the body.

rabbits could not stop him and once they went down they seldom got up. He
tried to push now, but his back legs could get no purchase in the pile of loose,
yielding soil behind him. He reared up, and as he did so realized that the enemy
beneath him was crouching in a scooped-out trench the size of his own body. He
struck out and felt his claws score deeply along the back and haunch. Then the
other rabbit, still keeping his grip under Woundwort’s shoulder, thrust upwards
with his hind legs braced against the floor of the trench. Woundwort, with both
forefeet off the ground, was thrown over on his back on the earth pile. He lashed
out, but the enemy had already loosed his hold and was beyond his reach.

near foreleg. The muscle was wounded. He could not put his full weight on it.
But his own claws, too, were bloody and this blood was not his.

‘Are you all right, sir?’ asked Vervain, behind him.
‘Of course I’m all right, you fool,’ said Woundwort. ‘Follow me close.’
The other rabbit spoke from in front of him.
‘You told me once to start by impressing you, General. I hope I have.’
‘I told you once that I would kill you myself,’ replied Woundwort. ‘There is

no white bird here, Thlayli.’ He advanced for the second time.

Bigwig’s taunt had been deliberate. He hoped that Woundwort would fly at

him and so give him a chance to bite him again. But as he waited, pressed to the
ground, he realized that Woundwort was too clever to be drawn. Always quick to
size up any new situation, he was coming forward slowly, keeping close to the
ground himself. He meant to use his claws. Afraid, listening to Woundwort’s
approach, Bigwig could hear the uneven movement of his forepaws, almost
within striking distance. Instinctively he drew back and as he did so the thought
came with the sound. ‘The near forepaw’s dragging. He can’t use it properly.’
Leaving his right flank exposed, he struck out on his near side.

back, Woundwort’s whole weight came down on him and the next moment his
teeth had met in his right ear. Bigwig squealed, pressed down and thrashing from
side to side. Woundwort, feeling his enemy’s fear and helplessness, loosed his
hold of the ear and rose above him, ready to bite and tear him across the back of
the neck. For an instant he stood above the helpless Bigwig, his shoulders filling
the run. Then his injured foreleg gave way and he lurched sideways against the
wall. Bigwig cuffed him twice across the face and felt the third blow pass
through his whiskers as he sprang back. The sound of his heavy breathing came

plainly from the top of the earth pile. Bigwig, the blood oozing from his back
and ear, stood his ground and waited. Suddenly he realized that he could see the
dark shape of General Woundwort faintly outlined, where he crouched above
him. The first traces of daylight were glimmering through the broken roof of the
Honeycomb behind.

47. The Sky Suspended

Flora Thompson Lark Rise

He had not expected the dog to be so close behind him. He could hear its

breath and the loose gravel flying under its paws.

‘It’s too fast for me!’ he thought. ‘It’s going to catch me!’ In another moment

it would be on him and then it would roll him over, snapping his back and biting
out his life. He knew that hares, when overtaken, dodge by turning more quickly
and neatly than the pursuing dog and doubling back on their track. ‘I shall have
to double,’ he thought desperately. ‘But if I do it will hunt me up and down the
lane and the man will call it off, or else I shall have to lose it by going through
the hedge: then the whole plan will fail.’

He tore over the crest and down towards the cattle-shed. When Hazel had told

him what he was to do it had seemed to him that his task would consist of
leading the dog on and persuading it to follow him. Now he was running simply
to save his life, and that at a speed he had never touched before, a speed he knew
he could not keep up.

In actual fact Dandelion covered three hundred yards to the cattle-shed in a

good deal less than half a minute. But as he reached the straw at the entrance it
seemed to him that he had run for ever. Hazel and the farmyard were long, long
ago. He had never done anything in his life but run in terror down the the lane,
feeling the dog’s breath at his haunches. Inside the gate a big rat ran across in
front of him and the dog checked at it for a moment. Dandelion gained the
nearest shed and went headlong between two bales of straw at the foot of a pile.
It was a narrow place and he turned round only with some difficulty. The dog

was immediately outside, scratching eagerly, whining and throwing up loose
straw as it sniffed along the foot of the bales.

‘Sit tight,’ said a young rat, from the straw close beside him. ‘It’ll be off in a

minute. They’re not like cats, you know.’

‘That’s the trouble,’ said Dandelion, panting and rolling the whites of his eyes.

‘It mustn’t lose me; and time’s everything.’

‘What?’ said the rat, puzzled. ‘What you say?’
Without answering, Dandelion slipped along to another crack, gathered

himself a moment and then broke cover, running across the yard to the opposite
shed. It was open-fronted and he went straight through to the boarding along the
back. There was a gap under the broken end of a board and here he crept into the
field beyond. The dog, following, thrust its head into the gap and pushed,
barking with excitement. Gradually the loose board levered open like a trap-door
until it was able to force its way through.

field to the hedge beside the road. He knew he was slower but the dog seemed
slower too. Choosing a thick part, he went through the hedge and crossed the
road. Blackberry came to meet him, scuttering down the further bank. Dandelion
dropped exhausted in the ditch. The dog was not twenty feet away on the other
side of the hedge. It could not find a big enough gap.

‘It’s faster than ever I thought,’ gasped Dandelion, ‘but I’ve taken the edge off

it. I can’t do any more. I must go to ground. I’m finished.’

It was plain that Blackberry was frightened.
‘Frith help me!’ he whispered. ‘I’ll never do it!’
‘Go on, quick,’ said Dandelion, ‘before it loses interest. I’ll overtake you and

help if I can.’

yelped and thrust its weight against the hedge. Blackberry ran slowly along the
road towards a pair of gates that stood opposite each other further down. The
dog stayed level with him. As soon as he was sure that it had seen the gate on its
own side and meant to go to it, Blackberry turned and climbed the bank. Out in
the stubble he waited for the dog to reappear.

gate-post and the bank into the field, it paid him no attention. It nosed along the
foot of the bank, put up a partridge and bounced after it and then began to
scratch about in a clump of dock-plants. For some time Blackberry felt too
terrified to move. Then, in desperation, he hopped slowly towards it, trying to
act as though he had not noticed that it was there. It dashed after him, but almost
at once seemed to lose interest and returned to its nosing and sniffing over the

ground. Finally, when he was utterly at a loss, it set off over the field of its own
accord, padding easily along – beside one of the rows of threshed straw, trailing
the broken cord and pouncing in and out at every squeak and rustle. Blackberry,
sheltering behind a parallel row, kept level with it. In this manner they covered
the distance to the pylon line, half way to the foot of the down. It was here that
Dandelion caught up with him.

‘It’s not fast enough, Blackberry! We must get on. Bigwig may be dead.’
‘I know, but at least it’s going the right way. I couldn’t get it to move at all to

start with. Can’t we –’

‘It’s got to come up the down at speed or there’ll be no surprise. Come on,

we’ll draw it together. We’ll have to get ahead of it first, though.’

and crossed the dog’s line in full view. This time it pursued instantly and the two
rabbits reached the undergrowth at the bottom of the steep with no more than ten
yards to spare. As they began to climb they heard the dog crashing through the
brittle elders. It barked once and then they were out on the open slope with the
dog running mute behind them.

Woundwort steadily where he crouched on the earth pile, expecting him to leap
forward at any moment. He could hear a rabbit moving behind him but the run
was so narrow that he could not have turned even if it had been safe to do so.

‘Everyone all right?’ he asked.
‘They’re all right,’ replied Holly. ‘Come on, Bigwig, let me take your place

now. You need a rest.’

‘ ’Can’t,’ panted Bigwig. ‘You couldn’t get past me here – no room – and if I

go back that brute’ll follow – next thing you’d know he’d be loose in the
burrows. You leave it to me. I know what I’m doing.’

It had occurred to Bigwig that in the narrow run even his dead body would be

a considerable obstacle. The Efrafans would either have to get it out or dig round
it and this would mean more delay. In the burrow behind him he could hear
Bluebell, who was apparently telling the does a story. ‘Good idea,’ he thought.
‘Keep ’em happy. More than I could do if I had to sit there.’

‘So then El-ahrairah said to the fox, “Fox you may smell and fox you may be,

but I can tell your fortune in the water.” ’

Suddenly Woundwort spoke.
‘Thlayli,’ he said, ‘why do you want to throw your life away? I can send one

fresh rabbit after another into this run if I choose. You’re too good to be killed.

Come back to Efrafa. I promise I’ll give you the command of any Mark you like.
I give you my word.’

‘Silflay hraka, u embleer rah,’ replied Bigwig.
‘ “Ah ha,” said the fox, “tell my fortune, eh? And what do you see in the

water, my friend? Fat rabbits running through the grass, yes, yes?” ’

‘Very well,’ said Woundwort. ‘But remember, Thlayli, you yourself can stop

this nonsense whenever you wish.’

swift hounds on the scent and my enemy flying for his life.” ’

nearly as great a hindrance dead as alive. ‘He wants me to come out on my feet,’
he thought. ‘But it’s Inlé, not Efrafa, that I shall go to from here.’

Bigwig like a branch falling from a tree. He made no attempt to use his claws.
His great weight was pushing, chest to chest, against Bigwig’s. With heads side
by side they bit and snapped at each other’s shoulders. Bigwig felt himself
sliding slowly backwards. He could not resist the tremendous pressure. His back
legs, with claws extended, furrowed the floor of the run as he gave ground. In a
few moments he would be pushed bodily into the burrow behind. Putting his last
strength into the effort to remain where he was, he loosed his teeth from
Woundwort’s shoulder and dropped his head, like a cart-horse straining at a load.
Still he was slipping. Then, very gradually it seemed, the terrible pressure began
to slacken. His claws had a hold of the ground. Woundwort, teeth sunk in his
back, was snuffling and choking. Though Bigwig did not know it, his earlier
blows had torn Woundwort across the nose. His nostrils were full of his own
blood and with jaws closed in Bigwig’s fur he could not draw his breath. A
moment more and he let go his hold. Bigwig, utterly exhausted, lay where he
was. After a few moments he tried to get up, but a faintness came over him and a
feeling of turning over and over in a ditch of leaves. He closed his eyes. There
was silence and then, quite clearly, he heard Fiver speaking in the long grass.
‘You are closer to death than I. You are closer to death than I.’

‘The wire!’ squealed Bigwig. He jerked himself up and opened his eyes. The

run was empty. General Woundwort was gone.

shaft, by the daylight outside. He had never felt so tired. He saw Vervain and
Thunder looking at him uncertainly. He sat on his haunches and tried to clean his
face with his front paws.

finish him off, Vervain, since he won’t come out.’

‘You’re asking me to fight him, sir?’ asked Vervain.
‘Well, just take him on for a few moments,’ answered Woundwort. ‘I want to

start them getting this wall down in one or two other places. Then I’ll come
back.’

Vervain knew that the impossible had happened. The General had come off

worst. What he was saying was,’ Cover up for me. Don’t let the others know.’

Thlayli’s had the best of it all along, ever since he first met him in Efrafa. And
the sooner we’re back there the better.’

earth pile. Woundwort limped across to the two runs, half-way down the eastern
wall, which Groundsel had been told to get open. Both were now clear at the
entrances and the diggers were out of sight in the tunnels. As he approached.
Groundsel backed down the farther tunnel and began cleaning his claws on a
projecting root.

‘How are you getting on?’ asked Woundwort.
‘This run’s open, sir,’ said Groundsel,‘but the other will take a bit longer, I’m

afraid. It’s heavily blocked.’

bring them in and start getting that end wall down.’

He was about to go up the run himself when he found Vervain beside him. For

a moment he thought that he was going to say that he had killed Thlayli. A
second glance showed him otherwise.

‘I’ve – er – got some grit in my eye, sir,’ said Vervain. ‘I’ll just get it out and

then I’ll have another go at him.’

Without a word Woundwort went back to the far end of the Honeycomb.

Vervain followed.

yours be in half a day? Aren’t you the most hated officer in Efrafa? That rabbit’s
got to be killed.’

raising their heads to peer past him from behind, saw why. Thlayli had made his
way up the run and was crouching immediately below. Blood had matted the
great thatch of fur on his head and one ear, half-severed, hung down beside his
face. His breathing was slow and heavy.

‘You’ll find it much harder to push me back from here, General,’ he said.
With a sort of weary, dull surprise, Woundwort realized that he was afraid. He

did not want to attack Thlayli again. He knew, with flinching certainty, that he
was not up to it. And who was? he thought. Who could do it? No, they would
have to get in by some other way and everyone would know why.

rabbits to pull down this wall in four places. Why don’t you come out?’

Thlayli’s reply, when it came, was low and gasping, but perfectly clear.
‘My Chief Rabbit has told me to defend this run and until he says otherwise I

shall stay here.’

‘His Chief Rabbit?’ said Vervain, staring.
It had never occurred to Woundwort or any of his officers that Thlayli was not

the Chief Rabbit of his warren. Yet what he said carried immediate conviction.
He was speaking the truth. And if he was not the Chief Rabbit, then somewhere
close by there must be another, stronger rabbit who was. A stronger rabbit than
Thlayli. Where was he? What was he doing at this moment?

Woundwort became aware that Thistle was no longer behind him.
‘Where’s that young fellow gone?’ he said to Vervain.
‘He seems to have slipped away, sir,’ answered Vervain.
‘You should have stopped him,’ said Woundwort. ‘Fetch him back.’
But it was Groundsel who returned to him a few moments later.
‘I’m sorry, sir,’ he said, ‘Thistle’s gone up the opened run. I thought you’d

sent him or I’d have asked him what he was up to. One or two of my rabbits
seem to have gone with him – I don’t know what for, I’m sure.’

‘I’ll give them what for,’ said Woundwort. ‘Come with me.’
He knew now what they would have to do. Every rabbit he had brought must

be sent underground to dig and every blocked gap in the wall must be opened.
As for Thlayli, he could simply be left where he was and the less said about him
the better. There must be no more fighting in narrow runs and when the terrible
Chief Rabbit finally appeared he would be pulled down in the open, from all
sides.

faint patch of light below the ragged hole in the roof, a rabbit was standing – no
Efrafan, a rabbit unknown to the General. He was very small and was looking
tensely about him – wide-eyed as a kitten above ground for the first time – as
though by no means sure where he might be. As Woundwort watched, he raised
a trembling fore-paw and passed it gropingly across his face. For a moment
some old, flickering, here-and-gone feeling stirred in the General’s memory –
the smell of wet cabbage leaves in a cottage garden, the sense of some easy-
going, kindly place, long forgotten and lost.

‘Who the devil’s that?’ asked General Woundwort.

‘It – it must be the rabbit that’s been lying there, sir,’ answered Groundsel.

‘The rabbit we thought was dead.’

Vervain? That’s one of them you might be able to tackle, at all events. Hurry up,’
he sneered, as Vervain hesitated, uncertain whether the General were serious,
‘and come on out as soon as you’ve finished.’

Vervain advanced slowly across the floor. Even he could derive little

satisfaction from the prospect of killing a tharn rabbit half his own size, in
obedience to a contemptuous taunt. The small rabbit made no move whatever,
either to retreat or to defend himself, but only stared at him from great eyes
which, though troubled, were certainly not those of a beaten enemy or a victim.
Before his gaze, Vervain stopped in uncertainty and for long moments the two
faced each other in the dim light. Then, very quietly and with no trace of fear,
the strange rabbit said.

to kill us if you could.’

‘Blame you?’ answered Vervain. ‘Blame you for what?’
‘For your death. Believe me, I am sorry for your death.’
Vervain in his time had encountered any number of prisoners who, before they

died, had cursed or threatened him, not uncommonly with supernatural
vengeance, much as Bigwig had cursed Woundwort in the storm. If such things
had been liable to have any effect on him, he would not have been head of the
Owslafa. Indeed, for almost any utterance that a rabbit in this dreadful situation
could find to make, Vervain was unthinkingly ready with one or other of a stock
of jeering rejoinders. Now, as he continued to meet the eyes of this
unaccountable enemy – the only one he had faced in all the long night’s search
for bloodshed – horror came upon him and he was filled with a sudden fear of
his words, gentle and inexorable as the falling of bitter snow in a land without
refuge. The shadowy recesses of the strange burrow seemed full of whispering,
malignant ghosts and he recognized the forgotten voices of rabbits done to death
months since in the ditches of Efrafa.

‘Let me alone!’ cried Vervain. ‘Let me go! Let me go!’
Stumbling and blundering, he found his way to the opened run and dragged

himself up it. At the top he came upon Woundwort, listening to one of
Groundsel’s diggers, who was trembling and white-eyed.

‘Oh, sir,’ said the youngster,’ they say there’s a great Chief Rabbit bigger than

a hare: and a strange animal they heard –’

‘Shut up!’ said Woundwort. ‘Follow me, come on.’
He came out on the bank, blinking in the sunlight. The rabbits scattered about

the grass stared at him in horror, several wondering whether this could really be
the General. His nose and one eyelid were gashed and his whole face was
masked with blood. As he limped down from the bank his near foreleg trailed
and he staggered sideways. He scrambled into the open grass and looked about
him.

long. Down below, there’s a kind of wall.’ He stopped, sensing all around him
reluctance and fear. He looked at Ragwort, who looked away. Two other rabbits
were edging off through the grass. He called them back.

‘What do you think you’re doing?’ he asked.
‘Nothing, sir,’ replied one. ‘We only thought that –’
All of a sudden Captain Campion dashed round the corner of the hanger. From

the open down beyond came a single, high scream. At the same moment two
strange rabbits, running together, leapt the bank into the wood and disappeared
down one of the blocked tunnels.

‘Run!’ cried Campion, stamping. ‘Run for your lives!’
He raced through them and was gone over the down. Not knowing what he

meant or where to run, they turned one way and another. Five bolted down the
opened run and a few more into the wood. But almost before they had begun to
scatter, into their midst bounded a great, black dog, snapping, biting and chasing
hither and thither like a fox in a chicken-run.

Woundwort alone stood his ground. As the rest fled in all directions he

remained where he was, bristling and snarling, bloody-fanged and bloody-
clawed. The dog, coming suddenly upon him face to face among the rough
tussocks, recoiled a moment, startled and confused. Then it sprang forward: and
even as they ran, his Owsla could hear the General’s raging, squealing cry,
‘Come back, you fools! Dogs aren’t dangerous! Come back and fight!’

48. Dea ex Machina

Dylan Thomas Fern Hill

Spider, spider on the ‘bus
Soppy Jane that made a fuss,
Spider got th’ eleven-plus.

moved. What was going to happen today? Thursday – market day in Newbury.
Dad would be going in. Doctor was coming to see Mum. Doctor had funny
glasses that pinched on his nose. They’d made a mark each side. If he wasn’t in a
hurry he’d talk to her. Doctor was a bit funny-like when you didn’t know him
but when you did he was nice.

Suddenly there was another sharp sound. It ripped through the still, early

morning like something spilt across a clean floor – a squealing – something
frightened, something desperate. Lucy jumped out of bed and ran across to the

window. Whatever it was, it was only just outside. She leaned well out, with her
feet off the floor and the sill pressing breathlessly across her stomach. Tab was
down below, right by the kennel. He’d got something: rat it must be, squealing
like that.

‘Tab!’ called Lucy sharply. ‘Tab! Wha’ you got?’
At the sound of her voice the cat looked up for a moment and immediately

looked back again at its prey.’ ‘Tweren’t no rat, though; ‘twas rabbit, layin’ on its
side by the kennel. It looked proper bad. Kickin’ out an’ all. Then it squealed
again.

Lucy ran down the stairs in her night-dress and opened the door. The gravel

made her hobble and she left it and went on up the flower-bed. As she reached
the kennel the cat looked up and spat at her, keeping one paw pressed down on
the rabbit’s neck.

‘Git out, Tab!’ said Lucy. ‘Grool thing! Let’n alone!’
She cuffed the cat, which tried to scratch her, ears laid flat. She raised her

hand again and it growled, ran a few feet and stopped, looking back in sulky
rage. Lucy picked up the rabbit. It struggled a moment and then held itself tense
in her firm grip.

‘ ’Old still!’ said Lucy. ‘I ain’t gon’ ’urtcher!’
She went back to the house, carrying the rabbit.
‘What you bin up to, eh?’ said her father, boots scratch scratch over the tiles.

‘Look at yore feet! En I told you – Wha’ got there then?’

‘Rabbit,’ said Lucy, defensively.
‘In yer night-dress an’ all, catch yore bloomin’ death! Wha’ want with ’im,

then?’

‘Goner keep ’im.’
‘You ain’t!’
‘Ah, Dad. ’E’s nice.’
‘ ’E won’t be n’ bloomin’ good t’ yer. You put ’im in ‘utch ‘e’ll only die. You

can’t keep woild rabbit. ‘N if ‘e gets out ‘e’ll do all manner o’ bloomin’ ‘arm.’

‘But ‘e’s bad, Dad. Cat’s bin at ’im.’
‘Cat was doin’ ‘is job then. Did oughter’ve let ’im finish be roights.’
‘I wanner show ’im to Doctor.’
‘Doctor’s got summin’ better to do than bide about wi’ old rabbit. You jus’

give ’im ’ere now.’

Lucy began to cry. She had not lived all her life on a farm for nothing and she

knew very well that everything her father had said was right. But she was upset
by the idea of killing the rabbit in cold blood. True, she did not really know what
she could do with it in the long run. What she wanted was to show it to Doctor.

She knew that Doctor thought of her as a proper farm girl – a country girl. When
she showed him things she had found – a goldfinch’s egg, a Painted Lady
fluttering in a jam-jar or a fungus that looked exactly like orange peel – he took
her seriously and talked to her as he would to a grown-up person. To ask his
advice about a damaged rabbit and discuss it with him would be very grown-up.
Meanwhile, her father might give way or he might not.

honest. On’y it’s nice talking to Doctor.’

Doctor. She was proper bright kid – very likely goin’ to grammar school an’ all,
so they told him. Doctor had said once or twice she was real sensible with these
things she picked up what she showed him. Comin’ to somethin’, though, bloody
rabbits. All same, would’n’ ‘urt, long’s she didn’ let ‘un go on the place.

‘Why don’ you do somethin’ sensible,’ he said, ‘ ’stead o’ bidin’ there‘ollerin’

and carryin’ on like you was skimmish? You wants go’n get some cloze on, then
you c’n go’n put ’im in that old cage what’s in shed. One what you ‘ad for they
budgies.’

Lucy stopped crying and went upstairs, still carrying the rabbit. She shut it in

a drawer, got dressed and went out to get the cage. On the way back she stopped
for some straw from behind the kennel. Her father came across from the long
barn.

‘Did y’seeBob?’
‘Never,’ said Lucy. ‘Where’s ‘e gone then?’
‘Bust ‘is rope an’ off. I know’d that old rope were gett’n on like, but I didn’t

reckon ‘e could bust ’im. Anyways, I go’ go in to Newbury s’mornin’. ‘F’e turns
up agen you’d best tie ’im up proper.’

now.’

‘Ah, that’s good girl. I reckon she’ll be right’s a trivet to-morrer.’
Doctor Adams arrived soon after ten. Lucy, who was making her bed and

tidying her room later than she should have been, heard him stop his car under
the elms at the top of the lane and went out to meet him, wondering why he had
not driven up to the house as usual. He had got out of the car and was standing
with his hands behind his back, looking down the lane, but he caught sight of her
and called in the rather shy, abrupt way she was used to.

‘Er-Lucy.’
She ran up. He took off his pince-nez and put them in his waistcoat pocket.
‘Is that your dog?’
The Labrador was coming up the lane, looking decidedly tired and trailing its

broken rope. Lucy laid hold of it.

‘ ’E’s bin off, Doctor. ‘Bin ever so worried ‘bout ’im.’
The Labrador began to sniff at Doctor Adams’ shoes.
‘Something’s been fighting with him, I think,’ said Doctor Adams. ‘His nose

is scratched quite badly, and that looks like some kind of a bite on his leg.’

‘What d’you reckon ‘twas then, Doctor?’
‘Well, it might have been a big rat, I suppose, or perhaps a stoat. Something he

went for, that put up a fight.’

‘I got a rabbit s’mornin’, Doctor. Woild one. ‘E’s aloive. I took ‘un off o’ the

cat. On’y I reckon ‘e’s ‘urt. Joo like see ’im?’

‘Well, I’d better go and see Mrs Cane first, I think.’ (Not ‘Your mother,’

thought Lucy.) ‘And then if I’ve got time I’ll have a look at the chap.’

Twenty minutes later Lucy was holding the rabbit as quiet as she could, while

Doctor Adams pressed it gently here and there with the balls of two fingers.

‘Well, there doesn’t seem to be much the matter with him, as far as I can see,’

he said at last. ‘Nothing’s broken. There’s something funny about this hind leg,
but that’s been done some time and it’s more or less healed – or as much as it
ever will. The cat’s scratched him across here, you see, but that’s nothing much.
I should think he’ll be all right for a bit.’

‘No good to keep ’im, though, Doctor, would it? In ‘utch, I-mean.’
‘Oh no, he wouldn’t live shut up in a box. If he couldn’t get out he’d soon die.

No, I should let the poor chap go – unless you want to eat him.’

round ’ere. ‘E always says one rabbit means ‘undred an’ one.’

‘Well, I’ll tell you what,’ said Doctor Adams, taking his thin fob watch on the

fingers of one hand and looking down at it as he held it at arm’s length – for he
was long-sighted –’ I’ve got to go a few miles up the road to see an old lady at
Cole Henley. If you like to come along in the car, you can let him go on the
down and I’ll bring you back before dinner.’

Lucy skipped. ‘I’ll just go’n ask Mum.’
On the ridge between Hare Warren Down and Watership Down, Doctor

Adams stopped the car.

of harm he can do here, if you come to think about it.’

They walked a short distance eastwards from the road and Lucy set the rabbit

down. It sat stupefied for nearly half a minute and then suddenly dashed away
over the grass.

Adams, pointing. ‘But he could perfectly well live for years, as far as that goes.

Born and bred in a briar patch, Brer Fox.’

49. Hazel Comes Home

Robert Graves Two Fusiliers

There could be no question now of the Efrafans renewing their attack on the

warren. None had any idea beyond saving his own life. Their leader was gone.
The dog had been set on them by the rabbits they had come to kill – of this they
were sure. It was all one with the mysterious fox and the white bird. Indeed
Ragwort, the most unimaginative rabbit alive, had actually heard it underground.
Campion, crouching in a patch of nettles with Vervain and four or five more, met
with nothing but shivering agreement when he said that he was sure that they
ought to leave at once this dangerous place, where they had already stayed far
too long.

Without Campion, probably not one rabbit would have got back to Efrafa. As

it was, all his skill as a patroller could not bring home half of those who had
come to Watership. Three or four had run and strayed too far to be found and
what became of them no one ever knew. There-were probably fourteen or fifteen

rabbits – no more – who set off with Campion, some time before ni-Frith, to try
to retrace the long journey they had made only the previous day. They were not
fit to cover the distance by nightfall: and before long they had worse to face than
their own fatigue and low spirits. Bad news travels fast. Down to the Belt and
beyond, the rumour spread that the terrible General Woundwort and his Owsla
had been cut to pieces on Watership Down and that what was left of them was
trailing southwards in poor shape, with little heart to keep alert. The Thousand
began to close in – stoats, a fox, even a tom-cat from some farm or other. At
every halt yet another rabbit was not to be found and no one could remember
seeing what had happened to him. One of these was Vervain. It had been plain
from the start that he had nothing left and indeed there was little reason for him
to return to Efrafa without the General.

Through all the fear and hardship Campion remained steady and vigilant,

holding the survivors together, thinking ahead and encouraging the exhausted to
keep going. During the afternoon of the following day, while the Off-Fore Mark
were at silflay, he came limping through the sentry-line with a straggling handful
of six or seven rabbits. He was close to collapse himself and scarcely able to
give the Council any account of the disaster.

Only Groundsel, Thistle and three others had the presence of mind to dart

down the opened run when the dog came. Back in the Honeycomb, Groundsel
immediately surrendered himself and his fugitives to Fiver, who was still
bemused from his long trance and scarcely restored to his senses sufficiently to
grasp what was toward. At length, however, after the five Efrafans had remained
crouching for some time in the burrow, listening to the sounds of the dog hunting
above, Fiver recovered himself, made his way to the mouth of the run where
Bigwig still lay half-conscious, and succeeded in making Holly and Silver
understand that the siege was ended. There was no lack of helpers to tear open
the blocked gaps in the south wall. It so happened that Bluebell was the first
through into the Honeycomb; and for many days afterwards he was still
improving upon his imitation of Captain Fiver at the head of his crowd of
Efrafan prisoners – ‘like a tom-tit rounding up a bunch of moulting jackdaws,’ as
he put it.

only thoughts throughout the warren were for Hazel and Bigwig. Bigwig seemed
likely to die. Bleeding in half a dozen places, he lay with closed eyes in the run
he had defended and made no reply when Hyzenthlay told him that the Efrafans
were defeated and the warren was saved. After a time, they dug carefully to
broaden the run and as the day wore on the does, each in turn, remained beside
him, licking his wounds and listening to his low, unsteady breathing.

Before this, Blackberry and Dandelion had burrowed their way in from

Kehaar’s run – it had not been blocked very heavily – and told their story.
Dandelion could not say what might have happened to Hazel after the dog broke
loose, and by the early afternoon everyone feared the worst. At last Pipkin, in
great anxiety and distress, insisted on setting out for Nuthanger. Fiver at once
said that he would go with him and together they left the wood and set off
northwards over the down. They had gone only a short distance when Fiver,
sitting up on an ant-hill to look about, saw a rabbit approaching over the high
ground to the west. They both ran nearer and recognized Hazel. Fiver went to
meet him while Pipkin raced back to the Honeycomb with the news.

As soon as he had learned all that had happened – including what Groundsel

had to tell – Hazel asked Holly to take two or three rabbits and find out for
certain whether the Efrafans had really gone. Then he himself went into the run
where Bigwig was lying. Hyzenthlay looked up as he came.

were: and then he said his ear hurt very much.’

Hazel nuzzled the matted fur cap. The blood had turned hard and set into

pointed spikes that pricked his nose.

‘You’ve done it, Bigwig,’ he said. ‘They’ve all run away.’
For several moments Bigwig did not move. Then he opened his eyes and

raised his head, pouching out his cheeks and sniffing at the two rabbits beside
him. He said nothing and Hazel wondered whether he had understood. At last he
whispered, ‘Ees finish Meester Voundvort, ya?’

can clean you up a lot better outside. Come on: it’s a lovely afternoon, all sun
and leaves.’

Bigwig got up and tottered forward into the devastated Honeycomb. There he

sank down, rested, got up again and reached the foot of Kehaar’s run.

‘I thought he’d killed me,’ he said. ‘No more fighting for me – I’ve had

enough. And you – your plan worked, Hazel-rah, did it? Well done. Tell me what
it was. And how did you get back from the farm?’

‘A man brought me in a hrududu,’ said Hazel, ‘nearly all the way.’
‘And you flew the rest, I suppose,’ said Bigwig, ‘burning a white stick in your

mouth? Come on, Hazel-rah, tell me sensibly. What’s the matter, Hyzenthlay?’

‘Oh!’ said Hyzenthlay, staring. ‘Oh!’
‘What is it?’
‘He did!’
‘Did what?’
‘He did ride home in a hrududu. And I saw him as he came – that night in

Efrafa, when I was with you in your burrow. Do you remember?’

tell it to Fiver. That’s a good idea – let’s go and do it. And if he’ll believe you,
Hazel-rah, then I will.’

50. And Last

Jane Austen Northanger Abbey

Many human beings say that they enjoy the winter, but what they really enjoy

is feeling proof against it. For them there is no winter food problem. They have
fires and warm clothes. The winter cannot hurt them and therefore increases
their sense of cleverness and security. For birds and animals, as for poor men,
winter is another matter. Rabbits, like most wild animals, suffer hardship. True,

they are luckier than some, for food of a sort is nearly always to be had. But
under snow they may stay underground for days at a time, feeding only by
chewing pellets. They are more subject to disease in winter and the cold lowers
their vitality. Nevertheless, burrows can be snug and warm, especially when
crowded. Winter is a more active mating season than the late summer and the
autumn, and the time of greatest fertility for the does starts about February.
There are fine days when silflay is still enjoyable. For the adventurous, garden
raiding has its charms. And underground, there are stories to be told and games
to be played – bob-stones and the like. For rabbits, winter remains what it was
for men in the middle ages – hard, but bearable by the resourceful and not
altogether without compensations.

were sitting with Holly, Silver and Groundsel. The Efrafan survivors had been
allowed to join the warren and after a shaky start, when they were regarded with
dislike and suspicion, were settling down pretty well, largely because Hazel was
determined that they should.

Since the night of the siege, Fiver had spent much time alone and even in the

Honeycomb, or at morning and evening silflay, was often silent and preoccupied.
No one resented this – ‘He looks right through you in such a nice, friendly way’
as Bluebell put it – for each in his own manner recognized that Fiver was now
more than ever governed, whether he would or no, by the pulse of that
mysterious world of which he had once spoken to Hazel during the late June
days they had spent together at the foot of the down. It was Bigwig who said –
one evening when Fiver was absent from the Honeycomb at story-time – that
Fiver was one who had paid more dearly than even himself for the night’s
victory over the Efrafans. Yet to his doe, Vilthuril, Fiver was devotedly attached,
while she had come to understand him almost as deeply as ever Hazel had.

Just outside the beech hanger, Hyzenthlay’s litter of four young rabbits were

playing in the grass. They had first been brought up to graze about seven days
before. If Hyzenthlay had had a second litter she would by this time have left
them to look after themselves. As it was, however, she was grazing close by,
watching their play and every now and then moving in to cuff the strongest and
stop him bullying the others.

those.’

though I dare say there’ll be a few.’

‘We can expect anything, it seems to me,’ said Holly. ‘Three litters born in

autumn – have you ever heard of such a thing before? Frith didn’t mean rabbits

to mate in the high summer.’

‘I don’t know about Clover,’ said Hazel. ‘She’s a hutch rabbit: it may be

natural to her to breed at any time, for all I know. But I’m sure that Hyzenthlay
and Vilthuril started their litters in the high summer because they’d had no
natural life in Efrafa. For all that, they’re the only two who have had litters, as
yet.’

comes to that,’ said Silver. ‘Everything that’s happened is unnatural – the
fighting, the breeding – and all on account of Woundwort. If he wasn’t unnatural,
who was?’

‘Bigwig was right when he said he wasn’t like a rabbit at all,’ said Holly. ‘He

was a fighting animal – fierce as a rat or a dog. He fought because he actually
felt safer fighting than running. He was brave all right. But it wasn’t natural; and
that’s why it was bound to finish him in the end. He was trying to do something
that Frith never meant any rabbit to do. I believe he’d have hunted like the elil if
he could.’

‘He isn’t dead, you know,’ broke in Groundsel.
The others were silent.
‘He hasn’t stopped running,’ said Groundsel passionately. ‘Did you see his

body? No. Did anyone? No. Nothing could kill him. He made rabbits bigger than
they’ve ever been – braver, more skilful, more cunning. I know we paid for it.
Some gave their lives. It was worth it, to feel we were Efrafans. For the first time
ever, rabbits didn’t go scurrying away. The elil feared us. And that was on
account of Woundwort – him and no one but him. We weren’t good enough for
the General. Depend upon it, he’s gone to start another warren somewhere else.
But no Efrafan officer will ever forget him.’

‘Well, now I’ll tell you something,’ began Silver. But Hazel cut him short.
‘You mustn’t say you weren’t good enough,’ he said. ‘You did everything for

him that rabbits could do and a great deal more. And what a lot we learnt from
you! As for Efrafa, I’ve heard it’s doing well under Campion, even if some
things aren’t quite the same as they used to be. And listen – by next spring, if
I’m right, we shall have too many rabbits here for comfort. I’m going to
encourage some of the youngsters to start a new warren between here and
Efrafa: and I think you’ll find Campion will be ready to send some of his rabbits
to join them. You’d be just the right fellow to start that scheme off.’

‘Won’t it be difficult to arrange?’ asked Holly.
‘Not when Kehaar comes,’ said Hazel, as they began to hop easily back

towards the holes at the north-east corner of the hanger. ‘He’ll turn up one of
these days, when the storms begin on that Big Water of his. He can take a

message to Campion as quickly as you’d run to the iron tree and back.’

Silver. ‘Someone not so very far away.’

where it was still sunny, a little group of three young rabbits – bigger than
Hyzenthlay’s – were squatting in the long grass, listening to a hulking veteran,
lop-eared and scarred from nose to haunch – none other than Bigwig, captain of
a very free-and-easy Owsla. These were the bucks of Clover’s litter and a likely
lot they looked.

do! You – what’s your name – Scabious – look, I’m a cat and I see you down at
the bottom of my garden chewing up the lettuces. Now, what do I do? Do I come
walking up the middle of the path waving my tail? Well, do I?’

‘Please, sir, I’ve never seen a cat,’ said the young rabbit.
‘No, you haven’t yet,’ admitted the gallant captain. ‘Well, a cat is a horrible

thing with a long tail. It’s covered with fur and has bristling whiskers and when
it fights it makes fierce, spiteful noises. It’s cunning, see?’

‘Oh yes, sir,’ answered the young rabbit. After a pause, he said politely, ‘Er –

you lost your tail?’

‘Will you tell us about the fight in the storm, sir?’ asked one of the other

rabbits, ‘and the tunnel of water?’

asleep in the sun, right? And you’re going to get past me, right? Now then –’

Holly and Groundsel had gone underground and Silver and Hazel moved out
once more into the sun.

‘I think we all would,’ replied Hazel. ‘If it hadn’t been for him that day, the

dog would have come too late. Woundwort and his lot wouldn’t have been above
ground. They’d have been down below, finishing what they’d come to do.’

came. That was what I was going to say just now, but it was as well I didn’t, I
suppose.’

Hazel. ‘We’re going to need it when the hard weather comes. That hole in the
roof of the Honeycomb doesn’t help at all. It’ll close up naturally one day, I
suppose, but meanwhile it’s a confounded nuisance.’

‘Here come the burrow-diggers, anyway,’ said Silver.
Pipkin and Bluebell came over the crest, together with three or four of the

does.

dug, ‘tis free from beetle, worm and slug. And in the snow, when down we go –’

concealed, are they?’

‘Just like Efrafa, I should think,’ said Bluebell. ‘As a matter of fact, I brought

one up with me to show you. You can’t see it, can you? No – well, there you are.
I say, just look at old Bigwig with those youngsters over there. You know, if he
went back to Efrafa now they couldn’t decide which Mark to put him in, could
they? He’s got them all.’

‘We came up early on purpose to have a bit of sunshine before it gets dark.’

‘All right,’ answered Hazel good-naturedly. ‘We’ve just come back from

there, Silver and I, but I don’t mind slipping over again for a bit.’

Silver. ‘It’ll be out of the wind. D’you remember how he cursed at us and tried to
peck us?’

‘And the worms we carried?’ said Bluebell. ‘Don’t forget them.’
As they came near the hollow they could hear that it was not empty. Evidently

some of the other rabbits had had the same idea.

‘Let’s see how close we can get before they spot us,’ said Silver. ‘Real

Campion style – come on.’

they saw Vilthuril and her litter of four lying in the sun. Their mother was telling
the young rabbits a story.

‘So after they had swum the river,’ said Vilthuril, ‘El-ahrairah led his people

on in the dark, through a wild, lonely place. Some of them were afraid, but he
knew the way and in the morning he brought them safely to some green fields,
very beautiful, with good, sweet grass. And here they found a warren; a warren
that was bewitched. All the rabbits in this warren were in the power of a wicked
spell. They wore shining collars round their necks and sang like the birds and
some of them could fly. But for all they looked so fine, their hearts were dark
and tharn. So then El-ahrairah’s people said, “Ah see, these are the wonderful
rabbits of Prince Rainbow. They are like princes themselves. We will live with
them and become princes too.” ’

Vilthuril looked up and saw the newcomers. She paused for a moment and

then went on.

‘But Frith came to Rabscuttle in a dream and warned him that the warren was

enchanted. And he dug into the ground to find where the spell was buried. Deep
he dug, and hard was the search, but at last he found that wicked spell and

dragged it out. So they all fled from it, but it turned into a great rat and flew at
El-ahrairah. Then Al-ahrairah fought the rat, up and down, and at last he held it,
pinned under his claws, and it turned into a great, white bird which spoke to him
and blessed him.’

‘I seem to know this story,’ whispered Hazel, ‘but I can’t remember where

I’ve heard it.’

turned round at the interruption and in a moment had tumbled up the side of the
hollow, squeaking ‘Hazel-rah! Hazel-rah!’ and jumping on Hazel from all sides.

mixed up in a fight with a lot of roughs like you! Let’s hear the rest of the story.’

‘But there’s a man coming on a horse, Hazel-rah,’ said one of the young

rabbits. ‘Oughtn’t we to run into the wood?’

‘How can you tell?’ asked Hazel.’ I can’t hear anything.’
‘Neither can I,’ said Silver, listening with his ears up.
The little rabbit looked puzzled.
‘I don’t know how, Hazel-rah,’ he answered, ‘but I’m sure I’m not mistaken.’
They waited for some little time, while the red sun sank lower. At last, just as

Vilthuril was about to go on with the story, they heard hooves on the turf and the
horseman appeared from the west, cantering easily along the track towards
Cannon Heath Down.

funny chap, though, young Threar, to spot him so far off.’

what a river looked like and said he’d seen it in a dream. It’s Fiver’s blood, you
know. It’s only to be expected with Fiver’s blood.’

say we’ll be all right. But you know, it’s turning chilly here, isn’t it? Come on,
let’s go down, and hear the rest of that story in a good, warm burrow. Look,
there’s Fiver over on the bank now. Who’s going to get to him first?’

A few minutes later there was not a rabbit to be seen on the down. The sun

sank below Ladle Hill and the autumn stars began to shine in the darkening east
– Perseus and the Pleiades, Cassiopeia, faint Pisces and the great square of
Pegasus. The wind freshened, and soon myriads of dry beech leaves were filling
the ditches and hollows and blowing in gusts across the dark miles of open grass.
Underground, the story continued.

Epilogue

Shakespeare All’s Well That Ends Well

Lewis Carroll Through the Looking-Glass

The warren prospered and so, in the fullness of time, did the new warren on

the Belt, half Watership and half Efrafan – the warren that Hazel had first
envisaged on that terrible evening when he set out alone to face General
Woundwort and try to save his friends against all odds. Groundsel was the first
Chief Rabbit; but he had Strawberry and Buckthorn to give him advice and he
had learned better than to mark anyone or to order more than a very occasional
Wide Patrol. Campion readily agreed to send some rabbits from Efrafa and the
first party was led by none other than Captain Avens, who acted sensibly and
made a very good job of it.

General Woundwort was never seen again. But it was certainly true, as

Groundsel said, that no one ever found his body, so it may perhaps be that after
all, that extraordinary rabbit really did wander away to live his fierce life
somewhere else and to defy the elil as resourcefully as ever. Kehaar, who was
once asked if he would look out for him in his flights over the downs, merely

replied,’ Dat dam’ rabbit – I no see ‘im, I no vant I see ‘im.’ Before many months
had passed, no one on Watership knew or particularly cared to know whether he
himself or his mate was descended from one or two Efrafan parents or from none
at all. Hazel was glad that it should be so. And yet there endured the legend that
somewhere, out over the Down, there lived a great and solitary rabbit, a giant
who drove the elil like mice and sometimes went to silflay in the sky. If ever
great danger arose, he would come back to fight for those who honoured his
name. And mother rabbits would tell their kittens that if they did not do as they
were told, the General would get them – the General who was first cousin to the
Black Rabbit himself. Such was Woundwort’s monument: and perhaps it would
not have displeased him.

later, Hazel was dozing and waking in his burrow. He had spent a good deal of
time there lately, for he felt the cold and could not seem to smell or run so well
as in days gone by. He had been dreaming in a confused way – something about
rain and elder bloom – when he woke to realize that there was a rabbit lying
quietly beside him – no doubt some young buck who had come to ask his advice.
The sentry in the run outside should not really have let him in without asking
first. Never mind, thought Hazel. He raised his head and said, ‘Do you want to
talk to me?’

‘Yes, that’s what I’ve come for,’ replied the other. ‘You know me, don’t you?’
‘Yes, of course,’ said Hazel, hoping he would be able to remember his name in

a moment. Then he saw that in the darkness of the burrow, the stranger’s ears
were shining with a faint, silver light. ‘Yes, my lord,’ he said. ‘Yes, I know you.’

that. I’ve come to ask whether you’d care to join my Owsla. We shall be glad to
have you and you’ll enjoy it. If you’re ready, we might go along now.’

sun was shining and in spite of the cold there were a few bucks and does at
silflay, keeping out of the wind as they nibbled the shoots of spring grass. It
seemed to Hazel that he would not be needing his body any more, so he left it
lying on the edge of the ditch, but stopped for a moment to watch his rabbits and
to try to get used to the extraordinary feeling that strength and speed were
flowing inexhaustibly out of him into their sleek young bodies and healthy
senses.

‘You needn’t worry about them,’ said his companion. ‘They’ll be all right –

and thousands like them. If you’ll come along, I’ll show you what I mean.’

He reached the top of the bank in a single, powerful leap. Hazel followed; and

together they slipped away, running easily down through the wood, where the

first primroses were beginning to bloom.

*Rabbits can count up to four. Any number above four is Hrair – ‘a lot’, or ‘a thousand’. Thus they say

U Hrair – ‘The Thousand’ – to mean, collectively, all the enemies (or elil, as they call them) of rabbits –
fox, stoat, weasel, cat, owl, man, etc. There were probably more than five rabbits in the litter when Fiver
was born, but his name, Hrairoo, means ‘Little thousand’, i.e. the little one of a lot or, as they say of pigs,
‘the runt’.

*Nearly all warrens have an Owsla, or group of strong or clever rabbits – second-year or older –

surrounding the Chief Rabbit and his doe and exercising authority. Owslas vary. In one warren, the Owsla
may be the band of a war-lord: in another, it may consist largely of clever patrollers or garden-raiders.
Sometimes a good story-teller may find a place; or a seer, or intuitive rabbit In the Sandleford warren at this
time, the Owsla was rather military in character (though, as will be seen later, not so military as some).

*The stresses are the same as in the phrase ‘Never say die’.

*Stinking – the word for the smell of a fox.

*Tractor – or any motor.

*‘Hoi, Hoi, the stinking Thousand, We meet them even when we stop to pass our droppings.’

*‘Song of the Blackbird.’

*Go above ground to feed.

*Bigwig’s word was hlessil, which I have rendered in various places in the story as wanderers,

scratchers, vagabonds. A hlessi is a rabbit living in the open, without a hole. Solitary bucks and unmated
rabbits who are wandering do this for quite long periods, especially in summer. Bucks do not usually dig
much in any case, although they will scratch shallow shelters or make use of existing holes where these are
available. Real digging is done for the most part by does preparing for litters.

*Zorn! means ‘finished’ or ‘destroyed’, in the sense of some terrible catastrophe.

*The first syllable is stressed and not the second, as in the word ‘Majesty’.

*Hyzenthlay: ‘Shine-Dew-Fur’ – Fur shining like dew.

*Bob-stones is a traditional game of rabbits. It is played with small stones, fragments of stick or the like.

Fundamentally it is a very simple kind of gambling, on the lines of ‘Odds or Evens’. A ‘cast’ of stones on
the ground is covered by the player’s front paw. The opponent must then hazard some sort of surmise about
its nature, e.g. one or two, light or dark, rough or smooth.

*Thethuthinnang: Movement-of-leaves. The first and last syllables are stressed, as in the phrase ‘Once in

a way’.

*Marli – a doe. Tharn – stupefied, distraught. In this particular context, the nearest translation might be

‘the maiden all forlorn’.

