Pearson Education Limited 
Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, 
Essex CM20 2JE, England 
and Associated Companies throughout the world. 

ISBN-13: 978-0-582-77962-4 
ISBN-10: 0-582-77962-6 

First published in Great Britain by Victor Gollancz 1998 
This edition first published by Penguin Books 2003 

7 9 10 8 

Original copyright © Nick Hornby 1998 
Text copyright © Penguin Books 2003 

Typeset by Ferdinand Pageworks, Surrey 
Set in ll/14pt Bembo 
Printed in China 
SWTC/07 

All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the 
prior written permission of the Publishers. 

Published by Pearson Education Limited in association with 
Penguin Books Ltd, both companies being subsidiaries of Pearson Plc 

For a complete list of titles available in the Penguin Readers series, please write to your local 
Pearson Education office or to: Penguin Readers Marketing Department, 
Pearson Education, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex CM20 2JE. 

Contents 

Introduction 

Chapter 1 

Chapter 2 

Chapter 3 

Chapter 4 

Chapter 5 

Chapter 6 

Chapter 7 

Chapter 8 

Chapter 9 

Chapter 10 

Chapter 11 

Activities 

A Man and a Boy 

SPAT 

The Dead Duck Day 

Marcus's Plan 

New Trainers 

Ellie 

Christmas at Fiona's 

Falling in Love 

Depressions 

A Trip to Cambridge 

Growing Up 

page 

iv 

Introduction 

They were all staring so hard at the scene of the crime that they didn't 
notice the park-keeper standing next to them. Marcus felt very frightened. 
He would be in big trouble now. 
'One of your ducks has died,' said Will. He made it sound like the 
saddest thing he'd ever seen. Marcus looked up at him. Maybe Will 
wasn 't such a bad guy. 

About a Boy is the story of the growing relationship between 
Marcus, a twelve-year-old boy, and Will, a 36-year-old man. Marcus 
is having problems at home and at school. Will wants a life without 
responsibilities; he isn't interested in children, marriage or work. 
But Will is interested in attractive single mothers, and he invents a 
two-year-old son so that he can join a single parents' group. When 
he meets Marcus and his mother, his life begins to change. 
About a Boy is very funny and enjoyable, but it also has a much 
more serious side. 

The writer, Nick Hornby, was born in 1957 and grew up in 
north London. He studied English at Cambridge University, then 
worked for the Korean company Samsung. Later, he worked as a 
teacher and journalist before starting to write fiction. 
Nick Hornby has written four books: Fever Pitch (1992); High 
Fidelity (1995); About a Boy (1998) and How to be Good (2001). 
The stories all take place in north London, and are mainly about 
relationships. The first three books have been made into 
successful films. In About a Boy, the popular British actor Hugh 
Grant plays the character of Will. The end of the story was 
changed for the film. Which ending do you prefer? 

IV 

Chapter 1 
A Man and a Boy 

Will Freeman was thirty-six years old and he had never had a job 
in his life. Sometimes he thought about working. He looked 
through the job advertisements in newspapers and wrote 
occasional letters to employers, but he was never invited to 
interviews. 
He didn't mind. He was OK as he was. He was a cool guy 
with a cool lifestyle. He read quite a lot; he saw films in the 
afternoons; he went running; he cooked nice meals for himself 
and his friends. When he got bored, he went to Rome or New 
York or Barcelona for a few days. 
Will didn't need to work for money because in 1938 his father 
had written a very successful Christmas song. Many famous 
singers had made recordings of this song, and each time Will's 
father had received royalties. Since his death the royalties had 
come to Will. 
So Will had become rich without having to work at all. He 
was happy with his life. He lived in a nice flat in London and 
drove a fast car. He liked women and had lots of girlfriends, but 
he never got too involved with them. He preferred to look at 
other people's lives from the outside, like watching TV. If a 
relationship with a woman became complicated, he ended it. He 
wanted to keep his life simple. 
In the evenings Will usually went out with friends. These 
were guys who worked in music shops or belonged to the same 
sports clubs as Will, or who were part of the same pub-quiz 
team. They weren't close friends - but they were good enough 
for a drink or a meal. 
The evenings were fine, but Will had a lot of free time during 
the day because all his friends were at work. So he filled the time 

bath, tidying his flat, going to the shops, watching Countdown. 
Countdown was an afternoon TV quiz show and it was his favourite 
programme. Sometimes he wondered how his friends had time to 
work. How could a person work and have a bath on the same day? 
Will didn't like children. He wasn't interested in them, and he 
didn't want any responsibility for them. But his friends, John and 
Christine, had two. The second was a baby girl, born just the 
week before, and Will had been invited to see her. 
When he arrived at John and Christine's flat, there were 
children's toys everywhere. Pieces of brightly coloured plastic 
were spread all over the floor, videos lay out of their cases near 
the TV, a white cloth over the sofa was covered with dirty brown 
marks ... How could people live like this? 
Christine came in holding the new baby while John was in 
the kitchen making tea. 'This is Imogen,' she said. 
'Oh,' said Will. 'Right.' He paused. What did people usually 
say about babies? 'She's ...' he began, but stopped again. It was no 
good. He decided to ask Christine about herself instead. 'How 
are you, Chris?' he asked. 
'Well, you know. I'm rather tired.' 
Why? A lot of parties?' 
'No. I've just had a baby.' 
'Oh. Right.' 
John came into the room, carrying three cups of tea. 'Barney's 
gone to his grandmother's today,' he said, for no reason that Will 
could understand. 
'How's Barney?' Barney was two, and interesting only to his 
parents, but Will knew he should ask John something. 
'He's fine, thanks,' said John. 'He's still getting used to Imogen, 
but he's lovely' 
Will had met Barney before and knew that he wasn't lovely, 
but he decided not to say anything. 

'I'm fine, thanks.' 
'Don't you want your own family?' 
I can't think of anything worse, thought Will. 'Not yet,' he 
said. 
We're worried about you,' said Christine. 
'I'm OK as I am, thanks,' said Will. 
'Maybe,' said Christine, and smiled. 
Will was beginning to feel very uncomfortable. Why did they 
want him to have children? Children would make him very 
unhappy. If John and Christine wanted children, and to be 
unhappy, that was fine. (Will was sure that John and Christine 
were very unhappy, even if they didn't realize it.) But why should 
they want him to be unhappy too? 
Will could see only one reason for having children. When you 
were old and poor, then they could look after you. But Will had 
plenty of money, so he didn't need toys on the floor or dirty 
sofas. 
John and Christine used to be OK, he thought. Will and a 
girlfriend had gone out to nightclubs with them once or twice a 
week, and they had all had a lot of fun. But since John and 
Christine had had children, everything had changed. Will didn't 
want to meet Imogen, or hear how Barney was. He didn't want 
to hear about Christine's tiredness. He decided not to visit them 
again. 
'We were wondering,' said John, 'whether you'd like to be 
Imogen's godfather?' The two of them looked at Will, smiling 
and waiting for his reply. 
Will laughed nervously. 'Godfather?' he said. 'You mean ... 
church and things? Birthday presents? If you two are killed in an 
air crash, I'll have to look after her?' 
'Yes.' 
'You're joking, aren't you?' 

you're a very serious and responsible person.' 
'Oh, no,' said Will quickly. 'No, I'm not. I'm really a very 
shallow kind of person. Thank you very much for asking me, but 
I can't think of anything worse.' 
He didn't stay much longer. 

• 

Not far away, in the Holloway area of London, a twelve-year-old 
boy called Marcus was lying in bed, unable to sleep. He was 
worrying about his mum and his new school. 
Marcus's mum was called Fiona, and she and Marcus had only 
been in London for a few weeks. They had moved there on the 
first day of the summer holidays because Fiona had got a new 
job. Before moving to London, they had lived in Cambridge, 
where Marcus's father, Clive, still lived. Fiona and Clive had 
separated four years ago. 
Marcus thought London was quite boring. He and Fiona 
hadn't done much in the holidays. They'd been to see Home 
Alone 2, which wasn't as good as Home Alone 1. They'd been to 
have a look at his new school, which was big and horrible. And 
they'd had lots of talks about London and the changes in their 
lives. But really they were sitting around waiting for their 
London lives to begin. 
Marcus had had two kinds of life. The first, which had ended 
when he was eight, was the normal, boring kind, with school and 
holidays and homework and weekend visits to grandparents. The 
second kind was more confused because there were more people 
and places in it: his mother's boyfriends and his dad's girlfriends; 
flats and houses; Cambridge and London. It was surprising how 
many things had changed when Fiona and Clive's relationship 
ended. 

But Marcus didn't mind. Sometimes, he thought, he even 

More happened, and that was a good thing. 
But now Marcus was very worried about his mum. She had 
started crying a lot in London - much more than in Cambridge. 
He didn't know why she cried. He wondered if it was about 
boyfriends. Marcus didn't mind if his mum had a boyfriend. She 
was pretty, he thought, and nice, and funny sometimes. He 
wanted his mum to meet someone who would make her happy. 
He couldn't help his mum with her problems, and she 
couldn't help him with his other big problem - school. His first 
day at his new London school had been a disaster. 
Marcus knew that he was different from most other kids of his 
age. He wasn't right for schools. Not big secondary schools like 
the one in London. His school in Cambridge hadn't been so bad. 
The children there were younger, and there were lots of weird 
kids there, so Marcus hadn't felt uncomfortable. 
It was OK not to be right for some things, he thought. He 
knew that he wasn't right for parties because he was very shy. 
That wasn't a problem because he didn't have to go to parties. 
But he had to go to school. 
Marcus couldn't talk to his mum about his problems at school, 
because she couldn't help. She couldn't move him to another 
school. Even if she did move him, it wouldn't make any 
difference. He'd still be himself, and that, it seemed to Marcus, 
was his real problem. The other kids laughed at him because he 
was weird. They laughed because he had the wrong trousers, the 
wrong shoes and the wrong haircut. 
Marcus knew that he was weird partly because his mum was 
weird. She was always telling him that clothes and hair weren't 
important. She didn't want him to watch 'rubbish' TV or listen to 
'rubbish' music or play 'rubbish' computer games. All the other 
kids spent their time doing these things, but Marcus had to argue 
with his mother for hours and he usually lost. She could explain 

Bob Marley and Joni Mitchell. And why it was more important 
to read books than to play on the Gameboy that his dad had 
given him. 

He was quite happy at home, listening to Joni Mitchell or 
reading books, but it didn't do him any good at school. It made 
him different, and because he was different the other kids made 
him feel uncomfortable. 
It wasn't all his mum's fault. Sometimes Marcus just did weird 
things. Like the singing. He always sang songs to himself inside 
his head but sometimes, when he was nervous, the song just 
came out of his mouth. It had happened in his English lesson on 
the first day of his new school. The teacher was reading and all 
the other students in the room were quiet. Suddenly, for no 
reason at all, Marcus had started to sing, and all the other kids had 
laughed at him. 

Chapter 2 
SPAT 

Will first saw Angie in a music shop off the Holloway Road. She 
had lots of thick blonde hair, big blue eyes and a lovely sexy 
voice. She reminded him of Julie Christie, a beautiful film star. 
Two days later, he saw her again in a cafe and started a 
conversation. By the time they had finished their coffee, he had 
her phone number. 

Will was rather surprised that Angie wanted to go out with 
him. He had never been out with a woman who looked like Julie 
Christie before. Women like her didn't go out with men like 
Will. They went out with other film stars, or lords, or racing 
drivers. 

He learnt the reason over dinner on their first evening out, 
when Angie told him that she was a single mother with two 

and a lot of men didn't like other people's children. 
Will wanted to push the table over and run out of the 
restaurant, but Angie was a very beautiful woman. 
'Really, it's no problem. I've never been out with a mum 
before, and I've always wanted to. I think I'd be good at it.' 
'Good at what?' 
Right. Good at what? What was he good at? That was the big 
question which he had never been able to answer. Maybe he 
would be good at children, although he hated them. Maybe he 
should give John and Christine and baby Imogen another 
chance. Maybe he was going to become Uncle Will! 
'I don't know. Doing things that kids like.' 
For the next few weeks, he was Will the Good Guy, and he 
loved it. It wasn't even very difficult. He played with Angie's 
children, and took them to McDonald's and to parks and for a 
boat trip on the river. It was a very good arrangement, he 
thought. He had never wanted to be a father, but this was 
different. He could walk hand-in-hand with a beautiful woman 
while the children played in front of them. Everybody could see 
him doing it. And at the end of the afternoon, he could go home 
again if he wanted to. 
Angie made Will feel very good about himself. Suddenly he 
became better-looking, a better lover, a better person. And she 
especially loved him because he wasn't her ex-husband, who had 
problems with drink and work, and who was sleeping with his 
secretary. 
Will went out with Angie for six weeks, but there were some 
things that he was beginning to find difficult. Once he booked 
tickets for the opening night of a new film, but Angie was half an 
hour late because she couldn't get a babysitter. And when they 
spent the night together, it always had to be at her place and she 
didn't have a video machine or many CDs. 

But just when Will was thinking about ending the relationship, 
Angie decided to finish it. 
'Will, I'm so sorry, but I'm not sure this is working. It's not 
your fault. You've been great. It's me. Well, my situation anyway. 
I've met you at the wrong time of my life and I'm not ready for a 
serious new relationship.' 
It really was very strange, Will thought. Angie had believed he 
was serious about her, and he hadn't been serious at all. Now she 
was starting to cry. He had never before watched a woman cry 
without feeling responsible, and he was rather enjoying the 
experience. 

'You don't have to be sorry for anything. Really.' 
Of all the evenings he had spent with Angie, he loved the last 
one the best. The relationship had been perfect, and had finished 
in a perfect way too. Usually when his relationships with women 
ended, he felt guilty, but this time he had nothing to feel guilty 
about. 

Will knew then that there would be other women like Angie 
- bright, attractive single mothers, thousands of them all over 
London - and he knew he had a lot to offer them. He could 
sleep with them, make them feel better about themselves, be a 
parent for a limited time, and walk away without feeling guilty. 
What more could a man want? 

• 

One Monday morning Marcus's mum started crying before 
breakfast, and it frightened him. Morning crying was something 
new, and it was a bad, bad sign. It meant that it could now start at 
any time of the day without warning. 
When he went into the kitchen, she was sitting at the kitchen 
table in her night clothes, a half-eaten piece of toast on her plate, 
her eyes red from crying. Marcus never said anything when she 
cried. He didn't know what to say. He didn't understand why she 

did it, and because he didn't understand, he couldn't help. So he 
stood there staring at her with his mouth open. 
'Do you want some tea?' she asked him in a sad little voice. 
'Yes. Please.' He made some toast, drank his tea and picked up 
his bag. Then he gave his mother a kiss and went out. Neither of 
them said a word. What else could he do? 
On his way to school, he tried to work out what was wrong 
with her. What could be wrong that he didn't know about? He 
didn't think it was money problems. She had a job - she was a 
music teacher - so they weren't poor, although they weren't rich 
either. But they had enough money for the flat, and for food, and 
for holidays once a year, and even for occasional computer games. 
What else made you cry? Death? But he'd know if anybody 
important had died. He'd seen all his relatives - his grandparents, 
his uncle Tom and uncle Tom's family - at a party the week 
before, and they'd all been fine. Was it about men? He knew his 
mum wanted a boyfriend because she joked about it sometimes. 
But if she joked about it, why should she suddenly start crying 
about it? 
So what else was there? He tried to remember the other 
things that people cried about on TV programmes. Prison? An 
unwanted baby? 
But Marcus had forgotten about his mum's problems by the 
time he was inside the school gates. He had his own problems to 
think about. A group of kids usually bullied him on his way 
across the playground. Today, though, they were at the other end, 
so he reached his classroom without difficulty. 
His friends Nicky and Mark were already there, playing a 
game on Mark's Gameboy. He went over to them. 
'All right?' 
Nicky said hello, but Mark was too busy to notice him. 
Marcus tried to watch the game, but he couldn't see the 
Gameboy very well, so he sat on a desk, waiting for them to 

finish. But when they finished, they started another game; they 
didn't offer him a game or put the Gameboy away. Marcus felt he 
was being shut out, and he didn't know what he'd done wrong. 
'Are you going to the computer room at lunchtime?' he asked. 
That was how he knew Nicky and Mark - through the 
computer club. It was a stupid question because they always went 
to the computer room. It was the only place where they would 
be safe from the other kids. 
'Don't know,' replied Nicky after a time. 'What do you think, 
Mark?' 
'Don't know,' said Mark. 'Probably.' 
They weren't real friends - not like the friends he'd had in 
Cambridge — but he could talk to them because they were all 
different from the other kids in the class. All three of them wore 
glasses, none of them was interested in clothes and they all liked 
computer games. 
Two older boys came and stood in the doorway. 'Give us a 
song,' they said to Marcus. 
Marcus didn't know these boys, but they'd probably heard 
about him singing in the English class. Mark and Nicky started to 
move away, leaving him alone. Then the older boys started 
insulting Mark and Nicky, and making jokes about girls and sex. 
Mark turned the Gameboy off, and all three of them stood 
waiting for the boys to get bored and go away. Marcus tried to 
play a game inside his head, listing different kinds of chocolate. 
At last the two older boys left. The three of them didn't say 
anything for a time. Then Nicky looked at Mark, and Mark 
looked at Nicky, and finally Mark spoke. 
'Marcus, we don't want you with us.' 
'Oh,' said Marcus. 'Why not?' 
'Because of them.' 
'They're not my problem.' 
'Yes, they are,' said Mark. We never got into trouble with anyone 

before we knew you, and now we have problems every day.' 
Marcus understood. They would be better without him. But 
he had nowhere else to go. 

• 

Will was looking for ways to meet single mums like Angie, but 
he didn't know where to find them. Where did single mums go 
and how could he get their phone numbers? Then he had a 
wonderful idea. He would pretend to be a single father and join a 
single parents' group. So he invented a two-year-old son called 

Ned. 
'I'm a single father. I have a two-year-old son. I'm a single 
father. I have a two-year-old son,' he told himself. 
But he couldn't actually believe it. He didn't feel like a parent. 
He was too young, too old, too stupid, too intelligent, too cool, 
too impatient, too selfish, too careless, too careful. When he 
looked in the mirror, he couldn't see a dad, especially a single 
dad. 
He telephoned a single parents' group called SPAT (Single 
Parents - Alone Together) and spoke to a woman called Frances. 
SPAT met on the first Thursday of each month in a local adult 
learning centre, and Frances invited Will to the next meeting. He 
was very worried that he'd get something wrong, like the name 
of his imaginary son - he couldn't stop thinking of him as Ted, 
not Ned. 
The centre was a depressing place with lots of classrooms. Will 
listened for the sounds of a party but he couldn't hear anything. 
Finally he noticed a small piece of paper on a classroom door 
with the word SPAT! on it. 
There was only one woman in the room. She was taking 
bottles - of white wine, beer and water - out of a box and 
Putting them on a table in the centre of the room. All the other 
tables and chairs had been pushed to the back of the room. It was 

the most depressing place for a party that Will had ever seen. 
'Have I come to the right place?' he asked the woman. She 
had a sharp nose and a bright red face. 
'SPAT? Come in. Are you Will? I'm Frances.' 
Will smiled and shook her hand. 
'I'm sorry there's nobody else here yet,' she said. 'A lot of 
people are late because of problems with babysitters.' 
'Of course,' said Will. He was wrong to come on time, he 
thought. He should pretend to have babysitting problems too. But 
then the other members of SPAT began to arrive, all women in 
their thirties, and Frances introduced him to each of them. The 
most attractive was a tall, blonde, nervous-looking woman. After 
she came into the room, he stopped looking at anybody else. 
'Hello,' he said. 'I'm Will. I'm new and I don't know anybody.' 
'Hello, Will. I'm Suzie. I'm old and I know everybody.' 
He laughed. She laughed. He spent most of the evening with 
her. She talked a lot and he listened. He was very happy to listen 
because he didn't want to talk about Ned. Suzie had been 
married to a man called Dan, who had left her the day before she 
gave birth to her daughter Megan. 
Suzie told him about the other women in the room. It was the 
same story - their husbands had all left them with children to 
look after. Will began to feel very depressed about being a man. 
How could men behave so badly? 
'I'm sorry,' said Suzie at last. 'I haven't asked you anything 
about yourself. Did your wife leave you?' 
'Well ... er ... yes.' 
'And does she see Ned?' 
'Sometimes. She's not very interested in him.' He was 
beginning to feel better; he could show her that women could 
behave badly too. He was acting, yes, but he was doing it well, 
just like Robert De Niro. 
'How does Ned feel about that?' asked Suzie. 

'Oh ... he's a good little boy,' said Will. 'Very brave.' 
To his surprise, he was beginning to feel quite upset. Suzie put 
a hand on his arm. 
'She likes me,' Will thought. 'Great!' 

• 

Some parts of Marcus's life continued normally. He went to his 
dad's in Cambridge for the weekend and watched a lot of TV. 
On the Sunday he and his dad, and Lindsey, his dad's girlfriend, 
went to Lindsey's mum's house. Lindsey's mum lived by the sea, 
and they went for a long walk on the beach. 
Marcus liked Lindsey's mum. He liked Lindsey too. Even his 
mum liked Lindsey. Marcus felt better after the weekend in 
Cambridge. He had a good time with everybody and nobody 
seemed to think he was weird. 
But the day after he got back, he came home from school and 
found his mum lying on the floor with a coat over her. 
'Didn't you go to work today?' 
'This morning. I was sick this afternoon.' 
'What kind of sick?' asked Marcus. 
She didn't reply, and Marcus felt angry. He was only a kid and 
things couldn't continue like this. He was having an awful time at 
school and an awful time at home, and school and home were 
almost the only places he knew. So someone was going to have 
to help him, and that person had to be his mum. She had to do 
something about it. He was only a kid, and she was his mum, and 
if he felt bad it was her job to stop him feeling bad. 
'What kind of sick?' he asked again in a rough voice. 
She began to cry and Marcus felt frightened. 
'You've got to stop this.' 
'I can't.' 
'You've got to. If you can't look after me, then you'll have to 
find someone who can.' 

His mum turned over on her stomach and looked at him. 
'How can you say I don't look after you?' 
'Because you don't. You make my meals and I could do that. 
The rest of the time, you just cry. That's ... that's no good. That's 
no good to me.' 
She cried even more then. Marcus went upstairs and played a 
computer game, but when he came downstairs again, she had got 
up and was cooking supper. 
'You're going to a picnic on Saturday,' she said suddenly. 
'A picnic? Where?' 
'In Regent's Park.' 
'Who with?' 
'Suzie.' 
'Not that SPAT crowd.' 
'Yes, that SPAT crowd.' 
'I hate them.' When Marcus and his mum had first moved to 
London, they had gone to a SPAT summer party in someone's 
garden. It had been full of horrible little kids, all about ten years 
younger than Marcus. 
'Are you going?' he asked. 
'No. I need a rest. You told me to find someone to look after 
you. So that's what I'm doing. Suzie's better at it than I am.' 
Suzie was Fiona's best friend; they'd known each other since 
their schooldays. She was nice and Marcus liked her a lot. But he 
didn't want to go to a SPAT picnic. 
'I can stay here. I'll keep out of your way. I can sit in my room 
all day, playing games.' 
'I want you to get out. Do something normal. We're not doing 
each other any good.' 
Marcus was shocked. What did she mean, they weren't doing 
each other any good? She wasn't doing him any good, but what 
had he done to her? He couldn't think of anything. He felt like 
crying too. 

Chapter 3 
The Dead Duck Day 

Will wanted to go to the SPAT picnic in Regent's Park because 
Suzie was going. But he knew that Suzie would expect Ned to 
be there too, so he had to invent a reason why Ned couldn't go. 
He telephoned Suzie on the morning of the picnic and told her 
that his ex-wife had taken Ned out. 
'But that's terrible, Will,' said Suzie. 'You can't let her change 

your plans like that.' 

'I know, I know,' he said. 'And she's taken my car too. Can I go 

with you to Regent's Park?' 
'Yes, of course,' replied Suzie. 'I'm bringing a twelve-year-old 
kid too - Marcus, my friend Fiona's son. She's asked me to look 
after him for the day.' 
All the way to the park Suzie talked about Will's ex-wife. She 
was very angry about Paula's behaviour. Had he called her Paula? 
Will 
couldn't 
remember. 
Things 
were 
getting 
rather 
complicated, he thought. How much longer could he continue 
pretending? And how could he ever invite Suzie round to his 
flat? There were no toys there, and he didn't even have two 
bedrooms. 
They walked through the park to the lake. Suzie was pushing 
her daughter, Megan, in a pushchair, and Marcus was walking 
beside them. Will thought Marcus was a weird kid. He had a very 
strange haircut and odd clothes. 
'I don't even know what you do,' said Suzie. 
'Nothing.' He usually invented a job, but he had told enough 
lies. He had to give Suzie something that was real. 
'Oh. Well, what did you do before?' 
'Nothing.' 
'You've never worked?' 
'Well, only for a day or two. My dad wrote a famous song, and 

I live from the royalties.' 

'Michael Jackson makes £60 million an hour,' said the weird 
kid. 'How much do you make?' 
'Marcus!' said Suzie. 'So what's this song, Will?' 
Will told them. He hated telling people because the title 
sounded so silly. 
'Really?' Suzie and Marcus both started singing the same part 
of the song. People always did this, and he hated that too. 
'But haven't you ever wanted to work?' asked Suzie. 
'Oh, yes, sometimes, but I never seem to do anything about it.' 
It was true. Every day for the last eighteen years he had got up in 
the morning thinking about finding a job. But by the evening he 
had lost interest. 

He decided to talk to Marcus. If he made friends with Marcus, 
Suzie would think he was a nice guy. 
'So, Marcus,' he said, 'who's your favourite footballer?' 
'I hate football.' 
'Right,' said Will. 'Well, who's your favourite singer?' 
'Are you getting these questions out of a book?' asked Marcus. 
Suzie laughed, and Will's face turned red. 
'No,' he said. 'I'm just interested.' 
'OK,' said Marcus. 'Well, it's Joni Mitchell.' 
'Really?' said Will in surprise. 'Does everyone in your school 
listen to Joni Mitchell?' 
'Most people.' 

Will was confused. He read a lot of modern music magazines, 
but none of them had said anything about Joni Mitchell's new 
popularity. 

Marcus turned away, so Will began to talk to Suzie. 
'Do you often have to look after him?' he asked. 
'Not often. But Fiona, his mum, isn't feeling very well.' 
'She's going crazy,' said Marcus calmly. 'Cries all the time. 
Doesn't go to work.' 
'She isn't crazy. She just needs a rest.' 

They could see the SPAT crowd of mothers and children 
sitting by the lake in front of them. The mothers were pouring 
juice into cups, and the children were eating sandwiches. 
Will played with the children for most of the afternoon. He 
kept away from the adults sitting on blankets under a tree because 
he didn't want to have to answer difficult questions about Ned. 
He kept away from Marcus too. Marcus was walking round the 
lake, throwing bits of his sandwich at the ducks. 
Later, Suzie came to talk to him. 'You miss him, don't you?' 
'Who?' He meant it; he had no idea what she was talking 
about. But then he remembered about Ned. 'I'll see him later.' 
'What's he like?' asked Suzie. 
'Oh ... Nice. He's a really nice boy.' 
Before Suzie could ask more questions, Marcus ran over to 
them. He seemed very nervous and upset. 
'I think I've killed a duck,' he said. 
Will, Suzie, Marcus and Megan stood on the path by the edge 
of the lake, staring at the duck's dead body in the water. 
'What happened, Marcus?' Will asked. 
'I don't know. I was just throwing a piece of my sandwich at it. 
I didn't mean to kill it.' 
'What's that in the water next to it? Is that the bread you 
threw at it?' 
'Yes,' said Marcus. He didn't like Will much, so he didn't want 
to answer his questions. 
'That's not a sandwich, that's a loaf,' said Will. 'I'm not 
surprised the duck was killed.' 
'Perhaps I didn't kill it,' said Marcus. 'Perhaps it died because it 
was ill.' 
Nobody said anything. 
They were all staring so hard at the scene of the crime that 
they didn't notice the park-keeper standing next to them. Marcus 
felt very frightened. He would be in big trouble now. 

'One of your ducks has died,' said Will. He made it sound like 
the saddest thing he'd ever seen. Marcus looked up at him. Maybe 
Will wasn't such a bad guy. 

'I was told it was your boy's fault,' said the park-keeper. 'It's a 
crime to kill a duck, you know.' 

'Are you suggesting that Marcus killed this duck? Marcus loves 
ducks, don't you, Marcus?' 

'Yes,' said Marcus. 'They're my favourite animal. I mean, my 
favourite bird.' This was rubbish, because he hated all animals, but 
he thought it helped. 

'I was told he was throwing enormous loaves at it.' 
'No,' said Will. 'He was throwing bread at the duck's body. He 
wanted to sink it because the sight of a dead bird was upsetting 
my friend's little girl, Megan.' 
There was a silence. At last the park-keeper spoke. 
'Well, I'll have to go into the water and get it,' he said. 
Marcus felt much better. He wouldn't have to go to prison. 
They were walking back to the rest of the SPAT group when 
suddenly a strange thing happened. Marcus saw - or thought he 
saw - his mum. She was standing on the path in front of them 
and she was smiling. But when he looked again, she wasn't there. 

• 

Usually when Suzie took Marcus home after a day out, she left 
him outside his flat and waited until he got inside. But today she 
parked the car and lifted Megan out in her car seat. She was 
never able to explain why she had done this. Will wasn't invited, 
but he followed them in. 

Marcus put the key in the door of the flat and opened it, and a 
new part of his life began, without any warning at all. 
His mum was half on and half off the sofa. Her face was white, 
and there was a pool of sick on the carpet and an empty pill 
bottle beside her. 

He couldn't speak. He didn't know what to say. He didn't cry 
either — the situation was much too serious for that, so he just 
stood there. But Suzie dropped the car seat and ran over to his 
mum and started screaming at her and shaking her. Marcus was 
confused. Why was Suzie so angry with someone who wasn't 
very well? 
Suzie shouted at Will to call for an ambulance, and told 
Marcus to make some black coffee. His mum was moving now 
and making a terrible noise that Marcus had never heard before 
and never wanted to hear again. 
'Fiona! How could you do this?' Suzie screamed. 'You've got a 
kid! How could you do this?' 
Suddenly Marcus understood that his mum had tried to kill 
herself. He had seen some shocking things, mostly on videos at 
other people's houses, but they hadn't frightened him because 
they weren't real life. This situation with his mum was different 
because it was very real. There wasn't anything shocking in the 
room, and he could see that his mum wasn't dead. But it was the 
most frightening thing he'd ever seen, and he knew he'd never 
forget it. 
When the ambulance arrived and Fiona was taken to hospital, 
the ambulance men didn't want to take Marcus and Megan too. 
So Suzie went to the hospital with Fiona, and Will drove Marcus 
and Megan there in Suzie's car. 
When they arrived at the hospital, Fiona had already been 
taken away. 
'What's happening?' asked Will. He was finding the whole 
experience very interesting — almost enjoyable. 
'I don't know. They're pumping her stomach or something. 
She was talking a little in the ambulance. She was asking about 
you, Marcus.' 
'That's nice of her.' 
Suzie tried to put her arms round him. 'Listen, Marcus,' she 

said. 'This isn't about you. You know that, don't you? I mean, 

you're not the reason she . . . you're not the reason she's here.' 

'How do you know?' He pushed Suzie away and went to get a 

drink from a machine. 

'What can you tell a kid whose mother has just tried to kill 

herself?' Will asked. He really wanted to know. 

'I don't know,' said Suzie worriedly. 'But we'll have to think of 

something.' 

They waited in the hospital for a long time. Megan went to 

sleep and Marcus ate a lot of sweets and chocolate from the 

machine. None of them talked much. At last a woman came over 

to see them — not a nurse or a doctor, but somebody official. 

'Hello. Did you come in with Fiona Brewer?' 

'Yes. I'm her friend Suzie, and this is Will, and this is Fiona's 

son Marcus.' 

'Right. We're keeping Fiona here for the night. Is there 

somewhere Marcus could go?' 

'He can stay with me tonight,' said Suzie. 

She put Megan back into the car seat and they made their way 

out to the car park. 

'I'll see you soon,' said Will. 'I'll call you.' 

'I hope things are OK with Ned and Paula,' Suzie said. 

For a moment Will didn't know who she meant. Ned and 

Paula, Ned and Paula . . . ? Ah, yes — his ex-wife and son. 

'Oh, it'll be fine. Thanks.' He said goodbye and went to find a 

taxi. It had been a very interesting experience, but he wouldn't 

want to repeat it every night. 

Chapter 4 
Marcus's Plan 

The next day Suzie took Marcus home and left him while she 

went to get Fiona from the hospital. He was just tidying the 

kitchen, as Suzie had told him to do, when he saw a note on the 

kitchen table. He picked it up and sat down. 

Dear Marcus, 
A big part of me knows that I'm doing a wrong, stupid, selfish, 
unkind thing. But unfortunately that's not the part that has 

control of me now. 
None of this is about you. I've loved being your mum, always, 
although I've found it difficult sometimes. And I don't know why 
it isn't enough for me, but it isn't. I just feel very tired, and there 
doesn't seem to be anything to look forward to. 
Things will be better for you than they were before. Really. You 
can go to your dad's, or Suzie has always said she'd look after you. 

Love you, 
Mum 

Marcus was still sitting at the kitchen table when his m u m came 

back from the hospital with Suzie and Megan. She could see 

immediately what he'd found. 

'I'm sorry, Marcus. I'd forgotten about the note.' 

'You forgot? You forgot you wrote a letter about killing 

yourself?' 

'Well, I didn't think I'd ever have to remember it, did I?' She 

laughed at that. She actually laughed. That was his mother. W h e n 

she wasn't crying at breakfast, she was laughing about killing 

herself. 

'It was stupid of me to leave Marcus here before I went to get 

you,' said Suzie. 'I wasn't thinking.' 

'Suzie, none of this is your fault. But maybe Marcus and I 

ought to have a little talk alone.' 

'Of course,' said Suzie. She gave Marcus a kiss. 'She's fine,' she 

whispered, loud enough for his m u m to hear. 'Don't worry about 

her.' 

W h e n Suzie had gone, Fiona made tea and sat down at the 

table with Marcus. 
21 

'Are you angry with me?' 
'What do you think?' 
'Because of the letter?' 
'Because of the letter, because of what you did, everything.' 
'I can understand that. I don't feel the same as I did on 
Saturday, if that's any help.' 
'So your problems have all just gone away?' 
'No, but ... at the moment I feel better.' 
'At the moment's no good to me,' said Marcus. 'I can see that 
you're better at the moment. You've just made tea. But what 
happens when I go back to school? I can't be here to watch you 
all the time.' 
'No, I know. But we've got to look after each other.' 
Marcus was no longer interested in what his mum said; the 
important thing was what she did, or what she was going to do. 
She wasn't going to try and kill herself again today. She'd drink 
her tea, and tonight they'd watch TV, and it would feel like the 
beginning of a different, better time. But that time wouldn't last 
for ever. Marcus knew that, for him, things would never be the 
same again. 
Two people in a family weren't enough. He'd always thought 
that two was a good number, and that he'd hate to live in a family 
of three or four or five. But now he could see that if there were 
lots of people in a family, and one of them died, you wouldn't be 
left on your own. But how could he make his family grow? He 
was going to have to find a way. 

• 

Will kept thinking about Marcus and Fiona. There wasn't much 
else happening in his life, so he had a lot of time to think about 
them. He had a strange thought: perhaps he should try and help 
them. He telephoned Suzie. 
'I was wondering how Marcus and Fiona are,' he said. 

'Not too bad, I think. She hasn't gone back to work, but 

Marcus went to school today.' 

'Listen, do you think there's any way I could help? Perhaps I 

could take Marcus out?' 
'Would you like to?' said Suzie. 'I could ask Fiona.' 
'Thanks,' said Will. 'And it would be nice to see you and 

Megan again soon.' 
'Yes,' said Suzie. 'I'm looking forward to meeting Ned.' 
Will bought Time Out, a magazine with information about 
events in London. He was looking for something that a twelve-
year-old boy might like to do on a Saturday. He tried to 
remember what he liked doing at Marcus's age, but he couldn't. 
Then the telephone rang. 
'Hi, Will. It's Marcus.' 
'Hi, Marcus.' 
'Suzie said you want to take me out for the day on Saturday. 
I'll come if my mum can come too.' 
'What?' 
'I'll come if my mum can come too. And she hasn't got any 
money, so we'll either have to go somewhere cheap, or you'll 
have to pay for us.' 
'Well ... wouldn't it be better with just you and me? Your 
mum could stay at home and have a rest.' 
Suddenly Will remembered last Saturday. They had left Fiona 
at home to rest, and she had tried to kill herself. 
'I'm sorry, Marcus,' he said quickly. 'I wasn't thinking. Of 
course your mum can come too. That would be great.' 
'We haven't got a car. You'll have to bring yours. And you can 
bring your little boy if you like.' 
He laughed. 'Thanks.' 
'That's OK,' said Marcus generously. 
'He'll be with his mum again on Saturday.' 
'Fine. Come round at about half past twelve. You remember 

where we live. Flat 2, 31 Craysfield Road, Islington, London 
N1 2SR' 
'Right,' said Will. 'See you then.' 

• 

Marcus wasn't really worried about leaving his mum. She was still 
in a strange, calm mood. But he wanted her to come so that she 
and Will could meet, and after that, he thought, it should be easy. 
His mum was pretty, and Will seemed quite rich. They could go 
and live with him and his kid, and then there would be four of 
them, and four was twice as good as two. Then if one of them 
died, it wouldn't matter so much. 

Marcus wasn't even sure whether he liked Will or not, but it 
didn't matter. He could see that Will wasn't bad, or drunk, or 
violent, so he would be OK. And Marcus knew a little about 
Will. One day on his way home from school, he had seen Will 
out shopping and had followed him home like a private 
detective. 

He hadn't really found out much about him except where he 
lived. But Will seemed to live alone - no girlfriend, no wife, no 
little boy. Perhaps the little boy was with his girlfriend at home? 
But if Will had a girlfriend, why was he trying to get friendly 
with Suzie? 

When Will arrived on Saturday, his mum was looking good, 
Marcus thought. She was wearing her best trousers and a hairy 
jumper, and she was wearing make-up for the first time since the 
hospital, and a pair of brightly coloured earrings from 
Zimbabwe. 
'Thanks for everything you did last weekend,' she said. 'I'm 
very grateful.' 
'It was a pleasure. I hope you're feeling ... I hope you've ...' 
'My stomach's fine. I suppose I must still be a bit crazy though. 
That sort of thing doesn't get better quickly, does it?' 

Will looked shocked, but she just laughed. Marcus hated it 
when she made jokes to people who didn't know her well. 
Will took them to a restaurant called Twenty-Eight. After 
they had ordered their food, Marcus hoped that Will and his 
mum would start talking. But they seemed to be finding it 
difficult to start a conversation, so he had to help them. 

'Don't just sit there,' he said. 'Talk to each other.' 
Both Will and Fiona looked at him. 
'What do you want us to talk about?' asked Will. 
'Anything. Politics. Films. Murders. I don't care.' 
'I'm not sure that's how conversation happens,' said his 
mother. 
Marcus started asking questions to make them talk, but he 
wasn't very successful. 
'Leave us alone, Marcus. You're making it more difficult, not 
easier,' said Fiona. 'We'll start talking soon.' 
Then Will asked questions about Marcus's dad, and soon they 
were talking about relationships. They were talking so much that 
they didn't notice when the food arrived. Marcus ate his lunch 
happily. Would they move into Will's place, he wondered, or buy 
somewhere new? 

• 

Will knew that Fiona wasn't his type of woman. She didn't look 
the way he wanted women to look. He didn't think looks were 
important to her at all. Why didn't she get a good haircut and 
wear nice clothes? And she was just too strange. He could see 
now why Marcus was so weird. She believed in things that Will 
didn't care about, like being a vegetarian. 

Will still wanted to help them. One evening he was invited to 
supper at their flat. He didn't like the food very much - something 
vegetarian with peas and rice and tinned tomatoes — but he quite 
enjoyed the conversation. Fiona told him about her job as a music 

teacher and they talked about his dad's song. But later Fiona sat 
down at the piano and started to sing. 
She wasn't a bad singer, but Will was very embarrassed. She 
sang old pop songs from the sixties, and she sang them with deep 
feeling; she even closed her eyes. Then Marcus began to sing too, 
in the same way, and they made Will sing with them. It was awful. 
Will could see that he'd made a big mistake about Marcus and 
Fiona. He couldn't do anything to help people like them. They 
were too weird and they felt too deeply about things. Will didn't 
feel deeply about anything. He couldn't imagine wanting to kill 
himself. He just wanted to live a long life without any problems. 
Fiona called Will and left a message on his answer machine, 
but he didn't call her back. He was trying to return to his old life. 
He went shopping for CDs and clothes, he played a bit of tennis, 
he went to the pub and to see films with friends. Then, one 
afternoon, the doorbell rang. It was Marcus. 
'I've come to see you,' he said. 
'Oh. Right. Come in.' 
Marcus marched into the sitting room, sat down on the sofa 
and looked round. 'You haven't got a kid, have you?' 
'Well ...' began Will. 
Marcus got up and walked around the flat. 'Where's your 
toilet?' he asked. 
'It's just down the hall.' 
When Marcus was gone, Will tried to think what he could say 
about Ned, but he couldn't think of anything. 
'You've only got one bedroom,' said Marcus when he got 
back. 'You've got no children's toys in the bathroom, there are no 
toys in here ... You haven't even got any photos of him.' 
'Is that your business?' 
'No. But you've been lying to me, and my mum, and my 
mum's friend.' 
'Who told you where I live?' 

'I followed you here once.' 
'Why don't you just go home, Marcus?' 
'All right. But I'm going to tell my mum.' 
Will couldn't think of any explanation to give Marcus except 
the truth — that he had invented a child so he could join a single 
parents' group and meet women. And the truth sounded much 
worse than he had ever intended. 
'Listen, Will,' said Marcus. 'I won't say anything to my mum if 
you go out with her.' 
'Why do you want your mum to go out with someone like me?' 
'I don't think you're too bad. I mean, you told lies, but you 
seem OK. She's sad, and I think she'd like a boyfriend.' 
'Marcus, I can't go out with someone just because you want 
me to. I have to like the person too.' 
'What's wrong with her?' 
'Nothing's wrong with her, but ...' 
'You want to go out with Suzie, don't you?' 
'I don't want to talk about this with you.' 
'I thought so.' 
'I didn't say anything. I just said ... Listen, I really don't want 
to talk about this with you. Go home.' 
'OK,' said Marcus. 'But I'll be back.' 
When Will had joined SPAT, he'd imagined entering the 
world of single mothers and their sweet children. He hadn't 
imagined Marcus, and he hadn't expected anyone to break into 
his world. He was one of life's visitors; he didn't want to be 
visited. 

Chapter 5 
N e w Trainers 

Marcus knew that he couldn't make Will go out with his mum if 
Will didn't want to. But he knew Will's secret now, so perhaps he 

could make him do something else. He started going round to 
Will's flat after school. 
The first time, Will wasn't very pleased to see him. He stood 
in the doorway and didn't invite Marcus in. 
'What?' 
'I just thought I'd come round. What are you doing?' 
'Watching Countdown! 
Marcus knew about Countdown — the most boring programme 
in the history of television. But he wanted to get inside Will's 
flat. 
'I could watch it with you if you want. I really like it.' 
Will looked at him for a time. 'All right. Come in.' 
There were lots of interesting things in Will's flat — hundreds 
of CDs, records and cassettes. There were pictures from films on 
the wall, and black and white photos of people with musical 
instruments. 
'Who are these people? And why are they on your wall?' 
'They're musicians. And they're on my wall because I like 
their music and they're cool.' 
'Why are they cool?' 
'I don't know. Because they took drugs and died, probably.' 
Marcus thought he wouldn't want pictures on his wall of 
people who took drugs and died. He'd want to forget all about 
that kind of thing, not look at it every day of his life. 
Will made tea in the kitchen. Then they went back into the 
living room and sat down on the sofa. 
'Do you like school?' Will asked. 
'No. I hate it.' 
'Why? Do the other kids bully you?' 
Marcus looked at him. How did he know that? 
'Not really. Just a couple of kids.' 
'What do they do to you?' 
'Nothing really. Just, you know, say things about my hair and 

glasses. And my singing. Sometimes ... I sing without noticing.' 
Will laughed. 'It's not funny.' 
'I'm sorry. But you could do something about your hair. You 
could have it cut in the way you want it.' 
'This is how I want it.' 
'Why do you want your hair like that?' 
'Because that's how it grows, and I hate going to the 
hairdresser.' 
'I can see that. How often do you go?' 
'Never. My mum cuts it.' 
'Your mum? How old are you? Twelve? You're old enough to 
get your hair cut yourself. You could get married in four years' 
time. Will you let your mum cut your hair then?' 
Marcus didn't think he'd be married in four years' time, but he 
understood what Will was telling him and knew that Will was 
right. But there was another way of looking at the situation. If his 
mum was going to cut his hair in four years' time, then she would 
still be alive. 
Marcus visited Will a lot that autumn, and by about the third 
or fourth visit he felt that Will was getting used to him. They 
didn't talk about much at first, but one day Will said, 'How's the 
situation at home?' for no reason that Marcus could understand. 
'You mean my mum?' 
'Yes.' 
'She's all right, thanks.' 
Marcus had never talked about it, and he'd never said how he 
felt. But what he felt, all the time, every day, was a horrible fear. 
This was the main reason why he came round to Will's after 
school. Every time he climbed the stairs at home he remembered 
the Dead Duck Day. When he saw his mum watching the news 
or eating or preparing work on the dining table, he wanted to 
cry, or be sick or something. But he couldn't talk about it. 
'Are you still worried about her?' 

'A bit, when I think about it.' 
'How often do you think about it?' 
'I don't know.' He thought about it all the time, all the time, all 
the time. Could he say that to Will? He didn't know. He couldn't 
say it to his mum, or to his dad, or to Suzie. They would all be 
too worried about him. He just wanted a promise from someone, 
anyone, that it wouldn't happen again, ever, and no one could do 
that. 

Will was wishing that he hadn't asked Marcus about Fiona, 
because it was clear that the boy was very upset. Will wasn't used 
to coping with people with real-life problems. He liked watching 
people's problems on TV, but he'd never had anyone with 
problems on his sofa before. 

Sometimes they managed conversations about other things, 
like Marcus's dad. 
'Do you see your dad often?' 

'Quite often. Some weekends. He's got a girlfriend called 
Lindsey. She's nice.' 

'Would you like to see him more than you do?' 
'No.' 

'Well, that's all right then.' 

The next week, while Will was watching Countdown as usual, 
he was interrupted by a long, urgent ring on the doorbell. He got 
up off the sofa and opened the door. Marcus was standing on the 
doorstep, and two ugly-looking boys were throwing hard sweets 
at him. Some sweets hit Will. 

'What do you think you're doing?' He couldn't remember the 
last time he had been so angry. 

The boys ran away and Will went back into the flat. Marcus 
was sitting on the sofa watching Countdown. 
'Who were they?' 

'I don't know their names,' said Marcus, his eyes on the TV 
'They're in the class two years above me at school.' 

'Marcus, does this happen often?' 
'Well, they've never thrown sweets at me before.' 
'I'm not talking about the sweets. I'm talking about older kids 
bullying you.' 
'Oh, yes. Not those two 
'No, OK, not those two. But others like them.' 
'Yes. Lots.' 
'Right. That's what I've been trying to find out. Your problem 
is, Marcus, that you look different from other kids. That's why 
they notice you. You need to look more like them. You need the 
same clothes and haircut and glasses as everyone else. You can be 
as weird as you want on the inside. Just do something about the 
outside.' 
Will took Marcus shopping in Holloway Road and bought 
him a pair of expensive Adidas trainers. Marcus thought they 
were cool, and Will was pleased. He couldn't remember feeling as 
good as this before. He had made an unhappy boy happy, and 
there hadn't been any advantage in it for him at all. He didn't 
even want to sleep with the boy's mother. 
But the next day Marcus's new trainers were stolen. He came 
home from school wearing only a pair of black socks. 
'Where are your shoes?' Fiona screamed. She hadn't noticed 
that he had been wearing new trainers. 
'Stolen.' 
'Stolen? Why would anyone want to steal your shoes?' 
'Because ...' He was going to have to tell her the truth, 
although he knew the truth would lead to a lot of questions. 
'Because they were nice ones. They were new Adidas trainers. 
Will bought them for me.' 
'Will who? Will, the guy who took us to lunch?' 
'Yes. The guy from SPAT. He's become my friend.' 
'He's become your friend?' 
Marcus was right — his mum had lots of questions, but she 

asked them in a very boring way. She just repeated the last thing 
he said, made it into a question and shouted. 
'I go round to his flat after school.' 
'YOU GO R O U N D TO HIS FLAT AFTER SCHOOL?' 
'Well, you see, he doesn't really have a kid.' 
'HE DOESN'T REALLY HAVE A KID?' 
When the questions had finished, he was in a lot of trouble, 
although probably not as much trouble as Will. Marcus put his 
old shoes back on, and then he and his mother went straight to 
Will's flat. Will opened the door and Fiona immediately started 
shouting at him about SPAT and his imaginary son. At first Will 
looked embarrassed — he had no answers to her questions, so he 
stood there staring at the floor. But as it continued, he started to 
get angry too. 

'Why do you invite twelve-year-old boys round to tea-parties 
in your flat after school?' asked Fiona. 

Will looked at her. 'Are you suggesting what I think you're 
suggesting?' He went red in the face and started shouting very 
loudly. 'Your son invites himself round here. Sometimes he's 
followed by other kids who attack him. I could leave him 
outside, but I let him in for his own safety. I won't do it again. 
Now, if you've finished, you can both get out of here.' 
'I haven't finished yet, actually. Why did you buy him a pair of 
expensive trainers?' 
'Because ... because look at him.' 
'What's wrong with him?' 

Will looked at her. 'You really don't know, do you? Marcus is 
being eaten alive at school by the other kids. He gets bullied 
every day.' 

'Marcus is doing fine,' his mother said. 
Marcus couldn't believe she'd said that. He wasn't doing fine; 
his mum was being blind and stupid and crazy. 
'You're joking,' said Will. 

'I know he's taking some time to get used to his new school, 
but ...' 
Will laughed. 'Oh, yes. And after a couple of weeks he'll be 
OK? When they've stopped stealing his shoes and following him 
home from school, everything will be great.' 
That was wrong. They were all mad. 'I don't think so,' said 
Marcus. 'It's going to take more than a couple of weeks.' 
'It's OK, I know,' said Will. 'I was joking.' 
Marcus didn't think there was much to joke about in the 
situation. But he was very pleased that Will understood what was 
happening to him at school. He'd only known Will for a short 
time, and he'd known his mother all his life. So why could Will 
understand, and his mother couldn't? But now his mother 
understood too, because Will had told her. 
'You're not going to Will's again,' Fiona said to Marcus on the 
bus on the way home. 'If you've got anything to say, you say it to 
me. If you need new clothes, I'll get them.' 
'But you don't know what I need. I don't know what I need. 
Only Will knows. He knows what kids wear.' 
'We don't need that kind of person. We're doing all right our 
way. Marcus, I've been your mother for twelve years. I do know 
what I'm doing.' 
Marcus didn't think either of them was doing all right. He 
wondered if his mother had a kind of plan for him. In the next 
few days he began to notice the way she talked to him. He was 
interested in everything she said about what he should watch on 
TV or listen to or read or eat. 
She had always said it was important to talk about things, and 
that she wanted him to think for himself. They had often 
discussed what was bad about fashion and modern pop music 
and computer games. But if she didn't like what he said, she 
argued with him until he agreed with her. But he hadn't agreed, 
really; he'd just lost the argument. 

'I've been thinking for myself,' he said,'and I want to go round 
to Will's flat after school.' 

'No. He's a rich guy who doesn't work, who tells lies, and 
who ...' 

'He understands about school. He bought me those trainers. 
He knows things.' He was getting annoyed. 'I'm thinking for 
myself and ... it doesn't work. You always win.' 
'Marcus, it's not enough to tell me you're thinking for 
yourself. You've got to show me too. Give me a good reason why 
you want to go round to Will's.' 

Marcus gave her a reason. It wasn't the right reason, and he felt 
bad saying it because it made her cry. But it was a good reason 
and he won the argument. 
'Because I need a father.' 

Chapter 6 
Ellie 

Will hadn't seen Marcus for a week and hadn't thought about 
him much. He preferred watching Countdown alone anyway. 
Then Fiona phoned. 

'Marcus seems to think he needs an adult male in his life. Like 
a father. He talked about you.' 

'Listen, Fiona, I definitely don't need a son in my life. Why 
doesn't he use his own father as a father?' 
'His father lives in Cambridge. It's a long way' 
'You told me not to see Marcus again. Fine. I told you I didn't 
want to see Marcus again. And now you're telling me ... I don't 
understand.' 

'Listen,' said Fiona. 'Can we meet tomorrow night for a drink 
to discuss all this?' 

They met in a quiet pub. Will had never been alone with Fiona 
before. He didn't find her attractive and he certainly didn't want to 

sleep with her. But conversations with her were never dull. 
'I've always been worried about Marcus not having a father 
around,' said Fiona. 'But he's always told me it didn't matter. 
Then, when I said I didn't want him to see you, he said he 
needed a father.' 
'He said that because he wanted to win the argument. Never 
trust a human male when he talks about his feelings.' 
'Really? Well, maybe it's best if he doesn't see you.' 
'What do you want me to do if he rings the doorbell?' 
'Don't let him in.' 
'Right.' 
Marcus was waiting for Fiona at home. He didn't like the idea 
of his mum talking to Will because he'd stopped believing that 
he and his mum and Will and Ned were going to live together in 
Will's flat. Ned didn't exist, and Will and Fiona didn't like each 
other very much. 
When Fiona came back, he looked at her face to see if she was 
angry or depressed, but she seemed OK. 
'Did you have a good time?' 
'It was OK. But you're not going round there again. He's not 
going to answer the door. He told me.' 
Marcus wasn't worried. He knew how loudly Will's doorbell 
rang inside the flat, and he knew he could ring it for a very long 
time. 

Fiona had made a complaint to the school about Marcus's new 
trainers being stolen, so he had to go and see the head teacher, 
Mrs Morrison. He was waiting outside her office when a girl 
called Ellie McCrae came and sat down next to him. Ellie was 
fifteen and she was famous in the school. She wore a lot of black 
eye make-up and cut her own hair, and she was always in trouble, 
usually for something serious. 

They sat in silence for a time, then Marcus thought he'd try to 
talk to Ellie. His mum was always saying he should talk to people 
at school. 
'Hello, Ellie.' 

'How does a little boy like you know my name?' 
'You're famous.' He knew this was a mistake immediately. 
'What am I famous for?' 
'Don't know.' 

'Yes, you do. I'm famous because I'm always in trouble. Do 
you know what I'm in trouble for this time? It's this sweatshirt. 
They don't want me to wear it, and I don't want to take it off, so 
there's going to be an argument.' 

Marcus looked at Ellie's sweatshirt. It had a picture on it of a 
guy with long blond hair, big eyes and half a beard. 
'Who's that?' he asked politely. 
'Don't you know? It's Kirk O'Bane.' 

'Oh, yes.' Marcus had never heard of Kirk O'Bane, but that 
wasn't surprising — he'd never heard of anybody. 'What does he 
do?' 
- 
\ 

'He's a footballer. He plays for Manchester United.' 
'Does he?' Marcus thought that the guy on Ellie's sweatshirt 
looked more like a singer than a footballer. Footballers weren't 
sad, usually, and this man looked sad. 

Just then Mrs Morrison's door opened and two young kids 
came out. 'Come in, Marcus,' said Mrs Morrison. 

Marcus's talk with Mrs Morrison didn't go very well. She 
asked him about the boys who stole his trainers and he said he 
didn't know who they were. This wasn't true, of course, but he 
didn't want any more trouble from them. 

'Marcus, if the other kids are bullying you, why don't you just 
keep out of their way?' 

Marcus was annoyed. Did she think he was stupid? Did she 
think he went looking for trouble? 'I have tried,' he said. 

'Maybe you haven't tried hard enough.' 
Marcus stood up to go. He'd had enough. She wasn't going to 
be helpful because she didn't like him. Nobody at this school 
liked him and he didn't understand why. 
'Sit down, Marcus. I haven't finished with you.' 
'But I've finished with you.' 
He had never been rude to a teacher before and he was very 
surprised at himself. He walked out of Mrs Morrison's office, and 
out of the school. 
Marcus was walking slowly along Upper Street when Will saw 
him. Will was driving back from the supermarket, listening to 
loud music in his car. What was Marcus doing out of school at 
two o'clock in the afternoon, he wondered. 
At exactly 4.15 that afternoon, right in the middle of 
Countdown, Marcus rang his doorbell. At first Will didn't answer, 
but Marcus rang and rang. Will turned off the TV and put on 
some music by the pop group Nirvana, hoping that Marcus 
would go away. But Marcus didn't stop ringing the bell, so finally 
Will opened the door and let him in. 

'You shouldn't be here.' 
'I came to ask you something. I want you to take me and a 
friend to a football match.' 
'You don't like football.' 
'I do now,' said Marcus. 'I like Manchester United. And I like a 
player called Kirk O'Bane. He's got long blond hair and a beard.' 
'Marcus, there isn't a player called O'Bane who plays for 
Manchester United. I know all the players and there's nobody 
with long blond hair and a beard. There was a player called 
O'Kane who played for Nottingham about twenty-five years 
ago. What lessons did you have this afternoon?' 
Marcus looked at him, trying to work out why he was asking 
the question. 'History, and then ... umm ...' 
'Marcus, I saw you this afternoon.' 

'What, in school?' 

'Well, I didn't see you in school, did I? Because you weren't 
there. I drove past you on Upper Street.' 

'It was Mrs Morrison's fault. The head teacher. She told me to 
keep out of their way — the boys who stole my trainers.' Marcus 
began to get upset, and to speak more quickly. 'They followed 
me! How can I keep out of their way if they follow me?' 
'All right, Marcus, calm down. Did you tell her that?' 
'Of course. But she didn't take any notice.' 

'Right. So go home and tell your mum this. It's no good 
telling me.' 

'I'm not telling her. She's got enough problems without me. 
Why can't you go and see her? Mrs Morrison.' 
'You're joking. Listen, Marcus. I'm not your father, or your 
uncle, or any member of your family. No head teacher is going to 
take any notice of what I say. You've got to stop thinking I know 
the answer to anything, because I don't.' 

'You know about things. You knew about the trainers. And 
you know about Kirk O'Bane. The footballer.' 
Suddenly Will realized who Marcus was talking about. 'It's not 
Kirk O'Bane, you fool, it's Kurt Cobain. The singer with Nirvana.' 
'I thought he must be a singer,' said Marcus. 'I didn't know 
about him, and my mum wouldn't either, but you did. You see, 
you know things. You can help.' 

It was then, for the first time, that Will understood the kind of 
help that Marcus needed. Fiona had given him the idea that 
Marcus needed an adult male in his life, but that was wrong. 
Marcus needed help to be a kid. And, unfortunately for Will, that 
was exactly the kind of help that he could give. Will couldn't tell 
Marcus how to grow up, or how to cope with a mother who 
wanted to kill herself. But he could certainly tell him that Kurt 
Cobain wasn't a footballer. 

Marcus went back to school the following day. Nobody had 

noticed that he had been absent the afternoon before, so he 
didn't get into trouble. In the morning break he found Ellie and a 
friend from her class, Zoe, by the drinks machine. Ellie was 
wearing her Kurt Cobain sweatshirt. 
'Kurt Cobain doesn't play for Manchester United,' he told her. 
'He plays ... he sings ... for Nirvana. A friend of mine has got 
one of their CDs. Nevermind.' 
'Thanks for telling me,' said Ellie and laughed. 'What year's 
your friend in? I didn't think anyone in this school liked Nirvana. 
And what do you think of them?' 
'He's left school. He's quite old. And I don't know what I 
think of Nirvana.' Will had played him some of their music the 
evening before. It had been very noisy with a lot of shouting, but 
there had been some quiet bits too. He didn't think he would 
ever like it as much as Joni Mitchell or Mozart, but he could 
understand why Ellie might like it. 
'It's a bit noisy,' said Marcus, 'but the picture on the cover is 
very interesting.' It was a picture of a baby, swimming after a 
dollar note. Will had said something about the picture, but he 
couldn't remember what it was. 'I think the cover has a meaning. 
Something about society.' 
Ellie and Zoe looked at each other and laughed. 
'You're very funny,' said Zoe. 'Who are you?' 
'Marcus.' 

'Cool name,' said Zoe, and they laughed again. 'See you 

around, Marcus.' 
It was the longest conversation he'd had with anyone at school 
for weeks. Later, he told Will about Ellie. 
'Can I invite her round to your flat?' he asked. 
'I'm not sure she'd come, Marcus. How old is she? Fifteen? I'm 
not sure fifteen-year-old girls want to go around with twelve-
year-old boys. She probably has a 25-year-old boyfriend who 
rides a Harley Davidson.' 

Marcus hadn't thought of that. 'I don't want to go out with 
her. She wouldn't be interested in someone like me. But we can 
come round here and listen to your Nirvana CDs, can't we?' 
'She's probably heard them already.' 

Marcus was getting annoyed with Will. Why didn't he want 
him to make friends? 'OK, forget it then.' 

'I'm sorry, Marcus. I'm glad you spoke to Ellie today. But a 
two-minute conversation with someone who's laughing at 
you ... I'm not sure this relationship is going to last.' 
Marcus wasn't listening. Ellie and her friend had said he was 
funny, and he'd made them laugh. That had made him feel good, 
and he knew he could make them laugh again. The next day he 
saw them again by the drinks machine. 

'Ellie, how old is your boyfriend?' The girls laughed and 
Marcus felt happy. 'My friend Will said he's probably about 
twenty-five and rides a Harley Davidson.' 

'He's a hundred and two,' said Ellie. 'How old's your girlfriend? 
She probably wants to kill me, doesn't she?' 
'I haven't got one,' said Marcus, and the girls laughed again. 
They were laughing all the time now. 

Ellie and Zoe came looking for Marcus at lunchtime. He was 
at his desk eating sandwiches when they came into his classroom, 
calling his name. Almost every kid in the room stopped what 
they were doing and turned round. You could see what they 
were thinking: Ellie and Marcus? Even Nicky and Mark, who 
hadn't spoken to him for weeks, looked up from their Gameboy. 
'What are you all staring at? Marcus is our friend, aren't you, 
Marcus? Let's go to our classroom. You don't want to stay here 
with these boring little kids, do you?' 

Some of the kids turned red, but nobody said anything. 
Nobody wanted to argue with Ellie. They watched as Marcus 
walked from his desk to where Ellie and Zoe were standing. 
When he got there, Ellie gave him a kiss. 

Marcus felt very proud as he walked through the school 
with Ellie and Zoe. The other kids, and even the teachers, 
stared at them in surprise. When they got to Ellie's classroom, 
Ellie made him stand outside. He could hear her shouting to 
the other kids. 
'OK, listen, everybody. I want you to meet Marcus. He's the 
only other person in the whole school who likes Kurt Cobain. 
Come in, Marcus.' 
He walked in, and everybody laughed when they saw him. 
Ellie and Zoe stood beside him and Marcus felt great. 

Chapter 7 
Christmas at Fiona's 

Will was feeling depressed. It was only 19 November, but he 
had heard his dad's Christmas song in a supermarket that 
morning. 
Will hated Christmas: people knocked on his door, singing the 
song he hated more than any other song in the world, and 
expected him to give them money. His dad had hated Christmas 
too, but for a different reason: it reminded him of how badly he 
had failed in his life. His famous Christmas song was the only 
successful song he had ever written. At Christmas, Will's dad had 
always got depressed and angry and drunk a lot, so it had never 
been a very happy time for Will. 
Since his parents had died, Will had usually spent the holiday 
with friends, or girlfriends' families, but this year he had no plans. 
There was no girlfriend, and so there were no girlfriend's parents. 
He decided that he would sit at home and watch old films on TV 
and get drunk, but that didn't seem very Christmassy. 
He thought about spending Christmas Day with a family — 
not his family, because he didn't have one, but a family. He 
definitely didn't want to spend Christmas with Marcus and 

Fiona, though — eating vegetarian food, not watching TV, singing 
Christmas songs with his eyes closed. But the next afternoon 
Marcus came round and invited Will to spend Christmas with 
them 

'Ummm,' said Will. 'That's ... very kind of you.' 
'But you're coming?' 
'I don't know.' 
'Why not?' 
'Because 
'Don't you want to come?' 

'Yes, of course I do, but... what about your mum?' 
'She'll be there too.' 

'Yes, I know. But she wouldn't want me there.' 
'I've already spoken to her about it. I said I wanted to invite a 
friend, and she said OK. She guessed it was you. I haven't got any 
other friends.' 

'All right,' Will said at last. 'I'd love to spend Christmas with 
you, Marcus.' 

When he arrived at Marcus and Fiona's flat on Christmas Day, 
he was pleased to find other people there too. There was 
Marcus's dad Clive, and his girlfriend Lindsey, and his girlfriend's 
mum, all sitting in a line on the sofa. Will was very surprised that 
Fiona and Clive were still friendly although their relationship had 
finished some time ago. The people in SPAT hadn't been like 
that about their broken relationships — they had been angry and 
unhappy. 

Will gave Marcus a CD of Nevermind and a Kurt Cobain 
T-shirt, and Marcus gave Will a book of Countdown quizzes. 
Fiona gave Will The Single Parent's Guide as a joke. 
'What's the joke?' asked Lindsey. 
'Nothing,' said Will quickly. 

'Will pretended to have a kid so he could join a single parents' 
group,' Marcus told her. 

'Oh,' Lindsey said. She and her mum and Clive looked at Will 

with interest, but he just smiled. 
Clive gave Marcus some computer games and CDs and 
sweatshirts. But Fiona's presents to Marcus weren't very 
interesting at all, Will thought — books, and a hairy jumper, and 
some piano music. But Marcus was really pleased with them, and 
for the first time Will understood that Marcus was a good kid. 
He didn't need expensive presents to be happy. 
They had lunch and then watched TV. Marcus was happy and 
Will felt very relaxed. But later in the afternoon Suzie arrived 
with Megan. Fiona had told her that Will didn't really have a 
two-year-old son called Ned, but Will hadn't seen Suzie since 
then and now he felt really embarrassed and ashamed. He stood 
up, and then he sat down again, and then he stood up again and 
said he had to go. 
'Don't be so silly, Will,' said Fiona. 
So Will sat down again and Suzie sat next to him, but she 
refused to speak to him. 
Megan went over to the Christmas tree and Fiona handed her 
a present. 'This is for you, Megan,' she said. 
Megan stood holding her present and looked around the 
room. Then she walked over to Will and tried to give it to him. 
Will didn't move. 
'Well, take it from her, you fool,' said Suzie. 
'It's not my present,' said Will, but Megan continued to hold it 
out until he reached for it. 'Now what?' he said. 
'Open it with her,' said Suzie. 
Will helped Megan open the present. It was a plastic musical 
toy. They both looked at it. 
'Now play with her,' Suzie said angrily. 'It's easy to see that you 
don't know anything about kids. But you should learn. It would 
be useful to you in your kind of work.' 
'What is your kind of work?' asked Lindsey politely. 

'He doesn't do anything,' Marcus said. 'His dad wrote a famous 
song and he earns a million pounds a minute.' 

'He pretends he has a child so he can join single parents' 
groups and meet single mothers,' said Suzie. 
'Yes, but he doesn't get paid for that,' said Marcus. 
Will stood up again, but this time he didn't sit down. 'Thanks 
for the lunch,' he said. 'I'm going home now.' 
'Suzie has a right to be angry with you,' Fiona said. 
'Yes, and now I have a right to go home.' 
'But I don't want him to go yet,' said Marcus suddenly. 'He's 
my friend. I invited him. I should be able to tell him when he 
goes home. Why is everyone being so horrible to him? He only 
pretended to have a kid for a couple of weeks. That's nothing. 
Kids at school do worse than that every day.' 
'Yes, but Will isn't a kid,' said Suzie. 

'Yes, but he's behaved better since then. He never wanted me 
round his flat every day. I just went. And he bought me those 
shoes and he listens when I say I'm having a bad time at school. 
And he knew who Kirk O'Bane was.' 
'Kurt Cobain,' said Will. 

'And you all do wrong things too sometimes,' said Marcus. 'I 
mean ...' He had to be careful here. He knew he couldn't say 
anything about the hospital or Fiona. 'I mean, how did I first 
become friends with Will?' 

'You threw a great big loaf of bread at a duck's head and killed 
it,' said Will. 

Suzie and Fiona started laughing. 
'Is that true, Marcus?' asked his father. 

'There was something wrong with it,' Marcus said. 'I think it 
was going to die anyway.' 

Suzie and Fiona laughed even more. The three people on the 
sofa looked shocked. Will sat down again. 

Chapter 8 
Falling 

Will met a woman called Rachel at a party on New Year's Eve,* 
and fell in love with her. He'd never wanted to fall in love 
because he'd always thought of it as a very unpleasant experience. 
He had watched it happen to friends, and had seen them lose 
weight and sleep and become unhappy. He was sure that Rachel 
was going to make him very unhappy, because he didn't think 
she would find him interesting. 
Rachel was beautiful and intelligent and she did drawings for 
children's books. She sat down next to Will at dinner and asked 
him questions, but he couldn't think of anything to say. Most 
people at the party worked in television, or had other interesting 
jobs, but Will didn't have a job and he hadn't done anything 
interesting with his life. He watched Countdown and drove 
around listening to Nirvana. 
The most interesting thing about his life, Will suddenly 
realized, was Marcus. He could see that Rachel was quickly 
losing interest in him. She had begun to talk to the person sitting 
on her other side and they were having a conversation about pop 
music. Rachel was saying that to her Nirvana sounded just like 
the sixties group Led Zeppelin. 
'I know a twelve-year-old boy who would kill you for saying 
that,' said Will. It wasn't true, of course. Marcus had only just 
started listening to Nirvana, and he didn't know anything about 
Led Zeppelin. But Rachel was interested. 
'So do I,' she said. 'Maybe they should meet. What's yours 

called?' 
He's not mine exactly, Will thought. 'Marcus.' 

'Mine's Ali.' 
'Right.' 

* New Year's Eve: 31 December; the day before New Year's Day 

'And is Marcus's mother here tonight?' 

'Ummm ...' Will looked up and down the table. 'No.' It 
wasn't a lie! Fiona wasn't there. 
'You're not spending New Year's Eve with her?' 
'No. We ... er ... don't live together.' This wasn't a lie either. He 
didn't live with Fiona, he had never lived with Fiona and he never 
intended to live with her in the future. 'How about Ali's dad?' 
'He lives in America.' 
'Right.' 

Rachel started to talk about Ali's father and Will listened. He 
was very good at listening when a woman told him how badly 
her ex-husband had behaved. He had heard the same story many 
times from the women in SPAT. 

At midnight Will and Rachel kissed, and at half-past twelve, 
just before Rachel left, they arranged for Marcus and Ali to meet 
and compare computer games and CDs. 

Now Will had a problem. He had allowed Rachel to believe 
that he had a twelve-year-old son because it made him more 
interesting. He was going to have to talk to Marcus, and he knew 
the conversation would be difficult. So he took Marcus out to a 
place full of video machines. 

'I want you to pretend to be my son,' he said. 
'But why?' asked Marcus. 'I don't understand.' 
'Because I've met a woman who thinks you're my son.' 
'Why don't you tell her I'm not your son?' 
'No.' 

Why not? I'll tell her if you like. I don't mind.' 
'That's very kind of you, Marcus, but it wouldn't help.' 
Marcus was busy playing one of the video games. 'Why not? 
I don't understand.' 

'Marcus, listen. I'm really interested in this woman. I let her 
believe you were my son because that's the only reason she might 
be interested in me.' 

'What do you mean, you're really interested in her? Why is 
she so interesting?' 
'I fancy this woman, Marcus. I want to go out with her. I want 
her to be my girlfriend.' 
At last Marcus turned away from the video machine and 
looked at Will, his eyes shining. 'Really?' 
'Yes, really.' Will wanted Rachel to be his wife, his lover, the 

centre of his world. 
'How do you know you want her to be your girlfriend?' 
'I don't know. I just feel it.' 
'Oh,' said Marcus. 'Well, I feel the same about Ellie. I want her 

to be my girlfriend.' 
'You want Ellie to be your girlfriend? Not just a friend?' 
'Well,' said Marcus, 'I want to be with her all the time. And I 
want to tell her things before I tell anyone, even you or mum. 
And I don't want her to have another boyfriend.' 
So Marcus agreed to help Will. Will called Rachel and Rachel 
invited them to lunch the following Saturday. Marcus came 
round to Will's flat just after midday. He was wearing the hairy 
juniper that he got from Fiona for Christmas and a pair of bright 
yellow trousers. Will looked cool: he was wearing his favourite 
shirt and a black leather jacket. 
'Listen,' said Marcus in the car on the way over to Rachel's 
place. 'If you're my dad, you should know some things about me. 
When's my birthday?' 
'I don't know.' 
'August the nineteenth. And what's my favourite food?' 
'Tell me.' 
'Pizza. And where did I go on my first trip abroad?' 

'France.' 
'No, Spain. And who's my mum?' 
'What?' The question was such an important one that Will 
couldn't think what to say. 'Your mum's your mum.' 

'So you were married to my mum and then you separated. 
Are you worried about that? Am I?' 

The questions seemed so silly that both Marcus and Will 
began to laugh. They laughed and laughed, and couldn't stop. 
Rachel lived in a tall, thin house full of books and old 
furniture and photographs. It had a warm, welcoming feel, very 
different from Will's cool modern flat. 
'Come in, both of you,' Rachel said. 'Come and meet Ali.' She 
shouted up the stairs: 'Ali!' No reply. 'ALI!' Still no reply. She 
looked at Will. 'He's got his headphones on. Shall we go up?' 
They went upstairs. Ali's bedroom was typical of a twelve-
year-old boy, with large pictures of singers and sexy actresses on 
the wall. Ali was bent over his computer with his headphones 
on, and didn't hear them come in. His mother touched him on 
the shoulder and he jumped. 

'Oh, hi. Sorry.' Ali stood up and Will immediately saw that Ali 
and Marcus were very different. Ali was cool, with fashionable 
boots and trousers, long hair and even an earring. His face 
seemed to darken when he saw Marcus's yellow trousers and 
hairy jumper. 

'Marcus — Ali, Ali — Marcus,' said Rachel. 'Do you guys want 
to stay up here?' 

Marcus looked at Will. 'Yes,' he said, and for a moment Will 
loved him. 

'OK,' said Ali, but he didn't sound very enthusiastic. 
Marcus knew the lunch with Rachel was very important to 
Will, and he wanted to help as much as possible. He also thought 
that if he helped Will with Rachel, then Will might help him 
with Ellie. But Ali never gave him a chance. 

'It isn't going to happen,' he said when Rachel and Will had 
gone downstairs. 

'No?' said Marcus, although he didn't know what Ali was 
talking about. 

'If your dad goes out with my mum, you're dead.' 
'Oh, he's all right,' said Marcus. 
Ali stared at him. 'I don't care if he's all right. I don't want him 
going out with my mum. So I don't want to see you or him 
round here ever again, OK?' 

'Can I use the computer? What games have you got?' Marcus 

said, trying to change the subject. 
'Are you listening to me?' 
'Yes, but ... I'm not sure there's very much I can do at the 
moment. We've come for lunch, and Will ... that's my dad, but I 
call him Will ... he's talking to your mum downstairs and he's 
really keen on her, and who knows? She might be keen on him, 
so ...' 
'SHE'S N O T KEEN ON HIM!' Ali suddenly shouted. 

'SHE'S ONLY KEEN ON ME!' 
Marcus was beginning to realize that Ali was crazy, and he 
wasn't sure what to do about it. He thought it would be 
dangerous to stay in Ali's room. He could go downstairs and join 
Will and Rachel, but he would have to explain that Ali was 
crazy, and that would be really embarrassing. He decided to run 
downstairs and out of the front door, and get a bus home. 
He was standing at a bus stop when Will drove up beside him 

and told him to get into the car. 

'What are you doing?' asked Will angrily. 'What happened 

upstairs?' 
'Ali's crazy. He said he'd kill me if you went out with Rachel. 
And I believed him. He's really frightening. Where are we going 
now?' 
It was raining now and the streets were full of traffic and 
people out shopping. Everywhere Marcus looked, there were 
people with long, wet hair. 
'Back to Rachel's.' 
'I don't want to go back there. She'll think I'm stupid.' 

'She won't. She thought something like this might happen. 
She said Ali could be difficult sometimes. Anyway, he's crying 
like a three-year-old child.' 

'Really?' Suddenly Marcus felt better. He was quite happy to 
go back to Rachel's, he decided. 

'Ali has got something to say to you, Marcus,' said Rachel 
when they walked in. 

'Sorry, Marcus,' said Ali. 'I didn't mean to say those things.' 
Marcus wasn't sure if he believed Ali. How could you say that 
you were going to kill someone by mistake? But Ali was crying, 
and that made Marcus feel generous. 
'That's OK, Ali,' he said. 
Rachel made Ali and Marcus shake hands. 
'Ali finds this kind of thing very difficult,' she said. 
Will smiled. 'It's OK,' he said gently, and Rachel looked at him 
and smiled back. Suddenly Marcus could see why nice, attractive 
women like Rachel and Suzie might like Will. He had a way of 
looking at them that he had never used on Marcus — there was 
something in his eyes, a kind of softness. Would Ellie like him if 
he did that? She'd probably hit him. 

'My last boyfriend was ... anyway, he and Ali didn't like each 
other. I'm sorry, I'm not comparing you to him. I have no idea 
whether ... I mean, I don't know, I just thought on New Year's 
Eve ... oh, this is so embarrassing. It's all your fault, Ali. We 
shouldn't have to talk about this now.' 

'It's OK,' said Marcus brightly. 'Will really fancies you. He told 
me.' 

Chapter 9 
Depressions 

Will wanted to spend the rest of his life with Rachel, and he 
knew that he couldn't continue pretending to her that Marcus 

was his son. So he told her the truth one evening when they 

were having dinner in a Chinese restaurant. 
'Oh,' said Rachel. 'So who's his natural father?' 
'It's a guy called Clive who lives in Cambridge.' 
'Right. And are you friendly with him?' 
'Yes. We spent Christmas together, actually.' 

'So ... if you're not Marcus's natural father, and you don't live 

with him ... how is he your son?' 
'Yes,' said Will. 'It must look very confusing from the outside.' 
'Tell me how it is on the inside.' 
'It's just that kind of relationship. I'm old enough to be his 

father, he's old enough to be my son ...' 
'Did you ever live with Marcus's mother?' 
'No. Listen, I never actually said he was my son. The words "I 
have a son called Marcus" never passed my lips. That's what you 
chose to believe.' 
'You mean ... I wanted to believe you had a son, so I just 
imagined it? I'm the one who was imagining things?' Clearly 
Rachel thought that Will was crazy. But he felt she was 
beginning to see the funny side of the situation too. 'But what 
about Marcus? You didn't just hire him for the afternoon. There's 
some kind of relationship there.' 
So Will told her everything about Marcus. Nearly everything 
anyway; he didn't tell her that he'd first met Marcus because he'd 
joined SPAT. He didn't think she would understand about SPAT. 
She might think he had some kind of problem. 
Rachel invited him back to her flat after the meal and they sat 
drinking coffee out of big blue cups. 

'Why did you think Marcus would make you more 

interesting?' she asked. 
'Was I more interesting?' 
'Yes, I suppose you were.' 
'Why?' 

'Because ... you really want to know the truth? Because you 
seemed to be a shallow kind of person. You didn't do anything; 
you didn't seem to care about anything or have much to say — 
and then when you said you had a kid ...' 
'I didn't actually say ...' 

'I realized that I'd made a mistake about you. And I had made 
a mistake. You do care about Marcus, and you understand him, 
and you worry about him. You're not the shallow kind of guy I 
thought you were.' 

Will knew that Rachel was trying to make him feel better 
about everything, but he still felt bad. He'd known Marcus for 
only a few months, so what about the thirty-six years before that? 
And he didn't want to be interesting only because of his 
relationship with Marcus. He wanted to be interesting for 
himself. 

Will was in love with Rachel and everything had changed. For 
the first time in his life he wanted to be deeply involved with 
someone. 

• 

Three or four weeks passed. Marcus saw Will, and he saw Ellie 
and Zoe at school. Will bought him some new glasses, and took 
him to have his hair cut, and played him some music by singers 
who he liked and Ellie didn't hate. He felt that he was changing, 
in his own body and in his head, and then his mum started crying 
again. 

Just like before, there didn't seem to be any reason for it. 
Finally, she started crying at breakfast again and Marcus knew 
that things were serious and that they were in trouble. 

But one thing had changed for Marcus. When she had started 
crying at breakfast before, he had been alone. Now he had Will 
and Ellie. 

'My mum's started crying again,' he said to Will. It was a 

Thursday afternoon and they were in Will's kitchen, making 

toast. 
'Oh,' said Will. 'Are you worried about it?' 
'Of course. She's the same now as she was before. Worse.' That 
wasn't true. Nothing could be worse than the last time, but he 
wanted to make sure Will knew it was serious. 
'So what are you going to do?' 

Marcus had thought that Will would help him. That's what he 

wanted. Wasn't that what friends were for? 
'What am I going to do? What are you going to do?' 
'What am I going to do?' Will laughed, and then remembered 

that the situation wasn't funny. 'Marcus, I can't do anything.' 

'You could talk to her.' 
'Why should she listen to me? Who am I? Nobody.' 
'You're not nobody. You're ...' 
'You come round here for a cup of tea after school, but that 
doesn't mean I can make your mum feel better. I know I can't.' 
'I thought we were friends.' 
'Yes, Marcus, we're friends. But I'm not your dad, I'm not your 
uncle, and I'm not your big brother. I can tell you who Kurt 
Cobain is and what trainers to get, and that's all. Do you 
understand?' 
'Yes.' 
But on the way home, Marcus thought about the way Will 
had said, 'Do you understand?' to end the conversation. He knew 
teachers said that, and parents said that, but he didn't think 
friends said that. 
He wasn't really surprised about Will. He thought of Ellie as 
his best friend more than Will — not just because he loved her 
and wanted to go out with her, but because she was always nice 
to him. Ellie had told him that she knew about his mum trying 
to kill herself. Ellie's mum was a friend of Suzie's, and Suzie had 
told her. 

But the next day, when Marcus went to find Ellie in her 
classroom at breaktime, she didn't seem very pleased to see him. 
Zoe was sitting next to her, holding her hand. 
'What's happened?' he asked. 
'Haven't you heard?' 

Marcus hated it when people said that to him because he 
never had. 'I don't think so.' 
'Kurt Cobain.' 

'What about him?' 

'He tried to kill himself. He took a lot of pills.' 
'Is he all right?' 

'I think so. They pumped his stomach.' 
'Good.' 

'Nothing's good,' said Ellie. 'He'll do it, you know, in the end. 
They always do. He wants to die. It wasn't a cry for help. He hates 
this world.' 

Marcus suddenly felt sick. He'd imagined having a conversation 
with Ellie about his mum, and Ellie making him feel better, but it 
wasn't like that at all. 
'How do you know?' 

'You don't know him,' said Ellie. 

'You don't know him,' Marcus shouted. 'He's not even a real 
person. He's just a singer. He's just someone on a sweatshirt. It's 
not like he's anyone's mum.' 

'No, but he's someone's dad,' said Ellie. 'He's got a beautiful 
little girl and he still wants to die.' 

Marcus was very upset. He turned round and ran out. Did his 
mum feel the same way as Kurt Cobain? He went to the boys' 
toilets and shut himself inside the end toilet because it had hot 
water pipes running along the wall and you could sit on them. 
After a few minutes someone came in and started kicking on the 
door. 

'Are you in there, Marcus?' said Ellie. 'I'm sorry. I'd forgotten 

about your mum. It's OK. She's not like Kurt. She's not going to 

try to kill herself again.' 

He paused for a moment, then unlocked the door and looked 

out. 'How do you know?' 
'Because you're right about him. He's not a real person.' 
'You're only saying that to make me feel better.' 
'OK, he's a real person. But he's a different kind of real person. 
He's like James Dean and Marilyn Monroe and Jimi Hendrix and 
all those people. He's not like your mum. You think I know 
things, but I don't. I don't know why Kurt Cobain feels like he 
does, or why your mum feels like she does. And I don't know 
what it feels like to be you. Quite frightening, I should think.' 
'Yes.' Marcus started to cry then. It wasn't noisy crying — his 
eyes just filled with tears and they ran down his face — but it 
was still embarrassing. He'd never thought he'd cry in front of 
Ellie. 
She came in and put her arm round him. 'Don't listen to me. 
You know more than I do. You should be telling me things.' 

They sat on the hot water pipes together in silence, moving 

when they got too hot, and waited until they felt like going back 

into the world. 

• 

Will knew that he should do something about Fiona and that 
he'd behaved badly towards Marcus. He was older than Marcus, 
he knew more ... He should get involved, help the kid, look 

after him. 
But he didn't want to have a conversation with Fiona about 
her depression. She would ask him what the meaning of life was 
— ask him why she should go on living. And Will couldn't tell 
her what the meaning was, because he didn't know. But Fiona 
was lost and unhappy, and if he told her that life had no meaning, 
she might actually kill herself. 

He decided to talk to Rachel about Fiona. They were in 
Rachel's kitchen, making coffee. 

'A few years ago I got very depressed,' said Rachel, 'and I 
thought about killing myself, like Fiona. But I always thought I 
would do it tomorrow, never today. There were always a lot of 
reasons to continue living; there were too many things that I'd 
started but hadn't finished, and I wanted to see what happened.' 
'Fiona must have things like that too.' 

'I don't know,' said Rachel. 'Perhaps she doesn't. Why don't I 
talk to her?' 

'You? She doesn't know you.' 

'It doesn't matter. And maybe you could learn to help her too, 
if I showed you how. It's not so bad.' 

'OK,' said Will, but he didn't want to think about Fiona just at 
that moment. He couldn't remember ever feeling as happy as he 
did with Rachel. 

Chapter 10 
A Trip to Cambridge 

It was spring and the days were getting longer. Now Marcus was 
able to walk home from Will's flat in the late afternoon sunshine. 
He began to feel better about things. Then his dad fell down 
some steps and broke his arm. 

'You'll have to go up to Cambridge and see him,' said his mum. 
'I'm not going while you're like this.' 
'Like what?' 
'Crying all the time.' 

'I'm OK. Well, I'm not OK, but I'm not going to do anything 
silly. I promise.' 

'But why do I have to go and see him?' 

'He was asking for you. He's lucky he didn't hurt himself 
really badly. Maybe he's having a big think about his life.' 

That made Marcus angry. He went and sat in his room. Why 
had his dad never had a big think about his life before? And why 
did he only want to see his son when he'd broken his arm? What 
about all the hundreds of days when his arm was all right, and 
Marcus had heard nothing from him? 
He went downstairs again. 'I'm not going,' he told his mum. 
'He makes me sick.' 

But the next day, when he told Ellie about his dad, he began 

to change his mind. 
'You should go and see him,' said Ellie. 'Tell him what you 
think of him. I'll come with you, if you like.' 
Marcus thought how nice it would be to have a whole hour 
with Ellie on the train to Cambridge. 
'Will you come with me really, Ellie?' 

'Yes, of course. If you want me to. It would be fun. I'll know 

what to say to him.' 

Marcus didn't stop to think about what Ellie was going to say 

to his father. He'd worry about that later. 
'So shall we go next week, then?' It was nearly Easter, and they 
were on holiday from school next week, so they could stay in 
Cambridge for the night if they wanted to. 
'Yes. Cool. We'll have a great time.' 
Marcus and Ellie arranged to meet at King's Cross station in 
north London, where they would catch the train to Cambridge. 
Fiona wanted to come to the station with him, but he didn't 
want her to see Ellie. 

'It would be too sad,' he told her. 'I don't want to say goodbye 

to you there.' 
So Fiona and Marcus walked from their flat to Holloway 
Road underground station and said goodbye in the entrance. 
Fiona gave Marcus an enormous hug, while everyone around 
them watched. 
The underground train wasn't crowded. It was the middle of 

the afternoon and there was only one other person in the same 
part of the train, an old guy reading a newspaper. He was looking 
at the back page, so Marcus could see the front. 

The photo seemed so familiar that for a moment he thought it 
was a picture of someone he knew, like a member of the family. 
But none of his relatives had long blond hair and half a beard. 

He knew who it was now. He saw the same picture every day 
of the week on Ellie's sweatshirt. He felt hot all over; he didn't 
even need to read the old guy's paper, but he did. 

ROCK STAR COBAIN DEAD, it said in big letters, and 
then underneath, in smaller writing, Nirvana singer, 27, shoots 
himself. Marcus thought and felt a lot of things at the same time. 
He wondered whether Ellie had seen the paper yet, and how she 
would be when she found out. He wondered if his mum was 
OK, although he knew there was no connection between his 
mum and Kurt Cobain because his mum was a real person and 
Kurt Cobain wasn't. 

Then he felt confused because the newspaper had turned Kurt 
Cobain into a real person. And then he felt very sad — sad for 
Ellie, sad for Kurt Cobain's wife and little girl, sad for his mum, 
sad for himself. And then he was at King's Cross and he had to 
get off the train. He met Ellie under the information board. She 
seemed normal. 

Everyone was carrying a newspaper, so Kurt Cobain was 
everywhere. There was a whole army of Kurt Cobains marching 
towards them. Marcus didn't know what to do. He didn't want 
Ellie to learn that Kurt Cobain was dead. Then he had an idea. 
'Ellie,' he said suddenly. 'Do you trust me? Yes or no?' 
'What are you talking about? Of course I trust you.' 
'OK, then. Close your eyes and hang on to my jacket.' 
'What? Why?' 

'I watched a programme on TV with my mum once. It was all 
about learning to trust someone. They made some people close 

their eyes and then other people led them around and made sure 
that they didn't hurt themselves.' 
'Marcus, have you gone mad?' 
'I'm going to guide you to the train through all these people, 
and then you'll trust me for ever.' 
'Oh, all right.' 
Ellie closed her eyes and Marcus led her to the part of the 
station where the Cambridge train was waiting. She didn't see all 
the people with newspapers coming towards them. Marcus was 
almost enjoying it, because he liked the feeling of looking after 
Ellie. 
'Are we nearly there?' 
'Yes. The train's there waiting for us.' 
'I know why you're doing this, Marcus,' she said suddenly in a 
small, quiet voice. He stopped, but she continued to hold him. 
'You think I haven't seen the paper, but I have.' 
He turned round, but she didn't open her eyes. 
'Are you OK?' 
'Yes. Well, not really.' She felt around in her bag and got out a 
bottle of vodka. 'I'm going to get drunk.' 

Will had arranged to go to a pub in Islington with Rachel and 
Fiona while Marcus was in Cambridge visiting his father. They 
would all have a drink and a talk, then Will would leave and 
Rachel and Fiona would have another drink and a talk. Fiona 
would feel better about things, and not want to kill herself. What 
could possibly go wrong? 
Will arrived at the pub first, got himself a drink, sat down and 
lit a cigarette, and Fiona arrived soon afterwards. But Rachel 
didn't come. Half an hour passed and she still hadn't arrived. Will 
went to phone her, but he only got through to her answer 
machine. Then he realized the truth. She had never intended to 

come because she wanted Will to talk to Fiona by himself. She 
had said he could learn to help Fiona if she showed him how, and 
this was what she meant. 

Will didn't know what to do. He went back to his seat and he 
and Fiona sat in silence for some time. Then Fiona started to cry. 
At first Will tried not to take any notice of her, but he couldn't. 
He knew he would have to try and help. 
'What's the matter?' he asked. 
'Nothing.' 
'That's not true, is it?' 

'Yes, it is. Nothing's the matter — no thing. I'm just like this. I 
think I probably need to talk to somebody.' 
'Do you want to go and get something to eat?' said Will. 
They went to a pizza restaurant on Upper Street. 
'I'm sorry for being like this,' said Fiona. 'And for being like 
this with you.' 

Will started to make a joke, but then he thought he would try 
to say something serious and useful. 

'I'm the one who should apologize,' he said. 'I want to help, but 
I know I won't be able to. I haven't got the answers to anything.' 
'I don't need answers,' said Fiona. 'I know there's nothing you 
can do. I'm depressed. It's an illness. It just started. Well, that's not 
true ... there were some things that happened ...' 

Suddenly Fiona started talking about her problems. It was 
much easier than Will had thought; he just had to listen, and ask 
the right questions. He'd done it before, lots of times, with Angie 
and Suzie and Rachel, but that was for a reason. This was 
different. He didn't want to sleep with Fiona, but he did want to 
make her feel better. 

He learnt a lot of things about her. He learnt that she hadn't 
really wanted to be a mother and that sometimes she hated 
Marcus; he learnt that she was worried about not having a 
relationship and that her last birthday had depressed her because 

she hadn't been anywhere or done anything. There was no one 
terrible cause of Fiona's unhappiness, or an awful dark secret in 
her life. 
They got a taxi back to Fiona's place. The taxi driver was 
listening to the radio and Will suddenly realized that it was a 
discussion about Kurt Cobain. 
'What's happened to him?' Will asked. 
'He shot himself in the head. He's dead.' 
Will wasn't surprised, and he was too old to be shocked. It 
wasn't unusual for pop stars to kill themselves. But then he 
thought about Marcus and Ellie, and that worried him. What 
would they think? 
'Isn't he the singer Marcus liked?' Fiona asked him. 
'Yes.' Suddenly Will was afraid. He didn't know why, but he 
had a strange feeling that Marcus might be in trouble. 
'Can I come in with you?' he asked Fiona when they arrived 
at her house. 'Perhaps Marcus has left a message on your answer 
machine. I just want to hear that he's OK.' 
There was 2. message from Marcus, but he didn't sound OK. 
He was calling from a police station in a town called Royston 
and he sounded frightened and lonely. 

• 

Ellie had started drinking vodka on the train, and Marcus was 
feeling very tired. Whenever people stared at her, she started 
shouting at them and saying that she would stop the train. 
Marcus was beginning to realize that he didn't actually want 
Ellie to be his girlfriend. She was funny and pretty and clever, but 
she just wasn't the right kind of person for him. He needed to be 
with someone quieter, someone who liked reading and computer 
games. Elbe's behaviour was frightening and embarrassing. 

'Why does Kurt Cobain's death matter so much?' he asked her 

quietly. 

'I loved him.' 
'You didn't know him.' 

'Of course I knew him. I listen to him every day. I wear him 
on my sweatshirt every day. He understood me. He knew what I 
felt, and he sang about it.' 

Marcus tried to remember the words of some of the songs on 
the Nirvana CD that Will had given him for Christmas, but they 
didn't mean anything to him. 
'So how were you feeling?' 
'Angry.' 
'What about?' 

'Nothing. Just ... life. Life's awful.' 
Marcus thought about that. He realized that Ellie spent her 
whole time wanting life to be awful, and making things difficult 
for herself. School was awful for her because she wore her 
sweatshirt every day, which wasn't allowed, and because she 
shouted at teachers and got into fights. But why didn't she stop 
doing those things? Her life wouldn't be so awful then. 
'Do you feel like shooting yourself?' Marcus asked. 
'Of course. Sometimes, anyway.' 
Marcus looked at her. 'That's not true, Ellie.' 
'How do you know?' 

'Because I know how my mum feels. And you don't feel like 
that. You have a nice life.' 
'I have an awful life.' 

'No. I have an awful life. And my mum has an awful life. But 
you ... I don't think so. I'll tell you, you don't feel anything like 
my mum, or Kurt Cobain. You shouldn't say that you feel like 
killing yourself when you don't. It's not right.' 
They sat in silence. Marcus was looking out of the window of 
the train, wondering what he was going to say to his dad about 
Ellie. He didn't notice that the train had pulled into Royston 
station. Suddenly Ellie stood up and jumped off the train. Marcus 

waited for a moment, then, with a horrible sick feeling, he 

jumped off after her. 
'What are you doing?' 
'I don't want to go to your dad's. I don't know him.' 
She walked out of the station and Marcus followed her. They 
walked up a side road and on to the High Street, past a chemist 
and a supermarket. Then they came to a music shop with a big 
cardboard figure of Kurt Cobain in the window. 
'Look at that,' said Ellie. 'That's really terrible. They're trying 
to make money out of his death.' 
She took off one of her boots and threw it at the glass window 
of the shop as hard as she could. The glass broke first time. Ellie 
reached inside and took out the cardboard figure of Kurt 
Cobain. She sat down outside the shop, holding the figure and 
smiling a weird little smile. 

'Oh, Ellie. What did you do that for?' 
Once again, Marcus had the feeling that Ellie didn't have to do 
what she'd just done. She didn't have to make trouble for herself. 
He was tired of her behaviour. There was enough trouble in the 
world without inventing more. 
The street had been quiet when Ellie broke the window, but 
the noise of breaking glass had woken Royston up. Some people 
ran down to see what was happening. 
'Right, you two. Stay there,' said a guy with long hair who 
looked like a hairdresser. 

'We're not going anywhere, are we, Marcus?' said Ellie 

sweetly. 

Chapter 11 
Growing Up 

A police car took Marcus and Ellie to the police station. The 
policemen were nice really. Ellie had explained that she wasn't a 

troublemaker or on drugs; she was angry because the owner of 
the music shop was making money out of Kurt Cobain's death. 
The policemen thought this was funny and laughed, which made 
Ellie even more angry. 

When they got to the police station, they were taken into a 
little room and a policewoman came in and started talking to 
them. She asked them their ages and addresses, and what they 
were doing in Royston. Marcus tried to explain about his dad 
and the big think and Kurt Cobain and the vodka. But the 
policewoman couldn't understand the connection between his 
dad's accident and Ellie and the shop window. 
'He didn't do anything,' Ellie suddenly said. 'I got off the train 
and he followed. I broke the window. Let him go.' 
'Let him go where?' asked the policewoman. 'We've got to 
phone one of his parents. We've got to phone yours too.' 
The police telephoned Marcus's dad and Ellie's mum. Then 
Marcus rang Fiona, but she wasn't in so he left a message on her 
answer machine. 
They sat and waited in silence until Marcus's dad and Lindsey 
arrived. Neither of them was in a very good mood. Lindsey had 
had to drive, because of Clive's broken arm, and she hated 
driving. His dad was in pain. He didn't look like a man who had 
had a big think or wanted to see his only son. 
The policewoman left them alone and Clive sat down on a 
seat that ran along one side of the room. Lindsey sat down next 
to him. Marcus looked at his dad unhappily. 
'He didn't do anything,' said Ellie impatiently. 'He was trying 
to help me.' 
'And who exactly are you?' 
'Who exactly? I'm Eleanor Toyah McCrae, aged fifteen years 
seven months. I live at 23 ...' 
'What are you doing with Marcus?' 
'He's my friend.' This was news to Marcus. He hadn't felt that 

Ellie was his friend since they got on the train. 'He asked me to 
come with him to Cambridge because he wasn't looking forward 
to talking to you.' 
Marcus put his head in his hands. He was suddenly very, very 
tired. He didn't want to be with any of these people. 
'I suppose you think all this is my fault,' said Clive. 'If I had 
stayed with your mother, you wouldn't be in trouble.' 
'What are you talking about?' said Marcus. 'What's happened? 
I just got off a train.' He wasn't tired now, but he was beginning 
to feel angry. 'What's wrong with getting off a train? Ellie's crazy. 
She broke a window with her boot because it had a picture of a 
pop star in it. But I haven't done anything. And I don't care if 
you left home or not. It doesn't make any difference to me. I just 
wanted to try and look after my friend.' 
Ellie laughed. 'Cool speech, Marcus! Can we go now?' 
'We have to wait for your mother,' Clive told her. 'She's 
coming with Fiona. Will's driving them up from London.' 

'Oh, no,' said Marcus. 
The four of them sat there staring at each other, like characters 
in a play without an ending. 

• 

After the police had called Ellie's mum, she had called Fiona. 
Then Fiona spoke to Clive, then she called Ellie's mum and 
offered her a lift up to Royston with her and Will. Ellie's mum 
was an attractive woman in her early forties. She didn't seem 
surprised or upset about her daughter's problems. 
When Will, Fiona and Ellie's mum arrived at the police station 
in Royston, Clive and Lindsey were staring angrily at Marcus, 
Marcus was staring angrily at the wall, and Ellie was staring 
angrily at everyone. 
'Can we go now?' Will asked the policewoman. 
'Not yet. We're waiting for the shop owner to come. It's 

something we're trying here. Criminals meet the victims of their 
crimes, so they understand the effects of their actions.' 
'Good,' said Ellie. 'I want to see what this person's like.' 
A nervous-looking young woman in her twenties was 
shown into the room. She was wearing a Kurt Cobain 
sweatshirt and lots of black eye make-up and she looked like 
Ellie's older sister. 

'This is Ruth, who owns the shop. This is the young lady who 
broke your window,' said the policewoman. 
Ellie looked at Ruth, very surprised. 'Did they tell you to look 
like me?' she said. 
'Do I look like you?' Ruth asked. 
Everyone in the room laughed, including the police officers. 
'You put that picture in the window to make money,' said 
Ellie, but she didn't sound as confident as before. 
'Which picture? The picture of Kurt? That's always been there. 
I think he's great. Is that why you broke the window? Because 
you thought I was trying to make money out of Kurt's death?' 
'Yes.' 
'Today has been the saddest day of my life. And then a stupid 
little girl breaks my window because she thinks I'm trying to get 
money out of people. Just ... grow up.' 
Ellie was very embarrassed and didn't know what to say. 'I'm 
sorry,' she whispered. 

'All right,' said Ruth. 'Come here.' She opened her arms, and 
Ellie stood up, walked over to her and hugged her. 
Suddenly Fiona, who had been very quiet, got up too, walked 
around the table, and put her arms round Marcus. 
'I haven't been a good mother to him,' she said to the 
policewoman who had been looking after them. 'I haven't been 
noticing things. I know I don't deserve another chance, but I'm 
asking for one ... If you give us another chance, you won't be 
sorry.' 

'We don't need another chance, Mum,' said Marcus. 'I haven't 
done anything wrong. I only got off a train.' 
But Fiona took no notice of Marcus. She was mad, thought 
Will, and she was saying crazy things, and nothing could stop her. 
But he knew she had suddenly realized that she had to do 
something for her son. And if she was thinking that, then she 
wasn't going to try and kill herself again. 

'Please let Marcus go,' Fiona said, and put her face in Marcus's 

neck. 
But Marcus shook her off and moved away from her and 
towards Will. 'You're mad, Mum. I can't believe how mad both 
my parents are,' he said with real feeling. 
Will looked at this strange little group and tried to make some 
sense of it. He couldn't understand these people. He hadn't 
known some of them before today; he had known some of them 
for only a short time, and he couldn't say that he knew them 
well. But here they were anyway, one of them holding a 
cardboard figure of Kurt Cobain, one of them crying, one with a 
broken arm, all connected to each other in different ways. Will 
couldn't remember being involved in this kind of situation 
before. He was looking at real life and seeing what it was like to 
be human. It wasn't too bad, really. 

• 

Marcus went to stay with his dad and Lindsey in Cambridge that 
night. In the car Clive complained a lot about Ellie and what had 
happened. Why did Marcus want to be involved with someone 
like that? Why hadn't he tried to stop her? Marcus didn't say 
anything, and finally his father was quiet. Later, when Lindsey 
had gone to bed, he and Marcus talked. 
'I've had a big think, you know, since my accident,' said Clive. 
'I know I haven't been a very good father. And ... you need a 
father, don't you? I can see that now.' 

'Why do you think I need a father now? I'm doing OK 
without one.' 
'It doesn't look like it.' 

'What, because Ellie broke a window? No, really, I am doing 
OK. Maybe I'm doing better. It's hard with Mum, but this year at 
school ... I can't explain it, but I feel safer than before, because I 
know more people. I was really frightened because I didn't think 
two people were enough, but now there aren't only two. There 
are lots.' 

'You mean Ellie and Will and people like that?' 
'Yes.' 

'It was wrong of me to leave you,' said his dad. 'That's what my 
big think was about.' 

'It doesn't matter, Dad. I know where you are if things get 
bad. I'm OK. Really. I can find people. I'll be all right.' 
And he would be all right, he knew it. He didn't know 
whether Ellie would be, because she didn't think about things 
very hard. And he didn't know if his mum would be, because she 
wasn't very strong a lot of the time. But he was sure he could 
cope in ways that they couldn't. He could cope at school because 
he knew what to do, and he had learnt who you could trust and 
who you couldn't. 

They talked a bit longer, about Lindsey, and how she wanted a 
baby, and how his dad couldn't decide, and whether Marcus 
would mind if they had one; and Marcus said he liked babies. 
And then his dad gave him a hug and he went to bed. In the 
morning his dad and Lindsey took him to the station and gave 
him enough money for a taxi from King's Cross back to the flat. 

• 

Will knew that his feelings for Rachel had changed his life for 
ever. He wanted her so much that it frightened him. He was 
terribly afraid of losing her; perhaps she would get bored with 

him, or meet someone else. He wasn't Will the cool guy who 
didn't want to get involved with other people now. He was 
deeply involved with Rachel, and he couldn't go back. He 
wanted to be an important part of her life, and to make her think 
of him as a responsible person. So he started taking Ali and 
Marcus out on Saturdays, sometimes to football games but 
usually to the cinema and McDonald's. 
In some ways Marcus seemed older than Ali now. He dressed 
better — he had won the argument with his mother about 
whether he could go shopping with Will — and he had his hair 
cut regularly. He was still good friends with Ellie and Zoe, but he 
was more careful about what he said to them, and they didn't 
laugh at him as much. 
It was strange; Will missed him. Marcus was the only person in 
the world who might be able to give him advice, but Marcus — 
the old Marcus — was disappearing. 

'Are you going to marry my mum?' Ali asked one day, when 

they were eating chips at McDonald's. 

'I used to want him to marry my mum,' said Marcus. 'I thought 

it would solve all our problems. Your mum's different, though. 

She's not as confused as my mum.' 
'Do you still want him to marry your mum?' 
Will stared at them both in disbelief. 
'No,' said Marcus. 'I don't think it would help. You're safer as a 
kid if everyone's friends. Think about it. Your mum and my mum 
are friends.' It was true. Rachel and Fiona saw each other 
regularly now. 'And Will sees my mum, and I see you, and Ellie 
and Zoe, and Lindsey and my dad. There are lots of people now.' 
One afternoon, when Will took Marcus back to his flat, 
Marcus disappeared into his bedroom with a quick 'thanks'. 
'He seems so much older,' Fiona said. 
'Yes,' said Will. 'Are you worried about that?' 
'Why do you ask? Of course I am.' 

'But . . . you've seemed better recently.' 

'I think I am. I don't know why, but I think I'm more in 
control of everything.' 

Will thought he knew one of the reasons, but he didn't want 
to hurt Fiona's feelings. The truth was that the new Marcus 
wasn't so difficult to look after. He had friends and he could look 
after himself. He was just like every other twelve-year-old boy. 

Marcus came out of his room. 'I'm bored. Can I get a video?' 
Will decided to give Marcus a little test. 'Hey Fiona. Why 
don't you get your music out and we can all sing a Joni Mitchell 
song?' 

'Would you like to?' asked Fiona. 

'Yes, of course.' But Will was watching Marcus's face carefully. 
Marcus was looking really embarrassed. 
'Please, Mum. Don't.' 

'But Marcus, you love singing. You love Joni Mitchell.' 
'I don't. Not now. I hate Joni Mitchell.' 

Will knew then, without any doubt, that Marcus would be 
OK. 

ACTIVITIES 

Chapters 1-2 
Before you read 
1 Read the Introduction to the book. 
a What do you know about the story from the Introduction? 
b Have you seen the film of About a Boy? If so, what did you 
enjoy about it? If not, have you seen any other films with the 
actor Hugh Grant? What kind of part did he play? 
2 Answer the questions. Find the words in italics in your dictionary. 
They are all used in the story. 
a Which of these nouns isn't a word for an adult? 

godfather 
guy 
kid 
b Which adjective isn't used to describe a person's clothes? 
blond(e) 
cool 
weird 
c Which verb doesn't always lead to unhappiness? 
bully 
depress 
involve 
d Which is a word for a game of questions and answers? 
picnic 
quiz 
royalties 
e Translate these sentences into your language. 
I never liked him anyway. 
My ex-wife took the children. 

After you read 
3 Which of the people in the story 
a has just started a new school? 

b doesn't need to work? 
c cries a lot? 
d looks like a beautiful film star? 
e is Fiona's best friend? 
f wants to go out with pretty single mothers? 
4 Answer these questions. 
a Why doesn't Will want to be Imogen's godfather? 
b What two things is Marcus worried about? Why? 
c Why does Angle want to go out with Will? 
d Why does Will join SPAT? 
e Why don't Nicky and Mark want Marcus as their friend? 

Chapters 3-4 

Before you read 
5 Discuss these questions. 

a What do you think is wrong with Fiona? What might help her? 
b What are Marcus's main problems at school? How can things 
get better for him? 

6 Find these words in your dictionary. 
duck jumper pump 
truth 
vegetarian 
Which word describes 
a a bird? 

b someone who doesn't eat meat? 
c the opposite of a lie? 
d something warm to wear? 
e the movement of liquid by a machine? 

After you read 

7 Are these sentences true or false? Correct the false ones. 
a Will has a two-year-old son called Ned. 
b Will wants Suzie to be his girlfriend. 
c Marcus throws a stone at a duck. 
d Suzie is angry with Fiona. 

e Marcus wants his mother and Will to have a relationship. 
f Will thinks Fiona is very attractive. 
8 How are these things connected in the story? 
a bread and a duck 
b a bottle of pills and a letter 

c vegetarian food and old songs from the 1960s 

Chapters 5-6 
Before you read 
9 Discuss these questions. 

a Marcus knows the truth about Ned. What do you think he will do 
with this information? Why? 

b Do you think Will will go out with Fiona? Would they be happy 
together, do you think? Why (not)? 

10 What do you think the words in italics mean? Check in your dictionary. 
a I can't cope with three small children and a full-time job. 
b He was wearing a dark green sweatshirt and Nike trainers. 
c We like him, but we wouldn't trust him with our money. 

After you read 
11 What importance do these have in the story? 

a Countdown 
b a pair of Adidas trainers 
c a sweatshirt with a picture of a famous singer 

d the group Nirvana 
12 Work in pairs. Act out this telephone conversation. 
Student A: You are Fiona. Telephone Suzie and tell her that Will 
has been lying about Ned. 
Student B: 
You are Suzie. You are angry and shocked. You have 
a lot of questions to ask Fiona. 

Chapters 7-8 
Before you read 
13 'Ellie and Zoe stood beside him and Marcus felt great.' Why does 

Marcus feel great? Do you think things will change for him at 

school, or not? 

14 Find these words in your dictionary. Use them in the sentences 

below. 
fancy headphones 
keen on 
a He bought 
for his CD player. 
b You 
my brother, don't you? 
c I'm 
all kinds of sport. 

After you read 
15 Who is speaking? Who are they talking to? 
a 'I want you to pretend to be my son.' 
b 'It's easy to see that you don't know anything about kids.' 

c 'What is your kind of work?' 
d 'I think it was going to die anyway.' 
e 'She's only keen on me!' 
f 
'Will really fancies you.' 

16 Match the two parts of the sentences. 
a 
b 

c 
d 
e 
f 

g 

Will usually spends Christmas 
Will spends this Christmas 
Fiona gives Will 
Will falls in love 
Rachel lives 

Her ex-husband lives 
Will pretends 

on New Year's Eve. 
a joke Christmas present. 
at Marcus's place. 
in America. 
to have a son. 

with friends' families. 
in a tall, thin house. 

Chapters 9-11 

Before you read 

17 Discuss these questions. 

a Will has fallen in love with Rachel. What effect is this going to 
have on his life, do you think? 

b What kind of relationship will Marcus have with Ellie? 
18 Answer the questions. Find the words in italics in your dictionary. 
a What is cardboard used for? 

b When might you want to hug someone? 

c What does it mean if you are the victim of a crime? 
d Which countries are famous for their vodka? 

After you read 

19 Work in pairs. Act out this conversation. 
Student A: You are a passenger on the train with Ellie and 
Marcus. You want to read your book. You are getting 
very annoyed about Ellie's behaviour. Talk to her. 
Student B: 
You are Ellie. You are upset about Kurt Cobain's 
death. You don't want to be quiet, and you don't care 
that you are annoying the other passengers. 
20 Fiona and Clive both say that they have been bad parents to Marcus. 
Do you agree? Why (not)? Will they behave differently now? 

Writing 

21 Write a one-page advertisement for SPAT, to put in a shop window. 
22 Imagine that you are the policewoman who interviews Ellie in 
Royston. Write a report of the interview. 

23 Imagine that you are Ellie. Write a letter to Ruth. Apologize for 
breaking her shop window. 
24 How have Will and Marcus grown up by the end of the story? 
Describe the reasons for the changes in their attitudes and 
behaviour. 
25 Imagine that you are Fiona. Write a letter to Clive. Describe your 
new relationship with Marcus at the end of the story. Explain how 
you will now be a better mother. 

26 Find out more about Kurt Cobain and write about his life. 

Penguin Readers Marketing Department, Pearson Education, 
Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, Essex CM20 2JE. 

