Table of Contents

About the Author
Title Page
Copyright Page
Dedication

One - ‘ B ’ IS FOR APPLE
Two - DRESS-DOWN WEDNESDAY
Three - DOWNRIVER, UPTOWN
Four - LACKING THAT SMALL MATCH TEMPERAMENT
Five - MISSION STATEMENT
Six - LONDON EYE
Seven - SEXUAL PIQUE
Eight - DENIAL
Nine - BIG GUNS
Ten - LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION
Eleven - EXTENDED PANIC FUNCTIONALITY
Twelve - DEAD CAT BOUNCE
Thirteen - THE SCOTTISH VERDICT

Iain  Banks  sprang  to  widespread  and  controversial  public  notice  with  the
publication of his first novel, The Wasp Factory, in 1984. Since then he has
gained  enormous  and  popular  critical  acclaim  with  further  works  of  both
fiction and science fiction, all of which are available in either Abacus or Orbit
paperbacks.  In  1993  he  was  acknowledged  as  one  of  the  Best  of  Young
British  Writers.  In  1996  his  number  one  bestseller,  The  Crow  Roadwas  a
dapted  for  television.  The  Times  has  acclaimed  Iain  Banks  ‘the  most
imaginative British novelist of his generation’.
Iain Banks lives in Fife, Scotland.

Praise for Dead Air

‘Banks’s clever, tense book gives a good idea of where fiction might usefully
go  with  this  material.  Staying  away  from  the  media-described  events  at
Ground Zero, he impressively details the social aftermath in London: paranoia
on  underground  trains  and  in  high  buildings,  suspicion  of  foreigners,  a
delirious new edge to political argument and sexual encounters’
Mark Lawson - Guardian

‘Banks ranks - along with Irvine Welsh and Ian Rankin - as one of Scotland’s
most  successful  writers,  and  his  new  novel,  Dead  Air,  will  do  nothing  to
diminish  his  reputation.  A  thrilling  read,  it’s  a  dazzlingly  clever,  edgy,
suspenseful book’
Scotland on Sunday

‘A Buchanesque adventure yarn set in 21st-century London’
The Times

‘Dead Air is just one of many immediate responses to a shocking event, the
kind  of  exhausting,  careering  ride  of  a  novel  adored  by  speed  junkies.
Possibly though, it’s just what we all need’
Independent
‘City  life,  political  integrity  and  personal  trust  come  under  Banks’s
coruscating spotlight’
Mirror

‘The  trademark  dark  wit  is  at  its  best,  and  this  daring  book  looks  set  to
become one of the most important novels this year’
Vivid

Praise for The Business

‘Devilishly inventive and inventively devilish’
Sunday Times

‘For any lover of a good story well told, a new book by Iain Banks is always a
treat. Imagination, wit and complexity are his hall-marks and The Business is
no exception’

Sunday Express

‘Written with enormous energy, crunchy wit and more curves than an alpine
road … this is a poisoned bonbon, a bitter fairy tale … The Business is the
business’
Independent

‘A  highly  inventive  piece  of  work,  amusing  and  sinister  by  turns  …  any
chapter of The Business picked at random will give an idea of Iain Banks’s
merits:  the  technical  pizzazz,  the  profound  compassion,  above  all  an
understanding of the way the world works’
Guardian
‘It  is  impressive  to  find  a  British  novelist  with  such  evident  range  …
intellectually exhilarating’
Observer

‘Eng. Lit. for the age of www’
Independent on Sunday

Further praise for Iain Banks

‘The most imaginative novelist of his generation … an exceptional talent’
The Times

‘His  technical  facility  with  language  now  matches  his  instinct  for  story-
telling. And the combination makes him one of the best British novelists’
Guardian

‘Currents of dark wit swirl through Banks’s writing, enriching its buoyancy
… and like Graham Greene, he can readily open the reader’s senses to the
“foreign-ness” of places’
Scotland on Sunday

‘His satire is exquisitely poised, his story-telling gripping’
Independent

‘A phenomenon!’
William Gibson

by Iain Banks

THE WASP FACTORY
WALKING ON GLASS

THE BRIDGE

ESPEDAIR STREET
CANAL DREAMS
THE CROW ROAD

COMPLICITY

WHIT

A SONG OF STONE 

THE BUSINESS

DEAD AIR 

THE STEEP APPROACH TO GARBADALE

And as Iain M. Banks 
CONSIDER PHLEBAS 

THE PLAYER OF GAMES 

USE OF WEAPONS 

THE STATE OF THE ART

AGAINST A DARK BACKGROUND

FEERSUM ENDJINN

EXCESSION
INVERSIONS

LOOK TO WINDWARD

THE ALGEBRAIST 

MATTER

Dead Air

IAIN BANKS

Hachette Digital

www.littlebrown.co.uk

Published by Hachette Digital 2008

Copyright © 2002 Iain Banks

The moral right of the author has been asserted.

All characters in this publication are fictitious and any 

resemblance to real persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.

All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 

system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior 

permission in writing of the publisher, 

nor be otherwise circulated in any form of binding or cover other than 
that in which it is published and without a similar condition including 

this condition being imposed on the 

subsequent purchaser.

A CIP catalogue record for this book 
is available from the British Library.

ISBN 978 0 7481 0989 0

This ebook produced by JOUVE, FRANCE

Hachette Digital

An imprint of

Little, Brown Book Group
100 Victoria Embankment

London EC4Y 0DY

An Hachette Livre UK Company

For Roger 

With thanks to Mic and Brad

One

‘ B ’ IS FOR APPLE

‘You’re breaking up.’

‘—orry?’
‘Never mind.’
‘—at?’
‘See you later.’ I folded the phone.
This was three weeks before the stuff with the Clout club and Raine (sorry;

the stuff with the Clout club and ‘Raine’) and the taxi and the road under the
railway bridge and the window and the nose-biffing incident and basically the
whole grisly West-to-East-End night experience when I realised some bastard
or bastards unknown seriously wanted to harm me, or even - and this was
according to their own threats - kill me.

All  of  which  actually  happened  not  far  from  here  (here  where  we’re

starting; here where we’re picking up our story precisely because it was like
the start and the end of something, a time when everyone knew exactly where
they were), all of it probably within sight, if not a stone’s throw, of this raised
here. Maybe; there’s no going back to check because the place where we’re
starting’s not there any more.

Whatever; I associate what happened in one place with what happened in

the other, with things beginning and finishing and - like the first tile in one of
those  impressive  but  irredeemably  geeky  record-breaking  domino-falling

displays  that  people  stage  in  sports  halls,  where  one  tiny  event  leads  to  a
whole toppling, fanning, branching cascade of tiny events, which happen so
fast  and  so  together  they  become  one  big  event  -  with  just  stuff  generally
being  set  in  train,  being  pinged  from  a  rest  state  into  restless,  reckless,
spreading, escalating motion.

‘Who was that?’ Jo joined me at the parapet.
‘No idea,’ I lied. ‘Didn’t recognise the number.’
She pushed a short glass into my hand. There was ice in the whisky and an

apple squatting on top of the glass like a fat red-green backside on a crystal
toilet. I looked over my shades at her.

She extracted a strip of celery from her Bloody Mary and clinked my glass

with hers. ‘You should eat.’

‘I’m not hungry.’
‘Yeah. Precisely.’
Jo was small with very thick black hair - cut short - and very thin white

skin - variously pierced. She had a wide, rock-star’s mouth, which was sort of
fitting as she did PR for the Ice House record label. Today she was looking
vaguely  Drowned  World-era  Madonna-ish,  with  black  tights,  a  short  tartan
skirt and an old leather jacket over an artfully ripped T-shirt. People, not all
Americans, had been known to call her cute and feisty, though not normally
twice. She had a temper, which was why I automatically lied about the phone
call even though I had no reason to. Well, almost no reason.

I hoisted the apple from the glass and took a bite. It looked shiny and great

but  tasted  of  nothing  much.  Jo  was  probably  right  that  I  ought  to  eat
something.  Breakfast  had  been  some  orange  juice  and  a  couple  of  lines  of
coke each. I did very little of that stuff these days, but I had this theory that
the last time you want to get coked up is late at night when you just make
your body stay up way beyond the time it wants to and you therefore stand a
good  chance  of  missing  the  next  day;  snort  during  the  hours  of  daylight
instead  and  sort  of  slide  off  into  alcohol  as  the  evening  descends,  so
maintaining something remotely like the body’s usual rhythms.

As a result we hadn’t eaten much of the wedding brunch at all and probably

should force ourselves to eat a little, just to keep things on an even keel. On
the other hand the apple was pretty unappetising. I put it down on the chest-
high brick parapet. It wobbled and started to roll towards the drop. I caught it
and steadied it before it could fall the hundred or so feet to the pitted asphalt
of the abandoned car park beneath. Which was not, in fact, totally abandoned;
my  pal  Ed  had  left  his  gleaming  new  yellow  Porsche  at  one  end,  near  the
gates. Everybody else had parked in the almost unnaturally quiet and empty
street on the other side of the old factory.

London’s  East  End  north  of  Canary  Wharf  for  a  couple  of  years,  always
knowing that the place was likely to be demolished at any time. The red-brick
building was over a century old. It had originally made stuff with lead; mostly
lead soldiers and lead shot (which apparently needed a big tall tower to drop
little spits of molten lead down into a big water pool). Hence the height of the
place; eight tall floors, mostly full of artists’ studios for the last dozen years or
so.

Kulwinder and Faye had leased half the top floor and turned it into a big

New York style loft; spare, echoing and vast. It was as white as an art gallery
and it didn’t really have many readily identifiable rooms; instead it had what
stage people would call spaces. Mainly one big space, full of minimalism, but
very expensive and artfully arranged minimalism.

However, some developer had finally got their planning permission and so

the  place  was  getting  knocked  down  in  a  week  or  two.  Kul  and  Faye  had
already bought a place in Shoreditch. Buying seemed to encourage the need
for further commitment so they’d got married this morning and Jo and I were
two of the fifty or so guests invited to the wedding (I couldn’t make it; show
to do) and the subsequent feast back at the loft. Not, like I say, that we’d eaten
much.

I  frowned  and  dug  into  my  glass  to  hook  out  the  ice,  dropping  the

glistening blocks on the wide brick parapet.

Jo shrugged. ‘That’s the way it came, hon,’ she said.
I  sipped  cold  whisky  and  looked  out  towards  the  unseen  river.  The  roof

terrace faced south and east, producing shadowed views beneath the scattered
clouds floating over the towers of Canary Wharf and the unending cluttered
flatness of Essex. A cool wind chilled my wet fingers.

I didn’t like it when Jo said ‘hon’. Thought it sounded like an affectation.

She said ‘daunce’ sometimes, too, when she meant ‘dance’. She’d grown up
in a posh bit of Manchester but she sounded like she was from somewhere
between Manhattan and Mayfair.

I  looked  at  the  slowly  melting  ice  cubes  puddling  on  the  brickwork  and

wondered  if  there  were  similar  little  things  about  me  that  were  starting  to
annoy her.

I flicked the lozenges of ice overboard, down to the cratered asphalt of the

car park.

‘Ken; Jo. How you two doing?’ Kulwinder joined us.
‘Fine, Kul,’ I told him. He was wearing a cool black suit with a white shirt

and Nehru collar. Skin as rich and glistening as dark honey; big liquid eyes,

currently  shielded  by  some  silver-framed  Oakleys.  Kulwinder  was  a  gig
promoter  and  one  of  those  annoying  people  who  was  effortlessly  stylish,
never more so than when they went back to some old fashion people had half
forgotten but which - when picked up again by somebody like Kulwinder -
everybody  suddenly  realises  actually  looks  pretty  good.  ‘Married  life  still
suiting you?’

He smiled. ‘So far so good.’
‘Nice suit,’ Jo said, touching his sleeve.
‘Yeah,’ Kul said, holding out one arm and inspecting it. ‘Wedding present

from Faye.’

Faye was a journalist/newsreader on the radio station I work for; she and

Kul met at one of our after-show pub afternoons. I think I’m on record on air
describing Faye as ‘comely’.

‘When do you head for NYC?’ I asked. They were honeymooning in the

States; New York and Yosemite. Just for six days due to Kul’s gig work and
the move to Shoreditch next week.

‘Tomorrow.’
‘Whereabouts are you staying?’
‘Plaza,’ Kul said. He shrugged. ‘Faye always wanted to stay there.’ He took

a drink from the bottle of Hobec he was holding.

‘You going on Concorde?’ Jo asked. Kul liked to travel in style; drove a

restored Citroën DS.

He shook his head. ‘No. Hasn’t started flying again yet.’
Jo looked at me accusingly. ‘Ken won’t take me to the States,’ she told Kul.

He raised his eyebrows at me.

I  shrugged.  ‘I  was  thinking  I  might  wait  until  democracy  had  been

restored.’

Kulwinder snorted. ‘You really don’t like Dubya, do you?’
‘No, I don’t, but that’s not the point. I have this old-fashioned belief that if

you lose the race you shouldn’t be given the prize. Getting it handed to you
because  of  electoral  roll  manipulation,  the  police  in  your  brother’s  state
stopping the black folks from voting, a right-wing mob storming a counting
station and the Supreme Court being stuffed with Republican fucks is called
… gosh, what’s the technical term? Oh, yeah; a coup d’état.’

Kul shook his head and looked at me with his big, dark eyes. ‘Oh, Ken,’ he

said sadly. ‘Do you ever get down off that high horse?’

‘Got a whole stable full of them, Kul,’ I told him.
‘Shit,’ Jo said, staring at her mobile’s display. I hadn’t heard it ring; she

usually had it set on vibrate (which about six months ago gave me the idea for
one of the show’s more long-running and successful items. Well, long-running
in  the  sense  I  still  went  back  to  it  now  and  again,  and  successful  by  the
perverse  standards  of  me  and  my  producer  in  that  we’d  had  dozens  of
complaints  about  our  crudity  and  obscenity  rather  than  the  more  common
handful).  Jo  thumbed  a  button,  scowled  heroically  and  said,  with  a  totally
insincere brightness, ‘Todd! How are you? What can I do for you?’

She shook her head and sneered down at the phone while Todd - one of her

bosses at Ice House and allegedly deeply inadequate in every way - talked.
She held the phone away from her and clenched her jaw for a moment, then
turned and put the phone back to her ear. ‘I see. Can’t you deal with it?’ she
said as she walked slowly along the broad terrace. ‘Right. No. I see. Yeah.
Yeah. No, of course …’

‘So, what about you, Ken?’ Kul asked, leaning on the parapet and glancing

at  Jo,  who  was  a  few  paces  away  now  and  giving  the  finger  to  her  phone
while still making noises into it. ‘Jo going to make an honest man of you?’

I looked at him. ‘Marriage?’ I asked softly, also glancing at Jo. ‘Are you

talking about marriage?’ He just grinned. I leaned on the parapet too, looking
down at the gradually browning flesh of the apple. ‘I don’t think so. Once was
enough.’

‘How is Jude?’
‘All  right,  last  I  heard.’  My  ex  was  currently  shacked  up  with  a  cop  in

sunny Luton.

‘Still in touch?’ Kul asked.
‘Very occasionally.’ I shrugged. Slightly dodgy territory here, as Jude and I

did meet up now and again and on a few of those occasions had - despite all
the bitterness and recriminations and other usual failed-marriage stuff - ended
up falling into bed. Not something I wanted Jo to know about, or Judith’s boy
in blue. Not something I’d talked about with any of my friends in fact. Also
not something that had happened for over half a year, so maybe that was over
at last. Probably just as well.

‘You must have been seeing Jo since about when Faye and I met up,’ Kul

said. Jo was on the other edge of the terrace, leaning on the parapet facing
south, still on the phone and shaking her head.

‘That long?’
‘Yeah; about eighteen months.’ He drank again, looking past me at Jo. ‘I

guessed you’d either be settling down or splitting up,’ he said quietly.

I showed the surprise I felt. ‘Why?’
‘Ken,  your  relationships  rarely  make  it  past  the  year-and-a-half  mark.  A

year is probably the average.’

‘Jesus, Kul, do you keep notes on this sort of thing?’
He shook his head. ‘No, I just remember stuff, and I can see patterns.’
‘Well,’ I began, and would maybe have half admitted that perhaps Jo and I

weren’t going anywhere, except she shut her phone and came marching over
to us. ‘Trouble?’ I asked.

‘Yeah,’ she said, almost spitting. ‘Those fucking Addicta wankers again.’

Addicta  were  Ice  House’s  latest  hot  band.  Happening;  their  time  was  very
definitely  now.  I  kind  of  liked  their  music  -  melodic  English  grunge  with
oases of surprising wistfulness - but had come to hate them in a vicarious,
solidarity-inspired way because they were, according to the usually reliable
source  that  was  Jo,  such  total  and  complete  arseholes  to  deal  with.  ‘That
fucking useless cunt needs me to go and hold their fucking hands while some
fucking precious snapper drapes them across a fucking Bentley or something.
Supposed  to  happen  yesterday  but  the  fucking  dickhead  forgot  to  let  me
know.’ She kicked the parapet with one Doc Marten. ‘Cunt.’

‘You’re upset,’ I said. ‘I can tell.’
‘Oh, fuck off, Ken,’ she breathed, heading for the flat’s interior.
I watched her go. Chase after and try to smooth things, or let her go, not

make a bad thing worse? I hesitated.

Jo  stopped  briefly  to  talk  to  Faye,  who  was  heading  in  the  opposite

direction  with  some  people,  then  she  was  gone.  In  a  moment  Faye  was
smiling at me and introducing these people and the possibility of pursuit and
attempted mollification had gone.

‘Ken. Thought you were avoiding me.’

‘Emma. As if,’ I said, sitting beside her on one of the main space’s two

chrome and black-suede couches. I chinked glasses. ‘You look great,’ I told
her. Just jeans and a soft silk shirt, an Alice band in her hair, but she did look
good. It’s a few drinks later here, but it definitely wasn’t the drink talking or
looking. She just raised her eyebrows.

Emma  was  married  to  my  best  pal  from  school  days  in  Glasgow,  Craig

Verrin; Craig and I were our own little two-guy gang for fifth and sixth year,
before he left for University College London and within a year was settled
down with Emma and a baby girl. Meanwhile I - viciously scapegoated by my
teachers and examiners on some trumped-up charge of not having done the
necessary work to pass my exams - left to make tea and score drugs for the
more lazy and dissolute DJs on StrathClyde Sound.

Emma was smart and funny and attractive in a delicately blond way and I’d

always loved her to bits, but things had become a little spoiled between us
because we shared the guilty secret that, just the once, we’d slept together.
She and Craig had been going through a bad patch when it had happened after
Craig had strayed and been found out, and they were split-up again now - had
been for a couple of years - so it somehow seemed not quite as bad as it could
have been … but still. My best pal’s girl; what the hell had I been thinking of?
The  next  morning  had  been  probably  the  most  embarrassing  of  my  life;
Emma and I had both been so ashamed it had been pointless trying to pretend
to the other that what had happened had been anything other than a colossal
mistake.

Well,  it  was  just  one  of  those  things  you  wished  you  could  delete  from

reality. I supposed we’d both done our best to forget about it, and just the
passing of time made the guilt less sharp, but sometimes, when Emma and I
looked each other in the eye, it was like it had been only yesterday, and we
both just had to look away. I lived in intermittent terror that Craig would find
out.

I suppose it was sort of similar to but different from when Jude and I fell

into  bed.  And  it  was  another  relationship  I  couldn’t  talk  to  anyone  about.
Come 
to 
think 
of 
it 
I 
couldn’t 
talk 
about 
most 
of 
my

relationships/liaisons/whatever  you  wanted  to  call  them,  for  one  reason  or
another. I certainly couldn’t talk about the other big one; the one with Celia -
Celia  the  svelte,  Celia  the  sexy,  Celia  the  slinky  as  a  seal  -  either.  Jeez,  a
shallow person could come away from a review of my private life with some
sort of idea that I liked a frisson of danger in my dalliances, but that particular
one  was  not  just  dangerous,  that  one  could  get  me  very  seriously  hurt,  or
worse.

In  my  darker  moments  it  sometimes  occurred  to  me  that  these

entanglements - or one of them - would be the death of me.

‘Haven’t  seen  you  for  a  while.’  Emma  was  leaning  towards  me,  talking

quietly, voice nearly lost in the party’s hubbub.

‘Things have been hectic.’
‘I bet. I saw Jo storming out.’
‘Well,  no;  that  wasn’t  quite  a  storm.  It  wasn’t  a  common  walk,  either,

granted. Somewhere in between; more of a flounce.’

‘Something you said?’
‘Remarkably, no. No, that was a work-related flounce, or storm. Where’s

Craig?’

‘Picking up Nikki.’ She glanced at her watch. ‘Should be here soon.’
‘And how is the gorgeous—?’

‘So,’ Emma broke in. ‘How’s your programme going?’
‘You have to ask?’ I pretended to be hurt. ‘Don’t you listen any more?’
‘You lost me when you were banging on about how only criminals should

have guns.’

‘That’s not quite what we were saying.’
‘Maybe you should have been more clear. What were you saying?’
‘I can’t remember,’ I lied.
‘Yes you can. You were saying criminals should have guns.’
‘I was not! I was saying the idea that if you took hand-guns away from

ordinary law-abiding people then only criminals would have guns was a crap
argument for keeping guns.’

‘Because?’
‘Because it’s the ordinary law-abiding people who go crazy and walk into

primary schools and open fire on a class of kids; compared to that, crims use
guns responsibly. To them a gun’s just a tool, and something they tend to use
on other crims, I might add, not a gym full of under-eights.’

‘You said criminals should have guns; that’s a quote. I heard you.’
‘Well, if I did, I was just exaggerating for comic effect.’
‘I don’t think it’s anything—’
‘You probably missed the way we developed that,’ I told her. ‘We decided

only extroverts and nutters should get guns, crims or not. Because it’s always
the quiet ones that go mad. Ever noticed that? The shocked neighbours always
say the same things: he was very quiet, he always kept himself to himself …
So; guns for nutters only. Makes sense.’

‘You’re  not  even  consistent;  you  used  to  argue  everybody  should  have

guns.’

‘Emma, I’m a professional contrarian. That’s my job. Anyway, I changed

my mind. I realised I was on the same side as people who argued that the
States and Israel were havens of peace and security because everybody was
tooled up.’

Emma snorted.
‘Well,’  I  said,  waggling  the  hand  that  wasn’t  holding  my  drink,  ‘the

statistics aren’t that clear-cut. They have a lot of guns in Switzerland, too, and
not much gun crime.’

Emma watched her drink as she swirled it in her glass. ‘You wouldn’t last

in the States,’ she muttered.

‘What?’ I said, mystified.

‘Somebody would shoot you.’
‘What?’ I laughed. ‘Nobody’s shot Howard Stern.’
‘I was thinking more of jealous husbands, boyfriends, that sort of thing.’
‘Ah.’ I knocked back my Scotch. ‘Now that’s a different argument entirely.’

I stood up. ‘Can I get you another drink?’

In the long, gleaming gallery that was the kitchen, Faye was sweeping up a
smashed glass from the slate floor. The caterers were unpacking more food
from cool boxes. I squeezed through a group of people I vaguely knew via my
pals  in  advertising,  saying  Hi  and  Hello  and  How  are  you?,  smiling  and
patting, shaking offered hands.

Kul was leaning against the puce-coloured SMEG fridge while a suit with a

flushed face and holding a slim briefcase tapped him on the chest.

‘… us have to go to work this afternoon you know,’ the suit was saying.

‘We have meetings.’

Kul shrugged. ‘I put on gigs, man. I work at weekends. This was the first

day we could both manage.’

‘Well, okay, let you off this time,’ the flushed suit said, swaying. ‘But don’t

let it happen again.’ He laughed loudly.

‘Ha ha,’ Kul said.
‘Yeah, don’t let it happen again,’ the suit repeated, heading for the front

door. ‘Na; it was great. Great. Thanks. Thanks for the invite. Been brilliant.
Hope you’re both very happy.’

‘Thanks for coming. Take care,’ Kul told him.
‘Yeah, thanks. Thanks.’ The suit bumped into somebody, spilling a drink.

‘Sorry, sorry.’ He lurched round to wave to Kul, who had already turned away
and was headed for the loft’s main space. I poured myself some more Glen
Generic  then  saw  that  somebody  had  brought  a  bottle  of  cask-strength
Laphroaig, so abandoned my first glass and poured another of the Leapfrog
and went to the fridge for some water.

‘Hey, Ken.’
I closed the fridge door and saw Craig, official best pal (Scottish). Usual

faintly  diffident  grin  and  sloppy-looking,  thrown-on  clothes;  wee  round
glasses beneath a shaven head. When Craig still had visible hair it was black
like mine; maybe a little curlier. We’ve both always had the same medium-
slim build and since third year in High School I’ve been a couple of inches
taller. We used to get mistaken for brothers, which both of us thought unfairly
flattered the other. Our eyes are different; his are brown and mine are blue.

Alongside Craig was his daughter Nikki, balanced on a pair of crutches. A
few seconds were required to take in this vision.

I hadn’t seen Nikki for over a year, when she was still at school, all gawky,

awkward and blushing. Now she was as tall as her father and as beautiful as
her mother. She had long glossy auburn hair half hiding a slim, pale face that
just shone with youth and health.

‘Craig!  Nikki!’  I  said.  ‘Kid,  you  look  fabulous.’  I  looked  down  at  the

freshly  plastered  leg  hanging  at  an  angle  from  her  boot-legged  jeans.  ‘But
you’ve broken your leg.’

‘Football,’ she said, shrugging as best she could. Craig and I hugged and

slapped  backs  in  full-on  hail-fellow-Caledonian-well-met  style.  I  embraced
Nikki rather more tentatively. She sort of leaned into the cuddle and nodded
against  my  cheek.  She  smelled  of  the  open  air,  of  somewhere  fresh  and
perfect a long way from London.

‘Heard you’re about to start at Oxford, yeah?’ I said, shaking my head as I

looked at her. She was nodding.

‘Uh-huh,’ she said, then, ‘Yeah, just a water or something,’ to her dad.
‘Chinese, wasn’t it?’ I asked.
‘Yup.’ She nodded.
‘Brilliant. Good for you. You can teach me how to swear in Mandarin.’
She giggled, suddenly, briefly a child again. ‘Only if you promise to do it

on air. Uncle.’

I sucked air through my teeth. ‘Favour; don’t call me Uncle, okay? Make

an  old  man  happy  while  we’re  together  and  pretend  you  just  might  be  a
trophy waif I’ve picked up.’

‘Ken!’ She kicked out at me with one crutch.
‘Hey,’ I said, rubbing my shin. ‘I’ve a reputation to keep up. Or down-hold.

Whatever.’

‘You’re terrible!’
‘Come  on,’  I  said,  offering  my  arm.  ‘Let’s  get  you  a  seat.  Craig;  we’re

through here,’ I told him. He waved. Nikki nodded me to go ahead of her.
‘Hobble this way,’ I said and pushed through the pack of people towards the
main space while Nikki clumped after me. I looked at her again as we got
clear of the kitchen crowd, and sighed. ‘Oh dear, Nikki.’

‘What?’
‘You are going to break so many hearts at Oxford, youngster. ’
‘Organs, rather than bones. Good idea.’
‘Mm-hmm. Football, you said?’

‘Girls do play it nowadays, you know.’
‘Golly, you don’t say. Don’t you find the long skirts get in the way? Ow!

Will you stop doing that?’

‘Well …’
‘What position?’
‘Striker; I was scythed down in the penalty box. On a hat-trick, too.’
‘Disgraceful.’
‘Nikki,  Nikki;  here.  Oh,  Nikki!’  Emma  had  jumped  up.  She  hugged  her

daughter tightly, eyes closed. I hovered for a bit, but there was no room on the
sofa once they’d got settled, and Emma seemed to be deliberately ignoring
me. I waved to Nikki and wandered off. Time for another line or two, and/or
one  more  quick  session  on  Kul’s  PlayStation  2  (if  that  last  bit  makes  me
sound like some kid whose parents won’t or can’t buy him a games machine
of his own, I have to plead half guilty to the childishness charge; I did have a
PS2 of my own but I got annoyed at it one drunken night back in the summer
and threw it overboard. I live on a houseboat so I can do that sort of thing).

A drink or two later, a couple of lines and various conversations to the better,
I was standing on the terrace again, admiring the view and breathing in the
fresh  autumnal  air.  With  Jo  gone  I  felt  a  sense  of  freedom  and  even
opportunity  and  promise,  the  afternoon  and  evening  stretching  ahead
invitingly. I had a couple of Evo 8s with me and pondered taking one. Loved
up for the rest of the day. This would mean, though, that I’d be out of synch
with  Jo,  assuming  we  reconnected  before  the  day  was  over.  With  Addicta
involved, probably we wouldn’t, but then you never knew.

An arm slipped round my waist. A body against mine, a kiss on my cheek

and a voice purring, ‘Herr-lerrr.’

‘Amy. Well, hello indeed.’
Amy was a friend. One of Jo’s friends, originally, though I suspected she

and I got on better these days than she and Jo, who seemed to have cooled
towards her. Amy was nearly my height; she had fine, shoulder-length dark-
blond hair with a natural curl. She also had very long legs and a figure. There
was something slightly time-warped about Amy altogether; she was actually
younger than Jo by a year but she dressed and acted five or ten years older. PA
to a lobbying firm.

‘You look well, Ken.’ Amy leaned back against the parapet, arms along the

stone. She wore pearls, a blue blouse, a mid-length skirt and a long jacket;
court shoes.

‘And you look delectable as ever,’ I told her, smiling. Amy and I met up for

lunch  every  now  and  again.  We’d  been  flirting  and  joking  about  having  a
torrid affair for a year or so but we both knew it wasn’t going to happen. Well,
probably. It was Amy I’d been on the phone to earlier when we’d got cut off.

She smiled slowly and looked around. ‘Jo here?’
‘Was. Had to go. Work.’
‘Was it her Addictive Band lot again?’
‘The same.’
She  held  a  glass  of  white  wine  and  took  a  delicate  sip.  ‘What  was  the

wedding  like?’  The  wind  produced  a  tiny  gust,  moving  her  hair  across  her
face. She blew it away.

‘Don’t know,’ I said. ‘Couldn’t make it; show to do.’
‘Ah-hah. Ken, do you have any drugs?’
‘Some coke; couple of Es.’
‘Think I might have some of the Charlie? I don’t know why. Just feel like

it.’ She wrinkled her nose. ‘Do you ever get that?’

‘Every day with a “Y” in it.’

There were a couple of children at the party and at least two print journalists I
didn’t trust, so we found a room off the loft’s only corridor. It had been Faye’s
office but now it was full of packing cases, ready for the move.

Back  on  the  terrace  a  little  later,  the  two  of  us  talking  up  a  storm,  she

picked  up  the  part-eaten  apple  still  lying  on  the  parapet,  twirling  it  in  her
hand.

‘It’s all right,’ I told her. ‘It’s one of ours.’
She threw it to me. It looked pretty unappetising, all brown around where

I’d taken my single bite out of it. I leaned on the brickwork and held it over
the drop to the car park. Amy leaned beside me. I let the apple go. It tumbled
very slowly, almost disappearing.

It  hit  the  asphalt  and  exploded  in  a  highly  satisfactory  manner,  all  little

lumps of whiteness bursting out across the dark surface.

‘Excellent!’ Amy clapped her hands. We looked at each other, our chins

just off the brick parapet. I felt, suddenly, like I was a schoolboy again.

‘Hey,’ I said.
‘What?’
‘Let’s drop more stuff.’
‘That’s just what I was thinking.’
‘I know.’

Which is how it came to pass that we ended up chucking what seemed like

half  the  contents  of  Faye  and  Kul’s  loft  over  the  parapet.  We  started  with
more  fruit.  ‘They’ve  got  far  too  much  food  in  anyway,’  Amy  said  as  we
loaded up on oranges, bananas, a melon and more apples.

We stared at the asphalt a hundred feet below. ‘That was disappointing.’
‘Was a bit, wasn’t it?’ I said, looking down at the squishy mess produced

by a couple of oranges. ‘I don’t think citrus fruits are the way to go. They just
don’t fragment in a satisfying manner.’

‘Or bananas.’
‘Agreed. Let’s go back to apples.’
‘Then the melon. That might be good.’
‘Yes. I have high hopes for the melon.’
‘Let’s do two apples at once; one each.’
‘Good idea. On three. One, two, three … Oh yes. Very good.’
‘Well synchronised. Let’s do four this time. Two each.’
‘We’ve only got three apples.’
‘I’ll get another one. No dropping the melon while I’m gone.’
‘Wouldn’t dream of it.’
‘Ere, wot are you two up to?’
‘Ed; hi. Hope you don’t mind. Dropping fruit onto the car park. S’okay;

nowhere near your car.’

‘Fucking  ell,  mate,  I  hope  not.  Only  got  it  last  week.  Cost  me  seventy

grand.’ Ed was my official best pal (English). Slight of build with a face that
always  reminded  me  of  a  black  Mark  E.  Smith;  hard  and  soft  at  the  same
time,  the  phizog  of  a  pliable  bantam-weight  bruiser.  Club  DJ;  sort  of  in-
demand guy does two gigs a night and catches a helicopter in between. The
Porsche probably constituted a week’s wages.

‘It’s a beautiful car,’ I told him. ‘But yellow?’
‘That’s a fuckin traditional Porsche colour, that is.’
‘Traditional?  How  can  yellow  be  traditional?  Blue,  or  green;  those  are

traditional colours. Even red, but not yellow. Yellow is traditional for JCBs
and Tonka toys. Even lime green at a pinch; Kawasakis. But not yellow.’

‘Wot a load of shit,’ Ed laughed. ‘Wot are you on?’
‘Hi, Ed,’ Amy said, returning with another apple. ‘Here.’
‘Thanks. Fibre,’ I said to Ed, holding the apple up to him. ‘I’m on lots of

fibre.’

‘Ready?’

‘Read—hey,’ I said indignantly, ‘there’s a bite out of this apple.’
Amy nodded. ‘Ya. Somebody was eating it.’
I looked at her. ‘What are you loik?’ I said in my best Dublin accent.
She  just  shrugged  and  got  ready  with  her  two  apples,  poised  to  drop.

‘Ready?’

‘Ready,’ I said.
‘Wot you doin this for?’ Ed asked as we let the apples go. ‘Eh? Ken?’ Ed

said, while Amy and I concentrated on the fruit falling to its doom. ‘What’s
the—?’ The apples duly splattered. ‘Aow, yeah!’ Ed said.

‘See?’
‘That’s why,’ I said.
‘Cool, man.’
‘Melon?’ said Amy.
‘Melon, definitely,’ I agreed, hefting it.
‘Let me!’ said Ed. ‘I want to drop the melon!’ Amy and I exchanged looks.

‘Come on!’ said Ed. ‘I haven’t got to drop nuffink yet.’

‘That’s the test,’ Amy said, sternly. ‘You have to bring something worth

dropping to the party, or it’s no entry.’

I nodded. ‘You haven’t been initiated.’
‘I’ll get sumfing!’ Ed started towards the apartment, then stopped. ‘Old on;

let’s see the melon go first.’

I held it out over the drop with both hands and then let it go.
Amy whooped and we high-fived. ‘Outstanding!’
‘Fucking yeah, man!’
‘Fine sport.’
‘We need more fruit.’
‘I’ll find some, I’ll find some.’
‘You’ll be lucky.’
‘Yeah, something of a short-fall situation on the fruit front.’
‘I’ll find sumfing else.’
‘What?’
‘I dunno; rubbish, junk.’
‘Have you seen this place? Their living-room’s like an operating theatre;

they don’t have junk.’

‘They’re movin, man. They must have stuff they’re frowin out.’

‘Good point. See what you can find.’
‘Let’s all see what we can find.’
‘Even better.’
‘What’s going on out here?’ Kul asked.
‘The very man!’ I said. Kul had a bit of a sheen on him; looked a little

glassy-eyed. It never did take much to get him drunk. ‘Kul; you must have
loads of stuff you were going to throw out, haven’t you?’

‘Umm, well …’

Most of the people at the party were taking turns to throw things over the
parapet. For a dedicatedly minimalist couple, Faye and Kul had a surprising
amount of stuff they weren’t going to miss when they quit the loft: quite a lot
of  old  kitchen  bits  and  pieces,  like  bowls,  plates,  jars,  a  broken  juicer,  a
defunct Thermos flask, some outdated goblets, a bilious green fondue set …
then  a  handful  of  ornaments  they’d  been  given  by  Faye’s  parents,  which
they’d never liked or ever displayed but had kept in case the old couple ever
came  to  visit  (the  ornaments  were,  like  Faye’s  parents,  pretty  hideous),
followed by bigger stuff as Faye and Kul got into it and people started to cam-
cord  what  was  happening:  an  old  hi-fi  system,  a  bust  TV,  a  misbehaving
radio, and bottles; lots of bottles.

‘Me fuckin car!’ Ed wailed as half a dozen carefully released wine bottles

plummeted to their destruction. A big cheer went up as they shattered, more
or less simultaneously.

‘The wreckage is going nowhere near the damn car, Ed,’ I told him.
‘You can’t be fuckin sure, man. What about me tyres? Those are fuckin

brand new tyres. They cost a bleedin fortune. Plob’ly.’

‘Bean bags?’ Amy laughed as one of Kul’s promoter chums heaved through

the  crowd  clutching  two  of  the  things  over  his  head  like  giant  brown
scrotums.

‘You have - you ever had bean bags?’ I said to Kul.
He shrugged. ‘Promise you won’t tell.’
‘What’s the point?’ somebody shouted. ‘They’re not going to shatter.’
‘Now,’ the promoter chum said (he meant ‘No’, but, like Ed, he was from

Sarf Landin). ‘But I was finking that if you, like, dropped eavier stuff on top
of them …’

‘Brilliant!’ I yelled, deeply impressed at such forethought.

‘Kul?’ Faye said, laughing but sounding a little unsure. ‘I thought you liked

that chair.’

‘Yeah, well, not that much,’ Kul said. ‘Give me a hand here …’
We got the big metal and wood chair up onto the parapet, a whole bunch of

us positioned it where it looked like it would drop onto one or both of the
bean bags, then we let it go.

Very big cheer for the chair; direct hit on one of the bean bags resulting in

an explosive spray of white polystyrene beads splashing out across the now
fabulously  wreckage-strewn  car  park  like  a  giant  snowy  feather  pointing
towards the chain-link fence.

‘Hey,  if  we  dropped  this  fish  tank,  would  the  fish  experience

weightlessness? I mean, like, double weightlessness? Just kidding.’

‘Faye, do you want this old table?’
‘I found more bottles!’
Faye looked at Kul, her eyes wide. She clicked her fingers. ‘That case of

awful Cava my uncle got cheap from Tesco! Remember?’

Kul  took  her  face  in  his  hands  and  kissed  her.  ‘Knew  it  would  come  in

useful for something. You certainly can’t drink the stuff.’ He set off towards
the  interior.  An  unsteady  stream  of  bottles  of  various  sizes  whistled  to  the
asphalt, each getting a small cheer as it hit. People were calling out marks for
technical merit and artistic achievement.

‘I bet you started this, didn’t you, Ken?’ I turned to find Nikki perched on

her crutches, all grumpy glare.

I  held  up  my  hands.  ‘Guilty,’  I  said,  surprised  at  her  expression.  ‘Why?

What’s wrong?’

‘Throwing perfectly good food away is wrong, Ken,’ she said, shaking her

head as though at a child who needed to be told that scrawling on the walls
with crayons was bad.

‘It was only a few bits of fruit,’ I said. ‘It would probably have been—’
‘Oh, Ken,’ she said. She shook her head and stumped away.
Kul  came  back  with  a  cardboard  box  full  of  bottles  of  Cava  and  started

handing  them  out  to  the  many  grasping  hands.  ‘Just  for  dropping,’  he  told
people seriously. ‘I beg of you; whatever you do, don’t drink it.’

I half-heartedly considered trying to get to within bottle-handing-out range

of him, but the press of people was too great.

I turned to Amy and held up my hands.
‘Never mind,’ she said.
We  leaned  back  against  the  east-facing  parapet.  She  put  out  her  hand  to

shake. ‘Good new game, Ken.’ She looked flushed, excited.

days.’

‘Really?’
More big cheers as the full Cava bottles hit with satisfyingly loud thuds and

booms. ‘Shake them first! Shake them up first!’ somebody was shouting.

‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘Call me a purist, but I feel the soul kind of went out of it

when we switched from fruit and lost our amateur status.’

‘You can’t live in the past, Ken.’
‘I suppose.’
‘We should be proud we were there at the start.’
‘You’re right. Was it my idea or yours?’ I asked.
‘Maybe we had it together.’
‘Indeed.’
‘Absolutely.’
‘Great minds.’
‘Idea; time had come.’
‘Not about ownership; about result.’
‘Destiny.’
‘-’s Child.’
‘Synchronicity.’
‘The Police,’ I said, just as my mobile went (I keep mine on vibrate, too).

As I pulled it out of my jacket, Amy’s ring-tone sounded; something classical
I knew but couldn’t name.

‘Ha-ha,’ she said. ‘Synchronicity indeed.’
I  laughed  and  looked  at  the  display  on  my  phone;  my  producer,  calling

from the office. I heard one or two other phones going off around the place
and  thought  I  could  hear  the  land-line  in  the  apartment  too  and  wondered
hazily whether for some bizarre reason everybody here had something urgent
they had set alarms for, a little after two o’clock on a Tuesday in September.

‘Yo, Phil,’ I said. Amy answered her call too.
‘What?’
‘What?’
‘New York?’
‘The what?’
‘Where?’
‘The World Trade Center? Isn’t that—?’

‘A plane? What, a big plane, like a Jumbo or something?’
‘You mean, like, the two big, um, skyscrapers?’
Kulwinder was walking back through the crowd of people as more phones

went  off  and  faces  started  to  look  puzzled  and  the  atmosphere  began  to
change and chill around us. He was heading for the loft’s main space again,
talking to somebody on his phone. ‘Yeah, yeah, I’ll put the TV on …’

Two

DRESS-DOWN WEDNESDAY

‘Half  Man  Half  Limp  Bizkit  there.  Their  Mission  Impossible  theme-ette.
Hasn’t been on the play list for a while, Phil. You attempting to make some
sort of point with that title?’

‘Not me, boss.’
‘You sure, Phil?’ I looked across the desk at him. We were in our usual

studio at Capital Live!. I sat surrounded by screens, buttons and keyboards
like  some  sort  of  commodities  dealer,  because  that’s  the  way  studios  have
gone, even in the relatively short time that I’ve been in the wonderful world
of  radio  broadcasting;  you  had  to  search  for  the  two  CD  players  -  in  this
studio, up to my right between the e-mail screen and the callers’ details screen
- to reassure yourself that you weren’t some suit playing the futures market.
Only the microphone, angle-poised out from the main console, gave the game
away.

‘Positive,’ Phil said, blinking behind his glasses. Phil’s glasses had thick

black  frames,  like  Michael  Caine  as  Harry  Palmer,  or  Woody  Allen  as
himself.  Phil  Ashby  was  a  big,  gentle,  rumpled-looking  guy  with  thick,
unruly,  prematurely  salt-and-pepper  hair  (the  grey  entirely  down  to  me,  he
said, though I had photographic evidence to the contrary) and a slight West-
country  burr  to  his  voice;  he  had  a  relatively  slow,  drawly,  almost  sleepy
delivery,  which,  though  I’d  never  admit  it  to  him,  complemented  my  own
voice. A running joke we’ve used is that he’s on permanent Valium while I’m

forever speeding, and one day we’ll swap drugs and just both sound normal.
Phil had been my producer for the last year here at Capital Live!. Another two
months  and  I  would  have  established  a  new  on-air  employment  record.  I
rarely  last  more  than  a  year  before  I  get  sacked  for  saying  something  that
somebody somewhere thinks I shouldn’t have. ‘Lalo.’

‘What?’ It was my turn to blink.
‘Lalo,’ Phil repeated. I could only see his head above the various screens

and electronic gear between us. Sometimes I couldn’t even see that if he’d got
his head buried in a newspaper.

‘Isn’t that one of the Teletubbies? I only ask because I know you are an

expert.’

‘No; Lalo Schifrin.’ He fell silent, shrugged.
‘Good radio shrug there, Phil.’ I had sound effects for many of the silent

syllables that made up Phil’s fractured body language, but I was still working
on one for a shrug.

He raised his eyebrows.
‘Right.’ I picked up an old-fashioned mechanical stopwatch from the green

baize of the desk. I clicked it. ‘Okay, I’m putting the dead air stopwatch on
you until you explain yourself, Ashby.’ I glanced up at the big studio clock
above  the  door.  Another  ninety  seconds  and  we  were  off  air.  Through  the
triple  glazing,  in  the  production  suite  where  producers  used  to  be  decently
confined,  in  the  good  old  days,  our  assistants  appeared  to  be  conducting  a
low-level  conflict,  which  consisted  of  throwing  paper  planes  at  each  other.
Bill the newsreader wandered in on them, waving his script and shouting.

‘Lalo Schifrin,’ Phil said patiently into the silence on our side of the glass.

‘He wrote the original theme for Mission Impossible.’

I  clicked  the  stopwatch  off.  ‘Four  seconds;  you’re  not  even  trying.  So;

Lalo. You mean for the TV series, I take it.’

‘Yes.’
‘Bully for him. And your point would be, caller?’
Phil knitted his brows. ‘Vaguely pop-related people with names that sound

like they were given them by babies.’

I snorted. ‘Just people? So “Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da”, by the Fabs, wouldn’t

count? Or “In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida”? Or “Gaba-Gaba Hey”?’

‘Hardly target audience, Ken.’
‘Is Lalo?’
‘Jay-Lo.’
‘Jay-Lo.’

‘Jennifer Lopez.’
‘I know who Jay-Lo is.’
‘P. Diddy, for that matter.’
‘Lulu? Kajagoogoo? Bubba without the Sparxx? Iio? Aaliyah?’
‘Gawd rest the poor girl’s soul.’
I shook my head. ‘It’s only Tuesday and we’re at the Friday bottom-of-the-

barrel stage already?’

Phil scratched his head. I pressed a Function button on my FX keyboard; an

exaggerated,  wooden,  head-scratching  noise  of  dubious  comedic  value
sounded in my headphones. It was either that or the dead air watch again, and
you can over-do these things. Our listeners, whom we knew - thanks to some
very  expensive,  pro-active  and  robust  market  research  -  to  be  statistically
stoutly loyal and containing a major proportion of ad-agency prime-target As
and  Bs  with  a  lofty  disposable  income  profile,  would  be  familiar  with  the
array of assertedly wacky and indeed even zany sound effects I used to give
them an idea of Phil’s silent on-air actions. They also knew about dead air,
which is the terrifically technical term us radio boffins use for silence. I took a
breath. ‘Can we talk about what we haven’t talked about yet?’

‘Must we?’ Phil looked pained.
‘Phil, I was held off the air for three days last week; we played the pop

equivalent of martial music through the whole show yesterday—’

‘What, is that what you get from Marshall amps, yeah?’
‘—and yet we’re told the world changed for ever seven days ago. Shouldn’t

a purportedly topical show reflect that?’

‘I didn’t even know you knew the word “purportedly”.’
I  leaned  closer  to  the  mike,  lowering  my  voice.  Phil  closed  his  eyes.

‘Thought for today, listener. For our American cousins …’ Phil groaned. ‘If
you do find and kill Bin Laden, assuming he is the piece of scum behind this,
or  even  if  you  just  find  his  body  …’  I  paused,  watching  the  hands  on  the
studio  clock  flick  silently  towards  the  top  of  the  hour.  Phil  had  taken  his
glasses off. ‘Wrap him in pigskin and bury him under Fort Knox. I can even
tell you how deep: thirteen hundred and fifty feet. That’s one hundred and ten
storeys.’ Another pause. ‘Don’t worry about that noise, listeners, it’s just the
sound of my producer’s head gently thumping on the desk. Oh, one last thing:
as it stands, what happened last week wasn’t an attack on democracy; if it was
they’d have crashed a plane into Al Gore’s house. That’s it for today. Talk to
you  tomorrow,  if  I’m  still  here.  News  next  after  these  vital  pieces  of
consumerist propaganda.’

‘I was in Bond Street this morning. DKNY had no normal stock that I could
see at all. Do you know what they had instead, Kenneth?’

‘No, I don’t know, Ceel. Why don’t you tell me?’
‘They had five thousand red T-shirts with the twin towers on them. Five

thousand. Red. That was all. In the whole shop. It was like an art gallery, not a
shop.  I  thought,  Hey,  that’s  really  touching,  really  artistic.  I  also  thought,
They’ll never sell all those, but somehow it didn’t matter.’ She turned in the
bed  and  looked  at  me.  ‘Everything  seems  so  quiet,  so  spooky,  don’t  you
think?’ She turned back again.

I  stroked  away  a  rope  of  her  long  brown  hair  and  licked  at  the  valley

between her shoulder blades. That hollow was the colour of milk chocolate
and tasted of salt. I breathed in the warm scent of her skin, senses swimming,
losing myself in the sweet, heady microclimate of her long, slim body.

‘It’s the planes,’ I said at last, smoothing a hand down her flank, over waist

and hip to thigh. Her body, so light for somebody so definitely black, looked
dark as old mahogany against the startling whiteness of the hotel sheets.

‘The planes?’ she asked, taking my hand and holding it in hers.
‘They’ve stopped them flying over the city on the way into Heathrow. So

another Mr Atta can’t crash-dive into the Canary Wharf tower or the Houses
of Parliament. Makes the whole place seem quieter.’

(That  day,  sitting  in  the  ruins  of  the  abandoned  party  at  Faye  and

Kulwinder’s,  while  it  slowly  dawned  on  those  two  that  they  would  not  be
going  to  NYC  for  their  honeymoon,  at  least  not  the  following  day  and
probably  for  many  days,  we  kept  going  out  onto  the  terrace  to  look  at  the
Canary  Wharf  towers,  tall  against  the  skyline  less  than  a  mile  away,  half
expecting  to  see  them  hit  by  a  plane  and  crumble  with  the  same  awful
grandeur as the first tower. ‘It’s Pearl Harbor II,’ we said. ‘They’ll fucking
nuke  Baghdad.’  ‘I  can’t  believe  this.  I  just  can’t  believe  I’m  seeing  this.’
‘Where’s Superman? Where’s Batman? Where’s Spiderman?’ ‘Where’s Bruce
Willis, or Tom Cruise, or Arnie, or Stallone?’ ‘The barbarians have seized the
narrative.’ ‘Fuck, the bad guys are re-writing the scripts … !’ ‘Challenger and
Chernobyl were SF, Aum Shinrikyo and the Tokyo Underground was manga;
this is a disaster movie directed by Satan.’

Switching channels, some man on the Beeb was saying that when people

claimed they’d seen people jumping from the towers they were really only
seeing  cladding  falling  off.  Then  you  switched  back  and  saw  the  bits  of
cladding  holding  hands  as  they  jumped  together,  skirts  blowing  up  around
their  bodies.  Then  the  second  tower  collapsed,  and  there  was  no  more
jumping  or  falling  to  be  done,  just  the  catching  up  with  the  additional
fragments of atrocity popping up and ploughing in elsewhere in America.)

hand. ‘But I mean it’s really quieter, too, Kenneth.’ Ceel was the only person
apart from my mother who ever called me Kenneth. (Well, also apart from Ed,
who sometimes called me Kennif, and Ed’s mum, who’s been known to call
me  Kennit,  but  that  doesn’t  count.)  ‘Less  …  fewer  people.  Especially  in
places like Mayfair and Knightsbridge, and Chelsea, too.’

‘Ah; the posh places; the hedonistic ’hoods. You reckon they’re quieter?’
‘Yes. I think they’re all staying in their places in the country.’
‘You’re probably right. So why are you still here?’
‘I hate Gladbrook.’
Gladbrook was Ceel’s place in the country, or rather her husband’s. Deepest

Surrey.  Disliked  it  the  instant  I  heard  of  it,  even  before  Ceel  told  me  her
husband only really used it for business meetings and impressing people. She
said she could never feel at home there and hated staying so much as a single
night. I mean, Gladbrook; it even sounded wrong, like the name of an off-the-
shelf company some well-smarmy City type would buy to front a dodgy tax-
shy scam. Never actually been there, but I saw the estate agent’s details for
the place once; basically a coffee-table book, it should have had its own ISBN
number. Ran to a good forty pages including all the glossy photographs, but
all anyone needed to know was that the main house had a heated driveway.
You know; for all those blizzards they get in Surrey.

‘Is that where Mr M is?’
‘No, John is in Amsterdam again.’
‘Hmm.’ John. Mr M. Mr Merrial. In the import-export business. Drugs, to

begin with; people, largely, these days. Plus fingers in more pies than he has
fingers.  Some  of  Mr  M’s  business  interests  were  even  legal  these  days;
impressive property portfolio, apparently. A man a little older than me; maybe
about  forty.  A  quiet,  even  diffident  guy,  by  all  accounts,  with  a  half-posh,
vaguely  south-east  accent,  pale  skin  and  black  hair,  usually  dressed  in  an
unshowy  Savile  Row  suit  and  not  at  all  the  sort  of  chap  who  looks  like  a
multi-millionaire  crime  lord  who  could  have  people  much  more  important
than me rubbed out as quietly and efficiently - or as painfully and messily - as
he wants, any day of the week. And I’m screwing his wife. I must be fucking
mad.

(But then when we fuck, and I am lost in her, surrendered to those depths

beyond  mere  flesh,  nothing  could  be  better,  nothing  ever  has  been  better,
nothing  ever  will  be  better.  There  is  no  one  like  her,  no  one  so  calm  and
studied  and  child-like  and  innocent  and  wanton  and  wise  all  at  once.  She
thinks I am mad, too, but only for wanting her so much in the first place, not
for risking whatever her husband would do to me if he ever found out about

us.

For  herself  she  says  she  has  no  fear  because  she  feels  she  is  half  dead

already. I have to try to explain this. She doesn’t mean half dead in any trivial
sense of being tired-out or tired of life or anything like that, but half dead in a
way unique to - and only capable of definition by - her own bizarre, self-made
religion,  a  belief  system  without  name,  ceremony  or  teachings,  which  she
cleaves  to  with  the  airy  casualness  of  the  truly  convinced,  not  the
fundamentalist intensity of those who secretly guess they may well be wrong.
It’s  a  mad,  bastard  concoction  of  Voodoo  spirituality  and  cosmologically
intense physics, like something Stephen Hawking might have dreamed up on
a really bad acid trip.

Me,  I  was  a  Humanist,  an  Evangelical  Atheist,  a  fucking  card-carrying

member of the Rationalist Inquisition, and Ceel’s totally barking but utterly
unrufflable beliefs just drove me crazy, but the truth was neither of us really
cared and the only time we discussed stuff like that was in bed; she enjoyed
being told she was nuts and she loved the way it got me worked up.

What it boiled down to was Ceel sincerely believed herself to be half dead

in the sense of existing in this world while in a deeply soul-entangled state
with a twin Ceel in another reality who was dead, a Ceel who died almost
exactly half her life ago, when she was fourteen.

It’s all to do with lightning, with the lightning … We’ll come back to this.)
‘And have you seen, Kenneth, how everybody’s become so suspicious?’
‘Suspicious?’
‘Yes; looking at each other like everybody they meet might be a terrorist.’
‘You want to take the Underground, kid. People have started eyeing each

other; especially anybody carrying anything that might be big enough to be a
bomb,  even  more  so  if  they  put  it  down  on  the  floor  and  could  even
conceivably leave it there when they get off.’

‘I get claustrophobic on the Underground.’
‘I know.’
‘I take buses sometimes,’ she said in a small voice, as though to apologise

for having a chauffeur-driven Bentley on call and an unlimited taxi account.

‘So you’ve told me. And may I express, on behalf of the struggling masses,

our gratitude that you deign to descend amongst us and grace our mean and
surly lives with your radiant presence, ma’am.’

She  slapped  my  hand  gently  and  made  a  tutting  sound.  I  took  my  hand

away and brought it down over her flat belly, through the soft spring of curls
and dipping to the cleft beneath.

before,’ she said, taking my hand again. She held it as she rolled over on the
snow-white sheets and settled on her front.

though  somebody  had  traced  a  henna  tattoo  of  forest  ferns  upon  her  light-
brown skin. It stretches from one shoulder, skirting her breast, and continuing
down to the honeyed swell of her hip. This is from the lightning.

‘What is that?’ I remembered breathing, on the night of the day that I first

saw it, nearly four months ago in the alloyed sheen of golden street and silver
moon light, in another room across the city. It was like something from an iffy
Science Fiction series, from budget Star Trek or Alien Nation or something;
thinking it really was some sort of weird fern/henna tattoo I even tried to lick
and rub it off. She just lay there, watching me, great dark eyes unblinking.

‘That is from when I half died,’ she said matter-of-factly.
‘What?’
‘From the lightning, Kenneth.’
‘Lightning?’
‘Yes, lightning.’
‘Lightning as in thunder and—?’
‘Yes.’
She had stood on a cliff in Martinique once, when she was barely more

than a child, watching a storm, and had been hit by lightning.

Her heart stopped. She could feel it had stopped, and when she fell down it

was pure luck that she fell back into the grass and not forward off the cliff
towards the rocks thirty metres below. She had felt very calm and had known
as she lay there - waiting for her heart to start again and the smell of burning
hair to disappear - that she was most definitely going to live, but she was also
absolutely  certain  that  the  world  had  gone  in  two  different  directions  at
exactly the point when the lightning bolt struck her, and that in another world,
right alongside this one and identical until that point in every respect, she had
died, either killed by the bolt itself or fallen to her death on the rocks below.

‘There is still a small mark on my head, too,’ she’d told me, in the dark-

brown  heat  of  that  first  remembered  room.  She’d  smoothed  back  her  hair
above her forehead, revealing a thin, wavy brown line that ran, barely more
than the thickness of a single hair itself, from the edge of her scalp back into
the tangled wilds of her long, light-dark hair.

I stared at it for a while. ‘Jesus Christ. I’m fucking Harry Potter.’ She’d

smiled.)

I traced the frond-lines with my gaze as she guided my hand down to the

cheeks of her perfect behind. ‘If you like,’ she said, ‘perhaps, you may go
here, instead?’

‘I’m on it, babe.’
‘… Ah yes, so you are. Gently, now.’
Somewhere beyond and beneath the layers of thick, dark curtains, London

growled quietly to itself.

‘What’s that?’

‘Ah.’  I  sighed  happily,  staring  at  the  framed  note.  ‘Yes;  my  very  first

complaint letter. I was sort of locum DJ at StrathClyde Sound, sitting in on
the  nightly  Rock  Show  while  our  resident  Tommy  Vance  wannabe  was
attending to his customary mid-January drying-out regime.’

‘I can’t read it.’
‘Yeah;  I  used  to  think  the  smudges  were  the  result  of  tears,  but  then  I

realised it was probably just drool. Least it’s not written in green ink.’

‘What did you do?’
‘Suggested Lynyrd Skynyrd and Mountain should appear on a double bill.’
Nikki looked at me blankly.
‘Well, you had to be there,’ I sighed. ‘Before your time anyway, child.’
‘Lynyrd  Skynyrd  were  a  band  from  the  States  whose  plane  flew  into  a

hillside,’ Phil supplied, looking up briefly from his Guardian. ‘They wrote a
song  called  “Sweet  Home  Alabama”,  seen  as  a  Confederate  reply  to  Neil
Young’s “Southern Man”, which was an indictment of Southern racism.’

‘Ah-hah,’ Nikki said. I had the strong impression we might as well have

been talking about ancient Greece.

‘Phil has all the annoying attributes of Encarta without the ease-of-turning-

off facility,’ I told her.

‘Start  talking  about  your  sex  life,  Ken;  that  usually  does  the  trick,’  Phil

said, reaching for another piece of chewing gum.

‘Oh yeah, and he smokes,’ I said. ‘Phil, isn’t it time for your next nicotine

patch?’

He glanced at his watch. ‘Nope. Eighteen minutes, forty seconds to go. Not

that I’m counting.’

We were in the show’s office in the Soho Square Headquarters of Capital

Live!, part of The Fabulous Mouth Corporation complex in what used to be
the United Film Producers building. Afternoon; Phil - who trawls the press
assiduously  for  material  before  the  show  -  then  goes  on  to  read  the

broadsheets afterwards. Unforgivable.

Assistant Kayla - a droopy-eyed über-fem-geek forever in graded shades

and camo baggies - was on standard afternoon perpetual phone duty, hitting
and hitted, scribbling notes and talking in a quietly intense monotone.

Nikki  shook  her  head  and  hobbled  towards  the  next  frame  on  the  office

wall. She was down to one crutch now, but still lame. Her plaster had been
covered  in  a  variety  of  multi-coloured  messages.  She  was  here  because  I
knew she was a Radiohead fan and Thom Yorke had been coming in to talk
on our lunchtime show. Only now, we’d just heard, he wasn’t, so the best I
could offer the girl was a tour round the place, culminating here in the narrow,
much partitioned and generally broken-up space where Phil, myself, our two
assistants and the occasional back-up researcher put the show together each
day. From here we had a fine view of the rain-stained, white-glazed bricks of
the light-well, though if you squatted down by the windows and looked up,
you could see the sky.

The office walls were mostly covered in posters for Indie bands I had never

heard of - I suspected Phil only hired assistants who heartily despised all the
music  we  played;  it  was  one  of  his  little  rebellions  against  the  system  -
however, we did have (as well as the office-equipment mandatory portrait of
our Dear Owner, Sir Jamie) a few Sony awards, donated gold and platinum
discs  from  artists  and  bands  who’d  been  cruelly  deceived  by  their  record
companies into thinking we’d helped them with their careers, and - what I
was genuinely by far the most proud of - a modest but high-quality collection
of framed landmark hate mail.

‘This one’s a lawyer’s letter,’ Nikki said, frowning.
‘Just a sample,’ muttered Phil.
‘Yes,’ I said. ‘I’d suggested that if you speeded up “You Are The Sunshine

of My Life” by Stevie Wonder, you got the main riff from “Layla” by your
man Clapton. There was talk of legal action, but it passed.’

‘Duane Allman,’ Phil said.
‘What?’ I asked him.
‘Came up with the riff; not Clapton. Allegedly.’
‘You know, the lips are particularly rich in blood vessels, Philip; you could

usefully stick that nicotine patch there.’

Nikki nudged me hard with one elbow and nodded at the next Frame of

Shame. ‘That one?’

‘Ah, my first death threat,’ I said with what I hoped sounded like undue

modesty. ‘A particularly proud moment.’

‘Death threat?’ Nikki asked, wide eyes twinkling.

‘Yes, my dear, from funny, sleepy old Northern Ireland, where time stands

still. I’d said let the Orangemen walk through Catholic areas, but for every
march they got to take part in, a similar-size one had to be allowed through
Loyalist areas, with tricolours, posters of Bobby Sands—’

‘Seventies hunger-striker and Republican martyr,’ Phil squeezed in.
‘—lots  of  hearty  singing  of  Republican  songs;  that  sort  of  thing,’  I

continued. ‘Which sort of developed into my patent three-word solution for
the Troubles: “United, federal, secular. Now get on with it.”’

‘That’s eight words,’ Phil mumbled.
‘I was allowing for subsequent editing,’ I said, looking brightly at Nikki.

‘Anyway, exception was duly taken; they’re awfully touchy over there.’

Phil cleared his throat. ‘I think your humorous observation about the Red

Hand of Ulster being a symbol of a land won by a loser prepared to mutilate
himself to claim a scraggy patch of rain-lashed bog may have contributed to
your healthy fan-base in the Shankhill, too.’

‘See? You try to bring out the local colour in some quaint little part of the

Provinces and these silly people insist on taking it all the wrong way.’

‘I’m sure your Nobel Peace Prize is in the post, Uncle Ken,’ Nikki said.

‘This one?’

‘First international death threat,’ I said. ‘All due to our then spanking-new

web-feed.  Back  to  the  old  gun  control  debate  again.  I  was  arguing  for,  if
memory serves. But I was making the point that in the US it was all too late;
they’d made their bed and they damn well had to lie in it. In the States I was
for no gun control laws at all. In fact in the States I reckoned guns should be
made compulsory for all teenagers. Might produce a grand kill-off, of course,
but who’s to say that was such a bad thing in the end? That way there’d be
less of the little bastards to bother the rest of the world. And why stop at just
hand-guns  and  automatic  weapons?  Let’s  get  with  grenade  launchers,  pull
down  some  mortar  and  mines  action,  get  jiggy  with  some  surface  to  air
ordnance  and  serious-calibre  heavy  weaponry.  Chemical  and  biological
weapons, too; they’re kind of the green option, in a wacky sort of way. Long-
range missiles. Nukes too. And if some dickhead with a grudge decides to
waste Manhattan or Washington with one of these, well, too bad. That’s the
price you pay for freedom.’

Nikki looked at me. ‘And they pay you for this, Ken?’
‘Young lady, for this they don’t just pay me, they compete for me.’
‘He’s a hot DJ,’ Phil said.
‘There you are,’ I told her.
‘Yup, hot like a potato,’ Phil said.

I smiled at Nikki. ‘He’s going to say, “Always getting dropped …”’
‘Always getting dropped.’
‘… Told you.’

‘Now, Nikki. Are you sure I can’t take you for lunch?’

‘Yeah, I’m fine, thanks.’
‘But you must be hungry.’
‘No, I’d better get back. Books to order, stuff to read, you know.’
‘Flying start at the Chinese course.’
‘That’s the idea.’
We were sitting in my ancient Land Rover in the office’s underground car

park, waiting for the engine’s plugs to warm up.

‘Are you sure I can’t take you for something to eat? Come on; it’ll make up

for not meeting Lord Thom of Yorke. I was all set to deliver this great treat
and then I was thwarted. I really feel I need closure here. Seriously; I know
some great places. We may well see some celebs.’

‘No, thanks.’
‘Is that your final answer?’
‘Yep.’
‘Would you like to call a friend?’
‘No, really. Look, you don’t have to drive me back to Craig’s, Ken. I can

jump in a taxi.’

‘Jump?’
‘Well; hobble, fall in. Honest. I don’t mind.’
‘Not at all. I promised your dad I’d get you home safely.’
‘I can look after myself, you know, Ken,’ Nikki said, smiling indulgently at

me.

‘Never doubted it. But taking you back is the least I can do. Rain check on

lunch? Some other time? Say yes.’

‘Some other time,’ she agreed, sighing.
‘Brilliant.’ The little coil-warming lamp on the fascia went out; I started the

engine and it settled down into an alarming percussive rattle. ‘Hey,’ I said,
heaving  on  the  bus-sized  wheel  to  pull  us  out  of  the  parking  bay,  ‘I  don’t
know if I’ve said, but I think it’s really cool you getting into Oxford.’

She shrugged, looked almost embarrassed.
‘You’re absolutely certain you don’t want to celebrate your ascension to the

dreaming spires with some slap-up nosh?’

She just looked at me.
I laughed, turning for the exit ramp. ‘Oh well. Come on then; let’s get you

home.’ I swung the Land Rover out of the Mouth Corp car park; we went
bouncing and rattling and squeaking into Dean Street. I looked over at her.
‘What’s so funny?’

Nikki laughed to herself for a moment, then glanced over at me through her

long red hair. ‘I wasn’t expecting a Land Rover,’ she said. ‘I thought you’d
have a Harley Davidson, or a limo, or maybe a Smart or one of those Audis
that looks like a bar of soap or something.’

‘I was never into Harleys,’ I said. ‘Suzis and Kwaks were my kind of bikes,

back in my courier days. But this old thing -’ I slapped the dark grey plastic
fascia under the narrow slab of the Landy’s windscreen ‘- despite, I’ll grant,
looking  like  the  sort  of  transport  that  would  be  infinitely  more  at  home
hauling a brace of sodden sheep from one field to another on a failing hill
farm in darkest Wales, is almost the ideal car for London.’

‘You reckon?’ Nikki sounded like she was humouring me.
‘Think about it,’ I said. ‘It’s old, slow and a bit battered, so nobody’s going

to  want  to  nick  it.  Even  the  wheels  don’t  fit  anything  else.  Look;  comedy
wipers.’ I turned on the windscreen wipers. On a Land Rover of this vintage
they’re about seven inches long and just sort of flop about in a disheartened
kind of way, looking more like they’re waving at the rain to welcome it onto
the glass than undertaking to do anything so strenuous as actually clear the
drops off the windscreen. ‘Look at that; pathetic. No self-respecting vandal’s
even going to bother bending those. Wouldn’t be sporting.’

‘They are a bit pathetic,’ Nikki agreed as I turned them off and let them

slump  with  what  looked  like  exhausted  gratitude  to  the  base  of  the  screen
again.

‘You’re high up - as you may have noticed clambering awkwardly in here

with your gammy leg - so you can see over most other traffic, the better to
take advantage of what overtaking opportunities do arise in the hurly-burly of
metropolitan  motoring.  Then  there  is  the  fact  this  is  a  Series  Three  of  the
diesel persuasion, so when people hear you coming they think you’re a taxi
and often mistakenly treat you with the respect due to your standard Hackney
Carriage.  The  ancient  design  means  that  the  vehicle  is  narrow  as  well  as
having  a  short  wheel-base  for  squeezing  through  gaps  and  into  restricted
parking spaces, and, lastly, driving one of these, no kerb in London holds any
terror for you whatsoever. If a brief expedition onto the pavement or over a
minor traffic island is required to facilitate progress, you just happily bump
onto and over it without a second thought. Now, thanks to the appalling noise

levels and seats patently constructed from low-grade friable concrete it would,
certainly, be utterly hellish on long journeys or at any speed above a brisk jog,
but then when the hell do you get to do either of those in London?’ I glanced
over at her. ‘So, for an agricultural device only one automotive chromosome
removed from a tractor, this is a surprisingly suitable urban runabout. And I
commend the vehicle to the house.’

I waggled my eyebrows at her as we inched along Old Compton Street. I’d

been developing this Why-a-Landy’s-great-for-London speech, and variations
thereof, for nearly a year and this was, IMHO, a particularly fine and well-
delivered example of the breed, which I thought might have elicited a pained
grin  if  nothing  else  from  the  lovely  Nikki,  but  it  drew  only  a  woundingly
blank Oh-yeah, ho-hum look across her glowing features.

‘Could do with power steering, couldn’t it?’ she suggested.
‘And a better turning circle. But glad you spotted that,’ I said. ‘The chance

to maintain upper body strength through in-car exercise is a truly valuable no-
cost option.’

‘Yeah, right,’ she said. She was silent for a few moments, then nodded at

the radio. ‘That’s not your station playing, is it?’

‘Ah, no; that’ll be Mark and Lard on Radio One.’
‘Isn’t that disloyal?’
‘Deeply. Can I let you in on a terrible secret?’
‘What?’
‘I’m only half joking about it being secret,’ I said first. ‘The press haven’t

heard this yet and on a quiet news day with a following wind it could just
make it into print and conceivably cause me problems in a straw-that-breaks-
the-camel’s-back kinda stylee.’

‘Guide’s honour,’ she said, saluting ironically.
‘Thanks. Okay; here it is … hold on …’ I’d been gradually nudging the

Land Rover’s much-dented front further and further into the traffic stream for
the  past  few  vehicle-gaps,  and  somebody  in  a  nice  car  had  finally  got  the
message. I waved cheerfully at the silver Merc that let us out of Old Compton
Street, as we swung onto Wardour Street to start heading north in a vaguely
Highgate-ish direction. I looked at Nikki. ‘Yeah. It’s this: I cannot fucking
stand commercial radio.’ I nodded. ‘There; it’s out now and I feel better for
it.’

‘Including the station you work for, obviously.’
‘Obviously.’
‘So you listen to Radio One.’

And I have a definite weakness for Mark and Lard. There; listen.’ In fact, all
we  were  listening  to  was  the  Landy’s  rattling  engine  and  ambient  outside
traffic  noises  until  the  Boy  Lard  squeaked,  ‘Carry  on,’  and  the  programme
resumed. ‘See?’ I said. ‘Dead air, there; silence. Used to be anathema for DJs
and radio people in general. Nowdays, well, nobody’s much bothered about
leaving pauses any more, but these guys have made it into a feature. Repeat
until funny, as they’d say themselves. Genius.’ I glanced at Nikki, who was
looking sceptically at me from beneath her mass of red hair. ‘But the point,’ I
insisted, ‘is that the Beeb has minimal advertising. I mean, they carry trailers
for their own shows and those can get wearing enough, but what they don’t
have is relentless high-rotation drivel every fifteen minutes from fucking loan
companies, 
ambulance-chasing 
shyster 
legal 
firms 
and 
Chipboard

Warehouse’s owner shouting at you from too near the mike to come on down
and feel the cut of his special offers. I hate adverts. I prefer the licence fee.
That’s how I want to pay; up front, efficiently, then get to listen to what I want
to listen to and nothing else, whether it’s pop-clones or Beethoven or the sort
of crap all-day talk shows that taxi drivers listen to.’

‘I  suppose  that  guy  Phil  points  out  that  the  adverts  are  what  pay  your

wages.’

‘Phil?’ I laughed. ‘He’s a Radio Three and Four man. Hates adverts even

more than I do.’ I glanced at her again as we troubled the usually little-used
upper  regions  of  the  Landy’s  gearbox  in  a  miraculous  void  in  the  traffic,
which gave us an almost clear run to the lights at Oxford Street. ‘Don’t get me
wrong;  he’s  a  good  producer  and  he’s  a  real  muso  -  goes  to  see  a  band
practically every night, whether it’s at Wembley Arena or a pub in Hackney -
but  he  can’t  stand  Capital  Live!  either.  No,  it’s  our  friendly  local  Station
Manager to whom it falls to bring the realities of commercial radio regularly
to our attention.’

We  crossed  Oxford  Street  and  started  to  head  up  Cleveland  Street,

following a motorcycle courier on a Honda VFR. Perhaps, I thought, a little
reminiscing about my days as a fearless gonzo courier - only a few years ago,
after all - would impress Nikki. It started raining and I turned on the wipers,
to hilarious effect. I looked at Nikki. ‘Well, do you listen to Capital Live!?’

‘Mmm … sometimes,’ she said, not looking at me.
‘Yeah,  well,  exactly.  You’re  eighteen;  you  should  be  part  of  our  target

audience. What do you listen to, anyway?’

‘Umm, well, they sort of come and go? But I think they’re all illegal black

stations from south of the river.’

‘What? K-BLAK? X-Men? Chillharbour Lane?’

‘Yeah, and Rough House, Precinct 17.’
‘Radio Free Peckham … is that still going?’
‘No, it was closed down.’
‘Well, frankly, good for you for ignoring the usual commercial tat.’ I was

snatching glances at Nikki to see if she was impressed that I knew all these
cool illegal stations, but she didn’t seem to be. ‘Not,’ I added, ‘that many of
them play much Radiohead, as I recall.’

‘Sadly, no.’
‘Never mind. Radiohead are local where you’re going; bound to get loads

of air time in Oxford.’

‘Hmm.’ She sounded distracted and when I glanced over she was looking at

a clothes shop window. I looked ahead again.

‘Shit!’
‘Oh—!’
A blue car swept out of a side street right into the path of the courier in

front of us. I caught a brief glimpse of the car driver, looking the wrong way
and talking on his mobile. The bike rider didn’t have time to bail or brake,
just went whump into the BMW Compact’s wing; the bike stood on its front
wheel then clattered back to the rain-greased street just in front of us, files
spilling  from  one  pannier  and  skidding  papers  over  the  street  and  into  the
gutter.  The  rider  went  sailing  over  the  Beemer’s  bonnet  as  it  braked  and
skidded to a stop. He landed heavily on the road ahead, sliding on his back a
metre to hit the kerb hard with his helmet.

‘Oh! Oh!’ Nikki was saying.
I’d pulled up. ‘He’ll probably be okay,’ I told her quickly. ‘You just stay

here.’

She nodded. She cleared some hair from her face with a trembling hand

and pulled a mobile from her jacket as I opened the door. ‘Should I phone for
an ambulance?’ she asked.

‘Good  idea.’  I  jumped  out  and  ran  past  the  white-faced  car  driver,  just

getting out, still holding his mobile. It crossed my mind to tell him what a
fuckwit  he  was,  but  I  didn’t.  A  couple  of  people  were  already  standing
looking down at the black figure lying in the road. He wasn’t moving. Some
kid in a puffa jacket was squatting by him, doing something to his helmet.

‘Just leave the helmet on, yeah?’ I said to the kid, kneeling on the courier’s

other side and carefully lifting up his visor.

Behind me, somebody had the sense to turn off the fallen bike’s engine,

which was more than I’d thought to do.

The courier was older than me; grey beard, glasses, face pinched by the

helmet’s foam padding. He blinked. ‘Fuck,’ he said weakly.

‘How you doing there, pal?’ I asked him.
‘Bit sore,’ he croaked. The rain was making little spots on his glasses. He

put his gloved hand up towards the helmet’s fastening. I held on to it.

‘Hold on, hold on,’ I said. ‘Can you feel everything? Waggle your toes and

stuff?’

‘Ah  …  yeah,  yeah,  I  think  …  yeah.  I’m  all  right.  I  think  I’m  all  right.

Breathing’s a bit … What about the bike?’

‘Think you’re going to need new forks.’
‘Shit. Fuck. Ah, rats. You a biker too, eh?’
‘Yeah. Used to be.’
He  looked  away  to  one  side,  where  I  sensed  more  people  standing,  and

somebody  approaching.  I  turned  round  and  saw  the  car  driver.  The  biker
coughed and said wheezily, ‘If this cunt says, “Sorry, mate, I didn’t see you,”
deck him for me, will you?’

Nikki was beautifully bedraggled by the rain.

‘You didn’t need to get out, kid,’ I told her. She was trying to dry her hair

with a small chamois leather. The Landy’s interior was trying to mist up.

‘The  operator  was  asking  me  where  the  incident  had  taken  place,  and  I

couldn’t see the street names,’ she explained. ‘Then I thought I’d better stop
the bike’s engine.’

‘Well, I think the guy’s going to be all right. We did good. We make a fine

emergency team; triples all round.’

I’d left our details with the cops, and the biker had been persuaded to take

the ambulance; he was still dazed and might have some broken ribs. Nikki
had handed him the VFR’s keys, though the cops had taken them away again
because they wanted them left with the machine.

She gave me back the chamois leather. ‘Thanks.’
‘You’re  welcome.’  I  used  it  on  the  windscreen.  ‘Blimey.  Welcome  to

London, eh? Oh; do just say if you need a stiff drink or anything.’

She shook her head. ‘No, thanks.’
‘Yeah, just straight home, I think.’ We continued north, through the rain, for

Highgate.

‘This is about what I think it’s about, isn’t it?’

‘Think so.’
‘So, what do you think?’
‘That we’re going to get carpeted, old son.’
‘Cripes, Biffo. A rocket from the WingCo, eh what?’
‘Severe dressing down. After you.’
‘Tally-fucking-ho.’

‘“… Well here is an alternative fatwa: women of Islam, judge your men, and
if they are bad, kill them. They oppress you and scorn you and yet they are
frightened of you; why else would they keep you from power and the sight of
other men? But you have power. You have the power to judge whether your
man is good or not. Ask yourself this: would your husband kill another person
just because they are Jewish or American or something else people are simply
born to be? Allah has let people be born these things; would your man kill
them for no other reason than the faith or the country they were born into, by
the will of Allah? If he would then he is a bad person and deserves death, for
he brings shame upon your faith and the name of Allah. When next he comes
to you, have a kitchen knife concealed beneath your bedclothes, or a pair of
scissors, or even a penknife or a carton-cutter, and slit his unworthy throat. If
you have no knife, bite out his throat. If you wish only to mutilate him, use a
knife or your teeth on his manhood.” But do we actually say—’

Debbie Cottee, our Station Manager, used the remote to click off the DAT

machine on the other side of her light, airy office. She slid her glasses down
her nose and looked at me with weary, bleary blue eyes. ‘Well?’

‘Hmm,  I  don’t  know,’  I  said.  ‘Do  you  think  we’re  using  too  much

compression on my voice?’

‘Ken …’
‘But nobody,’ Phil said, ‘was actually saying that. I mean, there was a bit

just before that where Ken was saying that we didn’t force Muslim women in
this country to wear mini-skirts or bikinis, whereas a Western woman going to
Saudi has no choice but to conform to their dress-code. The whole point is
about  toleration  and  intolerance,  and  about  public  figures  like  religious
leaders being allowed to pass what is in effect a death sentence, without any
sort of trial or defence, on nationals of another country. That was the whole
point of putting the bit at the start pointing out that nobody in a position of
responsibility in the West would say something like that—’

‘Is fucking irrelevant, Phil,’ Debbie said, putting her glasses down on the

surface of her desk, which covered about the same area as our whole office.
Her view, from near the top of the Mouth Corp building, was out over the

Square and the cluttered rooftops of Soho, towards the blunt, pitted blade of
Centrepoint. Debbie was thirty but looked older; she was fit in a chunky sort
of way, her hair was mousy brown and she had tired, puckered eyes.

‘I’m not sure I see it as irrelevant at all, really,’ Phil said with the air of an

academic discussing some fine point of ancient Etruscan property law, or the
historical basis of estimates for the Yellow River’s silt-deposition rate during
the  Hang  dynasty.  ‘The  whole  point  is  that  you  put  a  disclaimer  at  the
beginning and the end. You’re not saying, “Go and kill these people.” You’re
saying, “No one here is saying, ‘Go and kill these people.’”’

Debbie glared at him. ‘That’s just semantics.’
‘No,  it’s  …  grammar,’  Phil  said,  appearing  baffled  that  anybody  could

possibly think otherwise. He looked briefly at me. Of course it was semantics
rather than grammar (I was almost positive), but Debbie, who was certainly
one  of  the  more  human  execs  in  the  Mouth  organisation  in  general  and
Capital Live! in particular, and not an ignoramus, wasn’t quite smart enough
to  feel  confident  arguing  the  toss  over  that.  At  such  moments  I  loved  my
producer.

‘Phil!’  Debbie  said,  slapping  the  surface  of  her  desk.  Her  flat-screen

monitor wobbled. ‘What if somebody, what if a Muslim person switches on
just after your so-called disclaimer at the start of this, this … diatribe, and
then switches off, totally fucking incensed - as well they fucking might be, if
they can even believe their ears - just before the end? What the fuck are they
going to think they just heard?’

‘Oh, come on,’ Phil said. ‘That’s like asking what if somebody hears the

word “country” but switches off before the “—ry” bit. I mean, it’s just one of
those things.’ He held his hands out.

‘That’s one word; this is a whole speech.’
‘Yes, but it’s the principle,’ Phil insisted stubbornly.
Debbie switched from Phil to me. ‘Ken,’ she said, ‘even for you …’
‘Debbie,’  I  said,  holding  up  both  hands  as  though  in  surrender.  ‘We’re

proving our own point here.’

‘What?’
‘About prejudice, about bigotry.’
‘How  does  insulting  people  do  that?  How  does  the  Islamic  Council  of

Churches  screaming  down  the  phone  at  me  do  anything  to  defeat  bigotry?
You’re just—’

‘Because we had the Head Rabbi screaming down the phone last month,’ I

pointed out.

‘The Israel-as-a-rogue-state rant,’ Phil said, nodding.
‘So  fucking  what?’  Debbie  said  loudly.  ‘Are  you  trying  to  claim  that

insulting two religions is somehow better than insulting one?’

‘It’s being even-handed,’ I agreed.
‘It’s being bigoted towards ethno-religious groupings!’ she shouted. ‘It is,

arguably,  inciting  religious  and  even  racial  hatred  towards  Jews  and
Muslims!’

‘That’s  not  fair,’  I  protested.  ‘We  insult  Christians  too  whenever  we

possibly can. We did that whole week of Christ as Certifiable Nutter.’

‘But he was a Jew!’ Debbie yelled. ‘And sacred to Islam as well!’
‘One stone; three birds!’ I yelled back. ‘What’s the problem?’
‘All  Abrahamic  religions  have  been  selectively  targeted,  over  time,  for

trenchant, robust, but above all fair criticism,’ Phil put in. ‘I have the relevant
records.’

Debbie looked from Phil to me. ‘This isn’t a fucking joke, guys. There are

mosques, synagogues being fire-bombed—’

‘You sure?’ Phil said.
‘—people being attacked because they’re “Middle Eastern” in appearance

—’

‘Yeah, I know,’ I said, shaking my head. ‘Jesus; Sikhs have been attacked

for being Islamic terrorist sympathisers.’ I spread my arms. ‘So proving the
essential point here; bigots are fuckwits. ’

‘The point,’ Debbie said exasperatedly, ‘is that some nasty little dickhead

from  the  National  Front  or  the  British  National  Party  could  listen  in  to  a
programme of yours where you lay into the Jewish people or the Muslims and
fucking cheer you on,  Ken.’  Debbie  slapped  the  desk  again,  but  softer  this
time. She put her glasses back on and fixed her gaze on me. ‘Now is that what
you want?’

This was actually a pretty good point, and one that Phil and I had worried

over  ourselves.  ‘That’s  why  we  have  to  attack  bigotry  and  stupidity
everywhere!’ I blustered. ‘If we stop now they’ll be left thinking the last lot
we went after were the definitive bad guys.’

‘What?’ Debbie said, looking over her glasses at me again. (Fair enough;

this last assertion didn’t make much sense even to me.)

‘I think that is a fair point,’ Phil said, nodding.
‘Well, here are another two points, gentlemen,’ Debbie said, sticking her

glasses  back  up  her  face  and  pulling  herself  closer  in  towards  her  desk.
‘There’s such a thing as this station’s licence and the Broadcasting Standards

Authority.  There  are  also  such  things  as  our  advertisers.  They  pay  all  the
fucking bills and they can pull their ads even faster than the BSA can pull our
licence. Several already have.’

‘But they’ve been replaced,’ Phil said, looking just a little red in the face

now. He took his glasses off.

‘For now, at lesser rates,’ Debbie said steelily.
‘Rates  have  been  going  down  everywhere  for  the  whole  year!’  Phil

protested. He started polishing his glasses with a clean hanky. ‘New ones are
always going to be lower than old ones in the current climate! It’s—’

‘Some  very  important  people,  some  very  vital  advertisers,  have  been

having words with Sir Jamie,’ Debbie said through clenched teeth. (To our
credit, I thought, at this point not one of the three of us even glanced towards
the Dear Owner’s portrait on the wall.) ‘At cocktail parties. In his club. At
board meetings. On the grouse moors. At charity events. Over his mobile and
his home phone. He is not happy. He is not happy to the extent that he is
seriously weighing up which he needs most: your show or his good name.
Which do you think he will choose?’ She sat back, letting this sink in. ‘Guys,
you run a reasonably successful programme for us, but in the end it’s only ten
hours of air time per week out of one hundred and sixty-eight. Sir Jamie’s
backed you until now, Ken, Phil, but he can’t let you jeopardise the station, let
alone the reputation of the Mouth Corporation or the goodwill he’s built up
from nothing over the last thirty years.’

Phil and I looked at each other.
‘Jesus Christ, Debs,’ Phil said shakily. ‘Are you telling us to tone it down,

or are we sacked? I mean, what?’ He put his glasses back on.

‘You’re not sacked. But it’s not just tone it down, it’s make amends.’
‘Make amends?’ I squawked.
‘This attacking Islam and Judaism, in particular, has to be reversed.’
‘So we can attack Christianity?’ I suggested. Debbie glared at me. ‘What?’

I said, holding out both hands.

‘We’ve got the perfect thing,’ Phil announced, just like that.
I did probably the first genuine double-take I’d ever done in my entire life.

‘We have?’

Phil nodded. ‘Ken doesn’t know about this yet,’ he told Debbie.
‘I don’t?’
‘Suggestion came in just yesterday from the Breaking News people.’
(I just managed to prevent myself saying, ‘It did?’)
‘The new Channel Four thing?’ Debbie asked, eyes narrowed.

‘Yeah; their competitor for Newsnight,’ Phil said.
‘Weren’t they trying to poach Paxman for that?’
‘I think so, but he wasn’t having it. Last rumour I heard was their main

presenters would be Cavan Lutton-James and Beth Laing.’

‘She’s on Sky, isn’t she?’
‘Contract coming up for renewal.’
‘Anyway,’ Debbie said, waving one hand.
‘Anyway,’  Phil  said.  ‘They’re  still  doing  dummy  programmes  at  the

moment  but  they  start  for  real  on  Monday  and  they  want  something  hard-
hitting and controversial; something that’ll get them headlines.’

‘I  thought  they  just  wanted  me  to  practise  on  in  one  of  these  dummy

programmes,’  I  said.  (Stupidly,  I  realised,  as  soon  as  I’d  closed  my  mouth
again; it was entirely possible Phil was winging it here.)

‘They did, at first,’ Phil said. ‘I persuaded them otherwise.’
‘They want Ken for the Monday programme?’ Debbie asked.
‘If we can get the terms right,’ Phil said.
Debbie  could  probably  see  the  surprise  on  my  face.  ‘You’re  not  Ken’s

fucking agent, Phil.’

(This  was  true,  though  he  sometimes  acted  like  one.  My  real  agent,  the

long-suffering Paul, complained that thanks to my - to him incomprehensibly
bizarre - political fastidiousness, what I needed was an anti-agent; somebody
who would look for brilliantly remunerative work I could then cheerfully turn
down. In fact, he said, aside from contract negotiation time at the station, all I
really needed was an answering machine that shouted ‘No!’)

‘I mean the terms of control over content and the people involved,’ Phil

explained patiently. ‘I didn’t want Ken going in there thinking he was about to
do a short piece of light relief about mike technique or something and then
being confronted with half a dozen swivel-eyed fanatics representing all the
different brands of fundamentalists we’ve upset over the last year. That’s the
sort of thing that can happen and I just wanted to make sure it wouldn’t.’

‘Why  is  Ken  looking  like  …  well,  like  that?’  She  gestured  at  me.  Like

what? I thought. I tried to look business-like and unperturbed.

Phil glanced my way then said, ‘Look, this is something Ken and I talked

about. We’ve had too many dodgy, manipulative offers for TV appearances
for him in the past. Either they’re too trashy to be worth considering in the
first place, or they sound really interesting and we get all fired up about it
then it falls through, or they change their mind, or it turns out there was some
hidden  agenda.  We  agreed  that  I’d  handle  these  proposals  until  there  was

something worth taking to Ken, then we’d talk about it.’ Phil glanced at his
watch. ‘If it hadn’t been for this meeting we’d be doing just that right now,’
he said. (Happily he didn’t add ‘in the pub’.) He looked at me. ‘Sorry to land
this on you like this, Ken.’ I waved a hand.

‘So …’ Debbie said, still sounding and looking suspicious. ‘What are you

proposing?’

‘That we give them something hard-hitting and controversial, ’ Phil said.
Debbie  still  looked  deeply  dubious,  but  I  could  see  she  was  interested.

‘Which would be what?’

‘One of their ideas is to get Ken to debate with a genuine Holocaust denier;

a  guy  from  the  extreme-right  Aryan  Christian  Movement  who  claims  the
Allies  built  the  death  camps  after  the  War,’  Phil  said.  All  three  of  us
exchanged looks. ‘I wasn’t so sure about that,’ he added. ‘But, well, maybe -
given what you’ve been saying about the perceived if mistaken bias against
the  Jewish  and  Muslim  faiths  -  that  would  be  the  way  to  go  after  all.’  He
turned from Debbie to me. ‘Obviously, only if you feel comfortable with the
idea, Ken. I’m still not sure about it, frankly.’

‘Oh,  I’m  comfortable  with  it,’  I  said.  A  fucking  Holocaust  denier?

Somebody from the extreme Christian right prepared to put themselves up for
a tongue-lashing? What self-respecting militant liberal wouldn’t want to get
their teeth into one of those fucks?

Debbie’s eyes were so narrow they were almost closed. ‘Why do I feel that

this might just be a good idea,’ she asked slowly, ‘and yet we seem to have
come back to the original, totally facile and childish proposal that the way out
of all this was to insult Christians some more?’

‘Oh, come on,’ Phil said with a laugh in his voice. ‘This guy’s Christian

like Satan is Christian. The point is he’s wildly anti-Semitic and he’s mad.
Articulate, but mad. Ken’ll be seen defending—’

‘You sure this guy’s mad?’ Debbie asked.
‘Well, he agrees with the idea currently gaining ground in sections of Arab

society,’ Phil said, in the sort of slow, considered voice that told me he felt
back in control here, ‘that the September eleventh attacks were organised by
the International Zionist Conspiracy to discredit Islam and give Sharon carte
blanche against the Palestinians. But it’s okay; he hates the Arabs too. This
guy  has  a  consistent  belief  system  totally  based  around  race,  religion  and
sexuality; Nordic/Aryan/ Christian/straight equals good … everything else is
just shades of evil.’

‘Who is he? What’s his name?’
‘His name is Lawson, umm … Briarley or something.’

thought of it; my big idea. I knew what I was going to do. If they did let me
onto the show with that anti-Semitic fuck, I knew exactly what I was going to
do to him.

It  was  perfect!  Mad,  bad  and  dangerous  to  contemplate  and  it  probably

meant I was a bit mad, too, but hey; fire with fire. My mouth went dry and my
palms  felt  suddenly  pin-pricked  with  sweat.  Oh,  fuck,  I  thought.  What  a
sweet, beautiful, terrifying idea. Did I really dare?

‘Okay, I’m going to have to consult on this,’ Debbie announced.
I  clicked  back  to  reality.  Debs  was  going  to  kick  it  upstairs.  Sensible

woman.

‘Fine by me,’ Phil said. He looked at me and I nodded. ‘But we need a

decision by Friday at the very latest; tomorrow would be better.’

‘We’ll have one,’ Debbie said. She pushed back on her desk, her big, black,

leather  executive  chair  rolling  over  the  wooden  floor.  We  were  excused,
obviously.

‘Debbie?’ I said, getting up.
‘What?’
‘I want you to make it very clear to whoever else you talk to about this that

I really want to do it. I mean, really want to do it. I think it’s important.’ Phil
looked at me with a frown, then smiled at Debbie.

‘I’ll  let  you  know,’  she  said.  ‘In  the  meantime,  I  think  we’d  all  really

appreciate it if you avoided offending any major ethnic or religious groups.
Could you do that for us?’

‘We can certainly try,’ Phil said merrily.

‘Fuck.’

‘No, it’s okay,’ Phil said as we walked away down a broad corridor lined

with  framed  plaques,  discs,  awards  and  letters  of  thanks  and  endorsement,
none of which were mine. ‘This is a feature, not a bug.’

‘You weren’t making any of that up in there, were you?’
Phil  grinned.  ‘Course  not,  you  silly  sod.’  ‘Sod’,  which  I  was  under  the

impression had dropped off most people’s List Of Plausible Invective around
about  the  early  seventies,  was  Phil’s  most  powerful  expletive.  ‘I’ll  call  the
Breaking  News  people  before  we  hit  the  pub.’  He  frowned  at  me  as  we
stepped into the lift. ‘Didn’t realise you’d be quite so keen.’

I wasn’t going to tell him about my idea. Best if he didn’t know for his own

sake, apart from anything else. ‘Yeah, well,’ I said. ‘Keen Ken; that’s what

they call me.’

‘No they don’t.’

Three

DOWNRIVER, UPTOWN

‘‘What I said was, these namby-pamby Holocaust revision people didn’t go
remotely far enough. It wasn’t just the Holocaust that didn’t happen, it wasn’t
just the death camps that were faked; the whole of the Second World War is a
myth.  Occupation  of  Paris?  Battle  of  Britain?  North  African  Campaign?
Convoys  and  U-Boats?  Barbarossa?  Stalingrad?  Kursk?  Thousand-bomber
raids? D-Day? Fall of Berlin? Singapore? Pearl Harbor? Midway? Hiroshima
and Nagasaki? None of it happened! All special effects and lying. Guys of a
certain  age;  you  remember  thinking  how  close  those  Airfix  Spitfires  and
Lancasters  looked  to  the  real  thing  you  saw  in  the  film  footage?  That’s
because they  were  just  models  too!  All  the  old  airfields,  the  concrete  tank
traps, a few so-called bomb-sites; they were built after the war.’

The girl looked uncertain, then she laughed. ‘That’s insane.’
I  clinked  her  glass.  ‘That’s  the  point.  And  besides,  I  said,  what  sort  of

chicken-shit  Neo-Nazis  are  these  people  anyway?  They  should  be  saying,
“Sure we killed six million; wish it had been more”, not splitting hairs about
whether  it  was  one  million  or  two  million  and  whining  about  the  fucking
Führer being misunderstood.’

‘You don’t actually believe any of this, do you, though?’
‘Are you mad?’ I cackled. ‘Of course not! I’m taking the piss out of fascist

fuckwits!’

‘So is this what this TV thing’s about?’

‘Yeah. They’re going to get one of these nutters for me to “debate” with.’
‘Should  people  like  that  really  be  allowed  to  say  that  sort  of  stuff  on

national TV, though?’

‘Ask Channel Four that, not me,’ I said, drinking up. ‘But, yes, I think they

should.  You  can’t  hide  that  poisonous  shit  away  for  ever;  it’ll  come  out
somewhere. Better to face it and squash it. I want it out in the open. I want to
know who these people are, I want to know where they live.’ I finished my
drink. ‘That’s why these cowardly little shits love the Internet. They can post
any  sort  of  hate-filled  drivel  they  want  with  no  comeback  because  on-line
they can hide. It’s the perfect medium for bullies, liars and cowards.’

We  were  in  the  Golden  Bough,  our  usual  after-show  drinking  hole,  in

Hollen Street. The Bough was a basic central London pub; one of those places
neither  flattered  nor  insulted  to  be  called  a  boozer.  Not  fashionable,  rarely
crowded to the point of standing-room only (save on a Friday evening and
Saturday  night),  reasonable  juke  box,  basic,  unpretentious  food,  only  one
gaming machine - tucked out of the way under the stairs to the small first-
floor function bar - and a solid, unadventurous choice of drink.

There was no particular crowd associated with the place. Instead you got a

smattering  of  all  sorts  in  the  Bough:  workmen  in  dusty  boots  and  paint-
specked overalls, advertising creatives, theatre types, tourists, office workers,
music people, film people, homeless guys nursing a half and keeping warm,
waiting staff from restaurants and posher bars, one or two girls from the sex
shows, and us. There was one dealer who used the place, though for a quiet
drink, not for dealing. A couple of cops stuck their heads round the door about
once a month or so.

The  manageress  was  Clara,  a  brusquely  rotund,  no-nonsense,  half-

Portuguese  grandmother  with  a  dry,  wheezy  laugh  and  sixty-a-day  habit.
Nobody we know has ever seen her without one of two turban-like things on
her head - one green, one yellow - and there was a long-standing, variable-
odds  pot-bet,  which  has  allegedly  been  running  with  a  rolling  roster  of
regulars for over twenty years concerning whether she was bald underneath
there or not. Last time I’d checked it had been 65/35 for slap-headedness and
I’d stood to make a fiver if it turned out she wasn’t.

‘Can I get you a drink? What’ll it be?’
‘Oh, thanks. WKD blue. Cheers.’
‘I haven’t asked you your name,’ I said to the girl as I signalled to Clara.
‘Tanya.’ She stuck her hand out.
‘Ken. Pleased to meet you, Tanya.’
Tanya had overheard Phil and me talking about the Breaking News thing

earlier. I’d seen her staring, brows pinched, at us and she hadn’t looked away
when I’d stared back. I’d guessed she’d picked up an alarming selection of
race-hate-associated buzzwords and was thinking about either walking out or
throwing her drink at us and then running.

‘It’s okay,’ I’d said to her, past Phil’s shoulder. ‘We’re both nice liberals

really and this is genuinely one of those rare occasions when it honestly isn’t
as bad as it sounds.’

Tanya  was  quarter  Jewish,  which  was  one  reason  she  had  been  taking

offence at what she’d thought she’d been overhearing. She worked for a film
company in Wardour Street. I could be pretty sure of this because Phil had
grilled her about the film industry, albeit subtly, for a few minutes. Phil had
this  paranoid  theory  that  unscrupulous  tabloid  journalists  had  realised  we
drank in the Bough, that they thought we were worth exposing in some way
and were likely to send somebody here to coax me into saying something I
might regret, thinking I was talking off the record to a civilian when in fact it
was an undercover journo and I was very much on the record.

Given what I say when I know I’m on record and on air, this seems a fairly

bizarre fear, but there you are.

Anyway,  Tanya  seemed  to  pass  Phil’s  hostile-journo  filter  and  he  lost

interest in her when our production team and assistant gaggle walked in.

Tanya  was  short  and  slim  and  dark  and  always  moving;  sort  of  half

dancing, swaying to and fro, seemingly without really knowing she was doing
it,  rhythmic  and  slow  like  an  underwater  plant  in  a  meandering  river’s
languorous undercurrent. I’d seen girls doing this before in situations like this
and it often meant they were loved up, but I didn’t think she was. She had
wide grey-green eyes and hair in little black spikes.

We ended up with the others from our show and a couple of people from

Timmy  Mann’s,  the  one  after  ours,  though  not  the  boy  Mann  himself.  It
turned into a moderately serious drinking session, all sat round our favourite
circular table in one end corner of the Bough. I was getting on, I thought,
awfully well with Tanya, who laughed at all my jokes and touched me on the
forearm a couple of times.

I’d been supposed to meet up with Jo that night and take in a film but Jo

had to cancel - yet another Addicta crisis - and I’d started thinking that maybe
I should see how things progressed with Tanya instead.

Tanya was drinking her blue WKDs very slowly and I had moved on to

whiskies after a couple of pints of Fuller’s, but for the past two Scotches I’d
been cheating. When nobody was looking I’d lower the short glass towards
the floor and upend it, letting the drink fall onto the ancient and already pretty
tacky  carpet  underneath.  Jeez;  they  were  single  twenty-five  mill  measures

with no water; probably evaporated before they made it to the floor, but the
point was they weren’t getting me drunk. If anything did develop with the
lovely Tanya, I’d be in a fit state to appreciate it.

All in vain; Tanya had to go at six to meet some friends, and would not be

dissuaded. I even followed her to the door of the pub and out onto the street.
She gave me her mobile number and disappeared into the twilight, heading
for Tottenham Court Road Underground station. I sighed as I watched her go,
looking at the display on my Motorola where her number still glowed.

The phone’s screen went dark and I went back inside.

Our drinking party started to break up as people went off to catch trains, tubes
and  buses.  Phil  and  I  decided  on  takeaways  from  the  Taj,  our  local  curry
house round the corner from the Bough, then went our separate ways. I felt
sober enough to drive, but I knew I wasn’t, so I left the Landy in the Mouth
Corp car park and got a mini-cab home, suffering a lecture on the superior
qualities of wholesome Caribbean soul food compared to this highly suspect
Indo-Pakistani fare from Geoff, the Jamaican driver I always seemed to end
up  with  whenever  I  was  clutching  a  carrier  bag  full  of  curry  or  a  leaking
parcel stuffed with doner kebab.

‘Me car gonna stink now, mon!’
‘Here’s an extra fiver, my good fellow; wave it around and it should help

disperse the ghastly sub-continental pong.’

Geoff thought this was so funny he lit a big spliff as he drove off down

Lots Road, cackling and trailing clouds of ganja smoke.

Sometimes I told people I lived in a tied cottage. The houseboat at Chelsea

Wharf  used  to  be  one  of  Sir  Jamie’s  pads  in  the  city,  back  when  he  was
basically  trying  to  be  Richard  Branson  (Sir  Jamie  even  had  a  supposedly
trademark beard back then, too, though he switched to a pony-tail and earring
shortly afterwards, surrendering the high ground of facial fuzz to the Bearded
One).  The  Temple  Belle  was  an  old  and  much-converted  coaster.  It  still
belonged to Mouth Corp but it was rented to me at an extremely reasonable
rate. I was on a pretty good contract since I’d shifted to the late-morning show
and I could probably have afforded the rent or mortgage if I’d had to pay the
market rate for the tub, but getting it cheap certainly made an appreciable and
very pleasant difference, though it did, as Phil had been the first to point out,
give  Sir  Jamie  an  extra  hold  over  me;  if  I  lost  the  day  job  I  lost  the  cool
houseboat and Chelsea address too.

The Temple Belle was riding high on the flood tide as I walked down the

jetty past the other houseboats; music and light came from a couple of them.
Upriver, where the breeze was coming from, seeded with light rain, a train

grumbled across Battersea railway bridge. Nearer, the towering façade of the
Chelsea Reach development glittered with a cheesy opulence. The river was
silent  and  traffic  pretty  much  inaudible.  The  high  tide  meant  there  was  no
awful smell; the main drawback of living on the boat was that at low tide,
especially on a hot summer’s day, the revealed mud smelled of ancient shit
and things long dead. Probably because that was exactly what it was.

Despite  the  rain  and  my  empty  belly,  I  hesitated  by  the  old  wheelhouse

with  the  door  keys  in  one  hand  and  the  slowly  cooling  curry  in  the  other,
looking out at the dark water for what turned into a minute or two, feeling a
little lonely all of a sudden, and then - in my defence, almost immediately - a
bit ashamed for feeling sorry for myself. The gentle background roar of the
unsleeping city filled the sodium-stained skies and I stood listening for the
river’s dark, liquidic music in vain.

From my parents’ house, in Helensburgh, thirty kilometres down the north

bank of the Clyde from Glasgow, I could see the river from my bedroom. I
grew up watching the distant cranes of Greenock gradually disappear as the
shipyards  closed,  to  be  replaced,  later,  by  offices,  shops,  housing
developments and leisure facilities. By then we’d moved to Glasgow itself to
be near my father’s new dental practice in the city centre. Our first-floor flat
in the leafy South Side was big - my brother Iain and I had rooms easily twice
the size of those we’d had in the bungalow in Helensburgh - but the outlook
was to the broad, tree-lined street, the parked cars and the tall red sandstone
tenements like ours on the far side. I missed the view of river and hill more
than I’d expected.

I  met  Jo  on  a  river  cruise  one  sticky  summer  night,  Ceel  in  Sir  Jamie’s

glittering new penthouse at Limehouse Tower, during a storm.

‘You’re the guy did that Cat Stevens cover. Didn’t you get sued?’

Late  summer,  2000.  I  was  still  doing  the  Capital  Live!  pre-midnight

programme at the time and had been talking to my then producer near the
stern of the little river cruise boat. We had been watching the metallic shells
of the Thames Barrier pass - each one like a sinking ship, up-ended, the last of
the  sunset’s  ruby  light  flaring  from  their  summits  -  when  this  crop-haired,
blond semi-goth with lots of facial metalwork barged in between us.

Producer Vic stepped back to give her room, looked the girl up and down,

decided I probably didn’t mind being interrupted by her, raised his eyebrows
at me and wandered off.

I did a bit of entirely justifiable sizing-up myself - the girl was all in black:

DMs,  jeans,  scoop-necked  vest,  battered-looking  biker’s  jacket  off  one
shoulder.  About  mid-twenties.  ‘I  wasn’t  exactly  sued,’  I  said  warily,

wondering if I was talking to a journalist. ‘There was an exchange of lawyers’
letters that seemed to cost as much as serious litigation, but we managed to
avoid an actual writ.’

a hand to shake while nodding back towards the glass superstructure of the
boat, where music thudded and impressive-ten-years-ago disco lights flashed.
‘I’m with Ice House,’ she explained. ‘The record company. You’re Ken Nott,
the DJ, right?’

‘Right.’ I shook her hand.
‘Right. What was that song? “Rushdie and Son”?’
‘Uh-huh. But the tune was mostly “Moonshadow”.’
‘Ha. Right. What was it? “I’m being shadowed by a fundamentalist … ?”’

she sang, huskily but in tune.

‘Nearly,’ I said. ‘It was, “I’m being stalked by a fundamentalist. I think I’m

being shadowed.”’ I spoke rather than sang the lyrics. I was still feeling wary
of  the  girl.  Just  because  she  said  she  was  from  the  record  company  didn’t
mean  she  really  was.  I  had  already  given  at  least  one  interview  without
knowing it, one drunken, loved-up night to a girl in a club who turned out to
be a reporter for a tabloid with a dreadfully unreconstructed attitude to drugs
and drug-taking. The resulting interview had nearly got me fired and started
an argument between Capital Live! and the paper about whether she’d told me
she  was  a  reporter  at  the  start  of  our  conversation  or  not.  I’d  claimed  she
hadn’t but it was just possible she had and I’d not been listening because I
was too busy grinding my teeth and staring at her tits.

Jo  had  rather  impressive  breasts,  too;  not  large,  but  high  and  bra-less

beneath her top. The deck lights strung above us showed her nipples as little
sharply defined bumps raising the thin black cotton.

‘Yeah,’ she said. ‘I heard it at a party once. Never did get hold of a copy.’
‘Well, I’d love to, ah, provide you with one,’ I said, grinning, ‘but I don’t

even have a copy myself any more.’

‘Sorry,’  she  said,  smiling.  ‘I  wasn’t  trying  to  blag  one.’  She  pushed  her

hand  through  her  spiky  blond  hair,  exposing  ink-dark  roots  in  an
unselfconsciously  endearing  gesture  and  looked  back  briefly  at  the  main
party.

‘What do you do at Ice House?’ I asked her.
She shrugged. ‘Bit of A&R, bit of what my boss calls asset management.

Looking after bands.’

‘Anyone I might have heard of?’

‘Hope so. Addicta? Heard of them?’
‘Yeah. Heard the hype, certainly.’
She shook her head emphatically. ‘Not hype. They are really good.’
‘Right. I saw an interview with them. The lead singer seemed a bit full of

himself.’

She grinned. ‘And your point would be?’
I smiled. ‘Yeah, I guess it kind of comes with the territory.’
‘They’re okay,’ she said. ‘The band. Brad can sound arrogant but he’s just

being  honest  in  a  way;  he’s  good  and  he  knows  it  and  he  isn’t  into  false
modesty.’

‘Woh-no,’ I agreed. ‘I don’t think he’ll ever be accused of that.’
She looked around. ‘So. Enjoying the cruise?’
‘No.’  I  sighed.  ‘I  hate  these  things,’  I  said  to  her  quizzical  expression.

‘Well, apart from what happened to the Marchioness … I always feel trapped.
You can’t get off. A normal party or gig or do, you can always bale out and
head  for  the  door.  One  of  these  things,  you’re  along  for  the  whole  ride,
whether you’re totally bored or … well, the opposite of bored. A couple of
times I’ve met somebody and, ah, you know, been getting on exceptionally
well with them—’

‘Ah. A female somebody.’
‘A female somebody of the complementary gender of choice, indeed, and

we’ve suddenly found ourselves in an ungregarious mood and wanted to be
somewhere  together,  just  the  two  of  us,  and  …  well,  we’ve  had  a  very
frustrating wait for the end of the cruise.’

She smiled widely and took a bottle of beer from one jacket pocket. ‘You

make a habit of picking up women on these cruises?’

‘Just twice so far.’
‘Of course you could always have joined the metre-under club, or whatever

you’d call it, fucking in the loos in the boat.’

‘You know,’ I said, frowning as though this had just occurred to me, ‘I’ve

never known a relationship that started in a toilet last very long. Odd that.
Hmm.’

‘Why are you looking at me like that?’
‘Beg your pardon. Counting your piercings.’
‘Uh-huh?’
‘Uh-huh. Seven, that I can see.’
‘Ha,’ she said, and hoisted her T-shirt to show a belly button neatly cinched

with a little bone-shaped metal rod.

‘Eight,’ I said.
She drank and wiped her lips with the back of one hand, left her mouth

hanging open, her tongue running along the inside of her lower teeth as she
nodded and made an obvious job of measuring me up. ‘Nine, altogether,’ she
said, and performed a little movement that made me think at first she was
taking  a  bow,  then  I  realised  she  was  making  as  though  to  look  down  at
herself.

‘My,’ I said. ‘Must be fun going through airport metal detectors. ’
Her  brows  furled  a  little.  ‘Everybody  says  that.’  She  shrugged.  ‘Not  a

problem.’

‘Well, that’s airport security’s loss.’
‘You’re not into piercings?’
‘What can I say? I’m a fully paid-up hetero male.’ I grinned.
A  hoisted  eyebrow  made  it  look  like  she  took  the  second  meaning.  She

glanced  back  at  the  lights  of  the  boat  again,  her  facial  metalwork  glinting.
‘Hey,’ she said, ‘you want to dance?’

‘Gee, I thought you’d never ask.’

We didn’t join the metre-under club, or whatever she’d called it. We waited a
whole extra hour and had boisterous, energetic sex back on another boat, my
new home, the Temple Belle. I found the ninth piercing.

‘Whoo! Rock the fucking boat, man.’
I woke in the depths of the night, my arm gone to sleep beneath her. The

Temple Belle rested on some not-quite-perfectly-level mud at the bottom of
the tide, so that you could, to that minimal extent, tell what the state of the
tide was even at night, down in the main bedroom with the skylight curtains
closed, by the presence or absence of a faint sensation of being tipped towards
the head of the bed. I had that feeling now. I took a deep breath, testing for the
smell  of  decay  that  sometimes  infected  the  air  on  summer  nights  like  this,
born  of  the  mud  and  capable,  on  really  warm,  still  nights  like  this,  of
insinuating its way even down here. Nothing. Just her perfume.

The girl slept on, sprawled half across me, muttering quietly in her sleep.

She  liked  to  talk  during  sex,  too,  and  she  liked  being  bitten.  Well,  nipped,
really, but fairly hard. She professed herself amazed that I didn’t share this
predilection.  She  made  a  strange  little  exhaling  noise  in  her  sleep,  like  an
exasperated  sigh,  then  snuggled  up  closer  to  me  and  fell  still  and  silent,
breathing slowly and regularly.

Just visible in the glow from the radio alarm, a little plastic canister rested

on the bedside table; her party contacts. Jo wore fashion contact lenses that
made her eyes seem to fluoresce under ultraviolet light. Dancing with her on
the cruise boat with its dated lighting rig had been … interesting.

Looking  carefully  at  her  face,  I  could  just  make  out  the  soft  reflections

from some of the surgical steel piercings that punctuated her skin. I didn’t
mind in the least if people wanted to get tattoos or prick their bodies with bits
of  metal  -  was  it  better,  worse,  or  no  different  from  having  a  face-lift,  or
collagen implants, or liposuction, or Botox injections? I didn’t know. But the
more you thought about it, the more shoving lumps of metal through your
skin did seem a slightly odd thing to do. The lengths we go to to differentiate
ourselves, I thought. But then people had earrings and metal fillings in their
teeth, and there were much weirder things, like the tribe that put more and
more rings round the girls’ necks as they grew, until they were extended to
such a length that if the rings were taken off, their necks just collapsed, and
they died.

Jo was fun, UV contacts and all. We’d already established we were both

between serious relationships (which kind of implied we were both ready to
start a new one).

We’d see.

‘—guest in your country, sir, and I could not believe that which I was hearing
here in the city of London was not really coming out of Kabul, or Baghdad. I
could not believe my ears. I had to look around and reassure myself I was in a
London cab, not—’

‘Mr Hecht—’
‘Where  the  hell  do  you  people  get  off?  Dear  God,  man,  we  lost  four

thousand people in a morning. Every one of them innocent civilians. This is
war.  Don’t  you  understand  that?  It’s  time  to  wake  up.  It’s  time  to  choose
sides. When the President said that you’re either for us or against us, he spoke
for  all  decent  Americans.  Your  Mr  Blair’s  chosen  which  side  he’s  on  and
we’d like to think he speaks for all decent English people, but I don’t know
what side you think you’re on. It sure doesn’t sound like ours.’

‘Mr Hecht, if the choice is between American democracy and murderous

misogynists and a state governed by diktat and sharia, believe me I am on
your side. I’d shop - I’d turn in my own brother if I knew he’d had anything
to do with the attacks on September the eleventh. Mr Hecht, I know it doesn’t
sound like it usually, and I’m sure it didn’t sound like it to you when you
heard me yesterday, but there’s a lot about America I love. I love its freedoms,
its celebration of free speech, its love of … betterment. It is still the land of

opportunity, I know that; there’s no greater place on Earth to be young and
smart and healthy and ambitious. A lot of us Brits affect to be appalled so few
Americans have passports, but I’ve been to the States, I’ve travelled all over it
and I know why they don’t; America is a world in itself. The states are like
countries, the sheer scale of the place, its variety of climate and landscape; it’s
stunning, it is truly beautiful. And is there any nation and ethnic group in the
world not represented in the States? Americans don’t have to go out into the
world; the world’s already come to them, and you can understand why.

‘I still have a lot of issues - I have a problem with anybody who voted for

the  man  claiming  to  be  your  president,  for  example  …  but  then  as  not  all
Americans are eligible to vote, and half of those who were eligible to vote
didn’t  bother  to  vote,  and  less  than  half  of  those  who  did  vote  voted  for
Dubya, that means I guess I’m probably only appalled by about twenty per
cent or less of the population, which is not so terrible. But these are like the
issues you have with a family member you love; they only matter so much
because you’re so close to them in the first place. My point is that in your
anger and your pain, you’re - your government is making a series of awful
mistakes, mistakes that will damage America, damage all of us in the future.
And I do not want to see that.’

‘Well, this is like listening to two different people, sir, I don’t know how

you square what you’re saying now with what you said yesterday.’

‘Mr Hecht, I’m saying that there’s a kind of madness built up about this

already, a denial that benefits nobody. No, that’s not true; it will benefit the
sort  of  people  who  did  this.  Your  denial  will  benefit  your  enemies.  If  you
don’t understand this, if you don’t understand them, you’ll never defeat them.
So believing that America was attacked out of jealousy is not just ludicrous
and self-deluding, it’s self-defeating as well. This was not an act of grossly
over-developed petulance, for God’s sake. Twenty highly motivated men do
not train for months to kill themselves in a meticulously planned and executed
operation that the biggest, best-funded security services in the world don’t get
the  faintest  whiff  of  -  even  though  it’s  happening  right  under  their  noses  -
because you’ve  got  more  domestic  appliances  than  they  do.  What  was  the
phrase? “It’s the economy, stupid”? Well, in this case, it’s the foreign policy.
It’s that damn simple.

‘It doesn’t even matter if you or I don’t see it this way, Mr Hecht, but to

them  it’s  every  corrupt,  undemocratic  regime  the  United  States  has  poured
money and arms into since the last world war, propping up dictators because
they’re sitting on a desert full of oil and helping them crush dissent; it’s the
infidel occupying their holy places, and it’s the unending oppression of the
Palestinian people by America’s fifty-first state. That’s the way they see it.
You can argue with their analysis, but don’t kid yourself any of this happened

because they’re just jealous of your shopping malls.’

are on our side?’

‘May I refer my honourable friend to the answer given above?’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘No, I’m sorry, Mr Hecht; a piece of British Parliamentary phraseology we

use on the show sometimes. Look, Mr Hecht. Do I think you should invade
Afghanistan? For what it’s worth - and it’s worth almost nothing, I realise that
-  no.  But,  when  you  do,  it  couldn’t  happen  to  a  nicer  regime.  I’ve  been
banging on about the Taliban for years. But don’t forget you helped put them
there; you funded the Mujahidin and you armed Bin Laden and supported the
Pakistani  security  service,  like  you  once  supported  the  dictator  Saddam
Hussein  because  you  needed  him  and  like  you’re  supporting  the  dictator
General Musharraf and the grotesque mediaeval despotism of the Saudis now,
because you need them … Meanwhile, New Missile Defense, which destroys
arms  limitation  treaties  with  pinpoint  precision  but  is  utterly  guaranteed  to
have no discernible effect on any enemy missile whatsoever, which needs a
homing beacon in the nose of its target to miss it in the same hemisphere, and
which,  after  September  the  eleventh,  has  been  proved  to  be  an  even  more
wilful and irrelevant waste of money, is a hundred per cent certain to happen.
I mean … this is madness, Mr Hecht. It’s national psychosis.’

‘We have a right to defend ourselves, sir. We had that right before nine-

eleven.  Now  we  have  the  right  to  demand  it.  And  we’re  going  to  have  it
whether it suits people like you or not. If you want to be part of it, fine. But if
you’re not part of the solution, you’re part of the problem.’

‘You know something, Mr Hecht? Back when I was a teenager, just starting

to think for myself, I came up with a very basic formulation. I decided that
whenever somebody says, You’re either for us or against us, you had to be
against them. Because only moral simpletons and outright conniving rogues
see, or even claim to see, the world in such preposterously black and white
terms.  I  am  deeply  dubious  about  being  on  the  same  side  as  anybody  that
stupid or that disingenuous, and certainly will not be led by them. Evil always
starts  with  a  good  excuse,  Mr  Hecht.  George  W.  Bush  may  be,  in  effect,
President  by  acclaim  now,  and,  compared  to  the  people  who  attacked
America, he’s personally almost blameless, but the fact remains he got where
he is by chicanery and deceit and - not even very deep down - he’s a sad,
inadequate little man.’

‘Go to hell, sir, as you surely will.’ Mr Hecht hung up.
‘Think we lost him, Notty.’
I took a deep breath. ‘That is your single deployment of that word for this

year … Philly-Willy.’

‘US Embassy on line one!’
‘Oh, stop it, you’re killing me.’

‘Ken, great to meet you. Come in, come in. Ah, yes, let this delightful young
lady take your coat …’

‘Nice to meet you, ah …’
‘Jamie. Call me Jamie. No standing on ceremony here. Come on in to the

body  of  the  kirk,  as  they  say.  I  have  Scotch  blood  too,  you  know.  Us
Heelanders have to stick together against these Sassenachs, eh? Listen, we’re
all really excited about you joining us at Capital Live!. I hear you’re doing
incredibly well. Caught you a few times myself; wish it was more. Schedules,
meetings,  business;  you  know,  but  I’ve  heard  you.  I  have  heard  you.  Very
good, very good. Very near the bone, very near the bone, but I like that. That’s
my style, too. Edge work. Nothing like it, is there? The danger, the risk. Risk-
taking; that’s what it’s all about, isn’t it? Don’t you think? So, how are you
settling into the old Temple Belle?’

‘Ah, very nicely,’ I said. I hesitated, wondering whether to point out that I’d

been settled in there for over a year.

‘Brill. Superb, superb! Ah. Helena. Like you to meet Ken. Ken Nott. Ken;

this  is  my  wife,  the  lovely  Helena.  Ah;  drinks.  Excellent,  excellent.  Ken.
Champagne?’

‘Lady Werthamley,’ I said, nodding to her. ‘Thank you.’
Sir  Jamie  Werthamley,  our  Dear  Owner,  had  a  penthouse  in  the  top  two

storeys of his own newest office building, Limehouse Tower, overlooking the
river at Limehouse Reach. This was April 2001 and I’d been working for him
for nearly a year by then - three months of that on the relatively prestigious
late-morning show - but this, one of his birthday parties, was my first chance
to meet him (strictly no presents, the invitation had said, which might have
seemed  superfluous  for  a  man  who  owned  several  gold  mines,  a  bank,  a
Caribbean archipelago and his own airline. Anyway, I’d happily complied).

Sir  Jamie  was  a  young-looking  fifty;  ginger  going  grey.  The  trademark

pony-tail was long gone but the single diamond stud in his ear was still there.
He was dressed casually in designer jeans, a white T-shirt and a blue jacket
that looked glossily fine and very expensive. I’d dressed in my best smart-but-
casual but I felt like a tyke next to him.

There were maybe a hundred people in the sunken space of the main room,

which, famously, had been fashioned by a film-set designer. The room held
the  crowd  easily.  I  had  my  coat  whisked  away  by  what  looked  like  one

supermodel  and  a  glass  of  dark  gold  champagne  slipped  into  my  fist  by
another  before  I’d  really  had  a  chance  to  draw  breath.  Sir  Jamie  was  the
touchy-feely sort; taking your hand, cradling your elbow, patting your back,
gentle-punching  upper  arm,  all  that  stuff.  And  all  the  time  talking  in  that
intense,  breathily  enthusiastic  manner,  words  only  just  getting  out  of  each
other’s way in time. In that respect he was exactly the same as when he was
interviewed on TV.

His wife sat, upright and poised, in a tall, high-tech wheelchair. Lady W

had suffered a bad fall horse-riding ten years earlier, not long after they were
married. She wore something blue and gauzy, and a few shimmering pieces of
diamond and platinum jewellery. She was maybe ten years younger than her
husband and had raven black hair and violet eyes.

‘Call me Helena, please,’ she said, letting go of my hand.
‘Thank you, Helena.’
She turned the wheelchair round using a little joystick at her right hand and

moved it towards the steps down into the sunken part of the room. ‘I listen to
your show, Ken,’ she said over her shoulder as I walked after her.

‘Thank you.’
‘You are terribly outspoken, aren’t you?’
‘That’s my job, Helena,’ I said as Lady W’s chair got to the top of the steps

and stopped.

‘You do upset a lot of people.’
‘I’m afraid I do.’
‘A lot of important people, in fact.’
‘Guilty as charged, ma’am,’ I agreed.
‘I know quite a lot of those people.’
‘I … I’d be surprised if you didn’t,’ I said evenly.
She snorted in a very English public schoolgirl way and looked up at me,

winking. ‘Yes, well, keep up the good work. Now, who shall we find for you
to  talk  to?’  She  surveyed  the  room.  I  did,  too.  The  space  itself  was  very
swoopy and primary coloured. It did look like a film set; actually it looked
like the bad guy’s lair in an Austin Powers film, which was a funny thing to
spend a couple of million quid on, but there you were. The windows, facing
south and west, were three metres tall and easily fifteen long; great slabs of
darkness sprinkled with the lights of London.

There were a lot of famous faces, from, I guessed at the time, pretty much

every walk of life that led to people getting their faces into the papers or onto
TV apart from crime. (Actually I was wrong about the crime bit.) I imagined

that the people I didn’t recognise were just plain rich, or powerful in a low-
profile way, or both, and realised there was a decent chance that I was the
least important person in the whole apartment, with the not-a-given exception
of the supermodel-resembling serving staff.

‘Ah,’  said  Mrs  W  decisively.  ‘You  might  be  interested  to  meet  Ann  and

David  Schuyler.  She  teaches  Political  Philosophy  at  the  LSE  and  he’s  a
Tribune  Group  stalwart.  Come  on.’  The  wheelchair  lurched  forward  and  -
using a rotating three-wheel set-up at each corner - descended slowly, motors
whirring, to the dark red carpet below.

The Schuylers were charming and fascinating and interesting to talk to and

I chatted to various other people who were all or most of those things during
the course of the evening and passed some pleasant time with a Formula One
driver, a Junior Minister who was about fifteen years older than me but still
amazingly  attractive  (and  who  had  an  even  more  amazing,  eye-watering
contempt for her Minister) and a beautiful young actress whose name I could
still recall weeks later but whose personality entirely escaped me. I drank the
champagne and sampled some of the melt-in-the-mouth food circulating on
silver salvers borne high by the catwalk-grade serving staff.

And fascinating as all this felt at the time, the only thing that came to mean

anything, eventually, was meeting Celia, later.

I had already seen her, as I made my way back from the loo (‘Head for the

Monet  and  then  hang  a  right  at  the  Picasso,’  as  Sir  Jamie  himself  had
instructed me). She was standing with a smallish, pale man who was dressed
in a severely tailored black suit, listening while he talked quietly to a rotund
Lord who owned a national daily and a few regional titles.

She wore short heels that brought her nearly up to his height of about 170

centimetres,  and  a  long,  black,  high-necked  dress.  A  single  string  of  large
grey-black  pearls;  skin  like  milky  coffee.  She  looked  mixed-race,  a
combination of white and black and maybe South-East Asian too. Pushed, I’d
have guessed she was in her mid-twenties, but her face was extraordinary; it
gave the impression that it belonged to either a teenager who had seen some
terrible things in her short existence or a sixty-year-old who’d never had a
day’s trauma or a single ageing event in her entire life. There was a sort of
intense calmness to her features, an almost wilful innocence that I couldn’t
recall  ever  having  seen  before.  It  seemed  almost  identical  to  the  poised
serenity of a secure, untroubled child, and yet profoundly different; something
struggled for and arrived at rather than inherited, rather than bestowed. Her
eyes  were  amber  beneath  fine  sculpts  of  dark  brows  and  a  forehead  like  a
smooth and perfect bowl, and there was a roundness to her mouth and eyes
that  swept  into  elongated  lines  at  the  outside  edges,  contributing  to  that
expression of thousand-yard tranquillity. Her hair was gathered up, full and

shining, immaculate. It was the colour of heroin.

some more of that very pleasant champagne. I didn’t recognise her or the man
at  her  side  -  who  looked  a  bit  like  Bernie  Ecclestone  with  no  glasses  and
better hair - though I did see him leaving, an hour later, without her, but with
a blond guy so wide and tall he just had to be a bodyguard.

A storm had been advancing on London from the west since the vividly

bloody sunset hours earlier. The party was in full swing by the time it hit but
aside  from  a  distant  roar  if  you  stood  near  the  windows,  and  the  swirling
patterns of rain whirling over the west-facing glass, it was easy to miss.

I headed towards the Monet again, ready to turn right at the Picasso, but

there  was  already  somebody  in  the  bathroom.  Sir  Jamie,  clutching  a  thin-
necked bottle of Krug and in the company of a pair of giggling young soap
stars,  stopped  and  said,  ‘Ken!  Queue?  Walk  this  way;  show  you  another
pissoir. Mi casa, and all that. Oh! Fancy a game of snooker afterwards? We’re
missing - oh, I tell a lie, no, we’re not,’ he said as a sort of vapidly handsome
young man I recognised from a boy band came clumsily down some spiral
stairs to our right. ‘Beg your pardon, Ken; offer suddenly and embarrassingly
withdrawn. Hiya, Sammy,’ Sir Jamie said, grinning, and slapped the young
man on the arm. He turned to me and nodded to the spiral stairs. ‘Ken; up
there. Or there’s a lift, of course. Either way, follow your nose. Ha ha! See
you later. Have fun.’ Then to the girls and the young man, ‘Right!’ And off
they went.

I walked up the stairs then along a broad, deeply carpeted corridor lined

with Art. Windows at the far end gave out onto a view east to the Millennium
Dome, crowned with a circlet of red high-building lights. I couldn’t find any
open  doors,  so  I  shrugged  and  chose,  adventurously,  the  one  double-set  I
could see. A suitably large bedroom the size of a tennis court presented itself
and I crossed to where I guessed the en suite might be. It was a gym, but far
away, on the other side of the room, was the bathroom. It really did have a
little lidded ceramic pissoir fastened to the wall, as well as an ordinary loo,
two sinks the size of small baths, a vast sunken bath studded with nozzles,
lights  and  underwater  speakers,  a  colossal  shower  cabinet  with  marginally
more nozzles than the bath, and a sauna the size of a log cabin.

It  felt  slightly  pathetic  only  to  do  a  pee  in  this  palace  of  evacuation,

exfoliation and immersion, like using a McLaren F1 as a golf cart. I stood
there  looking  around  and  realised  that  this  was  probably  just  Sir  Jamie’s
bathroom;  there  was  no  special  facility  to  help  a  disabled  person  use  the
place. It was all immaculate save for a poorly wiped-clean area on a glass
shelf where a few tiny white crystals lay scattered. I lifted some to my tongue
with a fingertip and tasted cocaine. Moderately heavily cut, so surely not Sir

Jamie’s. Probably Sammy, the clumsy boy bandee.

the  edge,  and  felt  a  hint  of  a  draught  brush  my  face.  I  hesitated,  then
tentatively pulled the curtains back.

The  view  was  to  the  north-east  over  a  terrace  cut  diagonally  across  the

tower’s summit. Shrubs and small trees in giant pots swayed in the wind and
the surfaces of ornamental pools ruffled as the gusts stroked and struck them.
The sliding pane at this edge of the giant window had been left open a finger-
width. I wondered if I ought to close it. If the wind changed … but so what?
Sir Jamie probably had a butler or a major-domo or whatever the hell to do
this sort of stuff. I was going to let the curtain fall back and just leave things
as they were when I caught a glimpse of a figure in the shadows near one
edge of the terrace where thin, straight railings segmented the view.

Lightning. Much later I thought it ought to have been lightning that lit the

scene, that it had been that sort of storm and when I first saw her standing
there  it  was  courtesy  of  a  flash  of  lightning,  which  lit  up  the  Mysterious
Figure in the Shadows. But it wasn’t. Just the lights of the storm-pressed city.
Sometimes reality isn’t Gothic enough.

I could see it was a woman, standing about four metres away in the lee of

the building under a roof projecting over part of the garden. The shelter was
only partial; I could see her being buffeted by the swirling gusts. She looked
thin and frail and dark. Her arms were crossed under her breasts. The wind
tugged at the hem of her long dress and as my eyes adjusted I could see little
strands of her hair whipping about her face and flickering up about her head
like quick, attenuated flames.

I  realised  she  was  probably  aware  that  somebody  was  watching  her  -  a

sliver of light had fallen across the paving stones at her feet when I’d pulled
the curtains back - just as she turned her head to look straight at me. She stood
like  that  for  a  moment,  then  her  head  tipped  to  one  side.  I  recognised  the
woman in the narrow black dress with the extraordinary face. I couldn’t see
her eyes.

Even then, in theory, I could just have let the drapes fall back and toddled

off  downstairs,  tipsily  descending  to  the  party.  But,  you  come  upon
opportunities, little chance set-ups like this, too seldom. Even without having
read about scenes like this, or watched them in films and on TV, even if you’d
never read anything or watched anything in your life, there would be a kind of
imperative of the moment that required you to behave in a certain way, take
advantage of the presented chance, because to do anything else was just to
declare  yourself  terminally  sad.  Or  maybe  I  had  swallowed  Sir  Jamie’s
chummy bullshit about being a fellow risk-taker. In any event, what I did was

slide my hand into the gap between the windows and their frames and push
the heavy glass panel aside.

‘Hello?’ she said, her voice barely audible over the roar of the wind.
‘You’ll catch your death, you know.’
‘I beg your pardon?’
I  raised  my  voice.  ‘Your  death,’  I  said,  almost  shouting.  I  was  already

feeling foolish, the grand gesture of the occasion evaporating, shredded by the
noise and force of the wind. ‘You’ll catch it.’

‘Yes?’  she  said,  as  though  this  was  new  and  important  information  I’d

presented her with.

Gawd, I thought, she’s some sort of simpleton. ‘Look,’ I said, ‘will I just …

?’  I  gestured  back  into  the  bedroom,  meaning  to  suggest  I’d  leave  her  to
whatever solitary communing with rooftop nature she’d been indulging in.

She tipped and lowered her head, holding one hand to an ear. She shook her

head.

‘Shit,’ I said under my breath, and stepped out onto the stones. Well, what

else was I going to do? She was beautiful, the guy she’d been with had left the
hoo-ha  without  her,  I  was  thirty-five  and  starting  to  watch  my  weight  and
check my hair for grey each morning, and I wasn’t so entangled elsewhere
that I couldn’t handle the potential extra complication of getting tangled up
with a woman who looked as good as she did. Providing she wasn’t simple,
and unlikely as it probably was anyway. Rain sprinkled itself across my face
and the wind uncombed my hair.

‘Ken Nott. Pleased to meet you.’ I held out my hand.
She looked at it for a moment, then took it in hers. ‘Celia. Merrial,’ she

said. ‘How do you do.’

Her voice was soft, with a faint accent that was probably French.
‘You okay out here?’ I asked.
‘Yes. Is it all right?’
‘Sorry?’
‘For me to be here? Is it all right? It is permitted?’
With  a  sinking  feeling,  I  realised  that  she  hadn’t  recognised  me  from

earlier, down in the party. It sounded like she thought I was a security guard
for Mouth Corp come to shoo her back to the properly appointed fun-having
territory down below.

‘Haven’t the faintest idea,’ I admitted. ‘Civilian here myself.’ This wasn’t

leading anywhere. Make excuses and leave. This was preposterously early to
be baling out of a potential situation, but some sort of instinct I would usually

ignore was telling me to forget it. ‘Listen,’ I said. ‘If you’re okay, I’ll just
leave you to it. I just … you know, I saw you out here and …’ I wasn’t even
handling my withdrawal gracefully.

She  ignored  this.  Her  head  was  canted  to  one  side  again,  quizzical.  She

frowned and said, ‘Ah. I know your name.’

‘Do you now?’
‘You are on the radio,’ she said, brushing away a strand of hair sticking to

her mouth. She had a small mouth and full lips. ‘Someone said you would be
here.’ Her teeth were very white as she gave a little, tentative smile. ‘I listen
to you.’

That was me hooked. As far as my ego was concerned she might as well

have  claimed  to  be  my  biggest  fan.  At  the  same  time,  a  tiny  crease  of
disappointment ruffled my contentment. Intelligent, rich, over-achieving and
wildly influential though I naturally assumed all my listeners to be, there was
something insufficiently exotic for a woman like this to be listening to my
pop-raddled, commercial-choked show on daytime radio. Between the hours
of ten and midday this woman ought to be perfecting her technique playing
Bach fugues on her grand piano, or wandering the galleries clutching a draft
of her thesis, standing in front of vast canvases, nodding wisely. She should
be  a  Radio  Three  type,  I  told  myself;  certainly  not  listening  to  any  radio
station with an exclamation mark in its title.

I’m sorry, you fall beneath the acceptable standards of intriguingness that

my  over-heated  and  deeply  wretched  romantic  sensibilities  demand.  Very
Groucho altogether. Sad git.

‘I’m very flattered,’ I told her.
‘Are you? Why?’
I gave a small laugh. A gust of wind thudded into us, showering us with

rain and making us sway together, as if dancing to the pummelling music of
the storm. ‘Oh, I’m just always flattered when I meet somebody who admits
to listening to my terminally facile and disposable show. And you—’

‘Is it really so?’ she said. ‘Do you really think it is facile and disposable?’
I had been going to say something on the lines of, And you are the most

stunningly  beautiful  creature  at  this  party  largely  composed  of  stunningly
beautiful creatures, which makes your interest in me especially gratifying …
but instead she was having the temerity to interrupt a professional talker, and
taking my small talk seriously. Didn’t know which was worse.

‘Well, it can certainly be facile,’ I said. ‘And when it comes down to it, it is

just local radio, even if it’s local radio for London. Noam Chomsky it ain’t.’

‘You admire Noam Chomsky,’ she said, nodding and stroking away another

strand  of  hair  from  her  mouth.  The  wind  was  howling  round  the  building,
scattering rain drops over the two of us. It was April, and not too cold, but
there was still a fair amount of wind-chill factor happening here. ‘You have
mentioned him a few times, I think.’

I held up my hands. ‘Closest thing to a hero I have.’ I folded my arms. ‘You

really do listen to the show, don’t you?’

‘Sometimes. You say such things. I am always amazed that you get away

with what you do. So often I think, They won’t let him get away with that,
and yet, next time I switch on, there you are.’

‘We do call the studio the—’
‘Departure Lounge,’ she said, smiling. ‘I know.’ She nodded. The wind hit

her in the back, making her take a step forwards, towards me. I put a hand out
but she adjusted her stance, straightening again. She didn’t seem to notice the
gale blowing round her. ‘You must make many enemies.’

‘The more the better,’ I agreed airily. ‘There are so many people deserving

of utter contempt, don’t you think?’

‘You really don’t care?’
‘That I might make enemies of my elders and betters?’
‘Yes.’
‘Not enough to stop.’
‘You really don’t worry that somebody might take such offence at what you

say they try to harm you?’

‘I refuse to worry,’ I told her. ‘I wouldn’t hand people like that even the

partial victory of knowing I was concerned.’

‘So, then, are you brave?’ she asked with a small smile.
‘No, I’m not brave. I just don’t give a fuck.’
She  seemed  to  find  this  amusing,  lowering  her  head  and  smiling  at  the

paving stones.

I sighed. ‘Life’s too short to spend it worrying, Celia. Carpe diem.’
‘Yes, life is short,’ she agreed, not looking at me. Then she did. ‘But you

might risk making it shorter.’

I held her gaze. I said, ‘I don’t care,’ and, just then, there on the roof in the

loud midst of the storm, I meant it.

She lifted her face up a little, as another gust shook her and me in sudden

succession. I really wanted to take hold of that perfect little chin and kiss her.

‘Look,’ I said, ‘apart from anything else, like I say, it’s just radio. And it’s a

reputation I have, that I’ve developed. Mostly by getting sacked from other

radio stations, admittedly, but it’s what I’m known for. I kind of get a special
discount because of that. People know I’m paid to be controversial, or just
plain rude. I’m a shock jock. The Shock Jock, Jock the Shock, if you prefer
your definitions in tabloid form. If Jimmy Young or one of the Radio One DJs
or even Nicky Campbell said the things I do there’d be some sort of outcry,
but because it’s me people just dismiss it. To really make an impression these
days I’d have to say something actually slanderous, and that would get me
fired. Though that’ll probably happen soon enough anyway.’

‘Still,  it  seems  strange  to  approach  what  you  do  the  way  you  do.  Most

people want to be liked. Or even loved.’ She presented this as though it was
something that might not have occurred to my sorry, cynical ass before.

‘Oh, I’m always ready for my fair share of both,’ I told her.
‘But you insult people, and their ideas. Even their faiths. The things they

love.’

‘People don’t have to listen.’ I sighed. ‘But, yes, I do insult things people

hold dear. This is what I do.’ She was frowning. I put my hands to my cheeks.
‘Look,  I  don’t  mean  I  insult  people  or  their  beliefs  because  I  want  to  hurt
those people, because I get some sort of sadistic kick out of it, I mean that
what I find I need and want to say - and which is what I do, sincerely believe,
which  is  what  I  think  is  the  truth  as  exactly  as  I  can  tell  it  -  is  stuff  that
happens to hurt other people. Does that make sense?’

‘Yes, I think so,’ she said in a measured, sceptical tone.
‘What I’m trying to say is, I have my own beliefs. I … oh, shit, this is like

so  not  post-ironic  or  post-modern  and  so  insufficiently  cynical  for  our
knowing, you know … cynical … sorry, repetition of cynical … Jeez.’ I took
a deep breath of the storm’s air. ‘I believe in truth,’ I told her. She was smiling
a little now. I was making a complete idiot of myself but I didn’t care any
more.  ‘There;  I  said  it.  I  believe  there  is  something  pretty  damn  close  to
objective truth more or less all the time and I’m not accepting this shite about
everybody  having  their  own  truths  or  respecting  somebody’s  opinions  just
because  they’re  sincerely  held.  The  Nazis  sincerely  hated  the  Jews;  they
weren’t just kidding. I’m not respecting their fucking ideas just because they
were deeply held. I believe in science, in the scientific method, in doubt, in
questioning, in facing truths, not hiding from them. I don’t believe in God but
I admit I could be wrong. I don’t believe in faith at all because faith is belief
without  reason,  and  reason  is  the  only  thing  we  have,  the  only  thing  I  do
believe in. I think people have every right to believe in anything they want, no
matter  how  ridiculous  it  might  be,  but  I  don’t  accept  their  right  to  coerce
others into the same views. And I certainly don’t accept any right they might
think they have not to have their views challenged just because they’re going

to feel peeved in the process.’

back into place. ‘Don’t you?’

I laughed out loud, waving my arms about. ‘This is crazy!’ I yelled. ‘We’re

standing here on top of a tower block in the middle of a fucking hurricane
getting soaked to the skin and we’re talking about philosophy?’ I left my arms
spread.  ‘Does  the  essential  absurdity  of  this  situation  not  strike  you,  too?
Celia?’ (I added, in case she thought I’d forgotten her name).

She  put  her  head  to  one  side  again.  Another  staggering  gust  of  wind,

another adjustment of stance. ‘I’m sorry. Are you cold?’ she asked, sounding
concerned. ‘We could go in.’

‘No, no,’ I told her. ‘I’m fine out here if you are. I’m a Scotsman; we’re

legally and morally bound not to admit to feeling cold, certainly not in the
presence of thinly clad females and especially not heart-stoppingly beautiful
thinly clad females we might legitimately assume are used to balmier climes.
The penalties are actually quite severe. They endorse your passport and—’

She was nodding, a tiny frown creasing her brows. ‘Yes. You only become

inarticulate when you are being especially sincere, ’ she said, concluding.

That took the wind out of my sails. My hands dropped; I’d been talking

with them as well. ‘What are you?’ I demanded. ‘Celia, come clean; are you
some sort of flying squad critic-come-philosophical psychoanalyst?’

‘I am a married woman, a housewife, a listener.’
‘Married?’
‘Married.’
‘Do you give your husband this hard a time?’
‘I  would  not  dare.’  She  looked  quite  serious.  Then  she  shook  her  head.

‘Well, I might, but he would not understand.’

Fuck this; I was getting cold. This was the most interesting, even unusual

woman I’d met in a long, long time, but there comes a point.

I  held  her  gaze  and,  after  a  breath,  said,  ‘And  are  you  a  faithful  wife,

Celia?’

She didn’t say anything for a while. We just stood there looking at each

other. I could see little drops of rain on her face like sweat or tears and her
hair  was  coming  undone  in  the  tearing  wind.  She  shook  in  those  gusts,  as
though shivering.

‘I have been,’ she said eventually.
‘Well, I—’
She stopped me, holding up one hand towards my mouth, shaking her head.

She glanced behind me, to the still open window.

‘My husband is …’ she began, then stopped. She tutted, looked down and

to one side, and pinched her lower lip briefly with the fingers of her right
hand. She looked up at me. ‘Once,’ she said, ‘I thought that if I really, really
hated somebody, I would make love to them, and have my husband find out.
But  only  if  I  really  hated  the  person,  and  wanted  them  dead,  or  perhaps
thought that they wished they were dead.’

I let my eyebrows rise. ‘Holy shit,’ I said, reasonably. She did not look like

she was joking. ‘He is, ah, of the jealous persuasion, then.’

‘You do not know his name.’
‘Ah,’ I said, embarrassed. I tapped my temple. ‘Was it Merry—?’
‘Merrial,’ she said. ‘He is John Merrial.’
I shook my head. ‘I’m sorry,’ I said. ‘Not ringing any bells.’
‘It should, perhaps, I think.’
‘Well, you have the advantage over me,’ I said.
She nodded slowly, solemnly. She said, ‘I would like to see you again, if

you would like.’ Her voice was nearly drowned by the wind.

‘Yes,  I’d  like,’  I  said.  I  was  thinking,  I  haven’t  touched  her,  kissed  her,

anything, yet. Nothing.

‘However you must know that if I were to see you,’ she said, ‘it would have

to be seldom, and secretly. It might seem, sound … casual,’ she said, frowning
again, as though she wasn’t putting this just as she would like. ‘But it would
not be. It could not be. It would be …’ she shook her head ‘… of significance.
Not something to be entered into lightly.’ She smiled. ‘I make it sound all
very formal, do I not?’

‘I’ve suffered more romantic propositions.’
I moved slowly forwards and reached for her. She came up on her toes,

raising her head and tipping it, bringing her hands to either side of my face
and opening her mouth to mine, while the wind tugged and pushed and jostled
us and the rain sowed the gusts like a soft, cold shrapnel of the storm.

Jo had been at a big Ice House bash that night. She rolled in drunk half an
hour after me, staggering down the steps into the Temple Belle, grinning and
smelling of smoke. She laughed and started tickling me, then kissing me, then
we fell into bed.

She had a way she preferred to be fucked sometimes when she was drunk

like this; on her back, naked but for her T-shirt lifted up over her head and
caught  round  her  neck  with  her  arms  folded  up  inside  it,  making  a  sort  of

square around her head, her face hidden in the black cotton as she yelled and
whooped, a horny, swearing wild-child in the carnal negative of a burka.

‘John Merrial? Mr Merrial?’ Ed said. ‘He’s a gangsta, mate.’

‘He’s what?’
‘He’s a fuckin gangsta, I’m telling you. Crime boss. Whatever you want to

call it. Yeah; boss is better. Mind you, I’m saying that, but could be he’s not
much involved in actual villainy these days. Gone legit,  inne? Like in The
Godfather Part Two, when they talk about in a while they’ll be totally legit by
the end of the year or whatever it is, you know? That sorta fing. Course, on
the uvver uvver hand, there’s better profits in stuff like drugs and refugees an
cars an computah crime an stuff.’

‘Computah crime?’
‘Yeah. You know; fraud. Must be hard to give up on that sorta action an let

uvvers in. Pride involved, even, I should fink. Plob’ly. Why?’ Ed’s eyes went
wide. ‘Fuckin ell, Ken, you ain’t finking of sayin sumfink orrible about him,
are you? Fuckin say it ain’t true. I’m serious, mate. Fuckin bargepole, know
what I’m sayin?’

‘I wasn’t thinking of saying anything about him,’ I said truthfully. ‘I just

saw him at a party the other night and somebody said who he was but not
what he was and I thought I’d ask. I had no idea he was a cross between the
Kray brothers and Al fucking Capone.’

‘Well, he is. Leave well alone, know what I mean?’
‘I am leaving him well alone.’
We were in Ed’s then new car; a black Hummer with darkened windows. It

made my Land Rover feel like a 2CV. We were driving through the streets of
south London on the way to a gig in an old cinema in Beckenham. Ed was
determined  to  make  me  some  sort  of  club  DJ,  or  at  least  teach  me  the
intricacies of getting two bits of plastic to revolve at different rates so that the
tunes contained sounded like they had the same bpm.

‘Wot sort of party was this you was boaf at, anyway?’
‘The Dear Owner’s. Sir Jamie. One of his birthday parties.’
‘What? Does he have more than one, like the Queen? An official birthday

and a real one? What’s that about, then?’

‘Just the one birthday, but several parties. I think I was at the second most

exclusive soirée.’ We drew up, obstructed by a bus loading people at a stop on
one side, and the oncoming stream of traffic on the other. There was, in fact, a
sizable gap between the two, one you could have got any normal car, or even
a Transit van, through quite comfortably (the Landy could have made it with

both  doors  wide  open),  but  Ed  was  probably  right  in  erring  on  the  side  of
caution,  especially  as  the  machine  was  left-hand  drive.  Behind  us,  a  horn
sounded. ‘Jesus Christ, Ed,’ I said, looking at the rear end of the bus to our
left, and the Hummer’s expanse of bonnet, ‘I do believe this thing is literally
wider than a London bus.’

‘Yeah, it’s rough, innit?’ Ed grinned, teeth like a snow field.
‘Rough?’
‘Yeah; wicked, innit?’
I  slapped  the  transmission  tunnel.  This  was  a  tall,  black-fur-lined  box

between Ed and me about the size of a big fridge-freezer combo; you could
have believed the thing had a spare Mini hidden underneath. If Ed had been
any shorter I’d have had to rise out of my seat to make sure he was really
there. ‘What the fuck is it with this fucking black patois shit?’

‘What?’  Ed  said  innocently.  We  still  weren’t  going  anywhere.  The  horn

from behind sounded again. I didn’t know who was leaning on it, but they
were brave. If I’d been stuck behind a blacked-out Hummer I wouldn’t have
done that; I’d have been too scared the fucker would get slung into reverse
and just roll right over me.

‘Rough means good,’ I said indignantly, ‘wicked means good, fucking hell,

bad means good. I mean, I realise there are issues about slavery and centuries
of oppression here, but do you have to take it out on the language?’

‘Na, mate,’ Ed said, finally making slow forward progress as the bus rolled

off ahead of us. ‘It’s like you go so far into the concept, right, the meaning,
that you come out the far side. Know what I mean?’

I looked at him.
‘What?’ he asked.
‘My mistake,’ I said, waving one hand and looking away. ‘Silly old me. I

didn’t even realise that meanings had sides you could come out of. Serves me
right for passing up a university education. That’ll learn me. Or not, as is in
fact the case.’

‘It’s what language is about, innit? Communication.’
‘You don’t say. But if people make words mean the opposite of—’
‘But everybody knows what they really mean, don’t they?’
‘Do they?’
‘Course they do. It’s about context, innit?’
‘But hold on, the first time somebody said bad when they meant good, how

did anybody know what the hell they really meant?’

Ed thought about this. ‘Right,’ he said. ‘Way I see it, it was like this. Some

bloke was trying to cop off wif this bird, right? An she was a bit coy, right, a
bit not wantin to seem too eager, but still wantin it, yeah? An she says, Oh,
you wicked man. Or somefing. Like, maybe he’d been telling her all the fings
what he wanted to do wif her and she was pretendin to be modest but actually
she was gettin really wet, right? He was gettin her juices flowin. But she calls
him wicked, an smiles, an they boaf know what she means, see? So that’s the
first time that somebody says wicked an means good, brilliant, bring it on. So
then, like, by extension, know what I mean, people start using uvver words
what are the opposite of what they seem to mean, like rough for cool and bad
for good, cause it’s not, like, really much of a leap from usin wicked that first
time, an the reason that all this is happenin in the black community, right, here
or in the States, is precisely because the bruvvers haven’t got much else that is
theirs.  We  could  be  boxers  or  musicians  an  that,  but  all  these  uvver,  like,
modes of expression is closed off to us artistically, and so we fuck wif your
language. An that’s what I fink happened. Plob’ly.’

I  stared  at  him.  ‘There  could  actually  be  a  grain  of  truth  in  that  silo  of

gibberish,’ I said. (Ed went, ‘Hee hee hee’, in a wheezy voice.) ‘But this still
doesn’t  explain  how  you  can  come  out  the  other  side  of  an  accepted
lexicological  meaning  for  a  perfectly  clear  and  unambiguous  term  such  as
“bad”.’

‘It’s like Klein bottles, innit?’
‘It’s like what?’
‘Klein bottles. They’re like four-dimensional bottles what can only exist in

fuckin hyperspace, man.’

‘What the fuck has that got to do with anything?’
‘My old mum knitted me a Klein bottle hat when I was a nipper.’
‘Are you on drugs?’
‘Hee hee hee. Na, but listen, like, the spout of a Klein bottle sorta curves

round and goes back into the bottle, doesn’t it?’

‘It may astonish you to know - and it certainly appals me to admit - that I

do sort of know what you’re talking about.’

‘So  that’s  like  the  meaning  I  was  talking  about  earlier,  innit?  Goin  out

beyond itself an then coming back in. Bleedin obvious, I should fink. Fuckin
pay attention, Ken.’

I was actually lost for words. Eventually I recovered enough to say, ‘And

you seriously had a hat that resembled a Klein bottle, you mad fuck? Or was
that the bit I hallucinated?’

‘Me mum was doing this Open University course, wasn’t she? Geometry

an that. So she decided to knit a Klein bottle, and then it sorta turned into a

Bob Marley hat. Fuckin orrible it was. She made me wear it to school once,
too, cos she was so proud of it; came to the school gates wif me an everyfin
so I couldn’t accidentally lose it.’

‘I do trust that your pals did the decent thing and kicked the living shit out

of you.’

‘Ha! They did, too.’ Ed shook his head, a happy, nostalgic expression on

his face. ‘Never liked mafs, ever since.’

We were silent for a minute or so. Then I said, ‘Hey, we just went past a

cop car without you getting pulled over.’

‘That’s cause they fink you’re driving the fucker.’
‘Of course; white man in the right-hand seat. Easily enough to confuse the

average plod, I’ll grant you.’

‘Zactly. Why else do you fink I offered you a lift?’
‘You fuck! You’re exploiting me!’
‘Hee hee hee.’

Four

LACKING THAT SMALL MATCH TEMPERAMENT

“No, no, I’m for lots more CCTV cameras. I think they should be everywhere,
and especially in police stations.’

Craig, rolling a joint on the kitchen table, sniggered.
‘I’m serious,’ I told him. ‘Canteen culture? Sounds interesting. Let’s see it.

Total coverage; even the toilets. No more of these black or Asian guys beating
themselves up, throttling themselves and stamping on their own heads, and
then blaming our stout-hearted defenders of decency!’

‘The stairs,’ Craig suggested. ‘Don’t forget the stairs.’
‘Oh,  Christ,  yeah,  the  stairs;  you’d  want  serious  Sky  Premier  League

coverage on the stairs; top and bottom at the very least. With the important
Player Cam option, naturally.’

‘Prisoner Cam.’
‘Sus Cam. Con Cam.’ I nodded vigorously, with the intense concentration

on total trivia of the truly stoned. ‘Crim Cam.’

‘Shplim shplam bim bam,’ Craig wheezed, laughing.
‘What?’ I said.
‘You still not got Sky yet?’ Craig said, raising the joint to lick the Rizlas.
‘Did you really say … ? But, moving on. What, Sky? No fucking way,’ I

said vehemently. ‘I’m not giving that shite Murdoch any of my … soft-earned
dosh.’ I’d moved into the Temple Belle a year earlier. It hadn’t been lived in

for many years so it only had terrestrial; Craig had been trying to persuade me
to have Sky fitted ever since.

‘Mind you,’ Craig mused, ‘for a Clydebank supporter, what’s the point? I

suppose.’

‘Fuck off. Hun.’
Craig and I had this unpleasant though also comforting habit of reverting to

our  West  Coast  Male  Scottish  cultural  stereotype  when  we  met  up,  talking
about football. Craig was a bluenose, a Rangers supporter. Almost his only
failing,  really,  unless  you  were  going  to  count  his  part  in  a  long-term-
struggling  marriage  (and  in  a  spirit  of  male  solidarity  and  the  above-
mentioned  cultural  stereotype,  I  was  duty-bound  to  blame  that  mostly  on
Emma, regardless of anything else).

It  was  early  May  2001,  a  couple  of  weeks  after  the  party  at  Sir  Jamie’s

groovy pad at the top of Limehouse Tower. We were sitting in the kitchen of
the family home in Highgate, an elegant three-storey terraced house with a
large  conservatory  and  lots  of  decking  in  the  garden.  Emma  had  her  own
place these days, a garden flat a couple of streets away. Nikki lived with Craig
but spent occasional nights at Emma’s. Those tended to be the nights I came
along and Craig and I got the chance to relive an adolescence that he - a father
and effectively a husband at eighteen - had quit maybe too abruptly and I -
arguably dissolute, still alone but variously entangled at thirty-five - had never
quite shaken off.

So we listened to some music, smoked joints, drank beer - or wine, more

often these days - and talked about women and, of course, fitba. It was my
misfortune to be, nominally at least, a Clydebank supporter (could have been
worse;  I  might  have  decided  to  support  Dumbarton).  Clydebank  were  the
closest team of any note to where I grew up, in the prim grid of sunny, south-
aspected  Helensburgh,  a  town  far  too  middle  class  to  have  anything  as
proletarian as a decent football team of its own. The Rugby Club, on the other
hand, was a social centre almost on a par with the Golf Club. Clydebank is
one of those teams at least one level beneath the big Scottish clubs that are
themselves a level beneath the big two, the Old Firm of Celtic and Rangers.
Craig had inherited his Rangers scarf from his dad. They were posh Hun; not
bigoted or anti-Catholic, but unswervingly committed to the team.

‘Supporting a team like Clydebank has its compensations,’ I told Craig as

he  lit  the  spliff,  blowing  smoke  into  the  darkened  kitchen.  I  had  a  sudden
vision  of  Nikki  the  next  day,  sniffing  the  air  and  flying  round  opening
windows  here  and  in  the  adjoining  conservatory.  ‘Da-ad!’  Though  actually
these days she would say, ‘Crai-aig!’

‘Compensations?’ Craig said, cupping his free hand to his ear. ‘Hark! Do I

hear the sound of a straw being grasped at? Why, I do believe I can!’ I just
looked at him. In fact what he could hear was Moby sounding soulful and
interesting on the kitchen mini system. ‘What compensations?’ he demanded.
‘Having to travel to Cappielow for your home games, or visiting East Fife?’

‘No,’  I  said,  ignoring  the  insults.  ‘I  mean  that  it  prepares  you  more

comprehensively for life as a supporter of the national team.’

‘You what?’ Craig said, sounding very London for a moment.
‘Think about it,’ I told him, accepting the joint. ‘Ta. If you support a team

like Clydebank you get used to disappointment …’ I paused to pull on the
number, then talked out through the smoke. ‘The grossly truncated cup run,
the good players - the very rare good players - sold on before they have a
chance to do much for the club beyond show up the rest of the team for the
sorry  plodders  they  really  are,  the  mid-season  nervousness  as  they  sink
towards the lower reaches of the league, even, in the long term, the occasional
promotion you know will probably end in demotion the following year; the
just plain boring, inept displays of football where you sit in the cold for two
hours  realising  you’ve  doled  out  twenty  quid  to  watch  two  gangs  of
intellectually  challenged  bampots  running  around  a  muddy  field  hacking
away at each other’s legs and seemingly competing to see who can punt the
ball the furthest up the park, while your fellow men around you hurl abuse
and insults at their own team and the other supporters.’ I took another deep
toke and handed the J back.

‘Ah, the beautiful game,’ Craig said, affecting misty-eyedness.
‘And so,’ I said, ‘when it comes to supporting Scotland as a national team,

you’re  fully  prepared  for  the  resulting  failures,  disillusion,  frustrations,  let-
downs  and  general  all-encompassing  despair,  which  is  the  natural  result  of
following  our  plucky  but  generally  rather  undistinguished  Bravehearts.
You’ve  been  inoculated  against  such  disenchantment  throughout  your
supporting life; this is the sort of rubbish you’re used to watching and coping
with every week or every fortnight of the three seasons where it rains. You
just scale up your already pre-battered, ready-deflated expectations a little and
you’re there. You, on the other hand,’ I said, taking the number back. ‘You,’ I
repeated after a deep pull, ‘with your fancy nine league championships in a
row and your players with Ferraris and your forty-five thousand fans through
the  turnstiles  every  home  game  and  your  European  experience  …  you  get
used to success. You feel cheated if there’s no new silverware in the trophy …
yeah, you have a trophy room; we have a trophy cabinet.’

‘Currently empty, if memory serves. Thanks.’
‘Fuck off. You start whining when you don’t finish top of something at the

end of the season. We’re just glad our teams still exist and some fucker hasn’t

sold the ground out from under us for a new B&Q. The point is that you get
totally  conditioned  to  winning,  to  victory,  so  when  you  support  Bonnie
Scotland,  as  you’re  genetically  programmed  and  constitutionally  bound  to,
you can’t cope with the fact we’re basically crap.’

‘We’re not crap,’ Craig said defensively.
‘Well, not total crap, but just not much better than a team from a country of

only  six  million  people  ought  to  be.  So  suddenly  you’re  in  a  position  of
inferiority, of having to deal with—’

‘All right, all right,’ Craig said, kicking off his moccasins and putting his

feet up on the farmhouse table. ‘I take the fucking point. You end up taking
refuge in peripheral stuff, like having nice supporters.’

‘Nicer than those nasty, yobbish, xenophobic English supporters, certainly,

which  is  the  unspoken  subtext  of  this  aren’t-we-great  Caledonian  self-
congratulation.’

‘Drunk but amiable.’
‘Harmless.’
‘Pretty much like the team.’
‘Exactly.’
‘Just going for the spectacle,’ Craig said with a trace of sadness, stretching

to hand me back the spliff.

‘It’s the national equivalent of the straws you clutch at league level with

teams  like  Clydebank:  people  around  you  applauding  sportsman-like
behaviour,  the  fleeting  glimpse  of  skill  when  somebody  on  the  park
accidentally does what they meant to do, the combined pride and resentment
when a player sold to the big boys three seasons ago scores a hat-trick in the
English Premier.’

I pulled on the J until it was finished and then mashed it into the ashtray

with the one we’d had before Craig’s homemade chilli. I reached for my wine.

‘Yeah, but when you do win …’ Craig said, leaning back in his seat and

putting his hands behind his neck. ‘It’s worth it. Even as a supporter of the
Bankies you must have at least heard of this, you know, from supporters of
other teams.’

I ignored this too. ‘Is it? I’m starting to question that, frankly.’ Behind his

Trotsky glasses, he blinked. ‘What? Winning isn’t fun?’

‘Na, I mean I’m getting fed up with football in general.’
Craig  gave  a  stagy  gasp  and  said,  ‘Wash  your  mouth  out  with  half-time

Bovril, you blasphemous bastard.’

‘Do you not think so?’ I asked. ‘Seriously. I’m just getting super-saturated

with the damn game, and that’s without having fucking Sky. There’s too much
football.’

Craig put his hands over his ears. ‘Now you’re starting to scare me. I’m

going to pretend you’re not here until you stop saying bad, scary things.’

‘I had this idea.’
‘Can’t hear you.’
‘World Cup.’
Craig started to hum. I raised my voice above this and Moby, still being

moody somewhere inside the Sony system’s jewel-like mechanisms.

‘World Cup,’ I repeated. ‘Takes far too long,’ I shouted. ‘My idea would get

the  whole  overblown  rigmarole  over  with  in  one  day.  Same  with  any  cup
competition, actually.’

‘La, la, la-la-la.’
‘What’s the best, most exciting, most intense and nail-biting part of many a

final?’ I yelled. I spread my arms. ‘The penalty shoot-out!’

Craig  looked  incensed.  He  took  his  hands  down  from  his  ears  and  said,

‘You’re not suggesting—’

‘Yes! Scrap the ninety minutes of the actual game, ditch the half-hour of

extra time and go straight for the penalty shoot-out without all the running
around  and  panting  and  diving  beforehand.  Total  intensity  from  the  first
whistle  of  the  first  game  through  to  the  last  fall-on-your-knees-with-your-
face-in-your-hands,  goalie-jumping-up-and-air-punching  moment  that  sends
the Jules Rimet trophy back to Luxembourg where it belongs!’

‘You are such a fucking heathen even to have thought of that.’
‘The Yanks would love it,’ I told him. ‘The networks would finally have a

soccer  format  they  could  get  ads  into  every  three  or  four  minutes.  The
attention span of your average Peorian would not be taxed.’

‘The penalty shoot-out is a disgraceful travesty of the world’s best game,’

Craig  said  solemnly.  ‘Tossing  a  coin  is  more  honourable;  at  least  it’s
admitting it’s just luck.’

‘Spoken  like  a  member  of  the  SFA.  I’m  talking  about  the  future,  you

reactionary  bluenose  bastard.  Get  with  the  programme  or  start  following
shinty, Luddite.’

Craig did a very good impression of not listening. He was gazing, frowning

at the mini system, where Moby’s Play was about to Stop.

‘Moby,’ he said, looking at me.
‘What about him?’
‘D’you not think he looks a bit like Fabien Barthes?’

Later in the lounge, sitting side by side on the couch, waiting for my taxi to
arrive, sharing one last joint and a final couple of glasses of Bin 128: ‘Emma
says we never talk about important stuff.’

‘Oh?’ I said.
‘Yeah. It’s about number three hundred and seven on her list of Reasons

Why Craig’s Crap.’

‘Well, if she wants to talk to you about so-called important things—’
‘No no no, not her and me; you and me. You and I.’
I looked at him. ‘What’s she talking about?’
‘I think she means we don’t gossip.’
‘Oh,  you  mean  we  talk  about  things  that  we  think  are  important,  like

football, sex and politics, not, like, relationships?’

‘Something like that,’ Craig said, scratching his head. ‘Whenever I’ve seen

you she asks after your mum and dad and your brother and Jo, and I end up
shrugging and saying, I don’t know.’

‘Ah, right.’
‘So, how are your mum and dad and your brother Iain and girlfriend Jo

then, Ken?’

‘They are all fine, thank you, Craig.’
‘Thank you. I shall inform my currently estranged first wife when next I

encounter her.’

‘How is Em, anyway? How are you two these days?’
Why did I feel so guilty whenever I asked after Emma? She was a friend,

she’d always meant a lot to Craig and no doubt always would, and we’d only
spent  one  drunken  night  together,  which  we  both  severely  regretted  and
wished hadn’t happened, so why did I feel so like a traitor when I mentioned
her to Craig?

‘Ah,  we’re  bumping  along,’  Craig  sighed.  ‘The  bottom,  I  think,  but

bumping along. Yourself? Still seeing Jo?’

‘Yup.’
‘Anybody else?’
‘Not really. Well …’ I grimaced.
‘So, still playing the field, then?’ Craig said, with an easy smile.
I  squirmed  a  little,  acknowledging  awkwardness.  ‘Not  so  much  actually

playing the field; more darting out from under the cover of the hedgerows
every now and again, to—’

‘Retrieve your ball.’
‘I was thinking more of ploughing and seed-scattering analogies, but you

could put it that way,’ I conceded.

Craig looked away, thoughtful. ‘I think I should have done more of that.’
‘Jeez,  man,  you’re  thirty-five.  You’re  in  your  prime.  You’re  not  at  the

baffies and pipe stage yet, for Christ’s sake.’

‘Yeah, but I have friends who’re mostly married. And I work from home;

no flirting over the coffee point or the photocopier for me.’

‘How’s  your  work  going?’  I  asked  him.  ‘Designed  any  good  webs

recently?’

He  groaned.  ‘Don’t  ask.  Spent  the  whole  day  flushing  out  the  PCs  with

Anti-Virus. Probably some little shit from Outer Khazaktavia with a fucking
Sinclair Spectrum. What about you?’

‘You’re not supposed to ask a radio DJ how things are going,’ I told him

tiredly. ‘You’re supposed to tell me how each successive show of mine that
you listen to every day is even better than the one before.’ I looked at him.
‘You’re  not  really  totally  up  to  speed  with  this  “friendship”  thing  yet,  are
you?’

‘What the hell do I want to listen to you for?’ Craig demanded. Ruby light

from  a  second-generation,  post-ironic  lava  lamp  on  a  shelf  behind  him
reflected off his glasses and his shaven head. ‘If I was desperate enough to
listen to you tomorrow—’

‘What  do  you  mean  “if”,  you  disloyal  ex-so-called  best  friend  brackets

Scottish close brackets?’

‘—all I’d hear,’ Craig went on, ‘would be what I just heard tonight.’
‘What?’ I screeched.
‘Look me in the eye, you devious, lying toe-rag, and tell me you won’t be

regurgitating that drivel about supporting rubbish league teams being a better
preparation for supporting rubbish national teams than supporting successful
ones, or that gob-shite nonsense about the World Cup composed entirely of a
series of penalty shoot-outs, you shocking, shocking man.’

I stared at him for a while. ‘It’s a fair cop,’ I said huskily.
‘I should demand royalties,’ Craig said. ‘A wage.’
‘Do you really never listen to me?’
Craig guffawed. ‘Course I do. Until the adverts drive me nuts. But you do

recycle stuff we’ve been talking about.’

‘I know. Should I start mentioning you? Crediting you? Enrol you in the

Crapital Live! BUPA scheme?’

‘I told you; a regular cheque would suffice.’
‘Fuck off.’
He sighed. ‘Anyway.’
‘Anyway, don’t fucking sit here feeling sorry for yourself; get—’
‘I’m not feeling sorry for myself.’
‘Neither  you  should.  You’ve  got  a  good,  satisfying,  successful  career,

you’ve helped raise a smart, beautiful daughter, and you’re the lucky friend of
at least one really great dead famous person; me. I mean, what more can you
ask for?’

‘More sex?’
‘Would  have  been  nice.  Look,  get  out  there  and  start  socialising.  Meet

some women. Come out with me. We’ll go clubbing. ’

‘Yeah, maybe.’
‘No, not maybe; definitely. Let’s do it.’
‘Call me. Persuade me when I’m sober and not morose.’
‘Are you morose now?’
‘A  little.  I  do  love  my  job,  but  sometimes  I  think  it’s  just  electronic

wallpaper and what’s the point in it all? And Nikki is totally brilliant but then
I think she’s probably going to get hurt by some worthless bastard … I mean,
I know it’s caveman stuff, but I don’t even like to think of her having sex.’

‘You don’t? Shit, I do.’
‘Oh, Ken,’ Craig said, shaking his head. ‘Even for you …’
‘Sorry, sorry,’ I said, sincerely.
The doorbell chimed.
‘Good,’ Craig said. ‘Now get tae fuck out of my house, you vemonous—’
‘Vemonous?’
‘—you venomous cake of shite that you are.’
‘Okey-dokey,’  I  said,  jumping  up  and  slapping  him  on  one  knee.  ‘Same

time next week?’

‘Probably. Safe journey back to the gin palace.’
On  the  doorstep,  I  stopped,  clicked  my  fingers  and  said,  ‘Oh;  I  didn’t

mention.’

‘What?’ Craig said warily.
‘About my torrid homosexual affair with Lachlan Murdoch.’
‘Uh-huh?’
‘Yeah, and funnily enough I’ve started writing for one of his dad’s tabloids,

too.’

Craig closed his eyes. ‘Let’s just get it over with, okay?’ he sighed.
‘Just thought you should know; I’ve got a column in the Son.’
‘Oh, fuck.’
‘See ya!’
‘Yeah, try telling that on the fucking radio, Mr Funny.’
‘That was just for you, baby. Til next week.’
‘Yeah, yeah …’

When I first kissed Celia, on the night of the storm, that was as far as it went.
It was a fabulous kiss, with her warm, taut body against mine and her soft
mouth and hard little tongue flickering inside my mouth like a tiny flame of
moist  muscle,  but  that  was  all.  She  wouldn’t  even  give  me  her  address  or
phone  number  or  mobile  or  anything.  At  the  time,  of  course,  I  still  didn’t
know who her husband was, just that he sounded somewhat on the psycho
side  (which,  goodness  knows,  should  have  been  enough).  I  worried  that,
despite all the solemnity a few moments earlier, she was kidding me on, that
this was all just a bizarrely serious tease. But she would be in touch, she said.
Now she had to get back to the party, for soon a car would be coming for her
to take her away.

Another long, unbearably sexy kiss, when she let me run my hands all over

her, then she slipped inside the bedroom. I stood there in the wind and rain,
hard-on like a giant redwood, waiting for a decent interval and wishing, for
once, that I smoked, because now felt like the right sort of time to do just that.
Then - via the mega-bathroom again, to dry my face and comb my hair - I
went back down to the party.

Celia had already left.

Nothing,  for  weeks.  Life  went  on,  all  the  usual  nonsense  happened  (dental
appointments,  run-ins  with  management,  a  couple  of  boozy,  flirtatious
lunches with the lovely Amy, a gig in Brighton with Ed, which ended in some
chilly dawn skinny dipping with a couple of girls from Argentina). Jo and I
went out to parties and films, got loved up and went clubbing, had good, fun
sex every now and again, and I decided that Celia was just one of those never-
quite things; a little oasis of high-grade strangeness, charm and drama in an
existence not normally all that short of them in the first place. Anyway, the
woman was a gangster’s moll. Worse; his wife, for God’s sake. Edge work
and risk-taking and all that crap was all very well, and I hadn’t been entirely
lying when I’d told her I didn’t give a fuck, but I wasn’t actually suicidal. Life

was too short not to seize the day but she’d been right about behaviour that
might shorten that life, dramatically.

Then, one overcast Wednesday in mid-May, over a month later, a courier

arrived with a slim, padded envelope, immediately after I’d finished the show.
The envelope was light, so light it felt empty. There was a grey plastic hotel
key card inside. I was in the corridor from the studio to our office at the time;
I looked inside the envelope but there was nothing else in there; I tipped it up
and tapped it but still nada. I looked back down the corridor as I walked, in
case I’d missed something else inside falling out. Nothing there, either. The
key card didn’t say what room it was for, or what hotel. They never do. I put
it  in  my  pocket  and  inspected  the  envelope,  looking  for  a  sender’s  name,
wondering if I could trace it back to whomever had sent it.

My mobile sounded as soon as I switched it back on. The phone’s display

said Anonymous.

‘Hello?’ I answered.
‘Is that Kenneth?’ said a female voice.
‘Ken Nott, yes.’
‘May we talk?’
‘Yes,’  I  said.  I  stopped  by  the  office  door.  Inside,  I  could  hear  Phil  and

Andi, his assistant, talking and laughing. ‘Who is this?’

‘We met on the roof, about five weeks ago, do you remember? Please don’t

say my name, but do you remember me?’

‘Ah. Well, ah, yes. Yes, of course I do. How are you?’
‘Do you still … I am not sure what to say. Wish to proceed? This is very

unromantic, I am sorry.’

‘Ah,’ I said, staring at the carpet beneath my feet. ‘I found out who, ah,

who your other half is.’

‘So you do not. I see. I’m sorry. I have been stupid. Please dispose of—’
‘Well, no, hold on.’
‘You received what I sent?’
‘Size of a credit card? Nothing else?’
‘That’s right.’
‘Yes. Where is it for?’
‘The Dorchester. Six zero seven. It’s just that … I would have liked to have

seen you again.’

I don’t know. It was just something about the way she said it. I swallowed

and asked, ‘You there now?’

‘Yes.’
I glanced at my watch. ‘I have a few things to tidy up here. Half an hour?’
‘We have all afternoon, until about six.’
‘So, I’ll see you.’
‘Two things.’
‘What?’
‘You must not leave any mark on me. Nothing.’
‘Of course, I understand.’
‘Also …’
‘What?’
‘Just this time, would you be silent?’
‘Silent?’
‘Completely. From when you arrive to when you go.’
‘That’s a little weird.’
‘It is a private … superstition, you would probably say. I know it makes no

sense to you. But I would like you to indulge me in this.’

‘Hold on,’ I said, nearly laughing, ‘is this place bugged?’
‘No.’ I could hear her smile. A pause. ‘Will you do this for me? Just this

one time?’

‘What if I say no?’
‘Then I will not have been indulged, and because of that, if we go ahead, I

will  believe  that  this  will  end  badly  for  us.  I  do  not  know  what  you  will
believe, Kenneth.’

I thought about this. ‘All right.’
‘Half an hour, then. I will wait for you.’
‘See you soon.’
‘Yes.’
The phone clicked off.

At  the  Dorchester,  number  607  was  a  suite.  I  hesitated  at  the  door.  I  was
sweating. Mostly this was because I had walked from Capital Live!. The stuff
I thought I might have to tidy up had proved utterly trivial or just entirely fit
for  putting  off  until  tomorrow  or  later,  and  so  I’d  made  my  excuses  -  the
following day’s show was pretty much prepared already - and left. I’d walked
the  streets  under  the  low  grey  sky.  It  was  warm  and  the  air  felt  thick  and
humid for May.

Walking gave me time to think. Was I doing the sensible thing here? Well,

that  was  hardly  worth  answering.  Objectively,  knowing  whose  wife  I  was,
hopefully, about to fuck, I was behaving like a masochist with a death wish.
Or not, of course; maybe she’d been exaggerating that night on the terrace
outside Sir Jamie’s bedroom. Perhaps she’d been dramatising the whole thing
because doing so fulfilled some appetite for mystery, and her husband didn’t
give a damn what she did or who she did it with.

I fingered the little sliver of plastic in my pocket. The whole cloak-and-

dagger set-up with the key card was either faintly amusing and reassuring, or
deeply  worrying.  What  was  I  doing?  He’s  a  gangsta,  mate.  We  reassure
ourselves that we’re all special, but was anybody that special, was anybody so
extraordinary they were worth taking the sort of risk I might be taking?

Of course, people had been taking mad risks for sex, lust, love, for as long

as we’d been people. Wars had been fought for what you could, if you were
being  uncharitable,  characterise  as  basically  a  bit  of  slap  and  tickle.  Holy
books had been rewritten, the laws of God changed to facilitate the having of
some  desperately  yearned-for  piece  of  ass.  Desire  was  the  back-handed
compliment humanity had no choice but to pay itself. It was just the way we
were, it was what we did. We couldn’t help ourselves.

Seen one, seen ’em all, I reminded myself. But then that, of course, was

such shit. Sexists said that the way racists claimed, They all look the same to
me. Both were confessions of personal inadequacy, of the inability to really
see.

I used the key card and stepped into a dark hallway, illuminated only, once

I’d closed the door, by light spilling from a small loo on the other side of the
hall. The air was very warm; I had to take my jacket off. On a small table
opposite, a huge display of flowers filled the air with a thick, sweet scent.
There were two large doors, left and right, both ajar, both rooms dark beyond.
Just ambient sound of the city in both directions, heavily muffled. The first
door led to a sitting-room, darkly curtained, the afternoon sunshine held at
bay by drapes thick as carpets, tall as the distant ceiling. All a bit Edwardian,
but suitably sumptuous. The other door led to the bedroom.

There had been a light on in here all the time. Celia was sitting at a roll-top

desk on the far side of the room, reading by a desk lamp. She was wrapped in
a  white  robe  that  was  too  big  for  her.  Her  golden  brown  hair  was  down,
spreading and reaching almost to the seat of the chair. She turned round when
she heard the door open. She wore little round glasses. It felt even warmer in
the  bedroom;  a  vent  thundered  quietly  overhead,  producing  a  draught  of
tropical heat that was already drying the sweat on the back of my neck and
uncombing my hair.

She  raised  one  finger  to  her  lips.  My  heart  was  thudding;  I  was  half

expecting  muscled  goons  with  eighteen-inch  collars  to  burst  out  of  the
wardrobe, whack me on the back of the head, gaffer-tape my mouth and zip
me into a body-bag … though, from the impression I had of the room from
the desk lamp’s weak light, this place was too posh for wardrobes; it had a
dressing-room,  instead.  I  stood  there  in  the  heat,  wondering  how  much
initiative she wanted me to take; how much, indeed, I wanted me to take. This
whole silent running deal - or at least me agreeing to it - had put that ball
pretty firmly in her court. The dome of an elegantly gleaming trolley sat in
one shadowy corner of the bedroom. A champagne bucket and two glasses sat
on  a  low  table  in  front  of  a  towering  display  of  lilies.  The  flowers’  scent
saturated the blood-warm air.

Celia closed her hardback, took off her glasses, got up and walked over to

me, raising herself on her toes with her last step and kissing me just as she
had on the night of the storm. She smelled of musk and roses. I used both
hands to undo the rope-thick belt, then pulled her robe open. Her skin was
smooth and warm, warmer even than the over-heated air of the room. I held
her away a little to look at her. She let the white robe fall.

My eyes went wide and I breathed in, seeing the strange, curled imprint of

her lightning scar for the first time. I was about, I think, to say, ‘Good God,’
but  she  anticipated  me,  and  gently  put  her  cupped  hand  over  my  mouth,
silencing me as I stared at the tracery of dark brown lines. She stood still in
the glowing white whorl of the fallen robe, letting me inspect the fern-mark,
raising  her  arms  and  gathering  up  her  hair  to  let  me  see  better,  displaying
herself quietly.

On, not in, a vast bed beneath a swooping canopy, we fell to our shared

cause. I let her undress me, an urgency in her hands and expression I could
not  comment  on.  I  stroked  her  hair  while  she  did  this,  ploughing  its  rich
thickness with my fingers. Her body was the most sensuous thing I had ever
seen  in  my  life,  limbs  slim  but  muscled  enough  to  curve,  waist  tiny.  Her
areolae and nipples were unexpectedly pink for her caramel skin, whose tone
- save for the lightning-intaglioed print descending her left flank - didn’t vary
anywhere except faintly on the palms of her hands and the soles of her feet.
Her pubic hair was darker than that on her head, surprisingly soft but tightly
curled.  She  skinned  my  jeans  off.  The  head  of  my  cock  was  already
protruding out the top of my Calvins, purple and positively polished-looking
between the grey cotton and the pasty flesh of my irredeemably pale Scots
skin.  I  had  always  thought  this  looked  a  bit  gross  -  erections  usually  did,
regardless of the circumstances - but she smiled when she saw it, as though it
was already an old friend, and peeled off my briefs.

I mimed putting on a condom and pointed at my jacket, which she’d hung

over a chair. She shook her head. I raised my eyebrows and shook my head
slightly in what I hoped looked like a suitable translation of, You sure? She
nodded emphatically.

Well, okay, I thought, as she kissed me again.
I wanted her so much, so immediately, but I decided to take charge a bit,

and got her down on her back. I wanted to see her, to experience every part of
her with as many senses as I could bring to bear. I knelt between her legs,
clutching her perfect little buttocks in my hands and lifting her up. Her vagina
was pink as her nipples, parenthesised by the full, rosy-grey folds of her labia,
fronded  and  frilled  and  rising  to  the  little  puckered  lip  of  hood  hiding  the
glistening  stubby  button  of  her  clitoris.  Her  cunt  smelled  of  talc,  tasted  of
sweetened salt. I buried tongue and lips in her, pressing and nosing her like
some truffling hound while rubbing and pressing the tiny rosette of her anus
with one thumb, listening to her breath quicken, feeling as though my mouth
would burn with the engulfing heat of her.

Entering her was a slow, gradual, almost tentative process, just the opposite

of what I think we’d both expected. I found myself quivering, shaking like
some adolescent getting laid for the first time, my mouth suddenly dry, tears -
tears! - welling in my eyes. She lay on her hair, head to one side, facing the
darkness, the tendon on the side of her neck a taut, deeply shadowed column,
her arms thrown out across the bed, fingers clutching, caging fistfuls of plump
white pillows, her legs in a tensed V, toes pointing, then, finally, when at last I
was  fully  in  her,  she  gasped  and  threw  herself  around  me,  arms  and  legs
wrapping and squeezing me with an astonishing power, as though my whole
body was one huge cock and her body a hand, limbs fingers.

I  even  managed  to  come  quietly,  but  then,  afterwards,  lying  there,  chests
heaving, limbs trembling, she rolled over to me, slick with sweat, and put two
fingers delicately to my lips. ‘It’s all right,’ she said softly. These were the
first articulate sounds she had made. ‘We can talk now, Kenneth.’

It did cross my mind to shake my head, or just ignore her, or pretend to fall

asleep;  in  other  words,  or  their  lack,  tease  her,  but  instead  I  said,  ‘You’ve
changed your mind?’ She had said to remain silent throughout.

She nodded slowly. Her long, thick hair fell spooled, tangled, heavy on my

chest. ‘Just the beginning was enough. And that you were prepared to.’

‘Uh-huh?’
‘Uh-huh?’ she said, mimicking me.
I took a handful of her hair, rolling my fist around in it, taking up all slack.

Her head tipped towards my hand. Her large, darkly amber eyes gazed down.
‘You are a very singular woman, Celia.’

‘Will we do this again?’
I raised my head and made a show of looking downwards. ‘In about five

minutes, I’d guess.’

She smiled. ‘You will meet me again?’
‘Oh, I should think so.’
‘Good. We won’t be able to go out, to meet in public. It will have to be like

this.’

‘This is okay. I can handle this.’
‘Handle me,’ she whispered, lowering herself into my arms.

So began my erratic, erotic tour of the luxury hotels of London. Every few
weeks  -  apart  from  once  when  holidays  got  in  the  way  -  a  courier  would
deliver  a  slim  package  holding  only  a  hotel  key  or  key  card.  The
accompanying phone call got shorter and shorter each time until all I would
hear was, ‘The Connaught, three one six,’ or ‘The Landmark, eight one eight,’
or ‘The Howard, five zero three.’

In a succession of tall-ceilinged, feverishly hot, darkened suites, on top of a

series of King- or Emperor-size beds, Celia and I pursued our sporadic affair.

That first time, in the Dorchester, it turned out we had longer than she’d

first said; not until six but until ten, when she really had to go. I’d nodded off
at one point, into sharply sultry dreams of swimming in thick red perfume
beneath a fiery lilac sun, then woke to find all the lights out but the room
illuminated from outside and below and her standing by the windows, looking
out  between  the  drawn-back  curtains,  the  silvery  lustre  of  a  full  moon
combining on her skin with the glow of the hotel’s floodlights reflecting from
the ceiling and framing her slim, dark form with gold.

I  padded  up  behind  her,  held  her,  and  she  put  her  hands  on  mine  at  her

shoulder as I nuzzled her neck and hair. That was when I asked her about the
long,  swirling  mark  on  her  left  flank,  and  she  told  me  about  the  lightning
strike.

The  dark  bodies  of  Kensington  Gardens  and  Hyde  Park  lay  strung  with

pinprick  cords  of  light.  Below  us,  cradled  in  the  scoop  of  the  building’s
forecourt facing Park Lane, a great dark tree rustled in a freshening breeze,
new growth all green and black and full of life and movement and promise.

‘Who are you, Celia? Tell me about yourself,’ I said into the darkness, later.

‘If you want.’

‘What do you want to know?’
‘Everything about you.’

everything about anybody would be boring.’

‘Not you, I suspect.’
‘I told you; I am a married woman, a housewife, a listener.’
‘Perhaps you could start a little closer to the beginning.’
‘I am from Martinique. You know where that is?’
‘I know.’
‘My father was a fisherman, my mother a waitress. I have four brothers,

five sisters.’

‘My, your parents were busy. Sexual athleticism runs in the family, then.’
‘I studied languages, I became a model, I moved to Paris, then London. I

met a man who I thought loved me.’ She hesitated. ‘Perhaps that’s not fair to
him. He thought he did love me. We both did, then.’

‘What about you loving him?’
Her body tensed fractionally against mine, then relaxed again. ‘Love,’ she

said, as if saying, tasting the word for the first time, getting the measure of its
meaning in her mouth and mind. ‘I don’t know.’ I felt her turn her head to
stare off into the shadowy heights of the room. Eyelashes flitted against the
skin of my shoulder. ‘I felt fondness for him. He was kind to me. He helped
me. Helped me considerably. I don’t mean to say that I married him out of
gratitude, but I felt that I knew him and that he would be a good husband.’

‘And is he?’
She was silent for a while. ‘He treats me well. He has never struck me. He

became cold towards me about the time when it was found I could not have
children.’

‘I’m sorry.’
‘The point is more that it does not matter that he is a good husband to me;

what  matters  is  that  he  is  a  bad  man  to  others.  He  would  say  they  always
deserved it, but …’

‘Did you know he was like that when you married him?’
She was silent for a moment. ‘Yes and no. I knew a little. I did not want to

know it all. I should have.’

‘Do you mean to stay with him?’
‘I would be afraid to tell him I was leaving him. Also, practically my whole

family works for one of his businesses now, on the island.’

‘Ah.’
‘Ah, indeed. What about you, Kenneth?’

profiles in top media outlets?’

‘Your marriage? Your wife?’
‘I married a nurse called Jude. Judith. Met in a club when I was between

jobs,  not  long  after  I  moved  down  to  London.  Great  sex,  similar  interests,
robust  cross-platform  political  beliefs  with  only  a  few  troublesome  legacy
systems - she believed in astrology - compatible groups of friends … and we
certainly thought we were in love. She didn’t really want to get married but I
insisted. I knew what I was like; I knew I was very likely to stray, or certainly
to want to stray, to be unfaithful, and I came up with this bizarre concept that
if I got married then the fact I’d made a solemn promise to her to forsake all
others,  made  a  legally  binding  commitment,  would  stop  me.’  I  paused.
‘Probably the single most barmy idea I’ve ever entertained in my entire adult
life, and that when, by common assent, the field of other contenders is both
wide  and  deep.’  I  shrugged  gently,  so  as  not  to  jar  her  head  where  it  lay
against  my  shoulder  and  chest.  ‘However.  I  cheated,  she  found  out,
confronted me with it, and I swore it wouldn’t happen again. I meant it, too. I
always meant it. Repeat until no longer funny.’ I breathed deeply. ‘She’s okay
now; in a stable relationship. I still see her now and again.’

‘Do you still love her?’
‘No, ma’am.’
‘You still sleep with her.’
I  felt  my  body  jerk.  She  must  have  felt  it  too.  ‘You  guessing,  Celia?’  I

asked. ‘Or are we in some creepy Play Misty For Me vibe here?’

‘Guessing, you would call it. I am good at it.’
‘Well,  as  you  guessed.’  I  shrugged  again.  ‘We  never  mean  to,  it  just

happens … Old times’ sake, I suppose. Lame, but true. But anyway not for a
while.’

‘And you have a regular girlfriend?’
‘Yes. Nice girl. Bit mad. Works for a record company.’
‘She doesn’t know, I hope. About you and me. I hope nobody does.’
‘Nobody.’
‘You don’t mind? Some men like to boast.’
‘Not me. And no, I don’t mind.’
Usually we met on a Friday, but not every time. Never at the weekends.

She said this was because she liked to listen to me on the radio beforehand.
Soon, with every show I did, I’d start to wonder, was she listening? More to
the  point,  was  she  listening  in  an  eight-hundred-quid-a-night  suite,  slowly

undressing in the darkness while a cranked-up heating system wound round to
maximum gradually toasted every molecule of air in the place?

On several occasions, especially on Fridays, I had to stand people up. Jo, a

couple of times. I claimed a commiserating, men-only drinking party with a
just-dumped  colleague  on  the  first  occasion,  and  plain  alcohol-induced
forgetfulness in a mobile-reception-free dive bar the second time. Jo shouted
at me on both occasions, then wanted to have sex, which was awkward. I just
about managed it the first time, though I felt a) sore, and b) guilty that I was
still  thinking  about  Ceel.  The  second  time  I  faked  incapability  through
drunkenness. I began to make Friday night engagements tentative rather than
firm.

Wherever it was I met Ceel, she was always there, always waiting, almost

always reading a book - usually something recent I’d heard of: White Teeth,
Man and Boy, Bridget Jones’s Diary. Once it was The Prince, once Madame
Bovary, and once the Kama Sutra, which she was reading for ideas we didn’t
really need. Twice it was A Brief History of Time.  The  room  -  suite  -  was
always dark, always hot. There would be something light to eat if we wanted,
and vintage champagne. It was a while before I realised the glasses we drank
from were always the same ones, and that there would always be a different,
spare glass present. She brought the crystal flutes herself; they belonged to
her. She seemed pleased that I’d noticed.

‘You were a model, you said?’
‘Yes.’
‘What, like, clothes?’
She  gave  a  one-breath  laugh  into  the  warm  dark.  ‘Those  are  what  one

usually models, Kenneth.’

‘Swim-wear, lingerie?’
‘Sometimes. I began in swim-wear, when a magazine came to the island to

shoot a feature and two of their models were hurt in a car crash. That’s how I
got my break.’

‘What about them?’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Did they break anything?’ I shook my head, already feeling foolish. ‘Sorry,

I—’

‘The two models? Yes, one broke an arm and both had facial injuries. I

don’t think either ever worked as a model again. It was very upsetting. Not
how I’d have chosen to get into such a career.’

‘Sorry. I shouldn’t have said anything.’

‘That’s all right.’
‘Did you appear mostly in French magazines?’
‘Yes. I’m afraid I have no portfolio to show you.’
‘What was your modelling name?’
‘Celia McFadden.’
‘McFadden?’  I  said,  laughing.  ‘What  possessed  you  to  take  a  Scottish

name?’

‘It was my maiden name,’ she said, sounding surprised.
‘You’re a McFadden, from Martinique?’
‘My  great-great-grandfather  was  a  slave  on  Barbados.  He  was  given  the

name  of  his  slave  master,  who  may  have  been  his  biological  father.  He
escaped, and ended up in Martinique.’

‘Woh. Sorry.’
‘That’s all right,’ Celia said, shrugging. ‘You changed your name,  didn’t

you?’

‘Yeah.  Not  officially,  just  for  the  radio.  It  still  says  McNutt  on  my

passport.’

‘McNutt?’ She smiled.
‘Yes, with two “t”s. So, this,’ I said, changing the subject and stroking the

lightning scar, ‘has appeared in public, has it? It wasn’t a problem?’

‘Perhaps it was a small problem. I always had enough work but I’m sure I

lost some jobs because of it. But no, I don’t think it ever appeared.’

‘What did they do, cover it with make-up?’
‘No. They shot from the other side.’
‘So all your model shots are from the right?’
‘Mostly.  Though  they  don’t  all  appear  so  once  they’re  printed.  You  just

reverse the neg.’

‘Oh, right. Of course.’
‘Sometimes, when the light or the background meant we had to, they would

shoot from my left side and I would hold my arm in a certain way and if there
was anything of the scar visible it would be air-brushed out later. It is not a
problem.’ She shrugged. ‘Covering things up is easy.’

The latest she ever stayed was ten p.m. I was welcome to stay longer if I

wanted, but I never did, and I knew she preferred me to leave first. She would
arrive and depart with her hair tightly compressed under a wig - usually blond
- and wore large dark glasses and baggy, undistinguished clothes.

In Claridge’s, she’d stripped the bed to its bottom sheet and covered the

surface and a dozen extra pillows in red rose petals. The lights mostly stayed
on for that one. This was where she finally explained her insane theory about
having half died when the lightning struck her.

‘What?’
‘There are two mes. Two of me. In different, parallel worlds.’
‘Hold on. I think I know this theory. Simple idea but the complexities are

hideous.’

‘Mine is quite simple.’
‘Yeah, but the real one is confusing to a bonkers degree; according to it

there are an infinity of yous. A pleasing prospect, I might add, except there is
also,  are  also  …  anyway,  an  infinity  of  mes,  too,  and  your  husband.
Husbands. Whatever. See how confusing it is?’

‘Yes, well,’ she said, waving one dismissive hand. ‘But for me it is very

simple. I half died then, when the lightning struck me. In that other world I
am half dead, too.’

‘But also half alive.’
‘Just as in this one.’
‘So did you fall off this cliff in the other world, or not?’ I asked, deciding to

humour this matter-of-fact madness of hers.

‘Yes and no. I did, but I also fell back onto the grass, just as I did here.’
‘So in this world, here, you fell off the cliff too?’
‘Yes.’
‘And yet you woke up on the grass.’
‘That part of me did. This part of me did.’
‘So in the other world? What? If you woke up on the grass in this one, she

must have not woken up, because she was lying dead at the bottom of the
cliff.’

‘No, she woke up too, on the grass.’
‘So who the hell fell off the bleedin cliff?’
‘I did.’
‘You did? But—’
‘Both of I.’
‘I and I? What, now you’re a Rastafarian?’
She  laughed.  ‘We  both  fell  off  the  cliff.  I  remember  it  happening.  I

remember seeing myself fall, and the noise the air made, and how my legs
made a useless running motion and how I could not scream because the air
had been knocked out of my lungs and how the rocks looked as I fell towards

them.’

‘So did the lightning kill … half kill you, or was it the fall?’
‘Does it matter?’
‘I don’t know. Does it?’
‘Perhaps both did. Or half did.’
‘I think we’ve gone on to quarters by this stage.’
‘Perhaps  either  would  have  been  enough.  All  that  matters  is  that  it

happened.’

‘It would be useless to suggest, I suppose, that this might all really only

have happened in your head, the result of having ninety thousand volts zapped
through your brain pan and down your body?’

‘But of course it is not useless to suggest it! If that is what you need to

believe to make sense of what happened to me by your way of thinking, then
of course that is what you must believe.’

‘That’s not quite what I meant.’
‘Yes, I know. But, you see, when it happened, I was there, and you, my

dear, were not.’

I  let  out  a  long  breath.  ‘Right.  So  …  so  what  are  the  symptoms  of  you

being only half alive in this world … and the other one? You do seem wholly
and, I would risk saying, even vibrantly alive in this world, to me. Especially
about ten minutes ago. Oh, though there is that thing about the French calling
it the little death, of course. Though that’s not what you’re talking about, is it?
But back to the symptoms. What makes you feel this?’

‘That I feel it.’
‘Right. No, no, not right. I’m not getting it.’
‘It feels obvious to me. In a way I always knew it. Reading about parallel

universes simply made sense of that feeling. I didn’t feel any more certain of
what I felt, and it did not really alter what I felt, or what I believed, but it
made it more possible for me to explain it to others.’

I laughed. ‘So all we’ve been talking about in the last five minutes is after

it became easier to explain?’

‘Yes.  Easier.  Not  easy.  Perhaps  “less  difficult”  would  be  a  better

formulation.’

‘Right.’
‘I  think  it  might  all  change  on  my  next  birthday,’  she  said,  nodding

seriously.

‘Why?’

my next birthday I will be twenty-eight. You see?’

‘Yes,  I  do.  My  God,  your  aberrant  personal  belief  system  is  actually

contagious. I suppose they all are.’ I sat up in the bed. ‘You mean that on the
day of your twenty-eighth birthday, in April next year …’

‘The fifth.’
‘… What?’
She shrugged. ‘I don’t know. Perhaps nothing. Perhaps I die. Perhaps the

other one of me dies.’

‘And if the other one dies?’
‘I will become fully alive.’
‘Which will manifest itself … ?’
She smiled. ‘Well, perhaps I will decide that I love you.’
I stared into those amber eyes. It seemed to me then that she had the most

direct, clearly honest gaze of anybody I had ever met. No humour there just
now, no irony. Not even doubt. Puzzlement, perhaps, but no doubt. She really
believed all this.

‘There,’ I said, ‘is that big little word that neither of us have spoken until

now.’

‘Why should we speak it?’
I wondered what that meant. I might have pursued the matter, but then she

shrugged again, and her immaculate breasts moved in just such a way that in
this world and surely any other all I could say was, ‘Oh, come here.’

In the Meridien Piccadilly, finding she had a suite with a kitchen attached,

she  had  already  been  across  to  Fortnum  and  Mason  and  bought  the
ingredients to make an omelette, flavoured with saffron. She was trying out
different  types  of  underwear  on  that  occasion,  so  that  I  came,  bizarrely,  to
associate the smell of eggs cooking in olive oil with a basque and stockings.

I laughed as she presented the tray to me in bed.
‘What?’ she asked.
‘You spoil me,’ I said as she jumped up onto the bed, her stockinged legs

folded neatly beneath her. She took up a fork. I gestured at the food, at her.
‘This is … pretty much most guys’ fantasy.’

‘Good,’  she  said.  She  looked  round  the  dark  bedroom,  then  at  me,  and

smiled. ‘No complaints here, either.’

‘Think you might let me pay for one of these conjugal visits one day? Or

even take you away for a weekend?’

‘This has to be outside of real life, Kenneth. That way we can get away with
it.  We  expose  ourselves  less.  Less  of  a  risk  is  taken.  And,  because  this
happens outside of our normal lives, it feels less connected to what we might
talk about to other people. It is like a dream, no? So we are both less likely to
say something that might give us away. Do you understand?’

‘Yeah, sure. Just a residual scrap of old-school male pride, wishing to pay

for  something.  But  it’s  all  right;  being  an  intermittently  kept  man  rather
appeals to me.’

‘I wish you could take me out,’ she said, smiling at the thought of it. ‘I

would love to sit in a café with you, watching people go by. Go to lunch with
you, sitting on a terrace by a river, in the sunlight. Be taken to a play or a film
or to dance. Sit on a beach with you, under a palm tree, perhaps. Just the two
of us crossing a street, holding hands. I find myself dreaming of these things
sometimes, when I am low.’ She looked away, then back. ‘Then I think of
this. The next time we shall meet. That makes everything well.’

I gazed into her eyes again, lost for a thing to say.
She smiled, winked. ‘It will get cold. Eat up.’
In  the  Lanesborough  we  spent  hours  in  a  cavernous  bath,  experimenting

with various lotions and creams; she emptied a bottle of No. 5 into the oiled
foam and I smelled of it for three days.

‘What do you do, Ceel?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘How do you pass your days? What is your life like?’
‘I’m not sure I should tell you. This is supposed to be separate, not attached

to our real lives, don’t you remember?’

‘I remember, but telling me what a more normal day is like isn’t going to

make that big a difference.’

‘I do what the women of rich men are supposed to do; I shop and lunch.’
‘Friends?’
‘Some.  Different  friends  for  different  things.  Some  for  shopping  and

lunching, some at my health club, some for ice skating—’

‘You skate?’
‘A little. Not well. There are a couple of friends I have from my modelling

days who are also married now, or settled down, with rich men. Just two who
live in London. I visit Paris to see friends there, and one of my brothers. It is
so easy now, with the train.’

‘You go to Paris a lot?’

‘A few times a year. Sometimes I go there with John. Usually he travels

alone.  He’s  away  often;  Europe,  South  America.  I  go  to  Paris  more  than
anywhere else. John doesn’t like me to spend nights away unless he knows
the  people  I  stay  with  well.  In  Paris  it’s  all  right  because  I  stay  with  my
brother, who works for John and lives in a company apartment.’

‘What does your brother do?’
She looked at me. It was one of the few occasions she’d ever looked even

slightly angry. ‘Nothing bad,’ she said sharply.

‘Okay.’ I held up my hands. ‘Do you have any really close friends?’
She  turned  away.  ‘Most  of  the  women  my  age  have  children,  and  that

separates us.’ She shrugged. ‘I spend time on the phone each day, calling my
family back on the island. And they come to visit sometimes.’ She paused.
‘Not as often as I’d like.’

(Later, while she was in the bathroom, I noticed her Bridge shoulder bag

lying on a chair, and her mobile phone inside its little brown leather cave, a
green  light  blinking  slowly.  She  usually  switched  her  phone  off  while  we
were together. This must be the phone my mobile knew only as Anonymous. I
watched the faint green light for a few more beats of its tiny silicon heart.

Looking straight at it, it almost disappeared. I could see it better from the

corner of my eye.

I  swallowed  a  little  pride,  not  to  mention  some  principles,  and  quickly

rolled over and dug the dainty Nokia out. I’d had a similar, if chunkier, model
to this, two mobiles back, and knew how to access the phone’s own number. I
scribbled it on a piece of hotel paper and stuffed the note in a jacket pocket
after I’d returned the phone to her bag, long before she reappeared. This was a
safety  precaution,  I  told  myself.  In  case  I  ever  needed  to  warn  her  of
something;  like  a  terrorist  threat  we’d  heard  about  via  the  newsroom  but
couldn’t broadcast because it would cause mass panic … Yes, something like
that, say.)

In the Berkeley she had brought drugs and we had time to have frenetic

coked-up sex and make slow, stoned love.

‘I didn’t know you smoked.’
‘Mais non! But I don’t!’ she giggled, coughing.
A  little  later,  lying  there  in  a  stunned  haze  of  drugged  satiation,  limbs

spread  where  they’d  fallen  on  our  uncoupling,  I  watched  a  small  patch  of
sunlight - the product of a sunbeam penetrating the tall sweep of the drawn-
over curtains from the very centre of their summit - move slowly across the
white sheets towards her left arm. Half asleep, I kept staring at the molten
coin of yellow as Ceel drifted into a quiet, smiling doze. The egg-sized blob

of  buttery  light  slid  gently  up  her  coffee  skin,  slow  as  the  hour  hand  on  a
clock, and revealed the tiny, years-old scars spattered on the flesh above the
veins on her upper arm and the inside of her elbow.

smooth surface of golden brown.

I  gazed  at  her  face,  lying  half  averted  on  the  pillow,  her  blissful  smile

directed into the darkness of the suite, and then I looked down again at her
arm. I thought about her time in Paris, and about Merrial and the bad situation
he’d helped her out of. I decided I would never say anything, if she didn’t.

Beneath the light, beneath the skin, her blood pulsed slow and strong, and I

imagined it, minutely warmed by that small fall of light, coursing through her
body  while  she  stared,  unconscious  and  blind,  back  to  the  memory  of  a
poisoned chemical rapture.

A few times I tried to follow her, to see where she lived, or just what she

did next after one of these trysts. There was a bar in the Landmark with a
view of reception. I sat there pretending to read. I’d peeked in her bag earlier
to check which wig she was wearing that day, and in the wardrobe to see what
clothes she’d arrived in; it was a grey suit, hanging neatly above some Harvey
Nics’ bags. I sat there and I watched really carefully but I still didn’t see her. I
don’t know if she had more than one wig, or if I just glanced down at the
wrong moment and she’d walked quickly through, the bill already paid, or
what, but I sat there for an hour and a half, drinking whisky and nibbling rice
crackers until my bladder drove me from my look-out post.

A month later I tried again, sitting in a café across from the Connaught.

Again, I didn’t see her, but after about an hour I got a call on my mobile.

Anonymous, said the screen. Oh-oh.
‘Hello?’
‘I  live  in  Belgravia.  Usually  I  go  straight  home.  Sometimes  I  do  a  little

more shopping. Bookshops, often … Are you still there?’

‘Yup. Still here,’ I said. I took a deep breath. ‘I’m sorry.’
‘You would make a very poor spy.’
‘Yeah.’ I sighed. ‘It’s not …’
‘It’s not what?’
‘It’s not some weird, obsessive thing. I mean, it’s not something to worry

about. It’s not like I’m stalking you or anything like that. I’m interested. You
intrigue me. We’re so … intimate and yet, you know, so … strange to each
other. Strangers, still.’

‘I’m sorry it has to be that way. But it does. You do accept that?’

‘Yes, of course.’
‘You won’t do this again, will you? Please.’
‘No, I won’t. You’re not angry with me?’
‘More flattered than angry. But more alarmed than either. It’s not worth the

risk.’

‘It won’t happen again. But …’
‘What?’
‘It was worth it for this phone call.’
She was silent for a moment. ‘You are very sweet,’ she said. ‘I have to go

now.’

In  the  Ritz,  I’d  brought  some  E.  We  knocked  the  pills  back  with

champagne, listened to some white-label chill-out sounds I’d been given by
one  of  Ed’s  DJ  pals,  and  drifted  into  some  sublimely  blissful,  loved-up
fucking until my balls ached with the emptying.

‘You never ask me about John.’
‘That’s right.’
‘Do you hate him?’
‘No. I don’t know him. I don’t hate him just because he’s your husband. If

he’s some sort of crime boss, I suppose I ought to hate him on principle for
being what he is, but I can’t work up any enthusiasm for the subject. Maybe
I’ve taken to heart your idea of keeping this compartmentalised from real life.
Or maybe I just don’t want to think about your husband in the first place.’

‘Do you ever hate me?’
‘Hate you? Are you mad?’
‘I stay with him. I married him.’
‘I’ll give you the benefit of the doubt there, I think.’
That was the time I swallowed more pride and checked her purse. I think I

was  half  expecting  to  find  a  fat  roll  of  bank  notes,  but  there  was  barely  a
hundred in there. It had occurred to me that she would not want to pay all
these hotel bills by credit card, not if she was trying to keep all this as secret
as possible. Finding no thick Swiss-roll of grubby twenties kind of stumped
me. It was only later I thought that maybe she paid in cash all right, but before
rather than after.

(That was the longest interval, after the Ritz. Her husband was taking her to

Oz and New Zealand on a month-long holiday, and there was a week-long
overlap  while  Jo  and  I  spent  a  fortnight  doing  the  tombs  on  the  Nile  and
snorkelling in the Red Sea. While she was away I made the mistake of going
to see a film called Intimacy about a couple who meet up every now and again

in a filthy flat for sex, and remain strangers to each other. It was probably a
good film in a British art-house kind of way but I hated it and walked out
halfway through, something I’d never done in my life. Sometimes I’d take out
my mobile and cursor through to Ceel’s number, and just sit and stare at it for
a few moments, until the phone’s backlighting clicked off. Infected by Celia’s
caution, I hadn’t even entered her name in the mobile’s own memory, or the
SIM  card’s,  just  put  the  number  in  by  itself.  As  far  as  my  phone  was
concerned, she was just Location 96.)

In the Savoy one night, amongst mirrors and acres of cream and gilt, in a

suite looking out across the dark river to the floodlit bulk of the Festival Hall,
she had turned off all the lights and drawn the curtains right back. She placed
a small seat in front of the tall, open windows. She had me sit there, bollocks
to the chintz, already licked sweetly, achingly erect, then she straddled me,
facing the same way, both of us gazing out to the light-browned clouds and
the few bright stars between, while the sounds and smells of the summer city
rolled in through the opened doors of glass.

‘Like  this,’  she  said,  placing  my  hands  just  so,  so  that  I  was,  in  effect,

holding her in a head lock. ‘Ah, yes.’

‘Lordy fucking mama.’

‘So  what’s  the  problem?  Basically  you’re  having  the  perfect  affair.  Perfect
sex.’

‘I don’t know. Well, the actual sex … fuck, yeah. But … I don’t know.’
Craig and I were sitting in his lounge, watching football on the telly. It was

half-time;  time  for  Men  To  Talk.  After  peeing,  anyway.  Nikki  was  in  her
room,  two  floors  up,  listening  to  music  and  reading.  I’d  told  Craig  the
absolute minimum about my very occasional affair with Celia.

Normally I might have shared this sort of thing with Ed, who possessed the

merit of pursuing - with extravagant success - a lifestyle that made mine look
restrained  to  the  point  of  celibacy  in  comparison,  but  the  trouble  was  I’d
asked him about Mr Merrial that day in the Hummer, and I wasn’t absolutely
sure  that  I  hadn’t  mentioned  seeing  Mr  M’s  wife  at  the  time,  too,  and  -
paranoid though I knew it was really - I felt it would be just possible that Ed
would put two and two together and, well, faint, probably.

Maybe Celia guessing about the fact Jude and I still fell into bed together

every now and again had spooked me a little.

‘Look at it objectively,’ Craig said. ‘You meet up with this mystery female

whom you describe as the most beautiful woman you’ve ever slept with. You
always meet in circumstances, surroundings, that you describe as somewhere
between “very nice” and “sybaritic”, where you proceed to fuck the arse off

her and …’

can happen is that it just fizzles slowly, sadly out … What?’

‘Oh fuck.’
‘What?’
‘Just there.’
‘What?’
‘When I said “you fuck the arse off her”, right?’
‘… Yeah.’
‘You winced. Well, your cheek winced. Like a facial tic.’
‘Never … Did I? Really? Oh. Okay. Right. So?’
‘That means you’re falling in love with her. Now you have a problem.’

The  big  Breaking  News  thing  was  stuttering.  It  got  all  rather  hyper  and
frenetic over the next day or two after our meeting with Debbie the Station
Manager,  the  way  sometimes  these  relatively  trivial  things  tend  to,  with
urgent, all-hours, weekend-long phone calls, texts and voice mails flying back
and  forth  between  Channel  Four,  Capital  Live!,  the  production  company,
Winsome, assorted producers, assistants, secretaries, PAs, agents, lawyers and
people whose job it seemed to be purely to ring up and say they needed to
speak  to  somebody  urgently,  all  tying  up  a  significant  proportion  of  the
capital’s mobile and fixed-line telephony capacity trying to get this incredibly
vital  piece  of  exciting,  epoch-making,  edgy,  challenging,  confrontational
television  arranged  for  the  Monday  evening.  Even  Sir  Jamie  himself  got
involved,  because  according  to  my  contract  he  needed  to  give  personal
permission  for  me  to  appear  on  another  not  pre-agreed  media  outlet.  This
turned  out  not  to  be  a  problem  as  he  was  a  good  friend  of  the  owner  of
Winsome Productions, and even had shares in the company.

Then, of course, just as everybody concerned had whipped themselves up

into a high, teetering, effervescent froth of wild-eyed expectation and teeth-
chattering frenzy, it all fell apart.

Even I’d got myself all worked up, and I’m Joe Totally Cynical about these

things after years of people telling me they have this great project for getting
me on telly and how they’re really excited about bringing a new dimension to
my work, and then nothing happening.

‘You’re telling me it’s not fucking going ahead.’
‘It’s  being  postponed,’  Phil  said  tiredly,  putting  his  mobile  down  on  the

scratched wooden table. We were in the Capital Live! canteen on the floor

beneath  Debbie’s  office,  having  an  early  breakfast.  It  was  just  after  seven
o’clock. We’d come in early to do a special recorded edition of the show so
that  I  could  get  to  the  Channel  Four  studios  in  time  for  the  recording  of
Breaking News (they’d backed off the original idea of doing it live).

My  mobile  vibrated  on  my  belt.  I  checked  the  display.  My  agent.  ‘Yes,

Paul?’ I said. Then, ‘Yes, I just heard.’ Then, ‘Yeah, I know. Me too. Par for
the fucking course. Yeah … yada and then yada, raised to the power of yada.
Yeah, when I see it. In fact probably not until I see it when it’s number thirty-
seven on TV’s One Hundred Most Embarrassing Moments. Yeah, we’ll see.
Okay. You too. Bye.’

I sat back in the creaking flexibility of the brown plastic seat and drummed

my fingers on the table top, looking at my toast and marmalade and my cup of
milky tea.

‘Look on the bright side,’ Phil said. ‘They’d just have wanted you there

about four hours early, and then they’d have wanted to do another of those
pre-interview  interviews  where  some  breathless  researcher  with  a  famous
name just out of chalet school asks you lots of questions so they can find out
which ones are the good ones and you give really good, fresh answers and
then  they  ask  you  those  same  questions  in  the  actual  programme  and  you
sound all stale and talked out because you’ve already answered them once
and got bored with them, and during the recording you’ll have to answer the
same questions a third or a fourth time because somebody knocks over a bit
of the set and they have to start again from the top, so you’ll sound even more
stale and talked out, then they’ll record more than three hours and use less
than two minutes and you’ll forget to take your make-up off and workmen
will give you funny looks in the street and afterwards people whose opinion
you respect will say they missed it, or go all cagey when you ask them what
they thought, and people you don’t like will call up and tell you they loved it
and the papers you hate will either dismiss it or say how you should stick to
what you’re good at, not that you’re very good at that either, and you’ll be all
depressed and grumpy for weeks.’

Probably Phil’s longest diatribe; it was too laid-back to be called a rant. I

looked at him. ‘So, when did they tell you it might happen now?’

‘Oh, tomorrow,’ he grinned.
‘Fuck off.’
‘Na,’ he said, leaning back too and stretching and yawning. ‘Lucky to be

this year, now, according to my new close friend at Winsome, Moselle. Major
rethink on format after the events of September the eleventh.’ He scratched
his head. ‘What a brilliant excuse that’s turned out to be, for so many things.’

‘Yeah,’ I breathed. I toyed with my toast and stirred my already well-stirred

tea. Part of me was deeply relieved. I’d come up with this great idea for what
I was going to do on the programme if they put me on with the Holocaust
denier  guy,  and  it  still  excited  me  and  scared  me  in  equally  intense
proportions.  Now  I  wouldn’t  have  to  either  do  it  and  let  fuck  knows  what
happen, or chicken out and not do it and curse myself for evermore for being
a sad, pathetic, hypocritical, lily-livered crap-out merchant. In fact, just the
sort  of  sad,  pathetic  (etc.)  who  would  feel  as  relieved  as  I  now  did  that  I
wouldn’t have to make that choice, at least not for a while and maybe, the
way I knew these things tended to work, ever.

I threw the teaspoon down and stood up. ‘Ah, come on, let’s go and do the

fucking show.’

Phil  glanced  at  his  watch.  ‘We  can’t.  Judy  T’s  using  the  studio  till  half

past.’

I sat back down again, heavily. ‘Fuck,’ I said eloquently, putting my head in

my hands. ‘Fuck fuck fuck fuck fuck.’

Five

MISSION STATEMENT

“Yeah,  I’d  just  like  to  say  that  don’t  you  think  these  Eurosceptic  people
should be called Europhobes, yeah?’

Phil and I rolled our eyes. I leaned right up to the microphone. This has the

pretty universally automatic effect of making people lower their voices, and I
was no exception. It should sound like I was talking personally just to the
caller.  ‘Actually,  Steve,  we  went  through  all  this  two  years  ago,  on  the
evening show, and, if you recall, we did a sort of rolling Greatest Hits of the
Evening  Show  for  the  first  week  of  the  daytime  slot  when  that  very  point
came  up,  oh,  a  few  times.  Kind  of  guessing  here  you’re  new  to  the
programme, Steve.’

‘Oh. Sorry. Yeah.’ Steve seized up, audibly. ‘It’s great,’ he managed. ‘Keep

it up.’

‘Practically  my  personal  motto,  Steve,’  I  said  with  a  smile,  sitting  back

again. ‘Thanks for calling.’ I clicked on to the next caller, which the screen
said was a Mr Willis, from Barnet. Subject: Eurp & poound (Kayla may have
put  the  ass  in  assistant,  but  her  typing  owed  more  to  the  carpet-bombing
approach than any concept of precision targeting).

Mr Willis. Not a first name. That told you something immediately, without

even saying Hello to the guy.

‘Mr Willis,’ I said crisply. ‘Mr Nott. Your point, sir.’

in such a hurry to get rid of the pound and throw in our lot with a currency
that’s dropped so much value since it was launched.’

‘I’m not in a hurry, Mr Willis. Like most people in Britain I think it’s going

to happen sooner or later, so it becomes a question of which is best, when is
best, but I don’t claim to know. My point is that it’s all about economics and
politics, and it shouldn’t be about sentiment, because the pound sterling is just
money, like any currency. If the Germans can give up the Deutschmark, we
can surely stop using bits of paper with the monarch’s head on them.’

‘But, Mr Nott, why should we? A lot of us happen to think the pound is

important. We love the pound.’

‘Look, Mr Willis, you lost the pound … whatever it was, thirty years ago. I

can just about remember this; the pound - the real pound - had two hundred
and forty pennies; a third of a pound was six and eightpence—’

‘Yes, but—’
‘—there  were  thrupenny  bits,  sixpences,  shillings,  florins,  half-crowns,

half-pennies, ten-bob notes, and—’

‘I know—’
‘—if you were being fancy, guineas. That all went in the sixties and that

was the end of the pound. What you’ve got now is a British dollar, basically,
so why all the belly-aching about it?’

‘It’s not belly-aching to wish to preserve a vital part of our proud British

culture. I am a member of an organisation—’

I looked at Phil on the other side of the desk and spread my hands. He did

the throat-cutting thing. I nodded. ‘Mr Willis,’ I said, fading his voice down,
‘here’s a handy hint; attack the Euro via the interest rate. A single interest rate
barely makes sense throughout the UK, let alone all twenty-five members of
an expanded EU, unless you want - in fact to impose - absurd levels of worker
mobility or a vastly increased centralised regional compensation fund.’

‘Look, we didn’t fight and win the Second World War—’
‘It’s been interesting talking to you, Mr Willis. Goodbye.’ I looked at Phil

as I cut Mr Willis off. ‘We getting crossed lines with the Daily Mail letters
page or something?’

‘I think it’s encouraging that we have a spread of listeners of various ages,

views and ethnic and cultural backgrounds, Ken,’ Phil said, leaning towards
his mike.

‘Phil  Ashby,  listeners.  Voice  of  Reason.  Singing  in  harmony  from  the

hymnal of Corporate Mission Statements.’

caller?’

talk about Scotz && Erop & U.

‘Streatham Steve, hello.’
‘Awright,  Ken?  Ma  man!’  a  deep  voice  shouted.  I  looked  at  Phil  and

crossed my eyes.

‘Steve, you’re doing some violence to the mike on that mobile. I’m sure if

you return it promptly to its owner they may not press charges.’

‘Wot? Agh, ha-ha-ha! Na, mate, it’s mine.’
‘Well, bully for you. And the exact flavour of your beef would be what?’
‘Wot?’
‘What is it you want to say, Steve?’
‘Yeah, I don’t want to be a European!’
‘You don’t? Right. Which continent should we tow the British Isles to lie

off then?’

‘Na, you know what I mean.’
‘Indeed I do. Well, so vote against it whenever you have the chance.’
‘Yeah, but it’s still gonna happen, innit?’
‘Fraid so. It’s called democracy.’ I hit the FX for Hollow Laughter.
‘Yeah, but the fing is, I blame you Scots, don’t I?’
‘Ah-hah,’  I  said.  ‘Any  particular  reason,  Steve,  or  is  this  just  some

generalised anti-Caledonian prejudice?’

‘Yeah, the government’s all Scotch, innit? The Labour Party. They’re all

Jocks, aren’t they?’

‘Very high proportion of the top jobs, yes, Steve. The Dear Leader himself,

our prudent Chancellor is a Scot—’

‘Worse, he’s a Fifer,’ Phil cut in.
‘Na, Phil, sorry,’ I said.
‘What?’ Phil asked.
‘Yeah,’ Steve said, ‘That’s what—’
‘Hold on, Steve, pal,’ I said. ‘Come back to you in two seconds, but I just

need to straighten something out with Producer Phil. Okay?’

‘Ah,’ Steve said. ‘Yeah …’
‘What?’ Phil repeated innocently, blinking behind his glasses.
‘Sorry, Phil, pal,’ I said. ‘But you can’t do that.’

‘Can’t do what?’
‘Bring up divisions or petty squabbles between different bits of Scotland.

Our internal prejudices and micro-management bigotries are our own affair.
We’re allowed to indulge in that but you’re not. It’s like black people can call
each other nigger but us white folks can’t. And rightly so, I might add.’

Phil nodded. ‘Things don’t mean what the sayer says, they mean what the

listener hears.’

I hit the FX key for a quiet, minute-long sample of the ‘Hallelujah Chorus’,

and  over  it  said,  voice  raised,  ‘Still  our  most  elegant  formulation  of  what
really would be one of our mission statements if we didn’t spit on such foul
aberrations  from  a  great  height  and  grind  the  ordure-jammed  cleats  of  our
Jockboots into their snivelling faces.’

‘Along  with,’  Phil  said,  ‘If  you  don’t  give  people  justice,  they’ll  take

revenge.’

‘And, Never underestimate the greed of the rich.’
‘Not forgetting, Ditto the ability of people to take exactly the wrong lesson

from a disaster.’

‘NMD? Come on down!’ I was laughing again. ‘Or our emission statement:

I’m coming! I’m coming!’

‘Or the posh version: I’m arriving! I’m arriving!’
‘Indeed.’ I un-clicked the sample.
‘But anyway,’ Phil said, still grinning.
‘But anyway indeed, Philip.’
‘What it boils down to is,’ he said slowly, ‘that I can’t say the things about

the Scots that you say all the time.’

‘Of course not! You’re English. A few of us clever Jocks still blame you for

the  whole  Glasgow-Edinburgh  antipathy  thing.  The  good  citizens  of  each
very-much-equally-worthy conurbation just loved each other to bits until you
guys came along. And frankly the utterly preposterous idea that if we hadn’t
had the English to unite us in hate we’d still be a bunch of bare-arsed hill
tribes marrying our sisters and murdering each other in caves holds no water
with  us  whatsoever,  no  sirree.  We  reckon  you  were  just  dividing  and
conquering. So, like I say, just don’t start, okay?’

‘It’s a good job you’ve got us to blame,’ Phil said.
‘It most certainly is,’ I agreed emphatically. ‘Just don’t for a nanosecond

expect the least scintilla of gratitude.’

‘As if,’ Phil said, smiling. ‘As apparently the young folk say, these days.’
‘Yeah, you’ll prise that copy of Clueless out of the video one day, Phil.’

Phil laughed silently and I went back to Steve. ‘Steve. Yeah. All these Scots
in Westminster? Hear what you’re saying, but don’t forget: if you think the
Scots are crap, and they’re the ones who’ve clawed their way to the top of this
particular greasy pole, what does that say about the English politicians?’

‘I fink it’s a conspiracy, mate.’
‘Brilliant! Phil; a conspiracy form.’ I picked the paper copy of the running

order from the desk in front of me and rustled it near the mike. ‘Thank you.
Steve? Ready; shoot.’

‘Cos, like, you want to get us into Europe, don’t you?’
‘We do?’ I smiled widely at Phil. ‘Yeah! We do! You’re right. Steve, I think

you’re  on  to  something  here.  Possibly  a  rehab  programme.  But  listen,  this
makes sense. It’s a Scottish conspiracy to get revenge for three hundred years
of oppression, which we secretly feel we never did resist strongly enough.’

‘I fink it’s cos you’re jealous.’
‘Of course we are. Our invasions of you lot never worked. Same with yours

of us, though obviously our impression is very much that you were always
much better at killing lots of us than we were at killing lots of you. Then you
guys  realised  where  our  weak  spot  is  and  just  bought  us.  That  was  smart.
Except we’ve never forgiven you for being cleverer than us; we’re supposed
to be the canny ones in this relationship.’

‘Yeah, cos you lot do want to be in Europe, dontcha?’
‘Naturally. Scots’ll make great Europeans. When we hear the English say,

We don’t want to be ruled from a distant capital where they speak differently
from us and impose an alien currency on us, we think: hold on, we’ve had that
for three centuries. We’ve been there, we’ve had the conditioning, we’ve done
the apprenticeship. London, Brussels, what’s to choose? Better to be wee and
ignored  in  a  potential  superpower  than  wee  and  ignored  in  a  post-imperial
backwater  where  the  only  things  that  arrive  on  time  are  the  corporate
bonuses.’

‘Yeah, well,’ Steve said.
‘Excellent work there, Steve. Fine contribution. Breaks my heart we don’t

pay anything.’

‘Sawright.’
‘Of course this does mean, though, Steve, that having started to uncover the

conspiracy, the people who really run the country are now going to be after
you. Basically you’re on the run from here on in, chum. Sorry. And I’d get
moving now, frankly, because these people don’t hang around. They’ve been
known  to  collar  somebody  while  they’re  still  making  the  phone  call  that
alerted what little remains of our so-called free society to the threat in the first

place. I’m not kidding, mate, while they’re still—’ I’d clicked Steve’s line off.
‘Steve? Hello? Steve? Steve? Steve! Are you … Dear God, Phil,’ I said in
hushed, strangled tones. ‘They’ve got the poor beggar. My God they’re fast.’

‘That was quick,’ Phil agreed.
‘He’s  probably  already  trussed  into  a  head-to-toe  strait-kilt  and  being

bundled into an unmarked Irn Bru van even as we speak.’

‘Ayee,’  Phil  said,  in  what  was  already  recognisable  as  his  incurably

atrocious  Scots  accent.  ‘He’ll  be  languishing  in  a  pibrock  on  the  Isle  of
Ocktermuckty before the day is oot, Ken.’

‘Och, Phil,’ I sighed happily, ‘when you speak, it’s like being home again.’
‘Shplendid. Sho, who’sh our nexsht caller?’
‘Well, we’re obviously shunted onto a deeply Scottish vibe here, Phil, as

that  spookily  accurate  Sean  Pertwee  impression  of  yours  so  powerfully
testifies. Let’s have …’ I scanned the call-monitoring screen, paging down to
where  the  new  calls  were  still  appearing.  ‘Ah;  Angus.  Now  there’s  a  fine
choochter name.’ I clicked on his line. ‘Angus. Are you Scottish? Say yes.’

‘Aye, man, ah am. Hullo. How’re ye doin?’
‘Fine and dandy. Yourself?’
‘Magic, aye.’
‘And what have you and your magic eye been looking at, then?’
‘Aye, ah was jus listenin to what yur man there was saying about us an the

English, an ah jus thought he wiz talkin a lod a shite.’

Beep. ‘Shite’ was a beepable word; Phil did the business this time, though

we all had a button. Beepable words were: cunt, fuck (and variations thereof),
shit (and variations thereof), shite (but not crap), bastard (but not, apparently,
the Scotified versions I kept getting away with), prick (in context) and cock
(in context). We could do this because the show went out with a three-second
delay.  This  meant  that,  in  theory,  Phil  could  beep  me  if  I  said  anything
slanderous or likely to bring Capital Live! into disrepute, or court. Ha, ha.

‘So cogently put, Angus,’ I said.
‘Aw, sorry, man.’
I looked across the desk. ‘Beep count today, Phil?’
‘That’s the first.’
‘Thought it was. Seventy minutes in. Dear me. Standards are slipping. So,

Angus, is that all you want to say? We do allegedly have a national reputation
for cogent intellectual discourse we ought to be maintaining here, Angy, and
frankly you’re not coming up to the mark. Or pound, or groat.’

‘Na, but it’s just, if the English don’t want to be part of Europe, fine. But

why should we have to no be a part of it too, like? Let them go their own way.
We’ll  go  ours.  We  don’t  need  them.  Man,  they’re  just  an  embarrassment
sometimes.’

Krankies?’ he said, voice rising indignantly. ‘And the deep-fried Mars bar?
We embarrass you?’

I  was  still  laughing.  ‘Yeah,  well,  Angus,’  I  said.  ‘I  know  what  you’re

saying, but then we’ve always wanted it both ways, haven’t we? Us Scots, I
mean. When the Empire was still commonly held something to be proud of
we were like, Aye, an dinny forget who really built it fur ye; we wur yer best
sodjers an engineers an aw sorts, and we built yer ships fur ye too, an mined
the coal tae make them go. Aye, when ye were takin civilisation tae the fuzzy-
wuzzies  it  might  a  been  the  Inglish  general  an  is  foppish  chums  on  their
horses on the ridge sayin charge an tally-ho chaps, but it wiz the bams wi the
kilts an the bagpipes that stormed in tae dae the real bayonet work. Oh, an did
we mention we inventit the steam engine an the telly?

‘Right? But then, like, soon as imperialism became a dirty word we were

giving  it,  Aye,  solidarity  there,  black  brother;  ken  exactly  whit  ye’ve  went
through by the way; those Inglish bastirts invaded our country before anybody
else’s,  so  they  did;  under  the  imperialist  yoke  fur  three  hunner  years,  us.
Totally  exploited.  Stole  that  steam  engine  an  the  telly  frae  us,  too,  by  the
way.’

Angus’s  mobile  feed  had  crackled,  broken  up  and  gone  back  to  the  dial

tone about halfway through this.

Phil said, ‘Angus has left the airwaves.’
‘Indeed he has,’ I said, glancing at the studio clock and using my pencil to

cross off another segment on the running order. ‘Well, that’s the end of the
Looney Tunes section of the show, where all you brave, brave people ring up
to be insulted by a professional. We’ve got some vitally important information
about stuff you didn’t know you wanted coming up right here, and then, after
that, talking about insults, it’ll be Shaggy. Take it away, Shaggy. Take it very,
very, far, away …’

‘What on earth are you doing?’

‘I’ve changed me mind. I want a gin and juice.’
‘So you’re phoning Craig to change your order.’
‘Yep.’
‘He’s about eight fucking metres away,’ I protested, pointing into the bar. ‘I

can see his slap-headed cranium.’ We were sitting on some aluminium chairs

on the pavement outside a bar on Frith Street. This was back in August, I
think. It was a Saturday evening, one of those warm summer nights in Soho
when the whole place feels like it’s inside, like it’s a vast, warren-like room,
when the people throng the streets between the low-rise buildings and turn it
all  into  a  single  space,  and  the  cars,  edging  slowly,  slowly  up  the  narrow
streets, often slower than the people walking, seem to bloom to the same size
they look in a showroom; big, ungainly things, all that hot, fast metal trapped
by the press of soft, summer-stripped bodies. Music came whumping out of
the  bar’s  open  doors  and  windows,  seeped  from  a  club  down  some  steps
across the road, and pulsed from the vehicles crawling their way up the street,
sounding  dull  if  the  windows  were  closed  and  sharp  if  the  windows  were
open. I smelled cigars, blow, exhaust, perfume, curry, kebabs, beer, sweat and
tar. Plus, every now and again, there came the faint, almost subliminal smell
of drains, of sewage, like something decaying and noxious seeping up from
underneath.

Ed twisted briefly in his seat, glancing back towards the crowded, noisy

bar, where Craig had, it seemed, finally got to the counter. ‘Yeah, maybe he
is,’ he said, thumbing the phone. ‘But you try gettin froo to im or attractin is
attention.’

It occurred to me that Ed had a point. It also occurred to me that a well-

aimed ice cube might do the trick, but I looked at my bottle of Budvar and
Ed’s bottle of Beck’s, and thought, No. Even with a reliable ice cube supply
(which  we  didn’t  have),  and  my  fabulous  lobbing  abilities  (which  it  was
highly unlikely had been in any way compromised by the three or four hours
of  drinking  accomplished  until  this  point),  such  behaviour  could,  just
conceivably, result in a miss, a misunderstanding and a fracas. Even a mêlée.

‘Ullo, Craig? Yeah. Hee hee hee. Best way, mate. Na, a gin and juice. You

know; wif orange. Yeah, cheers, mate.’

‘Make it a double!’ I yelled at the phone. Some passing people looked at

me.

‘Yeah, that was im,’ Ed said into the mobile. ‘See you.’
‘You’re so decadent,’ I told him.
‘I’m so pissed off.’
‘Don’t take it personally.’
Ed should not have been here. He’d been just about to start a gig in Luton

when it had been cancelled due to a series of bomb alerts. With nothing to do,
he’d joined Craig and me on our Night Out. This was supposed to end up with
Craig and I going clubbing but somehow we’d kind of side-tracked ourselves
down a Serious Drinking route. Loved-up dancing on the prowl for luvverly
laydeez was now almost certainly out of the question. Of course we might

convince ourselves otherwise in the interim, but in that case the night would
almost certainly end in abject humiliation.

‘Why would somebody bomb a club, anyway?’ I asked Ed. ‘Or threaten to.’
‘Turf war, mate. Settin these fings up, doin the security, providin the pills;

lot a dosh involved.’ Ed finished his Beck’s. ‘Course it usually all runs nice an
smoov cos that’s in everybody’s inarest so that the money keeps comin slidin
froo,  but  every  now  an  again  there’ll  be  some  sort  a  disagreement  where
neevir side’ll back down an some cunt feels the need to make a point. This
evenin patently being one of them.’ He nodded at me. ‘Sorta fing that Merrial
guy might be involved in.’

‘Really?’
‘Possibly.’  Ed  shrugged.  ‘I  don’t  know  an  I  don’t  want  to  neevir.  Just  a

bastard when these geezers can’t get their fuckin acts togevver. Leaves a onist
jobbin DJ out of pocket, dunnit?’

‘Wait here; I’ll organise a whip-round.’
‘Fack orfft.’

I have no idea where this happened.

‘Ere.’
‘What?’
‘D’you unnerstand everyfin your mate’s sayin?’
‘What? Craig?’
‘Yeah, oo else, ya nutter.’
‘Course I do.’
‘Bit of a accent though, asn’t he? Dontya fink?’
‘What the hell are you talking about?’
‘I mean, I can just about cope wif your Highlan brogue, but I almost need a

interpreter wif im.’

‘Are you trying to be funny?’
‘Na, I’m serious, mate. Hee hee hee.’
‘You’re  talking  nonsense.  Craig  hasn’t  got  a  Scottish  accent  any  more.

Well,  virtually  none;  he  goes  back  to  Glasgow  and  they  think  he’s  a
Londoner.’

‘Na, but really.’
‘And what the hell’s this about my accent too, ya bastard?’
‘What? D’you really fink you speak BBC English or somefing, do you?’

an accent!’

‘Ha! You got an accent, man! I’m telling you!’
‘Naw ah dinny!’ I said. I meant it to be ironic.
‘Hee hee hee. All right, then; what nationality am I?’
‘You’re British.’
Ed rolled his eyes. ‘All right, which bit of Britain?’
‘Brixton.’
‘You is just being deliberately obtuse here, man.’
‘All right! You’re English!’
‘See? I’m not; I’m Inglish.’
‘“Inglish”? What d’you mean “Inglish”? There’s a fucking “E” at the start

there!’

‘Yeah, but it’s pronounced “Inglish”, innit?’
‘I beg to differ.’
‘Say “film”.’
‘Fim.’
‘Na! Come on; say it like you always say it.’
‘That is how I always say it.’
‘Fuck off! You say “fillum”! You always do.’
‘I do not. Film. There.’
‘See?’
‘See what?’
‘You said “fillum”!’
‘I did not!’
‘Yes you did. Here’s your mate; let’s see how he pronounces it. Ere, Craig,

mate; say “film”.’

Craig sat down, put the drinks on the table and, smirking, said, ‘Movie.’
Oh how we laughed.

‘Na, it’s just, like, realising there’s the powerful and the powerless, the strong
and the weak, the rich and the poor, the winners and the losers, and which lot
do you identify with? If it’s with the winners, then you’re basically saying,
Right, fuck the poor or the dispossessed or the oppressed or the whatever; I’m
just out for me; I want to be one of them winners and I don’t care who I hurt
or what I do getting there and staying there. If you identify with the losers—’

‘You’re a loser,’ Ed said.
‘No, no; no, you’re not.’
‘Anyway, you got money.’
‘I’m not saying having money at all is immoral. Though I’m not so sure

about having shares …’

‘Lissen to you, man! Wot’s wrong wif havin shares?’
‘The  legal  precedence  you’re  automatically  accorded  over  workers  and

consumers, that’s what,’ I said. At this point, even I was aware I was sounding
a bit pompous.

‘Yeah, right. I bet you got shares anyway, man, wevvir you know it or not.’
‘No I don’t!’ I protested.
‘No?’ Ed said. ‘You got a pension?’
‘No!’ I exclaimed triumphantly.
Ed looked amazed. ‘Wot? No pension plan?’
‘Nope. Opted out of the company’s and never opted into another.’
‘You’re mad.’
‘I’m not! I’m principled, you bastard.’
‘Self-righteousness is easily worth a few percentage points to a man like

Ken,’ Craig told Ed. At the time, I thought in support.

‘Still fink you’ve got shares somewhere. Where do you keep your dosh,

then?’

‘Building society. Nationwide; the last big mutual. All my money goes to

provide loans to people buying houses, not into the rest of the capital market
and certainly not into lining the pockets of fucking fat cat directors.’

‘Yeah,’ Ed snorted. ‘An wot you gettin? Four per cent?’
‘A clear conscience,’ I said. Oops; skirting the perimeter of the pomposity

precipice again. ‘Anyway, my point is that you can still have ambition and
want  to  do  well  and  want  your  friends  and  family  to  do  well,  but  you’re
keeping your, keeping your … what am I trying to say here, Craig?’

‘You’re tryin to say “I am drunk.”’ Ed laughed. ‘Loud and clear.’
‘I  think,’  Craig  said,  ‘you’re  trying  to  explain  what  determines  whether

you’re right- or left-wing. Or liberal or not. Something like that.’ He waved
one long arm. ‘I don’t know.’

Craig  sat  looking  gangly  and  overhanging  his  seat,  limbs  on  a  very  low

state of readiness, light reflecting from his shaven head. We had moved on to
the Soho House after the bar had shut. There might have been somewhere in
between (see above). Whatever; we had all been very sorry to leave the bar

because all these stunningly beautiful women had kept walking by us, going
up and down the pavement and the street, and we’d all observed that they’d
got more and more beautiful as the evening had gone on, remarkably.

Anyway, now we were here in the House and it was crowded and hot and

when I thought about it I couldn’t remember what floor we were on or which
room we were in or where the loo would be from here. At least we’d got a
table  somehow,  but  sitting  down  in  the  midst  of  all  these  standing  bodies
meant you were situated kind of low to spot any natural landmarks and so get
the old bearings. I had no idea how we’d got onto this stuff about belief but if
I’d stopped to think about it, it would probably have been me who’d brought
the subject up.

‘Something  like  that,’  I  said,  feeling  I  was  agreeing  with  an  important

point, though not quite able to recall exactly what it might be. ‘It’s a fucking
mission statement, man. One that actually has some point. It’s about where
your sympathies lie; with yourself or with your fellow man. Women. Human
beings. This is what it’s all about; this.’

‘What?’
‘This, what I’m going to explain, right here, right now.’
‘Well?’
‘Go on then.’
‘It’s about, do you see somebody having a really tough time of things and

think, Tough shit, loser? Or do you see somebody having a really tough time
and  think,  Hmm,  too  bad,  or,  Oh,  that’s  a  shame,  or,  Oh,  poor  person,  I
wonder how I can help? That’s the choice. Choices. Choice. It’s all about how
nasty or nice you are.’

‘Wow, you really must be nice,’ Craig said. ‘You missed out the one that’s

worse than, Tough shit, loser.’

‘I did? There is one?’
‘Yes; it’s, Hmm, how can I exploit this already down-and-out and therefore

usefully vulnerable person for my own ends?’

‘Fuck,’ I breathed, abashed by my own lack of sufficient cynicism. ‘So I

did.’ I shook my head. ‘God, there are some real bastards around.’

‘Never  more  than  ten  feet  from  a  rat,’  Ed  said.  He  raised  his  eyebrows.

‘Specially round ere.’

‘Ten feet?’ I said. ‘I thought it was ten metres.’
‘Twenty feet,’ Craig offered, possibly as a compromise.
‘Wotever.’
‘Yeah,’  I  said.  ‘Soho.  I  suppose  there  just  might  be  the  odd  tad  of

exploitation going on here.’

Ed  made  a  show  of  spluttering  into  his  drink.  ‘Fuckin  Exploitation  City

here, mate.’

‘The girls are all slaves,’ Craig said, nodding wisely.
‘Who? What girls?’
‘The prossies,’ Craig said.
‘The girls wif their cards in the phone boxes,’ Ed said.
‘Oh. Yeah. Of course.’
‘Yeah, you try findin a ho wot can speak English round ere.’
‘Right,’ I said. ‘Yeah; they’re all from Eastern Europe or somewhere now,

aren’t they?’

‘Slaves,’  Craig  repeated.  ‘Take  their  passports,  tell  them  they’ve  got  to

work off some ludicrous amount of debt. The girls think once they’ve done
that  they  can  start  earning  some  for  themselves  and  sending  money  back
home but of course they never do.’ He nodded. ‘Read about it. Observer, I
think.’

‘And the police are out, I suppose,’ I said, ‘because then they’ll just get

deported, or slung into a detention centre or something.’

‘Not to mention what’ll appen to their family back ome.’ Ed clicked his

fingers. ‘Nuvvir fing your Mr Merrial’s involved in, come to fink of it. Im an
is Albanian chums.’

‘Who?’ Craig said, looking mystified.
I had a sudden fit of hull-breach-category paranoia, and waved one hand

with what I hoped looked like airily casual dismissiveness.

‘Woops!’ Ed said, catching the glass before it fell all the way to the floor.

‘Nuffing in it anyway.’

‘Sorry,  sorry,’  I  said.  ‘Um,  ah,  yeah;  too  complicated,’  I  told  the  still

mystified-looking Craig. I turned to Ed.

‘Ed,’ I said. ‘What do you believe in?’
‘I believe it’s time for anuvver drink, mate.’

‘I wasn’t. I didn’t. I didn’t say half the things I was supposed to have said.’

‘Ya. So, like, what did you say?’
‘Three  things.  Two  of  them  simple,  unarguable  road  safety  points.  One:

estimable and thoroughly civilised city though it is, it was something close to
criminal neglect on the part of the Parisian authorities that a piece of road like
that  had  massive,  square  concrete  pillars  unprotected  by  crash  barriers.  It
couldn’t have been much more intrinsically dangerous if they’d attached giant

iron spikes angled to face into the traffic stream. Two: this is supposed to be a
mature, responsible adult, mother of two, beloved by millions, so she might
have done the first thing that any rational human being does when they get
into a car, especially one that might be going to travel quickly and even if you
haven’t guessed the driver is quietly pissed, and put on a fucking seat belt.
Three, and this is the one that really caused the trouble: my conscience was
clear. But a lot of the people who turned up to watch the procession and throw
flowers onto the hearse, if they blamed the photographers chasing the Merc on
their  motorbikes  -  which  a  lot  of  people  did  -  then  they  were  hypocrites,
because by their own logic they’d helped kill her.’

‘Ya. Right. Ya. How?’
‘Because why were the snappers bothering to stay up late outside a flash

Parisian  hotel  in  the  first  place?  Because  the  photographs  they  might  get
could be worth something. Why might the photographs be worth something?
Because the papers would pay good money for them. Why would the papers
pay  good  money  for  them?  Because  those  photos  sold  newspapers  and
magazines.

‘My point was that if any of the people that blamed the photographers - a

profession I have no great love for, believe me - ever bought newspapers that
regularly  featured  the  royals  in  general  and  Princess  Di  in  particular,  and
especially if they had ever changed from whichever newspaper they usually
bought,  or  bought  an  extra  one,  because  it  contained  or  might  contain  a
photograph of Diana, then they should blame themselves for her death, too,
because  their  interest,  their  worship,  their  need  for  celebrity  gossip,  their
money, had put those snappers at the door of the Ritz that night and set them
off on the chase that ended with a black Merc totalled round an underground
chunk of reinforced concrete and three people dead.

‘Me, I’m a republican; nothing—’
‘What, like the IRA? Right.’
‘No,  not  the  fucking  IRA.  I  mean  I’m  a  republican  rather  than  a

monarchist. Nothing against her madge or the rest personally … well, anyway
… but as an institution I want the monarchy dumped. I wouldn’t buy a piece
of shit like the Sun or the Mail or the Express in the first place, but even if for
some bizarre reason I’d ever been tempted, I’d have been less, not more likely
to do so if there had been a photo of Princess Di on the cover. So I hadn’t
helped kill her. My question to whoever might have been listening was, How
about you?’

‘Right, I see.’
‘Right. Do you?’
‘So they sacked you. Bummer.’

the Mail just didn’t like being called tabloids.’

‘But you found something else, right, ya?’
‘Oh, ya.’
‘Oh, you’re making fun of me. You’re terrible.’
‘Am I?’
‘Yes, I’m a big fan. You shouldn’t insult me. I thought I was doing quite

well.’

‘What? You thought you were doing quite well?’
‘Amn’t I?’
I looked her down and up. ‘You’re funny.’
‘You think?’
‘Definitely. Another drink?’
‘Okay.  No;  you  sit.  I’ll  get  them.  You  haven’t  let  me  buy  anything  yet.

Please.’

‘If you insist, Raine.’
‘I do. Same again?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Don’t go away,’ Raine said, touching me on the arm again. She’d done this

a lot over the last hour or so. I liked it.

‘Oh, okay then,’ I said.
Raine slid out from behind our table and insinuated her lithe, size six body

into  the  crowd,  towards  the  bar.  Phil  leaned  over.  ‘I  think  you’re  in  there,
mate.’

‘Yeah, I think I might be, too,’ I agreed. ‘Who’d a thunk it?’ Shit, I was a

bit  drunk.  I’d  actually  knocked  back  that  last  whisky.  Mistake.  I  turned  to
Phil. ‘Can I have some of your water?’

‘Yep. There you go.’
I drank from his bottle of Evian.
We  were  in  Clout  on  Shaftesbury  Avenue,  a  big,  coolly  swish,  third-

generation pleasure complex designed for the discerning older clubber who
might equally favour Home or be found in FOBAR (Fucking Old Beyond All
Recognition,  age-profile  successor  to  FUBAR:  Fucked  Up  Beyond  All
Recognition).

Phil and I were sitting in a booth in the Retox Bar, on Level Tepid. If you

listened carefully you could just make out the thud-thud-thud from the main
dance area on the floor above. From downstairs, where the main chill spaces

were and quiet, relaxing sounds were the ambient noisescape, there was what
sounded like silence. Well, maybe just the occasional quiet pop of yet another
fried brain cell departing this world.

Above, you could hardly hear the person next to you if you hollered in their

ear. Below, it felt wrong to do much more than whisper. Here, music played
but normal conversation was perfectly possible. I must be getting old, because
I preferred it here. Fucking right I did! Here was where you obviously got to
meet pieces of class ass like Raine! Fucking yee-ha!

Calm down, calm down, I told myself. I tried breathing deeply. ‘I’ve been

on a real fucking roll recently,’ I told Phil, shaking my head. Jo, Ceel - ah,
Ceel, who was really in another category altogether, who was a whole world
in herself, but who I saw so horribly seldom - … I’d lost track. Start again: Jo,
Ceel … that Argentinian girl in Brighton, one or two others, Tanya - well, not
Tanya, who’d baled out on me - but I still reckoned I was green-light with
Amy  if  I  wanted  to  take  things  further  down  that  next-on-personal-playlist
route, and … and now this Raine girl. A total fucking stunner with a Sloane
accent and she seemed to be after my body! I loved London. I loved even the
modest morsel of fame that I had. ‘I have, haven’t I?’

‘Yeah,’  Phil  said,  nodding  wisely.  ‘Don’t  know  what  they  see  in  you,

myself.’

‘Me either,’ I agreed. I drank some more water and studied the floor at my

feet.  The  floor  of  the  Retox  was  some  blond  Scandinavian-looking  wood.
Pouring  a  whisky  away  straight  onto  it  might  cause  unseemly  dribbling,
splashing noises, like you’d pissed yourself or something. Ah-hah; Phil had
put his jacket down on the floor when Raine had slipped in beside us. Perfect.
I  hooked  his  jacket  closer  underneath  me  with  one  foot  while  he  wasn’t
looking.

‘Here you go,’ Raine said, setting my whisky down in front of me. It was a

double. ‘Here; I got you some more water, ah, Paul.’

‘Phil,’ said Phil.
‘Ya. Sorry. Phil.’ Raine smiled at me and raised her glass; it looked like a

G&T. I raised mine. ‘Down the hatch,’ Raine said, and drank deep. I put my
glass to my lips and made a big show of drinking, but didn’t, keeping my lips
tightly closed. I sniffed it, instead. I was getting paranoid about this, thinking
that Raine was watching me drink. I made my Adam’s apple bob, like I was
swallowing.  I  put  the  glass  down  on  the  table,  keeping  it  covered  by  my
fingers so the level wasn’t obvious.

‘Nice. Bit peaty. Is it an Islay?’
‘Ah,  ya,’  Raine  said.  ‘Ya,  that’s  right.’  She  wore  tight  leather  pants,  a

couple  of  layers  of  pink  and  white  chiffon  blouse,  and  shades  with  a  faint

yellow-tint  that  made  her  look  a  bit  like  Anastacia.  Mid-twenties,  like  her
waist.  Awfully  good  cheek-bones  and  a  jaw  line  like  David  Coulthard’s,
except  smoother,  obviously.  Her  nipples  were  kind  of  obvious  through  the
chiffon  -  was  it  fashionable  again?  Looked  good  on  her,  anyway  -  and
something about her bare shoulders reminded me of Ceel. Raine’s hair was
blond and thick and she kept flicking it back off her face.

‘So, Raine,’ Phil said. ‘Ever sky-dived in La Mancha?’ He grinned inanely

at her, then at me. I got the impression he was at least as drunk as me. We’d
started mob-handed in the pub, gone on to the Groucho, then the Soho House,
and ended up here, losing co-workers en route to pathetic excuses like food,
prior engagements, life-partners, children; that sort of thing. I had the vague
impression we’d had a good talk about the show during some part of this and
come up with some new ideas and stuff for me to rant about, but I couldn’t
recall any of the details at all. Luckily Phil usually did, and he normally took
notes in tiny writing in the Useful Diary he always carried with him.

It was a Friday, so we didn’t have a show tomorrow; we were allowed to go

out to play, dammit. Jo was absent for the weekend, with the Addicta boys in
Stockholm and Helsinki. Also, it had been three weeks since I’d seen Celia
and I’d been hoping there would be a couriered package for me immediately
after the show and an Anonymous call on my mobile; in fact I’d spent the
show, the day since I woke up, even the week, if I was being honest, looking
forward  to  signing  my  name  on  a  dispatch  rider’s  acknowledgment  form;
received in good condition, sign here, print here, insert time here … But there
had been nothing, just an empty feeling.

I’d decided it was time for a jolly good drink.
‘Sorry?’ the girl said.
Phil waved a hand woozily. ‘Nothing. Ignore me.’
‘Ya.’ Raine looked rather meanly at my producer, I thought. Bit cheeky, I

thought. This man was one of my best friends and a very fine producer, too.
Who did she think she was, looking at him with a just-fuck-off expression?
How dare she? This man deserved respect, for Christ’s sake. While she was
distracted, I took the opportunity to pour about half my whisky over Phil’s
jacket, then brought the whisky glass up and did the pretend drinking thing
again, just as Raine switched her attention back to me, and a smile reappeared
on  her  face.  She  clinked  glasses  once  more.  I  thought  I  could  smell  the
whisky  fumes  evaporating  from  the  dark  surface  of  Phil’s  old  but  still
serviceably stylish Paul Smith. I swirled my whisky round in the glass. Raine
was watching.

‘You trying to get me drunk?’ I asked her in a sort of kooky, role-reversal

kinda stylee.

feel the warmth of her through my shirt. ‘I’m trying to get you to come home
with me,’ she murmured.

‘Ha!’ I laughed. I slapped my thigh. ‘You shall go to the ball, Cinders!’
Phil was snorting with laughter on the other side of me. Raine gave him a

dirty look. I took her chin in my hand and brought her mouth towards mine,
but she put her hand on my forearm and gently pushed my hand down. ‘Finish
your drink and let’s go, okay?’

I’d already disposed of most of the rest of the whisky and could happily

have slugged the rest because it wasn’t enough to make any real difference,
but by now it had become something between a game and a point of honour to
dispose  of  the  whole  lot  without  a  drop  passing  my  lips,  so  I  looked  over
Raine’s shiningly blond head and said, ‘Okay … Shit, is that Madders and
Guy Ritchie?’

She looked. I dumped the last of the whisky onto Phil’s jacket and stood

up, lowering the whisky glass from my mouth as Raine turned back again.
‘Guess not,’ I said. I felt fine, I thought. The prospect of sex with somebody
new,  especially  somebody  new  who  looked  as  good  as  Raine,  was  a
profoundly  sobering  influence  all  by  itself.  Still,  I  felt  myself  sway  as  we
edged out of the booth.

‘Phil, got to go.’
‘Fine. Have fun,’ he said.
‘That’s the intention. You take care.’
‘And you precautions.’ He sniggered.
‘See you Monday.’
‘I just have to visit the loo,’ Raine said as we crossed through the crowds.
‘I’ll see you at the cloakroom.’
I spent a couple of minutes nattering to the cloakroom girl on the ground

floor. Unlike Phil I usually checked my jacket in, but then I didn’t use mine as
a wearable handbag.

‘Ready?’ Raine asked, passing her receipt to the girl.
‘Very,’ I said.
Raine  let  me  help  her  on  with  her  coat.  It  was  an  Afghan,  which  I

interpreted  as  a  retro-fashion-driven  coincidence  rather  than  some  subtle
geopolitical statement. She turned and looked me in the eye, gaze switching
from one pupil to the other. It felt good, very sexy, to be inspected so closely.
She hadn’t tipped the cloakroom girl but I didn’t care. I kind of fell against
her  and  she  let  me  kiss  her,  though  not  deeply.  She  pushed  me  away  and

glanced at the girl. ‘Come on,’ she said.

back. I was moderately certain I knew their names, but I wasn’t absolutely
sure,  and  getting  bouncers’  names  wrong  was  a  lot  worse  than  not  calling
them anything. I stared at the rain and the traffic sizzling up and down the
Avenue, lights bright in the drop-jewelled darkness. ‘It’s rain, Raine,’ I said.

‘Right,  ya,’  she  said,  gazing  down  the  street.  Yes,  Kenneth,  I  thought  to

myself, like she’ll never have heard that one in her life before.

‘Friday night in the rain,’ I said authoritatively. ‘Our best chance is a taxi

dropping somebody off.  I’ll bravely  volunteer to make a dash for one if it
pulls up.’

‘Right.’
‘Or  I  could  just  phone  a  mini-cab,’  I  said,  taking  my  mobile  out  after  a

struggle with the little holster at my hip. ‘I’ll tell them there’s an even more
exorbitant  tip  in  it  than  usual.’  I  squinted  down  at  the  little  Motorola  as  I
flipped it open. ‘Just don’t say anything about curry,’ I muttered, closing one
eye to see the display properly.

Raine looked round. She put her hand over mine, over the phone. ‘No, it’s

all right. Here’s a taxi now.’

A black cab had just pulled up at the kerb. ‘Glory be,’ I said, putting the

mobile away again. ‘Na, its light’s off …’

But Raine was already pulling me across the pavement towards the cab.

‘Ya, I flagged it.’

‘Fine work, Raine,’ I said, grabbing for the door handle and missing. She

opened the door but I insisted on holding it open for her. I then hit my head
getting in. ‘Ouch.’

‘You all right?’
‘Fine.’ I started searching for my seat belt. ‘This is a really good omen, you

know, Raine,’ I told her, raising my backside off the seat to grab at the belt.

‘Ya, it is, isn’t it.’
‘Getting a taxi that quickly on a rainy Friday?’ I said. ‘You’re a miracle

worker. Or, as a combination, we’re just blessed.’

‘Right, ya.’
The cab pulled out into the traffic, heading north-east. I finally got my seat

belt on. Raine hadn’t bothered with hers. I started lecturing her on the extreme
inadvisability of this, given what had happened to Princess Di, but she just
looked  at  me  strangely  and  I  realised  that  as  well  as  preventing  you  from
being flung forward, limbs flailing, in a bad crash, seat belts also stopped you

from snogging. They made you Safe In Taxis. I was appalled with myself. I
was sure I’d known this before but I seemed to have forgotten.

‘You’re  right,’  I  said,  though  she  hadn’t  said  anything.  I  undid  my  belt.

‘Solidarity,  sister.’  I  slid  along  the  seat  towards  her.  I  caught  the  driver
glancing up at us in his mirror. Raine let me slip my arms round her, pressed
up against the seat corner. I covered her mouth with mine. She opened up a
little more this time. I fumbled to get my hands inside the Afghan coat.

‘Maybe you should put your seat belts on, eh?’ the driver said. It was an

oldish cab so he had to talk through the gap in the perspex screen between us,
rather than use the intercom set-up the more modern cabs have.

Raine pushed me away. ‘Ya, I suppose we should, ya,’ she said, with what I

took to be obvious reluctance.

‘Ha.  See?’  I  said,  wagging  a  finger  at  her.  I  felt  for  my  belt  again.  She

watched me, then put hers on.

‘Here,’ she said, helping me with one end.
‘Thanks.’ I sat back, closing my eyes.
‘Have a snooze, why not?’ Raine said.
I opened my eyes, looked at her. ‘I’m not tired,’ I told her. ‘Is it far?’
‘Ya, fair bit to go yet.’ She glanced at the driver, then leaned over to me and

said quietly, ‘Get some rest. You’re going to need it.’ She gave me one of
those heavy-lidded looks again and stroked my hand in a manner I decided
was distinctly carnal.

I grinned in what I hoped was not too lecherous a fashion and sat back,

closing  my  eyes.  ‘If  I  start  snoring,  I’m  only  pretending  in  a  sorta  post-
modern ironic way, okay?’

‘Ya, right, sure.’
The taxi drove on, grumbling and clattering through the late-night traffic. It

sounded a lot like my old Landy. Very relaxing. The rain swishing beneath the
tyres and against the wheel wells sounded calming and soothing. It was quite
warm here in the back. It made me think of darkened hotel suites. I took a
deep breath and let it out. A little while to rest the eyes. Why not? A snooze
would do no harm. On the other hand, I didn’t really want to drop off and start
snoring or drooling or looking gross, so maybe it wasn’t such a great idea.

Some time passed. A male voice said quietly, ‘Is that him gone?’
‘Yeah,  I  think  so,’  said  Raine.  At  least  I  thought  it  was  her.  Her  voice

sounded different. ‘We nearly there yet then?’

‘Nuvver five minutes.’
That  was  weird,  I  thought,  behind  my  closed  eyes,  with  my  chin

somewhere  near  my  chest.  Had  I  dropped  off?  Just  a  little.  But  why  was
Raine asking the driver if they were nearly there yet? Didn’t she know the
way home? Maybe she’d just moved in.

But what did the driver mean when he asked her, Is that him gone?
‘Just check he’s out, will ya, doll?’
Check he’s out? What the fuck was that about? I felt a hand stroke mine,

then pinch the skin. I didn’t react. ‘Ken? Ken?’ Raine said, quite loud. I stayed
just as I was. My heart had started to speed up. Then she said, ‘Yeah, he’s
gone.’

‘Roight.’
What was going on here? What the fuck was going on? Where were we

going, anyway? Had she given the driver an address as we got in? I’d kind of
assumed  she’d  told  him  her  home  address  while  I  was  getting  in  and
smacking my head off the top of the door frame, but had there been time?
Wouldn’t I have heard something? I couldn’t remember. Shit, I was drunk; of
course  I  wasn’t  going  to  remember  stuff  like  that.  But  then  the  taxi  had
appeared really fortuitously, too. Just rolled up, in the damp midst of a wet
Friday some time between theatre and bar chucking out time. On Shaftesbury
Avenue.  Just  appeared,  its  yellow  For  Hire  light  already  off,  if  my  hazy
memory served me right, ready and waiting at the kerb, just like that. And it
had seemed as if she’d been looking for it. But then she would have been;
looking  for  a  taxi,  any  taxi.  But  then  we  came  back  to  this  Check  he’s
out/Yeah, he’s gone shit. What the fuck was all that about? He’d expected me
to be out, to be gone, to be unconscious …

Sweet  Jesus  H.  Christ;  the  whisky.  There  had  been  something  in  the

whisky. What was that date-rape drug? I couldn’t remember. But something
like  that.  The  drink  she’d  insisted  she’d  get,  then  watched  me  drink,  or
thought  that  was  what  she  was  watching  while  I  suppressed  a  giggle  and
played  my  silly  game  and  anointed  Phil’s  jacket  with  the  stuff  instead,
distracting her, making my Adam’s apple go up and down, smacking my lips
and doing everything but wipe my mouth on my sleeve; look, I’m drinking it!
See? It’s gone! She’d put something in it. She must have. What was that date-
rape stuff? Euthymol? No, that was a toothpaste, wasn’t it? A fucking Micky
fucking Finn in this fucking day and fucking age and I’d fucking fallen for it!
Or would have, if I hadn’t been determined to salvage some dregs of sobriety
from my drunken stupor for the purposes of, hopefully, fucking.

Oh shit.
I’d sniffed it. The whisky with the date-rape drug or whatever it was; I’d

breathed it in. How powerful was that stuff? Some must have stuck to my lips
when I pretended to drink it. Was I falling into a drugged sleep now? No. No

definitely not me, no-how, no-way. Very awake and horribly, edgily, tensely
sober with my heart hammering so hard I’m astonished that Raine, if that’s
really her name, can’t hear it, that she can’t see my entire body shaking with
each thudding, crashing, flailing tremor of it.

‘You  aw-wight?’  the  driver  asks.  For  one  idiotic  moment  I  think  he’s

talking to me, and for a totally deranged micro-moment I’m actually about to
answer him.

Then the girl says, ‘Yeah,’ quite casually, as though she’s bored.
I open one eye very slightly, the left one, away from her. Where are we? I

have a vague feeling we’re somewhere in the East End but I don’t know. My
head is down and I can’t see much without raising it. How long did the driver
say? Five minutes? Yes, it was five minutes. But how long ago was that? One
minute ago? Two? Four?

I can see the little red tell-tale light on the door at my side, near the handle.

Of  course;  cab  doors  lock  while  the  vehicle  is  in  motion.  Safety  device,
allegedly.  Stop  you  doing  a  runner,  more  like.  Doesn’t  matter.  I  can’t  just
make a break for it when we slow down. Have to wait for a complete stop.
Shit.  We  slow  down  here,  and  I  start  to  get  sweaty  palms,  thinking  about
grabbing the door handle and sprinting off … but then we speed up again.

I use the acceleration as a plausible excuse to let my head fall back, my

neck over the back of the seat now and my view through my half-closed eye a
bit better. I sense Raine looking at me. I start snoring. Through the trembling
blur of eyelashes, I can see a lightly trafficked road and low-rise buildings. I
must really have dropped off. We’re well away from the West End here. We
take  a  left  into  a  darker,  quieter  road.  What  look  like  low  warehouses  and
light industrial units line the road. I see plentiful graffiti and billboards with
old, torn, rain-sodden posters flapping in the cold wind. We go under a bridge,
engine echoing off the rivet-studded undersides of massive black girders.

‘Nearly there,’ the driver says.
‘Mm-hmm,’ says Raine.
We slow. There’s a brighter, noisier road ahead. And traffic lights.
‘Just over these lights.’
Turning amber.
‘Right.’
Thank fuck.
‘Yeah, I fink that’s Danny there I can see.’
Turning red.
‘Uh-huh.’

wherever it is we’re going, from whoever the fuck Danny is.

The cab stops, engine idling noisily. The little red light by the door handle

should click and go off now. Now. There’s a click. I wait for the little red light
to go off. It doesn’t.

Something  in  my  bowels  makes  a  terrible  trembling  course  through  me,

squeezing cold sweat from every pore. The driver; taxi drivers can override
the door-locks’ stationary off-switch, keeping it on. He’s locked us in.

I’m fucked. These people can do whatever they want to me. I may be about

to die. The lights are still red but the traffic crossing our path has just stopped.
The driver is reaching for the gear stick.

I sit up suddenly. Raine looks at me and her mouth starts to open as her

eyes finish widening. I click my seat belt unlocked and swing my right leg as
hard as I can at the window to my left. It shatters first time. It feels like my
leg does too, but the window’s gone in an almighty bang, falling spraying to
the street outside and the rubber-matted floor of the cab in a thousand square-
edged little jewels glinting sodium in the street-light.

The driver’s shocked face turns towards me. Raine grabs my arm and I do

something I’ve never done before, ever; I hit a woman. Punch her square in
the nose and send her head whacking back against the door window on her
side.

Then I’m out of the smashed window on my side so fucking fast John Woo

would be proud of me, turning on my back, hands to the top of the frame and
levering  myself  out  with  just  some  kicking,  flailing  footwork  to  spoil  the
balletic beauty of it.

I  land  with  a  wind-expelling  whumpf  on  the  road,  just  as  the  taxi  jerks

forward and then screeches to a stop again, nose dipping. I’m rolling on the
broken glass and bouncing to my feet, starting to run. There’s shouting behind
me and a door slamming. More shouting from further away. These both male.
Female screaming now. The road ahead is broad and almost deserted. Some
parked cars, one or two Transits and Lutons. I angle for the pavement, to put
some  of  the  parked  stuff  between  me  and  them.  More  shouting  and
screaming.

The wind roars in my ears as I run. Engine noise back there now. I’m near

the end of the street. The engine behind me whines, caught in the low gear of
reverse, then the engine seems to cut out, there’s a squeal of tyres, a moment
of silence, and the engine screams. Handbrake turn.

I run out onto the street ahead at right-angles and pelt across a sudden burst

of traffic, horns blaring right and left as I leap a traffic island in one stride and
spot a chip shop with a queue of people outside, a hundred metres away. I

make the pavement, just dodging a Royal Mail van, which skids to a stop so
close I have my arm stuck out and the grille nudges the flesh of my palm. I
run for the chip shop queue, dodging between a few slowly walking people
like gates on a downhill slalom course. The Royal Mail van races past to my
left, the driver leaning out of the window, shouting that I’m a fucking wanker
and backing this up with a gesture. There are two cars at the kerb just beyond
the queue at the chip shop. I splash through a puddle. The rain is off, I notice.
The  cars  beyond  the  chip  shop  are  parked  outside  a  little  lit  doorway  and
window  with  a  cheap-looking  sign  above,  glaring  yellow-white  above  the
pitted brickwork and spelling out the two most beautiful words in the most
beautiful language in the universe: Mini-Cabs.

I slow and look back just as I get to the queue but there’s no taxi anywhere

to be seen, and nobody running. I straighten my jacket, run fingers through
my hair and by the time I get to the first cab in the rank, nodding first to the
guy in the doorway and then at the car, I’m actually whistling.

‘Well, do you ever look at the number of a cab when you get into one?’

‘Na,’ Craig admitted. ‘Who does?’
‘Phil, probably,’ I said. I’d called him on his mobile and home number but

only got answer machines.

‘I still think,’ Craig said, ‘you should have gone to the police.’
‘Christ, man, I just wanted to get away.’
‘Yeah, but.’
‘Yeah but what? It was half eleven on a Friday night. The cops are going to

be busy enough with fights and brawls and the usual weekend nonsense. And
what exactly would I be ringing up to report, anyway? I think I was being
kidnapped, I think  somebody  tried  to  spike  my  drink,  but  if  you  want  any
proof you’ll have to get another guy’s jacket and test it for the drug, if it’s still
detectable. I think some violence was planned for me but I don’t know. I’m
fairly  sure  I  was  chased  but  that’s  not  even  illegal.  Fucking  hell,  the  only
definitely  criminal  things  that  actually  happened  were  the  things  I  did;  I
smashed a cab window and I punched a woman in the face. I fucking hit a
woman, man! Jesus Christ, that was something I had hoped to get through my
whole life without doing, like breaking a major bone or changing a nappy.’ I
sucked very hard on the J. I’d wanted a brandy or something but Craig had
reckoned what I needed was a nice, mellow smoke.

My very first thought, once I’d got into the cab and told the guy to head for

Basildon (this had to be east of wherever we were, so it meant we didn’t need
to chuck a U-ey and go past the end of the road I’d been chased down), was to
call Amy. She lived in Greenwich, which was feasibly in the area, and turning

to her - and up on her doorstep - in an hour of need, on the run from heavies,
might be just the sort of romantic ice-breaker required to shift our relationship
onto whatever next phase might be on the cards (the last time I’d seen her had
been on 11 September, when we’d all sat together in Kulwinder and Faye’s
loft, watching the unbelievable unfold, until she’d been called away by her
boss).

Then I thought of Celia. Christ; Merrial. Maybe he was behind whatever

had almost happened back there.

I  don’t  know  who  I’d  imagined  might  want  to  have  me  kidnapped  and

whisked off to the East End for … whatever, but of course Celia’s husband
had to be a prime suspect. Why the hell hadn’t that been the first thing I’d
thought of? Could this be anything to do with Celia and me? Had we been
discovered? We thought we’d been so careful, but who really knew?

Oh shit. Should I use the mobile number she didn’t know I had, try to warn

her?

But if it wasn’t anything to do with her, with us, and she discovered I’d

taken her number without asking, without telling her …

Yeah, but if all this was about us then it was entirely possible a phone call

could save her life.

‘I’m Ken, by the way,’ I said to the guy driving the mini-cab. He was a

strapping white lad with a shock of red-dyed hair. I’d sat beside him rather
than in the back. We shook hands.

‘Dive.’
‘Dave, I’ve a bit of a funny request.’
‘Yeah? Wossat?’
‘Can  I  use  your  mobile?  I’ve  got  one  of  my  own  but  I  need  to  use  a

different one. Please? Add a fiver to the fare. It’s important. ’

‘Here you go.’
‘You  are  a  saint,  sir.’  I  pulled  out  my  own  mobile,  cursored  through  to

Ceel’s entered but never used number, and clicked it into Dave’s Sony.

‘The mobile phone you are calling is switched off …’
Another couple of tries got the same response. No voice mail or message

service available. ‘Thanks,’ I said to Dave the driver, handing him back his
phone. ‘Never got through.’ I hesitated. ‘Listen, Dave; what I said about  a
fiver? Call it a tenner, but in the unlikely event a woman … anybody ever
phones  about  a  call  made,  like,  now,  just  say  you  dialled  the  same  wrong
number or something.’

‘“You never saw me, I wasn’t here,”’ the  lad quoted, grinning. ‘Used to

work in a boozer, mate; lying to people on the phone looking for somebody
they fink’s there is like second nature.’

‘Yeah, well, cheers,’ I said. I tried Amy next, on my own phone, but her

mobile was switched to message and the land-line to her place in Greenwich
was on answer, with a long beep-time of stacked messages before the tone. I
sighed and rang Craig. He was in, sitting watching TV, about to go to bed.

‘Okay, Dave,’ I said. ‘Change of destination …’
I  tried  Celia’s  mobile  again  from  a  phone  box  near  Craig’s  place  in

Highgate. Still nothing.

‘You should still go to the cops,’ Craig said again, looking down at the big

old Geographia London Street Plan he’d spread on the kitchen table, to see if
we could work out where it had all happened. Idiotically, I hadn’t thought to
get  the  number  or  the  name  of  the  mini-cab  company.  The  first  thing  I
remembered from the drive was seeing a sign for Stratford station, off to our
left as we’d headed in the general direction of Essex. ‘Report what happened,’
Craig insisted. ‘Because of what might happen.’

‘Because of what might happen?’ I echoed.
‘Supposing something else does, and it has to be something the cops get

involved  in;  if  what  happened  tonight  comes  out  they’re  going  to  want  to
know why you didn’t mention anything about it. You’ve got to report it, man.
The cops might be able to find out if an old taxi gets its left window repaired
over the next couple of days.’

‘I doubt that a kidnap that never really happened will be far up their list of

priorities just now, plus I have said one or two unflattering things about the
boys in blue, over the years,’ I observed. Dryly, I hoped. I was still shaking,
and  my  leg  hurt  where  I’d  kicked  the  window  out;  I  was  going  to  have  a
splendid bruise in a day or two. There were various other mysterious aches,
pains,  grazes  and  likely  bruises  I  couldn’t  recall  picking  up  in  all  the
excitement, plus my hands and fingers were a little cut where I’d grabbed the
window. Craig had handed me a bottle of TCP and some kitchen towel and
told me to get on with it.

‘I know,’ he said. ‘But you still have to report it.’
‘What exactly is this stuff that might happen? What were you thinking of?’
‘I don’t know.’ Craig stretched his lanky frame back in the kitchen chair

and put his hands behind his head. ‘You don’t have any idea who these people
were?’

‘They  were  both  white,  south-east  England,  maybe  London.  There  was

somebody I didn’t see called Danny. The place I was being taken to was in the
East End and the driver seemed to know the area. I’d guess he’s a proper taxi

driver, done the Knowledge. It was …’ I gestured at the map in front of us.
‘There, somewhere.’

‘Suspects? Motives?’ Craig asked, grinning.
‘Stop enjoying this, you bastard.’
‘No,  I’m  being  serious.  Can  you  think  of  any  suspects  and  what  their

motives might be?’

‘Oh, Jesus, do you want them alphabetically or in order of appearance? The

world  is  basically  composed  of  people  who  want  me  dead,  and  my  close
friends.’

‘I’m not sure those are mutually exclusive categories.’
‘Fuck off.’
‘That’s a tad paranoid, even for you.’
‘Craig, I’ve lost count of the death threats I’ve had over the years. We have

to report each one to the local nick. They have a photocopied report form with
my details already filled in. The people who open my mail get danger money.
I’m not joking.’

‘You told me it was dirty money.’
‘Okay, it’s mostly shit, not bombs, but still. The point is lots of people have

claimed to want me dead, and that’s just the ones who feel a burning desire to
tell me. This could be fundamentalists of any persuasion, a corporate hit-job
—’

Craig sniggered. ‘Oh, come on.’
‘Excuse me? I have affected the share price of large corporations. That’s a

capital offence.’

‘Yeah, ha ha. Colour me chortle. But no, you haven’t. Not alone,’ Craig

said.  ‘You’re  not  an  investigative  reporter  or  anything,  Ken.  You’re  a
commentator.  You  comment  on  what  others  have  dug  up.  If  you  didn’t,
somebody else would, people who do dig stuff up. Private Eye, Mark Thomas
… I don’t know; Rory Bremner, I mean … Shit, people have been trying to
close down the Eye for decades. If Maxwell couldn’t and Jimmy Goldsmith
couldn’t … I mean, why would anyone bother trying to kill you?’

‘Did any of that make sense even to you?’ I asked him.
‘I’m tired,’ Craig flapped one hand. ‘Mr Penfold and I have been in deep

discussion most of the evening.’

‘Have  you  heard  some  of  the  things  I’ve  said  about  people?  About

fundamentalists in par-fucking-ticular?’

‘Fundamentalists don’t listen to your show.’
‘Khomeini didn’t read The Satanic Verses. So fucking what?’

‘Well,  they  don’t  sound  like  fundamentalists,  do  they?  White,  man  and

woman, somebody called Danny.’

‘That I’ll give you.’ I put the dead joint into the ashtray. ‘They don’t sound

like  fundamentalist  Muslims,  anyway.  Could  be  fundamentalist  Christians;
Aryan  Nation  militia  types  or  something.  They  can’t  all  be  wanking  over
pictures of Ayn Rand and polishing their Desert Eagles in South Dakota.’ My
hand was still shaking. ‘Man, I really need a drink.’

‘I’ve got a box of red. Banrock okay?’
‘If it’s red and it has lots of alcohol in it, that’s all that matters.’
Craig rose. ‘Sounds like your blood, pal.’

‘You ruddy sod. My jacket stank of whisky.’

‘I’m sorry. I didn’t see it lying there,’ I lied. ‘D’you still have it? I mean,

you haven’t washed it or anything, have you?’

‘Exhibit A is in a bin-bag in my kitchen,’ Phil said. He paused. He shook

his head. ‘I still can’t believe you punched a woman.’

‘For the last time! I didn’t have a fucking choice!’
‘Well,’ Craig said. ‘As long as you didn’t enjoy it.’
‘About as much as I’m enjoying this,’ I muttered.
Phil had picked Craig and me up on Saturday morning and taken us to the

Temple  Belle.  I’d  been  worried  what  I  might  find  there;  I’d  wanted
reinforcements. Phil and Craig knew each other so well they frequently had
great sport with my insecurities, telling me they were actually better friends
with each other than they were with me. This time they didn’t do that but they
ganged up and made me swear that if they helped me here, I’d report what
had happened to the police on the Monday morning.

The houseboat was fine. Nothing had been disturbed, no horses’ heads in

the bed, nothing. There was a tool box in the cupboard under the stairs; I’d
rummaged around in it until I found a hammer, which I suggested we took
with us in case we were attacked, but the guys just stood there and shook their
heads in unison, like they’d been rehearsing. I put the hammer back.

We went for a pint and a light lunch, then set off for the East End in search

of the site of the previous evening’s fun.

I found the place eventually. Haggersley Street, off Bow Road, which was

where the chip shop and the cab firm were. It all looked very different in the
fresh,  pale  light  of  an  October  afternoon.  Just  past  the  rail  bridge,  by  the
traffic lights, there was still window glass on the road. I took a handful.

We  mooched  warily  around  the  cul-de-sac  on  the  far  side  of  the  lights,

where Haggersley Street ended in a dead end off Devons Road.

‘I think your birds have flown, chum,’ Phil said, kicking at an old lager can.

‘If they were ever here.’

‘Yeah,  thanks,  Phil;  cheers,’  I  said.  Phil  was,  compared  to  Craig,  rather

more  sceptical  about  my  account  of  what  had  happened  the  night  before.
Probably because he had seen how drunk I was. And maybe because of the
jacket.

We were in a place of old, crooked kerb stones, peeling tarmac laid over

ancient cobbles, windscreen glass that crunched under foot like gravel, burnt-
out  and  abandoned  cars  with  rusted  panels  and  sagging  plastic  trim,  and  -
framing it all on three sides - tilted lengths of desultorily graffitied corrugated
iron  topped  by  rusting  angle  iron  strung  with  thin  strands  of  barbed  wire,
jagged strands of sharp, spaced knots decorated by the greyed-out tatters of
ruined black bin-liners, fluttering in a damp wind like the prayer flags of a
half-hearted monochrome hell.

Some  of  the  corrugated  iron  sections  were  crude  gates,  all  strung  with

ancient padlocks and grimy chains.

I took a stirrup-step up - Craig made me take my shoe off, which would

have  made  running  away  interesting  -  and  looked  over  the  corrugated  iron
walls.  Concrete aprons in front of abandoned-looking light industrial units.
Freight  containers.  Sheds.  Puddles.  Piles  of  wooden  pallets.  Waste  ground.
Weeds.  More  puddles.  There  was  nobody  about;  not  even  any  guard  dogs
came bounding out to greet me. The rain was coming on again.

‘I hate this place utterly,’ said Phil.
‘Seen enough?’ Craig asked me.
‘I can feel my life-force draining out through my soles,’ Phil muttered.
‘Nobody wears grey socks any more, Ken.’
‘Yeah, you’re right,’ I said, tutting and detaching one sleeve from a snag in

the barbed wire. ‘Let us to fuck get.’

‘That’s you off the German beer until your grammar gets back to normal,

pal.’

I  tried  calling  Ceel  at  least  twice  a  day  from  a  variety  of  phone  boxes
throughout central London.

I now knew her number by heart.
She never answered.
Instead,  on  the  Thursday,  just  after  I’d  finished  my  show,  a  package

arrived, by courier. The package was slim and light, like Celia herself, but I

didn’t dare hope. I signed for it, opened it, and there, glory be, was a key card.

My  mobile  rang.  Something  inside  me  melted  and  went  south  for  the

winter.

From the mobile’s tiny speaker, Ceel’s voice said, ‘One Aldwych. Dome

suite.’

‘Are you—?’ I started to ask, but the line had clicked off. I let my head

drop.

My phone burred again.
‘What?’ Ceel said.
‘Are you okay?’ I asked, almost choking.
‘Yes,’ she said, sounding puzzled. ‘Of course.’
I smiled into the middle distance. ‘I’ll see you soon.’

I  couldn’t  fuck.  I  just  wanted  to  cuddle.  Fully  clothed.  Ceel  seemed  more
confused than annoyed, but also more confused than sympathetic.

‘No, I didn’t get the taxi’s number,’ I said. ‘Who ever does?’
‘I do.’
‘Oh yeah? What was the number of the last taxi you—?’
‘Four four one seven.’
‘Oh, Ceel, you’re kidding.’
‘No. I used always to leave gloves, scarves, bags, umbrellas and so on in

taxis. Strangely, it was always easier to remember the taxi’s number than to
—’

‘All right, all right,’ I breathed.
‘Kenneth, don’t you want to take your clothes off ?’
‘Aah …’
‘Or mine?’
‘Well, ah …’
‘I think we need drugs,’ Ceel said decisively. ‘Luckily I have contacts.’
She was right.

‘Do you know what John does when he is not with me, or away on one of his
trips overseas?’

‘No.’
‘Do you want to know?’
‘Not particularly.’

‘He goes caving.’
‘He does what?’
‘He goes caving. He spelunks. He descends into caverns under the ground.

Mostly in England and Wales, but also abroad.’

‘That,’ I breathed, ‘is so not a gangster thing to do.’
We were lying on a giant circular table in one of the rooms in the Dome

suite. The Dome itself, in fact, at the very top of the whole hotel. We had
made it comfortable with sheets and pillows from the bedroom, two rooms
away  through  the  sitting  area.  The  Dome  room  had  numerous  small,  high
windows  that  looked  straight  down  Waterloo  Bridge,  part-way  up  the
Aldwych and down most of Drury Lane. If we’d stood up we’d also have had
a view to part of the Strand. There were twelve severe, formal-looking seats
spaced round the giant table. Even all the soft accoutrements hadn’t made the
solid surface all that comfortable. The bed would have been more forgiving,
but this was how, and where, Ceel had wanted it.

‘Mobile phones do not work in caves,’ she said after a long time.
I thought. I thought twice, in fact. ‘Don’t suppose he goes scuba-diving,

too, does he?’

‘Yes.’
I thought some more. ‘Why would he need that excuse?’
‘I don’t know. That is why I think perhaps it is not an excuse.’
There  was  silence  for  a  while.  Ceel  cuddled  up  to  me.  She  hadn’t  quite

managed  to  get  the  suite  up  to  what  she  considered  to  be  full  operating
temperature yet, so perhaps she was cold. I lay there, perspiring gently, and
thought about what Craig had said, about love.

Some  time  passed,  then  she  murmured  into  my  shoulder,  ‘You  have  my

mobile number, don’t you?’

I  closed  my  eyes.  Holding  her  had  never  felt  more  precious.  ‘Yes,’  I

admitted.

She said nothing for a while, but I felt her give what might have been a

small nod. ‘You have been careful,’ she said. ‘I appreciate that. I understand
now why you were concerned. I’m touched. But please; be even more careful.
You have the number committed to memory?’

‘I know it by heart.’
‘Remove it from your phone.’
‘All right.’
‘Thank you.’

‘This girl. Was she very beautiful?’

‘Very attractive, in a sort of obvious, blond way.’
Ceel was silent for a while. Then she said, ‘I feel jealous. I know I should

not, but I do.’

‘I’m sorry.’
‘Me too.’
‘Well, I feel jealous of your husband.’
‘And yet there are times you and I meet up when the last person to make

love to me was you.’

I thought. ‘I don’t know what’s the more pathetic,’ I said quietly. ‘The fact

that  that  does  actually  make  me  feel  a  little  better,  or  the  fact  that  we  are
clutching at this straw in the first place. It’s not just about sex, Ceel. I mean
that I’m jealous he gets to be with you more than I do, that you two can have
something like a normal life together.’

‘It is not very normal. He is away so much.’
‘No, but you can walk across a street together, holding hands.’
Another pause. ‘He never holds my hand.’

‘You’re admitting you assaulted this woman, Mr McNutt?’

‘It was self-defence, but yes.’
‘I see.’
‘Oh, shit,’ I breathed.
There was no comeback. Nobody was going to press charges, after all, and,

of course, as I’d expected, the cops did nothing. At least nothing they ever
told me about. They couldn’t even test Phil’s jacket for traces of rohypnol; a
visiting  friend had assumed the jacket in the bag was to be taken to a dry
cleaners, and done just that.

Never mind. I’d fulfilled my part of the bargain and reported the incident to

the police like a good little citizen.

‘Well, maybe, like, we should leak it to the press. Yuh?’

The speaker was Nina Boysert, Mouth Corp Group PR chief and Special

Adviser  to  Sir  Jamie,  whatever  the  fuck  that  was  supposed  to  mean.  She
didn’t say ‘Ya’, like Raine - sorry, ‘Raine’; hers was more of a ‘Yuh’.

Meant the same thing.
We all looked at her. This was her office, an even more spacious one than

Station Manager Debbie’s. Not high up, but wide and deep and airy and with
a pleasant view over Soho Square. Also present were Debbie, Phil and the

Group’s chief in-house legal mind, Guy Boulen.

‘Ah, the police did say not to,’ Boulen pointed out. We’d covered this point

about a minute ago. Boulen was an oddly rugged man to be a lawyer; about
my  age,  tall  and  fit-looking  and  with  a  face  that  appeared  wind-burnt.
Strapping, would be the word; looked like he belonged halfway up a fell in
the rain and cloud, manfully scrutinising a compass and leading a bunch of
deprived  kids  on  a  character-building  hike.  Softly  spoken,  though;  Home
Counties accent.

‘Yuh, but, like, they’ve got their job to do and we’ve got ours, right? We

have to think what’s best for the Group.’ Nina was business-suit posh; long,
not  inelegant  face,  perfect  teeth  and  silky  skin;  black  hair,  bobbed.  Deep
voice.  She’d been head-hunted for the Mouth Corp from an internationally
renowned management consultancy firm. Still under thirty.

‘May I call you Nina?’ I asked her with a smile.
‘Ah, yuh. Yuh, sure.’
‘Ms  Boysert,’  I  said,  not  smiling.  ‘My  life  might  be  in  danger.  I’m  not

entirely sure from what you’ve been saying whether you’ve fully grasped that
fact. I’m asking for help from my professional colleagues, and from the firm
that employs me. Now—’

It was the ‘Now’ that did it. Phil jumped in after that.
Of course what I’d wanted to say was, Listen, bitch, fuck the Group, fuck

the shareholders and fuck Sir Jamie, too; I was the one being bundled off into
the depths of the East End in the middle of the night to have fuck knows what
done to me, let’s focus on what’s best for me … but I’d reined myself in and
come out with a little speech that I thought was far more polite, even with the
sarky and probably unnecessary bit at the start about not using the woman’s
first name.

‘I think Phil’s right,’ Boulen said, to whatever Phil had said (I’d kind of

missed it, still glaring at Ms Corporate Good). ‘This is a legal matter and we
have to take our lead from the police.’

‘Yuh, but I’m thinking, like, what about the publicity? I mean, this would

be quite big news, yuh? I’m seeing the front page of the Standard; Top DJ’s
Death Threat Hell. And a photograph, of course. Something like that, yuh? I
mean, that’s big. We can’t ignore that; you almost can’t buy that.’

There was an awkward silence.
I said, ‘Are you for fucking real?’
‘Look,  Ken!’  Phil  said  quickly,  rising  and  clapping  me  on  the  shoulder.

‘You’ve had a tough couple of days; you don’t really need to be here. I can
look  after  things.  Why  don’t  I  meet  you  in  the  Bough,  half  an  hour,  say?

Yeah?’  He  waggled  his  eyebrows  at  me.  Guy  Boulen  was  nodding
fractionally, his expression somewhere between a grin and a grimace. Debbie
was looking at the floor.

‘What a splendid idea.’ I got up, looked round them. ‘Excuse me.’
As I got to the door I heard a deep female voice say, ‘Was it something one

of us said, yuh?’

‘Well done,’ Phil said, clinking glasses in the Groucho that evening. We were
in the wee nook with the blue plaque, up in the snooker level. ‘You told the
police  what  happened  and,  to  my  utter  astonishment,  you  didn’t  tell  Nina
Boysert exactly what you think of her. Proud of you.’

‘Thank you so fucking much. Do I get a badge or something? ’
‘I’m having a special commemorative medal struck tomorrow. ’
‘Did she shut the fuck up about leaking the story eventually or did you just

throw her out the fucking window?’

‘That would be Option A there.’ Phil nodded. ‘Though it did take Boulen

and I threatening to resign if she insisted on going ahead. I did also somewhat
talk  up  your  acquaintanceship  with  Sir  Jamie;  she  might  have  got  the
impression that if anything happened you didn’t like, you’d take it up with the
Dear Owner the next time you’re playing polo together.’

I shook my head, drank. ‘I bet she leaks it anyway.’
‘I  don’t  know.’  Phil  thought.  ‘Wouldn’t  like  to  hazard  a  guess.  But  I

wouldn’t be at all surprised. I’ve never met anybody who thought quite so
much like a spreadsheet.’

‘Well, never mind. Fuck it. Fuck her.’
‘Hmm. Well, after you.’
‘Hey, look, Phil, can I stay at your place tonight?’
‘Jo’s away again, is she?’
‘Yeah. I hate sleeping alone on the boat.’
‘Well, no, you can’t. Sorry.’
‘Oh, come on.’
‘No.’
‘I’m vulnerable! Don’t abandon me!’
‘Stay with Craig.’
‘He’s got Nikki staying for the weekend.’
‘So?’
‘They don’t want me there.’

‘So get a hotel.’
‘I don’t want me there. I …’
‘What?’
‘Nothing. Let me stay at yours, Phil. Come on. Please.’
‘No. You’re probably safe now; they know you’ll be wary.’
‘I’m trying to be fucking wary! That’s why I’m asking you to let me stay

with you.’

‘No.’
‘Please.’
‘No.’
‘Why not?’
‘I have a friend staying.’
‘What, the compulsively tidy jacket-cleaner?’
‘What about Ed?’
‘He’s away.’
‘Oh. Forgot to tell you; those Winsome people rang again, just before we

left.’

‘The Breaking News company?’
‘Yes. The thing with this Holocaust denial bloke is back on. Second or third

week in December, though that’s still tentative. ’

‘Tentative. Really. Right. But don’t go changing the subject. Come on; let

me stay over. You’ll never know I’m there.’

‘No. Stay in a hotel, or go back to the boat.’
‘Look, man, I’m fucking frightened, don’t you understand?’
‘You have to face it sometime.’
‘I don’t want to fucking face it! I want to fucking live!’
‘Even so.’
‘I’m thinking about asking Ed to get me a gun.’
‘Oh, for goodness’ sake.’

Six

LONDON EYE

‘Nah, mate. Sorry, no.’

‘Ed! Come on!’
‘Na.  Now,  that’s  wrong,  Ken.  You  shouldn’t  even  have  asked  me.  Let’s

forget you did. Look at the view instead.’

I sighed and leaned back against the curve of glass. We were on the London

Eye,  riding  one  of  the  big,  bulbous  cars  on  its  grand  forty-minute  rotation
through  the  air.  We  were  about  two-thirds  of  the  way  round  now,  slowly
descending. It was a bright end-of-November day and the air was clear. Most
of  Ed’s  extended  family  were  here,  laughing  and  pointing  and  generally
having a fun time. Ed had reserved the car for us. The blazered attendant and I
were the only white people on board.

I’d become quite worried on the way up; it had suddenly struck me that the

Eye  would  be  a  perfect  terrorist  target.  The  supporting  legs  stretched  out
behind it - looking, I thought, a lot like the marching hammers in The Wall -
splaying down to the ground by the side of the old GLC building … they and
their  supporting  wires  and  cables  suddenly  appeared  terribly  vulnerable.
Jesus,  I’d  thought;  a  big  enough  bomb  there,  blowing  the  whole  structure
forward to fall into the river just a bridge away from Westminster … but we
were on the way down now, my atypical paranoia subsiding along with the
gradually flattening view. Downriver, the tall white support towers of the new
works on the Hungerford Bridge seemed to echo the architecture of the Eye

itself.

Ed had just come back from DJing in Japan and this was the first chance

I’d had to catch up with him. It had taken a good twenty-five minutes - and
the passing of the best of the view at the top of the circle - for me to get him
alone.

‘Would you get me a gun if I was black?’
‘Wot?’ Ed said loudly, incredulous. A few of his family turned and looked

at us. I guess we’d made it obvious this was meant to be a private word. He
lowered his voice. ‘Listen to youself, man. Ken! I mean, fuckin ell.’

I shook my head, patted his forearm and sat forward, my head in my hands.

‘I’m sorry,’ I said, sighing. ‘I’m sorry, Ed. That was, that was truly, truly shit.
I …’

‘Look, mate, I can see you’re really shaken up wif this. Don’t blame you.’

Ed leaned down so that he was level with me and he could say even more
quietly, ‘But a shooter is not going to solve your problems. It’ll just add to
them. Plob’ly.’

‘It’s only for self-defence,’ I said lamely. But I’d given up. I knew I wasn’t

going to convince him. Worse, I knew he was probably right.

‘Yeah, that’s what they all say, chummy.’
‘You’re not denying you know people who could get me one though, are

you?’

‘Course not. But come on, Ken,’ Ed said. He gestured at the mass of people

in the car. ‘Look at this lot.’ I looked at them. They were a colourful, happy,
mostly  female  bunch,  all  bright  dresses  and  laughter  and  flashing  smiles.
You’d  rarely  see  so  many  smiles  in  the  one  place  these  days.  At  least  not
without a bottle of pills. Ed’s mother saw me looking at her and waved, her
smile as wide as the view of London. I returned the wave, and could not help
but smile back at her. I was well in her good books because I’d remembered
to tell her as we boarded the car that her hair looked wonderful. I mean, it did
look good, but it wasn’t the sort of thing I’d usually comment on because,
well, I’m a man … but Ed had given me the tip years ago that, with black
women in particular, complimenting them on their hair was a bigger step into
their affections than anything else he could think of, certainly than anything
else  he  could  think  of  that  was  free.  At  the  time  I’d  told  him  this  was
appallingly  cynical  and  accused  him  of  belonging  to  that  vast  and  mostly
black movement: Sexists Against Racism, but of course I’d used it ruthlessly
ever since.

‘I’m not some fuckin Yardie nutter,’ Ed told me, nodding at his family. ‘I

got all them to fink of, an a career. I’m a bleedin businessman these days,

know what I mean? I don’t need the sorta people who never leave the ouse
wifout a Uzi. I’ve seen what that leads to, Ken, an it’s shit. It just does the job
the  cops  an  the  racists  want  done  for  them.  Fuckin  ell;  look  at  the  States.
Amount  of  black-on-black  is  fuckin  heart-breakin,  man.  The  amount  of
bruvvers in jail an on def row is fuckin obscene.’

‘I know.’ I sighed. ‘I’ve mentioned this on the show.’
‘Yeah, well a lot of that is down to fuckin ordnance, mate, an unless you

got no uvver choices - which you ave - an you know zactly wot you’re doin -
which you don’t - you just don’t want to get involved.’

‘I’m not asking you to hand me a piece, I just want a name, a number, a

place to go. What was that pal of yours that did the time? Robe? Couldn’t he
—?’

‘Na. Not Robe. Loss contact, aven’t I?’
‘Just a number, Ed.’
‘I can’t do that, Ken.’
‘You mean you won’t.’
‘I can’t wif a clear conscience. You know what I mean.’
‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘I know what you mean.’
‘If  you  feel  freatened  in  London,  take  a  holiday;  go  back  to  Scotland

maybe.’

‘I’ve got commitments, Ed, a show to do. I’ve got a contract.’
‘Yeah, well, but maybe somebody’s got one out on you.’
‘That’s why I thought a means to defend myself—’
‘Look, either they’re so crap you won’t need a gun to get one over on them

- like you already ave - or they’re so good avin a Glock down the back of
your 501s ain’t gonna make a blind bit a difference. You ever see Leon?’

I looked at him. ‘You know, I think you were right earlier; we should just

admire the view.’

I didn’t want to leave London. I liked it here. Part of it was pride; not wanting
to run. Part of it was fatalism; depending who might or might not be after me,
maybe they could get me anywhere, so I was better off where I had the most
friends  (even  if  the  bastards  wouldn’t  provide  sanctuary  or  the  means  to
defend myself ). Part of it was I had a living to make and a job to do, which I
happened to enjoy.

I bought a big, long Mag-Lite torch, a six-cell job even longer than the ones

I’d seen security people carrying. A good, strong beam, but - at half a metre
long  -  an  even  better  club.  It  fitted  neatly  into  the  angle  between  the

headboard of the bed and the mattress and sometimes if I woke up during the
night,  especially  if  Jo  was  away,  I’d  reach  out  and  feel  its  smooth,  massy,
diamond-cut coldness, and be reassured, and fall asleep again.

on it now. Phil had insisted, and when I checked with Paul, my agent, he’d
confirmed that there was a clause in my contract that meant I had to report
any material threat to my life, my well-being or my potential ability to fulfil
my contract to present the show. I should have felt outraged but actually I felt
relieved.

Sir Jamie himself had phoned me from LA, assuring me that I’d be looked

after.  Mouth  Corp’s  Head  of  Security,  a  grizzled,  tough-looking  ex-SAS
geezer  called  Mick  Beezley,  had  the  alarm  system  on  the  Temple  Belle
replaced, a new CCTV monitor added on the quayside linked to Mouth Corp’s
own 24/7 Security Monitoring Centre, and an X-ray machine installed in the
post room (we were, these days, already looking out for anthrax). A satellite
tracking  system  was  added  to  the  Land  Rover,  also  feeding  in  to  the
Monitoring  Centre.  Something  called  a  Category  Four  Thatcham  alarm
system apparently made the Landy virtually impossible to interfere with or
nick except by stealth helicopter. I didn’t dare point out that adding all this
electronic  wizardry  to  something  that  was  basically  diesel,  clockwork  and
string  had  probably  increased  its  value  -  and  presumably  therefore  its
attraction to those of a thieving disposition - by about two thousand per cent.

I was told I could even have a bodyguard for times when I felt I might be

especially  vulnerable,  though  from  past  experience  I  suspected  I  was  most
vulnerable when I was being led by the dick by some flirtatious floozy and
didn’t want anybody else around in the first place (with the possible exception
of her twin sister).

I said I’d think about the bodyguard idea.
‘This is from the boss,’ Mick Beezley growled, handing me a chunky box.

‘The boss’ was how he referred to Sir Jamie.

It was a watch. A very chunky watch with dials within dials and a rotating

bezel with lots of marks and notches and tiny figures on it for working out
when  you  might  dream  of  making  your  last  payment  on  it  and  it  finally
becoming yours and a variety of buttons and knobs including one very big
one that looked like you could attach Big Ben to it and have a fair stab at
winding the bastard. It looked like the sort of watch small boys used to think
looked really cool (not nowadays; now they covet the sort of smooth, highly
post-modern  Spoon  I  was  wearing).  The  thing  looked  like  it  was  probably
waterproof to the bottom of the Marianas Trench, but it also looked like the
sort of watch there would be no point waterproofing because it was so fucking

heavy it would drag you straight to the bottom the instant you dived into the
briny. I stared at it, then at the piece of simply elegant sculpture on my wrist
and then at the scarcely-less-chunky-than-the-watch features of Mick Beezley.
‘What is this?’ I asked him. ‘Fucking James Bond?’

‘That  is  a  Breitling  Explorer,  that  is,’  Beezley  rumbled.  ‘Instructions

included, but basically if you pull this big button here, hard, a wire comes out
and  a  signal  goes  out  to  a  satellite.  Only  for  use  in  genuine  emergencies,
otherwise you’re left with a watch with a big long wire sticking out of it and
no way of getting it back in again, and a very expensive repair bill. After a
real emergency they repair it for free.’

‘Does it work indoors?’
‘Not so well.’
‘Right. How much does it cost?’
‘Three and a half grand. So don’t lose it.’
‘Bloody hell.’
‘And it’s not James Bond; you’ve been able to buy these over the counter

for years.’

I studied it. ‘I’ve obviously been shopping in the wrong jewellers.’ I lifted

it up. It wasn’t as heavy as I’d anticipated, but it was heavy enough. ‘Jesus. It
does tell the time, too, I take it.’

Beezley looked at me. I looked at him. After a bit I scratched my head and

said, ‘Do they teach you that look in the SAS?’

‘Okay, we’re back to that phone/vibrator thing. For those of you new to the
show,  this  is  our  long-running  project  to  get  somebody  to  build  a  mobile
phone of the correct dimensions and degree of, ah, proofness to be used, by
ladies, as … an intimate comfort device - I think that was the euphemism we
settled on, wasn’t it, Phil?’

‘I recall so,’ Phil agreed from the other side of the desk.
‘So we’re trying to get somebody to make it. Come on; there must be some

enterprising  manufacturer  out  there.  They  can  make  the  damn  things
waterproof  these  days;  what’s  the  problem?  Not  new  technology.  Okay,  so
there might have to be a thin sort of aerial thingy hanging down … again …’

‘There’s a precedent,’ Phil supplied.
‘It has to be safe, it has to be shaped, it has to be comfortable and it has to

work. Phone sex will take on a new meaning. When a woman says, Call me,
you’ll know she really means it, even though you also know you’ll probably
never get an answer.’

‘Till home them cows does come.’
‘Thank  you,  Phil.’  I  paused.  ‘Phil;  you’re  looking  smug.  I  realise  you

labour under the pathetic delusion that you deserve to look like that all the
time because you’re just so intrinsically fabulous, but why do you look so
particularly smug right at this point in time?’

‘That was a song lyric.’
‘What? “Till home them cows does come”?’
‘Yes.’
‘Fascinating.’
‘Joni Mitchell,’ he said quietly, smiling. ‘Or was it Melanie Safka?’ Then

he frowned.

I couldn’t help it; I burst out laughing. ‘You don’t say? Again, not precisely

on the button in terms of our target audience, Philip.’

‘Permit a middle-aged man his little foibles.’
‘Right. Foible away. Anyway. Come on,’ I said. ‘We’re talking to one of

the most vibrant cities in the world out there.’ (Phil guffawed.) ‘It can’t be
beyond the wit of human kind to invent a phone it’d be an utter pleasure for a
woman to use.’

‘And men,’ Phil chipped in. I raised my eyebrows at him. ‘Some men,’ he

said, shrugging. ‘Just a thought.’

‘Well, we do know you are of that persuasion yourself, Phil, but—’
‘Well,’ Phil said, taking off his glasses and starting to clean them with his

hanky, ‘being gay doesn’t automatically mean you feel a desire, you might
even  say  a  burning  desire,  to  put  electronic  vibratey  type  things  anywhere
near your sit-upon area.’

‘Give the words “ring tone” a new resonance though, wouldn’t it?’ I said,

laughing despite myself.

Phil grinned. ‘Anyway …’ he said lazily. ‘Maybe this isn’t really perfect

morning-show material.’

I glanced at the call-monitoring screen. ‘Phil, from the screen here I can see

there are literally integers of people ringing in to disagree with you.’

‘Let’s hear what the people have to say, shall we?’
‘Let’s,’  I  agreed.  ‘But,  listeners,  be  warned;  any  more  calls  consisting

primarily of a buzzing noise and the sounds of human passion will be dealt
with ruthlessly.’

‘Or recorded and used later on a premium-rate line,’ Phil added, up close.
‘Jimmy,’  I  said.  ‘First-time  caller  from  Lambeth.  Wants  to  make  a  point

about the show. What would that be, James?’

I clicked the line open. A quiet, even, male voice with no real accent said,

‘They’re going to need a new presenter for it, dead man.’ Then the line went
dead.

Phil could see the expression on my face. He bleeped the lot. I made a cut-

off gesture and said, ‘Woh! Serious bleep-work there. Mother, I’ve told you
not to call me at work. Hopefully we’ll find somebody with a civil tongue in
their head on line five. Marissa, that’s you. What have you got for us?’

‘Ullo, Ken! Yeah! I’d like to place an order for one of them phones! But

not too little a one!’

I clicked her off. ‘Now that is more like the calibre of call we need and

want on this show! More, after - hey; some good music! How did that get in?
- the Spooks.’

I hit Play and sat back, shaking.
Phil looked at me. ‘You all right?’
‘I’m fine,’ I said, though I didn’t feel it.
‘Want to take a break? We can go back-to-back with the next few tunes.’
I took a deep breath. ‘No. Fuck them. Proceed as normal.’ ‘Well, okay. But

think  we  should  maybe  zoo  it  up  a  little?’  Phil  suggested.  ‘Get  Kayla  and
Andi in too?’ I knew what he was thinking of; have all four of us chattering
on air, just one big squabbling family, and no more risky phone calls.

I  glanced  into  the  control  room,  where  both  our  assistants  were  sitting

looking serious and nodding through the glass at us. ‘Yeah,’ I said, ‘why not?’

‘I thought we weren’t taking any more anonymous calls,’ Debbie the Station
Manager said. We were in a small meeting room in the middle of the building;
her office was being redecorated. Phil and I were there, also Kayla and Andi,
and Trish Eaton, station Human Resources manager (I was still trying to work
out what Personnel had done to fall out of favour).

‘We never!’ Kayla protested. Andi, who’d also been taking caller details

over the phones, nodded supportively.

‘The number came up on the auto 1471 screen as normal,’ Phil told Debbie.

‘It was a mobile. I’ve passed the number on to the police, but they think it’s
almost  certainly  stolen.  Or  maybe  a  pay-as-you-go  with  no  record  of  who
bought it.’

Kayla sat back looking justified.
‘Well,  then,  maybe  you  just  shouldn’t  take  any  more  phone  calls  at  all,

what do we think?’ Trish suggested. She was a plumpish, matronly type with

youthfully smooth facial skin and finely drawn eyebrows.

‘Well,  it’s  not  our  unique  selling  point,  certainly,’  I  said.  ‘But  it’s  an

important part of the show. I’m loathe to lose it.’ I looked round them all. ‘So
far these people haven’t repeated trying to kidnap me, so maybe they won’t
repeat this, either. And we do still have the three-second delay.’

‘This is even assuming the two things are linked,’ Phil said, looking from

me to Debbie. ‘The thing in the taxi and the call this morning.’

‘Yes,’  I  said.  ‘Let’s  look  on  the  bright  side;  maybe  this  is  just  a  normal

death threat!’ I looked round them, trying to appear reassuring and reassured.
They were all looking at me. ‘What?’

‘Do you need to take some leave?’ Debbie asked. Trish was nodding.
Oh shit, I’d misjudged it. ‘No!’ I said. I lowered my voice, both in volume

and  tone.  ‘And  I  don’t  believe  in  giving  in  to  what  is  basically  personal
terrorism, either,’ I said firmly. ‘I say we carry on as normal. Otherwise the
bad  guys  win.  I  don’t  think  any  of  us  -’  I  glanced  meaningfully  up  at  the
portrait of the Dear Owner looking down at us from the wall. ‘- want to be a
party to that, especially in the current climate. There is a war on, after all.’ I
looked at Trish and Debbie. Now they were both nodding, and I knew I’d
won. That was the sort of bullshit they understood.

‘Oh-kay,’ Debbie said slowly. ‘But any more calls like that and we pull the

phone lines. Agreed?’

We all looked around, nodding.

‘Maybe you should get another job,’ Jo suggested.

‘Why? I love my job!’ I protested.
‘Do  you?’  Jo  stopped  and  turned  to  me.  We  were  walking  down  Bond

Street on the second Sunday in December. ‘Ken, you hate most of what you
do and what you’re involved in.’

‘What are you talking about?’
‘Think about it. Would you listen to Capital Live! if you didn’t have to?’
‘Are you mad? Of course not!’
‘The music you play; like that?’
‘Don’t be ridiculous! It’s almost all shite during the day. Fucking Westlife

and  Hear’say.  Things  have  come  to  a  pretty  grisly  pass  when  you  play
Jamiroquai and they sound like a breath of fresh air.’

‘What about the people who phone in?’
‘With  a  few  honourable  exceptions,  they’re  dullards,  dead-beats,

opinionated dingbats and bigoted fuckwits.’

‘The adverts?’
‘Don’t even get me started on the fucking ads.’
‘Fellow DJs?’
‘Vapid  cretins.  Offer  them  a  straight  choice  between  opening  another

supermarket for a fat fee and sucking Sir Jamie’s cock for nothing and their
single brain cell would fuse.’

‘The Tories? New Labour? American Republicans? The CIA? The IMF?

The WTO? Rupert Murdoch? Conrad Black? The Barclay Brothers? What-
d’you-call-him  Berlusconi?  George  Dubya  Bush?  Ariel  Sharon?  Saddam
Hussein?  Thingy  Farrakhan?  Osama  Bin  Laden?  The  entire  Saudi  royal
family? Muslim fundamentalists? The Christian Right? Zionist settlers? The
UVF?  Continuity  IRA?  Exxon?  Enron?  Microsoft?  Tobacco  companies?
Private  Finance  Initiatives?  The  War  Against  Drugs?  The  Cult  of  the
Shareholder?’

She only stopped, I assumed, because she ran out of breath. I stared at her

for a moment, then shook my head. ‘How could you leave out Thatcher?’

She spread her arms. ‘There is just so much you hate, Ken. Your life, your

working life; it’s, like, full of stuff and people and things and organisations
you just can’t stand.’

‘You’re trying to make some sort of point here, aren’t you?’
‘In fact, forget your working life; your leisure life, too. Can we go to the

States on holiday?’

‘I’ve told you; not until—’
‘Democracy is restored. Okay. Venice? Rome?’
‘With that corrupt fuck in charge, surrounded by his fascist—’
‘Australia?’
‘With their racist immigration policy? No fucking—’
‘China?’
‘Not while the butchers of Tiananmen Square are still—’
‘I rest my case. Is there anywhere—?’
‘Iceland.’
‘Iceland?’
‘I’d love to go to Iceland, so long as they don’t start whaling, obviously.

Plus we have been to Egypt, and then there’s France. I feel cool about going
to France. I’ve finally more or less forgiven them for sinking the Rainbow
Warrior. I’ve even started buying French wine again.’

‘You’ve always bought French wine.’

about six months ago.’

‘So what the hell is champagne?’
‘Ah. Champagne is different. Though admittedly I ought to despise it on

principle  as  a  sort  of  geographical  closed-shop.  I  look  forward  to  the  day
when a workers’ cooperative in New Zealand can produce the equivalent of a
’75 Krug.’

‘Jesus. Is there anything you really like, without qualification? ’
‘There’s loads of things I like!’
‘Like what?’
‘Apart from the usual suspects?’
‘I’m not talking about films.’
I  laughed.  ‘Me  neither.  I  mean  apart  from  friends  and  family  and  world

peace and little babies and Nelson bleedin Mandela.’

‘Yeah. Exactly. What?’
‘Students.’
‘Students?’
‘Yeah, it seems to be fashionable to be horrible about the little fuckers, but

I  think  they’re  okay.  If  anything  they’re  a  bit  too  studious  these  days,  not
rebellious enough, but basically they’re all right.’

‘What else?’
‘Cricket. I honestly believe cricket may well be the greatest game in the

world. It is total heresy for a Scotsman to admit to this, and I entirely see the
point of the American who said that only the English could invent a game that
lasts for five days and can still end in a draw, but I just can’t help it; I love it. I
don’t completely understand it and I still don’t know all the rules, but there’s
something  about  its  bizarrely  erratic  pace,  its  sheer  complexity,  its  …
psychology that just lifts it above any other sport. Even including golf, which
is full of grotesquely over-paid reactionary bastards but is still a thing of skill
and craft and beauty, and was, of course, invented in Scotland, like so much
other truly neat stuff.’

‘That’s still only two things.’
I clicked my fingers. ‘Liberals. The chattering classes. Political correctness.

Basically I’m for ’em. Again, they get a bad press from veracity-challenged
moral  midgets  employed  by  greedy  zillionaires  to  wank-off  bigots,  but  not
me; I stand right by them. They’re my kind of people. Liberals want niceness.
What the hell is wrong with that? And, bless them, they do it in the teeth of
such  adversity!  The  world,  people,  are  disappointing  them  all  the  time,

constantly throwing up examples of what total shites human beings can be,
but liberals just take it all, they hunker down, they grit their sandals and they
keep  on  going;  thinking  well  of  people,  reading  the  Guardian,  sending
cheques to good causes, turning up at marches, getting politely embarrassed
by  working-class  oafism  and  just  generally  getting  all  hot  under  the  collar
when  they  see  people  being  treated  badly.  That’s  the  great  thing  about
liberals; they care for people, not institutions, not nations, not religions, not
classes, just people. A good liberal doesn’t care whether it’s their own nation
or  their  own  religion  or  their  own  class  or  their  own  anything  that’s  being
beastly  to  some  other  bunch  of  people;  it’s  still  wrong  and  they’ll  protest
about it. I’m telling you, it’s a sick, sick nation that turned the word “liberal”
into an expletive. But there you are; the Yanks think basketball is a sport and
that there’s nothing cruel and unusual about taking four minutes to kill a man
by putting thirty thousand volts through him.’

‘Did you say you liked political correctness? News to me.’
‘Political  correctness  is  what  right-wing  bigots  call  what  everybody  else

calls Being polite, or what everybody else calls Not being a right-wing bigot.’

Jo looked at me through narrowed eyes. ‘I bet I could find tapes of you

banging on about how political correctness was something else to hate.’

‘Like  everybody  else,  I  have  my  own  definitions  of  what  is  what,  and  I

would never seek to deny that a few stupid people can take a perfectly good
idea too far, but I stand by my contention that political correctness is more
sinned against than sinning. Besides, a chap can change his mind. Oh, and
journalists. I like them.’

‘What?’ Jo said, incredulous. ‘You hate journalists!’
‘No I don’t, I just hate the ones who make up quotes, subsidise criminals,

hound the innocent, collude with the truly talentless and otherwise squander
their undoubted gifts on tat. A disgrace they assuredly are. But a journalist
determined to get to the truth of a story, expose lies and corruption, to tell
people what’s really going on, to make one lot of humanity care for another
lot, or even just start thinking about them? Weight-in-gold, they are. In fact,
weight-in-microchips.  Guardians  of  liberty.  Mean  more  to  democracy  than
most politicians. Fucking secular saints. Course, it helps if they’re liberal, too.
Don’t shake your head at me, young lady. I’m being serious.’

‘Now I know you’re taking the piss.’
‘I  swear,  I’m  not!’  I  said,  waving  my  arms.  ‘And  I  just  thought  of

something else I like.’

‘Yeah? What?’
I nodded. ‘This city.’

‘London?’
‘Yep.’
‘But  you’re  always  going  on  about  how  the  tube  is  dirty,  smelly  and

dangerous, and the traffic is awful, and the air stinks, and the people aren’t as
friendly as they are in Glasgow, and the drinks are too small and expensive,
and it’s not as exciting as New York or as civilised as Paris or as clean as
Stockholm or as cool as Amsterdam or as groovy as San Francisco or—’

‘Yeah yeah yeah, but just turn and look behind you. Look.’
Jo turned round and looked at the shop window she’d had her back to while

we’d  being  going  through  all  this  stuff.  We’d  included  Bond  Street  in  our
Sunday after-lunch stroll because I’d wanted to look in some posh jewellers
and see if they had my excessive new watch. The shop we’d happened to stop
outside was a jewellers. And its window was full of fish slices, suspended in
the space behind the glass like a surreal hail of twinkling trowels. It was The
Rabinovich Collection of Antique and Modern Silver Fish Slices, to quote the
elegant sign in the window (we were a few doors down from a shop called
Zilli, which seemed somehow appropriate). ‘How the fuck,’ I asked, ‘can you
not love a city that throws up stuff like that?’

Jo was shaking her head. She was blond again, and had taken to teasing her

short hair into little meringue-like spikes. She stuck her arm through mine.
She was wearing a silver puffa jacket. I wore an old RAF greatcoat an uncle
had given me when I was seventeen. ‘Come on,’ she said. ‘I’m getting cold.’
We started walking again, heading south, back towards the river.

‘And music, of course,’ I said. ‘I love music.’
‘But you just said you hated the stuff you have to play.’
‘Yeah, because it’s commercial effluent. It’s the sonic equivalent of a Coke

or a McDonald’s; it fills you up but it’s just production-line shit and there’s
precious little in there that’s really any good for you. The music I love is the
music people make because they have to, because they need to, from their
souls, not their wallets.’

‘You don’t believe in souls.’
‘I don’t believe in immortal souls. I just mean the kernel of who you are,

not anything superstitious.’

‘Yeah, well, be thankful you just have to play the stuff and don’t need to

get involved in the process of making it.’

‘You make it sound like pies.’
‘Pies?’
‘Yeah. You know; that thing about it being a good idea - if you like eating

pies - never, ever to see how they were made and what goes into them.’

‘Yeah,  well,’  Jo  said,  hoisting  one  steel-studded  eyebrow,  ‘believe  me;

there are a lot of pie bands out there.’

‘I believe the same applies to sausages.’
‘Ditto.’
I looked over to the far side of the street, at the DKNY shop. I remembered

Ceel telling me about its five thousand red twin-towers T-shirts, nearly three
months ago. In the December cold I shivered for the dark, baking heat of that
hotel  room.  That  had  been  another,  solitary  feature  of  today’s  walk,  one  I
couldn’t share with Jo. Our route had taken us past a few of the hotels I’d
been in with Ceel. We had passed Claridge’s just ten minutes earlier, and I’d
almost suggested that we went in for a drink, or a pot of tea, or just the chance
to  pretend  we  were  guests  and  get  to  ride  in  a  lift  that  actually  had  a
uniformed  lift-operator,  but  in  the  end  some  prophylactic  instinct,  some
grudgingly acknowledged requirement to obey Celia’s stricture about keeping
our affair as separate as possible from the rest of our lives, prevented me.

‘Is that your watch?’ Jo said, stopping at another jewellers’ window and

nodding at a display of chunkily sparkling Breitlings on a background of piled
yellow cloth.

I glanced at the arm-lengthening bracelet of heavy metalwork on my left

wrist. ‘No,’ I said. ‘Not nearly expensive or complicated enough.’

Jo looked at my new watch and shook her head as we walked on. ‘That

thing makes you look ten years older, you know.’

‘Don’t diss my timepiece, ho.’
‘It makes you look like you should be driving a Roller and shopping for -

fucking hell; those.’

We both stared at and then walked quickly past a window containing two

large thrones - mere chairs they were not - made of cut crystal and red velour.

‘Holy shit.’
‘Did we really see those?’
‘I feel ill.’

We  walked  to  the  Embankment  via  St  James’s  Park,  through  similarly
sauntering locals and clumps of tourists, amongst coots, storks, black swans
and  panhandling  squirrels.  Ahead,  the  top  of  the  London  Eye  stood  out
against sky, revolving almost imperceptibly over the departmental buildings
of Whitehall like an ironic, skeletal halo.

‘Hey! Skating. Cool.’

feet are sore.’

‘Yeah, okay.’
Jo  guided  me  into  the  great  courtyard  of  Somerset  House,  where  a

temporary ice rink had been set up for the winter holidays. Strings of lights
articulated  the  wide  quad.  Tall  windows,  columns,  arches  and  chimneys
looked  down  upon  the  scene,  where  hundreds  of  people  ambled  about,  sat
swaddled in thick clothes outside little cafés, or stood watching the skaters,
who circulated above the inscribed white ice like a slow, flat sweep of leaves
caught in a stirring wind. I could smell coffee, fried onions and mulled wine.

Above us was a water-colour sky, hues bleeding and feeding and fading

into each other as the light started to wane above the skeins of slowly drifting
cloud.

On the ice, people laughed and shrieked, holding on to each other or the

sides  of  the  rink,  doubled  over,  feet  skidding.  Squeals  echoed  off  the
courtyard’s imposing architecture as people fell thumping to the cold, scarred
surface of the rink. A gap opened in the crowds on the ice, there was a blur of
rising blue as somebody jumped, and that was when I saw it was Celia.

She was dressed in a powder-blue skating outfit: tights, a short, flared skirt

and a sort of tight tunic with a high neck and long sleeves. She wore brown
gloves and white skates. Her hair was gathered up. Rising to the top of the
jump that had first caught my attention, she twisted sleekly in the air, spinning
once, then landed square on her right blade, knee bent, her left leg held out
straight behind her. The quiet smack of her blade landing sounded across the
ice  between  the  circulating  bodies;  she  sliced  away,  arms  out  to  balance
herself, sizzing across the ice in a wide, slowly tightening spiral. She skilfully
avoided a couple of other skaters and then, with an elegant little skip, turned
to skate backwards into a clearing space near the centre of the rink, stooping
and tensing her body for another jump.

People got in the way, and I lost sight of her. I moved to the metal fencing

describing the edges of the rink, putting my hands on the cold tube of rail,
trying to see her again. Lengths of blue plasticised canvas were tied to the
fencing and I could feel one of the plastic ties under my left hand. My mouth
felt cold and dry and a swirl of wind made me feel the tears in the corners of
my eyes. I saw her once more as the crowds on the ice parted again and her
skimming, sinuous course brought her gliding on a metal hiss towards me like
a  fabulously  exotic  alien  creature  fallen  into  our  mundane  world  from  a
higher reality.

I suddenly realised two things. The first was that I had never really seen

this  woman  in  daylight  before.  The  second  was  that  she  was  the  most
beautiful thing I had ever beheld.

perfectly centred, not ten metres away. She brought her arms in and raised
them above her head. The spin speeded up and her slim body became a tall
blurred pillar of light blue above a spray of white, reflected light strobing off
the glittering blades of her boots. She came out of it and pushed away again,
edges aslant across the rasping surface. A smattering of applause from people
on  and  off  the  ice  followed  her,  and  she  smiled  but  didn’t  otherwise
acknowledge  the  acclaim  or  look  anybody  in  the  eye.  She  passed  only  a
couple of metres away from me and I swivelled to watch her. Her expression
was diffident, almost embarrassed. A blush of rose glowed beneath the light-
brown skin of her face.

A  body  leaned  alongside  me,  rubbing  against  my  side.  ‘She’s  good,’  Jo

said, putting her arm through mine again.

‘Yes,’ was all I could find to say. Celia went with the circulating people for

a while, serene and smooth and steady.

‘Huh. Got all the gear, too,’ Jo said. ‘Looks okay on her.’
‘Yeah.’
‘Fancy a glühwein?’
‘Hmm?’ I said. ‘Oh, yeah. Yeah. Good idea.’
‘My round. You going to stay here?’
‘Ah … yeah, okay.’
‘Back in a mo.’
When she came round the next time Celia was looking at the spectators, as

if watching out for somebody. She saw me and did a brief double-take, but
her  expression  barely  wavered.  She  skated  past  me,  not  looking  at  me,
scanning  the  crowds  further  round  the  boundary,  then  waved  to  somebody
there  and  came  to  a  stop  at  the  edge  of  the  ice  about  twenty  metres  away
round the perimeter.

Mr Merrial was standing there.
The giant blond guy I’d assumed was his bodyguard when I’d seen them

leaving  Sir  Jamie’s  party  back  in  April  stood  at  his  side.  I  was  amazed  I
hadn’t noticed him.

Mr Merrial was talking to his wife. He looked right at me for a moment and

nodded, though not in a way that meant Hello. I felt like an ice sculpture;
frozen,  fragile,  ultimately  doomed.  Celia  took  the  briefest  of  looks  in  my
direction.  My  mouth  had  gone  very  dry,  as  if  the  saliva  had  frozen  to  my

gums and teeth. The ground, the whole huge courtyard, seemed to tip beneath
my feet. I gripped the metal rail tighter. In front of me a girl, almost doubled-
over on the ice, felt her way past me, laughing, creasing the plastic canvas as
she pulled herself along.

Mr  Merrial  was  still  looking  at  me,  his  pale,  pinched  face  looking  very

white above the thick black coat he wore. His face was all there was to see; he
wore gloves, a thick scarf and a Politburo hat. Celia was shaking her head.
The big blond guy was looking at me too, now.

Oh  shit.  I  looked  away,  trying  to  appear  relaxed.  I  watched  the  other

skaters.  Some  other  people  were  quite  good,  too,  doing  jumps  and  spins
where they could find the space. I brought my right elbow in, just reassuring
myself that my mobile was still on my belt. Had I turned it on this morning? I
didn’t  always,  on  a  Sunday.  I  couldn’t  remember  for  sure.  I  suspected  I
hadn’t.

I  shook  my  left  wrist,  feeling  the  suddenly  reassuring  weight  of  the  big

watch.

I risked a sideways glance. Celia was still shaking her head, looking, from

her body language, as if she was arguing or pleading with her husband. He
was nodding, then shaking his head. Celia spread her arms in what looked like
a gesture of defeat, tipped her head to one side, was greeted with a nod, and
then skated quickly away, pushing towards the far side of the rink.

I  quickly  looked  back  at  the  other  skaters.  Oh  fuck,  we  hadn’t  been

discovered, had we? He didn’t know, did he? Oh fuck, why did we have to
come here? Why couldn’t we have caught a bus or a taxi back home from the
Embankment? Why hadn’t I thought that of course Celia skated, so she might
be here, I might see her, and of course if she was here she would probably be
with her husband? Why hadn’t I just slunk away the instant I’d noticed her?
Why did I have to stand like a love-struck adolescent staring at her? Why did
she have to see me and do that tiny, fatal double-take? Why did Merrial have
to  be  so  fucking  observant?  Oh  shit,  why  the  fuck  wasn’t  life  a  computer
game where you could go back and re-live the last few minutes and make a
different choice?

I looked back again. The big blond guy had disappeared. I looked round as

frantically as anyone can without actually moving their head. I couldn’t see
him  anywhere.  How  the  hell  could  I  miss  him?  Jesus,  they  wouldn’t  try
anything here, would they? Too many people. And there were cops around;
I’d seen two lots at least. Merrial had gone, too. He—

‘Mr Nott?’ said a voice at my back.
I froze, staring down at the ice. A pale flash of blue, somewhere out there. I

turned.

‘John Merrial.’ The man put his hand out. I shook it.
His face was slim, almost delicate, close up. He looked slightly sad and

infinitely  wise.  His  eyebrows  were  thin  and  very  black,  lips  thin  and  very
pale. Eyes bright blue. Contained by the coat, the scarf and the fur hat, his
face  looked  unreal  somehow,  like  something  two-dimensional  seen  upon  a
screen.

‘Hello,’ I said. My voice sounded very small.
‘That was my wife there; in blue,’ he said. His voice was quiet. Almost

accentless. I saw a massive blond head over the crowds behind him.

‘Very good,’ I said, gulping the words. ‘Isn’t she?’
‘Thank you, yes, she is.’ He narrowed his eyes. ‘I think we were both at a

party Jamie Werthamley threw, weren’t we? Back in the spring. Limehouse
Tower. We were never introduced, but I think I saw you, now you’ve been
pointed out to me.’

‘I believe we were,’ I said. I’m fucking your wife, I’m fucking your wife,

I’m fucking your wife, I kept thinking, some suicidally insane bit of my brain
wanting to blurt it out, to just say it, to get this over with, to make the worst
that could happen actually happen and not have to keep imagining it.

‘How is Jamie?’ He smiled.
‘Fine. Last time I saw him.’ Which was at that same party, come to think of

it; the party where I met your wife and snogged her and felt her up and agreed
to this patently suicidal affair in the first place.

‘Good. Pass on my regards, will you?’
Oh,  you  mean  you’re  not  going  to  kill  me  right  now?  ‘Ah,  happily.

Certainly. Yes.’

He looked past me, out to the ice. ‘My wife listens to you on the radio,’ he

said.

Yes. And that hand you just shook has been inside her sweet cunt. See this

tongue, these lips? Think of her ears, her nipples, her clitoris. ‘Really? I’m,
I’m very flattered.’

He gave a thin smile. ‘She doesn’t want me to ask you this, but I know

she’d be very happy if you played a request for her sometime.’

‘Well, we don’t really do requests,’ I heard some fuckwit part of my brain

say.

What?
‘Oh,’ he said, looking down for a moment.
Was I fucking crazy?
His coat looked thick and very dark and glossy.

Did I really want to die that fucking much?
He wore narrow, black, highly polished brogues and very fine black leather

gloves, though he’d taken off the right one to shake my hand.

‘But,’ I said, clapping my hands together and smiling. ‘For … for …’ For

somebody I’m shagging the fucking arse off for hours on end whenever I get
the opportunity. ‘For a friend of Sir Jamie’s, and … and for such a beautiful,
ah, ice-skater … I think we can make an exception.’ I nodded. Merrial was
smiling now. ‘In fact I’m certain we can,’ I told him. Because you see I have
absolutely no principles whatsoever, when it comes right down to it, and I’ll
do anything - anything at all - to save my miserable, lying, hypocritical hide.

‘That’s very kind, Mr Nott,’ he said evenly. ‘I appreciate it.’
‘Oh, ah, not at all.’ I love doing favours for people I hate.
He twisted from the waist about two degrees as he said, ‘Here’s my card.’

And the big blond guy with the metre-wide shoulders was suddenly there at
Merrial’s side and presenting me with a plain white business card, which I
took quickly so they wouldn’t see my trembling fingers. ‘Call me if I can ever
do you a favour.’

‘Ah, right.’ Well, you could die conveniently. How about that? I put the

card in a pocket. ‘Thank you.’

Mr Merrial nodded slowly. ‘Well, we have to go now. Good to meet you.’
‘And you.’ You fucking nasty murdering gangster bastard.
Mr Merrial turned to go, then stopped. ‘Oh,’ he said. He smiled his blade-

thin smile again. Fucking hell, you crime lord cunt, I was just about getting
my jangling nerves back into some sort of order and now you’re giving me a
fucking  Colombo  moment?  ‘I  should  tell  you  her  name,  shouldn’t  I?’  Of
course you shouldn’t, you dickhead, there’s no fucking need; it’s Celia. Ceel.
Babe babe babe sometimes when I’m coming deep inside her.

‘Oh! Well, yes, it might help.’
‘It’s Celia Jane.’
‘Celia  Jane?’  I  blurted.  Well  done,  Kenneth,  put  plenty  of  emphasis  in

there. Clearly you do still want to die.

He nodded. ‘Celia Jane.’ He reached out and patted my elbow once before

turning away.

They  moved  off  through  the  crowd,  the  blond  dude  leaving  a  spacious

wake. Celia - sorry; Celia Jane - left the ice at one of the rink’s access points
and they met her there. The blond guy produced a coat and a pair of shoes for
her. She didn’t look at me and she held on to her husband’s arm while she
changed from the skates to the shoes. I wiped my eyes with my hands. When I

opened my eyes again, Mr and Mrs Merrial and their bulky minder had gone.

of steaming mulled wine.

‘Here. Look like you need it, too. You’re very pale. You okay?’
‘Just fine. Thanks.’

‘You fuckin spoke to the guy? He shook hands wif you?’

‘His wife’s a fan.’
‘What of ? Knee-cappings?’
‘Of mine, you buffoon.’
‘You’re fuckin kiddin me, man!’ Ed’s voice went very high; the speaker in

my mobile struggled to cope.

I filled in the details of meeting Mr M at Somerset House.
‘Aow  yeah;  they  used  to  register  stuff  there,  didn’t  they?  Burfs  and

marriages. An defs.’

‘Yeah,  well,  now  it’s  got  an  artificially  cold  heart  and  that’s  where  I

bumped into him.’

‘An you’re goin to play his missus a record?’
‘Damn right I am.’
‘Sweet, man! An he says now he owes you a favour?’
‘Well, that’s what he implied, but—’
‘Ask him to find out who’s got it in for you, then. Fuckin ell, dedicate a

whole show to his bitch an he’ll fuckin rub them out for you as well.’

‘I think that might be a little excessive.’
‘He’s an excessive geezer, mate.’
‘Yeah,  well,  I  think  I’ll  keep  him  well  away  from  whatever  messes  I’m

already in.’

‘Wisdom, Kennif.’
I drummed the fingers of my left hand on my right arm. I was standing on

the deck of the Temple Belle, looking out at the dark waters. Jo was below,
opening some Korean take-away containers just delivered from a restaurant in
Chelsea. I’d felt I just had to tell somebody at least something of what had
happened  that  afternoon,  and  Ed  had  been  the  obvious  choice.  ‘Or  do  you
think maybe I should ask him for help?’ I said. ‘I know he’s a villain but he
did seem quite friendly; helpful, almost. I mean, maybe—’

‘Na, I don’t really fink you should. I was kiddin. Just you keep your skinny

white ass away from people like that.’

‘You sure?’
‘I’m sure, man.’
‘Yeah, but he didn’t seem that bad, I mean—’
‘Listen. I’m gonna tell you sumfink about your Mr Merrial.’
‘What?’
‘It’s a bit orrible, but I fink you need tellin.’
‘What, then?’
‘Right.’ I heard Ed take a deep breath. Or possibly a toke. ‘He’s got this

really  big  fucker  works  for  him,  right?  Blond  geezer  built  like  a  fuckin
nuclear bunker.’

‘I’ve seen him. He handed me Mr M’s card this afternoon.’
‘Right. Well, this is wot I heard from somebody wot was there when this

appened once. When Mr Merrial wants to find sumfink out from somebody
wot does not want to tell him, or if he’s upset wif somebody, right, he has
them tied  to a chair wif  their legs straight out  an their feet tied to another
chair, and then the big blond guy comes an sits on their legs an bounces up
and  down  wif  increasin  force  until  either  they  talk  or  their  knees  bend  the
wrong way and their legs snap.’

‘Oh for fuck’s sake! Oh Jesus Christ, that’s fucking sick.’
‘An I eard this from a bruvver who is definitely wot you’d call a usually

reliable source, too, mate, an not given to tellin milky whites. He was taken
along to see wot would happen to him if he ever crossed Mr Merrial. Actually
I fink the bruvver must have tried on sumfink very slightly dodgy himself an
Mr M wanted to give him a ever so mild warning. So he got to see. And hear.’

‘I feel ill.’
‘This bruvver’s a big fucker, too. An he can handle himself, but I swear

when he was tellin me all this he fuckin went grey. Grey, Kennif.’

‘Green,’ I gulped. ‘Me; now.’
‘Yeah, well, I juss fot you ought to know, before you go gettin any more

involved wif people like that.’

‘Ken?’ Jo yelled from below.
‘That’s  my  tea  out,  Ed.  Though  I  do  seem  to  have  lost  my  appetite,  for

some reason. Anyway, thanks for the warning.’

‘No probs.’
‘I’ll see you.’
‘Yeah; you take care. Strenf, bruvver. Bye.’

I didn’t look properly at Mr Merrial’s card until the following morning, just
before  doing  my  under-vehicle  bomb-check  and  heading  for  work.  The
Merrials lived in Ascot Square, Belgravia. I stopped at the side of the Landy
and wondered about putting their home number into my phone, then decided I
ought  to.  I  placed  it  in  Location  96,  overwriting  Celia’s  mobile  number.  I
never had got round to removing it - I still liked scrolling through to look at it
sometimes - but entering her home phone there seemed fitting somehow.

I’d barely finished doing this when the phone buzzed in my hand; Phil, at

the office. It was another dull December day and the rain had just started. I
de-alarmed and unlocked the Landy and climbed in out of the rain as I said,
‘Yup?’

‘Breaking News.’
I put the keys in the ignition. ‘What about it?’
‘It’s starting on Jan fourteenth.’
‘What, next year? Kind of rushing things a bit, aren’t they?’
‘It’s a month away. But it’s definite, this time.’
‘Of course it is, Philip.’
‘No, it’s firmly scheduled. And you’re in it.’
‘Not the world’s most reassuring phraseology.’
‘They’ve started doing publicity and everything.’
‘Everything. Well.’
‘The PR people are mentioning your name. There’s a buzz.’
‘A sound so often associated with dead, decaying things, don’t you find?’
‘Will you stop being so sodding cynical?’
‘Probably shortly after I stop being so damn alive.’
‘I thought you’d want to know.’
‘You’re right. It was the uncertainty that was killing me.’
‘If all you can do is be sarcastic—’
‘Then it should be a good show today.’
I heard him laugh. I went to start the Landy, then sat back again and waved

my hands even though Phil couldn’t see me. ‘Oh, for Christ’s sake,’ I said.
‘Why do TV people have to make such a big deal about everything? It’s one
fucking  item  on  a  minority  interest  telly  show,  not  an  unknown  play  by
Shakespeare  written  on  the  back  of  the  missing  bit  from  the  “Unfinished
Symphony”.’ I put my hand on the keys again.

Phil said, ‘You on your way in?’
‘Better than being on the way out.’

‘Save it for the show. Safe journey.’
‘It’s Chelsea to Soho, Phil, not the Paris-Dakar rally.’
‘So we’ll see you soon. Take care.’
‘Yeah, bye.’
I put the phone away. I looked at my hand, resting on the Landy’s keys,

dangling from the ignition. People kept telling me to take care. I looked out
across the Landy’s battered bonnet, still not twisting the key in the ignition. It
was raining quite hard now. I sighed, then got out and did the checking-for-
bombs-under-the-vehicle bit. Nothing there.

‘I’m all for globalism. I mean, if you’re talking about the sort of globalisation
that  says,  Stuff  whatever  you  people  voted  for,  you’ll  let  us  privatise  your
water and hike the prices five hundred per cent or else, then, no. Exclude me
in. What I’m for is the globalism of the United Nations, imperfect though it
may  be,  the  globalism  of  arms  treaties,  the  globalism  of  the  Geneva
Convention - possibly the next suspect piece of internationalism Dubya and
his  chums  will  want  to  withdraw  from  -  the  globalism  of  the  International
Court of Justice the US refuses to sign up for, the globalism of anti-pollution
measures,  and  d’you  know  why,  Phil?  Because  the  winds  know  no
boundaries. The globalism of the—’

‘The ground.’
‘What?’
‘The ground, and the sea, and space. Those are boundaries, for the wind.’
I  hit  the  FX  of  a  lonely  desert  wind  blowing  through  a  long-abandoned

ghost town, tumbleweed rolling across the dust between the creaking wooden
ruins.

‘What, like that?’ I said, glaring at him.
‘Possibly.’ He was grinning back at me over his Wall Street Journal.
‘I was, just possibly, on a roll there.’
‘I’ve interrupted your flow, haven’t I?’
‘You are a veritable stopcock, Philip.’
‘U-bend.’
‘Beg pardon?’
‘I thought I’d get that in before you did.’
‘You’re just a trust fund of straight lines this morning, aren’t you?’
‘It’s a living.’
‘Listen,  Phil,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to  put  on  my  Serious  Voice  for  a

moment.’

‘Oh no, not another Charity Announcement.’
‘No. But, Philip, as you know, we don’t tend to do requests.’
Phil  looked  surprised.  ‘Well,  we  can’t;  most  of  those  you  receive  are

anatomically impossible anyway.’

‘I  think  you’ll  find  there’s  a  small  private  clinic  in  Tangier  that  would

happily prove you wrong, for a price, Philsy-Willsy, but that’s as maybe.’

‘Keep going.’
‘Na, yesterday I bumped into somebody I met at a party once and I said I’d

play a request for his wife.’

Phil blinked at me. I raised the dead air stopwatch threateningly. ‘Is that it?’

he said.

‘Sometimes, Phil, it’s just banality all the way down.’
‘Is this a new spot on the show? Guess The Relevance?’
‘Nope. So, for the lovely Celia Jane, here’s “Have a Nice Day”, from the

Stereophonics.’

I hit Play and swept the faders.
Phil looked nonplussed. He looked at the faders and listened to the song

play in his headphones. ‘You’re not even talking up to the vocals,’ he said,
more to himself. He spread his arms. ‘What’s all this about?’

I eased my cans down round my neck to give my ears a rest. ‘What you

hear is what you get,’ I told him. I nodded at the unit spinning the CD. ‘We
were going to play it anyway. No extra paperwork involved.’

The  skin  around  his  eyes  crinkled.  ‘You  trying  to  get  into  this  woman’s

knickers?’

‘Phil! I told you; she’s married.’
Phil laughed loudly. ‘Since when has that ever stopped you?’
‘You can be so cynical sometimes, Philip. You want to watch it; the wind’ll

change and you’ll stay that way.’

‘It’s protective coloration around you, chum.’
‘What’s wrong with playing a request?’
‘We never do it.’
‘So it’s a change.’
‘There has to be an ulterior motive somewhere.’
‘Will you just leave it? There’s nothing going on.’
‘I know the way your mind works, Ken. There has to be. You’re more a

creature of habit and ritual than you think you are.’

by a … a friend of Sir Jamie’s,’ I said, glancing at the track’s run time on the
play list and then at the studio clock.

‘Ah-hah!’
‘There’s no bleedin Ah-hah! to it. Look; the guy’s some sort of big shot, he

knows the Dear Owner, we met unexpectedly yesterday and I sort of stumbled
into promising I’d play a song for his missus.’

‘Who is a looker, I bet,’ Phil said.
‘He’s a big shot, like I say. They usually are. See people like that with a

plain or ordinary-looking woman and you know it must be love. Will you stop
looking at me like that?’

‘Well, this was unexpected.’

‘I wanted to say thank you.’
‘Jesus, what sort of Christmas box do you tip your postman?’
Ceel smiled. ‘Also, I won’t be able to see you again until after the New

Year. I’m sorry.’

‘Ah well.’
‘You had something planned this afternoon, didn’t you?’
I  shook  my  head.  ‘Nothing;  appointment  with  some  lawyers.  They  can

wait.’

‘You’re not in trouble, are you?’
‘No,’ I said. ‘It’s not my own lawyers. Just a statement about an accident I

witnessed a month or two back. So, what are you doing over the holidays?’

‘Going home.’
‘To the island?’
‘Yes.’
‘Mr M too?’
‘Yes. And what about you?’
‘Staying  here  in  London.’  Almost  a  year  earlier  it  had  been  agreed  I’d

spend  Xmas  with  Jo  and  her  family  in  Manchester,  but  now  Jo  would  be
abroad over Christmas and New Year, dutifully helping Addicta strike while
the iron of fame was hot. I couldn’t even go back to see my own parents;
they’d decided long ago they were fed up with Scottish winters and the whole
seasonal  rigmarole,  and  had  spent  the  last  few  holidays  -  and  would  be
spending the one up-coming - in Tenerife. ‘Anyway, I’m glad we could meet

up now.’

She looked at her watch, which was all she was wearing. A flicker of a frown
had  passed  across  her  face  as  she’d  pronounced  the  word  ‘Amsterdam’.
‘However, we only have until two thirty.’

I levered myself up on one elbow and looked at her in the soft light spilling

from  the  bathroom  and  a  reading  light  above  the  scroll-top  desk.  She  lay
luxuriantly, legs spread, brown-gold hair strewn across the white sheets and
one  plump  pillow  like  a  fabulously  braided  river  delta,  one  arm  drawn  up
underneath  her  head,  the  fern-print  of  the  long-ago  lightning  a  fabulous
marquetry on her dark honey skin. ‘I had no idea you’d be there yesterday,’ I
told her. I shook my head. ‘You looked so, so beautiful. I should have ducked
away but I couldn’t take my eyes off you.’

She stroked my arm. ‘It’s all right. I was worried, when I realised he’d seen

me  recognise  you,  but  he  thought  he  knew  you  already,  from  the  party,  or
perhaps a photograph in the papers. He has a very good memory.’

‘So he left early this morning and didn’t hear me play your record?’
‘Yes. But I heard it.’
I looked around. ‘And decided on here.’
We were back at the Dorchester where our affair had begun. The big tree

outside, the one we’d stared at from the suite a couple of floors above, in the
mix of moon and flood light back in May, was leafless now. No silence this
time. I said, ‘I confess I had been wondering what you’d do when you ran out
of  posh  hotels  we  hadn’t  already  been  to.  One  scenario  I  imagined  had  us
going steadily  down-market until we ended up  sharing a bottom bunk in  a
dormitory in a back-packers’ hostel in Earl’s Court.’

She gave a small laugh. ‘That would be an awful lot of assignations, even

restricting ourselves to central London.’

‘I’m an optimist. So, what did make you decide to come back here?’
‘Well, I had thought to return on our first anniversary …’
‘Really?’ I said, smiling broadly. ‘There is romance in your trim little soul

after all, Celia Jane.’

She pinched my arm, making me yelp and have to rub the site. There might

be a bruise. This was especially mean, of course, because I was not allowed to
leave a mark on her.

‘Ah,’ she said, holding up one finger. ‘But then I thought that that would be

a kind of a pattern in itself, and so dangerous.’

‘You would have made such a great spy.’

have become entangled again.’

‘A wee, cowering, terrified part of me imagined that it had changed utterly,

and you would never want to see me again,’ I confessed. ‘Spell broken. You
know.’

‘Did you really imagine that?’
‘Oh yes. I’m thankful I only had one night to lose sleep over it, but yes, I

did.  You  have  this  thing  about  separation  and  entanglement,  and  a  set  of
beliefs I find perfectly bizarre and that I can’t comprehend or anticipate the
results of … For all I knew, to you, yesterday was some sort of sign, a bolt
from  the  heavens  that  absolutely  meant  -  without  argument  or  appeal,  and
according to a kind of faith I don’t even begin to understand - we were over.’

She looked almost sleepy as she said, ‘You think I’m irrational, don’t you?’
‘I think you behave like the most rational person I’ve ever met, but you

claim to have this completely crackpot belief in your own half life/half death
and a spookily entangled twin in another universe. Maybe that is profoundly
rational in some deep sense that has eluded me until now, but I don’t feel any
nearer seeing it than I was when you sprang this frankly wacko ideology on
me in the first place.’

She was silent for a moment. Those almond amber eyes gazed up at me,

steady flames in a deep well. ‘You are a globalist, aren’t you?’

‘Hey, you were listening.’
She smoothed her fingers through my chest hair, then gently took a fist of it

and let her hand hang there, caught up. ‘You make such a big thing,’ she said,
‘of  developed  countries,  rich  countries,  not  being  allowed  to  impose  their
ways of life and their way of thinking and of doing business on smaller or
poorer countries, and that extending to religions and customs and the like, and
yet you want to make everybody think the same way. You’re like most people
who have to … fulminate about things; you want everybody to think the same
way you do.’

‘Doesn’t everybody?’
‘But  it  is  true,  isn’t  it?  You  want  the  one  way  of  thinking  spread

everywhere, throughout the world, replacing all the different ways of thinking
that have grown up in all the different places and peoples and cultures. You
are  a  colonialist  of  the  mind.  You  believe  in  the  justified  imperialism  of
Western thought. Pax logica; that is what you believe in. You wish to see the
flag of your rationalism planted firmly in every brain on the planet. You say
you don’t care what people believe in, that you respect their right to worship
as they wish, but you don’t really respect the people or their beliefs at all. You

think that they are fools and what they believe in is worse than useless.’

people to think the way I do? I suppose I do. But I know it’s never going to
happen. Do I respect other people’s beliefs? Shit, Ceel, I don’t know. There’s
this saying about how you should respect a man’s religious beliefs the same
way you respect his belief that his wife is the most beautiful woman in the
world. Casual - and hopefully non-malicious - sexism aside, I can see that. I
do accept I could be wrong. Maybe the … the Abrahamists are right. Maybe
their cruel, woman-hating, woman-fearing unholy trinity of mega-cultism is
spot-on after all.

‘Maybe, even, some tiny, tiny little strand of it, like, for example, the Wee

Frees, who are part of the Presbyterian movement in Scotland, which is itself
part of the Protestant franchise, which is part of the Christian faith, which is
part of the Abrahamic belief-set, which is one of the monotheistic religions …
maybe they and only they - all few thousand of them - are absolutely bang on
the money in what they believe and how they worship, and everybody else
has been wrong-diddly-wrong-wrong all these centuries. Or maybe the One
True  Way  has  only  ever  been  revealed  to  a  one-man  cult  within  the  outer
fringes of Guatemalan Highland Sufism, reformed. All I can say is, I’ve tried
to prepare myself for being wrong, for waking up after I’ve died and finding
that - uh-oh - my atheism was actually, like, a Really Big Mistake.’

I  got  up  on  one  elbow  again.  ‘And  do  I  think  reason  should  replace

irrationality?  Well, yes.  Yes, I do. Guilty  as  charged. And, bless it, society
really is to blame. Society and education and enquiry and doubt and argument
and disputation and progress; all the schools and libraries and universities, all
the scholars and monks and alchemists and teachers and scientists. Faith is
fine for poetry, for images and metaphors and art and for telling us who we
are, who we’ve been. But when faith tries to describe the world, describe the
universe, it just plain gets it wrong. Which wouldn’t matter if it admitted it
was wrong, but it can’t, because all it’s got is its unwavering certainty in its
own infallibility; the rest is smoke and mirrors, and admitting imperfection
brings  the  whole  lot  tumbling  down.  There  are  no  crystal  spheres,  and  the
planets are not the result of some sky god’s wet-dream. If that is supposed to
be taken literally, then it’s a lie, plain and simple. If it’s a metaphor, then it has
bugger all to do with the way things really work. Reason works, the scientific
method works. Technology works.

‘If people want to respect their environment by believing that the fish they

eat might have been an ancestor, or learn to lower toilet seats because their
chi is leaking out, I’m happy to accept and even honour the results even if I
think the root of their behaviour is basically barmy. I can live with that, and
with them. I hope they can live with me.’

hard. I shouldn’t let this sort of thing get to me like this, but I had no choice.
This stuff was important to me; I couldn’t help it.

skin. ‘Sometimes I think we are like different coloured  bishops on a chess
board, you and I.’

‘Bishops? After all I’ve just said?’
She smiled, still spreading her hand on my chest, as though trying to span

the distance between my nipples. ‘Better to be a queen,’ she agreed.

‘You’ll just have to take my word for it that I’d rather be a pawn than a

bishop. At least they can transcend their origins.’

‘I believe you.’
‘Or  a  knight.  I’ve  always  liked  the  fact  a  knight  has  what  is  basically  a

three-dimensional move on a two-dimensional surface. And the castle; there’s
something about the bluff, blunt power of the rook that attracts me as well.
And it does do a potentially three-dimensional thing, too, just once, come to
think of it, castling. Bishops are more devious, somehow, sliding in between
pieces like a knife through ribs. The king, of course, is simply a liability.’

‘I was thinking,’ she said, ‘of bishops on opposing sides, and of different

colours as well. Just the two of them there on the chess board, with no other
pieces present.’

I nodded. I saw, now, what she meant.
‘They could never connect,’ I said. ‘They could slide past each other for

ever, but never affect. They appear to inhabit the same board, but really they
don’t. Not at all.’

She looked up at me with heavy-lidded eyes, her head tipped fractionally to

one side. ‘Don’t you think?’

‘Perhaps. And is that us?’
‘Maybe. Maybe all men and women. Maybe all people.’
‘For ever? Without exception? Without hope?’ I tried to say it lightly.
She  took  my  cock  in  her  hand,  then  brought  her  other  hand  out  from

underneath her head and cupped her sex. ‘We connect here …’ She smiled. (A
smile, it seemed to me just then, fit to light up the universe inside the skull; a
smile, indeed, to light up two. A smile to illuminate infinities.) ‘… That will
have to do for now.’

Seven

SEXUAL PIQUE

‘‘Nikki! Oh my God! What have you done?’

‘Verhoeven? Underrated?’ I thought about this. ‘How?’
‘Hendrie. Aston Villa. Separated at birth.’
‘Wanking; why the bad press?’
‘Knock-knock.’
‘You know; all mouth and no trousers.’
‘The hell with you, grounded on Mount Arafat.’
Craig was having a Hogmanay party at his place in Highgate.

‘Ken, hi! What? Oh, I cut my hair. Like it?’

‘No! It’s—’
‘Shorter. Easier to wash. Different.’
‘Yeah, and sort of browny-black. Are you mad?’
‘You sound like my dad.’
‘But you had beautiful hair!’
‘I still do, thanks.’

‘Fink about the endin of Total Recall.’

I sniggered.
‘Zactly.’
‘What  d’you  mean  “Zactly”?  You  can’t  just  say  “Zactly”  and  look  all

justified and smug like that. Explain yourself, man.’

‘Wot was that reaction of yours there then, what was that all about?’
‘It was about a totally preposterous ending featuring the Pyramid Mine - a

biggish hill but still less than a pimple on a planetary scale - emplacing an
entire Martian atmosphere at what appeared to be Standard Temperature and
Pressure in about half a minute, complete with milky clouds and everything,
in time to put Arnie and the ingenue’s eyes back into their sockets about a
minute  after  they  started  haemorrhaging,  all  with  no  lasting  ill  effects
whatsoever to bodies either planetary or human.’ I thought about what I’d just
said. ‘Or Arnie’s, for that matter.’

Ed nodded. ‘Zactly.’
‘You’re  doing  it  again!  Will  you  stop  with  the  fucking  “Zactly”  shit

already?’

‘Hee hee hee.’
‘Yeah, and the “Hee hee hee” thing is no great improvement. ’ I took Ed by

the shoulders and through gritted teeth said, ‘What the fuck do you mean?’

‘Wot I mean is,’ Ed said, giggling, ‘right, is that it is basically so fuckin

preposterous a endin that it can only mean, right, that Arnie, is character that
is, must still be in a virtual reality dream. None of the endin’s been real, azit?’

I opened my mouth. I took my hands off his shoulders. I wagged a finger at

him. ‘Hmm,’ I said.

‘An that therefore, like, that Verhoeven geezer is a subversive genius.’
I stood there, nodding, trying to recall more of the earlier parts of the film.
‘Course,’ Ed said, ‘it’s only a feery.’

‘Hendrie who?’

‘Hendrie; plays for Villa. You must have seen him.’
‘No I mustn’t. Why?’
‘He looks like Robbie Williams.’
‘… Craig, you need to get out more.’
‘I was out. I went to the match. That’s where I saw him.’
‘Okay, you should stay in more.’

‘Phil, “Wanking; why the bad press?” is not funny. Now, “Button pushers;

why the bad press?”; that has a modicum of comedic value. Only a modicum,
not enough to actually use in the show or anything, but I employ it purely as
an example.’

‘I was thinking of a new phone-in feature.’
‘Right.  Well,  there  are  ladies  on  the  end  of  premium-rate  phone  lines

dedicated to ensuring this sort of thing is already well catered for. I’m told.’

‘That wasn’t what I was thinking of.’
‘Well what, then? A sponsored wank-o-thon?’
‘No no no. Right; it’ll be called Get a Hold of Yourself.’
‘Uh-huh. You’ve always been jealous Chris Evans had that Breakfast Show

feature where a girl got her boyfriend’s “lollipop” in her mouth and recited
lyrics, haven’t you?’

‘Nooo; look—’
‘Phil; no. Just leave it.’
‘Really?’
‘Yes.’
‘You don’t think—?’
‘I think you should go and talk to Craig.’

‘Who’s There?’

‘Tijuana.’
‘Tijuana who?’
‘Gary Glitter.’
‘… What?’
‘Tijuana be in my gang, my gang, my gang?’

‘Oh, I understand the meaning it’s meant to have,’ I told Amy, leaning closer
to her. We were on the decking in Craig’s garden, near midnight. I’d just tried
to talk to Jo, in Barcelona with Addicta, but without success. ‘It’s just not the
meaning I took from it the first time I heard it. That’s what I’m saying.’

‘What, “Fur coat and no knickers”?’
‘Yeah! I always thought, Damn, that sounds great! That sounds, like, really

sexy!’

She laughed, putting her head back to show a long, winter-tanned neck and

perfect  teeth.  Her  blond  hair  glowed  softly  in  the  light  falling  from  the  lit
windows of the house. ‘Yes, well, you would.’

‘Witty but unfair. Look, I—’

‘You don’t know what it feels like. You just have no idea. All you’ve got is

your  theory,  just  your  precious  one-man-party  line,  as  usual.  You  have  no
concept  what  it’s  like.  You  haven’t  been  there.  You  haven’t  felt  the
atmosphere. We’re surrounded by people who hate us.’

‘Ah,  excuse  me?  This  is  me  you’re  talking  to  here.  I’m  all  too  well

acquainted with the tell-tale tingle on the temple that indicates the cross-hairs
of antipathy have locked on to me once more. But just … just back up a bit,
there;  who’s  this  “we”?  When  the  hell  did  you  become  a  Daughter  of  the
Zionist Revolution?’

‘When I realised it was them or us, Ken.’
‘Oh, fuck, you mean you really are? Jeez, I was just—’
‘They  all  hate  us.  Every  nation  on  our  borders  would  like  to  see  us

destroyed. Our only way out’s the sea, and that’s where they want us. Ken,
just  look  at  the  map!  We’re  tiny!  And  then,  inside  our  own  nation,  these
people murder and bomb and shoot us, inside our own borders, on our own
streets, in the shops, on the buses, in our homes! We’ve got to stop them; we
have no choice. And you, you have the gall to claim that we’ve become the
Nazis, and can’t see you’ve become just another bloody anti-Semite.’

‘Oh, fuck, Jude, look, I know you feel really deeply about this—’
‘No you don’t! That’s what I’m saying. You can’t!’
‘Well, I’m trying to! Look … please, please don’t put words into my mouth

or beliefs into my mind that aren’t there.’

‘They are there, Ken, you just won’t accept it.’
‘I  am  not  anti-Semitic.  Look,  I  like  the  Jews,  I  admire  the  Jews,  I’m

positively pro-Semitic for fuck’s sake. I’ve told you this! Well, some of it!
I’ve been this way since I was a kid, since I heard about the Holocaust and
since I realised that the Scots and the Jews were so alike. The Scots are smart,
but we get accused of being mean. Same with the Jews. It’s culture, not race,
but we’ve both punched way above our weight for civilisation; the Jews are
the only people I ever put ahead of the Scots in terms of their influence on the
world given the size of their population pool.’

‘This is so bullshit.’
‘I’m  serious.  I  loved  you  guys  from  when  I  was  a  kid!  So  much  I  was

embarrassed to tell you how much!’

‘Don’t bullshit me.’
‘It’s true. You were just so fearsomely far to the left I never dared.’
‘Ken—’

‘I’m serious. I used to love Israel.’
(This was true. When I was thirteen I’d fallen deeply in love with a girl

called  Hannah  Gold.  Her  parents  lived  in  Giffnock,  one  of  the  more  leafy
parts of Glasgow’s suburban southern hinterland. They took a dim view of our
friendship  and  my  obvious  infatuation  with  their  daughter.  But  I  charmed
them, plus I did my research. Within six months Mr G was expressing his
pleased surprise at how much I knew about Israel and the Jews. The Golds
moved to London shortly after Hannah’s fourteenth birthday and we were pen
pals  for  a  while,  but  then  they  moved  again  and  we  lost  touch.  I’d  been
heartbroken  when  they  left,  but  I  recovered  and  went  on,  going  from
desolation to something shamingly close to indifference in about three weeks.

My new interest in Israel proved rather longer lasting. And at the time I

didn’t  see  how  anybody  could  not  love  Israel.  It  was  the  world’s  most
charismatic, brave, buccaneering nation, defying all these bullies around it.
The  Six  Day  War,  Dayan  and  his  eye-patch,  a  woman  prime  minister,  the
kibbutzim; when I was a kid I was so proud it was British-built tanks that had
gone  sailing  across  the  Sinai  with  the  Star  of  David  flying  from  the  whip
aerials.  I  used  to  get  books  out  the  library  about  Israel.  Great  Jewish
Generals; can you believe Trotsky was in there? I even knew that the Israeli
army had improved their Centurions by putting petrol engines in place of the
British  diesels;  I  knew  all  that  adolescent,  war-geek  stuff,  I  loved  it.  Yom
Kippur; triumphing against the odds, nicking their own boats from under the
noses  of  the  French,  the  raid  on  Entebbe;  it  was  breath-taking,  cinematic!
How could anyone not admire all that?)

‘But that was before the invasion of Lebanon, before Sabra and Shatila—’
‘That was done by Christian militias,’ Jude protested.
‘Oh,  come  on!  It  was  Ariel  Sharon  who  let  them  off  the  leash,  and  you

know it. But that was the start; I began to wake up to what had happened to
the Palestinians, to all the UN resolutions that Israel had just ignored, that it
was uniquely allowed to ignore, then to the history - “The bride is beautiful,
but she is already wed” - and to the illegal settlements, and the secret nukes. I
heard what Rabbi Kehane believed, what his followers still believe, I saw the
bodies lying bleeding in the mosque, and I felt sick. And now civilians are
just killed without any legal process whatsoever, and I’ve heard Israelis as
good as talk about a final solution for the Palestinian problem. I’ve listened to
a  cabinet  minister  say  without  irony  that  if  they  can  just  round  up  all  the
terrorists and get rid of them, there won’t be any left, and I can’t believe I’m
hearing  an  educated  person  suggest  anything  as  monumentally  stupid,  as
psychologically obtuse as that.

‘Look; I don’t want anyone hurt. I don’t believe in suicide bombings or

attacking any civilians and of course you’ve every right to defend yourselves,
but, oh, God, look, can we just agree on this? That the Holocaust wasn’t evil
and  horrific  and  the  single  most  obscene  and  concentrated  act  of  human
barbarism  ever  recorded  because  it  happened  to  the  Jews,  it  was  all  that
because it happened to anybody, to any group, to any people. Because it did
happen  to  the  Jews,  and  there  had  been  nowhere  for  them  to  escape  to,  I
thought, Yes, of course, they did deserve a homeland. It was the least that
could be done. The world felt that. Partly guilt, but at least it was there.

‘But it wasn’t a moral blank cheque. For fuck’s sake, if any people should

have known what it was to be demonised, victimised and oppressed and suffer
under an arrogant, militaristic occupying regime, and possess the wit to see
what was happening to them and what they were doing to others, they should
have.

‘So when Palestinian youths use sling-shots against tanks and the tanks put

high explosive into tents where mothers are nursing, when every Arab village
has its orchards razed, its houses dynamited and roads dug up - I mean can’t
you see what you’re doing there? Those are ghettos you’re creating! When
the Israeli Army seriously claims that Mohammed Al-Durrah and his father
were  shot  by  Palestinian  gunmen,  as  though  this  isn’t  the  same  shit  in
microcosm as claiming the death camps were built by the Allies after the War
…  I’m,  I’m,  I’m  tearing  my  fucking  hair  out  here,  Jude!  And  then  letters
appear in the papers talking about appeasing the Palestinians and comparing
Israel  to  Czechoslovakia  just  before  the  Second  World  War,  and  that’s  just
absurd! Czechoslovakia was not the best-armed state in Europe at the time, it
was  one  of  the  weakest;  it  was  not  the  only  regional  superpower  with  a
monopoly on weapons of mass destruction, it was not the tooled-up victor of
three earlier wars sitting on the occupied territory of others.’

‘But they kill us! Step on a bus, go for a pizza, drive back from worship,

walk down the wrong path in your own city—’

‘And you’ve both got to stop! I know that! But you have the most control in

this! You’re the ones coming from a position of strength! It’s always the one
with the most power who has to give up the most, who has to exercise the
most restraint, who has to take the final few blows before all the blows stop!’

Jude was shaking her tear-stained face at me. ‘You are so full of shit. You’ll

never understand. You’ll just never understand. So we’re not perfect. Who is?
We’re fighting for our lives. All you do and all you say just gives succour to
those who’d drive us into the waves. You’re with the enemy, you’re with the
exterminators. We haven’t become the Nazis; you have.’

I buried my face in my hands and when I surfaced, looking at Jude’s angry,

reddened  face,  all  I  could  say  was,  ‘I  never  said  you  had.  And  there  is  an

Israeli Peace Movement, Jude. There are people, Jews, in Israel who oppose
Sharon  and  what’s  been  done,  what’s  being  done  to  the  Palestinians.  Who
want peace. Peace for land if that’s what it takes, but peace. Reservists who’re
refusing to fight in the Occupied territories. That’s who I’m with. That’s who
I respect these days. I’ve escaped my adolescent crush on Israel but I’ll never
stop respecting, loving the Jewish people for all they’ve done … it’s just that I
can’t  stand  to  see  what’s  being  perpetrated  in  their  name  now  by  that  fat,
white-haired, war-criminal bastard.’

‘Fuck you. Sharon was democratically elected. He’s said he will trade land

for peace. So fuck you. Fuck you!’

‘Jude—’
‘No! Goodbye, Ken. I won’t bother to say I’ll see you, because I hope I

don’t. And don’t bother to call. In fact, don’t ever bother again. Not ever.’

‘Jude—’
‘… I’m ashamed I ever let you so much as touch me.’
And with that, my ex-wife threw her drink over me, turned on her heel and

walked off.

Happy New Year.

Bit later. Drunk and maudlin and time to go to bed. I was crashing at Craig’s
place,  in  the  second  spare  bedroom.  Some  people  had  been  using  it  as  an
unofficial cloakroom, dumping their coats and jackets on the bed; I gathered
them up and took them next door to the box room, which was the official
cloakroom.

‘Oh, hi, Nikki.’
‘Ken,’ Nikki said, taking something from her jacket. She was dressed in a

fluffy pink sweater and tight black jeans. ‘How are you doing?’

‘Tired,’  I  said,  dumping  the  coats  and  jackets  onto  the  pile  on  the  bed.

Music sounded pumping from downstairs and I could hear people whooping.
The box room was devoid of furniture apart from an old desk - also piled with
coats and stuff - and the narrow, mounded bed. Lots of shelves with books
and assorted junk; a collapsible wallpaper table and a stepladder against one
wall. The room’s bulb was bare, unshielded. Nikki stood grinning at me. Even
with the short hair she looked great.

She  held  up  the  slim  silvery  thing  she’d  taken  from  her  jacket.  Large

orange  lozenges.  ‘Got  a  cold,’  she  said  through  her  smile,  almost  smugly.
Under  the  direct  light  of  the  room’s  single  bulb,  her  hair  showed  spiky
highlights of glossy red and deep ochre.

I narrowed my eyes and looked at her as though over some glasses. ‘What

are you on?’

and stood there, staring up at the ceiling and swivelling back and forth. Her
jaw was working from side to side, in time.

I  shook  my  head.  ‘You  young  whipper-snapper;  you’re  loved  up,  aren’t

you?’

‘Fraid so, Uncle Ken.’
‘Well, have fun, but remember Leah Betts; don’t drink too much water.’
‘I love you, Uncle Ken,’ she said, leaning forward and smiling broadly.
I laughed. ‘Yeah, I love you too, Nikki.’
She  brandished  the  throat  lozenges  in  my  face  like  some  sort  of  treat.

‘Would you like a Strepsil?’

‘Thanks. I’m trying to give them up.’
‘Okay.’
I stepped to one side and grasped the handle of the door, which had swung

shut. ‘After you, ma’am,’ I said, opening it.

‘Thenk-yuh!’ she said, stepping forward, then bumped into the edge of the

door and thudded into my chest. ‘Happy New Year, Ken.’ She raised her face
to mine, still grinning.

True enough, I thought, we’d managed to miss each other somehow in the

hours since the bells. ‘Happy New Y—’ I said.

She pushed her mouth against mine and gave me a big wet sloppy kiss,

then pulled away, smiling happily, then did a little side-to-side thing with her
head, made a noise that might have been, mm-hmm, and came forward again
and kissed me once more. With a certain amount of openness, it has to be
said. Though no tongues.

Oh my God, oh shit, oh fuck, part of me was thinking. I mean, another part

was thinking, Well, Yesss!, but most of me was thinking bad things of one sort
or another. I put my arms around her and kissed back, tasting and smelling
her, sucking in her sweet breath as though desperate for some transfusion of
youth. She squirmed in my arms, pressing herself against me and slipping her
arms round my sides and back.

Something dropped to the floor; the lozenges.
Then she pushed back, blinking, and I had to let her go. The smile was

gone for a moment. Then she shook her head and started laughing gently. She
wiped her mouth delicately with the back of one hand.

‘What am I doing?’ she breathed, still shaking her head. I thought of the

way her hair would have moved when she did that, if it had still been long.

um, I don’t think …’

‘No,  I  don’t  think  either  …’  she  said  softly,  then  laughed  loudly,  then

started coughing. She shook her head and looked down at the floor. I stooped
and handed her the packet of throat lozenges.

Nikki’s  hoarse  laugh  echoed  in  the  room.  ‘Oh,  Uncle  Ken,  I’m  sorry.  I

didn’t mean to … I’m sorry.’

I held up one hand. ‘No problem. And please stop apologising. It was fine

for me, believe me. But, ah …’

Nikki coughed. The harsh sound echoed in the bare-walled room. She made

a visible effort to pull herself together. ‘Yes,’ she said, and cleared her throat
noisily. ‘We probably better just pretend …’

‘… that none of this happened, yeah.’ I nodded.
She nodded too. ‘Just until, you know, we die,’ she suggested.
‘Agree completely,’ I said.
She shivered. ‘Sorry, Ken, but this is all just a bit …’
‘Weird?’ I suggested.
‘Yeah, weird.’
I’d opened the door again. ‘Oh. Hi, Emma.’
‘Mum! Hi!’ Nikki waved, her smile broad across her face.
‘What’s  weird?’  Emma  said,  walking  into  the  room  and  looking

gloweringly suspicious. Little black number. Hair in pearled black Alice band
like a soft tiara, black pearls round her throat. Already holding a dark coat
over her arm.

I waved one hand dismissively and nodded at the pack of throat lozenges in

Nikki’s  hand.  ‘I  was  trying  to  proposition  your  daughter  by  offering  her
drugs, but she wasn’t having it.’ I smiled sadly and let my shoulders sag while
Emma glared into my eyes. ‘Just trying to get to bed, actually, Em; dog-tired.
This you off too?’

Emma  wavered,  but  then  clearly  decided  I’d  been  just  casual  enough.

Nothing going on. Nothing you’d want to think about, certainly. ‘Yes,’ she
said, then looked at her daughter. ‘Nikki; you ready?’

Nikki popped a lozenge, flicked it into the air and stepped forward with her

mouth open, teeth clacking shut. She stepped back again with the throat sweet
displayed between her teeth. ‘Regy,’ she said. She turned and rummaged in
the pile of coats until she found her jacket. ‘Night, Ken,’ she said, pulling on
her jacket and kissing me lightly on the cheek.

‘Night, kid.’

‘I’ll be down in one minute,’ Emma told Nikki.
‘Okey-doke,’ Nikki said as the door started to swing closed again. ‘I’ll say

bye to Dad …’

Emma looked at me.
Oh-oh, I thought. Now what?
‘Great kid,’ I said to Emma, nodding towards the closing door. ‘Love her to

bits.’

‘You all right?’ Em said. She looked genuinely concerned. I relaxed.
‘Tired,’ I said, honestly.
‘I heard Jude gave you a hard time.’
‘It was mutual, but yes.’ I sighed, yawned. ‘Oh, dear. Sorry, sorry.’
‘It’s all right.’
‘Jude and I agreed to disagree,’ I said. ‘Although, come to think of it, I’m

not sure we even agreed that.’

Emma nodded, looked down at my chest briefly. She put one hand out and

touched my arm, patting it. ‘You get some sleep.’

‘Best idea I’ve heard all night.’ I held the door open for her.
‘Night, Ken. You take care.’ She kissed me lightly on the cheek, just like

her daughter had. She turned at the top of the stairs as I was opening the door
to  my  bedroom,  and  gave  me  a  small,  brave  smile.  She  raised  one  hand
hesitantly, then went quickly down the steps.

I stripped to my underpants and got into the bed. I went to sleep thinking

about Celia, hoping she was well and safe with her family on Martinique. I
did  this  quite  often  these  days.  Part  of  me  hoped  that  by  going  to  sleep
thinking of her I’d see her in my dreams, but so far this hadn’t happened.

I slept well for about half an hour until some people piled into the room,

turning on the light and looking for their coats. I told them where they were,
then once they’d gone I got up, pulled on my trousers and went through to the
official cloakroom and pulled all the coats and jackets off the bed and hung
them over the banister rail outside. This didn’t stop another group of drunks
coming into the room, turning on the light and looking for their coats.

I took the bulb out of the central light fixture and the next time somebody

came in, muttering about coats and clicking the light switch about ten times, I
snored very loudly until they went away.

When I wake up I’m dressed as an SS officer with my cock hanging out. I’m
handcuffed to the bed and there’s gaffer tape over my mouth and Jo’s; they
rape  her,  slit  her  throat  and  leave  her  lying  on  me.  They’ve  taken  stuff  to

make it look like a robbery gone wrong and the boat’s been holed so when the
tide rises I’ll drown.

‘Ah!’
‘Ken?’
‘Fuck! Shit! Fuck! Fucking hell!’
‘Ken! Come on! Just a dream. Whatever it was. Just a dream, a nightmare.

Hey, come on …’

‘Dear fucking Jesus Christ almighty.’ I flopped back down onto the bed.

My heart was hammering like an engine, I was breathing like I’d just run a
marathon. ‘Oh, God . . ’

Jo took me in her arms and cradled me. ‘It’s okay. Everything’s all right.

Calm down, calm down …’

‘Oh …’
‘That’s not like you.’
‘… Fuck …’
‘Okay now?’
‘Yeah. Okay. Okay now …’
Only I wasn’t okay at all.
Jo fell quickly asleep again but I spent a long, long time looking round the

darkened, slightly tilted bedroom, swallowing hard, catching the occasional
whiff  of  sewage  and  decay  coming  from  the  mud  outside,  listening  for
ominous gurgling noises from the bilges, searching for heavies hiding in the
shadows and shivering as the sheen of sweat dried on my skin.

I lay waiting for the dawn to come up and the tide to come in, waiting for

the waters to raise us again, bring the Temple Belle level once more, smother
the faint smell of death and restore balance.

‘Hello?’

‘Hey, Mrs C.’
‘Ooh!  Is  that  that  man  from  the  radio?  Kennit,  how  are  you  doin,  ma

darlin?’

‘Got a bit of a cold, but apart from that, fine. And all the better for talking

to you, Mrs C. And how are you? Beautiful and sexy as ever? Beautiful and
sexy as the last time I saw you? On the big wheel, wasn’t it?’

‘Oh, hell, honey, I’m more so. More so! You a terrible man. I tell me son on

you, you see if I don’t do juss that.’

‘Mrs C, you mustn’t. My unbridled passion for you has to stay a deep and

terrible  secret,  otherwise  Ed  would  be  terribly  hurt.  I  mean,  suppose  you
seduced me and then fell pregnant?’

‘What? At my age? Oh, lissen to you, you rogue man! Ha!’
‘I’d have to marry you; I’d be Ed’s father. He’d never forgive me.’
‘Stop! I’ll bust meself. Where’s me hanky? Oh, you surely are a terrible

man. I’d get the boy himself to give you a serious talkin to but he’s in France
or  Rome  or  some  damn  place  like  that,  honey,  so  you’ll  have  to  call  his
mobile.’

‘No problem, Mrs C. Actually I knew he was away; I just wanted an excuse

to hear your voice.’

‘There see now, you bein terrible again.’
‘I just can’t help myself. It’s the power you have over me.’
‘Terrible man, terrible, terrible rogue of a man.’
‘Okay, Mrs C. I’ll try Ed’s mobile. It was good talking to you. Oh … I did

want  to  have  a  word  with  a  friend  of  his,  too.  Ah  …  Robe?  Yeah;  Robe.
Would you have his number there at all?’

‘Robe? What you want to talk to him for, hon?’
‘… Sorry, just blowing my nose there, Mrs C. Excuse me.’
‘You excused, hon. So, what’s this you wantin to talk to Robe for?’
‘Ah, yeah; I was talking to somebody. In a record company. Ice House?

They’re pretty big. Apparently the company, the record label, it’s looking for
security people; bodyguards, that sort of thing. For artists, rap artists, when
they come over from the States. I just thought Robe could do that, maybe. I
mean, these are often pretty serious people themselves, ex-gangsta, a lot of
them; they wouldn’t have any respect for the average white kid with broad
shoulders who’s used to turning people away from clubs because they’ve got
the wrong footwear. Robe, however, they’d relate to. But it’s straight work,
and well paid. I know he could do it. Could lead to, well, who knows?’

‘Be a lot more respectable than what he usually gets up to, what I hear.

Robe is Yardie, Kennit. He dangerous. Too many guns. He’s not welcome in
this house no more. Ed don’t see him that I know of.’

‘I realise that. Ed and I were talking about him, not long ago. That’s why I

thought maybe this could be a way to get him out of that sort of life. I thought
maybe if I could have a word with him …’

‘Well, I don’t tink I got his number here, but I can get it, I suppose.’
‘It’d be great if you could, Mrs C. Of course, I’d understand if you didn’t

want to say anything to Ed. Nothing might come of this, we have to accept
that. But, you know; nothing ventured, and all that.’

tinkin of it. I call you back, that okay?’

‘You are a saint and sexy. I adore you.’
‘Ah! Stop it now!’

I’d decided I might be developing a crush on my dentist. Of course I wasn’t
and I knew I wasn’t, but the idea seemed nice; there was something oddly
relaxing and carefree about it. Maybe it was some very mixed up Freudian
thing, given that my dad was a dentist, maybe it was because Mary Fairley,
BDS, was Scottish, from Nairn, and had the most wonderfully soft, burring
accent I’d heard since I’d moved to London, maybe it was the whole thing
about lying almost flat with my mouth open, entirely at this woman’s mercy
while some gentle music played and she and her almost as attractive assistant
spoke quietly, professionally to each other, but whatever it was, I had almost
convinced  myself  I  felt  something  for  her.  Mary  was  chunky  of  build  but
delicate  of  movement  and  touch;  she  had  sandy  hair,  grey-green  eyes,  a
sprinkling of freckles across her nose, and breasts that got ever so slightly in
her  way  sometimes,  necessitating  a  quick,  twisting  movement  -  the  bodily
equivalent of a hair-flick - while she was leaning over me.

I gazed up into her eyes, wishing we didn’t have to put these safety visor

things on these days. Although, given that I seemed to have picked up Nikki’s
cold, that was probably no bad thing; I had to raise my hand and stop the
dental work a couple of times to have a good sneeze.

Amazing  how  safe  I  felt  in  a  dentist’s  surgery;  always  a  little  on  edge,

waiting for a twinge, but very safe. Mary was polite but not chatty, despite our
Caledonian connection. Very professional. Having a crush on a disinterested
dentist  might  appear  frustrating  and  sad,  but  it  also  struck  me  as  being
innocent  and  pure,  and  even  healthy.  Certainly  a  lot  healthier  than  falling
hopelessly in love with a gangster’s wife and planning to go tooled up into a
telly studio.

Mary  drilled  through  an  old  filling  into  decay,  and  the  air  in  my  mouth

filled with a smell like death.

‘Our client maintains strongly that he was not using his mobile at the time of
the accident.’

‘Then your client is lying.’
‘Mr,  ah,  McNutt,  with  respect,  you  could  only  have  gained  the  most

fleeting of glimpses of our client’s car when—’

‘Tell you what … excuse … ah-choo!’

‘Bless you.’
‘Thank you. Excuse me. Yes, as I was saying; the young lady I was taking

home made a phone call to report the accident to the police. That was about
five, ten seconds, max, after the crash happened. Why don’t we talk to her
mobile network and your client’s and compare the times when his call ended
and hers began? Because, now I think about it, he was still holding the phone
when he got out of the car, and I suspect he hadn’t hung up. Let’s see if that
call and Ms Verrin’s overlap, shall we?’

The lawyer and her articled clerk looked at each other.

‘You lucky, lucky people. Not only has my cold gone into my throat so that I
sound even huskier and sexier than ever, but we just played you the Hives, the
White Stripes and the Strokes; three in a row with nary a syllable of nonsense
to dilute the fun. Damn, we spoil you! Now then, Phil.’

‘Yeah; you can’t just leave an accusation hanging like that.’
‘You mean my broad hint that a fully functioning brain might be a liability

in a footballer?’

‘Yes. So what are you saying; all football club changing rooms should have

a sign saying, You don’t have to be stupid to work here but it helps?’

‘And how witty that would be if they did, Philip. But no.’
‘But you’re saying that footballers have to be stupid.’
‘No, I’m just saying that it might help.’
‘Why?’
‘Think about it. You’re playing tennis; what’s the one shot that looks easy

that people get wrong all the time? The one that even the professionals make
an embarrassing mess of every now and again. Happened at least once that I
saw this Wimbledon.’

‘We may,’ Phil said, ‘have located the source of the footballer’s seeming

stupidity, if they think they’re playing football but you’ve apparently changed
sports to tennis.’

‘You can see how having a single net in the middle instead of one at each

end would be confusing, but that’s not what I mean. Just stick with me here,
Phil. In tennis, what looks like the easiest shot there could be, but people still
get hopelessly wrong? Come on. Think. The good people of radio listener-
land are depending on you.’

‘Ah,’ Phil said. ‘The overhead smash when the ball’s gone way up in the

sky and you seem to spend about half an hour at the net waiting for it to come
down.’

‘Correct.  Now  why  do  people  get  that  shot  so  wrong  when  it  looks  so

easy?’

‘They’re crap?’
‘We’ve already established that even the best players in the world do this,

so, no, not that.’

Phil shrugged. I was making a one-handed waving motion at him across the

desk,  as  though  trying  to  waft  the  aroma  of  a  dish  towards  my  nose.
Sometimes we sort of half rehearsed these things, sometimes we didn’t and I
just landed stuff like this on him and trusted to luck and the fact we knew
each  other  pretty  well  by  now.  Phil  nodded.  ‘They  have  too  much  time  to
think.’

‘Pre-flipping-cisely,  Phil.  Like  most  sports,  tennis  is  a  game  of  rapid

movement,  fast  reactions,  skilful  hand-eye  coordination  -  well,  foot-eye
coordination in the case of football, but you get the idea - and people often
play  their  best  when  they’ve  got  no  time  to  think.  Think  service  returns
against  somebody  like  Sampras  or  Rusedski.  Same  in  cricket;  scientists
reckon it shouldn’t be possible for a batsman to hit the ball because there just
isn’t enough time between the ball leaving the hand of a good fast bowler and
it getting to the bat. Of course, a decent batsman will have read the bowler’s
body  language.  Same  applies  to  a  tennis  player  who’s  good  at  returning
against a big hitter; they can tell where the ball’s going before the server hits
it. The point is that it all happens too quick for the cerebral bit of the brain to
get involved; there’s no time to think, there’s only time to react. Right?’

‘Uh-huh.’
‘Now, football.’
‘Oh good, we’re back.’
‘In football you often have quite a lot of time to think. Certainly often you

don’t; a ball comes flying in, you raise your leg and first-time it and it’s away
and you’re already running down the touchline doing the shirt-over-the-head
bit with your arms outstretched. But, if you’re on a break-away, get the ball in
midfield, there’s only one defender to beat and nobody up to support, you’ve
got what will seem like a long, long time to run and think, and I’m certainly
not accusing footballers of not being able to do both at the same time. So; you
beat  the  defender,  there’s  only  the  goalie  left,  and  now  you’ve  got  time  to
think again. And this is where you see some guys, even at the very top, make
a mess of it because they’ve had time to think. Their full frontal cortex or
whatever it is has had time to go, Hmm, well, we could do it this way, or this
way, or that way, or - but by that time it’s too late, because the goalie’s come
out and you’ve hit it straight at him, or skied it to the ironic cheers of the
opposing fans, or decided to go for a lob and hesitated and he’s had time to

dive at your feet and grab the ball off you. This happens to perfectly good,
highly  paid  professional  footballers,  and  in  a  way  it’s  no  disgrace,  it’s  just
being human.

‘However. If you get a particularly thick footballer—’
‘You’re  going  to  be  horrible  about  that  nice  Gascoigne  boy  again,  I  can

tell.’

‘Oh, come on; this is a man so daft he couldn’t even play air-flute without

making a mess of it. But yes; Gazza is my best example. He is - well, was - a
great, gifted footballer, but he was so intellectually challenged that even in all
those seconds running in on the goalkeeper, he still hasn’t had time to think.
Or if he is thinking, he’s thinking, Wuy-aye, that’s a fit-lookin bird behind the
goal  there,  man.  And  that’s  the  difference;  the  longer  you  can  go  without
really thinking, the better a footballer you’ll be.’

Phil  opened  his  mouth  to  speak,  but  I  added,  ‘That’s  also  why  golf  and

snooker  are  so  profoundly  different;  they’re  games  of  nerve  and
concentration, not reactive skill.’

Phil scratched his head. I hit the appropriate FX button. ‘Well, that was a

compendium rant,’ he said. I’d already started the next track, playing the intro
faded down. We had fifteen seconds to the vocals. ‘We started on football,’
Phil said, ‘diverted to tennis, then on to cricket and finally came back to the
beautiful  game  …  but  then  body-swerved  into  golf  and  snooker  at  the  last
minute there. All very confusing.’

‘Really?’ I glanced at the seconds ticking away.
‘Yes.’
‘You  sound  a  bit  stupid.  Have  you  thought  of  becoming  a  professional

footballer?’

‘So it’s definite?’ Debbie asked.

‘Yes,’ Phil said.
‘How definite?’
‘Well, definite,’ Phil said awkwardly.
‘Yes, but how definite is it? Is it fairly definite? Very definite? Totally one

hundred per cent certainly definite?’

‘Well, no, it’s not that definite,’ Phil conceded.
‘Jesus Christ,’ I said, ‘I thought only films suffered from this on-off-stop-

go-red-light/green-light/red-light bullshit. It’s only a fucking telly programme,
not Lord of the Fucking Rings parts one to three.’

‘It’s delicate,’ Phil said.

‘So’s  my  head  on  a  Saturday  morning,’  I  muttered.  ‘I  don’t  make  this

fucking song and dance about it.’

Debbie’s new temporary office was almost as far down the light-well as

ours. I gazed out at the white glazed bricks. It looked like it might be raining
but  it  was  hard  to  tell.  This  was  Friday;  the  Breaking  News  thing  was
scheduled  for  Monday.  Again.  My  great  confrontation  with  the  beastly
Holocaust  denier  Larson  Brogley,  or  whatever  his  name  was,  was  back  on
again. In fact it had been on for over a month now without being cancelled,
which was probably some sort of record. It might actually be going to happen.
I felt nervous.

Of  course  I  felt  nervous,  I  thought,  as  Station  Manager  Debbie  and

Producer Phil argued the toss about how definite was definite like a pair of
bishops trying to settle how many angels could dance on the head of a pin. It
was okay for these guys; they thought the only danger was me making a fool
of myself or bringing the station, or by extension Sir Jamie, into disrepute;
they  had  no  idea  what  I  was  planning  to  do  (if  they  had,  they  would,  of
course, have been appalled and either tried to argue me out of it - and maybe
warn the Breaking News production team - or just cancelled the whole deal
and  threatened  me  with  the  sack  if  I  insisted  on  going  ahead  without  their
blessing. That’s what I’d do if I was ever in a situation like this … if, that is,
the talent concerned had been daft enough to tell me what he was thinking of
doing).

Fucking  typical;  usually  these  TV  things  came  up  and  happened  really

quickly. If I’d had my brilliant but dangerous idea for any other appearance or
even proposed appearance it would all have been over months ago and I’d
long since have been dealing with the consequences, whatever they’d turned
out  to  be.  For  various  reasons,  but  especially  11  September,  this  one  was
running and running, and so I was being given plenty of time to stew.

‘… follow it up with a phone interview on the show?’
‘Hmm. I don’t think …’
Yeah, let the poor, deluded fools debate. They didn’t know how lucky they

were,  not  knowing.  Only  I  knew  about  my  great  idea,  my  great,  risky,
probably mad, certainly criminal idea. I hadn’t shared it with Jo, Craig, Ed;
anybody. I’d started dreaming about it, though, and worried that I might say
something  in  my  sleep  that  Jo  would  hear.  This  was,  certainly,  better  than
dreaming about death squads raping Jo and leaving me dressed like a Nazi
waiting to drown, but it still wasn’t much fun. I’d got used to having pretty
mundane, even boring dreams over the years, and the last run of nightmares
I’d  suffered  had  been  in  the  run-up  to  my  last-year  exams  at  school,  so  I
wasn’t  psychologically  prepared  for  having  bad  dreams  about  Nazis  in  TV

studios and being tied to a chair and people waving guns about.

On  the  other  hand,  I’d  probably  crap  out  at  the  last  minute.  I’d  do  the

planning,  take  the  equipment,  but  fail  to  follow  through.  Some  Imperial
Guard of good sense, still loyal to the idea of keeping me in a job and out of
court and prison or whatever, would storm the gates of the occupied Palace of
Reason and effect a counter-revolution, a coup for common sense and decent
standards of behaviour. That was, if I was being totally honest with myself,
the most likely outcome. Not by far the most likely outcome, but still the most
likely one all the same.

‘Oh for God’s sake,’ I said, interrupting Debbie, who was faffing on about

shared legal insurance against slander and who should pay what proportion. I
almost  wanted  to  tell  her  that  me  only  saying  something  outrageous  and
criminal was the least of her worries, but I didn’t. ‘Let’s just do it, can’t we?’

‘Okay,’ Phil said. ‘But we’re holding out for an afternoon recording.’
‘Whatever.  I  don’t  care.  I  just  want  it  over  and  done  with.’  They  both

looked  at  me,  as  though  surprised  at  something  like  this  getting  to  me.
Whoops, possible security breach here. I spread my hands slowly. ‘Oh, I’m
just getting fed up with the hanging around,’ I explained calmly.

‘Okay, then,’ Debbie said. ‘Monday it is.’
‘Halle-blinkin-lujah.’

‘Listen.’

And that’s enough. Here we go …

‘Jesus. Got enough wee funny lights in here?’

‘Rough, innit?’
‘Oh, totally rough.’
It was the Friday night. Ed and I were due to be limo’d to a gig in Bromley

in an hour, but he’d wanted to show off his newly redecorated and refitted
place,  so  I’d  come  to  the  family  house;  a  much  knocked-through  and
creatively  mucked-about-with  complex  taking  up  two  terraced  houses  in
Brixton,  one  of  them  an  end-terrace  incorporating  what  had  been  a  small
supermarket  on  the  ground  floor.  Ed  could  have  afforded  a  mansion  in
Berkshire if he’d wanted, and I suspected he still kind of hankered after one,
but I respected the fact he’d chosen to stay here with his mum and extended
family, adapting the house he’d grown up in and buying the one next door
too, plus the shop underneath, rather than get the hell out of his old ’hood the
instant the money had started rolling in.

I’d been slightly worried that Ed had heard from his mum that I’d been

trying to get hold of his Yardie pal Robe, guessed that I was still after a gun,
and wanted to shout at me or something, but nothing like this had happened
so far; we’d met up in the big main living-room on the ground floor and been
suddenly surrounded by a chaotic, laughing crowd of Ed’s aunts, cousins and
sisters (several of them pretty damn attractive), and a couple of male relations
and boyfriends. His mum hadn’t been there because she was attending some
night class, which had saved any potential embarrassment. Ed had made our
apologies and we’d got away upstairs but he still hadn’t said anything about
Robe.

Ed’s own place within the communal house ran the length of the two lofts.

The big dormers just looked out onto other roofs but the views inside were
more striking; a long, mostly open space in warm ochres and deep reds with
splashes of yellow. Trust me; it was a lot more tasteful than it sounds. It all
smelled  very  new.  The  only  certifiable  style-lapse  was  in  Ed’s  moderately
vast, impressively uncluttered bedroom.

‘Mirrors, Edward?’
‘Yeah! Wicked, eh?’
‘Mirrors? I mean, on both sides—’
‘They’re wardrobes!’
‘But on the ceiling? Oh dear. Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear.’
‘Wot? Just cos nobody’d want to watch your sorry white ass when you’re

bangin some bird. Me, I’m a picture. If I wasn’t straight as a bleedin die, I’d
fall in love wif meself.’

I’d folded my arms, taken a step back and looked at him. Eventually I’d

just shaken my head.

‘Wot?’
‘No,’ I’d said, ‘you got me; I’m lost for words.’
‘Fuck me. Hold the showbiz page.’
‘Come on; I’m off duty.’
Now we were in Ed’s study/den/studio, and he’d turned on all his music

gear.  I  gazed  round  the  six  stacked,  angled  keyboards,  the  three  man-high,
nineteen-inch racks and a mixing desk you’d struggle to touch both ends of
even  with  your  arms  outstretched  and  your  face  jammed  against  the  pots.
There was a bunch of other bits and pieces too; much-be-buttoned units lying
on desks, a set of drum pads, and at least three pieces the functions of which I
could  not  even  begin  to  guess  at.  Most  of  the  gear  was  twinkling  in  the
heavily curtained darkness; hundreds of little LEDs in broad constellations of
red, green, yellow and blue, plus dozens of softly glowing pastel screens with
dark, blocky writing on them. Two wide-screen monitors bigger than my TV

flickered into life as Ed’s Mac powered quietly up. Ed’s monitors were giant
Nautilus  jobs,  thirty  grand’s  worth  of  gleaming,  shoulder-high,  spiked  blue
ammonites with bright yellow cones sitting on the far side of the room and
aimed at the big, black, leather chair poised in the epicentre of all this cool-
tech gizmology.

‘What exactly does all this do, Ed?’
‘Makes music, man.’
‘I thought you just played the stuff.’
‘Yeah, well, I’m branching out, inn-I?’
‘You mean you’re actually going to start composing?’ I picked up a dark

red  A4-sized  manual  for  something  called  a  Virus  and  flicked  through  it,
squinting in the low ambient light.

‘Yeah. I fot it’d be a laugh. An anyway; just look at this stuff.’
I looked at it again. ‘You know, you’re absolutely right, Ed. It doesn’t have

to produce a fucking note to justify its total, glorious gorgeousness-hood-icity.
Please don’t tell me all you’re going to produce on it will be N-chih N-chih
music.’

‘N-chih N-chih music?’
‘Yeah, you know; the sort of music you hear from some brother’s blacked-

out Astra passing you in the street. It always goes N-chih N-chih N-chih.’

‘Na, mate. Well, yeah, some, maybe. But, na; one day I’m gonna write a

bleedin symphony.’

‘A symphony?’
‘Yeah. Why not?’
I looked him up and  down  again. ‘You don’t lack for ambition, do you,

Edward?’

‘Certainly fucking not; life’s too short, mate.’
I leafed through the manual for the Virus thing. ‘I mean, do you actually

understand all this?’

‘Course not. You don’t need to to get good sounds out of it. But the deep

stuff’s there if you need it.’

‘“Extended  Panic  functionality”!’  I  quoted.  ‘Ha!  How  can  you  not  love

something with Extended Panic functionality?’

‘Uvverwise known as the All Notes Off command.’
‘Brilliant,’ I said, putting the manual back on its bookshelf with the others.

My phone vibrated on my hip. I glanced at the screen. ‘Jo,’ I told Ed. ‘Better
answer it; she’s in, I don’t know, Berlin or Budapest or somewhere.’

‘I’ll fire up the software, let you hear some N-chih N-chih tunes.’
‘Hello?’ I said.
And, distantly, I heard, ‘Yes, yes, yes, come on, fuck me, fuck me, do it, do

it, there, yes there there there, fuck me, fuck me harder. Fuck me really hard.
Right  there,  right  there,  yes,  yes,  yes!’  This  was  accompanied  by  what
sounded like clothing rubbing on clothing, a series of slaps, and then a man’s
voice saying, ‘Oh yeah, oh yeah …’

It didn’t stop, either. Went on for some time.
I stood there and listened for long enough to entirely convince myself that

this was not a joke, not any sort of an attempt at humour at all, and also not in
any  way  meant.  This  was  about  the  time  when  Ed  turned  round  from  the
bewilderingly complicated displays on his two giant monitors and looked at
me; just a glance at first, then back again, frowning, eyebrows rising. I handed
him the phone.

He listened for a while as well. The frown was replaced by a smile, even a

leer for a moment or two, but then he must have read something from my face
because  the  smile  disappeared  and  he  handed  the  phone  back  to  me  and
looked down, clearing his throat and turning back to the screens. ‘Sorry, bruv,’
I heard him say.

I listened a little while longer, then Jo’s phone must have fallen, because

there  was  a  loud  but  soft-sounding  thump,  and  the  noises  became  very
muffled, incoherent. I folded the phone off. ‘Well,’ I said, ‘I think the choice
phrases involve sauces for ganders and geese; and petards, whatever the hell
one of those is.’ Ed knew well enough I wasn’t faithful to Jo; blimey, we’d
been able to watch each other at it with those two Argentinian girls that night
on the beach at Brighton during early May.

Ed looked round, chewing his bottom lip. ‘Fink that was a wind-up?’
‘No.’
‘Deliberate?’
I shook my head. ‘I doubt it; I’ve had Jo’s accidental calls jam my phone

for hours at a time before. Usually her and her girlfriends in a bar or a club.’ I
released a deep breath. ‘Plus, ah, that is the way she expresses herself, during
the act. I don’t think she’s a good enough actress to fake that.’

‘Woh. Right then. So. You two have one of them open relationships then,

do ya?’

‘Looks like it,’ I said. ‘Just neither of us ever bothered to tell the other.’
Ed looked concerned. ‘You still want to hear some tunes, man, or would

you ravver ave a drink or a smoke or sumfing?’

gave a small, not funny laugh.

Jo said: ‘Listen.’

And I said: ‘Oh-oh.’
‘What?’
‘These days, people our age - okay, my age and also your age - don’t say

“listen” like that without it meaning something pretty fucking serious.’

Jo looked down. ‘Yeah, well …’
Here we go, I thought.
We were in the London Aquarium, housed in the old GLC building on the

South  Bank  of  the  Thames,  beside  the  London  Eye.  Mouth  Corp  Records
were having a bash and I’d been invited. So had Jo. She’d pretty much just
arrived, coming straight from Heathrow off the flight from Budapest.

The aquarium was a slightly spooky place for a party, I thought. Especially

a music industry party. Sharks in abundance; as above, so below. The light
was  kind  of  freaky  too;  apparently  the  fish  wouldn’t  take  kindly  to  lots  of
flashing disco-stylee lights, strobes and shit, so all you had was this bluey-
green  wash  of  underwater  luminescence,  making  everybody  look  slightly
sick. The light slid off Jo’s facial metalwork, visual echoes of the green and
blue diodes on Ed’s music gear the night before.

I’d asked her how she was and been told, Okay. I’d thought the better of

asking her if she’d made any accidental phone calls twenty-four hours earlier,
but now, with virtually no preamble, I was getting a ‘listen’.

‘Look,’ Jo said. People passed on either side, somebody said, Hi, and great,

sleek, grey bodies moved sinuously behind and above her.

‘Oh,’ I said. ‘Now it’s “look”? We’re covering the senses one by one, are

we? What’ll your next exhortation be? “Sniff”?’

Jo sucked her lips in and looked at me. ‘You don’t want to make this easy

on either of us, do you?’

‘Make what easy, Jo? Why don’t you tell me?’
‘Ken, I think we should, ah, you know; split up.’ She said this and drew

herself straight, putting her shoulders back and her head up, as though defiant.
I  thought  of  the  night  we  met,  and  the  way  her  stance  had  shown  off  her
nipples through her T-shirt. Now she wore a big, ribbed yellow jumper with a
roll neck. Black jeans. Only the DMs were the same.

I stared at her. Of course I’d known that this was the most likely thing she

was going to say after ‘listen’, but somehow it still came as a shock, and I was

left temporarily speechless for the second time in two days, and this time not
in a good way. I’d thought that maybe she was going to say she knew what
had  happened  with  the  phone  and  she  was  sorry,  or  that  she  was  pregnant
(always a good stand-by, that one, if unlikely as we always, but always, used
a condom) or maybe something else entirely, like she was taking a job in LA
or  Kuala  Lumpur  or  had  decided  to  become  a  nun  or  something,  but  I’d
known, at least since last night, in Ed’s studio, that maybe whatever it was we
had had going was near the end.

Still, I found myself feeling kind of crushed, and surprised. I opened my

mouth. She was still sucking in her lips, making her nose look longer. She had
taken a sort of half-step away from me, almost bumping into people standing
talking  behind  her,  in  front  of  the  thick,  distorting  glass  of  the  aquarium
windows. I wondered if she thought I was going to hit her. I never had. I’d
never hit any woman; never would. Oh, well, apart from ‘Raine’, of course,
but I reckoned I could claim massively extenuating circumstances there.

‘Oh, well,’ I said. I looked down at my bottle of Pils. I supposed I could

throw that in her face, like Jude had thrown her G&T in my face at Craig’s
during the first hour of the New Year, but then Jude had had the forethought
to  arm  herself  with  a  nice  wide  tumbler;  I  had  a  narrow-necked  bottle.  To
achieve a satisfactory soaking of my intended  victim I’d have to  ask Jo to
wait a second or two while I jammed my thumb in the bottle and shook it up
before emptying it in her face. That would be inelegant, somehow. Anyway, I
didn’t really want to do it.

So she’d cheated on me. Probably not the first time, but, well, so what to

that, too; I’d done more than my own fair share of cheating.

‘Is that all you can say?’ she said. ‘“Oh, well”? Is that it?’
‘I heard you fucking somebody last night, Jo,’ I told her. ‘On the phone.

Your mobile; it did that thing again.’

She stood, blinking. ‘I didn’t know,’ she said. She nodded. ‘Found it on the

floor this morning; batteries flat.’ She took a deep breath. ‘Woh.’ She looked
down at the floor, nodding, then up to me. She spread her arms. ‘I’m sorry. I
didn’t want you to find out that way.’

‘Well, I did.’
‘Were you going to say anything?’
‘Hadn’t decided. I thought in the meantime you might have realised what

had happened and whose mobile yours had rung, and when, and you’d be all
contrite, or come up with some embarrassingly unlikely explanation.’

‘Were you getting ready to dump me?’
‘Not particularly, Jo. It had occurred to me in the past that, well, all those

foreign trips, the nights away, the rock ’n’ roll lifestyle, drugs and drink and
stuff; I kind of suspected you might have had the occasional adventure and so
—’

‘And what about you?’ she asked, raising her head again, the underwater

lights glinting on the studs and bars barnacling her face.

‘You mean,’ I said, ‘have I been playing away, too?’
‘Yes. Well?’
‘Wait  a  minute,’  I  said,  starting  to  feel  angry  now.  ‘I’m  being  far  too

fucking reasonable here. I heard you fucking somebody else last night; you
didn’t hear me. And now you’re dumping me and you’re looking for some
sort of justification after the fact? Well, no fucking way. You have no fucking
right to start asking me questions. Yes; yes, I was going to dump you as a
matter of fact. Actually, in my heart, in my head, I’d already dumped you,
before you dumped me.’

‘Don’t be so childish.’
‘Fuck off, Jo.’
‘Don’t you even want to know why I want out of this relationship? ’
‘I don’t know and I don’t care. Maybe your new guy’s got a bigger cock

than I have; who fucking gives a damn?’

‘Oh, Ken, for fuck’s sake.’
‘Look, I hope you’re both very fucking happy, okay? Now just get the hell

away from me. And get your stuff off the Belle, as well.’ This was more like
it, I thought. This was taking the initiative. I deserved to, after all, dammit; I
was the injured party here. ‘I’ll give you till Monday morning to clear your
shit off my boat then it all goes over the side. Goodbye.’ I turned and walked
away, the effect barely spoiled by bumping into somebody and accidentally
spilling a little Pils over their sleeve and having to mumble an apology as I
stalked off.

I half expected Jo to follow me and remonstrate - and by golly this seemed

to me to be a situation where a person could reasonably employ a word like
‘remonstrate’  or  even  ‘inveigh’  rather  than  just  ‘object’  or  ‘argue’  or
something. But she didn’t.

I  spent  the  remainder  of  the  party  getting  profoundly  hammered  on  an

exciting variety of alcoholic beverages and I didn’t see Jo for the rest of the
evening.  This  was  probably  because  she’d  taken  me  at  my  word  about
chucking her stuff in the drink and didn’t trust me to wait as long as Monday
morning,  because  when  I  did  eventually  roll  home  in  the  wee  hours  and
poured myself out of the taxi and into the Temple Belle, she’d already been
and gone; her clothes and bits and pieces had been cleared out and on the mat

under the letter box lay her key.

I stared at it for a while, picked it up after only four or five attempts, took it

out onto the deck and threw it wildly into the dark receding waters.

‘It was always going to happen. You weren’t right for each other.’

‘Craig, Christ almighty, you sound like my mother.’ We were sitting on a

bench near the top of Parliament Hill, Hampstead Heath, looking out over the
city, submerged beneath the watery sun and drifting showers of a cool January
afternoon. Craig had walked here. I’d taken the tube.

I was probably still too hungover/drunk to drive, but I couldn’t have even if

I’d wanted to, at least not in the Landy; somebody had slashed a couple of its
tyres and smashed both headlights last night. I’d reported it to the police and
they  said,  Yes,  they  knew;  they’d  been  round  during  the  night  after  the
trembler  alarm  in  the  Landy  noticed  the  list  to  one  side  and  informed  the
Mouth Corp security centre, which in turn had alerted the cops. They’d tried
my door for ten minutes and my phone for half an hour before they gave up
and left me to snore the sleep of the truly drunk. The CCTV tapes would be
studied. Probably kids, that’s all.

Yeah, right, I thought. Just when I’d been hoping that maybe whatever bad

shit had been going on, it wasn’t any more. Oh well.

‘Aye,’ Craig said, in response to my accusation of sounding like my mother.

‘And what do mothers know? Best.’

I shook my head. ‘People always give you this You weren’t right for each

other stuff afterwards.’

‘Course they do; if anybody ever tells anybody before, when it could do

some good, they get accused of being jealous or something, and then when
the relationship does break up, they get accused of causing it. You can’t win.
Best just keep quiet until it’s over.’

‘Did you not like Jo?’
‘I didn’t dislike Jo. I thought she was all right. This wasn’t one of those

occasions where you’re waiting for it to end so you can tell your friend what
you thought of his or her ex. I just meant in theory. Jo was all right, but she
was  nearly  as  daft  as  you,  and  she’s  more  ambitious.  You  need  somebody
who’ll steady you a bit, not a fellow nutter you can fuck.’

‘I don’t think Jo was as crazy as you seem to think she was.’
Craig tipped his head once. ‘Well, she was pretty off the rails at times. I’m

amazed you lasted as long as you did.’

I sighed. ‘Yeah, Kulwinder said he was surprised we’d lasted as long as we

had at the nine-eleven party.’ I watched the slow procession of big jets angling

in around the distant scape of clouds, settling onto the gentle, invisible slope
that would slide them west into Heathrow.

‘She tried to get off with me you know, once,’ Craig said.
I looked at him. ‘You’re kidding.’ Now this could be awkward.
‘Na;  it  was  one  time  she’d  lost  you  or  something;  during  the  summer.

You’d had an argument and you’d stormed off and left your mobile behind
and she assumed you’d come to mine, so she turned up on the doorstep. I
invited the lass in; impolite to do anything else, specially as she was in tears.
Offered her a drink, did the agony aunt thing …’

‘… Agreed what a bastard I was.’
‘Excuse me; I trod the fine line between masculine solidarity and lending a

sympathetic ear to a distressed female.’

‘So one thing led to another,’ I said.
Oh shit, what if he had fucked her? Even if he wasn’t going to admit to it

here, what if he had? Think, Ken. Was I bothered? Well, was I?

Not  particularly.  I  mean,  I  had  no  right  to  be  jealous  or  upset,  not  with

Craig, anyway, given what had happened with Emma, but that sort of logical,
quid-pro-quo  consideration  wasn’t  the  kind  of  argument  that  carried  much
weight with the set of instincts and part-programmed reactions that constitute
the human heart.

‘Well, no, not one thing leading to another,’ Craig said. ‘She just grabbed

me. Out of the blue.’

‘Jesus.’
‘We’d had about a half-bottle each—’
‘Wine?’
‘Yeah, of course wine; I wasn’t feeding the girl whisky.’
‘Sorry.’
‘I’d got up to uncork another—’
‘Oh yeah?’
‘Yes; I was still being polite and supportive. Fuck off with the suspicion

and innuendo, will you?’

‘Sorry, sorry.’
‘Just wrapped herself around me. I turned round - surprised, you know -

and she slapped her mouth over mine and grabbed my balls.’

‘Fucking hell.’ I looked up at the clouds, then back at Craig. ‘You did the

decent thing, though.’

‘No, Kenneth,’ he said, stretching his long legs out. He was wearing grey

trackie  bottoms  under  a  jacket  last  fashionable  ten  years  ago.  ‘The  decent
thing would have been to have shown her how wonderful the act of love can
be when you do it with a real man, but I didn’t do that.’

‘Bet you snogged her for a while, you bastard. She was a good kisser.’
Craig  considered  this.  ‘Hmm.  I’d  been  putting  that  down  to  shock,  but

you’re right.’

‘You didn’t fuck her, did you?’
‘No. I did the self-sacrificing, You’re beautiful and I’m flattered but if we

do we’ll both regret it in the morning thing. God help us, we even agreed it
wouldn’t  be  right  to  betray  you;  it  was  worth  depriving  ourselves  of  some
pleasure for your sake.’

‘Oh, fuck.’
‘Now what?’
‘Just had a terrible thought.’
‘What? Who are you calling?’
‘She went looking for me at Ed’s once.’
‘Wuh-oh.’
‘Yeah.’
Craig made as if to get up off the bench. ‘Want me to … ?’
‘Na; if you’re going to see me humiliated we might as well get it over with

now.’

‘You fucked her, didn’t you?’

‘No, I didn’t!’
‘Look,  Ed,  she  told  me  she’d  gone  to  yours,  once.  She  went  to  Craig’s

once,  too,  and  she  threw  herself  at  him.’  (‘Hey!’  said  Craig.  ‘I  resent  the
implication.’ I ignored him.) ‘You trying to tell me Jo didn’t try it on with
you?’

‘Ah …’
‘Ah? Ah? Is that what you’re fucking giving me? Fucking “Ah”?’
‘Well …’
‘You did fuck her! You shite!’
‘She fuckin jumped me, man! It was practically rape!’
‘Fuck off, Ed.’
‘An  anyway,  she  said  she’d  never  done  it  wif  a  black  guy;  wot  was  I

supposed to do? Deprive her?’

stud bullshit either!’

‘I didn’t bring race into it, man, she did!’
‘Aw, Ed, fuck off; how could you?’
‘I couldn’t help it, man.’
‘Well, fucking try learning, you overgrown adolescent!’
‘Look,  man,  I  am  sorry;  I  felt  terrible  the  next  day  an  it  never  appened

again.’

‘Yeah,  you’d  had  your  fun,  fucked  your  friend’s  girl  and  added  another

notch to your fucking ceiling mirrors; why bother?’

‘Ken, listen; if I could go back in time an make it that it nevvir appened,

believe me I would. I nevvir told you because I didn’t want to hurt you or do
anyfin against you an Jo. I wish it just adn’t appened, I truly do. But it did, an
I’m sorry, man. I really am sorry. I’m asking you to forgive me, right?’

‘Well - just - I’m not -’ I spluttered. ‘Just let me fucking be angry at you a

bit longer!’ I said. ‘You bastard!’ I added, rather ineffectually.

‘Sorry, man.’
And  I  thought,  Yeah.  We’re  all  sorry.  Everybody  is  so  fucking  sorry.  It

should  be  the  fucking  species’  middle  name;  Homo  S.  Sapiens.  Maybe  we
could change it by misdeed poll.

‘… Listen,’ Ed said.
Something cold seemed to land in my guts. Oh, good grief. A ‘listen’ from

Ed; now what?

‘What?’ I said.
‘You got this telly fing tomorrow, aven’t you?’
Oh fuck, he’d heard about Robe after all and worked out that I might want

a gun to take into the studio. ‘Yes,’ I said.

‘Best of luck wif it, all right? Hope it goes well. You give this Nazi geezer

wot-for, yeah?’

‘Yeah,’ I said.
‘You can go back to bein mad at me now if you want, or you can wait till

we meet up next weekend an shout at me then. If we’re still meetin up. We
still meetin up?’

‘I suppose.’
‘I’m sorry, man.’
‘Yeah.’
‘Still bruvvers?’

‘Yeah, I suppose so. Still bruvvaz.’

Craig invited me to supper. I suspected it was a sympathy thing; Nikki was
staying and Emma was coming round and I think what they really wanted was
a quiet evening meal with just the three of them.

What I really wanted was to see Nikki again, just to be sure that we were

okay, and that nothing had changed, at least not for the worse, after the New
Year party, because that kiss - those two kisses - had left me worried. I’d let
her kiss me, and I’d kissed her back, and the more I’d thought about this over
the intervening period, the more ashamed I’d become, and I felt a terrible urge
to tell her that it had changed nothing, and of course it would never happen
again, and that I was sorry, too, for the time in the Land Rover in the rain, on
the day of the crash, when I’d tried - in what now felt like a deeply sad and
desperate way - to persuade her to have lunch with me, and that I’d always,
always be a good friend and a good uncle for her, for the rest of her life …
Though at the same time I also wanted not to have to say anything at all, and
to have everything be just the same as it had always been between us, with no
awkwardness or distance.

The trouble was that Emma would be there, too, and if Craig mentioned

what had happened with Jo - I’d asked him not to say anything to Nikki or
Emma, and especially not to mention Jo and Ed, but still - then it might get
awkward, given  the history I had with Emma. It was a very slim sliver of
history, I kept on telling myself, but it was no less potentially lethal for my
relationship with Craig for that.

I was in danger of losing one girlfriend, two best friends and - tomorrow -

maybe my job, and liberty, all in one insane forty-eight-hour period.

Screw the nut, I thought. Batten down. Supper would have been nice, and I

had such a bad hangover I’d probably not want to drink very much and so it
would actually constitute quite a sensible, measured preparation for the big
day tomorrow, but I decided to say no. Other plans.

‘Ken, hi.’

‘Amy, kid; how are you?’
‘Brilliant. You?’
‘Ah … kinda, you know.’
‘Darling, no, I don’t. What? Is there a problem?’
‘Jo and I are … over.’
‘Oh! I’m sorry to hear that. You seemed so close.’
‘Well,’ I said. Did we? I thought. I wouldn’t have said so, but then maybe

that was just the sort of thing you said when somebody told you something
like this. ‘Yeah,’ I said. ‘It’s … it’s, ah, very finished with. Kind of saw it
coming, but … hit me a little harder than I’d expected, must confess.’

‘Gosh. You poor thing.’
‘Yeah. Nearly two years.’
‘Really.’
‘Yeah. Feels like longer.’
‘Right.’
‘Felt quite a lot for her, I have to say.’
‘Well, of course.’
‘… All gone now.’
‘Oh dear.’
‘… Anyway.’
‘Hmm. Are you going to be all right?’
‘Amy … I’ll live.’
‘Oh, dear; you sound so sad!’
‘Ah, I’ll get over it. One day.’
‘Oh! Is there anything I can do?’
‘Well, I suppose …You could let me take you out to dinner. Tonight, even.

How does that sound?’

‘That sounds like a totally bloody marvellous idea, Ken. I was at a bit of a

loose end myself, actually.’

I looked at the mobile, thinking, Well, you might have got on-message a bit

earlier there, woman.

‘Amy,  for  goodness’  sake.  There  are  two  lies  here:  one  is  that  private
management is automatically better than public—’

‘But it is! Have you ever dealt with a local authority, Ken? Those useless

bloody people wouldn’t last two minutes in the real world!’

‘Neither did Railtrack once the government subsidy was whipped away.’
‘Ha! I bet they got their people from local government.’
‘Oh, don’t be … look. The other great lie is that private can be cheaper; it

brings  in  extra  money.  But  that’s  bullshit!  Just  Treasury  accounting  rules.
Infrastructure costs no matter who builds it. You have to invest in it, so invest
as cheaply as possible; pay the least you can in interest payments. And that’s
even  before  you  factor  in  the  profits  a  private  investor  expects,  too;  that

comes on top. So, ask yourself: who or what can borrow money cheaper than
any commercial concern? Answer: the state.’

‘I think you’ll find that depends on which state, actually, Ken.’
‘Okay, the British state can borrow money cheaper, for a smaller interest

rate, than any commercial concern.’

‘Yes, because it doesn’t go wasting it on things the private sector can do

better.’

‘Amy, that’s ridiculous!’
‘No, it isn’t. And what about risk?’
‘What risk? If it all goes wrong the poor bloody taxpayer ends up paying.’
‘There’s always a risk, Ken,’ Amy said, smiling thinly at me. ‘Life is full of

risk.’

I  sat  back  in  my  seat.  We  were  in  La  Eateria,  an  achingly  trendy  new

restaurant  in  Islington.  Wooden  garden  furniture  for  tables  and  chairs,  and
walls  lined  with  that  perforated  orange  plastic  stuff  builders  use  to  create
instant  fences.  Menu  pretentious,  food  barely  adequate,  staff  surly.  I  was
amazed it wasn’t busier. Still, it was a Sunday night.

Amy looked great, with her fine, now straight blond hair glowing in the

light of what looked like car headlights dangling from the ceiling. She was
dressed in black tights and skirt, and a clingy black long-sleeved top with a
gold chain lying on the tanned skin revealed by a square, low neck.

So she looked superb and she’d dressed up - if she’d appeared in paint-

speckled  jeans  and  an  unironed  T-shirt  I’d  have  known  there  was  no  way
anything was going to happen - and yet, suddenly, for the first time in all the
times we’d met to eat, she’d turned into Little Miss Capitalist Lobby Girl.

Until  now  all  our  lunch  and  dinner  dates-that-were-not-really-dates  had

consisted  of  eating,  drinking  and  flirting.  Dammit;  they’d  been  great  fun!
Certainly no arguments about fucking PFI and PPPs. I mean, I knew that the
lobbying firm she worked for was involved in promoting that sort of crap, but,
Jeez,  she’d  never  started  pushing  it  at  me.  I’d  made  one  off-hand  remark
about  Railtrack  and  the  forthcoming  attractions  of  Postrack  and  Tubetrack,
and she’d jumped down my throat feet first.

‘You know what really gets me?’ I said, putting my fork down. I hadn’t

eaten much of my main course. The chef here seemed obsessed with height
and  apparently  chose  his  ingredients  and  cooking  methods  to  ensure  the
maximum altitude and stability of the towers of material the kitchen created,
with  edibility  and  taste  coming  way  down  the  list  of  priorities.  Probably
somewhere between the grid of soggy rosti and the layer of glue-like mustard
mash acting as a hold-fast.

of her lamb and figs towards her mouth, ‘but I have the awful feeling you’re
just dying to tell me.’

inadvertent trip to the East End, the threatening phone call and the slashed
tyres  on  the  Landy  yet.  I’d  told  Craig,  Ed  and  Jo,  and  sworn  them  all  to
secrecy, but with Amy I’d been holding it in reserve for later in the evening.
Now I was starting to think there was no point.

‘Yes,’  I  said.  ‘What  I  want  to  know  is,  why  put  what  is  basically  greed

above the urge to serve? What’s wrong with wanting to help people? Isn’t that
what politicians say they want to do? They say they just want to serve society,
they tell us that’s why they became politicians in the first fucking place, so
why don’t they side with the nurses and the teachers and the fire brigade and
the police and all the other people who really do serve?’

‘They do side with the police, Kenneth.’
‘Oh, so they do. But what about everybody else? So are they lying about

wanting  to  serve,  and  just  want  power,  or  have  they  just  not  made  the
connection yet?’

Amy sat back too, breathing deeply and flexing  her  shoulders. I  tried to

keep eye contact and appreciate her breasts by peripheral vision only, but it
was almost an insult to them. On the other hand, maybe I should make the
most of the view, because it looked like what I was seeing now was all I was
ever going to see. Amy shook her head and said, ‘You really are quite naïve,
aren’t you, Ken?’

‘Am I?’
‘Yes.  You  seem  so  clued-up  and  clever  but  really  you  just  scratch  the

surface of everything, don’t you?’

‘If you say so, Amy.’
She looked at me for a bit. Her eyes were greeny-blue and her irises had

that  over-defined  look  you  get  with  contacts  sometimes.  She  was  still
breathing  fairly  deeply  and  I  just  let  my  gaze  fall  to  her  chest,  which  was
pleasant in a regretful sort of way. ‘You’re just Sir Jamie’s little performing
monkey, but you think you’re some sort of cool radical type, isn’t that right,
Ken?’

I thought about this. ‘On a good day,’ I conceded. ‘With a following.’
‘I suppose you think you’re Mouth Corp’s conscience or something, don’t

you?’

‘Oh, no. Jester, maybe; bladder, bit of string, that sort of thing, you know.’
Amy sat forward. ‘Think about this, Ken,’ she said. I sat forward too, eager

to be given something to think about. ‘You let Sir Jamie get away with more,’
Amy told me. ‘By employing you and allowing you to do your little rants and
letting you criticise bits of the Mouth  Corp  empire and the people and the
organisations it gets into bed with, Sir Jamie can give the impression of being
even-handed and fair and able to tolerate criticism. What’s actually going on
is that the bad corporate stuff, which Mouth Corp does as much as anybody,
gets a lot less publicity than it deserves, thanks to you.’ She sat back. So did I.
But  she  wasn’t  finished.  ‘You  cost  the  radio  station  the  occasional  ad
placement  and  Mouth  Corp  loses  the  odd  contract,  but  Sir  Jamie  gets  his
money’s  worth  out  of  you,  Ken,  don’t  think  he  doesn’t.  You’re  part  of  the
system, too. You help make it work. We all do. It’s just that some of us know
it and some of us don’t.’

She dabbed at the corner of her mouth with her napkin.
I  looked  at  her  for  a  moment.  Her  eyes  were  bright.  She  was  smiling.  I

thought about Ceel and wondered suddenly what the hell I was doing here.
‘So,’ I said, ‘do I get to fuck you or not?’

She laughed and leaned forward again, which was a good thing in itself.

Voice lower this time. ‘Have you got any drugs, Ken? Any E? Or Charlie?’

It actually occurred to me to lie and say no. Can you believe that? ‘Not on

me.’

‘Get some.’
‘Okay.’

So we did, but it wasn’t very good. The drugs or the sex.

Eight

DENIAL

Maybe Jo’s right; I hate so many things. I’m a media person and there’s so
much media stuff I just despise. From comics who make fun of their audience
- ah, the masochism of paying good money to be insulted in public - to crap
like Big Brother; hours and hours of boring, self-obsessed dimwits trying to
be zany while performing pointless, stupid tasks that would be an insult to
anyone with half a brain. Ali G, Dennis Pennis, Mrs Merton, Trigger Happy
TV; shows that make me squirm with embarrassment and, sometimes, feel the
beginnings  of  sympathy  even  for  people  who  deserve  nothing  but  my
unalloyed  hatred.  God,  I  hated  so  much  TV  these  days,  and  the  terrifying
thing was, it was this stuff that was popular, I who was out of step.

Numty  TV,  we  called  it  on  the  show  (part  of  our  long-term  and  deeply

insidious  campaign  to  bring  more  Scottish  words  into  day-to-day  English
usage). The only aspect of Numty TV I liked was the not-obviously-set-up
entries on You’ve Been Framed, but part of me was ashamed of that, because I
couldn’t help feeling there was an edge of cruelty watching this stuff; you see
a clip begin with some bozo on rollerblades wobbling towards the camcorder
at  high  speed,  or  perched  precariously  on  a  still  shiny  mountain  bike  and
tearing down a rutted path between the trees, or almost anything to do with jet
skis, high winds, people on a rope swing over a muddy puddle, or weddings
or wedding reception dances, and you could feel yourself thinking, Oh goody;
this’ll be a laugh. It was fun watching people making fools of themselves, but
the question is, should it be?

supposed.

Here was a Victorian warehouse in Clerkenwell converted into a TV studio

and  the  place  where  Winsome  Productions  would  be  making  their  new,  if
much-delayed  and  re-scheduled,  late-evening  news  magazine  and  analysis
show Breaking News. Most of it would be live but the bit I’d be doing was
being recorded. Sensibly. After I’d had my mad, bad idea for what to do here,
I’d  felt  really  deflated  when  I’d  learned  that  the  piece  with  the  Holocaust
denier  would  be  taped  rather  than  shown  live;  I’d  wanted  the  buzz  of  it
happening for real (but then I also started to feel relieved, thinking, Well, no
point in doing it at all, then … before I caught myself, and thought, Oh yes
there is; no chickening out).

Though I might still chicken out. There was a heavy metallic lump in the

right  pocket  of  my  jacket  reminding  me  that  I  had  something  to  do  here,
something  nobody  was  expecting,  but  I  knew  that  when  it  came  to  the
moment, I might still ignore it, play along, do what everybody expected me to
do, and do nothing more than shoot my mouth off.

It was late afternoon. I felt over-briefed. Phil had gone through the obvious

stuff with me, and so had yet another young, attractive, breathless, awfully
well-spoken researcher.

Our presenter would be Cavan Lutton-James, a slim, darkly handsome and

energetic guy with a quick, clipped but clear delivery and a natty interview
style, which could veer from emollient to biting in the turn of a phrase. He
was  Irish,  so  I’d  already  stockpiled  one  or  two  remarks  about  Ireland’s
inglorious part in the great war against Fascism, to keep in reserve just in case
any misguided ideas about balance caused him to start siding with the bad
guy. A bad guy I hadn’t seen yet; they were keeping us apart.

The  only  person  I’d  met  in  the  Green  Room  -  apart  from  a  couple  of

attractive but breathlessly awfully production assistants, at least one of whom
was  called  Ravenna  -  was  a  young  comedian  called  Preston  Wynne,  who
came across as a bit of a fan boy and was supposed to record a topical, robust,
cutting-edge,  irreverent,  yada-yada  piece  on  something  or  other,  after  we’d
done the big Holocaust denial discussion/confrontation. He was still working
on his script while he sat in the Green Room, clattering quietly on his iBook,
staring  at  a  plate  of  gourmet  sandwiches  and  drinking  too  much  coffee.  I
almost felt like telling him to let the piece run longer than he’d been told, and
even be prepared to pad a little, because the bit I was going to be on might not
have quite the run-time the producer was expecting, but of course I didn’t.

I didn’t even have a drink in the Green Room. I really wanted one, but I

kept myself sober because I wanted to be sharp and fully alert for what was

going to happen.

Phil and I had spent a sober lunch in the corner of the Black Pig, another basic
Soho boozer similar to the Bough. Phil was obviously worried I was going to
make  a  mess  of  things,  lose  my  rag,  freeze,  rant  incoherently  and  start
foaming at the mouth; whatever. He’d really wanted to come along with me
but I’d told him weeks ago he wasn’t going to. Partly this was for the stated
reason, that he wasn’t my dad and I didn’t need my hand held, but partly also
it was because he might, a) guess just from my look or behaviour closer to the
event that I was going to get up to something seriously off-piste and so give
the game away, and b) catch a little less flak from our mutual bosses after I’d
done what I intended to do. If I had the guts to actually do it.

‘Umm … what else. Oh, yeah, and obviously, the whole thing about the

Second World War not happening, too; that’s obviously a brilliant line to take.
It’s so basically ludicrous, yet it’s not intrinsically any more so than claiming
the Holocaust didn’t happen.’

‘I know, Phil,’ I sighed. ‘We have kind of been through this.’
‘I know, I know, but you’ve got to get this rehearsed.’
‘No, I don’t. Actually rehearsed is the last thing I want it to be.’
‘Too risky. What if you make a mess of it?’
‘Look, I don’t make a mess of it in front of a million radio listeners five

days a week, why should I make a mess of it in front of a late-night Channel
Four audience of probably fewer people … when it’s taped, for fuck’s sake?’

‘Oh, yeah, and you won’t swear, will you?’
‘Phil, have I ever fucking sworn on air?’
Phil  looked  like  a  man  with  severe  diarrhoea  sitting  in  a  Land  Rover

heading quickly down a bumpy jungle path towards extremely distant toilets.
‘Well,  no,’  he  admitted,  ‘but  I  still  don’t  know  how  you  do  it.  I  mean,  it
doesn’t seem possible you’ve managed to avoid it all these years.’

‘Well, I have.’
‘What, even on Inverclyde Sound?’
‘StrathClyde Sound; the radio station where the creative’s typist missed the

space bar rather than accidentally hit the exclamation mark key, and no, not
even there. It’s because even though it might not sound like it, I do have a
pretty accurate idea exactly what I’m going to say the instant before I say it, I
never forget the context - am I in the pub or the studio? - and there’s just
sufficient time for my on-board censor to step in and make the relevant - if
not always perfectly elegant or sometimes even grammatical - amendments.’

‘Right. Well.’
‘Anyway, it’s late-night Channel Four, for Christ’s sake, not Blue Peter. If

they can say “fuck” on Sex and the City  I  don’t  see  why  I  can’t.  Christ,  I
heard a “cunt” on Larry Sanders once.’

Phil’s eyes went wide. ‘Oh, no, I really don’t think you should—’
‘Look,  will  you  just  calm  down  a  bit?’  I  told  him.  ‘I’m  not  going  on

intending to swear, okay?’

He said, ‘Okay,’ but he still looked worried.
Of course, what I wanted to add was, Dammit, man, I won’t have time to

swear; it’ll probably all be over in about five seconds and I really wouldn’t
worry your ugly big head about what I’m going to say.

Again, though, I didn’t.

I was plumbed in. I’d half expected it would be radio mikes (always attached
to you with a warning not to visit the loo with them switched on, in case you
want to cause the sound engineers, ooh, seconds of hilarity), but they were
using hard wire instead. What appeared to be a clone of one of the attractive
but awfully assistants slipped the wire beneath my jacket, under the button of
my shirt just above the waistband of my trousers and then - once I’d worked it
upwards - attached it between the top two buttons of my shirt. I was going for
the relaxed, casual, open-necked look. Besides, they take your tie off you in
the nick, along with your belt and laces.

The awfully assistant smiled as we were negotiating the cool black wire up

between my chest and the fabric of the shirt, and I smiled back, but while
we’d been doing this her bare arm had swung against my jacket and made the
pocket clunk off the seat and I was secretly terrified she was going to see the
sweat prickling up underneath my make-up and ask, ‘Hey, what’s that hard,
heavy, metallic thing in your jacket pocket?’

Paranoia. The terrible thing about paranoia is you always have the sneaking

suspicion that the moment it passes is when you’ll be at your most vulnerable.

They tested for sound and then the black microphone wire was taped to the

arm of the plastic and chrome chair I was sitting in, below desk level and
therefore out of sight for the cameras that would be trained on me. On the
black-painted floor, the mike cable snaked away, almost invisible save for the
lengths of silver gaffer tape securing it there.

I  looked  about  the  rest  of  the  studio.  Cavan  would  be  in  between  us,  a

couple of metres away from me round the giant comma-shaped wooden desk;
his seat was bigger and higher-backed than mine or the bad guy’s, which was
another two metres past Cavan’s, round the curve. Lots of bright overhead

lights kept the place very warm.

Somebody sat in the chair across the desk from mine and for a moment I

wondered what was going on; it was one of the awfully assistants, not the
scumbag Holocaust denier I was expecting. Then another assistant plonked
herself in Cavan’s seat in the middle and I realised they were just sitting in for
the real people while they got the cameras sorted out.

In  front  of  Cavan’s  position  was  a  big  camera  with,  on  the  front,  the

downward-angled hood and attached upward-facing monitor of an autocue; a
little bearded guy looked almost lost behind the camera, minutely adjusting its
position  according  to  instructions  through  his  headphones.  There  were  two
surprisingly small, unmanned cameras on heavy tripods, one for me and one
for the bad guy, plus an umbilicalled handheld manned by a plump guy who
at this point was muttering into his own head-mike as he crouched back and
forth, rehearsing where he could go within the curve in front of the big desk
without getting in shot from the other cameras.

Everybody was listening on their headphones and earpieces to the people in

the  production  suite,  and  for  a  while  it  was  actually  very  peaceful,  sitting
there  in  what  was  more  or  less  silence,  feeling  pleasantly,  politely  ignored
while everything else was sorted out. Somebody rolled a big monitor screen
on a trolley to a position a couple of metres behind the cameras and turned it
on;  it  showed  a  blue  screen  with  a  big  white  clock  face  on  it  and  the
programme  ID.  It  sat,  static,  unchanging,  in  the  midst  of  a  semi-hush
punctuated with murmurs.

I found myself thinking about Ceel. I remembered the feel of her body, the

precise touch of her fingers, the satiny sensation of running my hand across
her  back,  the  deep,  musky  smell  of  her  hair,  the  taste  of  her  lips  after  a
mouthful of champagne, the taste of her sweat from the hollow formed by her
collar bone, and most of all the sound of her voice; that measured softness
with the faint ghost of accent, a calmly sinuous stream of quiet amusement
breaking into sudden rapids when she laughed.

The monitor flickered, the blue and white display replaced with a view of

the assistant sitting in Cavan’s chair. Then the clock and ident display flicked
on again.

I was missing her. It had been a month now since I’d seen her, and a long

month at that. I supposed time seemed to stretch over the Xmas/New Year
holidays for everybody, but I felt I’d been particularly busy, which made the
interval seem longer. I’d spent an unhealthy amount of time over the holidays
checking that there had been no crashes of Air France flights bound for or
coming  back  from  Martinique,  or  sudden  unseasonal  hurricanes  or  fresh
volcanic eruptions in the Eastern Caribbean.

wasn’t here. There was no logic to this feeling whatsoever, and it wasn’t as
though Ceel and I spent very much time in each other’s company when she
was around - we saw each other for about half a day once a fortnight, so she
shouldn’t really have felt like any great influence on my life - but nevertheless
with her away I felt adrift and disconnected, my life tumbling chaotically.

There wasn’t even the promise, or at least the possibility, that we might

meet up in a day or two, steadying me from a distance.

Coping with my break-up with Jo, with the ramifications of that touching

Ed and Craig, with everything that had happened at the New Year party, with
this continuing campaign of damage and threat some bastard was mounting
against me - not to mention the chilly contemplation of what I was thinking of
doing here - left me feeling dangerously exposed and at risk.

It was like trying to control a skid on a bike on a rainy street; that same

feeling  of  cold,  gut-clenching  panic  while  wrestling  desperately  with
something powerful but suddenly wild and out of control. I’d had a few skids
like that in my courier days. I’d always managed to stay upright and I was
proud of that, but I’d never kidded myself that on each occasion it had been
anything other than luck, mostly, that had kept me out of the gutter or from
under the wheels of a bus. At least those incidents were over in seconds; this
was  going  on  for  weeks,  months.  Everything  I  might  have  hung  onto  for
support  seemed  compromised.  I  needed  Ceel.  I  needed  to  access  her
calmness, secure myself to that perverse rationality of hers.

I looked at the seat straight across from me, where the bad guy would be

sitting. I glanced at my watch. I hated the way they kept you hanging around
for TV.

I  just  wasn’t  cut  out  for  this  medium.  Paul,  my  agent,  despaired  of  me

because I’d been offered TV stuff in the past plenty of times but the proposals
always read like shit and I’d turned them down. They all seemed gimmicky,
strained and overly elaborated, but that was almost not the point. On radio,
you  just  go  in  and  do  it.  You  can  talk  about  stuff  in  the  pub  or  the  office
beforehand, effectively rehearsing bits, and you can script little exchanges and
sketches,  and  there’re  always  trailers  and  pre-recorded  stuff  to  work
painstakingly over until it’s note perfect … but most of it, the best of it, I
think, is just stuff that happens, words that come out of your mouth almost as
you think (allowing for the on-board censor, which I was not bullshitting Phil
about).

On radio, that fresh stuff is the norm. On TV it’s very much the exception,

and most of it’s recorded, re-heated. So you sit there and make some really
funny or cutting point and then discover there was a glitch on a camera feed,

or somebody backed into a bit of the set and knocked it over, and they have to
start again, and you have to either try to say something about the same thing,
which is totally different but just as witty, or say the same again and pretend
it’s spontaneous. I hated that shit. Come to think of it, some of that had been
the gist of Phil’s little laid-back rant in the Capital Live! canteen a month or
so earlier. I seemed to have appropriated it. Oh well, that wouldn’t be the first
time.

My  mouth  was  dry.  There  was  a  very  small  plastic  cup  of  still  water  in

front of me, which I drained. I looked around, holding it out, and one of the
awfully assistants came and topped it up with Evian. I wanted to sink the lot
right  there,  but  I  put  it  back  on  the  desk.  I  suspected  they’d  take  it  away
before we started recording.

‘Ken?’ a very smooth Irish voice said from behind me. ‘Nice to - ah, now,

no; don’t you get up. Cavan. Good to meet you.’

I couldn’t have got up anyway, not with the mike wire securing me to the

chair. I shook hands from a seated position. ‘Cavan; hi.’ I smoothed down the
flap over my right jacket pocket, making sure he couldn’t see into it.

Cavan  perched  one  fawn,  Armani-clad  buttock  on  the  desk  between  my

seat and his. He looked tanned underneath the make-up and there was a hint
of  shadow  where  his  beard  would  have  been  that  probably  no  amount  of
shaving would remove. His blue eyes were deep set, brows dark and full and
shaped. A sharp ledge of black hair sat over his forehead. ‘It’s very good of
you to come in.’

‘My  pleasure,  Cavan.’  A  translucent  wire  coiled  up  from  inside  the  rear

collar of his jacket and ended in a discreet flesh-coloured earphone in his right
ear. Where his soft beige jacket fell open against his hip, I could see the radio
transmitter clipped to his belt. No hard-wiring for Cavan.

‘You’ve been booked in for a while, Ken, is that right?’
‘For  what  has  on  occasion  felt  like  a  significant  part  of  my  life,  Cavan,

yes.’

He laughed soundlessly. ‘Yes, well, sorry about that.’ He sighed and looked

off into the shadows. ‘We’ve all been kept hanging around while Winsome
have been getting themselves sorted out.’

‘I’m sure it’s been a lot worse for you than it was for me.’
‘Ah,  yes.  It’s  been  a  frustrating  old  time  to  have  a  current  affairs  show

waiting in the wings while all this history’s been happening, but hopefully
we’ll be making up for - ah. Excuse me, will you?’

‘Sure.’
Lawson Brierley. That was the name of the man who walked out of the

darkness,  blinking  in  the  light.  My  age.  Green  cords,  fogey  jacket,  yellow
waistcoat, farm manager’s shirt and a cravat. I almost smiled. Tall, medium-
heavy build, verging on beefy; hair like grey sand. Not a bad-looking face in a
bland sort of way, except his nose was a little bulbous and he had the peering,
scrunched look of a vain man on a date trying to do without his glasses. Ex-
Federation  of  Conservative  Students  (one  of  the  Hang  Nelson  Mandela
brigade; later thrown out for being too right-wing), ex-National Front (quit
when they moved too far to the left), and ex a few other extreme-right groups
and parties. Claimed to be a libertarian racist now. I knew one or two people
who’d come to libertarianism from the left, and people like Lawson Brierley
had them spitting blood.

Monetarist  fundamentalist  might  be  a  more  accurate  description  of  his

views,  with  the  racist  bit  never  very  far  away.  According  to  Lawson,
evolution was the ultimate free market in which the white races were proving
their innate superiority through money, science and arms, threatened only by
the  perfidious  guile  of  the  Jews  and  the  hordes  of  dark  and  dirty
Untermenschen breeding like flies thanks to the misguided beneficence of the
West.

We’d got all this off the man’s own website; he ran - he basically was -

something called the Freedom Research Institute.

Lawson genuinely didn’t approve of democracy. He believed in getting rid

of the state, and - in reply to the point that doing so would leave companies,
corporations,  multi-nationals  (or  whatever  you  would  call  multi-nationals
when there were no more nations) in complete control of the world - he would
have said, Yes, so? These corporations would be owned by shareholders, and
money was the fairest way to exercise power, because as a rule stupid people
would  have  less  of  it,  and  therefore  less  influence,  than  more  intelligent
people,  and  it  was  the  more  intelligent  and  successful  people  you  wanted
controlling things, not the great unwashed.

I’d decided my considered reply to all this would have been something on

the lines of, Fuck the fucking shareholders, you ghastly fascist cunt.

I watched him sit down and get miked up. He was being wired in, taped to

the seat like I’d been. Good. I couldn’t make out what he was saying to the
production assistant and the sound engineer as they helped him get settled in.
He didn’t look over at me. Cavan had spoken a few words to him and then
nodded and gone to sit in his own big seat in the middle, getting its position
just so, clearing his throat a few times, patting his tie down and running a
hand over the air above his hair.

My heart was beating hard, now. Somebody came to take away the little

cup  of  water,  but  I  had  them  wait  a  moment  while  I  drained  it,  my  hand

trembling. My bladder seemed to think I needed to pee but I knew I didn’t
really. It felt like I was listing to the right with the weight in my jacket pocket.
To the right; how very, very inappropriate, I thought.

The  monitor  behind  the  cameras  flicked  to  the  head-on  waist-up  shot  of

Cavan coming from the big camera with the autocue.

The floor manager announced we were doing a taped rehearsal of the intro.

Cavan cleared his throat a few more times.

‘Okay; quiet in the studio,’ the floor manager said, then, ‘Turning over.’

She did the ‘Five, four, three …’ thing, with the two and the one shown only
on her fingers.

Cavan  took  a  breath  and  said,  ‘The  vexed  issue  of  race,  now,  and  the

provenance - or not - of the Holocaust, in the first of a series of Breaking
News  special  features  pitching  two  people  with  profoundly  different  views
against  each  other.  I’m  joined  tonight  by  Lawson  Brierley,  a  self-labelled
libertarian  racist  from  the  Free  Research  Institute,  and  Ken  Nott,  from
London’s Capital Live!, doyen of the so-called … Sorry.’

‘No problem,’ the floor manager said. She was a tall gangly girl with close-

cut  brown  hair;  she  wore  big  headphones  and  held  a  clipboard  and  a
stopwatch. She listened to her phones again. ‘Okay,’ she said. ‘You all right,
Cavan?’

Cavan was squinting towards the camera ahead of him, shading his eyes

from the overhead lights. ‘Ah … Could you just move the autocue up a tiny
little bit?’ he asked.

The man with the big camera adjusted it fractionally.
Was  I  really  a  doyen?  I  wondered.  That  meant  ‘old’,  didn’t  it?  More

‘senior’ rather than ‘ancient’, if I recalled the dictionary definition correctly,
but still. I was sweating badly now. They’d probably notice and have to stop
and bring one of the make-up girls in to touch up my face. I felt a pain in my
guts and wondered if I was giving myself an ulcer.

Cavan nodded. ‘Fine now.’ He cleared his throat again.
‘Okay,’ said the floor manager. ‘Everybody okay?’ She looked around at us.

Everybody seemed to be okay. I wasn’t going to say anything about sweating.
Lawson  Brierley  sat,  blinking,  looking  from  Cavan  to  the  monitor,  still
avoiding my gaze. The little bearded guy with the big camera adjusted it back
to  where  it  had  been  before,  but  Cavan  didn’t  notice.  ‘We’re  going  again,
quiet in the studio. Turning over,’ said the floor manager. ‘And: Five, four,
three …’

‘The  vexed  issue  of  race,  now,  and  the  provenance  -  or  not  -  of  the

Holocaust, in the first of a series of Breaking News special features pitching

two  people  with  profoundly  different  views  against  each  other.  I’m  joined
tonight by Lawson Brierley, a self-labelled libertarian racist from the Freedom
Research Institute, and Ken Nott, from London’s Capital Live!, doyen of the
so-called  Shock  Jocks  and  -  as  he’s  described  himself  -  unrepentant  post-
lefty.’ Cavan raised his eyebrows for effect. ‘First, though, this report by Mara
Engless, on the undeniable existence of deniers.’

I looked over to Lawson Brierley. He was smiling at Cavan.
‘Good,’ the floor manager said, nodding. ‘Good. Perfect, Cavan.’ (Cavan

nodded gravely.) ‘Okay, we’re going for—’

‘How long’s the video bit?’ Cavan asked.
The floor manager looked away for a moment, then said, ‘Three twenty,

Cavan.’

‘Right,  right.  And  we’re  just  going  straight  into  the  interviews,  the  ah,

discussion bit, now, right?’

‘That’s right, Cavan.’
‘Fine.  Fine.’  Cavan  cleared  his  throat  a  few  more  times.  I  found  myself

wanting to clear my own throat, too, as though in sympathy.

‘Everybody ready to go?’
It looked like we were all ready to go.
‘Okay. Quiet in the studio.’
I put my hand in my pocket.
‘Turning over.’
In my pocket, the plastic coating the metal felt cold and slick in my right

hand.

‘And: Five, four, three …’
I leaned forward slightly, to hide my hand coming out of my pocket.
Two.
My other hand was at my belly, holding, steadying.
One.
Click.
Cavan took a breath and turned to me. ‘Ken Nott, if I can turn to you first.

You’re on record as—’

I’d snipped the mike cable with the pliers.
I  had  tried  to  think  all  this  through,  weeks  and  weeks  earlier,  and  I’d

guessed they might wire us up; that was why I’d brought the pliers in my
jacket pocket.

But that wasn’t the clever bit.
I let the pliers fall as I kicked the seat back and jumped up on the big desk.

I’d have settled for three seats in an arc, but the desk was better; I’d reckoned
as long as I didn’t take too long getting myself up there it would provide a
highway. So far, so good; seat falling backwards out of the way and a clean
leap up onto the wooden surface.

Though that wasn’t the clever bit either.
Cavan had time to shut his mouth and jerk back. Lawson Brierley’s eyes

were  going  wide.  I  ran  at  him  across  the  desk.  I’d  worn  a  pair  of  black
trainers, for purchase, so I wouldn’t slip, just for this.

That, too, was not the clever bit.
Lawson  had  his  hands  on  the  desk  edge,  tensing  to  push  himself

backwards. Cavan was falling off his seat as I passed him. From the corner of
my other eye I thought I saw the big camera and the guy with the handheld
both tracking me. From the shadows behind Cavan, somebody threw themself
forward and grabbed at my feet, but missed. I threw myself down, too, my left
hand out to grab Brierley’s cravat if I could, my right hand coming back in a
fist.

Lawson was moving backwards but he hadn’t started pushing away in time,

plus the mike wire would be slowing him down. I hit the desk on my belly
and slid; my left hand missed his cravat, catching him by the padding in the
left  shoulder  of  his  hacking  jacket  instead,  but  my  right  fist  smacked
satisfactorily - and painfully, for my fingers - into his left cheek, just below
the eye.

My momentum, and his push, carried us both back over his seat, falling in a

flailing tangle to the floor behind, where I landed another couple of lighter
blows and he managed to thump me once on the side of the ribs and once on
the back of the head with weak, painless punches before we were pulled apart
by security guards and production people.

That, obviously, wasn’t the clever bit either.
Brierley  was  ushered  away  shouting  about  communist  violence  and

intimidation, surrounded by headphoned staff, while I was held, the backs of
my thighs against the desk, by two uniformed security guards. I was smiling
at Lawson, and not struggling at all. I was highly gratified to see that Lawson
already looked like he was developing what we used to call, back where I
came from, a keeker; a nice black eye. A door closed softly in the darkness
and Brierley’s shouts were silenced.

‘It’s okay, guys,’ I told the security guards. ‘Promise I won’t run after him.’
They kept holding me, but their grip might have relaxed a little. I looked

around. Cavan seemed to have disappeared as well. I grinned at each of the
two security guards as the floor manager came over. She looked professional
and  unruffled.  ‘Ken;  Mr  Nott?  Would  you  like  to  go  back  to  the  Green
Room?’

‘Fine,’ I said. ‘Though I’ll want my pliers back, or a receipt.’ I smiled. ‘I’ll

pay for a new mike cable.’

Still not the clever bit.

‘Ken!’ Cavan came into the Green Room. The two guards were in there with
me, and two of the awfullies. I was watching News 24 on the room’s TV and
relaxing with a Scotch and soda. Not something I’d normally countenance,
but, hey, it was only a blend, and besides, I felt a certain refreshing desire to
get drunk quickly.

‘Cavan!’ I said.
He  looked  a  little  flushed.  There  was  a  smile  on  his  face  that  looked

unhappy to be there. ‘Well, that was a bit of a surprise there, Ken. What was
that all about?’

‘What was what?’ I asked.
Cavan sat on the edge of the table with all the sandwiches and drink. ‘Bit of

a rush to the head there, Ken?’

‘Cavan,’ I said. ‘I have no idea what you’re talking about.’
The  door  opened  again  and  the  exec  producer  came  in;  a  small,  bald,

harassed, sullen-looking guy I’d met briefly earlier whose name I’d forgotten
the instant I’d been told it. ‘Ken,’ he said throatily, ‘Ken; what, what, what
was that … ? I mean we just can’t allow, I mean, that was just, that was really
just, I mean, what, what on earth—?’

‘Cavan, old son,’ I said.
‘… I mean, I mean …’
‘What?’
‘… You can’t, just can’t …’
‘Are you calling the police?’
‘… no respect, professionalism …’
‘Ah, the police?’
‘… ashamed of yourself, quite, I mean, I don’t …’
‘Yes; are you calling the police?’
‘… in my entire career …’
‘Eh? Ah, now …’

‘… disgrace, just a disgrace …’
‘Have you called the police? Do you intend to call the police?’
‘… what you could be thinking of …’
‘I’ve  no  idea,  Ken.  Your  man  here  might  know.  Mike;  we  calling  the

police?’

‘What? I … Ah … I … I don’t know? Should we?’
Mike looked at Cavan, who shrugged. He looked at me.
‘Guys,’ I laughed. ‘I can’t tell you!’ I returned my attention to the telly and

said,  ‘I  think  you  should  find  out  whether  the  feds  are  to  be  involved.
Because, otherwise, I’m about to leave.’

‘Ah … leave?’ said Mike the exec producer.
‘Mm-hmm,’ I said, sipping my drink and watching shots of Camp X-Ray.
‘But, well … we thought we could, maybe, still do the discussion. I mean,

if you would agree …’

Cavan crossed his arms and appeared innocently bemused.
I was looking at the two of them, shaking my head. ‘Listen, guys, I have no

fucking  intention  of  even  beginning  to  take  that  nasty  little  right-wing
shithead’s diseased ideas seriously, to debate them, for fuck’s sake.’ I looked
back at the TV. ‘Never did,’ I muttered. I looked back at the producer. He was
standing with his mouth open. I frowned. ‘You did get it all on tape, didn’t
you?’

‘Yes. Of course we did.’
‘Good,’ I said. ‘Very good.’ I watched the TV a moment longer. ‘So,’ I said

to him, when he still hadn’t gone, ‘if you could just find out if the boys in
blue are going to be involved or not. Okay? Thanks.’ I nodded at the door and
then went back to watching the guys in orange shuffling between the cages in
Guantanamo.

He shook his head at me, and left. I smiled at the two attractive awfullies,

who grinned back nervously.

Cavan chuckled and got up to leave. ‘Well,’ he said, ‘if I’m not mistaken,

Ken,  you’ve  totally  fucked  us.’  He  opened  the  door.  ‘But  it  was  elegantly
done.’ He nodded as he left. ‘Look after yourself.’

I just smiled at him.
Actually, at that point I’d quite happily have settled for whacking a fascist

and getting away with it, but - in theory, according to the mad, bad plan at
least - what had to happen next was that somebody did take the matter further,
and the cops did become involved, and I was formally charged with assault.

Because  then  -  despite  all  the  witnesses,  despite  the  cameras  and  the

videotape and the thing being replayable in slow motion from two or three
different  angles,  and  certainly  despite  what  I  hoped  would  develop  into  a
splendid black eye for Lawson Brierley - I had every intention, in front of the
police, in front of the lawyers, in front of a judge and in front of a jury if it
came to that, of denying it had ever happened.

And that was the fucking clever bit.

Nine

BIG GUNS

‘I knew you were up to something.’

‘Fuck off! You did not.’
‘I did! Why do you think I was so nervous earlier in the Pig?’
‘You’re always nervous when I’m doing something you can’t control.’
Phil made a noise you could only call a gasp. ‘Now that’s not true, Ken.

That’s unfair.’ He seemed genuinely hurt.

I put a hand on his shoulder. It was still true, mind you, but I said, ‘Sorry.’
‘You didn’t really hit him, did you?’
‘Yup. Biffed the blighter on the phizog.’
‘A proper punch?’
‘A proper punch. Look at them bunch a fives.’ I held my right hand out to

show him the grazes on the knuckles. My hand still hurt.

‘You’re really proud of this, aren’t you?’
I thought about it. ‘Yes,’ I said.
We were in the Bough. Phil had said he’d hang about Capital Live! until

the recording for Breaking News was finished, expecting a debriefing; he’d
been suitably surprised when I’d walked into the office barely ninety minutes
after I’d left him for the studio in Clerkenwell.

‘You attacked him?’ Kayla had said, sitting back in her chair in her winter

camos and chewing on a pen. I’d nodded, and she’d got up and kissed me.
‘Brilliant, Ken.’

Phil and his assistant Andi had looked aghast at each other. Andi had said,

‘Pub, now, I’d suggest.’

‘But they didn’t call the police.’
‘Not so far. They spent most of their time trying to persuade me to stay and

continue  with  the  debate.  I  don’t  know  what  put  them  off  eventually,  me
stonewalling  or  the  make-up  girls  running  out  of  foundation  to  cover  up
Lawson’s black eye. Eventually I just walked out and got a taxi.’

‘Do you think Brierley will press charges?’
‘No  idea.’  I  drank  my  London  Pride  and  smiled  widely  at  Phil.  ‘Don’t

fucking care.’

‘You’ve been planning this for weeks, haven’t you?’
‘Months, actually. Since it was first brought up in Debbie’s office, back in

September. I had that classic dilemma thing going where you don’t want to
give these people a platform, but on the other hand you want to get them in
public and grind the grisly fuckers into the dust - and I actually really thought
I could do it, because I’m a fucking militant liberal, not the wishy-washy sort
that  would  try  to  understand  the  bastard  or  just  be  appalled  -  but  then  I
thought, na, just give the piece of shit a taste of his own medicine.’

Phil  was  silent  for  a  while,  so  I  looked  at  him;  he  was  sitting  side-on,

looking at me.

‘What?’
‘Maybe I don’t know you as well as I thought I did.’
‘Yeah.’ I grinned. ‘Good, eh?’
‘If he does press charges, though, you could be in serious trouble.’
‘First offence? No weapon involved? I don’t think I’ll be going to prison. I

did  have  a  doomsday  scenario  going  on  in  my  head  about  getting  carried
away once I got my hands on the fuck and beating him to a pulp, leaving him
paralysed or dead or something or with a Telefunken UB47 rammed up his
arse,  but  in  the  end  it  played  out  pretty  well.  I  can  stand  a  fine  and  being
bound over to keep the peace, or whatever.’

‘I was thinking more about your job.’
I glanced at him. ‘Yeah. In theory.’
‘Not just in theory.’
‘I thought I was pretty safe there. We haven’t had a dressing down for, shit,

weeks.’

‘Ken, for goodness’ sake; we exist on a knife-edge all the time whether or

not  we  get  a  formal  warning  or  even  just  a  quiet  word.  I’ve  had  the  ads
department on to me about cancellations from American Airlines, the Israeli
Tourist Board … and one or two others I’ve managed to repress, obviously.
They’re hurting. There are few enough big campaigns going as it is at the
moment; losing those that are on offer is giving them sleepless nights, and
I’m pretty sure news of the pain is being passed up the corporate structure.’

I frowned. ‘Well, maybe the Israeli Tourist Board will come back now I’ve

beaten up a horrible Holocaust denier.’ I glanced at Phil.

He wore a suitably sceptical expression. ‘Or maybe,’ he said, ‘this could be

the bale of hay that breaks the camel’s back. I’d check your contract. Never
mind  vague  stuff  about  bringing  the  station  into  disrepute,  I’ll  bet  any
criminal proceedings, even pending, threatened ones, means they can pull you
off air without pay.’

‘Shit.’ I had a horrible feeling he was right. ‘I’d better phone my agent.’

‘So, Mr McNutt. Would you like to describe what happened in the studio of
Winsome Productions, in Clerkenwell, London, on the afternoon of Monday
the fourteenth of January, 2002, in your own words?’

Oh shit, it was the same DS who’d interviewed me about the East End trip,

when I’d broken the taxi’s windscreen and punched ‘Raine’ in the face. I’d
had  the  choice  of  coming  to  my  local  nick  to  give  a  statement,  and  I’d
stupidly  taken  it.  The  DS  was  a  young  white  guy,  sharp-faced  but  a  little
jowly, with brown hair starting to recede at the temples. He smiled. ‘In your
own time, Mr McNutt.’ He patted the big, clunky wooden cassette recorder
sitting on the desk in the interview room.

I didn’t like the relish with which he pronounced my name. For about the

five hundredth time in my life to date, I cursed my parents for not having
changed their name by deed poll before I was born.

‘It never happened,’ I said.
A pause. ‘What, the entire afternoon?’
‘No, whatever I’m being accused of,’ I said.
‘Assault, Mr McNutt.’
‘Yes; that. It didn’t happen. They made it all up.’ I was starting to sweat.

This had seemed like such a great plan right up until I had to start following
through with it.

‘They made it all up.’
‘Yes.’
‘So, what did happen, sir?’

‘I went along to do an interview, and it was cancelled.’
‘I  see.’  The  Detective  Sergeant  thought  for  a  moment.  He  looked  at  his

notes. ‘At what point was it cancelled?’

‘I never left the Green Room,’ I said, feeling suddenly inspired.
‘The what, sir?’
‘The Green Room, the hospitality suite; it’s where they put you before they

need you in the studio.’

‘I see.’
‘I never left it. They came and told me the interview, the discussion, was

being cancelled.’

The DS looked at me through narrowed eyes. ‘You are aware, sir, that you

will be asked to repeat what you’re saying, under oath, in court?’

Oh  shit.  Perjury.  Why  hadn’t  I  thought  of  that?  I’d  been  too  busy

congratulating  myself  on  my  own  cleverness  and  blithely  assuming  that
everybody  would  just  play  along  once  they  saw  what  I  was  up  to.  I  had
thought this through a hundred times but somehow it always ended with me
modestly  accepting  Man  Of  The  Year  awards,  not  being  sent  down  for
perjury.

I gulped. ‘I may well choose to say nothing under oath.’
Now the DS was looking at me as though I was simply mad.
I  cleared  my  throat.  ‘I  think  I  should  talk  to  my  lawyer  before  I  say

anything else.’

‘So I definitely get to be tried by a jury?’

‘If you insist, Mr Nott, yes. However I’d strongly advise that you take the

option of going before a magistrates’ court instead.’ The lawyer was called
Maggie Sefton. She worked for the criminal department of my own lawyer’s
firm.  She  had  deep  brown  skin  and  beautiful  eyes  behind  the  tiniest,  most
low-profile glasses I’d ever seen.

‘But I need to plead Not Guilty!’ I protested. ‘I’m trying to make a political

point here! This could make the news, dammit. Won’t that mean it has to go
to a higher court?’

‘Not really, no. And it is usually best to avoid going before a judge.’
‘But why?’
‘Because magistrates can’t impose custodial sentences.’
I frowned. Ms Sefton smiled the sympathetic, worldly-wise smile adults lay

on children sometimes when the poor darlings just totally fail to understand
the way things actually happen in the big bad world. ‘They can’t send you to

jail, Kenneth. Whereas a High Court judge can.’

‘Shit,’ I said.

I’d sent Amy some flowers at her office, but she sent them back. After our
rather unsatisfactory bout of going through the motions on the Sunday night
she’d said she’d call me, but she hadn’t, so after two days I’d headed for the
nearest florist. I’d thought a dozen red roses would be just the right gesture
for the sort of retro good-time semi-posh girl I’d had her characterised as - it
certainly  wasn’t  something  I’d  normally  do  -  but  obviously  I’d  got  it
completely wrong.

The dozen roses arrived back before I set off for work on the Thursday,

three days after the Breaking News fracas. The note accompanying them said,
‘Ken; interesting but hardly worth commemorating. See you sometime. A.’

‘Bitch,’ I said to myself, even though I had to admit she was right. I took

the wrapping off the flowers and threw them into the river. It was a flood tide,
so as they drifted slowly upstream, sped on their way by a stiff north-easterly,
I reflected ruefully that if I came back at the right/wrong time this afternoon, I
could watch them all come sailing back down again. Come to think of it, a
timely  combination  of  tides  and  winds  could  conceivably  keep  their
bedraggled,  distributed  sorriness  within  sight  of  the  Temple Belle for days;
even weeks.

I shrugged, stuffed the wrapping paper into the bin and headed for the car

park and the car Capital Live! had sent for me. The Landy was still in the
garage; it had been fitted with its two new tyres - three, in fact, as the spare on
the  back  door  had  been  stabbed  as  well  -  but  they  hadn’t  replaced  its
headlights yet.

My phone went as soon as I turned it on, walking up the pontoon towards

the car park.

‘Debbie; you’re up and running very early. How are you?’
‘Come straight to my office when you get in, all right?’
I took a couple of steps. ‘I’m fine too, Debs. Thanks for asking.’
‘Just be there, okay?’
‘Ah, okay,’ I said. Oh-oh, I thought. ‘Why? What’s happening? ’
‘See you soon.’ She hung up.
The Motorola vibrated again as I got to the Lexus waiting at the kerb. A

Lexus; it had been a Mondeo yesterday. Good job something was looking up.
I  waved  to  the  driver,  who  was  reading  the  Telegraph.  ‘Nott?’  I  asked,
unfolding the buzzing phone as he folded the paper. I thought it was best to
ask; I’d once jumped into another houseboat dweller’s limo waiting to take

them to Heathrow. ‘For Capital Live!’

‘That’s me, boss,’ the driver said.
I got in, belted up and into the phone said, ‘Yes, Phil?’
‘The papers have got it.’
‘What?’ I asked as the car pulled smoothly away.
‘Lawson  Brierley’s  Institute  for  Fascist  Studies,  or  whatever  it’s  called,

released a press statement this morning. Basically saying they can see what
you’re trying to do here, but … blah blah blah … the full majesty of English
law, and common Anglo-Saxon justice, must take precedence over arrogant
and theatrical pseudo-intellectual cosmopolitan political machinations. ’

‘You’re not paraphrasing there, I hope.’
‘No. We’ve just had the Mail on the phone. Followed by the Sun, followed

by the Standard and then ITN, the Eye and the Guardian. I’m expecting to
collect the rest of the set before the hour is out. Why is your land-line down?’

‘I pulled it out last night; some fucker rang about one in the morning and

kept ringing but not leaving a message on the machine, plus their identity was
withheld, so I got annoyed and wheeched it.’

‘Probably a journo favoured by Mr Brierley getting wind of it early. You

weren’t door-stepped this morning, were you?’

‘No.’
‘You were lucky. You in the car?’
‘Yup.’
‘Well, if you want to avoid questions at this end, have the driver take you

down into the car park here and take the lift, okay?’

‘Yeah. Shit. Okay,’ I sighed. ‘Oh, fuck, here we go …’
‘Courage, mon brave.’
‘Yeah. Right.’
‘See you soon.’
‘Yeah, in Debbie’s office.’
‘Damn, she’s heard, has she?’
‘Oh yes.’
‘That’ll be who’s jamming my internal line here. Better talk to you when

you get here; meet you down in the car park?’

‘See you there.’ I put the phone away.
The driver looked at me in the mirror, but didn’t say anything.
I sat and watched the traffic go past. Shit. What if they were going to fire

me? I’d taken heart, bizarrely, from the profoundly noxious Nina’s remarks
about publicity. I’d thought that no matter how messy everything got with the
assault in the studio, at least it would be great publicity for me and the show
and  the  station  and  that  because  of  that  everybody  would  be  happy.  Good
grief,  had  I  actually  been  insufficiently  cynical?  Maybe  Amy  was  right.
Maybe I was naïve. I thought back to the night in Soho during the summer
with  Ed  and  Craig,  and  me  not  dipping  far  enough  down  into  the  cess  of
human motivation with my imagination, being so innocent as to think that the
worst  reaction  towards  somebody  who  was  helpless  and  vulnerable  was
indifference, not something worse.

How personally and professionally embarrassing.
I got lost in the traffic for a while, submerged in memories. A dispatch rider

swept past on his panniered Bandit. Oh well, I thought, if I did get fired and I
couldn’t get in anywhere else, I could always get a job being a bike courier
again. Or maybe Ed would take me seriously if I said I finally really really
wanted to be a proper club-type DJ. Fuck, yeah; the money was good, and just
because I’d been dismissive about it in the past and gone along for the fun,
drugs and women didn’t mean I couldn’t try to make a go of it as a career
now. Boy George could do it; why couldn’t I?

We were drawing to a stop in the Mall, pulling in to the side near the ICA.
‘What’s the problem?’ I asked.
The driver glanced in the mirror, pressed the hazard warning lights, killed

the engine and turned round, handing the keys to me. I looked at them lying in
my hand, wondering what the hell was going on. ‘I’d like a word, Mr Nott,’
he said (this was itself enough to have me tense up and check that the door-
lock buttons were in the unlocked position), ‘but I don’t want to alarm you.’
He nodded at the keys in my hand. ‘That’s why I’ve given you them. If you
want to get out, you can.’

He  was  about  fifty;  a  balding,  slightly  overweight  guy  with  the  sort  of

large-framed  glasses  last  fashionable  in  the  early  nineties  and  a  pinched,
concerned-looking face; sad-looking eyes. Otherwise fairly nondescript. His
accent  sounded  vaguely  Midlands,  like  a  Brummie  born  and  raised  who’d
lived in London most of his life. He was neatly dressed in a light-grey suit
that  only  now  was  starting  to  look  a  little  too  well  cut  to  be  that  of  your
standard limo driver.

‘Uh-huh?’ I said. ‘I’ll just test the door, right?’
‘Be my guest.’
The door opened easily enough and the sound of traffic and the chatter of a

passing gaggle of Japanese tourists entered the cabin. I closed it again. ‘I’ll
just keep my phone open here, too,’ I said warily. The driver nodded.

He offered his hand. ‘Chris. Chris Glatz.’ We shook hands.
‘So what’s going on, Chris?’ I asked him.
‘Like I say, Mr Nott, I’d like a word.’
‘About what?’
‘A matter that has, umm, fallen to me to try to resolve.’
I screwed up my eyes. ‘I’m kind of looking for specifics, here.’
He  looked  around.  On  the  broad  pavement  under  trees  in  front  of  the

colonnaded  white  splendour  of  the  ICA,  a  couple  of  cops  were  walking
slowly along, eyeing us. ‘Here isn’t perfect, frankly,’ he said apologetically.
‘You suggest somewhere.’

I looked at my watch. An hour and ten before the last possible time I could

get to the studio for the start of the show. ‘Tell you what,’ I said. ‘I’ll drive.’

If he’d taken too long, or said no, I’d have walked, but he just looked a

little surprised, nodded and opened his door. I made sure the two cops got a
really good look at us, waving at them and saying, ‘Morning, officers!’ They
nodded, professionally.

I rang the office en route but the lines were busy. Instead I left a message

with Debbie’s secretary to say I’d be late.

I parked the Lexus behind the Imperial War Museum. We got some coffees
from a mobile stall and walked round to the front, under the barrels of two
colossal Naval guns. Mr Glatz pulled some gloves from his coat pocket and
put them on. The air had an easterly tang to it and the clouds were grey as the
paint on the giant artillery pieces above us.

‘Nice car,’ I said. ‘Yours?’
‘Yes, it is. Thanks.’
‘Should have known I wouldn’t rate a Lexus from the radio station.’
‘Ha ha.’
‘So, Mr Glatz; Chris.’
‘Well, Mr Nott—’
‘Call me Ken, please.’
‘Right. Ken. Well, I’ll come straight to the point. Oh; well, first, I’d better

say, this is all off the record, right?’

‘I’m not a journalist, Mr Glatz, but yes, all right.’
‘Right.  Good.  Now  then.  You’ll  remember  you  witnessed  a  road  traffic

accident a few months back.’

‘Mm-hmm. Guy in a blue Beemer Compact, talking on his mobile, came

out—’

‘That’s the one, that’s the one.’ He sipped his coffee. ‘See,’ he said, ‘Mark -

the gentleman involved, Mr Southorne - is a, an occasional business partner
of mine.’

‘I see.’
‘You haven’t heard of him?’
‘No, should I have?’
Glatz teeter-tottered one hand. ‘He’s fairly well known in the City. One of

these flamboyant types, you know?’

Well, no, I thought, but I could imagine. He hadn’t looked very fucking

flamboyant  standing  holding  his  mobile  in  the  rain  looking  down  at  a  still
stunned biker lying in the gutter, but maybe that had just been shock.

‘Thing is, you see,’ Glatz said, looking pained. ‘He’s sitting on ten points.

On his licence.’

I nodded. ‘The poor soul.’
‘Twelve, and he’s banned. Sure you know how it is.’
‘Of course.’
‘And, well, the thing is, Mark really needs his car. He loves his car; loves

his cars. But he does a lot of driving, which he enjoys, and—’

I’d held up one hand. ‘Hold on, Chris. That was a bog-standard two-year-

old Compact he was driving. If he loves cars so much—’

‘Yeah, that was just a courtesy car. His M5 was being serviced. ’
‘Ah-hah,’  I  said.  Ah-hah,  indeed.  Served  me  right,  I  thought.  There  I’d

gone, making assumptions about the man just because he’d been driving the
sort  of  car  people  bought  because  they  wanted  to  say  they’d  got  a  BMW
rather than because of what it actually did. In fact he had an M5. That was
different.  I’d  test  driven  an  M5  about  a  year  ago;  a  sleek  brute  with  four
hundred horse-power. A brilliant motor, but wasted in London.

‘Look, ah, Ken,’ Glatz said, smiling awkwardly at me. ‘Frankly, I think this

has been mishandled. I think that the whole way this has been approached
was pretty fucking stupid.’ Another stilted smile. ‘Excuse my vernacular.’

‘Well, obviously I am shocked, but all right.’
He smiled. ‘I’m going to level with you, Ken. Thing is, you see, we’d like

you to retract your witness statement, especially the bit about Mark using the
mobile at the time of the accident. ’

‘Oh?’ I said. I sipped my coffee. Actually I hated this new coffee culture;

people wandering around with these pint-sized cartons full of a mild, warm,
watery drug it takes about twenty words and five questions just to fucking

order,  turning  some  streets  in  London  into  nothing  but  a  procession  of
Starbuck’s, Aromas, Coffee Republics, Costas and … but enough. Mr Glatz
was making his point. ‘We’ll get a good brief, we’ll suggest that the biker guy
was going too fast, and with a bit of luck and a following wind, like they say,
we’ll get Mark off. But we do need you to retract that statement, you see,
Ken, because that’s the really damning bit. Without that there we might be
able to swing it; with it the prosecution can walk all over us.’

I nodded. ‘Right,’ I said. A very strange, disturbing but oddly relieving idea

had occurred to me. It seemed grotesquely unlikely, but then when had that
ever proved a problem for reality when it was determined to serve up a squid
in your custard? ‘This occasional business relationship you have with this guy
Mark …’

‘Yes, Ken?’
‘In terms of above-boardness, whereabouts would we be talking here?’
Chris Glatz chuckled. ‘You’re catching on here, Ken. Frankly, pretty well

below the waterline.’

‘Right, and when you say,’ I started slowly, ‘that this has been mishandled,

what exactly are you referring too?’

‘Ah,’ he said. ‘Well. When - and I hasten to add here, Ken, that I was not

personally involved at this point,’ he said, holding up one hand. ‘When it was
decided that my colleagues might be able to help Mark with this problem, a -
how’s best to put this? - a rather extreme plan was formulated to, well, to
attempt to impress upon you the fact we were serious in our commitment to
aid our friend and colleague.’

We’d  been  strolling  round  the  big  circular  path  in  front  of  the  museum.

Now I stepped round and stopped in front of him and said, ‘Is this about my
trip to the East End in a certain taxi, to fucking Haggersley Street?’ I almost
shouted the last bit.

My new pal Chris looked around and patted the air with one hand. ‘Now, I

can see why you might be upset about that, Ken, but—’

‘You fuckers were trying to drug me and kidnap me because of a fucking

traffic  violation?’  Again,  I  had  trouble  keeping  my  voice  modulated  for
maximum mellifluousness.

Glatz did the air-patting thing again. He sighed and put a hand to one side

of his face, then nodded forward and we set off again, walking slowly round
the big circle. ‘Ken, I’m not going to lie to you,’ he said in a tired voice. ‘That
was  an  overreaction.  But,’  he  said,  holding  up  one  hand,  before  I  could
respond  to  this,  ‘the  need  was  felt  to  impress  on  you  that  we  are  serious
people,  and  that  we  have  the  necessary  resources,  and  the  will,  to  follow

through  with  any  -  what’s  the  best  way  to  put  this?  -  incentivisation
framework we might wish to implement.’

‘You can back up threats because you’re crims.’
Chris actually laughed quite loudly at this. ‘Well, basically, yes, if we’re

being frank with each other.’

‘I see. And the threatening phone call? And the tyres on my Land Rover?

And the headlights?’

He nodded. ‘All a bit messy, a bit unrequired, frankly, Ken. That’s why I’m

here. That’s why I’m approaching you as one reasonable man to another.’

I gave a small laugh. ‘You obviously don’t listen to my show.’
He smiled, sipped some more coffee. ‘Ken, we’d like to compensate you

for the damage and distress you’ve suffered.’

‘I see. You mean bribe me.’
‘Frankly, yes.’
‘How much?’
‘Two grand. And we’ll settle the bill with the garage.’
‘And what if I say no?’
He looked round at me. ‘Frankly?’
‘Frankly.’
‘Then I go back to Mark and say that we’ve done our best; gone out on a

limb for him, even, and it hasn’t worked. We’ve tried money and that hasn’t
worked  either,  and  unless  he  wants  to  raise  the  offer  to  something  you’d
accept—’

‘I’m not poor, or greedy enough, Chris. And I am easily proud enough not

to.’ I smiled.

‘Fair enough,’ he said, dumping his coffee in a bin. I’d have followed his

example except I’d remained just worried enough to be keeping the still-just-
about-scaldingly-hot coffee to use as a weapon if things suddenly turned nasty
again.  ‘So,’  he  said,  ‘I’d  tell  Mark  that  maybe  he  should  just  take  his
punishment  like  a  man  and  take  more  care  driving  in  future,  and  get  a
chauffeur for however long his ban lasts. And unless he does something very
stupid, which I shall try to persuade him not to do, that’ll be the end of the
matter.’

‘Really?’ I looked into the man’s eyes. I formed the distinct impression that

actually Mr Glatz wouldn’t be at all averse to his business associate having to
swallow his pride and accept his punishment.

He shrugged. ‘You have to have a sense of proportion about these things,

Ken,’  he  said  reasonably,  ‘otherwise  people  end  up  getting  hurt.  Which  is

messy. And messy, generally, is not good for business.’

‘So,’ I said. ‘If I say I’m not going to retract my witness statement, that’ll

be that.’

‘It should be.’
‘I know it should be, but will it?’
‘Ken,’ Glatz sighed heavily. ‘I am not here to threaten you. I am here to

make you an offer, which I’ve done. You seem to be rejecting it. That’s the
end of the matter as far as I’m concerned and as far as my colleagues are
concerned, in so far as you’re concerned … if you see what I mean.’

‘I think so. Go on.’
‘I can’t speak for Mark, who may wish to approach you himself. ’
‘And what the fuck does that mean?’
‘Ken, Ken,’ he said, holding up both hands. ‘Don’t get upset. It means just

what it says. It’s not a threat.’ He gave what was probably meant to be an
encouraging smile. ‘Mark is not … he’s not the physical sort, know what I
mean? That’s why we make a good team. He’s very good with money, and
contacts, and charm, and … Well. But with us washing our hands of the case,
the direct action side of things is pretty much off the agenda.’

‘Good,’ I said. I thought. I pointed a finger at Glatz. ‘Just in case he does

get any ideas, you tell him there’s a man called John Merrial who owes me a
favour, all right?’

Glatz looked very surprised for a vanishingly brief interval of time. Then

he looked slightly surprised. ‘Mr Merrial?’ he asked. ‘Really?’

‘Really,’ I said. ‘And if he doesn’t know who John is, I think maybe you

ought to enlighten him. Don’t you?’

Glatz was looking away from me, nodding. We were back almost under the

big  guns  again,  which  felt  like  a  shiveringly  appropriate  place  to  be  when
invoking the name of Mr M to another, palpably lesser, villain. ‘I see, Ken,’
he said, still nodding, glancing at me. ‘Well, that is interesting. I’d no idea. A
favour, eh?’

‘That’s what he said, last time I saw him,’ I told Glatz.
He looked at me and nodded. ‘I can rely on your discretion here, can’t I,

Ken? Off the record, as we agreed. Obviously all of this is strictly between
you and me.’

‘Obviously. Providing your friend Mark doesn’t do anything stupid.’
‘I’ll have a word.’
‘That’d be nice.’
He  smiled.  ‘Right.  Well,  I  think  we’re  finished  here,  Ken,  would  you

agree?’

I grinned. ‘I think I would, Chris.’
‘Okay.’ He clapped his hands. ‘Let’s get you back to your radio station. Do

you want to drive, or shall I?’

‘Allow me,’ I said. We started walking back to the car.
Mr Glatz nodded at my left wrist. ‘By the way; nice watch.’
‘Mm-hmm.’

Oh, the sheer bliss of it; when we arrived at Capital Live! I got to do the old
Ronnie Reagan thing, cupping my hand to my ear, pretending I couldn’t make
out what the press were saying. Of course, rather than doing this across the
White House lawn on the way to my helicopter with the press fifty metres
away behind a rope, guarded by marines, I was about ten centimetres away
from the journos, separated from them only by the thickness of a window I
could have lowered with a single click of a button. This made it all the more
fun.

‘Ken! Ken! Is it true you kicked this guy?’
‘Ken! What’s the truth? Tell us what happened.’
‘Ken, is it true he hit you first?’
‘Ken! These pliers; did you throw them intending to hit him?’
It was great seeing so many journos here; I’d expected one or two, but this

was real celeb stuff. Must be a quiet news day in the capital. I did the hand-
ear thing, shook my head, smiled broadly and mouthed, I-can’t-hear-you as I
nudged the car slowly forward and angled it towards the car park ramp. They
were trying the door handles but I’d locked all the doors somewhere round
Trafalgar Square. Two snappers were standing right in front of the car, aiming
straight through the windscreen; I let the car trickle forward in Drive, brakes
creaking, slowly forcing the photographers backwards.

In  the  passenger  seat,  Mr  Glatz  had  looked  puzzled  when  he’d  seen  the

small  crowd  of  reporters  gathered  round  the  office  entrance.  When  they’d
spotted  me  driving  the  car  through  the  traffic  towards  the  underground  car
park,  and  come  running  over  to  hammer  on  the  windows,  tape  recorders
aimed, flashes flashing - heck, there was even a TV crew there - he’d been
horrified, but by then it was too late. He’d picked up his newspaper and hid
behind it. This was, of course, entirely the wrong thing to do, because now the
ladies and gents of the press were starting to think, Hold on, who’s Mr Shy in
the passenger seat? A couple of the snapperistas took photos of Mr G’s hands
and the Torygraph they were clutching.

‘Sorry about this, Chris,’ I said.

‘Jesus,’ he said. ‘What the fuck’s all this about?’
‘Oh, I was on a telly programme with this guy who deserved a good slap,

so I duly whacked him one. Bit of a fuss about it for some reason.’

‘Did I not need this,’ Glatz breathed as I nodded at the security guy in the

booth at the top of the ramp; the striped pole rose and we roared away down
the slope. I stamped on the brakes and got a very satisfying squeal out of the
tyres at the bottom.

Mr  Glatz  left  looking  unhappy,  resigned  to  facing  down  the  crowd  of

muttering rotters still milling at the top of the car park ramp.

I bumped into Timmy Mann in the lift.
‘Timmy,’ I said cheerfully. ‘You’re in early.’
‘Uh, yeah, ah, hi, ah, Ken,’ Timmy said, displaying the incisive wit that has

made him such a hit on the lunchtime show. He looked down as the lift doors
closed. Timmy was something of a throwback; older than me, an ex-Radio
One Breakfast Show presenter, dark hair worn in a style dangerously close to
being a mullet. He was short, even for a radio DJ.

I  felt  my  good  mood  evaporate  as  the  lift  whined  into  action  and  my

stomach seemed to drop. ‘Oh, yeah, of course,’ I said. ‘You’re here to do my
show, aren’t you?’

‘Ah, just half,’ he said. ‘Maybe.’
‘Well, don’t forget to apply for overtime.’
‘Um, yeah.’

‘Where the fuck have you been?’

‘Talking  to  a  man  about  a  fucking  death  threat,’  I  told  Station  Manager

Debbie,  throwing  myself  into  a  couch.  The  couch  was  on  the  far  side  of
Debbie’s redecorated office, a pale mauve oval carpet away from her new ash
and chrome desk, where Producer Phil and Guy Boulen, Mouth Corp’s legal
geezer, were sitting. ‘Hi, Phil, Guy.’

‘I didn’t say you could sit over there.’
‘Good,  Debbie,  because  I  didn’t  fucking  ask  to.’  The  sofa  was  big  and

plump and cerise without actually looking like a pair of lips. It smelled very
new.

‘What’s this about a death threat?’ Phil asked quickly, while Debbie was

still opening her mouth to say something.

‘It’s been resolved. It was all a hideous mistake; an overreaction. I know

what it was all about and it’s almost certainly been taken care of.’

Phil and Boulen looked at each other. Boulen cleared his throat. ‘You met

whoever it was who’s been behind all this?’

on after people below him didn’t get the results they’d wanted. And arguably
took it all too far.’

‘Who was it? Who is it?’ Phil asked.
‘Can’t tell you,’ I said. ‘Sworn to secrecy.’
‘Is this—?’ Boulen began.
‘Can I just point out that we’ve a decision to make about a radio show due

to start in twenty minutes?’ Debbie said loudly, swinging our attention back to
her.

‘Debs,’ I said. ‘The Breaking News, Lawson Brierley thing; I’m denying

everything. It didn’t happen. It’s all a lie. They made it up.’ I looked at Boulen
and  smiled.  ‘That’s  the  line  I’m  taking.’  He  nodded,  then  smiled  too,
uncertainly.

‘But you’ve been charged,’ Debbie said.
‘Yup.’
‘We can take you off air.’
‘I know. So; going to?’
Debbie looked at me as though I’d just crapped on her new couch. Her desk

phone warbled. She glared at it, grabbed it. ‘Don’t you fucking understand
English? I said no—’ Her eyes closed and she put a hand to her brow, making
her glasses slip down her nose. She took them off and stared at the ceiling
with tired eyes. ‘Yes, of course. Sorry, Lena. Put him on.’

Each of us chaps looked at the other two.
Debbie drew herself up in her seat. ‘Sir Jamie …’

‘Chumbawumba and “Tubthumping”. Good to hear the old signature tune all
the way through there, bit of comfort music in these trying times, don’t you
think, Phil?’

‘Knock  people  down  and  they  just  jolly  well  get  back  up  again,’  Phil

agreed.

‘Ms  Nutter,  Mr  Prescott  and  I  would  all  agree.  But  what  makes  you

mention knocking people down, Phil?’

‘Oh, nothing,’ Phil waved one hand airily. ‘Just the lyrics of the song.’
‘Splendid. Time for some vitally important advertisements. Back in a mo if

we haven’t been removed in the meantime for gross moral turpitude. Back, in
fact,  with  Ian  Dury  and  The  Blockheads  and  “Hit  Me  With  Your  Rhythm
Stick”.  Just  kidding.  It’s  actually  Cornershop  and  “Lessons  Learned  From

Rocky One to Rocky Three”. Stop that, Phil.’ I FX’d the squeaky noise for
Phil’s head shaking.

‘What are you like?’ he sighed.
‘Just keeping things topical, Phil.’
‘I despair.’
I laughed. ‘Yeah, I know. It sounds pretty crap now but just you wait till

later. It won’t even be pretty.’

‘Hit the ad cart, Ken.’
‘It are hitted.’
We both sat back and put our cans round our necks as the ads played.
‘So far so good,’ Phil said.
‘Getting away with it,’ I agreed.
‘All  my  life.’  Phil  glanced  up  at  the  portrait  of  Sir  Jamie  on  the  wall.

‘Wonder if himself’s listening in on the Internet feed.’

Sir  Jamie  had  called  Station  Manager  Debbie  from  the  archipelago  he

owned in the Caribbean. He’d just heard about the press getting hold of the
Breaking News story and called to say he thought it was vitally important that
I should do my show unless the station had no legal choice but to pull it. I did
believe it was the first time I’d actually felt a mild glow of affection for the
man. He’d even had Debbie pass me the phone and spoken a few words to
me. He told me he was right behind me, right behind me, hundred and ten per
cent.

‘I  can  only  hope  and  trust,’  I  told  Phil,  ‘that  I  am  living  up  to  the  faith

placed in me by our Dear Owner.’

‘Are we really going to take calls?’
‘I think we must, Philip. We owe it to our public.’

‘Yeah, right. Ken, what’s this about you hitting some bloke on the telly then?’

‘Sir, you have been grievously misinformed.’
‘So it’s not true then?’
‘Actually I was just talking in general, Stan; you have the sound of a man

who  takes  the  tabloids,  so  you  have  undoubtably  been  grievously
misinformed for, well, years, I imagine.’

‘Come on, Ken. Did ya hit him or not?’
‘At this point I have to resort to the old diplomatic service thing of saying

that I can neither confirm nor deny whatever it is you may have heard.’

‘But is it true?’

‘What  is  truth,  Stanley?  One  person’s  truth  is  another  person’s  lie,  one

person’s faith is another’s heresy, one person’s certainty is another’s doubt,
one person’s boot-legs are another’s flares, know what I’m saying?’

‘You ain’t gonna tell nobody, are ya?’
‘Stan, I’m like the Egyptian fresh-water carp; I’m in denial.’
‘What?’
‘The matter I believe you might be referring to is sub judice, Stan, or soon

will be; the exact technical legal status it holds at the moment is not entirely
clear,  but  let’s  just  say  it’s  better  to  treat  it  as  definitely  not  to  be  talked
about.’

‘All  right.  So,  how’s  that  rubbish  football  team  of  yours  up  there  in

Jockland going to do then?’

I  laughed.  ‘Now  we’re  talking,  Stan.  Which  aspect  of  the  profound

awfulness of the Bankies did you wish me to elaborate upon, Stanley? The
choice is wide and the show is long.’

‘Don’t really give a toss, mate.’
‘Ah; indifference. Good choice. Now … Stan? Stanley? Hello?’ I’d cut him

off. ‘Ah, how oddly pointed was Stanley’s casual but cutting dismissal just
there.  Though  in  fact  I  have  to  point  out  that  actually  the  Bankies  are
currently  doing  remarkably  well  in  the  league  and  are  strong  promotion
contenders. However, I’m sure normal service will be resumed in due course.’

I glanced at the callers’ screen. The girls were doing their best to weed out

journalists - the system was flagging numbers of newspapers and if Kayla or
Andi were suspicious, they asterisked the name (though in Kayla’s case, as
well as * it could equally well be &, [, 7, 8, 9, U or I). One name and subject
snagged my gaze instantly. Oh-oh.

Name: Ed. Subject: Robe.
‘Ah … Toby; you’ve a beef about airport security.’
‘Yeah. Hi, Ken. It’s about glasses.’
‘Glasses?’
‘You can’t take nail clippers onto a plane nowadays, not even little ones,

but people wearing glasses; no probs.’

‘Your point being?’
‘Glass-lensed  glasses,  right?  Not  plastic,  right?  Break  a  glass  lens  and

you’ve got two perfect blades, right? Really sharp. Take them on? No probs.
But nail clippers? I mean, nail clippers ? No way. What’s all that about then?’

I  saw  Ed’s  entry  on  the  screen  disappear;  he’d  rung  off.  Point  made,  I

guessed.

and a choice of soft contact lenses for these astigmatic miscreants at every
airport security scanner.’

‘Ed.’

‘Wot. The fuck. Were you doin. Tryin to get old of Robe?’
‘Oh, come on. Guess.’
‘I told you not to. I told you to leave it.’
‘I was desperate. But, listen; it’s all right now.’
‘It’s not all right.’
‘It is; he wouldn’t sell me a … you know. Wouldn’t even meet up. And—’
‘Fot you were a cop, didn’t he? Fot you was filf tryin to set im up.’
‘I did kind of get that impression. But—’
‘Now he’s givin me grief cos you got is number froo me. Froo me mum,

Kennif; froo me mum. I am not amused.’

‘Ed, I’m sorry.’ I was trying to hold off from saying something like, Come

on, Ed it’s not as bad as fucking your pal’s girl. ‘I was scared and I panicked,
but I really am sorry.’

‘So you should be.’
‘But  I  don’t  need  the  …  article  in  question  any  more.  That’s  the  good

news.’

‘You don’t? Why not?’
‘It turns out it was something of a misunderstanding. I met with somebody

who’s in the process of resolving the matter.’

‘You’re soundin like an accountant. As somebody got a gun to your ead

now?’

‘I think it’s going to be all right. Almost certainly.’
‘Right. So now you only got to worry about fascist boot boys comin round

in the middle of the night an kickin your ead in in retaliation for fumpin this
Holocaust geezer on telly.’

‘Oh, you’ve heard.’
It had taken me most of the afternoon to get hold of Ed; his phone had been

either  off  or  engaged,  and  I  hadn’t  wanted  to  leave  a  message.  I’d  started
trying as soon as the show ended. We’d had yet another meeting with Debbie
and Guy Boulen, got some sandwiches sent down from the canteen for lunch
in the office and then got round to some routine but necessary work for the
middle part of the afternoon.

appropriate view and seen that there were still some press waiting outside, so
we’d called a taxi and a mini-cab to the underground car park; Phil, Kayla and
Andi took the cab; they piled their coats and bags on the floor in a big mound
that might just about have been big enough to hide a person and were duly
followed. I left in the mini-cab’s boot ten minutes later. I’d already cleared it
with Craig to stay with him for a day or two until all the worst of the fuss died
down. The mini-cab stopped as arranged on Park Road and I got out of the
boot and into the front seat.

I finally got through to Ed after I’d settled in at Craig’s.
‘Course I’ve eard. You’re in the Standard, mate.’
‘Really, which page?’
‘Wot, you aven’t got one?’
‘Not yet. I’ll get one, I’ll get one. Which page? Which page?’
‘Um, five.’
‘Above the fold or below?’
‘The what?’
‘The middle of the page. It doesn’t matter so much on a tabloid, but—’
‘You’ve  got  the  whole  page,  mate.  Well,  part  from  a  advert  for  cheap

flights.’

‘The whole page? Wow.’
‘Says they reckon you did it cos you was under such stress from avin a def

fret made against you an bein kidnapped an stuff.’

‘What?’
Well, yuh.

I shook my head. ‘Ridley Scott has a lot to answer for.’

‘What?’ asked Craig. ‘Making Black Hawk Down?’
‘Hell’s teeth, yeah, but no; I was thinking more of introducing the concept

of Gratuitous Steam.’

Craig glanced over at me. We were a bit drunk and a bit stoned, watching

Alien on DVD after an early meal of a home-delivered pizza. We’d eaten it
while watching the London local news programmes on the TV, in case I was
mentioned,  but  I  wasn’t.  I  wondered  who  the  camera  team  had  been  this
morning outside the office in that case, then decided that probably they had
been from one of the TV stations but they hadn’t got enough good footage
(maybe I should have got out, said something), or the story just hadn’t been
judged important enough by the TV news editors.

eaten one slice of the pizza; he had a mystery date he wouldn’t tell me about,
at nine. In the meantime: Alien. Craig was exactly the sort of guy who would
gradually replace all his treasured videos with DVDs. He was also exactly the
sort of guy who’d ration himself, buying one old film on DVD whenever he
bought a new one being released for the first time. Alien was the latest oldie.

Craig looked at me. ‘Gratuitous Steam?’
‘Yeah,’ I said, gesturing at the screen. ‘Look how fucking steamy it is in the

old Nostromo there. Who the hell decreed space-ships dozens of generations
after the shuttle - the Model-T of spacefaring craft as it will doubtless prove to
be and not itself notoriously water-vapour-prone - would be so full of steam?
I mean, why? And it’s been grotesquely over-used in practically every SF film
and no-brain thriller ever since.’

Craig sat and watched the film for a while. ‘Designer.’
‘What?’
‘Set designer,’ he said authoritatively. ‘Because it looks good. Makes the

place look lived in and industrial. And hides stuff, menacingly. Which is what
you  want  in  a  horror  movie,  or  a  thriller.  Plus  it  gives  people  like  you
something to complain about, which is patently an added bonus.’

‘Do I complain a lot?’
‘I didn’t say that.’
‘Yeah, but, come on; that’s the implication. Do I?’
‘You have all these problems with films, Ken.’
‘I do?’
‘Take  Science  Fiction.  What,  according  to  you,  is  the  only  technically

credible SF film?’

‘2001.’
Craig sighed. ‘Why?’
‘Because  Kubrick  doesn’t  allow  noises  in  space.  And  because  he  was  a

genius, he knew how to use the no-sound thing, so you get the brilliant bit
where what’s-his-name blows himself out of the wee excursion pod thing and
into the airlock and bounces around inside the open airlock until he hits the
door-close and air-in controls and it’s only then you get the sound feeding in;
magnificent.’

‘And every other space movie—’
‘Is that bit less credible because you see an explosion in space and next

thing you know there’s a fucking teeth-rattling sound effect.’

‘So—’

the time-delay thing wrong, anyway. Not only do film directors seem not to
understand  that  sound  doesn’t  travel  in  a  vacuum,  they  also  seem  not  to
understand how it does travel in an atmosphere. You see an explosion half a
fucking klick away, but the sound always happens at exactly the same time,
not a second and a bit later, when you should hear it.’

‘But—’
‘Though  there  are  signs  of  improvement.  Band  of  Brothers  had  proper

explosions. I mean, that was the least of its brilliance, but it was a sign they
were  taking  the  whole  thing  seriously,  that  the  special  effects  people  were
making the explosions look like real high-explosive explosions look, with just
maybe  a  single  flash  and  stuff  flying  everywhere,  rather  than  all  this
vaporised  petrol  or  whatever  it  is;  these  great  big  rolling  fiery  clouds  of
burning gas, that’s so bullshit.’

‘Why?’
‘Why?’
‘Yeah. Why does all this matter? It’s only the goddamn movies, Ken.’
‘Because  it  isn’t  fucking  true,  that’s  why,’  I  said,  waving  my  arms  for

emphasis.

‘So,’ Craig said, ‘what happened in that TV studio?’
‘I’ve told you.’
‘Yeah, you have told me, and you’ve told me that what you told me is the

truth. But it isn’t what you’ve told other people, it isn’t what you’re putting in
your sworn statement, is it?’

I  turned  on  the  couch  to  face  him,  ignoring  Sigourney  and  her  doomed

chums. ‘What the hell has that got to do with anything?’

‘Ken, you’re always banging on about truth and just sticking to the facts,

but here you are telling lies in public.’

‘But there’s a point to all this! Haven’t you understood anything ?’
‘I  understand  exactly  what  you’re  doing,  Ken,’  Craig  said  reasonably.  ‘I

even applaud it. I think.’ He stretched back in the couch, hands behind his
neck.  ‘I  mean,  it’s  resorting  to  violence,  which  is  more  your  bad  person’s
stock-in-trade reaction, but I see what you’re doing. All I’m saying is that in
trying to make this point you’re having to compromise this thing about telling
the truth even when it hurts.’

‘Craig, shit, come on; I’m no better than anybody else; I tell lies all the

time. Mostly in the context of relationships. God, I’d love to be a dear, sweet,
faithful, one-woman man, but I’m not. I’ve lied to … most of the women I’ve

known. I’ve lied to my employers, to the press, to—’

‘And me?’
That drew me up short. I sat back, thinking. ‘Well, there are … well, they

used  to  be  called  white  lies,  didn’t  they?  Relatively  unimportant  untruths
necessary  to  …  spare  people’s  feelings,  or  to  prevent  people  becoming
complicit in … well, either complicit or—’

‘I do kind of know what a white lie is, thanks, Ken.’
‘Yeah;  stuff  that  you  need  to  tell  people,  even  friends,  if  you’re  being

untruthful to somebody else.’ The on-board, on-line, on-message censor that
was usually employed looking a few words or phrases ahead to make sure I
didn’t swear on air was here doing something similar so that I didn’t actively
lie to Craig, even as I was carefully not telling him the whole truth, which
would have involved admitting I’d lied to him a lot about the night I’d spent
with his wife. ‘I wouldn’t tell you the truth when I was off fucking somebody
else if I thought that Jo might ask you if you knew where I was. Come on,
man. You do it too; you’re doing it now. Where are you going later? Who are
you meeting?’

‘That’s not the same. I’m just not telling you. You can’t compare refusing

to tell at all with deliberately telling a lie.’

‘Yeah, but it’s still not being open, is it?’
‘So fucking what? You don’t have a right to know everything about my

private life.’

‘But I’m your best friend!’ I looked at him. ‘Amn’t I?’
‘Best male friend, definitely.’
‘Who’s your best female friend?’
‘Well, what about Nikki?’
‘Nikki?’
‘Yeah; hey, I’ve known her all her life, for one thing.’
‘Yeah, but—’
‘We’ve  had  too  many  great  times  together  to  count,  been  through  tough

things too, plus she’s great fun to be with, she’s caring, funny, a great listener,
understanding … What?’

I was shaking my head. ‘You have to let the girl go, Craig. Okay, she’s a

great pal and all that, but—’

‘I’ve let  her  go!’  Craig  protested.  ‘She’s  at  Oxford.  She’s  loving  it;  she

hardly comes home any more, she’s got more friends than she knows what to
do with. For all I know she’s already had more sexual partners than I’ve had
in my fucking life. Ken, believe me, I’m pleased for her about all this and I

don’t want to smother her in affection or anything. But she’ll always be a best
friend.’

‘Okay,’ I said. ‘Okay. But you have to be a bit funny about the sex thing.’
‘Ken, I had umpteen years to prepare myself for the fact my child would

have an independent sexual existence. Credit me with some forethought. And
some … understanding. We’ve talked about this stuff, Ken; the three of us.
Nikki takes precautions. We didn’t raise her to be an idiot.’ He prodded me on
the  knee  with  one  finger.  ‘Anyway.  That’s  all  beside  the  point.  The  point
being  that  I’m  being  truthful  in  telling  you  I’m  not  going  to  tell  you
something, I’m not—’

‘All right already!’ I said. ‘Distinction taken.’ And conversational direction

subtly changed, you lying hypocritical dissembling louse, I told myself.

‘Anyway, it’s not just stuff like that,’ I said, wanting to move swiftly on and

away from all this lying and relationship stuff. ‘Or stuff like using a parsec as
a unit of time like they did in the original Star Wars and didn’t even take it out
in the new edition. It’s the whole way movies, Hollywood movies, are put
together. I’ve been thinking about this; imagine if paintings were produced
the way Hollywood films are.’

Craig sighed, and I suspected he suspected there was a proto-rant coming

up, which was true.

‘The Mona Lisa as we know it would be just the first draft; in the second

she’d be blond, in the third smiling happily and showing some cleavage, by
the fourth there’d be her and her equally attractive and feisty sisters and the
landscape behind would be a jolly seaside scene; the fifth draft would get rid
of her and keep the sisters, lose the seaside for a misty mountain and make the
girls both red-headed and a bit more, like, ethnic looking, and by the sixth or
seventh the mountain would be replaced by a dark and mysterious jungle and
there’d just be the one girl again, but she’d be a dusky maiden wearing a low-
cut wrap and with a smouldering, alluring look and an exotic bloom in her
long black tresses … Bingo - La Giaconda would look like something you
were  embarrassed  your  elderly  uncle  bought  in  Woolworths  in  the  early
seventies and never had the wit to get rid of in subsequent redecorations.’

‘So what?’ Craig asked. ‘If films were all made the way paintings are every

one would look like an Andy Warhol movie.’ He gave a sort of stage shiver.
‘Which, whatever it does for you, surely scares the hell out of me.’ He looked
at his watch. ‘Anyway. I’d better get ready.’ He stood up.

‘You’ve nearly an hour,’ I said.
‘Yeah, but I need a shower and everything.’ He headed for the door. ‘Help

yourself to stuff, okay?’

cute - and hard to resist - when Ceel did it. ‘Who is she, Craig? Anyone I
know?’

‘Not telling you.’
‘It is somebody I know. It’s not Emma, is it?’
He just laughed.
‘So it’s somebody new?’
‘Ken, this isn’t any of your business.’
‘Yeah, I know. But it is somebody new, isn’t it?’
‘Could be,’ he said, the (in retrospect) bastard, with a small smile.
‘Is she our age? Younger? Older? Children? How’d you meet?’
He shook his head as he opened the door. ‘You’re like a fucking journalist

yourself, so you are.’

‘Hope  she’s  worth  it!’  I  called  as  he  left  the  living-room  and  headed

upstairs.

I will freely confess that what I helped myself to while he was out - after a

lonesome  J  and  a  bottle  of  Rioja  -  were  the  1471  and  last-number  redial
functions on his phone, but all I got was fucking Pronto Pizza.

Come on, now; I could have started rifling through his itemised telephone

bill or something. The 1471/last-number thing was small beer … even if I did
feel just the tiniest bit of guilt at abusing my host and Official Best Friend
(Scottish)’s trust.

Like he was going to care; he still hadn’t reappeared next morning when I

left for work.

‘Ms Boysert is working from home today.’

‘Fine. Can you give me her home number?’
‘I’m sorry. She doesn’t want to be disturbed.’
‘Not really work, then, is it?’
‘I’m sorry?’
‘Look, can I have her home number or not?’
‘I’m sorry, Mr Nott. May I take a message?’
‘Yes; tell her she’s a bitch.’
‘I see. Do you really want me to pass that on, Mr Nott? I shall if you insist,

but …’

‘Ah, forget it.’

Noon on the Friday of the week Celia was due back in town came and went,
but  there  was  no  package  and  no  phone  call.  I’d  never  felt  so  crushed  at
knowing I would have to wait longer to see her. I started to wish I’d done
something a bit sad during one of our earlier afternoons, and asked her for a
pair  of  her  knickers  or  something.  At  least  then  I’d  have  something.  I
wondered if there was some Internet newsgroup or some website that would
steer me to the old magazines and catalogues she’d appeared in as a model.
There probably were, of course (I had long since hit the realisation, which
comes  to  most  users  sometime,  that  there  was  almost  nothing  you  could
imagine  that  was  not  on  the  Internet,  somewhere),  but  almost  as  soon  as  I
thought of this I decided that, on second and third thoughts, I really didn’t
want to know.

Craig spent the weekend away with his mystery woman. Ed was away, Emma
was engaged all the time, Amy I’d given up on and Phil was busy decorating.
I watched a lot of DVDs.

‘Ken! What’s your side of the story? Are you really claiming that none of it
happened?’

‘Ken! Ken! Did you send those death threats to yourself?’
‘Would you say Lawson Brierley got what he deserved, Ken?’
‘Ken, is it true them def frets were from someone wif a Muslim accent?’
‘Ken, is this all about publicity? Is it true the show’s being cancelled?’
‘Ken!  Straight  to  the  point,  straight  to  the  point;  we’ll  pay  you  for  an

exclusive. And you get approval. Pictures too!’

‘Ken,  is  it  true  you  punched  and  kicked  two  security  guards  and  a  girl

production assistant as well?’

‘Ken; they might get you for contempt of court; any thoughts?’
‘Kenneth, would you say your actions last Monday and your position since

constitute more of a context-challenging, metagenristic art work rather than a
simple act of political media violence?’

‘Oy! Ken; didya biff the cant or not?’
‘Hi, chaps! Chapesses! Fine morning, isn’t it?’
(That was me.)
‘Ken. Is your stance on this anything to do with your renowned antipathy

towards Israel? Could you be said to be over-compensating?’

‘Ken! Come on, Ken. You’re one of us. Play ball for fuck’s sake. Answer a

fucking question, can’t you? You know what’ll happen if you don’t. Did you
thump this bloke or not?’

‘Ken; is it true you have a conviction for assault already? In Scotland.’
‘Mr  Nott,  you’ve  frequently  criticised  politicians  for  refusing  to  answer

straight  questions  from  the  media;  don’t  you  feel  in  any  way  or  sense
hypocritical here?’

‘Love to answer all your questions, really would; just flippin well dying to,

as a matter of fact, and you can quote me on that. But I can’t. Ain’t life a pain
sometimes?’

(That would be me again.)
‘Ken! Ken! Ere, Ken! Over ere! Come on, mate; give us a smoile.’
‘Na, mate,’ I said. ‘That’s not my best side.’
‘Then wot the fuck is?’
‘Whatever it was, I’ve put it behind me. See you, guys.’
Kenneth has entered the building.
I  waved  my  pass  at  reception  and  the  security  guard  and  had  the  lift  to

myself  to  the  second  floor.  In  the  lift,  I  let  out  a  whoop,  then  relaxed,
slumping briefly against the wall.

I’d  decided  to  brave  the  press  on  the  one-week  anniversary  of  my  now

near-mythical tussle with the beastly fascist Holocaust denier and all-round
rotten egg, Lawson Brierley. I’d walked, tubed and walked from Craig’s to the
Capital  Live!  offices  and  seen  the  waiting  press  pack  ahead,  on  the  broad
pavement outside the main Soho Square entrance. I’d squared my shoulders,
reviewed one or two pre-prepared responses I’d thought might come in handy,
and gone sailing in amongst the fuckers.

If they knew they weren’t going to get anything out of you even when they

could  confront  you  face-to-face,  they  might  give  up  a  bit  earlier  than  they
would if you just plain avoided them, because if you just plain avoided them
they could still hope that if they ever did get you alone you’d crumble and
blab and basically come up with the goods they wanted. Not, of course, that
that would stop them just making stuff up, including supposedly direct quotes
- what the guy meant who’d said, You know what’ll happen if you don’t - but
at least your own conscience would be clear.

The  trick  had  nothing  to  do  with  not  answering  the  sensible,  reasonable

questions; the trick was all about not responding to the ridiculous ones, the
over-the-top  ones:  had  I  sent  death  threats  to  myself?  Had  I  hit  some  girl
assistant? Had I a conviction for assault already? (If I had, they’d have known
all about it; they’d have had a photocopy of the fucking charge sheet.) These
probably weren’t even rumours the press had heard from anybody else; these

would be questions the journos had made up themselves hoping that I’d react
to at least one of them, saying, Of course not! … But the trouble was that
answering one question would be like opening a vein while treading water in
a  pool  full  of  sharks;  it’d  be  a  fucking  feeding  frenzy  after  that.  Start
answering - start denying - and it was very hard to stop.

But it had been very hard.
A  Muslim  accent,  indeed.  And,  Was  the  show  being  cancelled?  The

devious, unprincipled fucks. (What the bampot who thought it was a work of
art was on about, I had no fucking idea. Did the Philosophical Review have
door-stepping rat-packers in these post-post-modern days? I had to suppose
that there was every chance they did.)

Still,  in  a  bizarre,  leaving-morality-aside-for-a-moment  sort  of  way,  you

couldn’t  help  but  be  impressed  by  their  ingenuity  and  dedication.  I  felt
privileged  to  have  been  verbally  roughed-up  by  such  consummate  experts.
And I was doing well; those had to be the premier league newshounds out
there, not cub reporters cutting their teeth.

Life and the show went on. Craig announced he would be out on the Monday
night as well, so I thought I might as well move back to the Temple Belle. I
did, and nothing bad happened. The Landy came back from the garage and
spent a night outside in the car park without being attacked or set on fire or
kidnapped or anything.

Having  braved  the  journos  once,  it  became  easier  and  easier  to  keep  on

doing so. The trick was to respond to nothing at all. ‘Ken; your dad says he’s
ashamed of you; what’s your response?’ (My response was to phone my mum
and dad, who’d been door-stepped by the fucking Mail on Sunday. Of course
they hadn’t said they were ashamed of me at all; they’d responded to some
hypothetical  question  the  journalist  had  put  to  them  about  people  hitting
defenceless other people and this had somehow - spookily - been extrapolated
into a direct quote.)

On  the  other  hand,  the  Guardian  had  done  some  digging  on  Lawson

Brierley and found that he did have convictions for assault; two, in fact, one
with  a  racial  element.  Not  to  mention  having  done  time  for  fraud  and
embezzlement.  Some  of  the  other  papers  were  sounding  just  a  little  more
sympathetic to me, though the Telegraph and the Mail still thought I ought to
be hung up by the thumbs, and the Mail made a big thing about withdrawing
its advertising from Capital Live!. Meanwhile I turned down a couple of TV
appearances and several exclusive interviews; I think the offers topped out at
eleven grand, which was mildly flattering without amounting to so much that
I’d ever entertain actually succumbing.

‘I suppose it must be a bit weird having to defend somebody you know is
guilty,’ I said to my lawyer.

Maggie Sefton looked at me with what looked like an, Are you serious?

expression. I looked back at her and she obviously decided I was just as naïve
as I appeared. ‘Ken,’ she said, shaking her head. ‘Ask any defence lawyer;
most of our clients are guilty.’ She gave a soundless laugh. ‘Civilians always
seem to think it must be really hard defending somebody you know is guilty.
It isn’t; that’s what you do practically all the time. Defending somebody you
know  is  innocent;  that  is  weird.’  She  hoisted  one  eyebrow  and  opened  an
already fairly stuffed box file. ‘That can cause you sleepless nights.’

‘So, tell me straight, Maggie,’ I said. ‘Am I being really stupid here?’
She looked up sharply. ‘You want my professional or personal opinion?’
‘Both.’
‘Professionally, you’re entering a minefield. Riverdancing.’
I had to smile at that. She smiled too, then the smile went.
‘Ken,  you’re  risking  charges  of  perjury  and  being  in  contempt  of  court.

Happily - if it comes to it - your employers are able to afford a good brief, but
I suspect he or she is going to spend a lot of their preparation time impressing
upon you the fact that you’ll have to be very, very controlled and careful in
what you say. If you go shooting your mouth off - in court or out of it - you
could be in serious trouble. The judge can send you down for contempt right
there and then, without any extra procedure, and perjury is, rightly, regarded
by judges as being a lot more serious an offence than simple unaggravated
assault.’

‘What about your personal opinion?’
Maggie smiled. ‘Personally, Ken, I’d say, Bully for you. But then what I

think personally doesn’t matter a damn.’

‘And the good news?’
She looked away for a while.
‘… In your own time,’ I said.
She clapped her hands. ‘Let’s crack on, shall we?’

Fending off journalists and ordinary callers interested in the matter during the
phone-ins became a game for that week. The crowd of journos shrank rapidly
until by the Thursday I got to work completely unmolested. I got it into my
head that Ceel would be listening that day, and that there would be a package
and a phone call from her when I finished the show, but - again - nothing.

That  left  Friday;  there  had  to  be  something  from  Ceel  on  the  Friday.

Otherwise it would just be too long an interval. She’d forget what I looked
like. She’d fall in love with her husband again. She’d find somebody else -
Jeez, suppose she already had? Oh my God; suppose she was some sort of
series-serial sexual adventurer and I was just one of a dozen or so guys she
met up with for sex every couple of weeks? What if she was fucking a whole
male harem of guys, one a day, even two a day! One in the morning, before
me! Maybe she was never out of those five star hotels, maybe she practically
lived in them, serviced by a steady stream of sadly deluded lovers. Maybe …

Shit, I was going crazy. I had to see her again, I had to talk to her.
‘Hey; that’s your old girlfriend, isn’t it?’
We were in the office after the Thursday show. Kayla had grabbed our copy

of the February edition of Q as soon as it had arrived. She was holding it up
across the desk from me. Phil looked up from his computer screen.

I frowned. ‘What? Who?’
‘Jo,’ Kayla said. ‘Look.’ She passed the magazine over.
It  was  in  the  News  section.  A  small  colour  photograph  and  a  couple  of

paragraphs. Brad Baker of Addicta pictured post-gig in Montreux with current
squeeze Jo LePage. La LePage, part of Addicta’s management team, has been
spotted on stage helping to provide backing vocals for the band; definitely a
better voice than Yoko Ono or Linda McCartney. Comparisons to Courtney
Love not invited. Hate mail from female teenage Brad Baker fans probably in
post already.

‘She’s fucking that bastard?’ I said. ‘She told me she hated him!’
‘That old trick,’ Kayla muttered. She was holding her hand out towards me.

She clicked her fingers. ‘Back, please.’

‘And  she  was  doing  PR  for  Ice  House,’  I  said.  ‘Not  helping  manage

Addicta. Fucking useless fucking journalists. Bastards.’

‘Ahem.’ Kayla clicked her fingers again.
‘Have it,’ I said, shoving it into her hand.
‘You’re blushing!’ Kayla said.
‘Who’s blushing?’ Andi said, coming through the door with a tray of coffee

and cakes.

‘Ken is; look,’ said Kayla. ‘His old girlfriend’s shagging Brad Baker.’
‘What? The Addicta guy?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Lucky cow!’
‘Yeah. It’s in Q; see?’

She glanced at me. ‘That’s a shame.’

I  looked  at  Phil.  ‘Am  I  really  blushing?’  I  felt  that  I  could  have  been.  I

certainly felt embarrassed. To still be so affected just because Jo was pictured
with somebody else; pathetic.

Phil looked at me carefully. ‘Ta,’ he said absently as Andi handed him his

cup and a doughnut. His eyes narrowed behind his glasses and he nodded.
‘Maybe a little.’

‘I think that’s sweet,’ Andi said, looking at me with a rueful, sympathetic

smile. In return I managed a mouth-twitch that might, from a distance with
the light behind it, have been interpretable as a smile by somebody partially
sighted.

‘Reminds me,’ Phil said, clattering at his keyboard. ‘Bit of gossip on the

office e-mail.’ He clattered some more. ‘Yeah,’ he said, nodding at the screen.
‘Mouth Corp might be buying Ice House.’

‘Ice Mouth!’ Kayla said.
‘Mouth House,’ Andi suggested.
‘Oh, fuck,’ I said, eloquently.

The Friday show ended. No package. I felt utterly depressed. I was walking
along the corridor to the office when my newly switched-on phone vibrated.
Yes! I pulled the Motorola from its holster.

Shit; my lawyer, again.
‘Maggie,’ I said, sighing.
‘Good news.’
I  perked  instantly;  lawyers  don’t  go  bandying  about  phrases  like  that

without  very  good  reason.  ‘What?  Lawson’s  been  found  in  a  child  abuse
ring?’

‘Better. He’s dropped the charges.’
‘You’re kidding!’ I stopped in the corridor.
‘No. He had some backers who were going to bankroll him in any resulting

civil action and I think they decided if they saw it through they’d just give
you a platform and let you make the point you’re so obviously trying to make.
So, they’ve pulled the plug. Mr Brierley has come to the same conclusion.’

That was rich; Lawson and his right-wing pals concerned about giving me a

platform. ‘So, is that it?’

‘There’s the matter of costs. We could go after them.’
‘Right, well, you’d better talk to the money or the legal people here about

that, but what about any sort of court case? I mean, is that it … for that?’

‘As I say, a civil action appears to have been ruled out, and, given that the

police  didn’t  choose  to  suggest  a  prosecution  themselves,  yes.  I  think  it’s
highly  unlikely  they’ll  change  their  minds  now.  Looks  like  you’re  in  the
clear.’

‘Ya fucking beauty!’ I said loudly. ‘So we’ve won!’
‘Well, you could put it that way, but technically we never fought, did we?

Let’s say they’ve withdrawn from the field and left it to your good self.’

‘Brilliant.  Maggie;  thanks  for  everything  you’ve  done.  I  appreciate  it.  I

really do. That’s incredible.’

‘Yes,  well,  the  bill  will  be  in  the  post,  but  for  what  it’s  worth,

congratulations. It was nice to meet you, Ken.’

‘Likewise, Mags. Superb job. Thanks again.’
‘Okay. Enjoy the champagne.’
‘Damn right! Hey; we’re off soon, here. Do you want to come round for a

drink?’

‘Thank you, but I’m very busy. Some other time, maybe. Okay?’
‘Yeah, okay. Thanks again. Cheers now. Bye.’
‘Bye, Ken.’
I walked the last few steps and threw the office door open on a surprised-

looking Phil, Kayla and Andi.

I threw my arms wide. ‘Ta-fucking-RA!’

‘Craig! Brilliant! I’ve been trying to get you!’

‘Ken.’
I was standing outside the Bough, looking down the street. Behind me, the

pub’s CD box was playing Outkast’s ‘Ms. Jackson’. It was moderately loud in
there;  we’d  persuaded  Landlady  Clara  to  turn  the  volume  up  to  levels
commensurate with serious celebration. It was about half six and the sky was
as dark as it ever gets in London; the dark of a cloudless night after a clear
day.  An  unseasonal  smell  of  drains  wafted  in  from  some  grating,  briefly
faecal before the light breeze flushed it away.

‘I got off!’ I yelled into the mobile. ‘There isn’t going to be a court case!

Lawson Fucking Brierley caved in! Isn’t that fucking brilliant?’

‘Yeah. I’m very happy for you.’
His voice chilled me. ‘Craig? What’s wrong?’ I asked, moving further out

of the pub’s doorway, further into the street, away from the noise and cheery,

beery smell of the pub.

‘Well,’ Craig said. ‘There’s some good news and some bad news, Ken.’
‘What? What is it? Is Nikki okay?’
‘Nikki’s fine. This is not about Nikki.’
That at least, was some sort of relief. ‘Well, what, then?’
‘The good news is that Emma and I are getting back together.’
‘You are?’ I stopped and thought. ‘Well, that is fucking superb! Well done!

That’s great. I am so pleased for you. I am really so happy for the two of you.
Honestly.’

‘Yeah,’ Craig said, and I could hear him take a deep breath.
‘The bad news is that when we decided we were going to get back together

we  thought  we  ought  to  have  a  sort  of  clearing  of  the  decks  about  other
relationships.’

Oh-oh, I thought. ‘Uh-huh,’ I said.
‘I had one or two … episodes to report.’
‘Yeah,’  I  said,  feeling  suddenly  cold.  ‘Good  for  you;  glad  to  hear  it.’  I

leaned back against the stonework by the side of one of the pub’s windows.

‘Emma had one or two little dalliances to put on the table too. And one -

just a one-night thing - she didn’t want to tell me about. We were supposed to
tell each other everything, but she still didn’t want to name names, or name
the  name.  In  fact,  she  never  did  tell  me  directly.  But  after  a  bit  …  well,
eventually I just realised who it had to be, Ken.’

There was a long pause. ‘Yes,’ I said.
‘It was you, wasn’t it?’
Oh fuck. Oh fuck, fuck, fuck oh fuck.
‘… You still there, Ken?’
‘I’m still here, man.’
‘So it was you, wasn’t it?’
‘Craig, I—’
‘It was you.’
‘Look, man, I—’
‘It was you.’
‘… Yes, it was me.’
Another long pause. I cleared my throat, shifted my position  against the

wall,  smiled  briefly,  thinly  at  a  guy  walking  past  who  glanced  at  me  and
seemed to recognise me.

feel?’

too.’  I  had  to  clear  my  throat  again.  ‘It  was  just  something  that  happened,
Craig, not something we planned or, or meant in advance or anything. It was
one of those comforting things, just got a bit, ah, just went on a bit beyond,
well, you know … ?’

‘No, I don’t know, Ken,’ Craig said. ‘The only time I was in a remotely

similar situation, like a mug I agreed with Jo that it wasn’t worth jeopardising
our relationships with you for a quick shag. I have to say I kind of regret that
now. You must have been laughing your head off, inside, when I told you that,
mustn’t you?’

‘Of course I wasn’t, Craig; for fuck’s sake, I was cringing. Look, for God’s

sake, man, I am sorry. I never wanted you to get hurt. I so did not want you or
Emma to get hurt. It just happened, it was one of those things.’ Oh Jesus, I
thought. Listen to me. One of those things. Was that really the best I could
do? ‘I just thought we could …’

‘Get away with it?’
‘If you like. Just … just have it be a no-loss thing. God, man, it wasn’t me

getting one over on you or anything or any sort of macho shit, it was just,
trying to be a friend to Em, to help her through what she was going through. It
was all tears and, well, you know; drink had been taken, and, and so there
were, like I say, a lot of … a lot of tears, and hugs, and, and—’

‘And you fucked my wife, Ken.’
I closed my eyes, turned in towards the stonework of the pub. ‘No,’ I said.
‘No?’
‘No, that’s not what happened. That just isn’t what it was all about. Two

people  who’d  known  each  other  and  been  friends,  and  had  somebody  in
common that they loved, or had loved and still loved, two people like that
were together and one was very lonely and vulnerable and needed a shoulder
to cry on and the other was a bit lonely too, and weak the way most men are,
and was so glad to be able to offer some support and flattered that the other
person  felt  comforted  being  held  and  hugged  and  shushed  by  him,  and  …
neither of them could stop just a sort of natural response happening when they
held  each  other.  And  they  both  felt  guilty,  but  they  both  felt  …  reassured,
validated; no, not validated, that’s such a crap word. They both had clung to
another human being and though there was another person involved, another
person they both loved, in the background, it was just that; it was not about
—’

‘Not about fucking my wife, Ken.’
I kept my eyes closed. ‘No. It wasn’t. That just wasn’t it. If that’s the way it

feels, I’m sorry. I am so, so sorry, Craig. I did not want to hurt you, or her. I
am so sorry I have.’ I paused. ‘I mean it.’

He was silent for a while. ‘The sad thing is, Ken, you probably do mean it.’
‘You are still getting back together? What I mean is, this isn’t going to—’
‘We’re  still  getting  back  together,  Ken,’  Craig  said.  ‘It’s  you  who’s  the

problem. Not me or Em.’

‘Look, man, I—’
‘Ken, Ken; Ken …’
‘What?’
‘Could you just leave us for a bit? Just the two of us. We need time to … to

settle in together. Know what I mean?’

I wanted to be sick. I opened my mouth very wide. I swallowed. ‘Sure. Yes.

Of course. I … yeah, of course.’

‘We’ll maybe be … we’ll need … we’ll need time to think.’
‘Yeah. Of course you will.’ I found I’d bitten my lip. I could taste blood. ‘I,

ah, I hope you’re both really happy. I hope it all works out. I really do.’

‘Yeah. Well. Ah … thanks for being honest, at least. I’m glad your court

thing came out well.’

‘Yeah. Thanks. Yeah.’
‘Goodbye, Ken.’
And, oh, Christ, just the way he said that. I felt tears on my cheeks as I

said, ‘Bye, Craig.’

The phone clicked off. I folded it, holstered it. I stood looking at the gutter

for a while, listening to the sound of the music coming from the pub.

Eventually I pulled myself upright, wiped my nose and dabbed my cheeks,

squared my shoulders and went back to the door of the Bough. I half thought
of  just  walking  away  then,  going  home  and  crying  into  my  pillow  or
something, but I still had a legal let-off to celebrate, and what better way to
drown the pain of having hurt - and maybe lost for ever - my best pal than by
getting disgustingly drunk?

Pints, whiskies, a cigar. Much pointed nattering and nonsense with Phil and
Kayla and Andi, then the girls went and Phil and I were left alone for the last
hour before chucking-out time. We talked about going to Clout or some other
club, then settled on the Groucho. I bumped into an ad creative I knew usually
carried excess gear and scored some reasonable quality coke off him, to sober

myself  up  a  little  (mainly  so  I  could  get  drunk  all  over  again),  but  then  I
spilled most of it on the toilet floor just because I was so fucked on booze.

I didn’t remember getting a taxi, or saying goodbye to Phil, or leaving the

Groucho;  all  I  remembered  was  getting  home  to  the  Temple  Belle  and
standing on the deck looking out at the waters and having to close one eye so
as not to see double and then deciding that it was absolutely necessary that I
phoned Ceel. I hadn’t seen her for far too long. I’d just escaped a court case
and I might have lost one of my two best friends and I needed to talk to her,
badly. I even considered, very briefly, going round to the Merrials’ house and
staring up at each window in turn, hoping she was in, hoping she was there,
just so that I could feel I was close to her; maybe I could even ring the bell,
and … No.

I’d phone her.
I had to use both hands on the phone and keep one eye closed but I found

my way to Location 96 on the menu and immediately hit OK when it said
Call Number? and then heard her voice. I heard her voice! It was recorded,
but it was her! I found my eyes filling with tears.

A message. I could leave a message.
Ha; dirty, why not? Maybe she’d like that.
‘Oh, lady, I want to fuck you sooo much,’ I said, slurring. ‘It’s been far too

long, Ceel … and that’s not just my cock I’m talking about … Ha ha. Please
get in touch. I need you. I miss you so much. I need to lick that lightning,
yeah. Let’s get together again, soon. Real soon. Love you. Night. Night, Ceel.
Oh,  oh,  it’s  me;  me,  Ken.  Ken  the  Naughty.  Ha.  Night  night.  Night  night,
Ceel. Love you. Want to fuck you. Night night. Love you. Night night.’

I got indoors and to bed somehow.
Some bit of my brain must still have been working, though, because when I

woke to the light of morning it was not just to a total bastard of a hangover
but  to  the  full,  awful,  blood-draining,  bowel-loosening,  heart-constricting
realisation of what I’d done.

Ten

LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION

Oh shit.

Eleven

EXTENDED PANIC FUNCTIONALITY

Oh  dear  holy  fucking  Christ  almighty.  Oh  my  fucking  God.  Oh  fuck  upon
fuck upon total fuck to the power of fuck.

I hadn’t, had I? Oh dear God, let it be a dream, let it be a nightmare, let it

not have happened, let me have called a different number. Let it be anybody
else’s phone, anybody; my mum and dad’s, Craig’s, Ed’s, the office, anybody
anybody anybody just please please please not that one, not the number that
I’d overwritten where Ceel’s mobile number had been.

I fell off the bed, still fully clothed. The phone wasn’t in its little holster on

my hip. I looked around. Where the hell was it? Oh my God, oh my God.
Where was it? I threw back the duvet, looked under the bed, searched the tops
of the bedside cabinets, the dresser, the table in front of the couch. What had I
done with it? I had to find the little fucker, had to check, had to make sure that
what I was terrified I had done, I hadn’t really done. Oh fucking hell, they
could be on their way now, they might be parking, walking down the pontoon,
treading on the gangplank, setting foot on the decking. They’d have the two
seats set up, the big blond guy would be looking forward to the sound and feel
of knees bending the wrong way and snapping. Then they’d castrate me, then
they’d torture me to death. Or maybe they’d be quick, merciful, and just put a
bullet through my head. Oh but dear God, Ceel. What would Merrial do to
her? What would he do to make her talk, then once she had, what would he do
to her for what she’d done with me?

room.  It  had  to  be  here.  It  had  to  be.  Oh,  fuck,  this  just  could  not  be
happening. This had to be a dream. This right now; I wasn’t really awake at
all.  I  was  having  the  mother-fucking  great-granddaddy  of  all  nightmares.  I
had to be. I hadn’t done that. I just hadn’t. I could not be that drunk; nobody
could. It was not physically possible to drink so much that any human being
could forget that he’d overwritten his lover’s mobile number with her home
number, not when the home number was that of not just her but her husband,
a  major  league  fucking  gangster  notorious  for  having  his  giant  bodyguard
bounce  up  and  down  on  the  legs  of  people  he  disliked  until  their  knees
cracked  or  their  ankles  snapped  or  their  femurs  popped  out  of  their  hip
sockets  or  whatever  fucking  horrible  thing  or  ghastly  combination  or
succession of things happened when they did this to you.

I  turned  the  living-room  upside  down.  I  threw  cushions,  lifted  rugs,  left

drawers hanging open. This had to be a dream, this had to be a nightmare. I
couldn’t have done what I thought I had. There was not enough booze on the
fucking  planet  to  make  a  man  do  something  so  fucking  stupid.  There  had
never been, in the whole history of the species, sufficient drink fermented,
distilled or brewed to make anybody, anybody, anybody at all no matter how
stupid,  how  thoughtless,  how  much  of  a  total  fucking  complete  and  utter
fuckwit of the first water, do something that suicidally imbecilic. There were
physical laws, immutable rules written into the very warp and woof of the
fabric of reality itself, which would prevent any supposedly sentient creature
doing anything a tenth as cretinously, murderously insane as that.

A dream. A nightmare. The worst one ever; a new low-water mark in the

sump  of  human  fright  and  terror.  I  must  still  be  asleep  and  my  heart  was
probably about to stop out of sheer horror. I had to wake up. I really did.

I stumbled into the bathroom, turned on the cold tap and splashed my face,

splashing and slapping my cheeks and staring at myself in the mirror, at the
white, terror-struck face of a man who was not going to wake up from his
nightmare because it was the worst sort of nightmare, the kind that’s real, the
kind you can die from but never wake from. The face of a man who’d killed
the one woman he really loved in all the world, consigned her to a horrific,
slow, painful, pitiful death because he’d got drunk and been stupid, because
he just hadn’t thought, because he’d selfishly wanted to talk to her, because
he’d thought it would somehow be funny or sexy to leave a totally shite dirty
message on her phone, because he couldn’t read a fucking display and see
that it was a different number, a land-line number, because he couldn’t hear
the  difference  between  a  mobile  message  service  and  a  common-or-garden
domestic answering machine.

Why had it been her? Why the fuck couldn’t the fucking man of the house

have  recorded  the  fucking  answering  machine  spiel?  Why  had  that  cunt
Merrial made his wife record the message, the pathetic, useless, disgusting,
inadequate piece of shit?

I looked down at the shelf above the sink. The phone was there. I grabbed

it. But I must have left it on last night, because it was dead; no power.

I screamed at it. No words, just a scream. Yes, scream, I thought. Get in

some practice for later, because you’re probably going to be doing quite a lot
of screaming in the very near future. Scream when you see the two chairs
drawn up just a leg-length apart, when you see the big blond guy smiling at
you  and  bouncing  up  and  down  on  his  toes,  scream  when  they  tie  you  in,
scream when they bring out the knives or the pliers or the blow torch. Yes,
screaming now was a very good idea. Might even energise the phone in some
spooky  way,  jar  its  battery  into  life.  Because  I  had  to  check;  I  needed  the
fucking useless silvery little piece of shit on and working so I could hit the
Last Calls Made list and find that - hey - of course I hadn’t called Ceel (even
though I could still hear her voice, still remember standing on the deck in the
darkness and listening to her beautiful voice); no, I’d called somebody else.
Any-fucking-body else.

Ceel. I had to phone her. I ran out, put the phone into the recharging unit on

the living-room desk, and lifted the boat’s own land-line phone.

Nothing. Oh, Jesus! They’d cut the phone line! They were - the dialling

tone sounded. I hesitated. Right thing? Was I doing the right thing? Yes, of
course. Right to check, just in case this was somehow as stupid as what I’d
done  last  night,  but  the  right  thing.  Definitely  the  right  thing.  I  called  her
mobile number, the number I knew by heart. Oh please be there, please have
it switched on. No; please don’t be there at your house, please be somewhere
else, anywhere else, somewhere you can run, hide, get away from him.

Oh sweet Jesus Christ, answer, Ceel, answer. Please, please answer.
‘Hello?’
Oh, Christ, yes!
‘Celia. Hi. It’s Ken. Kenneth. Ken Nott.’ Oh God, I was going to have to

tell her, going to have to admit I was an imbecile, that I’d put her in the most
fucking awful danger, all through my sheer drunken stupidity.

‘Yes?’
‘Listen, I’ve done something really, unbelievably stupid. You need to get

away, you need to run.’

‘Yes,’  she  said  calmly.  ‘I’m  in  Scotland.’  Behind  her  voice  I  could  hear

what sounded like a car engine.

‘Scotland?’ I yelped. But then that was good. Anywhere away from London

was  good.  Unless  she  was  with  him,  unless  she  was  with  him  and  he  was
going to access their answering machine remotely, from wherever they were
in Scotland. Oh, shit.

‘Oh, you’re breaking up, I’m afraid,’ she lied. ‘I’ll call you back when I’ve

got a clear … oh, no; gone. Well,’ I heard her say to somebody else, ‘that was
unusua—’

And she was gone.
I picked up the mobile, hoping it had recharged sufficiently. No.
I sat down, shaking. Ceel was alive. In Scotland. She’d had a warning of

sorts and she was going to call back when she wasn’t with whomever she was
with.

If  I  had  done  what  I  feared  I  had  -  and  I  had  to  accept  I  probably  had

because I could remember her voice and something of the words she’d used
on the answering machine message - then what could I do? I looked at my
watch. The massive Breitling said it was - shit - half ten. Had to give it back, I
thought; go back to my more elegant Spoon … what was I thinking of? Fuck
the watch, fucking thinking about the watch or anything else apart from the
fucking  suicidal,  murderous  position  I’d  put  myself  and  Celia  in.  Think;
maybe  Merrial  was  with  her.  Maybe  -  probably  -  they  were  away  for  the
whole weekend. That gave me a day and a half to do something.

What could I do? Burn their house down? Break in? Hope there was a maid

or a butler or somebody (but then why the answering machine?) and try to
impersonate a … I didn’t know. Gas man? Cop? Jehovah’s fucking Witness?

Could I access the tape or the chip from outside somehow? What if I rang

again and just left an immensely long message, would it overwrite the one
from  last  night?  No.  Of  course  not.  No  answering  machine  I’d  ever
encountered would do that. Nobody would design one like that. Well, nobody
with any sense; a fuckwit like me would, obviously.

Set fire to the fucking place. Heave a petrol bomb through a window, pour

lighter fluid through the letter box; when the fire brigade came - ring them
first, ring them just beforehand, but not the police - let them break down the
door  and  then  go  in  with  them,  pretend  to  be  a  plain-clothes  cop,  or  from
special branch, or find a fancy dress shop and hire a police uniform …

Oh, please let it still not have happened. Please let it be a really vivid false

memory syndrome thing. I’d imagined her voice on the answering machine
message. It hadn’t been her. I’d put the wrong number in from Merrial’s card,
misplaced a digit and it had been there all the time and the first time I used it I
got some female who happened to live at the house that had the phone with
the one-digit difference from the Merrials’ and so I’d left this filthy, sexually
abusive message on the answering machine of a total stranger. Oh, God, it had

to be that. It had to be.

But if it wasn’t, if I really had done it, what could I do?
I felt sick. I felt really sick. My head was spinning, I was getting the tunnel

vision thing. Roaring in ears. I got up and stumbled to the loo.

Ten minutes later, still getting the occasional dry heave, my throat raw, my

mouth vile despite the mouthwash, my teeth with that stripped stickiness that
comes from having recently been bathed in stomach acid, I sat back at the
living-room desk and tried the mobile again. My face had still been white in
the mirror. My hands were shaking uncontrollably. I had to rest the mobile on
my  lap  so  that  I  could  hit  the  right  buttons.  I  started  crying  with  the
awkwardness and the hopelessness of it all.

The  little  phone  buzzed  awake  on  my  thigh.  It  only  had  a  single  bar  of

battery  capacity  showing  but  that  was  all  I’d  need.  Just  keep  going  for  a
minute or two, you little piece of shit; you could have fucking died on me last
night  before  I  made  the  call  that  might  get  me  tortured  and  killed  and  my
beloved  too,  you  silvery  be-buttoned  turd.  Yes,  I  know  you’re  fucking
Searching … Just fucking stop it and get on with it. Menu; Phone Book, OK,
Voice Dialling, Personal Numbers, Last Ten Calls. My mouth went dry. OK.
Last Calls Made. Select? OK.

Here we go.
I stared at the number. I jumped up and got my wallet, where Merrial’s card

still was. I checked one number against the other. I checked again and again,
willing one, just one, just one lousy single fucking little digit to be different.
For fuck’s sake, it wouldn’t have been difficult to make a mistake; I made
mistakes all the time. Even when I’m sober. Constantly. Just this one time let
this be a mistake.

Call? said the little bit of script at the bottom of the screen. No. No, I don’t

fucking want to call it again, you worthless stupid piece of crap. I want to
Undo. I want to press F1 or go to the relevant menu with a mouse arrow and
Undo,  totally  fucking  Undo  what  I  did  last  night,  rewind  the  tape,  oh  yes,
wipe  the  chip,  reformat  the  disk,  rewind  that  fucking  little  deadly  tape  or
whatever the hell it was sitting in a house less than a mile away from here,
rewind and erase. Better still, take it out and fucking burn it and mash the
ashes into a fine paste and flush it all down a waste disposal unit somewhere
in Outer fucking Mongolia.

I  read  the  numbers  out  from  the  phone’s  screen,  comparing  them  to  the

numbers  on  Merrial’s  card.  They  were  identical.  They  weren’t  going  to
change now. I closed the phone.

Maybe he wouldn’t guess who it was. I’d said it was Ken, I remembered

that - I thought - but maybe he wouldn’t think to link that drunken Ken with

the guy he’d met once in the courtyard of Somerset House … Oh, shit, what
was I thinking of ? I’d said Naughty Ken or something equally pathetic and
incriminating, hadn’t I? Or had I?

voice. Even if Merrial didn’t ever listen to the show and had missed my high
TV and radio presence over the last few weeks or never heard an ad with my
voiceover, somebody he knew would recognise me. And anyway, I didn’t bar
my  mobile  number;  his  answering  machine  would  have  remembered  the
number,  the  way  they  all  did,  didn’t  they?  Or  maybe  his  didn’t;  maybe
Merrial was one of those Early Adopters and he had a really old machine he’d
never  got  round  to  replacing  and  it  didn’t  keep  a  note  of  the  incoming
numbers.

Yeah, right.
But even if he had the number, how would he know it was mine? I hadn’t

given him my number, he couldn’t … Yes, and of course as a big crime lord
he’d have absolutely no way of finding who a mobile number belonged to. Of
course he would.

I know! I thought. He owed me a favour. Merrial; he’d said to call him if

there was ever a favour he could do for me. I’d phone and phone and phone
until I got an answer, or go over there and slip a note through the door, ask
him  to  just  not  listen  to  his  messages,  as  a  favour  to  me;  just  trust  me.
Heavens, yes, that was bound to work. And OJ was innocent and al-Megrahi
was guilty.

Phone now! I thought. Of course! Phone now and find out if the fucking

answering machine was still switched on. Why hadn’t I thought of that first?
Because I was still drunk, hung-over and panicking under the influence of the
most  catastrophically  fuckwittish  mistake  ever  made  in  the  long  history  of
catastrophically fuckwittish mistakes.

I reached for the land-line. Oh fuck, what if he answered? What if he said

something like, Ah, Kenneth, you again. I received your earlier message. Very
interesting. I’ve just sent some of my colleagues round to your place to invite
you for a little chat …

Oh fuck, oh fuck.
I took three attempts to press the number into the phone, my hands were

shaking so much.

Ceel’s voice, recorded. Her beautiful, clear, calm, perfect voice. Leave a

message after the tone … then a series of beeps signifying the message or
messages already left - mine! mine was there, that dirty, drunken, rambling
shite  being  spooled  past  right  now!  -  then  the  beep.  I  didn’t  leave  another
message. I put the phone down. So - probably - nobody had listened to the

message.  The  worst  had  not  yet  happened.  Unless,  of  course,  Merrial  was
being clever and only pretending that he hadn’t listened … but that was even
more paranoid than reality demanded, and fuck knew that was bad enough.

Maybe I could sort of half own up. I could say I’d become obsessed with

Celia after seeing her on the ice that day. I was living out this fantasy where
we were lovers, stalking her … No. No, he’d still do something horrible to
me, just for that, and more likely he’d want to check that nothing had been
going  on,  so  he’d  still  have  me  tortured  to  get  at  the  truth.  And  I  had  no
illusions about my ability to hold out under severe pain, not for Ceel, not for
myself, not for anybody.

My palms were very sweaty. My mouth was so dry I couldn’t swallow. I

got up unsteadily and went to the kitchen for some bottled water. The land-
line phone rang on the second swallow, and I sprayed water over the carpet.

‘Yes?’
‘Kenneth?’ It was her. Thank fuck. Her; still alive, still not screaming in

agony, still able to talk; now able to talk. ‘What’s wrong?’

I told her. In all my life - and there might not be much more of it to come -

I had never known anybody stay so calm in the face of a disaster as utter and
unmitigated.  She  had  every  right  to  scream  and  cry  and  bawl,  but  she  just
asked a couple of sensible, measured questions to clear up some of the holes
I’d left in my semi-hysterical account of what had happened. Then I heard her
sigh. ‘Right,’ she said. ‘Well, I’m in Scotland, staying with some friends near
Inverness.  John  is  caving  in  the  Peak  District.  He’s  due  back  tonight  or
tomorrow.’

‘Tonight? Oh, Jesus Christ.’
‘Depends on the weather; if there’s been too much rain the system will be

flooded and they won’t be able to do much. It was touch and go, last I heard.’

I  ran  a  hand  over  my  face.  ‘Can  you  access  the  messages  on  your

answering machine from outside, from a different phone?’

‘No.  John  specifically  did  not  want  one  which  could  do  that,  in  case

somebody else found out how to access it.’

‘Okay, okay, well, that gives us until he gets home, at least.’ I closed my

eyes and stood there shaking my head. ‘Oh, Ceel, I am so, so sorry. I can’t, I
just can’t begin to tell you—’

‘Kenneth, stop. We have to think. Right. Bien. I can claim an emergency

and ask to be run straight back to the airport. I’ll get on the next flight. I can
get home before him, wipe the tape.’

‘Oh, please, yes; please, please.’
‘I’d  better  let  my  hosts  know.’  I  heard  her  exhale.  ‘This  should  be

interesting. I’ll call you back as soon as I know what’s happening. ’

‘Ceel?’
‘What?’
‘I love you.’
This  time  it  was  an  in-taken  breath.  ‘Yes,’  she  said.  ‘Well.  Talk  to  you

soon.’

And off.
I drank from the bottle of water, hands still shaking. I stared ahead, seeing

nothing. Still alive. Both of us still alive. So far so good. So far no torture and
painful  death.  She’d  get  back.  She’d  return,  in  time.  Brilliant,  calm,
resourceful Ceel would clear up the pig’s diarrhoea of a mess her idiot lover
had made. She’d make it all well again. Bless that smart, sexy, wonderful,
gorgeous, fantastic woman. She might never talk to me again, she might write
me out of her life forevermore and curse me ritually every night before she
went to sleep for the rest of her hopefully long life for the ignorant scumbag
dickhead that I so surely was, but at least she’d be alive to do it, at least we’d
both live. We wouldn’t suffer for my stupidity. I drank some more water and
told myself that one day I’d see the funny side of all this.

Ceel rang back forty minutes later with the news that Inverness airport was

out of action for the day, fog-bound.

‘You have to run,’ I said. My mouth had gone dry again. ‘That’s all we can
do. Run. You have to get away. Further away. Oh, God, Ceel—’

‘No-no,’ she said crisply. ‘I’ll find out when there’s a flight next to London

from Aberdeen, Edinburgh or Glasgow, then hire a car to whichever one. I’ll
charter a plane or helicopter if I can. The timing will be tighter but it ought
still to be possible. But there is another possibility.’

‘What?’
‘You could get into the house.’
‘How? Does anybody else have a key? Is there anybody in the house?’
‘No. There shouldn’t be. The staff have the weekend off.’
‘So, how—?’
‘There’s a key in the back garden, inside an artificial stone.’
‘There is?’ This sounded a bit low-rent and risky for such a posh address.
‘Yes. Then once you’re inside you’ll have to switch the alarm off.’
‘Okay, okay, right.’
‘I’ll give you the number for that. However, there is a problem.’

‘Shit. What?’
‘Getting into the back garden from the lane. There’s a high wall.’
‘So what’s the point of—?’
‘There’s a garage off the lane; you’re supposed to be able to get into the

garage  with  the  remote  control  in  the  car  and  then  use  the  spare  key.  Or
there’s an ordinary door, but it’s locked too.’

‘Right. Okay.’ I had an idea. ‘How high is the wall exactly? Well, not ex—’
‘Three metres, perhaps three and a half.’
‘Any razor wire or anything?’
‘No.’
‘Not even broken bottles?’
‘No.’
‘Okay, I think I can get into the back garden. I suppose it’s over-looked? By

other—?’

‘Yes. But it’s usually quiet; it’s a dead-end off the mews further down.’
‘This artificial stone; how do I find it?’
‘Counting from the rear wall of the garage there are two lanterns on the

west garden wall, then the third one. The stone with the key inside is directly
under the third lantern and two stones out from the wall. Once you see it it
looks almost obvious.’

‘West wall, garage rear wall, third lantern, two stones out.’ I rubbed a hand

over the back of my neck. All this was just what I needed in the condition I
was  in.  ‘What  about  the  alarm?  Is  it  linked  to  a  security  firm  HQ  or
anything?’

‘Yes, and to the local police station.’
‘The local police station? Really?’
‘You  might  be  surprised  at  the  arrangements  John  has  with  the

Metropolitan Police, Kenneth.’

‘Yeah, I dare say I might,’ I agreed. ‘What about surveillance cameras?’
‘No. Well, none that I know of.’
‘Right.’
‘Here’s the alarm code.’
‘Shoot.’
‘Write it down, will you?’
‘Okay.’ I lifted Merrial’s card. ‘Go.’ I wrote the code down on the back of

Merrial’s card, then repeated it. ‘And where is the answering machine?’

‘It’s in John’s study. On the first floor. Oh.’
‘Now what?’
‘The study might be locked.’
‘Locked? But—’
‘It’s a gun room, too; it’s supposed to be locked.’
‘A gun … ? Jeez. Right. So if it is, then what?’
‘I  have  a  key  in  my  bedroom.  That’s  on  the  second  floor.  John  doesn’t

know about it. You’ll have to go there first if the study door is locked.’

You  couldn’t  just  have  the  damn  thing  where  people  usually  have

answering  machines,  by  the  front  door,  could  you?  I  thought.  And,  Ceel’s
bedroom; I’d fantasised about something like this for months, but not exactly
in these circumstances.

‘Okay. Where’s the key?’
‘In  my  bathroom.  There  is  a  cabinet  above  the  sink.  Inside  the  box  of

tampons.’

Smart thinking, I guessed. ‘Right.’
‘When you get to the answering machine, you wipe the tape by pressing

Function and then Clear. Got that?’

‘Function and Clear. I’d rather tear the whole tape out or take a big magnet

and wipe it of everything, but that’ll have to do. Maybe I’ll do it twice.’

‘Function and Clear should do it.’
‘Okay.’
‘Keep in touch.’
‘Will do.’
‘Please be careful, Kenneth.’
‘Oh, I will. Best of luck getting a flight.’
‘Thank you. Goodbye.’
‘Bye.’
I put the phone down. I wasn’t shaking so much now. I drank some more

water. At least we had a plan of campaign. At least I had something I could
do, rather than just wait for Celia to come and fix things. God, what sort of
man was I? Of course I should be doing something. I’d got us both into this
grisly mess; it should be me that got both of us out of it. Or even only her. If I
could just save Ceel I’d have done something good, something to make up for
my gross incompetence. My own miserable behind was patently not worth the
saving,  attached  as  it  so  obviously  was  to  a  spine  with  a  lump  of  barely
solidified  porridge  at  the  other  end  where  a  normal  person  would  have  a

functioning brain, but hers … her glorious ass was entirely and utterly worth
saving, even at the expense of my own.

over the wall? They’d call the cops, or at the very least they might take the
Land Rover’s registration number.

How  could  I  get  new  numbers  for  it?  You  could  get  rear  number  plates

from any Halfords; people did all the time for trailers and there was no check
on whether you really had a vehicle with that number, but you couldn’t get
white, front number plates that easily. Maybe I could make false ones using
the  computer.  Print  out  a  couple  of  sheets  of  A4  with  the  relevant  sized
numerals and then wrap them in cling-film or something and tape them over
the real ones. Should fool the casual observer. Wouldn’t even need exactly the
right font because people had weird fonts on their plates sometimes; I’d seen
them.

Better, I could phone the garage that had repaired the Landy and get some

old plates off them. They were bound to have some; it would just be a short-
term loan anyway. I had about three hundred quid in an emergency stash at
the back of my sock drawer and I could pick up another two-fifty from a cash
machine. That should hire a set of plates for an hour. Wouldn’t it? How likely
was I to find the only small London garage that would shake their heads at my
proposed criminality and promptly phone the cops? Surely not.

On  the  other  hand,  it  would  take  time,  delay  things.  Supposing  Merrial

came back early? Detouring via the garage might make all the difference. And
it  would  introduce  another  variable  into  the  equation,  one  more  source  of
potential  leaking.  Supposing  the  garage  people  knew  people  who  knew
Merrial? If the Landy was spotted and the false numbers were traced to them,
who knew what might happen, what they’d do, what they’d be persuaded to
say, how they’d jump?

So  I  couldn’t  risk  it.  But  meanwhile  I’d  sat  here  slugging  water  and

thinking  about  it  and  wasted  a  few  minutes.  Well  done,  Kenneth.  Ten  past
eleven. Get going.

Traffic  was  relatively  light.  It  was  a  pleasantly  mild  winter  morning;  high
cloud and a watery sun. Breezy. Why the fuck couldn’t it be breezy in fucking
Inverness? And dry in the Peak fucking District? I could have gone faster, but
I stuck to between thirty and thirty-five. This would be no time to be caught
speeding, especially with God knew how much alcohol still sloshing about in
my system.

Ascot  Square  was  quiet.  Bunches  of  silver  balloons  tied  to  railings

indicated there’d been a party in one of the grand town-houses on the other

side  of  the  square  from  the  Merrials’.  Maybe  a  twenty-fifth  anniversary  or
something. Lots of Mercs, Jags and BMWs, plus Range Rovers and a brace of
Rollers or Bentleys; Audi A2s and a couple of Smarts, too. The Merrials lived
in number eleven, near the centre of the imposing, four-storeys-plus-basement
terrace. No obvious signs of life at number eleven.

Tall limes and beeches in the private gardens in the centre of the square. I

drove on through into Eccleston Street then into Chester Square. I parked in a
residents only space for a couple of minutes, climbing into the back of the
Landy and pulling on my overalls. Brand new, basically; I’d got them when I
bought the Landy, thinking I’d do my own repairs. And a size too small; my
shirt sleeves and the bottom of my 501s protruded from the green overalls by
a  good  two  or  three  centimetres.  Great;  so  now  I  looked  stupid  as  well  as
villainous. I had an old Sony Music Awards baseball cap; I put that on too. Bit
of a giveaway industry-wise, but what else was I supposed to do? Sunglasses
from the cubby box between the front seats.

Gloves! Of course I needed gloves. I was going to break into a house, or

make an illegal entry or whatever the legally nice definition was. I didn’t want
to  go  leaving  fingerprints  all  over  the  fucking  place.  Gloves.  I  had  some
somewhere. I rummaged behind the bench seats on either side, feeling down
between  the  seat  cushions  and  the  back  rests.  Blimey,  you  could  hide  a
complete fucking tool kit along here … gloves. Got them. They were thick,
padded things for pulling out bramble bushes or hauling on winch wires or
some such manly shit as that, not at all the sort of fine, thin things you’d want
for the delicate business of letting yourself into somebody else’s house, but,
shit, they’d just have to do.

I  jumped  back  into  the  front  and  set  off  again,  back  past  Ascot  Square

proper and round into the mews behind it on the south side. Lots of close-
packed but very expensive mews properties with differing treatments of the
old  architecture;  a  jumbled  variety  of  windows  large  and  small,  balconies,
awnings and outside steps. Lots of plants, too; hanging baskets, big pot plants
and trailing vines. Oh shit; and a family loading up their Landy Discovery.
Young couple and three kids getting their cool boxes and child seats sorted for
a day out. Shit! What sort of time was this to be setting out for the day? It was
practically noon! Best bit of the day gone, dammit! Couldn’t the miserable
fucking curs have got their shit together a bit closer to breakfast?

The  man  looked  up  when  he  saw  my  battered  Short-Wheelbase

approaching  down  the  cobbles.  Took  a  good  look  at  me.  Hmm,  don’t
recognise  that  beaten-up  old  wreck,  or  the  shifty  looking  weirdo  with  the
sunglasses driving it. Not a resident I’ve ever seen before. And that’s not a
Power or Gas company van. You could practically see the thought bubbles.

I wound the window down and stopped by the Disco. ‘Scuse me, mite. Zis

Ascot Mews Norf?’

‘Ah, na,’ said the man. ‘This is Siythe, actually.’
‘Sarf ?’ I said. ‘Ah, roight.’ I looked over at the other seat, as though there

was something there I was consulting. ‘Roight. Ta, mite,’ I said, and reversed
out again.

I  parked  up  near  the  corner  of  Eccleston  Street  and  Eaton  Square,

pretending to study an A to Z. The Disco swung out into the traffic and headed
for  the  river  ten  long,  long  minutes  later.  I  pulled  back  into  Ascot  Mews
South, drove on past the mews cottages into the last part of the lane where the
garages  and  tall  garden  walls  began.  I  counted  my  way  along  to  number
eleven,  but  I  needn’t  have  bothered;  there  was  a  number  eleven  on  the
gleaming green pedestrian door that gave out onto the lane beside the equally
freshly painted garage doors.

I’d rehearsed this in my mind already. Best done quickly given it had to be

done at all. Ignore the rear windows of the houses on the other side of the lane
and those next door to number eleven. I killed the engine, got out, locked the
door, climbed onto the roof via the front bumper and bonnet - the aluminium
roof flexed under my feet, which I actually had the reserve brain power to feel
slightly disappointed by - then I jumped up onto the rounded top of the tall
stone wall.

Japanese garden; raked gravel forming dry round lakelets with big smooth

boulders  forming  islands  in  the  frozen  ripples  of  greyness.  Small,  tidily
clipped  bushes  and  shrubs;  a  still  pool  with  another  big  boulder.  Decking
under green awnings. Something about its calm organisation told me this was
Celia’s garden more than her husband’s. I looked down. I was going to have
to drop the whole way, into more gravel. It was easily three and a half metres.

I swung one leg over, then the other, and let myself dangle as far to the

ground as I could. In Scotland, as kids, we’d called this dreeping. I had no
idea what it was called down here. I couldn’t get any real hand-hold on the
smooth round top of the wall so just had to keep as much friction as I could
on my forearms and gloved hands until gravity took over and I dropped to the
gravel bed. It was mercifully deep. I hit and rolled and didn’t break anything.
I’d  have  to  do  some  remedial  work  on  the  gravel  bed-work  with  a  rake,
though.  I  looked  up  at  the  wall.  I’d  worry  about  getting  out  again  later.  I
smoothed the gravel out a bit now, while I thought of it, just in case I forgot
later. It didn’t look perfect but it might pass as the result of a cat coming into
the garden. I checked the door in the garden wall. The lock was some sort of
ruggedised outdoor Chubb; I tried to open it but it looked like you needed a
key even from the inside.

My phone went as I was walking up the path towards the stone with the key

inside. There was a sort of slit on each side of the overalls so you could get at
the pockets of whatever you were wearing underneath. I hauled the Motorola
out through one of those. Ceel.

‘I’m in the back garden,’ I said.
‘Good. I’ve just had a thought. John should have the car. Use the keys just

to the right of the back door, once you’ve got in, to open the garage and put
your car in. It might look less suspicious.’

I hadn’t paid much attention to the garage doors. I had the impression they

were  pretty  tall,  but  I  might  have  been  wrong.  ‘It’s  a  Land  Rover,’  I  said.
‘Two metres tall at least. Might not fit.’

‘No, it should. It’s an old coach house.’
‘Okay, then. Good idea.’ I stopped opposite the third lantern and looked

down at a neat arrangement of smooth, varied stones. ‘Hold on. What if he
comes back? Seeing a Land Rover parked outside your back wall might be a
little puzzling; finding the thing sitting inside his own garage …’

‘Hmm, you’re right. Also, I phoned the Weather Centre. The Peak District

has had more rain than expected overnight. I think it’s very likely he will be
back later today.’

‘Oh, shit. What about you? How are the flights looking?’
‘Aberdeen is out. It’s a three- or four-hour drive to Edinburgh or Glasgow.

I’m trying to arrange a charter from a smaller airport closer to here but it’s not
proving easy.’

‘Well, I’m in here already anyway. Hold on.’ I stooped to the stones. The

thick gloves meant I took a couple of attempts, but after a few seconds and
some muttered curses I was able to announce, ‘I’ve got the key.’

‘You have the alarm number?’
‘Memorised and written down. The door in the garden wall, back into the

mews, into the lane; where would I find the key for that?’

‘To the left of the back door in the utility room, looking out. It has a green

plastic tag.’

‘Can I lock the door without it? I’m trying to get out without having to

climb the wall.’

‘Let me think.’ Ceel was silent for a couple of seconds. ‘Yes. Use the key,

open the door, put the key back, put the little button down on the lock and
then close the door from outside. That will do it. Don’t forget to put the house
back-door key back inside the stone first.’

‘Christ,’ I said, putting one hand over my eyes. ‘Do I so not need all this

with a serious fucking hangover.’ I took a deep breath, straightened up. ‘Okay.

Never mind. Right. I’ve got all that. Thanks.’

‘Good luck, Kenneth.’
‘You too, kid.’

The  back  door  swung  closed  and  re-locked.  I  walked  quickly  through  the
utility room, the kitchen and along the hall; an insistent beeping noise was
sounding from the far end, near the front door. I punched the code into the
alarm unit but the thick gloves meant I must have pressed the wrong buttons. I
felt sweat prick on my brow as I started again. The beeping went on. I was
going to run out of time. I whipped my right glove off and entered the code
properly. The noise stopped. My heart was thudding, my hands still shaking. I
took a few deep breaths. I used a paper handkerchief to polish the keys I’d
touched, then I put the glove back on. God, I was hot. I took off the stupid
baseball  cap  and  shoved  it  into  a  pocket.  Something  made  me  think  that  I
should keep doing things while I thought of them, so I went to the back door,
left it unlocked on the catch and wedged with a welly boot while I went out to
the garden and replaced the key inside the artificial stone.

I closed the back door again. As I walked along to the foot of the stairs near

the  main  door  I  realised  I  seriously  needed  to  visit  the  toilet.  This  was
ridiculous - for all I knew a suspicious neighbour was already on the phone to
the  local  nick  telling  them  she’d  just  seen  a  guy  in  badly  fitting  overalls
jumping into a back garden - but I really was going to have to get to a loo in
the next minute or so or basically I was going to soil myself. Partly, I guessed,
it was the result of my colossal alcohol intake from the previous night, but
partly  it  was  simple  fear.  I  recalled  reading  something  about  this,  how
burglars  who  left  crap  in  the  middle  of  their  victim’s  carpets  weren’t
necessarily just being shits themselves. They just couldn’t help themselves.
Breaking into somebody else’s house was a scary thing to do; most people
would be scared shitless. And - as a rule - they weren’t invading the privacy
of fucking London crime lords.

I  ran  up  the  stairs  and  started  looking  for  a  toilet,  opening  doors  into  a

sitting-room, a library, a small cinema, another sitting-room, and a walk-in
cupboard  before  finding  one  that  wouldn’t  open,  which  must  be  the  study
where the answering machine was.

Oh  my  God,  I  was  going  to  shit  my  pants.  I  could  feel  my  bowels

loosening, a muscle down there starting to spasm as I tried to hold things in.
No loo here that I could see. Upstairs; I knew there was a toilet up there; that
was  where  Celia’s  bedroom  was  with  its  en  suite  bathroom.  I  did  a  weird,
knee-knocking sort of walk to the stairs leading up to the next storey, then
minced  up  the  steps,  sucking  in  my  belly  as  though  this  would  stop  the

disaster I was expecting any second. Even as I got to the next floor I was
thinking, What was I doing? Running up here had been stupid; there must be
a  loo  downstairs,  on  the  ground  floor,  where  the  kitchen  and  dining-room
would be.

Too late now. I ran along to a door whose room probably looked to the rear

of the house, overlooking the Japanese garden. I was sucking my cheeks in - I
mean my cheeks on my face as well as the cheeks of my bum - as though in
sympathy.  My  whole  body  was  trembling  now;  I  nearly  fell  as  I  stumbled
through the door and into the room. Bedroom. Big. Dark behind dark-grey
vertical blinds shielding two tall windows.

There was a door to each side of the wide, black and white bed. I pulled the

left one open; a fucking dressing-room. Jesus fucking Christ, what was it with
these rich fuckers? Couldn’t they just have fucking wardrobes like fucking
normal people, the self-indulgent sons of bitches? I hobbled round the bed,
trying to keep my legs together and yet still walk, and actually putting my
right hand to my backside, trying to press upwards, help keep things in. Oh
Christ,  oh  Christ;  if  this  door  didn’t  lead  to  a  loo,  I  was  going  to  shit  my
fucking pants.

The door swung open and I was looking straight at a beautiful white china

loo with a rich dark wooden seat and lid. I quickly pulled both gloves off.

My whimper of relief turned to a terrible keening of frustrated rage and

despair as I had to waste a few seconds I hadn’t been accounting for - and
which I might not have to spare - as I had to tear at my stupid fucking under-
size  overalls  before  I  could  even  get  to  my  jeans  and  pants.  I  only  just
remembered to lift the lid of the loo before I turned round.

I started shitting even before my backside hit the wooden rim of the toilet.

It  was  a  ghastly,  splattery  and  appallingly  malodorous  experience,  but  I
believed I’d - just - succeeded in keeping within the bounds of social shitting
behaviour.

Sitting back, I closed my eyes, breathing through my mouth to escape the

putrid smell of what was going on down below, and - for a few, brief, fleeting
moments - just let myself surf along the wave of animal relief surging through
my body.

‘Fucking hell,’ I breathed.
Cleaning up took a while. I’d nearly finished when I realised that I’d just

taken a seriously fucking rancid dump in what looked like John Merrial’s own
bathroom,  not  Ceel’s.  The  toiletries  spread  about  the  shelves  were  all
masculine  and  there  was  a  shaving  mirror  and  an  electric  razor  on  a  shelf
above one of the two big wash-handbasins. When I thought about it, I realised
that the clothes in the dressing-room I’d looked in earlier had indeed been

male clothes; in the wide-eyed terror of the moment, I hadn’t even noticed.

were no marks left seemed like a good idea.

I left the place as I’d found it, apart from the smell. I used an air-freshener,

more  in  deference  to  my  mother’s  early  bathroom  training  than  because  it
would make any difference; Alpine Glade would be every bit as suspicious as
Fetid Faeces if Merrial happened to come home in the next hour or so and
decided the first thing he needed was a nice shower to freshen up after a hard
day’s caving.

The perfectly folded towels in the bathroom intimidated me, so after I’d

washed my hands I just wiped them dry on my overalls rather than sully those
snowy  white  expanses.  I  did  some  more  wiping  down  of  touched  surfaces
with the paper hanky.

A few more deep breaths and a drink of water from the cold tap and I was

just about steady and calm enough to continue. I found another large bedroom
across the hall, also with a view to the rear. This bedroom was all pale greens
and  blues,  from  ceiling  and  walls  and  carpets  to  the  furniture  and  fittings.
Bursts of tropical colour on the walls were provided by paintings of riotous
jungle scenes, all profuse abstractions of flowers, leaves, sky and rocks, shot
through with what looked like squadrons of parrots or cockatiels racing across
the scenes, caught in blurs of chromatic chaos.

Thick black Venetian blinds covered windows of a similar size to those in

the  room  across  the  hall.  Maybe  everybody  hereabouts  kept  their  blinds
closed all the time, I thought, allowing hope to blossom again. Maybe nobody
would have seen me make the leap over the garden wall.

Pale furniture. A large dressing table with combs and bottles and a small

ring tree with a few rings on it, all tidy, neatly arranged. It was very warm.

Definitely Ceel’s room, I thought. The bathroom was on the opposite side

to the room across the hall. I had to take the damn stupid big gloves off again.
Why hadn’t I thought of this? If I’d only taken a minute to look ahead I’d
have realised back on the fucking Temple Belle that I’d need a good thin pair
of gloves for this. Oh well. The Yale key was secured to the floor of the little
box of tampons by a piece of double-sided tape. I confess I held a few of the
tampons,  looking  at  them,  then,  still  holding  them,  looked  round  the
bathroom; at her bath and, alongside it, a big steam-cabinet shower, with a
seat. I found myself smiling as I looked at the loo.

Oh,  God,  what  sort  of  poor  pathetic  loon  was  I,  caressing  the  woman’s

tampons and staring fondly, love-struck, at her toilet seat, for fuck’s sake? Get
fucking real, Kenneth. And get fucking moving, fuckwit. I put the tampons
back  and  replaced  the  box,  then  did  the  wiping-finger-touched-surfaces  bit

again.

I went down to the locked door on the first floor. I had a little more time to

look around. The house was furnished in a slightly dated respectable style that
was probably about right for the building. Actually it looked a lot like some of
the slightly more modern hotel suites Ceel and I had been in. She must have
felt at home. Not as stiflingly hot, though.

The study door opened with the key and I let it close behind me. The study

was more old-fashioned than what I’d seen of the rest of the house. The big
desk was un-ironic retro, with a gold-tooled burgundy leather top and a brass
lamp with a green glass shade. The computer was a Hewlett Packard with a
big  plasma  screen.  Ha!  I’d  just  known  Merrial  wouldn’t  be  a  Mac  guy.  I
couldn’t see any sign of a gun safe, but I guessed it might be hidden.

The answering machine was on its own little table near the door. I looked at

it accusingly, as though this was all its fault. You see the trouble you’ve put
me to, you nasty little piece of office-beige shite? I moved towards it.

That was when I heard the siren.
It must have been on the fringes of my hearing for a couple of seconds. I’d

been feeling a general unease, which seemed at odds with the fact I was now
within sight of the thing I’d spent so much effort, angst and sweat getting to.
Then I realised: a siren. The Emergency Services. You stop hearing the sound
in a big city after a while.

If you’re driving - and providing you’re not the sort of cack-brained bozo

who can have a fucking twenty-tonne fire engine right behind him with its
lights flaring and its siren screaming and still not realise it’s time to Get The
Fuck Out Of The Way - then you do still take notice when you hear a siren;
you start looking at side streets, checking the rear-view every few seconds,
watching  for  people  pulling  out  of  the  way  or  bumping  up  onto  kerbs  or
swerving into bus stops to clear a path for the vehicle with the blue lights.
Otherwise, you hear it but you pay no attention unless it signifies something
you’re waiting for, or it keeps getting louder all the time until it gets very loud
and then stops.

I listened to the siren get closer and closer.
Doppler,  you  fuck,  I  thought.  Fucking  Doppler  your  fucking  woop-

wooping arse on past. Don’t stop. Don’t pull up here, in the mews or in the
square outside. Keep on going. Let it be an emergency somewhere else. Let it
be  a  cop  car  en  route  to  a  robbery  on  the  King’s  Road  or  an  ambulance
heading for a boating accident on the river or a fire engine attending a false
alarm at a shop; let it be anything at all but not a patrol car coming to check
on a suspected break-in at the rear of Ascot Square.

I stood there, staring at the answering machine, knowing that I should keep

going, knowing that the sensible, per cent-ages-wise course of action was to
keep doing what I was doing, get at the tape, wipe the fucker, wipe the fucker
twice,  make  sure  it  was  clean  and  I  and  Celia  were  in  the  clear  …  but  I
couldn’t. I had to hear what was going to happen with that damn siren. There
would still be time to wipe the tape even if the sound did stop right outside
anyway, but I just couldn’t move, couldn’t do anything until I knew. Closer,
closer. Did they use a siren in such a situation? Would that not be like the
stupidest thing to do if you were hoping to catch the crims in the act? Give the
fuckers plenty of warning. Give them time to scarper with their bags of swag
and their stripy jumpers and their eye masks, before the rozzers caught them
bang to rights and they went to chokey so fast their feet didn’t touch …

My own phone went, vibrating against my hip. I jumped as though zapped

with a cattle prod then pulled my right-hand glove off and held it in my mouth
while I withdrew the mobile from its holster. I was whimpering again. I was
getting  good  at  whimpering.  My  hands  were  shaking  so  much  I  almost
dropped the phone. I flipped it open. Phil. I clicked, No, don’t answer and put
it away again, trembling fingers missing the holster three or four times. The
siren was still coming closer. I put my glove back on.

Go past, go past. Oh, just fucking go past … Saint Doppler, I appeal to thee

to intercede on my behalf … Oh, fuck off; what a load of fucking shite. Next
I’d be appealing to the patron saint of atheists.

The  siren’s  note  started  to  deepen.  I  let  out  a  breath  I  must  have  been

holding for a minute or more. A roaring noise in my ears began to fade and
the room took on more colour and stopped looking like the view down a pipe.
Jeez, I must have been close to blacking out there.

Never mind. A candle would be lit at the shrine of Saint Doppler after all.

Red shifted, of course.

I walked over to the skinny table and the answering machine. It had a little

black-on-green  LCD  display  which  was  in  message  counter  mode  at  the
moment. Five messages. I was still staring at the machine when it rang.

I jumped. ‘Fuck!’ I screamed. Then, ‘You fucking bastarding little cunt!’ At

the time, this seemed only reasonable.

The  machine  clicked  after  four  rings.  ‘There’s  nobody  here  right  now,’

Ceel’s calm, beautiful voice said.

‘Yes there fucking is!’ I screamed hoarsely, shaking my fists in front of my

chest.

‘Please leave a message after the tone.’
‘No!’  I  yelled.  ‘Don’t  fucking  bother!  Whoever  the  fuck  you  are,  just

fucking fuck off!’

‘Aow hullo yes my name is Sam I’m calling on behalf of BT we would just
like to check that you know of our latest offers for domestic customers I’ll
call again at a later time and hope to discuss these offers with you thank you
goodbye.’

‘Fuck off!’ I screamed as the phone clicked again and the tape started to

wind itself back to Ceel’s announcement at the beginning. Fucking typical, I
thought.  Go  ex-directory  because  you’re  fed  up  getting  junk  calls  from
fucking double-glazing salespeople and what happens? You get fucking junk
calls  from  B  fucking  T.  At  least  I  ought  to  find  it  reassuring  that  even
metropolitan crime lords weren’t immune from that sort of shit.

When the machine had gone quiet again, I carefully identified the Function

and Clear buttons. They were big enough to use with the heavy gloves still
on. I pressed one - the black and green display asked Clear All Messages? -
followed by the second button. Nothing happened.

I’d been stooping. Now I stood up.
Actually something had happened; the display now read No Messages. But

there was no more clicking, no humming, no other sounds at all.

Was that it? It didn’t seem right. Was that all there was to it? Shouldn’t it

wind forwards and wipe the tape after Ceel’s introduction?

I guessed not. It would just forget about the messages sitting there already

recorded and record over them when there was another incoming call.

Was  that  good  enough?  It  should  be.  That  was  the  way  the  machine

worked. As far as it was concerned, there had been no messages. If you tried
to play the tape, you’d get nothing, just No Messages.

But the message I’d left was still there. The words were still printed there

in patterns of magnetised stripes on the little brown ribbon of oxide-coated
plastic. If you took the micro-cassette out of the answering machine and put it
in an ordinary dictation machine you’d still hear what I’d said.

I pressed Function again. Re-record Message? No. I pressed Function again

a few times until I got to the No Messages screen again. I was sweating now. I
couldn’t  decide  what  to  do.  In  theory,  it  was  all  fixed  now;  mission
accomplished. Definitely time to Get To Fuck.

But the message was still there. Was it worth the risk of leaving it there,

even though it wasn’t likely that anybody would take the necessary steps to
access  it?  What  if  Merrial  had  called  his  own  phone  for  some  reason,  and
knew there was a message or messages there? Or somebody said they’d left a
message? What would happen in that case if he came home and saw it said
No Messages? Wouldn’t he investigate, take the cassette out, try it in another

machine?

on the tape, or only junk calls, but what if he was first back?

Jesus,  what  was  I  thinking  of  ?  I  took  off  my  glove  again,  got  out  my

mobile  and  started  walking  to  the  door.  I’d  call  the  fucking  answering
machine myself and just leave a soundless call that would last long enough to
overwrite  my incriminating message from last night. Maybe not soundless;
maybe the machine would sense that and switch off. I’d rub my hand over the
microphone on the mobile so it would pick up some sound and lay that down
on the tape.

First, though, I had to set up my mobile to ban its caller ID on the next

outgoing call. I pressed Menu as I opened the door to the first-floor hall. I
walked towards the stairs to the ground floor. Phone Book. OK. I got to the
top of the stairs.

Oh, Jesus, I hadn’t locked the fucking study. I turned back from the stairs.

No, wait a minute; the study’s Yale had locked itself; I didn’t need to actively
lock the damn thing. I got to the top of the stairs again. Call Related Features.
OK.

Oh, fuck, I had to put the key back in Ceel’s bathroom; I was going the

wrong way. I turned round to head for the stairs leading up. Show Battery
Meter. No; next. Restrict My Phone Number. OK. I walked upstairs.

This was stupid; I was trying to do two things at once when I was barely

capable of doing one with any degree of competence. Restrict ID On Next
Call.

At last! OK.
Crossing Ceel’s bedroom, I clicked back until I could make a call then rang

the number here. I still jumped when the land-line extension in the bedroom
rang. The study key went back in the box of tampons and I listened to Ceel’s
voice inviting me to leave a message after the tone. There were no beeps in
between, just the tone, immediately. I held the mobile clumsily in my gloved
left hand and rubbed it with my thumb while I closed the cabinet and wiped it
with the paper hanky again.

I  was  closing  Ceel’s  bedroom  door  and  still  enthusiastically  rubbing  the

phone’s mike with the glove fabric (and thinking, Hey, this must sound a bit
like when I got that unmeant call from Jo’s mobile) when, distantly, down the
stairwell, two storeys below, I heard the sound of the front door opening.

I froze. No. Not happen. Not to happen. No happening of such like thing. Just
fucking, like, no.

I  could  hear  from  down  there?  Then  a  tiny  beeping  noise.  Of  course;  the
alarm  that  should  have  been  on  when  somebody  came  into  the  house,  the
alarm they’d be expecting to be on but then discovered was not. Oh fuck.

‘Celia?’ said a voice. My bowels suddenly felt like they were up to their old

tricks again, like there was unfinished business needing attention in there. Oh
my God, it was him, back even earlier than we’d been expecting. Oh fucking
hell, now what was I supposed to do? I looked down at the mobile phone in
my gloved hand. My thumb was over the microphone. Shit, it wouldn’t be
picking  all  this  up,  would  it?  Re-transmitting  it  back  to  the  answering
machine in the study?

‘Celia?’ again. Louder. ‘Maria?’
I took a couple of steps back, to Celia’s bedroom door. I’d take sanctuary

there. It was right. The natural place, the slim straw it was proper to clutch at,
that  of  my  love’s  inner  sanctum  …  well,  that  was  a  load  of  bollocks.
Assuming that was him, and he was looking for her, where would be the first
place he’d try? Well, yes, Kenneth.

I stepped further back, to another door. I could hear footsteps down below.

The door led to a shallow cupboard. Not enough room to hide in. That was it.
There was his room, hers, and to access any others I’d have to walk past the
stairwell  and  be  visible  from  below  for  a  certain  amount  of  time.  The
footsteps were hard to make out. Was that somebody walking up the stairs to
the floor below, the first floor? Or somebody walking along the hall on the
ground floor?

I was quaking. I gripped the mobile so hard I was in danger of breaking it.

My jaw was grinding like I’d taken twenty E an hour earlier. It felt like I was
right slap bang on the verge of a heart attack. Sweat was trickling from my
brows; I could taste it on my upper lip. Jesus Christ; I’d been on the piss from
mid-afternoon  yesterday,  slept  in  my  clothes,  got  up  without  changing  or
washing, suffered at least one full-on panic attack per hour since I woke up
and now I was sweating like a paedophile in Mothercare; even if I found the
perfect hiding place the fucker was going to smell me.

I walked as fast as possible past the stairwell towards the rooms at the front

of the house. I did that walk where you step quickly but put each foot down
very gently, trying not to cause any creaks or other noises. I stared wide-eyed
down the stairwell. No obvious signs of anybody coming up to this floor or
the one below. ‘Maria?’ More distantly this time. He must be through in the
kitchen or thereabouts.

Three  doors  ahead.  One  to  the  side.  That  one  led  to  another,  narrower

staircase  heading  steeply  for  what  would  have  been  the  servants’  or  the

children’s rooms when the house was designed. I closed it. So far no comedy
door-creaking noises from the well-maintained hinges. Thank fuck. Central
door.  Another  cupboard.  Not  as  shallow  as  the  one  along  the  landing,  but
nowhere to hide if he did look in.

Right-hand door. Jesus; was this his bedroom? Big enough. Grand enough.

Masculine-looking  enough  (I  thought).  I’d  vaguely  assumed  they  both  had
their  bedrooms  at  the  rear  because  it  would  be  quieter,  but  maybe  the  one
opposite hers was somebody else’s - the bodyguard, the big blond guy? - and
this was Merrial’s. It looked lived-in, somehow. I closed it. Maybe a little too
quickly; there was a distinct click.

The third door revealed a gym. A very well-equipped gym with a polished

blond-wood floor and lots of machines, some of which I recognised, a couple
I didn’t. Two more tall windows and translucent vertical blinds.

There were footsteps coming up the stairs. I was starting to hyperventilate.

What did it feel like when you had a heart attack? Heart thrashing? Pains in
chest? Headache? Sore arms? That would be (E) All of the above, then.

I slipped into the gym. Heck, the smell of stale sweat might even be less

conspicuous in here. I still needed somewhere to hide. Two more doors; the
first led to another en suite. The second belonged to a large, deep cupboard.

Oh shit; I could hear somebody on this floor now, out on the landing. The

cupboard held old bits of fitness equipment plus various items of sports gear,
including some scuba apparatus. This would have to do. I closed the door and
made my way through the darkness as rapidly as I could, banging one shin
and barking a hand on something hard and metallic. When I hit the rear wall I
got into a corner and squatted down. The place smelled musty. I decided that
was good.

A door opened. Was it the door to the gym?
Oh fuck. What the hell had I been thinking? If Merrial had just come back

from  caving,  what  was  he  likely  to  do?  Put  the  gear  away.  Where  was  he
likely to put it? Where would he come straight to? Right here. This cupboard,
this  door.  Right  here  where  mister  fuckwit  was  hiding,  squatting  like  a
frightened schoolboy at the back of a hidey-hole.

Well  done,  Kenneth.  Top  fucking  marks,  son.  Take  a  good  feel  of  your

knees while they still fold the same way as everybody else’s.

Steps; a tread coming closer, shoes on polished wood. Oh, fucking hell. I

wanted  to  cry.  I  was  going  to  cry.  I  put  my  head  down,  bowing  to  the
darkness. Hide your face, don’t let the whites of the eyes show. Maybe the
footsteps  weren’t  coming  this  way.  You  couldn’t  always  tell  in  unfamiliar
houses. Maybe he was walking upstairs. Maybe - the door to the cupboard
opened. Light sensed through the eyelids. I stopped breathing.

How long? What would happen? Would he smell me? Would he see me?

How long? How long before I knew? Would he say something? Would he just
look, squint, then shout, or take out a gun? Or go for a gun from his gun safe
in the study? Or call the big blond guy? Light! There had to be a light fixture
in a cupboard this size! I hadn’t thought to look or feel for one, but there must
be  a  switch.  He’d  turn  on  the  light  and  see  me  hunched  here.  Fucking
imbecile!

No light clicked on. Maybe he could see me without it. Anyway the smell

was  sure  to  do  it.  Animals  could  smell  fear  and  we’re  all  just  animals,
especially in situations like this. The oldest, basest, most deeply wired sense
was  going  to  betray  me,  and  the  more  I  panicked  about  it  the  more  fear
pheromones I’d be giving out and so the more likely it was to happen. Oh
fuck, I was going to lose control of my bowels again. Something clattered,
making  the  floor  under  my  backside  thump.  I  came  very  close  to  both
jumping and yelping.

Then the door closed and the light went.
Steps sounded going away again.
I breathed again. Of course, Merrial might still have seen me but thought

the best thing to do was to pretend he hadn’t, so he could go and get a gun, or
call the cops, or the blond guy.

‘Yes, Celia?’ I heard him say. ‘I’m home … Yes, there was too much rain.

But listen. The alarm wasn’t on when I got in.’ I heard a rhythmic metallic
tapping noise as he spoke. Then, as I looked at the thin frame of light around
the closed door, one edge of that glowing boundary started slowly to widen
and  enlarge.  The  fucking  door  was  opening!  ‘The  house  alarm.  It  wasn’t
switched  on.’  The  door  opened  silently  and  very  slowly.  Bits  of  gleaming
fitness  equipment  came  gradually  into  view.  Then  Merrial  himself  was
revealed,  standing  by  one  of  the  polished  chrome  machines,  looking  out
through the opened blinds of one tall window. He was dressed in jeans and a
dark leather bomber jacket. ‘Of course I’m sure,’ he said. ‘Don’t ask stupid
questions.’ He was resting one hand on the fitness machine, tapping one of the
wire-hung  weights  against  the  chrome  metal  support;  that  was  the  tapping
noise I’d heard. He hadn’t noticed the cupboard door still slowly opening. ‘I
don’t even have Kaj here with me. I—’ Now he must have noticed the door
from the corner of his eye; he started and his head shot round as he jumped
and made a small involuntary noise. ‘Fucking door,’ he said quietly. He was
staring, it seemed, straight at me.

Oh fuck. If I shifted now he’d see the movement but if he kept looking at

me he’d surely see my pasty white face in the darkness. I kept still but closed
my  eyes.  Then  opened  them  a  touch  because  I  could  hear  him  walking

towards me across the wooden floor of the gym.

‘No, just the door to the cupboard in the gym. Swung open there. Gave me

a … moment,’ he said, putting one hand to the edge of the door and closing it.
The light faded again. I took another breath. ‘So were you last out, or what?’
he said, voice muffled again by the closed door. ‘Well, somebody forgot to set
the fucking alarm, Celia.’

Oh, just fucking leave her alone, you fuck. It wasn’t her. She’s Ceel; she

would never make a mistake like that. She’s the calm, infallible one. Her only
fault is a certain weakness for villains and idiots.

Maybe  if  I  rushed  the  bastard  and  smacked  him  over  the  head  with

something heavy. Kill the fucker; murder the man. He was a fucking people-
smuggling,  life-ruining,  knee-snapping  crime  lord,  for  fuck’s  sake;  I’d  be
doing society a favour. Then Ceel and I could run away together.

Or, better still, say, just hide here in the darkness and hope.
‘Well,  I’m  calling  Kaj,  get  him  to  have  a  look  at  the  alarm  …  Well,  he

helped install it. I’m going to take a look round, make sure there’s nobody in
here … It’s not being paranoid, Celia. I’m not taking a shower thinking there
could be some smack-head on the loose in here looking for your jewels or
something. These types are unbalanced, capable of anything … Yes, that sort
of remark is amusing around the dinner table, Celia. Standing here right now
thinking there could be some junkie hiding behind a door with a knife, irony
is the last thing on my mind … I’m not suggesting a junkie could defeat the
alarm,  I’m  suggesting  that  somebody  forgot  to  turn  the  alarm  on  and  that
therefore there could possibly be somebody in the house who got in without
the alarm going off as it would have otherwise … I’m not discussing this with
you. You seem in a very strange mood … No, I don’t want to know how your
weekend is going … Do what you want.’ There was a soft snapping noise,
like a phone being closed, perhaps. Then steps, a pause, more steps, a door
opening off the room, then closing, then another door, and then silence.

My hand was getting sore. I was still gripping my mobile; it was still, I

guessed, connected to the answering machine in the study on the floor below.
I closed the phone then opened it again so that the back light would come on.
Duration of call: 6:51, 6:52, 6:53 … End Call?

That  had  to  cover  the  message  I’d  left  last  night.  It  must  have  been

recorded  over  by  now.  I  clicked  OK  to  end  the  call.  The  phone  vibrated
almost immediately, making me panic again. I dropped the phone, grabbed at
it while it was still in mid-air and succeeded only in batting it across the dark
cupboard, off a wall with a loud thud and against some unidentified piece of
metallic  equipment  with  a  resounding  clang.  Then  it  fell  to  the  floor  with
another thump.

Fuck! Would he have heard that? And where was the phone? Lying on the

floor somewhere. If I was lucky the fucker would have been smashed by the
series of impacts, but if I wasn’t then it was about to exhaust the three or four
vibrations it went through in the mode I had it in and start ringing normally. I
had to get to it before it did. Merrial was probably standing stopped in the hall
outside, listening intently and thinking, Did I hear a couple of thuds with a
clang  in-between  there?  If  he  heard  the  piercing  warble  of  an  unfamiliar
mobile phone coming from the room he’d just left, he’d be right back in here.
Or  more  likely  he’d  dash  down  to  his  study,  grab  a  gun  and  then  come
storming back.

I levered myself forward, feeling along the unseen floor for the little phone.

Why did they have to make the damn things so fucking small nowadays? Old
mobiles were the size of a brick; I’d have found the thing by now instead of
whimpering as my hands fanned out across the wooden floor, banging into
bits of gear and failing totally to find the phone, which I couldn’t even hear
now. The ringing would start any second. Not that that would matter, because
thanks to my panic and subsequent whacking of the phone about the place
like it was a fucking squash ball, Merrial had almost certainly realised there
was somebody hiding in his gym store and probably already had his shotgun
or  whatever  and  was  walking  calmly  upstairs,  chambers  full  and  hammers
cocked.

Green glow to one side, quietly flicking off. The phone’s screen. I found it,

bashing my forehead off something metal as I did so. I closed then opened the
phone again. The display looked normal; nothing wrong with the little fucker.
So  how  come  it  hadn’t  gone  from  vibration  to  ring?  Then  I  saw  the  little
envelope symbol. Of course; it had registered an incoming text message and
so had vibrated once only. I needn’t have panicked; I certainly needn’t have
started bouncing it off the walls like a bluebottle in a fucking jam jar.

Still no sounds from outside. Maybe I’d got away with it. I squatted there

in the darkness and accessed the message: OK 2 CALL? C.

I looked to the door of the cupboard. There was an old-fashioned keyhole

there, halfway up one edge. I swivelled over to it to put my eye to the bright
slit. My forehead banged off the door handle. I sat back, blinking through the
tears. A door-knob just above a keyhole; who’d have thought that? Fucking,
fucking  idiot.  It  had  hurt  so  much  I  hadn’t  really  registered  how  loud  the
sound had been. Jesus H. For all the stealthiness I was showing here I might
just as well march out singing a medley of Slipknot numbers and slide down
the fucking banister rail yodelling.

I  looked  carefully  through  the  keyhole.  Most  of  the  gym  was  visible,

including the door to the hall outside. The door was closed. Nobody in the
room. I wedged myself against the wall and dialled Celia’s mobile number.

‘Yes?’
‘I’m in the cupboard in the gym,’ I whispered. ‘Can you hear me?’
‘Yes. I just had a call from John.’
‘I know. I heard. Who’s this Kaj?’
‘John’s bodyguard. Swedish. You’ve met him, at Somerset House.’
The big blond guy. ‘Oh, fuck.’
‘Have you cleared the tape on the answering machine?’
‘Thoroughly.’
‘Get out. Quick as you can.’
‘That was my intention.’
‘He said he’d have a look round, and call Kaj to get him over. Also, he

might  have  a  shower.  If  he  does  shower  you  should  hear  it;  it’s  a  power
shower and the pump is in a cupboard off the second-floor hall; it makes a fair
amount of noise, on that floor at least.’

‘Where will this Kaj person be coming from?’
‘I don’t know. I’m surprised he wasn’t with him. Unless they were together

and he gave him the rest of the day off. Wait; Kaj has a girlfriend who lives
… somewhere off Regent’s Park. He may be there. John could have dropped
him on the way down from Yorkshire. He didn’t say anything about seeing
your Land Rover in the mews so he’s probably parked out the front. But you
must get out as soon as possible.’

‘I know!’ I hissed,  glancing through the keyhole again. Regent’s  Park to

Belgravia. How long would that take by car? Potentially several hours if you
made the journey during a rainy weekday rush hour while there was a tube
strike, but this was a sunny Saturday lunchtime. Ten minutes? No; maybe on a
Sunday. Twenty minutes? Longer? Always assuming that was where this Kaj
guy  was  in  the  first  place.  Maybe  the  fucker  was  only  five  minutes’  walk
away, shoulders taking up half the pavement as he searched the King’s Road
for a trendy Outsize shop. ‘I’ll give it a couple of minutes more,’ I told Ceel.
‘If  he’s  searching  the  place  he  probably  reckons  he  needn’t  look  in  here
because he’s already taken care of it.’

‘Why don’t I phone him again?’ Celia suggested. ‘I can try to find out what

he’s going to do and how far away Kaj might be. I might even try to convince
him he should go out until Kaj gets there, visit some friends or go to a café.’

I thought. ‘Good idea,’ I said. ‘Call me back.’
‘All right. Be ready to move.’
‘Oh, I am,’ I said. Ceel rang off. I was about to close the phone when the

display faded of its own accord. Oh. No. I closed the phone and opened it, but

the phone had turned itself off. I tried turning it back on again and it got as far
as vibrating once and beginning its start-up procedure, showing zero bars out
of  three  of  available  battery  power  before  confirming  this  by  going  dark
again. Out of power. I supposed I’d been lucky to get what I had out of it after
such a short charge-up time on the Temple Belle this morning.

I sat there, breathing almost normally, with the little phone a dead lump in

my hand, then I holstered it and sighed. So I was on my own now. Poor Ceel;
she would worry, not being able to contact me. She’d guess the phone was out
of juice, I hoped. The keyhole again. Still nothing happening in the gym. I
supposed I ought to put on my other glove.

Ah; the other glove. Now then, where would that be?
I shook my head at the darkness. Swivelling and sliding back to where I’d

been squatting earlier, in the rear corner of the store, I banged another shin on
something very hard. At this rate it wouldn’t need Kaj to jump up and down
on my knees to wreck my fucking legs. I felt around on the floor. I felt the
glove.  And  some  relief.  One  more  tiny  hurdle  accidentally  set  up  but  then
cleared. Oh, Christ, I was getting very tired. I was going to spend the rest of
my life in this fucking posh house, just trying to get the hell out of it.

Maybe I could just lie here and go to sleep and nobody would ever find me.

I could squat here; stow away. Live secretly here in the house like a sort of
soft  hermit.  Celia  would  discover  me  and  bring  me  something  to  eat  each
evening, like a child sent to their room by a strict father brought food by a
forgiving mother or younger sister.

My knees were getting sore from all this squatting. Sore knees. Think about

that. Think of that pain, hold that image; Kaj’s big face and short blond hair as
he smiles at you and goes boingy-boingy on your fucking leg bones, man.

A surprisingly large part of my brain really did seem to want to do nothing.

A significant and very vocal minority of my brain cells seemed to think that
just resting here in the darkness was actually quite a good idea. It had proved
all  right  so  far;  I  hadn’t  been  discovered,  it  was  quiet  and  unthreatening;
maybe if I stayed here everything would somehow be okay. I knew this was
nonsense, obviously, but that was the temptation. Stay put. Leaving my dark,
musty-smelling sanctuary meant going out into the light, braving the landings
and stairs and floors and halls and doors of a house whose owner was present
and suspicious and potentially - and very possibly by now - armed. And who
was  anyway  a  crime  boss.  And  who  had  just  ordered  his  personal  Dolph
Lundgren-on-steroids bodyguard here to investigate what was going on. Oh
yes, staying here in the darkness and hiding quietly seemed like a seductively
good idea. Or maybe I could go back to Ceel’s bedroom and hide there, and
our intense sexual karma would spookily protect me even from a determined

and thorough search, until she got back and could smuggle me out when the
coast was clear …

No. Out. Get the fuck out. Now. Get back to the door. Look through the

keyhole. Confirm nothing happening and nobody there. Take hold of the door
handle.  Twist  handle  and  slowly  open  door.  Rise.  Feel  knees  complain,  as
though they’re anticipating what might happen to them later if this all goes
horribly wrong. Take deep breath. Close door again. Walk quietly to door of
gym. No keyhole so can’t look out to hall.

Stop and listen. Can you hear a power shower pump operating? No. So,

what  to  do?  Go  back  to  the  cupboard  and  wait  there?  Keep  an  ear  to  the
keyhole so you could hear when the pump did start up? But then what if the
pump  couldn’t  be  heard  from  inside  the  cupboard?  Wait  here,  at  the  door
leading to the hall? But then what if Merrial took another look inside the gym
before taking his shower? He’d already been in here, but he might want to
check again.

A  house  this  size  was  probably  well  in  excess  of  some  mathematically

provable topographical limit that defined when a space became too big for
one person ever to search perfectly. You could confirm that there was nobody
on a certain floor, but then while you were in the depths of one of these large
rooms, checking in an en suite loo or whatever, the person doing the hiding
could slip out of a not-yet-searched room and creep up to one of the already-
searched rooms without the searcher being able to spot them. So checking a
room twice would make some sort of sense.

Oh fuck, I didn’t fucking know. I looked behind me. Opened blinds. The

window Merrial had been standing at while he’d been talking to Ceel on his
mobile. I could see the house on the far side of the square, visible through the
leafless  trees  of  winter.  Probably  too  far  away  for  it  to  be  a  problem.  I
wondered if there was any way to get out of the window and down to the
ground without causing a fuss. Or making it to the upper storey, to the loft and
then out onto the roof and then finding a way down. If I still had a working
phone I could call 999 and ask for the fire brigade because there was a major
fire in the place, and hope to get away in the confusion. No; all of these just
led to more complications and more opportunities for things to go appallingly
wrong.

Footsteps outside in the hall, coming closer. Oh shit. Did I have time to get

back to the cupboard? Probably not, and certainly not quietly. I shrank back
behind the door. If Merrial did open the door, and he was daft enough not to
look behind it as soon as he’d opened it, then I might still escape.

The  footsteps  went  past.  A  door  closed.  Closed  and  locked,  I  thought.  I

waited for the sound of a shower. I looked around the gym. If there was a

phone extension in here, did I dare phone Ceel in case there was something
vital she now knew that I needed to? But then what if Merrial was already on
the land-line? Bit of a giveaway, hearing that old other-extension click.

I waited. But how long did I have? Where was Kaj coming from? King’s

Road?  Regent’s  Park?  Somewhere  else?  And  how  fucking  long  did  it  take
Merrial to get ready for a fucking shower, for fuck’s sake? Come on, man;
stop fucking about and get your fucking clothes off and jump into the fucking
thing. Twist that dial and lather up.

Maybe Ceel had been exaggerating about how loud the pump was. Maybe

she had more acute hearing than I did. Maybe some eccentricity of the way
sound was transmitted through the house meant that right here where I was
standing in the gym was the one place you couldn’t hear the goddamn pump. I
tried to listen really carefully. Was that the sound of a pump? Jesus, if my
phone still had power I could phone Ceel and hold the phone up and ask her,
Is that the sound of the pump, that barely audible hum way in the distance? Or
is  that  the  central  heating,  or  the  fucking  drinks  fridge  in  the  study  or
something? Maybe Merrial was using a mains-pressure shower over his bath
instead for some reason I could only guess at. Ha! Maybe he was showering
as quietly as he could specifically because he didn’t want to let his supposed
junkie with a knife know where he was, even if he had locked the bedroom
and presumably the bathroom door.

When  the  pump  did  start  up  I  jumped  again;  it  sounded  like  it  was  just

through the wall from where I was standing. I thought about that phrase about
somebody  being  as  nervous  as  a  kitten  and  thought  what  a  load  of  crap  it
really was; I’d never seen a kitten as nervous as I’d been over the last couple
of hours.

Okay. Signal to go. I put my hand on the door handle. But what if Merrial

had  started  the  shower  going  as  a  ruse,  and  was  -  no,  no,  no,  fuck  it;  just
fucking well fucking go for fuck’s sake, you over-cautious fuck.

I went quickly but quietly out into the hall, gently closed the door and went

along to the stairwell, treading on the sides of the steps as I descended to keep
down any creaking noises. I did the same on the next set of stairs. I was right
at the bottom stair, facing the front door and about to make the turn to head
back along the long hall to the kitchen and the rear door, when I heard the
sound of a key in the front door’s lock.

I didn’t freeze. I didn’t even start to think that, Hey, maybe I can brazen it

out, dressed in my incredibly convincing overalls. There was no time to dash
back upstairs or get to the kitchen. There was maybe just enough time to get
to the door to the  right of the main  door. I lunged for it, leaping from the
bottom  stair,  grabbing  the  handle  and  pulling  the  door  open  to  fall  into  a

cloakroom  as  I  hauled  the  door  closed  behind  me,  managing  to  damp  its
closing  just  enough  to  stop  it  slamming  an  instant  before  I  heard  the  front
door open.

Oh no, I was going to sneeze. I was panting, close to wheezing, worried

that I was going to make so much noise that whoever it was - Kaj, probably -
would hear me anyway, but now I felt the tingle in my nose that meant I was
going to sneeze. I shoved my tongue up into the top of my mouth and forced
the edge of a finger up into the base of my septum, under my nose. The urge
to sneeze faded. I tried to work my way back into the coats and jackets - the
smell of waxed material always did make me want to sneeze for some reason
- and hoped that Kaj didn’t need to put a coat in here. The front door closed.

‘Boss?’ a deep, male voice boomed. ‘John?’
Then silence. I crouched down, behind and underneath the thickest clump

of coats. It was winter; not exactly freezing but not exactly warm either, so
there was every chance Kaj would have a coat he wanted to deposit in here.
Oh no, don’t. Oh no, please don’t. Please be a really hard Swedish guy who
just totally scorns the very idea of coats and jackets until the temperature is a
good ten below and the wind chill doubles that.

The door opened.
Oh God, this is it. This must be. I didn’t think I could be seen but my luck

just  had  to  run  out  sometime  and  I  suspected  it  was  long  overdue  for
departure. All I could see, as I was buried under and behind the coats, were
two very large Timberland boots and the broad shins of a pair of jeans. Could
he see anything of me? There was a swishing noise, the sound of fabric on
fabric, then the door closed.

I stayed where I was. Give the big blond bastard time to do a double-take;

Yoost a meenoot, whose were those shoes that I saw yust there?

Then I heard heavy footsteps going rapidly upstairs.
My mouth had gone all dry once more. When I tried to stand up my legs

collapsed under me and I had to sit down, breathing heavily. I levered myself
up. I put my ear to the door. I was a metre from escape. I’d use the front door
and the hell with getting out the way I came in. Thank fuck I’d replaced the
key inside the stone earlier.

Silence. No keyhole here either. I risked cracking the door and looked out.

Nobody about. The door opened and closed almost silently. Upstairs, I could
still just hear the sound of the shower pump. A door closed up there, sounding
faint. I turned to the wide front door. Please don’t let there be a returning maid
or an investigating copper standing outside. The front door was heavy but it
too swung open without a sound and I went out. The fresh, cool air of a bright
winter’s  afternoon  hit  my  face  as  I  skipped  down  the  steps  to  the  square,

breathing deeply. It tasted like freedom.

I got in and reversed out. I whooped and hollered most of the way back to the
Temple Belle. I parked on a double yellow by a phone box on Buckingham
Palace Road to phone Ceel’s mobile. Message service. I licked my lips, trying
to think what to say.

‘It’s all okay,’ I said.
I  blew  a  kiss  at  a  parking  warden  already  starting  to  take  the  Landy’s

details.

Then when I got back to Chelsea Creek I could hardly move once I reached

the car park. It felt like the front wheels were ploughing through half-melted
tarmac,  and  my  legs  almost  buckled  underneath  me  as  I  got  out.  I  had  to
support myself with both hands as I went down the narrow gangway to the
boat. I got the door closed, half fell down the steps and - for the second time
in twelve hours, and, in the overalls, even more fully clothed - collapsed onto
the bed like a dead weight. I was asleep before the second bounce.

Twelve

DEAD CAT BOUNCE

There’s  this  thing  called  the  Dead  Cat  Bounce.  It’s  a  stock  market  term,  I
believe. What it’s talking about is the fact that even a stock that is essentially
worthless and really going nowhere but down for ever can register a slight
upward movement, just for a bit, because there is generally a floor for almost
everything. The comparison rests on the fact that even when a cat hits the
pavement from forty storeys high and dies instantly, it’ll still bounce back up
a little.

Now may be a good time to think of something happy, inside here.

When I first came to London in ’94 it wasn’t as a DJ. I’d lost my job with

StrathClyde Sound after a series of disputes (the last straw, absurdly, had been
a campaign I’d called Don’t Rubbish Our Stations, to bring back litter bins to
Scottish railway stations, because the IRA had never carried out any terrorist
attacks anywhere in Scotland and so there was no need to ape the English
safety  precaution  of  removing  bins  because  they  were  potential  places  to
leave a bomb). So I decided to make the move down south to the big smoke,
like generations of Scots before me. In London, I’d got nowhere with the few
contacts I had and the dozens of demo tapes I’d sent off, so I got a job as a
bike courier, whizzing through the crowded streets on an already well-used
Bandit that had cost me the last of my savings, weaving in and out between
the cars and trucks and buses and going the wrong way round the occasional

traffic  island  to  get  documents  and  disks  and  drawings  from  one  office  to
another as quickly as possible.

Then  I  got  a  job  with  a  firm  of  Motorcycle  Chauffeurs,  somehow

convincing the manager that I was a good, responsible, and above all smooth
driver  (miraculously,  I’d  held  on  to  a  clean  licence  in  all  the  mayhem  of
London dispatch biking, though I had been knocked down twice). The idea
was  that  the  London  traffic  had  become  so  congested  there  was  an  almost
literal gap in the market for getting people from one bit of the capital to the
other quicker than a taxi or a limo could. A big bike was the answer; a Honda
Pan  European  or  a  1200  BMW  tourer,  complete  with  panniers  to  carry  an
extra helmet and an over-suit for the client and a tall enough screen so that the
worst of any weather was kept off them (providing you were moving, though
of course being on a bike, you should be able to, even in a serious jam).

The company did well enough but then ran into cashflow problems and was

taken over by a limo firm; they lost half the drivers but I was one of the lucky
ones.

One late spring morning, at the start of an early shift, I was called to an

emergency  job  taking  somebody  from  Islington  to  Langham  Place.  A  car
hadn’t  shown  and  I  was  nearest.  I  pulled  up  at  a  nice,  semi-posh  terraced
house in Cloudesley Square, one of the district’s leafier bits, and this elfin
blonde  in  jeans  and  a  rumpled  T-shirt  appeared,  running  down  the  steps
pulling on a pretend biker’s jacket and waving goodbye to a sleepy-looking
guy standing in the doorway, wearing what looked like a very small woman’s
dressing-gown.

‘Hi!’ she said, pulling on the helmet I had held out to her.
She  had  a  small,  friendly  looking  face,  profoundly  unkempt  short,  curly

hair and crinkly eyes that were about as wide-set as they could be in such a
thin face. Cheeky-looking, somehow. I was sure I recognised her. Come to
think of it, the guy in the too-small dressing-gown had rung a bell or two as
well.

‘Morning,’ I said, helping her with the buckle under her chin. This wasn’t

as easy as it ought to have been because she was bouncing from one foot to
the other all the time. ‘You’ll have to stop jumping up and down,’ I told her
gently.

‘Sorry!’ She waggled her eyebrows. The helmet was a bit big for her, but I

did the strap up as tight as I could.

I got the buckle fastened and she swung her leg over and jumped on behind

me.  ‘Broadcasting  House!  Langham  Place!’  she  yelled,  helmet  banging
against mine. ‘Fast as you can! If that’s okay.’

I nodded and we set off. It was about ten to six. We didn’t quite make it in

time but her producer filled for her and played a couple of records back to
back and - parked up by a wee café on Cavendish Street and listening on my
FM  earpiece  -  I  heard  her  start  her  show,  and  smiled  when  -  breathless,
giggling, apologising - she said thanks to the bike guy who’d helped her get
there  almost  on  time.  ‘Sorry  I  forgot  to  ask  your  name,’  she  said.  ‘But  if
you’re listening, mate, well done. Right …’

Samantha Coghlan was something very close to being the nation’s darling

at the time. Sam had presented various shows on children’s TV, been a big hit
there, tried some more serious TV without any great success - one of those
deals where they keep adding zeros to the money on offer until the talent has
to  say  yes,  then  the  execs  stand  around  scratching  their  heads,  wondering
what exactly to do with the star they’ve bought - and then made the move to
national radio in what at first looked like an act of desperation by both her and
Radio One.

As  it  turned  out,  though,  she  was  perfect  for  the  Breakfast  Show.  Well,

perfect apart from sleeping in all too often with her celeb film-star boyfriend
after showbiz parties and general late nights with their famous friends. Breezy
and pally, but sharp and funny too, Sam added a million and a half listeners to
the  show  and  reinvigorated  a  career  that  might  just  have  been  starting  to
stutter. Within a year she was winning awards, fronting a TV rock and pop
show to even more acclaim and helping a couple of major retailers lift their
profile with a generation of customers they’d been losing touch with.

I  became  Biker  Ken,  her  preferred  mode  of  transport  for  most  of  that

summer. I’d made a decision right at the start to keep quiet about my own
dormant radio career. Sam started to mention me on air more often, and over a
couple  of  months  I  became  one  of  the  disparate  cloud  of  friends,
acquaintances,  hangers-on  and,  well,  parasites  she  would  mention  -  always
funnily, never bitterly - during the course of her show; a cast of characters she
built up apparently without thinking about it until we became part of a sort of
real-life soap opera the listening public followed avidly five mornings out of
seven.

After  a  while  -  once  the  bike  hire  company  equipped  us  with  two-way

intercoms so that we could, if the client wanted to, communicate with each
other - she started asking me, en route, about what I’d done before I’d become
a bike chauffeur. Finally I couldn’t keep my old career quiet without either
being rude or lying, so I confessed all.

‘Brilliant! Really?’
‘Really.’
‘Great! Come on the show!’
‘Look,’  I  told  her,  ‘I’m  not  going  to  say  no,  Sam,  but  you  may  want  to

recon—’

‘Na; come on! It’ll be fun!’
So I did. And found I hadn’t lost my radio voice or my touch, and was

suitably, humbly funny for a five-minute spot with her one morning when I
was off duty. That afternoon, I got a call from one of the stations I’d sent a
demo tape to a year earlier; would I like to come in and do an audition? So,
Sam gave me my big break.

The  lovely  Samantha  parted  company  with  her  listeners  one  tearful

morning that autumn, leaving to go off and have babies in LA with her actor
fiancé, whose career had taken off in serious style. We all missed her, but by
then  I  had  my  own  late-night  show  on  a  new  commercial  London  station
called M25. I sent her flowers; she sent a gracious, funny, affectionate note
that I still had. She was a happily married mother of twin girls and a big hit on
the Hollywood social scene, last I’d heard, but what I remembered most was
not her leaving, or those five generous minutes on her show that kick-started
my  own  stalled  career,  or  even  that  morning  when  I  first  met  her;  what  I
remembered most, what I remembered now, was charging down the sleepy
streets in the light of a new summer’s morning, heading south for Langham
Place through the sparse five-thirty traffic with the big bike humming beneath
us. She held onto the grab handles at first, then, after a couple of weeks, asked
if it would be okay to put her arms round my waist.

I’d said, Of course, and so, about three mornings out of five, and usually by

the time we got to Caledonian Road, she’d clasp her gloved hands in front of
my belly and put her helmet against mine and then fall comfortably asleep for
the rest of the journey.

When  we  started  wearing  the  intercom  units,  I  could  hear  her  snoring

sometimes, ever so gently, as we thrummed smoothly down the quiet, side-lit
streets towards the heart of the slowly waking city.

In all my life to that point, I had never been happier.
Since then, only when I’d been with Ceel.

And I’m thinking about her now, because now I’m in a box, all trussed, bound
up, blind in the darkness and petrified that something gruesome is going to
happen to me, because all that I did earlier, all the business with the getting
into and getting out of Merrial’s house was somehow not enough, and the bad
men have come for me and taken me away and I’m terrified for myself and
for Celia, because I have the awful, gut-churning, bowel-chilling feeling that
when they take me out of here I’m going to see her and she’ll be in just as
much trouble as I am.

They came in the depths of night and the bottom of the tide, when the whole
ship was tilted, out of true and out of kilter, sloping away to one side on the
dark slope of ancient mud where the smell of cold death rises from.

I  woke  up  panicking  again,  but  this  time  because  I  thought  I’d  heard

something. I lay there across the bed in the darkness, not daring to move. Had
I heard something? Sometimes I used to be sure I heard a great banging noise
the  instant  before  I  woke,  but  Jo  would  always  say  that  I  must  have  been
dreaming.  Had  that  happened  this  time?  I  heard  another  noise,  somewhere
above me. I started to move my hand towards the head of the bed, where the
big black Mag-Lite torch/club lay. Maybe I was dreaming. Or maybe it was Jo
come  back,  shame-faced,  unable  to  live  without  me.  Maybe,  better,  it  was
Ceel; I’d left the door unlocked or she’d learned how to pick a lock from her
husband’s crim pals.

Another noise. Oh, sweet Jesus. Forget the Mag-Lite. Activate the fucking

Breitling’s emergency satellite signalling gizmo, dickhead. I started to bring
my hands together.

The light clicked on. My eyes hurt. I spun round, turning over in the bed in

time to see a tall, well-built white guy I didn’t recognise standing above me;
another big guy stood at the door to the bedroom, some sort of large box just
behind him. They looked like I had; overalls and baseball caps. My right hand
moved to my left wrist, where the big Breitling was, but it was all happening
too  slowly.  The  first  guy  punched  me  hard  in  the  belly  and  the  wind
whooshed out of my lungs. He grabbed my wrist and tore the watch off my
hand.

Released, I curled up, gasping and mewling, bunched round the pain and

the  wheezing  vacuum  formed  by  the  punch,  and  they  bound  me  in  that
position before I could do anything about it, quickly and efficiently sticking
silver gaffer tape over my mouth and tying my hands and ankles all together
with  the  same  plastic  ties  the  cops  use.  They  both  wore  latex  gloves,  like
surgeons. They frisked me quickly, efficiently, taking everything out of my
pockets. Then they roped my neck to the same four-way knot securing my
wrists and ankles so that I was trussed into a fetal position. That way I fitted
into the foam-lined metal shell of a washing machine in the big cardboard box
I’d  glimpsed  earlier,  which  they  must  have  lifted  down  the  stairs.  They
lowered me into it, sitting me on my buttocks and feet, and then secured the
lid, cutting out all light. I heard the cardboard flaps slap down above me and
the tearing noise of more gaffer tape being applied, then I felt myself being
lifted up the steps.

I  was  on  my  side  now,  lying  on  and  surrounded  by  what  felt  like  thick

expanded polystyrene. I tried to move, tried to scream down my nose, tried to
kick or punch or do anything, but all that happened was I produced a pathetic

keening noise through my snotty nostrils and got myself all hot in the tiny,
insulated space. I felt myself carried up the gangway, along the pontoon, up
the slope to the car park, and then heard the faint noise of what sounded like a
pair of van rear doors opening. I was placed down, the doors closed with a
muffled thud and a few seconds later the van, engine unheard within all the
foam  padding  around  me,  started  off,  swinging  into  the  main  road  and
accelerating away.

Oh God, oh fuck, oh shit. The very, very best I could hope for now was that
this  was  still  something  to  do  with  that  wanker  and  his  dangerous  driving
case. Mark whatever he was called. Maybe he was still trying to get away
with a functioning driving licence; maybe he had persuaded my new pal Mr
Glatz  that,  after  all  -  and  despite  our  little  word  outside  the  Imperial  War
Museum - I still needed to be leaned upon. Maybe he’d found new crim pals
willing to do the job for him. Maybe he had more villainous resources of his
own than Mr Glatz had credited him with. Maybe all this was just to get me
utterly  fucking  petrified  -  if  so;  hey,  mission  accomplished,  guys!  -  so  I’d
agree to change my witness statement.

Except I didn’t think so.
It was all so fucking easy and efficient and well thought-out, somehow. Too

practised. These fuckers had done this before. It was Merrial.

But maybe not. Maybe when we got to wherever we were going - and it

was  always  possible  we  were  going  somewhere  really  terminally  and
immediately god-awful, like a crusher or an incinerator, or just the edge of an
old dock - maybe I’d see this guy Southorne, not John Merrial. Maybe.

I started to cry. The pain in my abdomen was receding now, but I started to

cry.

The van swung smoothly through the city’s night-time streets, this way and

that.

All the things I’ll never get to say. All the rants I’ll never get to rant. There
was one shaping up about context, about blindness, about selectivity, about
racism and our intense sucker-hood when it came to reacting to images and
symbols, and our blank, glazed inability to accept and comprehend reality in
the form of statistics.

It’s because there was a reliable-sources statistic Phil discovered the other

day; that every twenty-four hours about thirty-four thousand children die in
the  world  from  the  effects  of  poverty;  from  malnutrition  and  disease,
basically. Thirty-four thousand, from a world, a world-society, that could feed
and  clothe  and  treat  them  all,  with  a  workably  different  allocation  of

resources. Meanwhile, the latest estimate is that two thousand eight hundred
people  died  in  the  Twin  Towers,  so  it’s  like  that  image,  that  ghastly,  grey-
billowing, double-barrelled fall, repeated twelve times every single fucking
day; twenty-four towers, one per hour, throughout each day and night. Full of
children.

We feel for the people in the towers, we agree with almost any measure to

stop  it  ever  happening  again,  and  so  we  should.  But  for  the  thirty-four
thousand,  each  day?  Given  our  behaviour,  and  despite  the  idea  we’re
supposed to love our children, you could be forgiven for thinking that most of
us just don’t give a damn.

So, maybe not such a terrific world to be contemplating leaving, then (a

straw caught in the undertow, heading downwards into the darkness, to clutch
at). At least I said I loved Ceel. I told her, in the conventional three words.
That’s something. Not much, perhaps, and she never did return the sentiment,
but it’s something that I got to say, maybe the last unforced thing I’ll ever say.

It seems like a long time before the van stops. Then it starts again, moving
slowly. It jiggles over what feels like some roughish ground or badly pitted
roadway,  then  angles  down.  One  left  corner,  taken  slowly,  then  a  series  of
them, as though we’re on a spiral ramp, heading downwards. Then we stop.

It feels like my heart is thrashing against my ribcage, desperate to escape; a

rat  in  an  already  humming  microwave.  Sweat  pours  off  me  in  the  tightly
insulated confines of the box. Then I’m lifted, set down, and there’s the sound
of tape being ripped from the cardboard above me. The lid comes off and a
little light seeps in. I’m hoisted out easily by the two overalled guys who had
put me into the box. They undo the rope holding my neck down to my ankles
and wrists, then cut a plastic tie holding my wrists and ankles together. I’m
opened out like a penknife and stand precariously between them, ankles still
tied  to  each  other  and  wrists  the  same.  I’m  in  a  big  rectangular  concrete
tunnel. It’s quite dark, lit only by a couple of armoured glass ceiling fixtures.

The van we came in was a white Astramax and a little part of my brain that

doesn’t believe all this is really happening to me thinks, Ah! Of course it’s an
Astramax; what else? Ahead there are two wire mesh gates and distant ceiling
lights forming a grid in a larger space beyond. The air smells dank and filthy
like rain-diluted sewage; it feels cold on my sweat-beaded skin.

They drag me to the mesh gates and push them open. We’re on a slight

slope. Beyond, the slope disappears into darkness black as night, the darkness
of an infinite pit.

Lights come on across the black gulf. The mainbeams of a car, blinding.

The blackness is water. We splash into it, raising a smell of something dead

and rotten into the air. The water is only a couple of centimetres deep, barely
more than a film. The toes of my shoes are dragged through the thin covering
over old but still smooth concrete. About fifteen metres in from the shallow
ramp we entered from, we get to the place where the car is. It’s a big, dark,
modern  Bentley.  By  its  offside  there  is  a  little  island  of  pallets;  about  two
dozen squares of anaemic yellow-white undressed wood arranged to provide a
sort of crude pontoon above the shallow sheet of dark water. The Bentley sits
beside the pallet island for all the world like a liner tied up to a quayside.

In the centre of the pallets, a single metal column comes down from the

roof. There are two piles of bricks on each side of the column, about sixty
centimetres high, bound to the black iron column with thick black insulating
tape. A metre away, facing this, there is a single big plain wooden seat, sturdy
and armless, the sort of thing you might find at the head of a farmhouse table.

When  I  see  it  I  try  to  struggle,  but  it’s  almost  comically  ineffective.  I

suspect the two guys holding me don’t even notice. They put me in front of
the seat. When I resist being sat in it the one who hit me before whacks me
with one fist, crunching into my cheek. I lose it for a moment and when I’m
fully  aware  again  I’m  already  tied  and  taped  into  the  seat  and  they’re  just
finishing taping my feet to the iron column. My heels are resting on the piles
of bricks, one on either side of the metal post.

I can’t believe this. My head feels like it’s revolving and somersaulting and

vibrating,  like  it’s  a  fairground  waltzer  and  my  brain’s  the  single  hapless,
helpless passenger. When I’m quite secure and unable to move much beyond
a  twitch  -  my  head  is  the  only  part  of  me  I  can  really  control  at  all  -  the
driver’s door of the Bentley opens and John Merrial gets out. He’s dressed in
a black three-piece suit with a high-necked waistcoat. Black gloves. The two
guys, one to each side of me, straighten fractionally.

So there goes my last hope. It is him and not Mark Southorne. I am here

because  of  yesterday,  because  of  the  message,  because  of  Ceel,  and  not
because of some idiotic points-dodging scam.

Mr Merrial looks small and dark and regretful, as though he isn’t going to

enjoy any of this either.

I lose control of my bowels and shit myself. I really can’t help it. I’m a

passenger in my own body now and I just sit there and listen and feel and then
smell it all happen and I’m astonished how quickly and easily it takes place.
Mr Merrial wrinkles his nose. The shit fills my underpants.

Nothing, I think. I’m to be spared nothing.
The guy who hasn’t hit me goes to Merrial and offers him the stuff they’ve

taken off me. Merrial takes a large pair of latex gloves from one pocket, puts
them  on  over  his  black  leather  gloves  and  then  accepts  the  big  Breitling,

hefting it. He smiles. ‘Nice watch.’ He hands it back to the guy. He tries to
turn my phone on but of course it’s dead. Then he looks in my wallet, taking
out  my  various  credit  cards  and  bits  and  pieces  and  inspecting  them.  He
pauses at his own white calling card, the one I’d written on.

From  here,  because  I’m  sitting  down  and  so  looking  from  a  lower

perspective, I can see the back of the card, where I wrote down the code Celia
told  me  over  the  phone,  the  code  that  turns  off  the  burglar  alarm  in  the
Merrials’ house. I’ve been sitting here desperately trying to work out what to
say and I do have an idea, but it all depends on the fucker not looking at the
back of that little white card. If he does, there’s nothing I can think of that
might save Celia, let alone me. If he doesn’t, then the slenderest of chances
remains.

The moment seems to freeze. In that instant I’m suddenly with Ceel and

her absurd entanglement theory. In one universe, Merrial flips the card over in
his fingers and sees the alarm code written there. In the other, he just looks at
the one already printed side and that’s all.

Maybe I deserve what might happen here. I know I’m not a particularly

good person; I’ve lied and I’ve cheated and it’s no consolation that little of it
was illegal. It’s not illegal to lie to your best friend, to fuck his wife, to lie to
your partner, to cheat on her. Smashing car windows, hitting somebody in the
face, smoking dope, burglary; that sort of thing’s illegal and I’ve done all that
too,  but  none  of  that  means  very  much  compared  to  betraying  the  people
you’re closest to; that’s the stuff really to be ashamed of. So maybe I’d have
no real cause to complain if I’m made to suffer here.

But nothing I’ve done deserves the death penalty, or even having my legs

broken, does it? I’ve told lies on a small scale but I’ve tried to tell the truth on
a larger scale. I’ve tried to be true to what I believe in rather than make as
much money as I could have. Doesn’t that count for something? And who the
fuck are these people to judge me anyway? I’m a liar and I’m weak and I’m
certainly no hero because I’ve filled my fucking pants, but - even sitting here
in  my  own  stench,  in  greasy,  sweat-stained  two-hard-days’-living  clothes  -
I’m a fucking better man than these vindictive shitheads, for all their crisply
ironed shirts.

If only deserving something was all there was to it.
Actually it doesn’t matter a damn. I am in the realm of pure luck here, even

if Ceel’s crazy ideas are true (which they just damn well aren’t). So roll the
dice; let the universe do the fucking maths.

Merrial  slips  the  card  back  into  my  wallet,  without  looking  at  the  other

side.  He  hands  everything  back  to  the  man  in  the  overalls,  then  slowly
removes his latex gloves and gives those to the guy, who comes and stands

behind my shoulder again.

Merrial says, ‘Take the tape off his mouth, would you, Alex?’
The guy who’s hit me twice so far does that, tearing it off casually. It hurts

a bit. I swallow. Cold sweat trickles down my face and into my mouth.

‘Good evening, Kenneth,’ Merrial says.
For  a  while  I  just  breathe,  unwilling  to  trust  myself  to  come  out  with

anything coherent.

Merrial hoists himself a little and sits on the wing of the Bentley. ‘Well,’ he

says with a hint of a smile. ‘Thank you for coming. I expect you’re wondering
why I’ve invited you here this evening.’

This is probably meant to be funny. I keep on breathing, not willing to say

anything. I stare into his eyes, dark under his brows and the shadows of the
small overhead lights. I keep swallowing, trying to get some saliva into my
mouth. I look about the place, squint into the Bentley. At least there’s no sign
of Celia. Maybe she got away in time. Maybe she’s not been linked to this.
Oh, Lord, a straw to grasp at; a still-floating one.

‘Do you like being underground, Kenneth?’ Merrial asks. I don’t think he

really  wants  an  answer  so  I  don’t  give  him  one.  ‘I  do,’  he  says,  smiling,
looking around at the darkness. ‘I don’t know … just makes me feel …’ He
stares up. ‘Safe, I suppose.’

I’m a single nerve-firing away from hysterical laughter at this point, at that

particular word, but I don’t think that laughing in Mr Merrial’s face right now
would  be  a  very  good  idea  at  all,  and  sense  prevails.  A  series  of  small,
horrible, bubbly farts announce my bowels have completed their evolutionary
duty and prepared me for fight or flight by getting rid of the excess matter
they’d been holding inside my body. Very helpful, I think, sat here, immobile
and helpless.

‘Yes,’  Merrial  says,  looking  round  too.  ‘I  like  it  here.  Useful  old  place,

this.’  He  gestures  down  at  the  floor,  where  the  water  has  already  stopped
rippling and gone back to its impression of pure blackness again. ‘Flooding,
now.’ He shakes his head, lips pursed. ‘Won’t be able to use it in a year or
two.’  He  looks  at  me.  ‘Water  table,  you  see,  Kenneth.  Water  table  of  the
whole  of  London  is  rising  again.  It  was  going  down  for  years;  centuries,
apparently, while they were taking water out for industry; tanning, breweries,
that sort of thing. Now it’s rising again. They have to keep pumps going all
the time in the deep tube lines and some multi-storey underground car parks.’
He smiles thinly. ‘You’d think they could use some of it as drinking water
instead of flooding nice valleys in the Home Counties, but apparently it’s too
polluted. Shame, really, don’t you think?’

‘Mr Merrial,’ I say, voice quivering, ‘I honestly don’t know why—’
Merrial raises one hand to me and looks towards the ramp I was brought

down.  Lights,  and  the  sound  of  a  big  car  engine.  A  Range  Rover  trundles
down the slope. It edges between the opened V of the wire mesh gates and
into the water. It comes hissing slowly towards us on small, inky bow-waves,
then loops away into the darkness and curves back in again, stopping on the
other  side  of  the  little  pallet-island  from  the  Bentley,  a  series  of  miniature
wakes rippling and gurgling against the wood beneath us. The Range Rover
kills its lights. The air smells of exhaust.

On  the  far  side,  the  driver’s  door  opens  and  Kaj  gets  out.  He  comes

splashing round, steps up onto the pallets and puts one hand to the passenger
door’s handle.

I know it might be her. I know who’s probably going to be there behind the

smoked  glass.  Merrial  is  watching  me  intently;  I  can  feel  it.  I  stare  at  the
Range  Rover’s  door.  For  as  long  as  I  can,  I’m  going  to  do  what  I  can  to
protect her. That might not be very long, but it’s all I can do, the only control
over anything I have here. When the door opens and I see it’s Celia, I look
surprised, no more. I stare at her, then look round briefly at Merrial.

Ceel  appears  uninjured.  She  looks  at  Merrial,  then  Kaj,  still  holding  the

door  open  for  her.  She  steps  out,  wrinkling  her  nose  at  the  smell.  She’s
dressed in blue jeans, a thick red shirt and a yellow and black hiking jacket.
Hair down, spread. Hiking boots. She looks calmly angry.

‘What do you think—?’ she starts to ask Merrial, then she seems to see me

properly for the first time. Oh, Jesus, don’t blow it so soon, kid. She frowns at
me.  ‘That’s  …  that’s  Ken  Nott.  The  DJ.’  She  glares  accusingly  at  Merrial.
‘What the hell’s he supposed to have done?’ The question ends on what is
almost a laugh.

Merrial stays where he is, sitting on the wing of the Bentley. Kaj quietly

closes the door of the Range Rover and stands beside Celia with his hands
folded over his crotch, bouncer style, eyes flicking about the scene. The two
guys who kidnapped me stand still, one at each of my shoulders.

‘Let’s  ask  him,  shall  we?’  Merrial  said  pleasantly.  He  looks  at  me.  ‘So,

Ken, why do you think you’re here?’

‘Mr Merrial,’ I say, ‘I don’t know. I don’t know what you think I’ve done,

but—’

Merrial shakes his head. ‘Ah, no, Ken. You see you’ve started lying already

now, haven’t you?’ He looks genuinely disappointed in me. ‘I thought you
were always saying on your show how people had to be truthful, how they
had to be truthful even when it hurt, but there you go, you see, the first proper
answer we’ve had from you so far and it’s a flat lie, isn’t it?’

breath. ‘If I’ve done something you don’t like, I’m sorry, Mr Merrial. I really
am.’

Merrial shrugs, raising his eyebrows and making a pouting motion with his

lower lip. ‘Well, everybody’s sorry when they get caught, Kenneth,’ he says
reasonably. ‘But I think you do know why you’re here.’ His voice is quite
soft.

Nothing useful I can say at this point, I suspect. I stick to swallowing. The

shit is starting to go cold around my backside on the front of the seat I’m tied
to. Jesus, I stink. Oh, Celia, I wish you didn’t have to see, smell, experience
all this. I wish you’d run, got away, just kept on heading north or anywhere as
long as it was away from this man.

‘Kaj?’ Merrial says. ‘You have exhibit A, do you?’
Kaj nods and opens the Range Rover’s rear door.
‘John,’ Celia says. ‘I don’t know what’s going on here, but I don’t want to

be part of it. I want to go home. Now.’ She sounds composed, unflustered, but
still distinctly pissed off.

‘I’d like you to stay a while yet, Celia,’ Merrial says.
‘I don’t want to stay,’ she says through clenched teeth.
‘I’m  sure  you  don’t,’  Merrial  tells  her.  He  swings  one  foot  a  couple  of

times, gently tapping the flank of the Bentley with his heel. ‘But I insist.’

Kaj is holding an opened laptop computer.
Celia  narrows  her  eyes.  She  takes  a  breath.  ‘There  had  better,’  she  says

slowly,  ‘be  a  very  good  reason  for  this,  John.’  She  looks  about  the  place,
sparing me a brief, pitying, slightly disgusted look. ‘You’ve kept me away
from … this sort of thing until now. I always assumed that was because you
knew how I might react if I was brought into contact with it.’ Her gaze snaps
back to Merrial. ‘This changes things between us, John,’ she tells him. ‘You
can’t go back from this. I hope you realise what you’re doing.’

Merrial just smiles. ‘Show Kenneth the evidence, would you, Kaj?’
The big blond guy holds the laptop open a metre away from me. From this

angle, Celia can see the screen too. Kaj presses Return and a big grey-blue
window already open on the desktop flickers into life.

Oh shit. If I hadn’t already crapped myself, I would now.
It’s the interior of the Merrials’ house; one of the landings. Daylight. First

floor; I can see down the stairwell to the front door and the loo I hid in later.
Only the first quarter metre of each door is visible. The alarm controls aren’t
visible.  There’s  me,  coming  up  the  stairs  in  jerky  every-few-seconds  lo-fi

slomo,  the  sort  of  thing  you  see  on  TV  real-life  crime  programmes  when
they’re showing a recording of a raid on a bank or building society or a sub-
post office. No sound. Looks like the shot is taken from the ceiling.

you were wondering.’ He glances at his wife. Celia takes in a deep breath,
puffing herself up. ‘I had, ah,’ Merrial says quickly, ‘one or two suspicions
about things; this was a way of—’

‘You  put  surveillance  in  my  home?’  Celia  says,  rage  overflowing.  ‘You

didn’t even think to ask me, tell me?’

Merrial looks almost awkward. ‘Security is my concern, Celia, not yours,’

he says, not looking at her but at me. ‘It’s only in the hall and landings, not
anywhere else.’

‘Have you lost your senses, man?’ Celia breathes, almost more to herself

than to her husband. ‘How could you? How could you?’

Merrial doesn’t answer.
Meanwhile, on screen, in living grainy Rubbish Colour, I try various doors

then  disappear  upstairs.  The  clip  switches  to  the  next  floor  up,  and  me
ascending the stairs. I go into the bedroom across from Celia’s. Not exactly
good portrait-quality pictures, but good enough; easily sufficient to convince
a  jury  that  that  was  me,  all  right.  Especially  as  I’m  still  wearing  the  same
fucking clothes now as I was then.

‘Okay, Kaj,’ Merrial says softly. Kaj closes the laptop and puts it back in

the Range Rover. ‘So, Kenneth,’ Merrial says. ‘What were you doing in my
house?’

I look at him. Swallow. I say, ‘I was wiping the tape on your answering

machine.’

He tips his head. He looks mildly surprised. ‘Were you, now? And why

would you want to do that?’

‘Because I left a message on it that I regretted the instant I woke up the

next morning, a message I thought would get me into trouble if you heard it.’
I look around at the two gleaming cars, the pallet island, the black, unseen
waters. I gulp. ‘This sort of trouble.’

Merrial nods for a moment. ‘What did the message say, Kenneth?’
‘It was insulting to you, Mr Merrial.’
‘What exactly did it say, Kenneth?’
‘I honestly can’t remember the exact words,’ I say, closing my eyes for a

few seconds. ‘I swear I can’t. I was … I was very drunk when I made the call.
Very drunk indeed. I’d had a bit of an emotional sort of day, to be honest.’ I

attempt a hopefully infectious smile, but it seems Mr M’s empathic immune
system is proof against this. ‘A friend found out that I’d been, ah, seeing his
estranged wife,’ I tell him, struggling manfully on. ‘But I also discovered I’d
just got out of a court case I hadn’t exactly been looking forward to. So there
was, ah, a sorrow to be drowned and something to be celebrated as well. I did
both,  and  got  very  drunk  indeed.  Obviously  I  wouldn’t  have  been  stupid
enough to have made the call if I hadn’t been extremely drunk. But I was, ah
…’ I lick my cold, dry lips. I clear my throat. ‘Listen,’ I say, trying to look
appealing. ‘I don’t suppose I could have some water, could I?’

Mr Merrial nods his head. ‘You suppose correctly, Kenneth. Go on.’
I swallow on my dry throat, grimacing. ‘What happened was that I’d found

out from another of my friends what you … what you were involved in,’ I tell
Merrial. ‘What your, ah, profession was, what it involved.’ I shrug, look away.
‘I  felt  angry  that  I’d  played  you,  your  wife  a  record.  I  felt,  um,  complicit,
dirtied  up,  you  might  say.  I  called  you  to  tell  you  this  and  got,  ah,  a  little
carried away, you might say. I called you things I would not call you to your
face now, Mr Merrial. I, ah, I’m sure you can fill in the blanks yourself.’

Mr Merrial nods slowly. ‘And my wife?’
I  let  my  brows  tremble.  I  glance  at  Celia,  who  is  looking  aghast  at  her

husband.  In  a  small  voice  I  say,  ‘I,  ah,  may  have  referred  to  her  as  …  a
gangster’s moll, or something.’

I have half a hope this might get a laugh, or at least a smile, but Merrial

looks quite serious. ‘And so you thought you’d burgle my house?’ he says,
not sounding completely convinced. Not sounding at all convinced, in fact.

‘I realised what I’d done when I woke up,’ I tell him. ‘So I called your

house again. The answering machine was still on so I guessed you were away
for the weekend. I drove to your place, climbed into the garden from the roof
of my Land Rover, found a key to the back door in one of those artificial
stone  things,  realised  the  alarm  wasn’t  switched  on  and  thought,  Hey,  the
Gods are with me here.’ I shift in my seat. This is a mistake. The shit feels
like some disgusting jelly inside my pants and jeans, and is already seeping
through  to  my  overalls.  ‘Then  I  really,  really  needed  to  take  a  dump,  so  I
started looking for a toilet. I finally found one. Then I went back down to the
study, wiped the tape and—’

‘You’re  leaving  my  wife’s  bedroom  out  of  all  this,’  Merrial  said.  He

glanced at Celia, then smiled. ‘I can’t help noticing.’

Celia glared at me and crossed her arms.
‘I’d thought earlier that if there was any sign I’d - anybody had - been in

then I should try to make it look like a robbery,’ I tell him. ‘So I took a couple
of  rings  from  Mrs  Merrial’s  dressing  table.  Then,  after  I’d  got  the  tape

cleared, I realised taking the rings would just draw attention to the fact that
somebody had been in the house, so I went back to her room and put them
back where I’d found them.’ I look at Merrial. He looks sceptical. I shrug as
best I can. ‘I’d never done this sort of thing before, Mr Merrial. I’d talked to
people;  I  knew  about  artificial  stones  and  fake  Campbell’s  Soup  tins  and
pretend mains sockets for hiding valuables in and stuff like that, but I didn’t
think I’d get in and out without an alarm going. But it didn’t matter. I was
going to get in no matter what it took; smash a window, break down a door;
anything, because even if I was caught by the cops, whatever sentence I got,
whatever fine I was hit with or time I had to serve, it had to be less … less
unpleasant  than  what  would  happen  to  me  if  you  heard  that  answering
machine tape.’

‘And  if  my  friends  in  the  Met  had  caught  you,  what  were  you  going  to

claim was your purpose in breaking into my house?’

I shrug again. ‘My, ah, first thought was to claim that I’d become obsessed

with your wife, but then I thought you’d probably be pretty upset about that,
too, so I decided I’d claim that I’d become a … vigilante or something, that I
was looking for evidence of your criminality, or just wanted to give you a
taste  of  your  own  medicine,  subjecting  you  to  crime.  It  didn’t  matter  how
stupid it sounded, how lame, as long as I got that tape wiped.’

‘But the study was locked, Kenneth,’ Merrial says reasonably. ‘How did

you get in there?’

I frown. Just lie, I think. Deny the video, the recorded evidence. Pretend it’s

Lawson Brierley we’re dealing with here. Trust to the graininess of the image,
the  awkward  angle  the  camera  has  of  that  door  and  the  big  gloves  I  was
wearing to obscure the fact I used a key. ‘No it wasn’t,’ I tell him. ‘The study
was open.’

‘Kenneth,’ Merrial says gently. He nods at the Range Rover where Kaj put

the laptop. ‘We can see it was locked.’

‘It wasn’t!’ I protest. ‘I stuck my head in, saw it wasn’t a bedroom, caught a

glimpse of the answering machine and kept going!’ I look at Kaj. ‘I did! It
took about two seconds; I was desperate. I was about to …’ I let my voice fall
away and look down at my lap. ‘I was about to do what I’ve just done, for
Christ’s sake. I took a very quick look, closed the door and kept on going.’
I’m breathing deep and hard. There are tears in my eyes. I look at Merrial.
‘God,  man,  what  I’m  telling  you  is  bad  enough;  what  more  could  make  it
worse?’

Merrial looks slowly from me to Celia. He looks thoughtful. ‘That’s what

I’ve  been  asking  myself,  Kenneth.’  He  switches  his  gaze  to  Kaj.  ‘That
possible? What he just said?’ he asks.

Kaj  shrugs  massively.  ‘Perhaps,’  he  says.  His  voice  is  deep  but  not  as

Swedish as I’d been expecting. ‘The frame capture rate is about one per three
seconds. He might have had time to open and close the door between frames.’

Merrial looks at me. ‘The study was locked when I got back yesterday,’ he

says.

I shrug again. ‘Well, I don’t know!’ I say, almost wailing. ‘Maybe I put the

sneck down.’

Merrial looks puzzled. ‘The what?’
‘Scottish word,’ I say desperately. ‘The, the, the catch thing down, on the

lock inside the door. Anyway, I was about to leave when you came back, so I
hid in the cupboard in the gym. I heard you on the phone to your wife saying
you were calling somebody called Sky or Kyle or something. Then when you
were showering I almost made it to the front door when, when -’ I gesture at
Kaj ‘- when he came in, so I hid in the cloakroom by the front door. Once
he’d  gone  upstairs  I  just  walked  out.’  I  let  out  a  deep,  juddering  breath.
‘That’s it. Whole truth. Nothing but.’

Mr Merrial purses his lips. He looks at me for a few moments, and I grit

my teeth and return his stare. He nods.

And I realise then that there is - just - the hint of a chance. There’s a hint of

a chance because, complicit in the conspiracy Ceel and I are involved in here,
attempting to deceive Mr Merrial, there is, surprisingly, a third person, and
that third person is Merrial himself.

The man doesn’t really want to find out he’s been cuckolded. He knows he

has to be suspicious - suspicion is sensible, suspicion is safe, suspicion is how
he lives his entire professional life - but, ultimately, he’d rather not discover
his wife and another man have made a fool of him. He will go so far to make
sure it looks like nothing’s happened - as far as is reasonable, as far as he
must to establish the truth beyond something like reasonable doubt - but he
won’t pursue the matter as doggedly and as determinedly as he might a debt,
or an insult from another crook.

His own pride puts him on the same side as Ceel and me; none of us wants

him to know the truth.

Merrial makes a sort of huffing noise that might be a laugh and gets down

from the Bentley, walking slowly over to me, his hands raised in front of his
chin as though in prayer. He stops and looks at Celia. ‘Maria was last out,
apparently,’ he says. ‘I think we need a new maid.’ Celia’s frown deepens.
Merrial comes up to me. He sits down, gently, on my right knee. Oh shit, oh
shit,  oh  shit.  Totally  fucking  wrong  about  all  the  above.  Oh  fuck.  Here  it
comes.

voice.  ‘Nothing  compared  to  what’ll  follow,  I  should  think,  but  this  is
personal, from me, for invading my privacy.’

He takes a good back swing and punches me hard in the balls.
I’d forgotten how much it hurt. School playground, last time this happened.

I’d forgotten the lights, the nausea, the waves and waves of subtly differing
types of pain that course through your body when this is done to you. Not
being able to double up properly just makes it worse. It was as though your
brain had stored up all the orgasms you’d ever had in your whole life to that
point, then paid them back, all in one go, with the polarity reversed so that
what had been ecstasy became agony and what had been over in seconds each
day was lumped together over five or ten consecutive minutes of pure, grisly,
pulsating pain.

I screamed, loud and high and shrill, then sucked and wheezed and gasped

in the slowly, slowly ebbing aftermath.

Merrial had gone back to the Bentley.
‘How fucking dare you,’ Celia said. Her voice sounded more menacing and

cold than Merrial’s had at any point so far. I blinked through the tears and
looked at her. She was looking levelly, gravely at Merrial.

Merrial  looked  back.  ‘Yes,  dear?’  he  said.  But  it  already  sounded  weak.

Something in the way Ceel had spoken had given her the initiative here.

‘How fucking dare you do that to him and make me watch it,’ she breathed.

She walked across the pallets towards Merrial. Kaj followed a step behind,
looking wary. Celia stopped a metre from her husband. ‘You have no right to
do that,’ she said. Her voice was shaking with controlled fury. ‘You have no
right to make me witness it, no right to make me part of it, no right to make
yourself the law and me no better than one of your fucking thugs.’ She spat
the last word out like a broken tooth.

Merrial looked down briefly. ‘You know I don’t like you using that sort of

language, Celia,’ he said calmly.

‘I am not one of your fucking gang!’ she shouted at him.
He looked up, blinking. ‘Oh, for Christ’s sake!’ he yelled back. ‘What do

you think buys your jewellery, your dresses, the holidays?’

‘I’m not stupid!’ Celia exploded. ‘I’m not a fool! I know damn well! Mon

dieu! I thought, I stupidly thought until tonight that I didn’t get involved in
this  sort  of  thing  -’  she  gestured  behind,  towards  me  ‘-  in  return  for  me
staying with you, even though I know what you do, what you’ve become!’

Merrial shook his head and pulled down his cuffs, looking awkward but

recovering his composure. ‘It was always like this, Ceel.’

no. Oh, no; he calls her Ceel, he uses the same name for her that I do.)

this!’ she said, a sort of tumultuous control infecting her voice. ‘I married you.
I married a man who took me from a bad place and bad people and a bad
thing inside myself, a man who made me feel protected as well as desired.’
She stood back and straightened up. She looked down at him. ‘I will not stand
for this, John.’

He looked down again. ‘You’ve been having an affair,’ he told her quietly.
‘What?’ she said, and, with that one word, somehow, and for only about the

third or fourth time since I’d met her, sounded like a French-speaker speaking
English.

‘We  have  photographs,  more  video,’  he  said,  looking  down  again.  He

glanced to me, then Kaj.

She stared at him. She shook her head slowly. ‘You have nothing,’ she said

quietly.  A  silence  followed.  I  realised  that  somewhere  in  the  black,  hollow
distance, somewhere through the ambient smell of decay, there was a slow
drip-drip-drip noise. ‘Nothing,’ she repeated. ‘Except paranoia.’

He looked up at her. She shook her head again. ‘My girlfriends, ’ she said

slowly,  ‘have  boyfriends,  husbands,  brothers;  sometimes  when  we  meet  up
one of them will get there just before or just after me, before the others do.
Don’t think that a photograph of me sitting in Harvey Nics with a man you
don’t  know  constitutes  an  affair.  Leave  those  people  out  of  your  sordid
imaginings.’

Merrial looked from her to me.
Celia frowned, then glanced back at me. ‘With him?’ she said, and laughed.

She turned to look at me, and stopped laughing, looked serious. ‘Mr Nott; no
offence, but I could do better.’

‘None taken,’ I managed to wheeze round the pain.
Celia whirled round to face her husband again. ‘Show me, then. Show me

what this evidence is!’

Merrial just smiled at her, but the smile was strained, and by then even I

could see what she’d sensed instantly; he really didn’t have any evidence on
her,  he’d  been  hoping  to  force  a  confession  out  of  her  with  the  accusation
alone, if a confession had been due.

Celia  fixed  her  gaze  upon  her  husband  then  and  took  on  a  frosty  look.

Actually, frosty didn’t even start to cover it; it was more of a shaving-of-a-
degree-above-absolute-zero  look.  It  put  the  fear  of  God  into  me  and  I  was
only  caught  in  the  backwash  of  its  baleful  focus.  Merrial  withstood  it

somehow - must have built up some sort of immunity over the years they’d
been married, I supposed - but you could see he was affected. Some fuckwit
part of me, patently not in any way connected to my horribly bruised and still
jangling testes, almost felt sorry for the bastard.

‘I have been a faithful wife to you,’ Celia said in a measured, contained,

utterly sure and certain voice. ‘I have always been faithful to you!’ she said,
her voice breaking.

And  sitting  there,  right  then,  goddammit,  even  I  believed  her.  I’d  have

stood up in court or on any field of honour to insist with my last breath that
this woman had been an utterly faithful wife and was being sorely, grievously
wronged and defamed by being accused of being anything else.

Part of me found the time to wonder how the hell she was doing this, and

that was when it occurred to me that - just possibly - Ceel’s patently lunatic
ideas  about  entanglement  were  making  a  real  and  crucial  difference  here.
Maybe  at  this  moment  she  genuinely  believed  that  she  had  been  a  faithful
wife, because, in that other reality she claimed to be linked to, she actually
was. She was speaking not so much for herself but for the Celia on the other
side of that divide; the Celia who was a perfectly, unimpeachably good wife
who had never cheated; the Celia who could rightly claim, as she just had,
that she had always been faithful to her husband.

‘Can  you  say  the  same  to  me,  John?’  Her  voice  was  hollow  as  a  vast

canyon, and as sad as the sound of earth hitting a tiny coffin.

Merrial met her gaze.
Drip, drip, drip, in the distance. I was breathing hard, swallowing on a dry,

parched throat. The smell of death and shit didn’t seem quite so bad in the air
around us now, but maybe it was just something you got used to. Eventually
Merrial said, ‘Of course I can say it, Celia.’

That  last  shaving  above  Zero  Kelvin  vanished  with  a  whimper  into  the

darkness surrounding us.

‘Do not treat me like a fool, John,’ Celia said, and her voice was like the

voice a glacier would have if it could speak, the voice of the oldest, steepest,
widest, most powerful mountain-grinding-up glacier in all the fucking world,
after it had thought good and hard in glacier terms about precisely what it
wanted to articulate.

Merrial cleared his throat. I didn’t realise he must have looked away until

he brought his gaze up to meet hers again with what looked like an appalling,
abysmally draining amount of effort. ‘You—’

‘I want a divorce, John,’ she said.
Fucking bombshell. Just like that. Merrial blinked. The two of them stayed

that  way  for  a  few  moments,  him  swinging  one  foot  without  realising  it,
thunking  against  the  trailing  edge  of  the  Bentley’s  wheel  arch,  her  glaring
down at him, perfectly, savagely still.

her. ‘I don’t think here is really—’

‘We talk about it here, now,’ Celia said quickly. ‘You brought me here to

see  this,  you  changed  our  rules.  You  put  cameras  in  my  home.’  Her  voice
almost  broke,  and  she  took  a  quick,  controlling  breath.  ‘So  business  and
marriage are the same, now,’ she told him. ‘They are in the same arena. I said:
I want a divorce.’

Merrial ground his teeth. ‘No,’ he said.
She didn’t react. Dear God, this woman had perfected threatening stillness

to  a  high  art  indeed.  Merrial  might  be  good,  but  Ceel  would  have  made  a
brilliant crime boss.

Merrial cleared his throat and lifted his head up to her again. ‘Actually, I

want a divorce, Celia.’

She tilted her head a little. ‘You do, do you?’ Her voice was neutral now,

but sounded ready to slip into menace or accusation at any moment.

‘Yes, I need a divorce.’ Merrial gave an unhealthy looking little smile. ‘I

don’t like the term “widower”, Celia, so I hope you’ll be as accommodating
as I require you to be.’

She laughed a quick, convulsive laugh. ‘And what does that mean?’
Merrial looked just plain nasty now. ‘It means don’t expect any money.’
She  gasped.  Really  gasped,  genuinely  astonished.  ‘I  don’t  want  your

money, John,’ she told him. There was a hint in her tone as though she had
just realised she had been dealing with a child all along. ‘I didn’t marry you
for money. I didn’t want it then and I don’t now. Keep the money. Have your
divorce.’  She  was  breathing  hard  now,  shoulders  rising  and  falling  in  the
yellow and black jacket. Her voice had quivered over the last few sentences,
barely  under  control.  ‘So,’  she  said,  shaking  her  head  once,  regaining
command. ‘Has one of them insisted you make an honest woman of her?’

‘You might say that,’ Merrial said. You could see he was having to force

himself  to  keep  looking  at  her,  battling  against  the  pressure  of  that
remorselessly self-possessed gaze.

‘The one in Amsterdam?’ she asked evenly.
‘The one in Amsterdam.’ There was a strange sort of defiance in his tone.
‘And is she younger than I am, John?’ Celia asked quietly. ‘Is she more

beautiful? Is she as young as I was when you met me? Or younger? Is she as

exotic, is she as foreign? Is she better connected? Has she a famous name?
Has she money? Is she fertile?’

Merrial’s gaze might have flickered a little.
Ceel relaxed her stance. She stood back, her weight went more on one foot

than the other as she nodded. ‘Ah,’ she said. ‘She is pregnant, is she?’

Merrial’s eyes went wide just for a moment, then he gave a small laugh.

‘You always were good like that, weren’t you, Celia?’ He looked past his wife
to the big blond guy. ‘Isn’t she, Kaj?’

Kaj just looked awkward, and nodded.
‘Well, congratulations,’ Celia said bitterly.
She  seemed  suddenly  to  collapse  inside  then,  looking  quickly  away  and

putting one hand up to her eyes. Silently, her shoulders - wide inside the thick
yellow and black hiking jacket - shook; spasming once, twice, three times.
Merrial looked even more awkward and uncertain. He seemed to be about to
go to her and hug her, but he didn’t. He tried to find something to do with his
hands and then folded his arms and looked at Kaj and did a sort of pathetic,
Women, eh? look and gesture at the bigger man. Kaj sort of twitched, which
was probably as close as he was going to come to waxing eloquent on the
matter.

You beautiful, brave, intelligent, fabulous woman, I thought, staring at her

with tears in my eyes. I had to look away, in case Merrial saw the way I was
gazing at his wife. I was still having to remind myself that the extraordinary,
exquisite, immaculately righteous ire she was displaying here was all in fact a
complete fake, that she was lying through her perfect, delicious teeth when
she told Merrial she’d been a faithful wife, but she had successfully, so far,
anyway, shifted the focus of all that was going on here away from me and
onto herself, onto her marriage. She’d gone nuclear with the big D word and
duly been nuked in return, but it looked like she was actually getting away
with it.

This was a woman fighting for her own life and that of her lover, but she

wasn’t settling for just the result, she seemed determined to accomplish the
task  with  audacity,  bravura  and  style.  I  didn’t  think  I’d  seen  a  more
resourceful and courageous piece of acting in all my life, in person, on stage
or on screen. Even if it still all went horribly, painfully, lethally wrong from
here on in, at least I could suffer and die knowing I had been in the presence
of genius.

Celia dried her eyes with one hand, then fetched a handkerchief from one

of the pockets in her jeans and dabbed at her nose and cheeks. She sniffed and
put the hanky away again. She drew herself up. ‘I don’t want any money. And
I won’t say anything, to the press, the police, to anybody. I never have, I never

will. But I want to be left alone, afterwards. I want to live my own life. You
live yours. I live mine. And nothing must happen to any of my family, any of
my  loved  ones.’  She  raised  her  chin  to  him  after  she  said  this,  as  though
defying him to object to any of it.

Merrial nodded, then said softly, ‘Fair enough.’ He made a small gesture

with his hands. ‘I’m sorry it had to end like this, Celia.’

‘I’m sorry it had to be so bloody undignified, in front of Kaj and these guys

and -’ she gestured vaguely in my direction ‘- this poor clown.’

Merrial looked at me like he’d forgotten I was there. He sighed. ‘I thought

…’ he began. Then he shrugged. He fixed me with a stare I shrank back from.
‘One word on your show about this, Mr Nott, one word to anybody at all;
friends or family or police or public, and I’ll make sure you die slowly, do
you understand?’

I  swallowed,  nodded.  I  didn’t  trust  myself  to  say  anything  sensible.  The

fuckwit bit of me with its thumb seemingly super-glued to my personal Self-
Destruct  button  wanted  to  say  something  like,  Yeah  yeah  yeah,  fucking
omertà or I die in drawn-out agony, yada yada yada big man, but your wife’s
just  worked  you  over  and  we  both  fucking  know  it  and  this  compensatory
macho threat stuff isn’t convincing anybody … Eventually, though, under that
gaze,  I  had  to  give  way  and  croak,  ‘Yeah.  Yes,  I  understand.  Nothing.
Nobody.’

Merrial kept looking at me for a moment longer, then nodded to the two

guys standing at my shoulders. ‘Give him back his stuff and take him back to
where you found him.’

‘In the box, Mr M?’ said the guy who’d hit me.
Merrial looked upset. ‘No, not in the fucking box. In the back of the van;

put some tape over his eyes, that’ll do.’

I thought, Yes! … but just a tad too soon. Kaj stepped past Celia, lowered

his mouth to his boss’s ear and muttered something. Merrial smiled that thin,
thin  smile  of  his  and  quietly  said,  ‘All  right.  One  little  one.’  Then,  as  I
thought,  No,  no,  no!  We  got  away  with  it!  This  isn’t  supposed  to  happen!
Please, no! Merrial looked at Celia and sighed and said, ‘Maybe you’d best
look away.’ Celia rolled her eyes and did so.

Kaj stood in front of me.
‘This is for crapping in my loo,’ he said.
I had just enough time to think, Now the cunt sounds vaguely Swedish, then

he punched me so hard across the face I didn’t wake up until I was in the back
of the Astramax again, eyes taped over and hands tied together but otherwise
unrestricted. My head and my balls hurt like fuck, blood was bubbling from

my  nose,  my  pants  were  full  of  chilled  shit  and  I  was  very  cold  indeed;  a
bitter  winter  breeze  was  whipping  through  the  van  from  the  open  front
windows.

I didn’t blame the guys; it was reeking in here.

Thirteen

THE SCOTTISH VERDICT

‘What the fucking hell happened to you?’

‘I walked into a door.’
‘… Right. Would some stairs be involved at any point?’
‘That’s right; then I fell down some stairs.’
‘And after that?’
‘Then somebody beat the shit out of me, Craig.’
‘That must have taken a while. Were they working shifts?’

‘… Now that has got to smart.’

‘Philip,  if  I  live  for  a  thousand  years,  “smart”  is  not  a  word  I  will  ever

choose to associate with how I came to acquire this little lot.’

‘Good,  your  brain  and  tongue  are  still  working.  Debbie  wants  to  see  us

after the show and the first record up is Addicta’s new one with Jo on joint
lead vocals … Na, looking for sympathy doesn’t get any more efficient with a
black eye. Good try, though.’

‘Oh, my good Lord almighty, get yourself in here, Kennit, you need tendin
to.’

‘Fackin ell, man, you white guys go brilliant colours!’

Anonymous. ‘Yes?’

‘Don’t  forget  to  wipe  your  phone’s  Last  Calls  Made  and  Received

memories, just in case. I’ve tidied everything at this end.’

‘Already done.’ I’d destroyed the calling card with the incriminating code

number on it, too. ‘Though now I’ll have to do this one, of course. Celia?’

‘What, Kenneth?’
‘Thank you. You were brilliant. You saved my miserable life.’
‘It was my pleasure.’
‘I love you.’
‘Still? Are you sure?’
‘I do. I mean it.’
‘Well. Thank you, Kenneth.’
‘… What happens now?’
‘I have to pay the woman who was our maid some money to compensate

her for her dismissal.’

‘That’s not what I meant.’
‘I know.’
‘So.’
‘So. Well, wait.’
‘For what?’
‘For a package, and a phone call?’
‘So I’ll see you again.’
‘I can hear you are smiling as you say that. Yes.’
‘Ditto, kid. And will I see you again, after this next time?’
‘I would hope so. You know it will not be the same, though, don’t you? It

can never be the same again.’

‘I know. But maybe it can be better.’
‘John has started divorce proceedings. He is in Amsterdam most of the time

now.’

‘So can we meet up soon?’
‘I need to be very careful, still, but I hope so, soon. I must go.’
‘I’m sorry, Ceel. About getting us both into that mess.’
‘Good came of it. Never do its like again.’
‘I pro—’

‘I must go, my love.’
‘—mise. Hey, wait; did you say—?’
‘…’

There is this verdict, which is unique, as far as I know, to the Scottish legal
system,  and  remained  distinct  from  the  English  one  even  for  the  three
centuries of the full Union with the rest of the UK. It’s called Not Proven.

It means that the jury isn’t going to go as far as pronouncing the defendant

Not Guilty, but that the prosecuting authorities simply have not proved their
case.  It’s  a  funny  verdict,  because  you  still  leave  the  court  a  free  man  or
woman, with no criminal record (well, unless you had one before, of course),
though people - friends and family, the community at large - may remember,
and the implications of that neither-one-thing-nor-the-other verdict might well
live with you for the rest of your life.

There have been moves to get rid of it, to adopt the binary choice of Guilty

or Not Guilty, but I think that’s a mistake. If I was on a jury I would never
agree to a Not Proven verdict for somebody I basically thought was Guilty,
but I would go as far as Not Proven for somebody I would otherwise have
found  just  plain  Not  Guilty  and  who  I  thought  ought  not  to  be  punished
beyond the implications of that debatable verdict itself. Because that’s what it
is:  a  semi-punishment,  a  sort  of  warning,  a  conditional  discharge  that  is,
remarkably, in the gift of the jury, not the judge. I think it’s worth keeping for
that alone.

I’ve  wondered  for  many  months  now  if  that  was  the  judgement  John

Merrial  recorded  in  the  personal  courtroom  he  kept  in  his  head,  if  he  still
suspected there was something more going on somewhere, just with me, or
even between me and Celia.

I don’t know. I can’t decide.
Not Proven. It would do.
It’s one of those odd concepts that, the more you think about it, the more it

seems  applicable  within  all  sorts  of  other  contexts  besides  the  one  it
originated in. My whole radio career, for example, feels like it has been Not
Proven (actually it’s been Guilty loads of times, whenever I got fired again,
but  -  overall  -  I’m  still  claiming  the  Not  Proven  thing).  Scotland;  the  UK,
devolution. More British? More European? Not Proven.

And Celia and me. Not Proven.
I never did get that package and that phone call. Instead she decided we

ought to start meeting in public. She suggested the British Museum, the first
time; the room that held the Pergamum Altar. This was in March. In front of

that vast, white, towering edifice of Imperial plunder, we met, nodded, shook
hands, then went for coffee in the museum’s café. She asked how I was and I
said I was recovering. She apologised for her husband’s behaviour, hurting
me  as  he  had,  and  I  apologised  for  mine,  entering  her  home  without
permission.  We  talked  as  though  playing  parts,  then  parted  with  another
handshake.  I  slipped  the  folded  piece  of  paper  she’d  passed  during  the
handshake into my pocket and met her in the Sanderson the next afternoon.
The sex hurt. Me; not her, obviously. But it was still great.

We started to meet up more often, through the spring and into the summer,

while  Mr  M  set  up  his  operating  base  in  Amsterdam  and  the  divorce
proceedings slid smoothly along and his new fiancée blossomed.

We met in public as friends. In private, less often, as the lovers we had

always been.

One day in June she kissed me on the cheek as she left the bar, and the

following week brushed her lips with mine as she got out of the taxi, after
dinner. A fortnight later we went to Clout, dancing, and kissed on the dance
floor and later in a shady booth in the Retox bar. It was late July before she
came to the Temple Belle and stayed overnight, so that I finally got to spend a
whole night with her, and wake up with her. We never did discover if anybody
had been watching. But the risk had not been worth taking.

I still worry that one day Merrial will wake up and just somehow know that

of  course  Celia  and  I  had  been  lovers  back  then,  when  it  seemed  he  had
suspected  we  might  be,  and  still  take  his  revenge,  but  Ceel  seems  quite
sanguine about this.

‘John thinks I am too proper and too concerned with fairness, ’ she told me.

‘Paying off Maria and meeting you to apologise for all that happened appear
like symptoms of an amusing obsession to him. He thinks that I am going out
with you to spite him, that I am deliberately or subconsciously taking what he
suspected wrongly and making it true, just to punish him. So he believes that
what you and I have together is about him, not us, which pleases his ego, and
he thinks that I am deceiving myself over my motives in seeing you in the
first place, which he also finds a comfort.’

I frowned. ‘You sure about this?’
‘But of course. I can see what he thinks, and I know how to make him think

certain things.’

I thought about this, and an appalling thought occurred to me. ‘You can’t

do the same with me, can you?’

Celia laughed lightly, squeezed my hand and said, ‘What could possibly

make you think that?’

I had no real answer.
So, anyway, I think we’re safe, but still; Not Proven.
Another of my worries was that what we had between us would all have

changed  too  much,  that  we  had  only  ever  existed  as  the  fervently  coupled
entity we had been as a sort of two-person sexual freak; exquisite and fine in
the  rarefied,  hot-house  atmosphere  of  those  episodically  connected,  lily-
scented  hotel  rooms,  but  utterly  unsuited  to  the  rest  of  life,  to  the  day-to-
dayness  of  mundane  existence,  where  such  a  delicate  bloom  would  shrivel
and die in the light of the commonplace. Maybe we had nothing more to say
to each other than what we had already said, with our minds and our bodies,
in those intense darknesses. Perhaps we both had habits, idiosyncrasies, that
the  other  had  never  experienced  because  until  then  -  in  the  erratically
dispersed  and  limited  intervals  we’d  been  able  to  claim,  inside  those
tropically  lush,  reality-divorced  suites  -  we’d  been  too  busy  having  sex  to
exhibit any other behaviours.

So she discovered that I snored if I’d been drinking and then slept on my

back (I’m sure there’s a lot more, but I trust her to tell me). What I found was
that, try as she might, she could not resist slipping into rapid-fire Martinique-
style  French  patois  whenever  she  was  with  her  relations  or  talked  to  them
over the phone. Oh, and when she had a cold once, she was a rotten patient;
she whined and over-dramatised like a man. She claims this is because she
practically never gets ill and so has had no practice. That’s about it. Well, that
and  the  craziness  about  being  entangled.  Her  twenty-eighth  birthday  had
come and gone without incident or appreciable change, and she had seemed
vaguely, distractedly disappointed for a day or so, then had shrugged it off
and got on with things.

‘How can you just give up on all that?’ I’d protested. ‘How can you just let

it drop? I thought you really believed in all that crap!’

Ceel had shrugged. ‘I think perhaps that the cross-over point came earlier

than it was meant to,’ she’d said, frowning. ‘In that underground car park. It
was meant to happen on my birthday, but it happened then instead. That was a
strong event. It pulled matters towards it, distorting things sufficiently.’ She’d
nodded, as if coming to a decision, and smiled at me, radiantly. ‘Yes.’

I’d shaken my head.
The ironic thing was that now sometimes I had dreams and nightmares in

which I was the entangled one, and caught terrifying glimpses into another
reality where I hobbled round on crutches, a broken man, and never saw Celia
again; or I’d wake panting from images of my own decaying body, a space of
rotting  flesh  curled  fetal  within  a  concrete  mould  inside  a  water-logged
packing case resting on the bottom of the Thames, downstream.

of us? Both of us? Neither?

Me, I’d tick Option C there, but who the hell really knew?
Not Proven, if you liked.
I  never  went  back  to  the  house  in  Ascot  Square.  Celia  slept  aboard  the

Temple Belle maybe once a week. Craig and I became friends again, though
we were kind of starting from scratch. Emma was probably the most okay
about it. Nikki found out about me and her mum and gave me a glare I will
remember to the end of my days. ‘Ken,’ she said, relenting and shaking her
head ruefully. ‘What are you like?’

They all think Ceel’s wonderful. Ed does too. The first time he laid eyes on

her he immediately said, ‘Leave im. Be mine. I’ll give up all the uvvers. An I
mean for ever. Plob’ly.’

Celia smiled and said, ‘You must be Edward. How do you do?’
Later that evening, when she was out of earshot, I asked him, ‘You like her,

then? Think I should stick with this one?’

I was trying to be funny but he looked at me pityingly and said, ‘Mate, I

don’t fink it’s a question of you decidin to stick wif er.’ Even now sometimes
he’ll just stare at the two of us and shake his head and look at me and say,
‘Ow?’

I suppose he’s right.
I don’t make a big thing of it, but I have told Ceel I love her, while she

doesn’t so much tell me as let it slip, rarely. About the only time I ever see her
get flustered or embarrassed is when she says something like she said that
first  time  over  the  phone,  and  calls  me  ‘my  love’,  or  something  similar.  I
asked her about this one night when we were particularly relaxed and easy
with things, and she just smiled and suggested that love was a word that had
become cheapened. ‘Where love is concerned,’ she told me, ‘you must be a
behaviourist.’ I thought about this and decided, Well, I feel loved.

So,  Not  Proven.  Maybe  no  relationship  that  is  not  over  is  ever  really

proven, one way or the other. Perhaps that’s all we can ever hope for, in this
fractured, fallen world we’ve constructed for ourselves, and our heirs.

Addicta became very big indeed and Jo’s face seemed to be everywhere,

but thankfully then they or their management decided they had to crack the
States, and they did the rising-without-trace thing and effectively disappeared
off most people’s near-space radar screens.

I kept my job, amazingly.
The month before we were due to go to Martinique, we flew to Glasgow.

All  Celia  had  really  seen  of  Scotland  was  this  fucking  bleak  estate  and

draughty castle near Inverness and close-ups of the heads of stags and hinds
through a telescope before some other bugger shot them, and I wanted to start
showing her the rest of the place, in all its late-summer glory. We had a week,
would hire a car, stay in B&Bs. We spent some time shopping and wandering
around Glasgow during that first day, before we went back to my parents’
place for dinner, and - in a sudden shower, dodging traffic - we ran across
Renfield Street, holding hands.

