Ecotopia:
A sustainable vision  
for a better future

ISBN: 978-989-8648-92-1;

Title: Ecotopia. A sustainable vision for a better future

Author/Editor: Nuno Coelho and Ecotopia team members

First published in 2016 by the Faculty of Arts (Digital Library), 
University of Porto.

 
Format: PDF / PDF/A

 
Graphic Design: Studio P2P

@ All rights reserved

3
ECOTOPIA

Index

5– Introduction

14 – Ecotopia Team Members

15 – Paul Allen, of the Centre for Alternative Technology (UK), 
and ZeroCarbon-Britain project co-ordinator.

23 – Monika Alleweldt, researcher at the Institute for Global 
Peace Work at the Tamera Peace Research Center (Portugal). 

29 – Dr. Mara-Daria Cojocaru, philosopher, poet and 
postdoctoral researcher in philosophical pragmatism at 
the Universities of Sheffield (UK) and Munich (Germany). 
 
39 – Professor Douglas Crawford-Brown, Director of the Centre for 
Climate Change Mitigation Research at the University of Cambridge 
(UK) and Professor Emeritus of Environmental Science & Policy at 
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (USA). 

43 – Lonny Grafman, Lecturer in Environmental Services Engineering 
at Humboldt State University, California (USA) and President of 
Appropedia.

51 – Habitable Spaces, a sustainable farm and artists’ residency 
in Texas (USA).

61 – Dr John Harlow, Postdoctoral Scholar in Sustainability at the 
Center for Policy Informatics at Arizona State University (USA). 

67 – Dr Jason Hickel, Lecturer in Anthropology at the London 
School of Economics (UK).

75 – Professor Giorgos Kallis, environmental scientist working on 
ecological economics at ICREA, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
(Spain). 

83 – Professor Ted Kesik, Professor of Building Science at the 
University of Toronto (Canada). 

95 – Isak Stoddard, Program director at the Centre For Environmental 
and Development Studies, Uppsala University (Sweden).

101 – Dr Jacquetta Lee, Director of the PhD programmes in 
Sustainability and Environmental Systems Analysis and Senior 
Lecturer in Mechanical Engineering and Materials at the University 
of Surrey (UK).

4
ECOTOPIA

105 – Karin Malmgren, Founder-Director of Ecotopia Osterlen, social 
entrepreneurs with a focus on ecological community development 
(Sweden).

109 – Dr. Alan Marshall, Environmental Social Science Program 
Department of Social Sciences Faculty of Social Sciences and 
Humanities Mahidol University (Thailand).          

115 – Dr Alice Moncaster, Lecturer in Interdisciplinary Design for 
the Built Environment, and the Centre for Sustainable Development, 
both part of the Department of Engineering at the University of 
Cambridge, and Fellow of Newnham College (UK).

121 – Professor Mugendi K. M’Rithaa, President of the World Design 
Organization (formerly Icsid) and Professor of Industrial Design 
at the Cape Peninsula University of Technology (South Africa).        

129 – Tim Parsons & Jessica Charlesworth, Lecturers at the 
Department of Architecture, Interior Architecture and Designed 
Objects at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and 
co-founders of the Parsons & Charlesworth speculative design 
studio (objects, exhibits, texts & images), Chicago (USA). 

135 – Jane Penty, Lecturer in Product, Ceramic and Industrial 
Design and Sustainability Coordinator at Central Saint Martins, 
University of the Arts London (UK).

147 – Dr Rupert Read, Reader in Philosophy at the University of 
East Anglia (UK), and Chair of the Green House think tank.  

153 – Stephanie Ristig-Bressers, New Economy expert, Economy for 
the Common Good (Germany).

159 – Dr. Fátima Vieira, University of Porto, Coordinator of the 
research project ALIMENTOPIA / Utopian Foodways; Coordinator 
of the outreach project PAN Utopia 2100: Fighting Food Waste; 
Director of the electronic periodicals E-topia and Spaces of 
Utopia; Book Review Editor of Utopian Studies (published by 
Penn State); Director of the book series Biblioteca das Utopias 
(published by Afrontamento); former Chair of the Utopian Studies 
Society / Europe (Jul. 2006 – Jul. 2016).

172 – Contributers

175 – References

Introduction

6
ECOTOPIA

Ecotopia is both a physical and virtual concept across multiple 
platforms exploring the appeal of utopian thinking in envisaging 
a sustainable and better future for our planet and society. It 
introduces the sustainable visions of experts in science, phi-
losophy, politics, design, architecture, and those communities 
building transitional villages to a wider audience. It brings 
together the work of illustrators, designers and thinkers working 
collaboratively in response to these visions, giving us an insight 
as to what Ecotopia might look like. The concept includes this 
publication and a multi-sensory installation, using sight, sound 
and touch. It is supported, and enhanced, by its own website 
(www.ecotopia2016.org), and its integration within social media 
(e.g. Twitter (@Ecotopia2016), Instagram (www.instagram.com/eco-
topialdn2016) and Facebook to encourage audience participation.

The quincentenary of the publication of Sir Thomas More’s novel, 
Utopia, gives us an opportunity to discuss how we perceive our 
future and how we might change it. In Utopia, More described a 
journey to an imaginary island state where everything was perfect. 
It was a pioneering quest for an ideal society that would come 
to be denounced in later years as wishful thinking, and even 
dangerous, and only pursued by lunatics and idle dreamers. It 
is true that there are dangers in utopian thinking, but there 
are much greater dangers in its absence. Ecotopia holds that in 
our uncertain times, we need a bold and compelling vision of a 
better future. Now is the time to reclaim utopian thinking as a 
critical means of interrogating the current state of affairs and 
offer alternative visions. 

Ecotopia thinks that climate change is the most urgent issue we 
as human beings must tackle to ensure our survival, as it is 
being accelerated and exacerbated by human activity. Our current 
obsession with the need for “stuff,” is the cause of much of 
the damage done to our planet. We have been made to believe that 
we must constantly consume new things and upgrade to the latest 
model to keep the economy growing, and in order to attain the 
good life. This insidious fetishising of economic growth and 
progress does not take into consideration the depletion of our 
planet and the huge amount of waste generated. 

Since the mid-eighteenth century, more of the natural world has 
been destroyed than in all previous human history. In the last 
fifty years alone, we have stripped our planet of a quarter 
of its topsoil and a third of its forests. A third of all our 
planet’s resources have been consumed in the last forty years. 
We are living under the illusion that perpetual material growth 

7
ECOTOPIA

is possible using our planet’s finite resources, but the reality 
is our plundering of our planet’s atmosphere, oceans, wildlife, 
and even geology, has created what scientists have dubbed the 
Anthropocene, (“new human”) epoch. This recently proposed new 
era relates to our present geological age, viewed as the period 
during which human activities have been the dominant force on 
climate (change), and the environment. 

The emergence of a contemporary sustainable conscience is associ-
ated with Rachel Carson’s seminal book, Silent Spring, published 
in 1962. The work of Howard Odum, particularly, Environment, Power 
and Society (1971), pioneered notions of ecological engineering, 
ecological economics and environmental accounting. Another book 
that had a considerable impact on our present understanding of 
sustainability and green politics was the book entitled, Limits 
to Growth (1972), by Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, Jørgen 
Randers, and William W. Behrens. The book argued that if the 
levels of natural resources consumption at the time (amongst other 
criteria such as population growth) persisted, it would eventually 
lead to the collapse of our economic and ecological systems.

Ernest Callenbach’s novel, Ecotopia, published in 1975, was the 
starting point for this project. It is one of the most recent 
ecological Utopian novels, which calls on people to change their 
worldview and adopt a new mindset, placing sustainability and 
saving our planet at the core of society, and our values and 
actions, in order to imagine a new life beyond unbridled con-
sumption and growth. In Ecotopia, Callenbach writes, “But what 
matters most is the aspiration to live in balance with nature, 
to walk lightly on the land, to treat the earth as a mother. It 
is no surprise that to such a morality most industrial processes, 
work schedules, and products are suspect.”

Although today’s understanding of sustainability can be traced 
to the second half of the twentieth century, historically these 
ways of thinking about the environment and social life, and its 
impact on nature, can be traced much further back. Callenbach’s, 
Ecotopia, is part of a tradition of Ecological Utopian Litera-
ture spanning over five centuries that include books by Henry 
David Thoreau, Peter Kropotkin, William Morris, Ebenezer Howard,  
B. F.Skinner, Aldous Huxley, and Murray Bookchin. These ecologi-
cally attuned works were described by Marius de Geus, a political 
scientist at the University of Leiden in The Netherlands, as 
“utopias of sufficiency”, that is, they are societies whose goal 
is the satisfaction of moderate human needs through balanced and 
equitable social and ecological relations. What these societies 

8
ECOTOPIA

have in common are meaningful communities with a common sense of 
purpose, coupled with sufficiency of goods, rewarding work and 
joy and leisure in harmony with ecological cycles.

The role of art and design in promoting a more sustainable life-
style can be traced through the Romanticism and anarchism of the 
nineteenth century, to notions of the sublime and the conservation 
of nature first propounded by Edmund Burke in the eighteenth 
century. The work of William Morris, most notably his propaganda 
novel, News from Nowhere (1890), bears the hallmarks of some of 
today’s ideals of sustainability and design for sustainability, 
and foreshadows the ideologies of Carson and others. In News from 
Nowhere, Morris depicts an England transformed by an imaginary 
revolution that has taken place in 1952. Previous structures 
of society have been overthrown, and England has become a place 
of communistic freedom and genuine equality between men, women 
and children. There is no private property, no money, and no 
divorce courts as laws of sexual ownership have been overthrown. 
Schools, prisons and central governments are obsolete. The work 
of Morris would pave the way for other pioneers in design for 
sustainability, not least Ebenezer Howard and his garden cities 
of Tomorrow. 

Ecotopia has been further informed by the work of pioneering 
and ground-breaking individuals such as Packard (1960), Fuller 
(1968), Papanek (1971), and Schumacher (1973) amongst many others. 
Buckminster Fuller, a renowned 20th century American maverick 
inventor and visionary, dedicated his life to “make the world work 
for 100% of humanity in the shortest possible time through sponta-
neous cooperation without ecological offense or the disadvantage 
of anyone.” His concept of synergy, that is the “behavior of whole 
systems unpredicted by the behavior of their parts taken separately” 
was at the core of his pioneering concept of ‘comprehensive antici-
patory design science’. Victor Papanek was a Viennese architect, 
industrial designer and educator influenced by Fuller. Papanek 
came to the widest public attention in 1972 with the publication 
of his seminal book entitled Design for the Real World, making to 
measure.  He advocated what is today understood as Social Design, 
with a particular focus on developing countries, the environment, 
real needs, and the elderly. Papanek’s message was underpinned by 
a collaborative, multi-disciplinary methodology based on awareness, 
understanding, and empathy. It was a vision of designers as cata-
lysts for social change. André Gorz’s book Capitalism, Socialism, 
Ecology (1994), has also provided a renewed interest in utopian 
socialism as a solution for the green imperative.

9
ECOTOPIA

Following in the footsteps of these Ecological Utopias, the 
present project sets out to usher in a new economy of altruism, 
of free availability, of mutual giving, of co-creation, of col-
laboration, public interest, and the greater good of society and 
our planet. The challenge facing us today is to develop a shared 
vision that is both desirable for the vast majority of society, 
and, ecologically sustainable for future generations. 

The Ecotopia project is a contribution to the broad discussion on 
what this shared vision might be. Rather than merely speculating, 
it showcases the visions of scientists, academics, philosophers, 
designers and architects who are currently looking at climate 
change and sustainable solutions. Each contributing expert was 
asked a set of ten questions, which defined the scope of this 
enquiry. The questions also helped to inform the outcome of this 
project. Ultimately, this project aims to establish an envision-
ing process based on expert knowledge. It does not profess to 
provide solutions to the many challenges facing us today, as these 
would require a more in-depth level of research to do the subject 
the justice it deserves. It does, however, provide snapshots 
of contemporary thinking and what a better, more equitable and 
sustainable world could be like. 

We are witnessing a shift towards more flexible, entrepreneur-
ial and collaborative work approaches. It is an era marked by 
co-creating and the sharing of skills and knowledge. This self-
initiated project was born in this new collaborative spirit, a get 
together of like-minded, creative individuals from diverse fields 
wanting to collaborate and explore the possibilities of future 
ecologically sustainable societies. The emphasis of Ecotopia is 
on co-creation and the power and agency of visual communication 
to represent these visions and concepts to a broad audience. The 
members of the Ecotopia team demonstrate an impressive range of 
achievements and skill sets. Together we have created playful 
concepts across a range of disciplines and processes, including, 
critical thinking, writing, graphic design, typography, drawing, 
printmaking, collage, digital image making and three-dimensional 
installation. The Ecotopia team members worked collaboratively in 
a process of co-creation and idea sharing. Notions of individual 
authorship have been avoided in favour of a more fluid, and 
open, collaborative process. Ideas, sketches, drawings, images 
were part of a common source of material to create the different 
elements of this project.

We sought out experts currently working in various fields within 
sustainability, and who represent different geographies and 

worldviews. The criterion for the selection of contributing 
experts was to invite a wide representation of opinions, with 
the aim to achieve a cross-fertilisation of ideas spanning dif-
ferent continents, expertise, and approaches. The experts who 
contributed to the realisation of this project are the ones who 
were available and willing to participate. 

This process went through several stages and theoretical view-
points, which to some extent, has helped crystallise and organise 
a particular theoretical position, and way of thinking about 
sustainability. During this process, a partnership was estab-
lished with Green House, a think-tank with the aim of leading 
the development of green thinking in the UK. Green House helped 
us write some of the questions which we asked the contributing 
experts, and which in turn provided a theoretical framework for 
this project. Questions one to four are more abstract, prompt-
ing reactions and a clarification of theoretical positions 
and viewpoints. Questions five to ten are more concrete and 
operational as they look at the role of the state, the level 
of intervention (local or central – for instance, the level of 
intervention within societies), and provide a synthesis of how 
different concrete themes such as renewable energy, politics or 
sustainable architecture could be explored in tandem. 

In total twenty-one experts from three continents, Africa, 
America and Europe, whose fields include eco-philosophy, social 
sciences, sustainable development, green economics, sustainable 
materials, building science and sustainable product design, and 
those building and creating transitional villages and communi-
ties contributed to this project. Our experts are: Paul Allen, 
Monika Alleweldt, Dr Mara-Daria Cojocaru, Professor Douglas 
Crawford-Brown, Lonny Grafman, Habitable Spaces, Dr John Harlow, 
Dr Jason Hickel, Professor Giorgos Kallis, Professor Ted Kesik, 
Dr Jacquetta Lee, Karin Malmgren, Dr. Alan Marshall, Dr Alice 
Moncaster, Professor Mugendi K. M’Rithaa, Tim Parsons & Jessica 
Charlesworth, Jane Penty, Dr Rupert Read, Stephanie Ristig-Bressers, 
and Dr. Fátima Vieira.

The final visual works that accompany this publication are an 
interpretation of these experts’ visions of what an Ecotopia 
might be like. They have been organized and curated according 
to ten recurring themes which are, utopian thinking, process, 
localization, community, renewable energy, sustainable transpor-
tation, upcycling, sustainable architecture, doing-it-together, 
and seeing ourselves as being part of the earth. A quote selected 
from our expert’s answers was selected to accompany each image, 

thus adding more context and intellectual grounding. By creating 
these themes, and by grouping them together in this way, we are 
providing cognitive and visual tools to think about a possible 
realisation of a sustainable society. It also introduces a col-
lection of ideas, future directions, and resources for later 
scholarly investigation.

The themes, as outlined by our contributors, are perhaps best 
understood as follows:

1.  
Utopian thinking is vision and ambition for a better future. 

Without these faculties, a better future is unimaginable, and 
therefore unattainable. It is a pragmatic and creative endeavour 
that encourages risks for effective social change. It requires 
us to address the current climate and to formulate strategies 
towards realising utopian thinking in tangible outcomes relating 
to the given context.

2.  
Process is the means by which we continuously, and pro-

gressively, adapt current systems/structures to meet current 
and future needs, while keeping those processes in harmony 
with ecological systems. It demands collaboration, stakeholder 
engagement, innovation in governance, rigorous experimentation, 
systemic thinking and serious consideration of uncertainty. 

3. 
 Localisation is the establishment of strong local com-

munities that are governed by themselves, and which draw, primar-
ily, from locally sourced resources. For localisation to work it 
requires communities to be inclusive and to embrace difference 
and otherness in order to avoid xenophobia and discrimination. 

4.  
Community is central to Ecotopia. It requires pride and 

participation in one’s local community for Ecotopia to be a con-
crete reality, and for it to be a sustainable vision. The notion 
of “Commons”, in which there is no private property, is a key 
concept within community. The commons are governed collectively 
by the community, which in turn are part of a wider global com-
munity concerned with protecting global commons. 

5.  
Renewable energies are vital within the realization of 

Ecotopia. Their use and the physical processes used, for example, 
solar/photovoltaic, hydro, geothermal, wind and ocean wave sources, 
would be governed in accordance with the needs and capacity of 
a given region. Energy would be created locally and would not 
stem from a centralized energy grid system.

6.  
Sustainable architecture is the production of domiciles 

that are specific to a given region. It is an architecture which 
is suited to the needs of its inhabitants. It would be constructed, 
primarily, using locally sourced resources and celebrated by its 
inhabitants as the work of local craftsmanship.

7.  
Doing-it-together is the encouragement of knowledge 

sharing within communities. It contributes to the building of 
local communities, both in their physical construction, and in 
the development of their social fabric. This ensures the sustain-
ability of Ecotopia for future generations.

8.  
Seeing ourselves as being part of the earth dictates that 

communities should reach an understanding of togetherness in order 
for there to be a sustainable future. It requires an abandonment of 
individualism, so common in western societies, in order to ensure 
the longevity of Ecotopia. Moreover, being part of the earth is 
inherently associated with deep ecology which regards human beings 
as just one of many equal elements of a global ecosystem. 

9.  
Upcycle is a mode of thinking which calls for the contin-

ued use of existing buildings and tools in our societies today, 
but their continual modification into things which are better 
suited to the needs of their users at a given time. It is based 
on re-use, re-cycle, re-adapt, and adhocism.

10.  
Sustainable transportation proposes there is no need for 

significant infrastructural transport systems. Local communities 
would be connected via light railways, walk and cycle paths. In 
short, it is based on sustainable transit-oriented development.

It is perhaps worthy of mention that the most prevalent theme to 
emerge within our contributors’ answers was the end of capital-
ism, however, this has not been included due to its more abstract 
nature, and the challenges presented in its visual representa-
tion. The problem with global capitalism, as we know it today, 
is that it promotes a singular worldview, one that is based on 
individualism, competition, consumerism, growth, corporatiza-
tion and urbanisation. Several of our contributors pointed to an 
alternative model based on prosperity without growth, and meeting 
real needs, whilst respecting the environment and our planet’s 
own capacity to self-regenerate. 

This anti-capitalist stance is part of a wider emerging sustainable 
conscience manifested in the post-growth or degrowth movements. 
Several books have been written on both post-growth and degrowth, 

not least, Prosperity without Growth, by author and economist Tim 
Jackson, one of the advisers of The Green House, and, Degrowth. 
A vocabulary for a new era by Professor Giorgos Kallis, one of 
our contributors. However, as professor Kallis reiterates in 
his answers to our questions, “The difficult point is not to 
realize the absurdity of capitalism and growth; most people do. 
The difficult point is to struggle to overcome it. We are all 
constrained within the structural constraints of the system and 
the need to secure our everyday survival and reproduction.”

In his book Where Stuff Comes From (2005), American sociolo-
gist Harvey Molotch offers an insight into the possible role of 
governments in promoting sustainable thinking and action. The 
last chapter of his book entitled, Moral Rules, advocates the 
benefits of legislation, regulation, and governments, acting 
as model clients in establishing more sustainable practices. 
By integrating ecological measures and values, governments can 
initiate new cultural change. Goverments could, for instance, 
facilitate the implementation of sustainable development by 
promoting a shift towards a circular economy with ecological 
accounting at its core. Odum’s concepts provide an excellent 
example of a method to evaluate and compare systems, and their 
transformation and use of resources, by accounting for all the 
energies and materials that flow in and out, and expressing them 
in an equivalent ability to do work. 

Implicit in this project is a belief that a sustainable future 
lies in our shared commitment to shape public perception of 
climate change and sustainability. As several of our contributors 
have pointed out, public education is perhaps one of the most 
efficient ways of fostering an awareness about deep ecology and 
sustainability. Deep ecology, pioneered by Norwegian philosopher 
Arne Næss implies a state of ecological harmony and equilibrium 
between all living entities on our planet, each an equal part in a 
global ecosystem. For Næss, humans can only attain, “realization 
of the self,” as part of an entire ecosphere, as the survival of 
humans depends on healthy global ecosystems. 

Ultimately in order to strive towards Ecotopia we will need to 
fully embrace Ecosophosy, that is, the interrelationship between 
social ecology, mental ecology, and environmental ecology. Only 
then will we be able to fully embrace a sustainable future for 
our society and planet. 

Ecotopia Team Members

The members of the Ecotopia team demonstrate an impressive range 
of achievements and skill sets. Together they have created playful 
communication concepts across a range of disciplines and processes, 
including graphic design, typography, drawing, printmaking, collage, 
digital image making and three-dimensional installations.

Aiden Barefoot,
illustrator and printmaker,  
www.cargocollective.com/aidybrft

Nuno Coelho,
lecturer in critical theory, curator,
www.csm-arts.academia.edu/NunoCoelho

Toby Downham,
illustrator,  
www.tobydownham.com

Luisa Kahlfeldt,
designer,  
www.luisakahlfeldt.com

Melissa North,
illustrator and printmaker,  
www.melissa-north.com

Caitlin Parks,
illustrator and printmaker,  
www.caitlinparks.com

Studio P2P,
print & digital design,
www.studiop2p.co.uk

Will Verity,
designer,  
www.willverity.com

Roz Woodman,
illustrator, 
www.rozwoodman.com

Paul Allen,  
of the Centre  
for Alternative 
Technology (UK), and 
ZeroCarbon-Britain 
project co-ordinator.

www.cat.org.uk

I feel it is important to define between: 
a) a vision of a world where we are rising to the most 
urgent climate crisis (i.e. countries agreeing to do what 
the COP21 Paris agreement demands)
b) a vision of utopia

We have an urgent timeframe to deliver a), so must focus 
on it ASAP, if we can identify co-benefits that move us 
towards b) all the better.

Achieving a) will require massive and rapid action, ret-
rofitting millions of buildings, restructuring transport 
systems, building massive new energy systems, so there 
is no way anyone working to achieve this could be framed 
as ‘an idle dreamer’

Achieving b) is less easy to define, but starting from 
where we are now, looks like a lot of work.

Business as usual in a post 2 degrees climate is an abso-
lute fantasy, those who talk about it as being possible 
are the real dangerous dreamers.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’.) How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Are you saying utopia and ecotopia are the same thing? 
I think there are visions of utopia that do not meet the 
needs of ‘the other life on Earth’. This makes the ques-
tion a little confusing to me. 

But overall I think Utopia can be different for different 
people and different cultures, so it can be both. Personally 
I see it as an enabling process, a ‘yes we can’ mind-set 
that empowers people to press ahead for positive change.

I feel engaging people in a discussion about what a green 
future would look like is important but also think it is 
valuable to paint a picture of what we mean by a zero 
carbon society not focused on material consumption. The 
‘green movement’ often highlights that we could have a 
better quality of life with less of a focus on material-
ism, but what does this mean in practice for the everyday 
lives of most people? (in particular for people living 
in cities rather than those who have opted out of the 
rat race and bought a piece of rural land to live on). 
If this can be demonstrated – as a concept rather than a 
fixed vision – and in a way people can relate to rather 
than as an academic idea – this would be very valuable.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

Our current addiction to self-gratification through mate-
rial goods and fossil fuels is itself a symptom arising 
from even more fundamental factors. Thomas Berry suggests 
a core driver appears to be the belief that we regard our-
selves, as a species, as separate from nature and separate 
from each other (Berry, 2003) Even in green thinking, 
any reference to “the environment” subliminally leads to 
a perception of humans and nature as distinct entities. 

Global spiritual leader, poet and peace activist and writer 
Thich Nhat Hanh puts this succinctly: “The Earth is not 
the environment. The Earth is us. Everything depends on 
whether we have this insight or not.”

This prevailing belief that we are separate from, or 
even somehow ‘above’ nature, allows any feelings to be 
shut down when faced with clear evidence that lifestyle 
choices are deeply damaging the habitat of other humans 
and other species and perhaps most importantly, threaten-
ing humanity’s stable collective living platform on planet 

earth. In any analysis of the barriers to a zero carbon, 
climate-safe future, it therefore makes sense to explore 
how a re-vitalisation or re-orientation of worldviews 
help embolden and empower the practical actions urgently 
demanded in homes, communities and places of work. These 
actions are often underpinned by values, which in turn 
can be shaped by religious, spiritual or ethical beliefs. 
Part of the role of faith, spirit and worldview is to 
help explore answers to deep questions such as: 

How should we live our lives? How should we treat our 
fellow humans? What is our responsibility to the natural 
world? How should we care for the future?

If we can bring about a cultural shift in attitudes in 
which we see ourselves as deeply connected to each other 
and to nature, then political systems will follow suit.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

The first step is to develop positive visions of what 
a post-carbon future would actually be like, to remove 
fears and counter ‘propaganda’ that we will have to live 
in caves and eat insects off the walls. Since it’s incep-
tion in 2007 the CAT’s Zero Carbon Britain project has 
been offering the hard data and confidence required for 
visualising a future where we have risen to the demands 
of the climate science – to remove fear and misunderstand-
ings and to open new positive conversations. The range 
of reports produced since 2007 clearly demonstrate that 
using only existing technology; we can meet the scale 
and speed of decarbonisation required, and that such a 
transition holds potential for positive co-benefits on 
society, the environment and the economy. 

We do not intend any of our ZCB scenarios to be seen as 
the ‘only way to save the planet’, our intention is to 
open conversations that start with the physical realities 
of what scientific consensus demands, acknowledging the 
UK’s historical responsibility as a long industrialised 
nation that has been emitting GHGs for over 150 years. 
Through researching and communicating this work, CAT aims 

to stimulate economic and political debate around rapid 
decarbonisation, engage the research community and get 
society thinking in a new way to help build consensus on 
action. 

It is now almost ten years since our first report Zero 
Carbon Britain report was launched in Parliament. Today 
Zero Carbon is becoming a much more commonly accepted 
and achievable goal. We are confident our work to date 
has played an important part, not only in raising the 
profile of ‘zero’ but also in increasing confidence it 
is deliverable. 

A key part of this has been a recognition that the 
pro-active communication of our findings is equally 
as important to undertaking our research. For almost 
a decade, the ZCB team has been engaging with a wide 
spectrum of society; from faith-groups, local environmental 
groups, climate activists and Transition groups etc, to 
MP’s, AM’s, policy organisations, NGO’s, think tanks, UK 
parliamentary groups, international networks and the UN 
COP process itself.

In that process we have grown to understand that it is 
vital we help audiences recognise that as we go about our 
everyday lives, our current relationship with energy, used 
to deliver many of the things that shape our lives and 
make us happy, is only the most recent chapter in a very 
long story. This story and its wider historical context 
may help us to better understand today’s energy-extreme 
lifestyles; seeing them not as a natural evolution of 
human development, or even well intentioned progress 
gone slightly wrong, but rather a deliberately designed 
break in our connection with each other and with nature. 
Understanding this story, and how today’s ‘normality’ is 
actually an extreme energy lifestyle can change how we 
think about our world and ourselves, and open us up to 
new possibilities. 

In describing this future vision, if we can identify 
potential co-benefits that help move us towards the better 
society and increased wellbeing, health and happiness 
described by a utopian vision this also acts as additional 
motivation.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Ideally the democratic state should offer a lead, but if 
it has been captured by corporate vested interest, which 
itself is bound into short term thinking by the system 
in which it operates - then the role falls to the people.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Mixed – some things are done optimally by a centralized 
democratic government, and others are far better done  
by local democracy. The challenge is if corporate inter-
ests dominate.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort of 
infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

This is all outlined in our Zero Carbon Britain reports, 
see www.zerocarbonbritain.com/en/

Basically we need to power-down from our current extreme 
energy lifestyles whilst also powering up clean renew-
able energy sources. But the optimum infrastructures for 
delivering this will vary between cultures and countries. 
In 2015, to get ready for the COP21 UN climate summit in 
Paris, CAT Charity teamed up with Track0 to develop the 
“Who’s Getting Ready for Zero” report. This maps over 100 
peer-reviewed research projects, plans and practical on 
the ground projects from across the globe that demonstrate 
paths towards zero greenhouse gas emissions, using only 
existing technology. To bring this to life, we featured 
27 of these from both developed and developing countries, 
using a range of icons highlight the scale, scope and 
origins of the work. To download ‘Who’s Getting Ready for 
Zero’ visit www.zerocarbonbritain.org/en/ready-for-zero

Many robust scenarios from across the globe now clearly 
demonstrate that the technologies already exist to reach 
zero or near-zero net GHG emissions, whilst offering 
co-benefits in many sectors - cleaner air, better diets, 
smarter cities and increased wellbeing.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Off-shore wind is the major source of renewable energy 
for the UK – we are a windswept island with significant 
coastal waters. In our Zero Carbon Britain energy model 
off-shore wind provides approx 50% of energy, especially 
as peak supply coincides with peak energy demand (i.e. in 
the winter). The other renewables, on-shore wind, solar 
PV, solar heating, hydro, tidal etc provide the other 50%.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Sustainability means living safely within the boundaries of 
earth systems. A good indicator of this is The Planetary 
Boundaries framework. (see www.stockholmresilience.org/
research/planetary-boundaries.html)

There are many ways of achieving this from humans acciden-
tally killing themselves off, to a flourishing egalitar-
ian high-wellbeing zero carbon society. So how it looks 
is up to the choices we make and how the worldview that 
underpins our society evolves.

In the Zero Carbon Britain scenario, most things would 
look the same. We would still have personal mobility, but 
the cars would be electric, although ZCB assumes reduc-
tion in the amount of time we need spend in a car (better 
public transport, reduced need to travel etc). We would 
still have homes, but they would be better insulated and 
have shops near-by.

The two key big changes would be a reduction in flying and 
a reduction in meat consumption, but there could still 
be some of both.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

All new buildings would be zero carbon, most existing 
buildings retrofitted to high standards. 

There would be a rise of low embodied energy natural 
materials (timber, hemp, lime etc) and a decline in high 
embodied energy materials (steel, cement etc) – but still 
careful use of ‘industrial vitamins’ – high tech materials 
used in small quantities but in roles where they make a 
big difference (IT, electrical wiring etc).

Monika Alleweldt, 
researcher at the 
Institute for Global 
Peace Work at the 
Tamera Peace Research 
Center (Portugal).

www.tamera.org

New ideas release new potentials for action. Grand theo-
ries are paving the way for grand revolutions. The Dutch 
sociologist, politician and futurist Fred Polak showed 
that a positive image of the future is the most important 
determinant in the rise and fall of civilizations. (The 
Image of the Future, 1973, Fred Polak).

We can only overcome the old system of violence by creating 
a new one. Small reforms within the existing system are 
not enough. What is decisive for the success of the new 
systems realized in some models on Earth, “... is not how 
big and strong they are (compared to the existing appara-
tuses of violence), but how comprehensive and complex they 
are, how many elements of life they combine and unite in 
themselves in a positive way. Within evolutionary fields 
what is key is not the “survival of the fittest” but the 
“success of the more comprehensive.” Otherwise, no new 
development would have been able to establish itself, 
for they all began as “small and inconspicuous.” (Dieter 
Duhm in: Future without War) 

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’.) How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

We live in a becoming universe. Evolution never reaches 
an end. It is the constant co-creation between us humans 
and the powers within creation which gives birth to the 
next pictures and phases of the development. There is 
never a final truth, but an oscillating compass. Once 
we start to follow this inner compass we know the direc-
tion with growing certainty. The way is the goal. It is 
like walking on a winding path. Behind every corner we 

might discover a new component of the whole. There is 
no problem other than to train our consciousness to get 
used to understanding the unity of polarity, the “koan” 
nature of our reality.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

We will have to unleash in ourselves the power of think-
ing, the power of art and the power of love. The power of 
thinking will bring us to the point where we understand 
that we can heal our planet. The knowledge is there. Now 
we have to study and implement it. The power of art will 
help us to connect with our own creative source and will 
give us humour and the ability to find the higher level 
to solve conflicts. The power of love will give us the 
endurance and compassion to care for all beings.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

By implementing it in a model where people are invited 
to see how it works. We made the experience once you 
replace the old system of food, water and energy supply 
by regional and autonomous ways we step from dependency 
to freedom. It is regaining a power we have given away 
to institutions. You can get rid of a good part of your 
fear. And you feel the abundance, instead of being bound 
to the illusion of scarcity. You do not have to think how 
to persuade enough people, they will follow your example, 
once you yourself set it up.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

In the vision I love most there will not be any govern-
ments in the future. The future society is a network 
of autonomous communities, taking care of the land, of 

people, of life. These communities are based on trust 
and cooperation within the community and between each 
other. The need for institutions with centralized power 
is overcome. They will find creative ways of how to deal 
with all the issues coming up.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralized?

It is clear from the above statements that I see a network 
of communities. (But I cannot yet see the full picture. 
It will unfold once we are further down the line... One 
cannot just theoretically say something, it is important 
to only say what one can already “see” with their inner 
eyes.” Otherwise we get lost in senseless discussions.)

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Before I can see infrastructure and transport systems I 
have to visualise and realise a form of life based on 
trust. This is the basis for everything. We are so used 
to first thinking of outer life forms, which have to 
be changed. But the inner paradigm shift is much more 
important. Here we have to change! Our thinking habits, 
our love systems, our ways of treating one another...! I 
skip this question. We did envision solar zeppelins for 
transportation, but this is still far from being “seen” 
and realised. 

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

There is a lot of solar technology, biogas which is very 
useful even though it still operates within the known 
energy paradigms. Outside of this there is a new energy 
concept developed by inventors like Jürgen Kleinwächter 
for example.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

We live in community with each other and nature. The com-
munity has its own fresh drinking water, its own energy 
supply, its’ own food supply. We would cooperate with 
all animals around us. We would live in close contact to 

nature, to wildlife and in accordance with the rhythms of 
creation. Not like our ancestors, but as modern people. 
We live again in alliance with the world that created us. 

We have a lot of contact with each other we are in con-
nection with many people from all over the world. We have 
as many love partners as we wish. We live in abundance. 
Therefore the communities are hospitable and open to 
receiving and sharing with everyone.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

My favourite way of living is in a community house which 
is always open. It gives us shelter, but does not discon-
nect us from the outside. The material should be local, 
like clay and straw for example, which creates a wonderful 
temperate climate inside the house. The housing area is 
attached to a green house where we can harvest our daily 
fresh food. It also has areas for wildlife – for birds 
like swallows and owls, or other animals that want to live 
close to us humans and are still independent. 

What we do not need and can leave behind are thousands 
of single households which all need their own set of 
materials, instead we live again in community (by gaining 
more and more individuality) and can share all of this. 

Dr. Mara-Daria 
Cojocaru,  
philosopher, poet  
and postdoctoral 
researcher in philo-
sophical pragmatism  
at the Universities  
of Sheffield (UK)  
and Munich (Germany).

maradariacojocaru.weebly.com

Business as usual certainly will not do — and I think it 
is important to see that it already doesn’t do for many 
people who don’t think of themselves as ‘utopians’. If we 
go back to the original play on word that Thomas More used 
to coin the term, it is just synonymous with the ‘good 
place’ (eu-topia). In a sense then, I think that everyone 
is waiting to embark on a journey to a better place. I 
like the image of a journey. We are all, by nature, on 
that journey to a better place. 

Now it is true that, in this time and age, many people 
who think that things can get better, that they can be 
improved without postulating a final state of perfection 
as the end, are called naive meddlers or do-gooders. I 
find it literally hard to breathe in such cynical envi-
ronments and I get the sense that cynics are the ones 
who will never get their act together and get ready to 
move (move as in move yourself, move others, and move 
somewhere else). You have to invest a little something 
to embark on that journey and the minimum contribution 
is a small amount of hope. 

Hope in what? Actually, in progress - but progress as 
moving away from something, not toward something ideal 
in the wrong sense of the word. And yes, I do believe in 
reform, but I don’t see why I can’t acknowledge that leaving 
the limitations of this, or that wrong and narrow-minded 
policy, behind me actually is a move toward the horizon. I 
will give you an example: it certainly is tiring to debate 
changes in say animal welfare regulations, but I can debate 
them with the end to all animal exploitation in mind and 
by doing so, I will know which position to take on the 
more detailed, reformist issue. I am sure that similar 
examples can be found in the realm of sustainability more 
narrowly speaking (although I would like to think that 
the animal issues and issues involving sustainability are 
often linked). Think of banning plastic bags: of course, 

in the long run, we want to abolish plastic as far as we 
can. Hence, it would be a good thing to ban plastic bags; 
as long as we don’t have the political constellation to 
achieve that, let’s price them at 5p. But it is important 
not to advertise them (as in “Would you like a plastic bag 
for only 5p?”). The goal of small reforms may be to lay 
huge stones in the ways that lead into wrong directions.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’.) How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

I hope to have made clear that I don’t conceive of these 
as alternatives: either process or end-state. But if I had 
to opt for one, I’d probably opt for the process picture. 
Think of the journey again — maybe you would have to take 
a train to get moving. If you find the situation you are 
in really lacking in what you need, you might want to 
be on the train rather than remaining in the situation, 
thinking of where to go and seeing no way out. 

I think, often when people don’t get moving, they are 
too fixed on clear deals: what will I get if I do this 
instead of that? And when an outcome seems too vague, they 
lack the imagination and the sense of actually being in 
a position to decide on the turns and the direction the 
whole thing is going. People lack the idea that their 
actions matter. In that sense, the tracks in which that 
ecotopian train is running, are not fixed; and sometimes 
there will be the need to split the coaches, get another 
locomotive, and let some people experiment with a dif-
ferent set of tracks.

I think it is all about getting people ‘on board’. To get 
everyone moving and thinking is the pre-condition needed 
to realise sustainable futures. I don’t know what it would 
look like, but it means, as a process, education, nurtur-
ing all the sensibilities that we need to make better 
choices. The problem with end-states is also that as long 
as nothing in reality seems to live up to them, people will 
tend to live in a continuous disappointment: still not 
there. The journey must be rewarding. We need to create 

situations in which people get a sense of achievement, in 
which they can see that what originated in their thought 
became reality. They add layers of meaning to reality 
every single step of the way just because they behave 
in some ways and not in others, and that it is, in many 
cases, up to them, to make sure that the landscape is not 
polluted completely by false aspirations, mass produced 
dreams that come in one size fits all etc. At the same 
time, I fear, we need to accept that there will always 
be some who will be satisfied rather easily. I have no 
clue what to do with them. 

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

These are huge questions that I couldn’t pretend to be 
answering in earnest. I think we need much, much more 
education and one where the goal is not to fit people 
into this system, but to put them into a situation of 
shaping the system, with constraints that acknowledge the 
systemic capacities. This means that we need to teach 
people about the important structures of the system: they 
need to know the ins and outs of the locomotive, so to 
speak. I personally, am always amazed that never in my 
whole life did anyone teach me how to lead a life in the 
economic system that we have. Never did I hear a thing 
about social justice or pensions at school. We prepare 
our children to be quick at spotting free seats on the 
train, but not to understand the system. 

Also, I don’t think the imperative at caring more stops at 
future generations; in particular, given the non-identity 
problem, I do not think that they (whoever they are going 
to be) deserve more consideration than the extant gen-
erations of human beings AND all the vulnerable beings 
mankind affects. Thus speaking of systemic capacities, I 
don’t mean to suggest that it is enough for us to regulate 
and reduce our activities and impact down just a little 
bit. I think, sadly, we have not proved to be the most 
promising species at sustainable and intelligent living; 
we should start thinking beyond ourselves, creating space 

for more intelligent, or at any rate, less harmful life 
to move in. 

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

Again, it is not about that one grand vision, but about 
education. And by the way, let’s get real at some point, 
let’s start while we are seeking consent by means of 
persuasion, making some real laws, let’s use law and 
politics as real drivers for change.

I sometimes feel that democracy is misunderstood in these 
debates and that in particular, cultural agents of change 
feel that their focus should be on cultural politics 
in the name of democratic consensus seeking, because 
otherwise we cannot proceed. This, to me, is polite but 
wrongheaded: we need experts and elites, not in that old 
and boring avantgardist sense, but in a moral sense. I, 
personally, don’t want and I don’t need to be consulted 
when it comes to actually proving the material of the 
brakes on the train. I need to know what the brakes are 
for, but I don’t need to be the one to administer them. 
There are people who have studied that and we need their 
expertise because this train is actually a high-speed 
train. (Interestingly, I wonder whether we can make sense 
of the emergency brake here — maybe we need a discussion 
about what that could be and what it takes to pull it.)

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Yes: make the laws, implement change, and protect values 
even if not everyone is already on board. Govern, lead 
and, most importantly, do lead by example! Do something, 
for the public good (not for the manufactured ‘political 
will’). That is your job AND your sole justification for 
existing. And make way for other institutions if problems 
can be handled better at a different, more intelligent level.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Both. I don’t believe in complete devolution. I take it 
that there are certain problems that need to be adminis-
tered centrally/globally and others that are best dealt 
with locally, and which problem fits what category will 
depend on the precise circumstances, which, in turn, can 
also change, so (going back to the train metaphor) it 
may be that at some point something (say the width of 
the sleepers) needs to be determined centrally (maybe 
because traffic increases), while it was perfectly fine 
to determine that locally 50 years ago. Stay away from 
blueprint answers; assuming that there was such a thing as 
an ideal blueprint was the most dramatic mistake utopians 
made (think of the early socialists for instance).

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort of 
infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Well, I guess trains are actually a good start to begin 
with. Most importantly: reduce, massively reduce, private 
cars. And don’t teach children from a young age that what 
you do on trains is eat. We don’t have to eat all the time. 
In general, I think that most solutions should involve 
public projects - not because I think that the state 
itself is justified or unavoidable, but now that we have 
them in most places of the world, we may as well start 
putting them to good use and re-invent public services. 
In general, and metaphorically speaking, abolish first 
and second class and class in general.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Whatever works locally. (Tongue in cheek, I am always 
amazed by the fact that, at least in industrialized coun-
tries, people spend so much time voluntarily burning off 
calories; if only we could harvest the energy produced 
on all the morning runs, in all the hot yoga lessons, and 
on all the spinning bikes.)

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

It involves a lot of thinking, training, erring, admitting 
of the errors, learning, etc. I also think it won’t work 
without some limitations, honest limitations in place.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

To my mind, it is important to emphasize that, again, we 
abandon the projects that involve blueprints. Buildings 
in South London will probably look quite different from 
buildings in Sheffield, from buildings in Munich, from 
buildings in Lisbon, from buildings in Bujumbura and so 
on… We should, of course, use materials that are sustain-
able but more importantly, we should make sure that the 
planning and zoning is appropriate: that no buildings are 
built to waste, that there is a sense of at least dual 
use where possible, that neighbourhoods are developed 
in ways that prevent segregation along any cleavages in 
society (class, race, income, nationality), that we turn 
off the light for bird migration, that we offer shelter 
for hedgehogs and foxes as well as for bats, and family 
planning for pigeons, that we get used to sharing space 
in every sense of the word etc. 

What would we leave behind? 

Plastic. All the stuff that is harmful to animals. And 
locks, locked doors of all sorts - it would be nice to 
leave them behind as well. 

“It is not about that one 

grand vision, but about 

education. And by the 
way, let’s get real at 
some point, let’s start 

while we are seeking 

consent by means of per-
suasion, making some real 

laws,let’s use law and 

politics as real drivers 
for change. Govern, lead 
and, most importantly, do 

lead by example!”

Dr Mara-Daria Cojocaru

‘I participate therefore I am’

Professor Douglas 
Crawford-Brown,  
Director of the 
Centre for Climate 
Change Mitigation 
Research at the Uni-
versity of Cambridge 
(UK) and Professor 
Emeritus of Enviro-
nmental Science  
& Policy at the 
University of North 
Carolina at Chapel 
Hill (USA).

www.4cmr.group.cam.ac.uk/
directory/djc

Utopians/ecotopians are often accused of being idle 
dreamers. The word ‘utopian’ is often used in fact as 
a term of criticism, even abuse. How do you respond 
to this? Do you think that actually it is the mere 
tinkerers, those who think a little reform at the 
edges - or even just business as usual - will be enough 
to deliver us a good future who are the real idle and 
dangerous dreamers? 

The key phrase here is ‘the proof is in the pudding’. 
Utopians will show the validity of their ideas when they 
create a stable, utopian society, and make it function 
over time. That has not yet been produced to date, so 
skeptics will continue to cite this failure as suggest-
ing the ideas at the heart of utopianism are hollow, or 
at least fragile. Personally I think the division into 
‘utopians’ and ‘tinkerers’ is a false one. There is a 
full spectrum between these extremes. The real issue is 
the speed of change and the scale of that change. I’m 
not convinced utopians are any better than tinkerers at 
producing the right speed and scale of change. 

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’.) How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

It is of course both. An end state is reached through 
a process. The challenge of a process is lock-in: the 
investments (in infrastructure for example) that we make 
today lock us into material and energy systems in the 
future. Therefore, the process must be one that focuses 
on the transition and not on the end point, since we do 
not know which end point will emerge. It is a process of 
incremental change that is constantly monitored and re-
assessed to determine how we are progressing (or not), 
and adjustments made.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
 

brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

I’m not sure I agree that this transition in thinking will 
be needed. I can imagine the transition without thinking 
much beyond the current horizons we use, simply because 
there are problems already evident that need addressing. 
But I also am not convinced society will find a way to 
change the horizons used by individuals. So we need a way 
to bring about the transition without hoping for something 
that will never emerge (everyone caring much more about 
distant futures or places).

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

I would first say that not all of the change will come 
from ‘persuading’ people. Much of the change will come 
from institutions simply investing in post-carbon infra-
structure, so people have essentially no choice in being 
lower carbon. But persuading requires a positive vision of 
what life will be like in a post-carbon society; showing 
that it will not be a dire and constrained life but rather 
one that is as pleasant, or perhaps even more pleasant, 
than one that is high carbon.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Governments are usually responsible for infrastructure 
provision, so they will play a critical role by having 
green/sustainable procurement policies. This requires 
that sustainability be a key performance criterion when 
selecting technologies and providers, which is not yet 
the case in many governments.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

There is a need for both. Centralised governance brings 
efficiencies of scale and the ability to close material 
cycles. Local governance brings a closer understanding of 

the needs and demands of individuals, which a sustainable 
society must meet. The key is to find a ‘transmission’ 
between these two levels of governance so they co-exist.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

I couldn’t possibly answer this in a short essay.  
You might look at our thinking in:
www.cam.ac.uk/research/discussion/innovating-for-the- 
future-of-cities

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

First is not a source of energy, but rather reduction of 
energy demand through improved efficiency. But then there 
ultimately will be the global deployment of solar to meet 
whatever energy demand remains after efficiency improvements.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

It would be a world of high energy and material efficiency, 
reduced energy and material demand by individuals, and a 
modular construction/manufacturing system so materials can 
be recycled back into different products. I would envision 
a world built on nanotubes or similar, since these can be 
used, taken apart and re-assembled into an infinite variety 
of products.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Much greater use of wood, or of clay construction where wood 
is not available. Wood is ideal because it absorbs carbon 
dioxide during growth and then locks it into buildings. 
Once a building is at the end of life because the wood is 
no longer viable, it will be important to bury the wood so 
it doesn’t just decompose back to carbon dioxide, or use it 
for energy production coupled to carbon capture and storage.

Lonny Grafman, 
Lecturer in 
Environmental 
Services Engineering 
at Humboldt State
University, 
California (USA)  
and President of 
Appropedia.

www.appropedia.org

I consider myself and my colleagues to be practivis-
tas. We are focused on working together with communities 
to build current solutions with existing resources. It  
is most definitely not idle dreaming, maybe more like 
operative dreaming. 

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’.) How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

It is not an end-state, it is an ever evolving process. 
To draw an image of utopia is a conceit, yet a necessary 
part of the process where we visualize, share, hybridize, 
synergize, and evolve our visions.

We represent it as a process, by making sure that all of 
the stakeholders are represented. I can’t guarantee what 
technologies will be part of an ecotopian future, but I 
can tell you to get there we must utilize inclusive and 
transparent processes of diverse stakeholders.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

It is harder to create a long-term system because politi-
cal, job, and even human life cycles are so short. 
Politically, in order to get there, I think we will need 
to find new ways to quantify short-term success that 
manifests long-term success. Examples of this include 

the circular-economy and analyzing data and using sound 
Evaluation, Measurement and Verification processes. E.g. 
medical success based not upon sales of prescriptions, 
but based upon improved health of the population. The 
latter is a much harder metric to measure, but we have 
the ability to do it. Another example would be police 
metrics based not upon arrests, but upon harm reduction 
and community happiness. 

The political will help the cultural, but ultimately 
it is up to the people to decide how to get to longer- 
term thinking.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

It is not that we need to be post-growth, it is more that 
we need to redefine growth. Continuing economic growth by 
ever increasing exploitation of natural resources most 
certainly will destroy us long-term. Redefining growth as 
about experience instead of things, and economics as about 
meeting needs as opposed to GDP, are steps in that direction.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

The role of the government should be directed by the people 
and play a critical role in the transition. Regulations 
for instance are critical to carving the path. That said, 
the path must be illuminated by the people. Specifically, 
diverse groups of people tacking real problems with avail-
able resources. 

The government can start now by addressing how specific 
goals have been incentivized in an antiquated fashion 
that no longer serves us. For example, police should be 
incentivized based upon harm reduction and community trust 
not engagements, quotas, tickets, etc. Doctors should 
be incentivized based upon overall health, not visits, 
prescriptions, or surgeries. These are just a couple of 
examples, and more importantly an active and engaged 
populace should be directly part of the process.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Each society should define, and redefine, this themselves.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

We build a more sustainable society together. 

Transportation systems will be easy, safe, connected, and 
fun. We will soon look back upon our history of trans-
portation agape at the willful, daily, risk we incurred 
personally and globally.

Community design will be collaborative and systemic, 
considering transportation, family, connectivity, inclu-
sion, safety, and joy.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

These will continue to evolve and to leverage the almost 
free energy falling on us from consistent natural pro-
cesses. I also envision a population more connected to 
their resource use… knowing where it is coming from, its 
impacts, and our use. 

Eventually we will work towards renewable energy systems 
that not only minimize impacts, but also seek to regener-
ate ecosystems.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

This will be different for each community. The main  
difference is that we will be better ancestors in each of 
those communities.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Future ecotopian architecture will be even more varied 
than current architecture in order to meet the differ-

ent flavours and needs of diverse populations. The most 
exciting built environments to me are ones that:

* Combine ancestral and vernacular architecture with modern 
testing and systems of codification. Structures that speak 
to our deep knowledge of making space and our new precise 
knowledge of performance (e.g. seismic, thermal, etc). 

* Consider long-term systemic health as well as the event 
based safety (e.g. earthquake) currently considered. At 
first you might not notice, but entering a modern ecoto-
pian home would find you free of VOCs (volatile organic 
compounds), molds, and small particulate.

* Regenerate their surroundings, e.g. through carbon 
sinking, providing ecosystems and creating micro-climates.

* Be conducive to the needs of the habitants. For me, that 
would include spaces for creativity and collaborations. 
For others, that may include spaces for meditation and 
reflection. It is important to remember that it is for 
the habitants to decide. 

* Bolster our process towards a better future, through 
inspiration and restoration of our health.

Another interesting aspect to consider will be how we tend 
to relate indelible architecture with civilization, yet 
which civilization is more advanced: one whose building 
last long past their use, or one whose building return 
to the earth when no longer needed. I don’t think there 
is only one answer to this question.

“It is not that we need 
to be post-growth, it is 

more that we need to 

redefine growth. Continu-

ing economic growth by 

ever increasing exploita-
tion of natural resources 

most certainly will 

destroy us long-term. 

Rede ning growth as about 

experience instead of 

things, and economics as 

about meeting needs as 

opposed to GDP, are steps 

in that direction.”

Lonny Grafman

‘Process’

Habitable Spaces,  
a sustainable farm 
and artists’ resi-
dency in Texas (USA).

www.habitablespaces.org

Utopians/ecotopians are often accused of being idle 
dreamers. The word ‘utopian’ is often used in fact as 
a term of criticism, even abuse. How do you respond 
to this? Do you think that actually it is the mere 
tinkerers, those who think a little reform at the 
edges - or even just business as usual - will be enough 
to deliver us a good future who are the real idle and 
dangerous dreamers? 

While Utopians/ecotopians are dreamers, I don’t know 
a single one who knows the meaning of idle – in fact, 
all of the people working in our community and everyone 
trying to strive for an ecotopia in the central Texas 
area, seems to believe in the idea of honest hard work to 
achieve these goals. Utopia is an ideal, to be constantly 
worked towards. Systems are designed, and tinkered with 
until they are streamlined and work not only within 
the community of humans, but also with that of plants 
and animals. We are constantly altering and perfecting 
systems at Habitable Spaces to ensure that our entire 
community, human, animal, and plant, is thriving within 
the systems that we have built. This means, of course, 
constant hard work. It is a combination of dreaming and 
actual implementation that works to create an ecotopia. 
To be successful, an ecotopian system needs to be able to 
submit to self-analysis. Because we can never foresee the 
problems of the future, we need to be able to constantly 
adapt to new circumstances that arise. 

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’.) How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem? 

We believe it is definitely a process. The word Utopia is an 
ideal, to be strived towards, it is the work towards it that 
makes the system what it is. It is dangerous to only plan for 
the “final State” of ecotopia, this idea disregards all of the 
uncomfortable practicalities that must be worked out as the 
system is implemented. There are also constant changes that 
must be worked around – if one creates a system that only has 
an end goal, there will be many flaws within the actual archi-
tecture of the system that are never acknowledged or resolved.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required? 

It is possible that to truly achieve ecotopia, we will 
need a break down of the larger capitalist system that 
currently governs most of the world. This is a system that 
thinks in the immediate sense, and not in the long term 
– in fact, long term is a known detriment to capitalist 
goals. A reversion to a simpler share economy, and an 
emphasis on community, especially the immediate community 
around us, is what Habitable Spaces looks to as an ideal. 
We take care of the community within our ecovillage, and 
the surrounding community in our small town of Kingsbury. 
We have set up a kind of barter economy that works well 
for both people living at Habitable Spaces, and people in 
the larger community of Kingsbury. This kind of economy 
creates a community that looks out for each other – if 
someone’s car breaks down, for instance, a neighbor is 
always willing to lend one until that car can be fixed. 
When someone needs help building a structure, or renovating 
their house, they receive it, and food is traded in shared 
in the form of homemade jams, pickles, fresh vegetables, 
fruits and eggs. Habitable Spaces encourages this kind of 
behavior, but rural people are no strangers to it. Country 
people are rich on skills and building knowledge, but not 
always on money, so a share economy fits in perfectly with 
this way of life. A share economy also creates a close-
knit village, and when you have a village rather than a 
large urban sprawl, people know not only each other, but 
also their children and grandchildren, in this way the 
generations mingle and share experiences and community 
knowledge. It is actually an important way of keeping 
generations in touch with each other.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

On a practical level, each local village/community needs 
to be somewhat self sufficient, producing its own source 

of food and the goods necessary for life. Each community 
needs to be able to regulate its own economy. There will 
always be things that people will desire from outside the 
community/village/farm – but people can be persuaded to 
buy or trade locally by creating a carbon tax system that 
creates a higher sales or trade tax on items that are 
brought in from outside the local community. The farther 
the distance the product has travelled, the higher the tax. 
On the other hand, the more local the product, the more 
affordable it becomes. Local products will also have the 
advantage of being fresher, and produced and only found 
locally, creating a pride in a certain kind of handicraft 
that can only be found in that area. 

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

By instating a carbon tax, and trade taxes that encour-
age and support local trade, the government can regulate 
these things in a sense – people can still buy coffee from 
Columbia, but a carbon tax will be levied on it that can go 
towards environmental preservation projects in that region 
for instance. Global industry needs to be regulated on a 
massive scale, and held to the same standards that are 
asked of each community. The multi-national corporation 
model has failed us – they operate like rogue countries 
with no regard for international law or human rights. They 
need to be restricted and held to strict standards that 
enrich communities, rather than enslaving them.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised? 

Local organization is the only way to create utopian 
systems that are sensitive to the needs of a particular 
group of people. The organizations need to be community 
based or they become too overreaching, and don’t know how 
to fit into every community.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What 
sort of infrastructures and transport systems should  
we have? 

Small towns would have everything they need at their center 
– they would produce their own food and provisions for 

the large part – there would be no need for transporta-
tion except for walking and bicycles within these small 
towns. If a light rail system and bike paths connected 
these towns, people could have a great ease and ability 
to travel without using fossil fuels.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage? 

This will have to vary from region to region, depending 
on what makes the most sense for that area. For instance, 
in central Texas, we have plenty of sun, so solar energy 
makes the most sense here; although in West Texas we 
have a steady source of wind, so wind power seems more 
efficient. It will be necessary to adapt each areas needs 
to what they can most easily produce – overall, cutting 
down on use of energy through efficient housing, such 
as underground structures, and earth ships, and use of 
geothermal and passive solar techniques is essential.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

We would not have shops filled to the brim with throwaway 
plastic trinkets and items in fashion only for a moment. 
Artisans would make clothing, housewares, and furniture 
locally, food would come from small-scale local farmers 
using humane animal husbandry techniques and permaculture 
to create a landscape that thrives rather than is depleted 
with each harvest. Communities would be small, localized, 
with neighbours working together to achieve common goals.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Again, this depends on the specific environment that the 
buildings are in. The materials used for buildings should 
be locally sourced as well. In desert regions, adobe 
dwellings that are dug into the earth might make the most 
sense, in areas with a bunch of rain; it might make more 
sense to use cordwood, stone, or straw bale. Houses must 
be overall, well insulated and well thought out to combat 
the challenges of their particular environment. 

“A share economy also 
creates a close-knit 
village, and when you 
have a village rather 

than a large urban 
sprawl, people know  
not only each other,  

but also their children  

and grandchildren, in  

this way the generations 
mingle and share experi-

ences and community 

knowledge.”

Habitable Spaces

‘We’re in this together’

“Small towns would have

  everything they need at

 their center – they 

would produce their own 
food and provisions for 
the large part – there 

would be no need for 

transportation except for 

walking and bicycles 

within these small towns.  

If a light rail system 

and bike paths connected 
these towns, people could 

have a great ease and 

ability to travel without 

using fossil fuels.”

Habitable Spaces

‘Transport’

Dr John Harlow, 
Postdoctoral Scholar 
in Sustainability  
at the Center for 
Policy Informatics  
at Arizona State 
University (USA).

www.policyinformatics.asu.edu/
content/john-harlow

Utopias are bound to culture of their origins, and to the 
failings of that culture. This is exemplified by slavery 
in Sir Thomas More’s Utopia, and is a common thread in 
modern discourse and visions of utopias. 

I believe that there is nothing but ‘tinkerers.’ Incremen-
tal change looks transformational only in retrospective 
narrative. Under deep scrutiny, transformational narratives 
will always fragment into their, often lengthy and complex, 
precursors and causal chains. Was the assassination of 
Franz Ferdinand the cause of WW1 (transformational event), 
or was the entire preceding history of Europe (incremental 
change) more/equally important?

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Ecotopia as a process is skill based. Collaboration, 
stakeholder engagement, innovation in governance, rigorous 
experimentation, systemic thinking, serious consideration 
of uncertainty, and far more underutilized skills would 
be required. Forgo visual art for performance art that 
shows the transition from present modes of operation to 
more democratic, more evidence-based, more culturally 
aware skillsets.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

Humans are not biologically primed to think about the 
future and the long-term implications of their actions. 
Further, our reasoning, particularly the economic concept 
of “discount rate” makes the future far less salient than 
the present. Beyond that, the bureaucracies and governments 
we use to govern are extremely risk averse and conservative 
(not in the political sense), making concrete concerns in 
the present overvalued compared with more abstract risks 
in the future. Bioregional anarchism with trade between 
local markets is the political institution I could see 
in an Ecotopia. That model both ties human activity to 
environmental carrying capacity and restricts the extrac-
tion of the current global capitalist system. I’m not 
sure that attitudes necessary for ecotopia are so much 
new as they are non-western. Environmental problems are 
often common pool resource problems and the atomization 
of individuals in western culture promotes the conditions 
that drive resource depletion. In contrast, eastern and 
Asian attitudes are more communitarian, and more likely 
to support Ecotopian processes, but aren’t “new.”

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

I don’t think an ecotopian vision gets us very far at all. 
Ecotopia requires dramatic changes to nearly all global 
systems, environmental, financial, social, etc. I think 
persuasion is most effective when tightly bounded and 
focused. Persuasion might not be the tool we need. Rather 
than persuade people to act differently, we should focus 
on understanding what people want and value. Then, we can 
create a future in line with Ecotopia, that’s responsive 
to the wants and values of individuals, but that they 
choose on their own, without needing persuasion.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Government can subsidize long-term efforts in the short-
term, and create the conditions for development of sus-
tainable technologies. However, technology is insufficient 
for the task at hand. There can be no Ecotopia under 

capitalism, which concentrates wealth, gained through 
destructive resource extraction, and thereby destabi-
lizes society. Governments need to reduce gloabalization, 
increase protectionism in trade, and demilitarize to even 
begin to realize an Ectopian possibility.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Local, probably even more local than you are thinking. 
Subsidiarity is the most democratic, and culturally based 
governance. However, nativism, othering outsiders, and 
xenophobia can quickly turn highly localized communities 
away from tolerance. Subsidiarity must be balanced with 
empathy and the acknowledgement that we are neurologically 
and culturally primed to find and stigmatize outsiders 
(see Haidt’s Righteous Mind).

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

The simple answer here is generalities, a steady-state 
economy, using the Natural Step framework, and closing 
the loop on all production processes. The details are 
the hard part, though we have seen massive gains in solar 
energy efficiency and electric cars. Most importantly, 
the human details are hard. What does Ecotopia say about 
people? Earth without/before people is surely Ecotopia, 
but how do we have both Ecotopia and society?

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Solar, geothermal, wind, tidal, riparian, wherever available.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Sustainability in practice means that individuals empathize 
with “others” and the values of “others,” think systemically, 
consider the future their actions portent, and take strategic 
actions to create a sustainable future. That future would 
be different than our world today because wealth distribu-
tion would support rather than inhibit empathy. Ecosystem 
integrity would outweigh corporate profit. Long-term impacts 
would be factored into near-term decision-making.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Ecotopia would have the same buildings we have now. We 
would use extremely durable materials for construction, 
repair, and maintenance. New buildings would be notable, 
as latent space (2nd homes) would like be repurposed as 
primary housing. We would leave behind a functioning 
circular economy in harmony with the environment that 
provides a desirable life for generations to come.

Dr Jason Hickel, 
Lecturer in 
Anthropology at  
the London School  
of Economics (UK).

www.lse.ac.uk/anthropology/
people/hickel.Aspx

This is a leading question – but yes, of course. They 
call us unrealistic dreamers for attempting to imagine a 
world beyond capitalism. But they are the dreamers who 
believe we can continue with the status quo; they are the 
ones who are unrealistic. We know for a fact that business 
as usual has done nothing to alleviate mass poverty and 
hunger. We know it has done nothing to prevent recurring 
financial crises. We know it has done nothing to avert 
climate catastrophe. Business as usual is unacceptable. 
We need to set a different course, and quickly.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Another leading question – but yes, clearly utopia is only 
ever a process. For me the key point is that there is no 
single utopia to be realized. The problem with global 
capitalism is that it prescribes a single way of being 
in the world – one based on individualism, consumerism, 
corporatization, and urbanization. Today, virtually the 
whole world aspires to this single model as the apex of 
“development”, and it is putting immense strain on our 
planet’s ecology. In imagining our way out of this trap 
we need a diversity of utopias. We need to facilitate 
multiple ways of being human suitable to multiple different 
contexts. True sustainable living must be tailored to local 
ecological niches – there can be no single Grand Plan.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 

brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

The problem with our dominant culture of individualism 
is that it leads us to think with short time horizons 
coterminous with the self (or perhaps the nuclear family), 
which is all that really matters. This is in contrast to 
many indigenous cultures, which do not regard individual 
persons as definitively separate from other persons – both 
past and present – or indeed from other forms of life. If 
we are to chart our way into a sustainable future, we will 
need to abandon our ontology of individualism and relearn 
this ontology of connection. We will need to rediscover 
the basic truth that our existence as individuals is bound 
up with the existence of others, and that our fate as a 
species is bound up with that of the fish, the forests, 
the bees, and the oceans. Only then will we be able to 
think with longer time horizons.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

We need to do all we can to persuade our peers and poli-
cymakers that the present system of indefinite economic 
growth is untenable and dangerous. GDP growth has been 
sold to us as the only way to create a better world, but 
we now have robust evidence that it doesn’t make us any 
happier, it doesn’t reduce poverty, and its “externali-
ties” produce all sorts of social ills: debt, overwork, 
inequality, and climate change. We need to abandon GDP 
growth as our primary measure of progress, and we need 
to do it quickly. There are many compelling alternatives 
out there that we might consider, including the Genuine 
Progress Indicator and the Happy Planet Index.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

As a matter of urgent priority, governments need to cease 
subsidizing the fossil fuel industry and direct subsidies 
instead toward developing clean energy alternatives. Only 
governments have the power to introduce policy that will 

rapidly phase out fossil fuel use. In addition, governments 
will have to abandon the use of GDP growth as a measure 
of economic and social progress, and replace it instead 
with an alternative measure that accounts for pollution, 
resource depletion, and climate change, and work toward 
bringing us into a steady-state economy.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

We know that the forces of globalization are major drivers 
of climate change and ecological degradation. Reversing 
this trajectory means learning to make our societies more 
local, relying more on local food and local materials and 
local labor. As we relocalize production, politics too 
will become more local, and we will find ourselves with 
more influence over the decisions that affect our lives.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

No answer.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

There has been a lot of hype about biofuels in the past, 
but we are learning now that biofuels are deeply prob-
lematic. They have spurred land grabs across the global 
South, they are redirecting land use away from basic food 
production, and they contribute immensely to CO2 emissions 
from land use change, deforestation, and soil depletion. 
Biofuels are not a solution – they are part of the problem. 
Instead, we need to prioritize the development of wind, 
solar, and wave energy technologies. 

But of course getting off fossil fuels is not enough in 
and of itself, for fossil fuel use accounts for only 70% 
of greenhouse gas emissions. The rest come from defores-
tation, industrial agriculture, industrial animal farms, 
landfills, and the chemical reactions involved in the 
production of cement, iron, steel, and plastics. If we 
want to avoid climate catastrophe, we will have to address 
these other major sources of greenhouse gas emissions, 
which means dramatically reducing our consumption.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Sustainability in practice can mean many things. People 
often start with little things like recycling and com-
posting, but of course this is not enough. We all need 
to take the more important step of radically reducing 
our consumption, buying used, sharing what we have, 
and repairing our worn goods whenever possible instead 
of replacing them. We need to face up to the fact that 
our air travel is a major contributor to greenhouse gas 
emissions. We should do what we can to source our food 
from local farms that do not rely on intensive chemical 
pesticides and fertilizers. We will have to organize 
within our communities to create the conditions wherein 
these new behaviors are possible. Some will seek to take 
it a step further, shifting off the grid or creating local 
currencies so as to cease participating in debt-based 
money. We should begin with what is within our reach, and 
learn from others as we go.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

No answer.

“If we are to chart our  
way into a sustainable 
future, we will need to 
abandon our  ontology of 
individualism and relearn 
this ontology of connec-

tion. We will need to 
rediscover the basic 

truth that our existence 
as individuals is bound 
up with the existence of 
others, and that our fate 
as a species is bound up 

with that of the fish, 
the forests, the bees, 

and the oceans. Only then  
will we be able to think 
with longer time horizons.”

Dr Jason Hickel

‘Our Fate Is Tied Up With All Other Species’
Aiden Barefoot, Toby Downham, Melissa North,  

Professor  
Giorgos Kallis,  
environmental 
scientist working  
on ecological 
economics at ICREA, 
Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, (Spain).

www.icrea.cat/Web/
ScientificStaff/Georgios-
Kallis--481

Fantasy is a fundamental aspect of human nature. We need 
to imagine how things could be different in order to be 
motivated to change them. Utopia is an explosion of our 
imagination: imagining not only how our personal lives, 
but how the world as a whole could be different. There 
is a role and time for reformers and tinkerers, and there 
is a time and a role for utopians.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

It is a process. In a novel it is not difficult to rep-
resent a process, and the Dispossessed is an excellent 
example. The society depicted in the novel is in turmoil 
and ridden with conflict. The utopian planet therefore 
is in process, not in an end state. The novel itself is 
about a process, the travel of a scientist from one planet 
to another. And the novel does not have a closure or an 
end, it is open-ended.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 

A utopia is never achieved, it is a fantasy of a different 
future that motivates to achieve things now. The “how” and 
“what type of institutions” questions are huge. In our book 
“Degrowth. A vocabulary for a new era” we scratch the surface 
of some of these questions. “Commons” is a keyword here; 
interesting that both in More’s utopia or Ecotopia there is 
no private property and the commons are governed in common.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

First we need to persuade ourselves. We don’t need to 
persuade others of anything, this is utopianism of the 
wrong sort, assuming that we know what the future should 
be look like, and then seeing our role as that of enlight-
ening others. The difficult point is not to realize the 
absurdity of capitalism and growth; most people do. The 
difficult point is to struggle to overcome it. We are 
all constrained within the structural constraints of the 
system and the need to secure our everyday survival and 
reproduction.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

I am leaving tomorrow for vacations. This question could 
take me a few years to answer.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Multi-level, interconnected.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Bikes, slow but reliable trains and party buses.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Decentralized solar and wind power at the community and 
household level. Bicycled washing machines.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Oh my, oh my. Guys these are huuuuge questions!

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Not an expert on materials or buildings, just an ignorant 
user. I love the Truli of Puglia in South Italy, and the 
Cycladic architecture in the Greek islands. Imagine this at 
the level of a city.

““Commons” is a keyword 
here; interesting that 
both in More’s utopia  
or Ecotopia there is  
no private property  
and the commons are  
governed in common.” 

Prof. Giorgos Kallis

‘Grow Your Own’

Professor Ted Kesik, 
Professor of Building 
Science at the Uni-
versity of Toronto 
(Canada).

www.daniels.utoronto.ca/people/
kesikted%20

The idea of utopia has always been and remains a benchmark 
against which humans can gauge the relative successes and 
failures of their society. Utopian thinking is actually 
a form of criticism because it postulates that which has 
not been attained. While not necessarily a condemnation, 
utopianism is a challenge to each and every one of us 
to make a better world. By contrast, incrementalism is 
only looking ahead to the next corner on the road, never 
envisioning a destination beyond that which is just before 
us. The state of our global ecosystem has passed a tipping 
point where incrementalism cannot restore a healthy balance. 
Utopian/ecotopian “dreaming” is the only process by which 
a sustainable future can be envisioned, because that which 
cannot be envisioned cannot be attained. [The Origins of 
Knowledge and Imagination (1978), Jacob Bronowski]

Illustration: Infographic showing the glacial/incremen-
tal pace of greenhouse gas mitigation protocols (Kyoto, 
etc.) versus the rising rate of emissions and global 
temperatures.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Utopia/ecotopia is a transitory meta-stable state that 
emerges from n-dimensional dialectic processes, but then 
continues to morph, adapt and evolve. The origins of life 
and the species of living flora and fauna are among the 
best examples of these unfolding processes. Even with 
mass species extinctions due to cataclysmic phenomena, so 
many other threads of life continued to flourish and this 
reveals the biological basis of utopia/ecotopia - diver-

sity, persistence and resilience. In this sense, utopia/
ecotopia is all about enabling individuals and groups 
to self-determine their present and future aspirations. 

Illustration: Animations are among the best ways to 
represent ecotopia whereby the relationship between sea, 
land and air and the flora and fauna that occupy these 
ecotopes are revealed through comparisons between our 
present dystopian model of exploitation/depletion/extinc-
tion versus the ecotopian model of diversity/symbiosis/
equity where all species thrive. Imagine what the dolphins 
and whales would tell us about their idea of ecotopia.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

The collected wisdom of indigenous peoples points to a 
world view that is trans-generational and respects the 
carry capacity of the ecosystem. [“In every deliberation, 
we must consider the impact on the seventh generation... 
even if it requires having skin as thick as the bark of 
a pine.” Great Law of the Iroquois] Public education is 
the most critical means of developing an awareness about 
deep ecology and sustainability that generations of urban 
dwellers gradually discarded under the consumption based 
economic model underlying cities that commenced shortly 
after the advent of the Industrial Revolution. The dis-
connection from stewardship of the land and cultivation 
of crops eroded a fundamental awareness of the circle of 
life, thus eventually objectives became more important 
than processes.

Our current political institutions can remain, but the 
standards of care and duty must be realigned with the 
ecotopian world view. Short term programs and policies must 
be rejected in favour of trans-generational strategies. 
Evidence-based testing of proposed governance structures 
must displace trial and error expediency.

Illustration: Infographic comparing various time constants 
(geological, climatic {Ice Ages}, emergence of humans; 
recorded history, life span of a human, useful life of 

buildings, cars, computers, etc. Great Lakes scientists 
estimated that one change of water in Lake Michigan 
requires some 150 years, suggesting that what we do to 
its water impacts over seven generations.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

The Idea of Progress* by J.B. Bury outlines how notions 
of progress and growth have become ingrained in our 
civilization. In 1920 when Bury advanced his perspective 
on progress, there were insufficient data and evidence 
to indicate the correspondence between progress and its 
negative impacts on social/cultural cohesion, economic 
equity, ecological degradation, biodiversity and general 
quality of life. The ecotopian vision must hold out evi-
dence that human happiness and the life of the planet have 
not and can never improve under the current paradigm of 
growth. Balance and harmony are at the root of happiness 
and this can only come about under a return to natural 
cycles and rhythms.
* http://www.gutenberg.org/files/4557/4557-h/4557-h.htm

Illustration: A graphic comparing post-industrial lifestyle 
with ecotopian lifestyle. The poster would depict how much 
time the typical individual devotes to work, commuting, 
shopping, leisure, social interaction, etc. under the 
two paradigms and would reveal how much of time today is 
devoted to entropic processes that bring us no joy.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

The state (government) in our post-industrial society is 
an outdated institution that is often steered by wealthy 
individuals, myopic interest groups (including the media) 
and powerful corporations that control virtually all of 
the means which support life for the population at large. 
The role of government should be to first reform political 
structures such that the average citizen can gain equitable 
input to the governance process. Complex adaptive systems 
are often self-correcting if unconstrained by vested 

interests and the transition must begin with empowering 
people to change their lives for the better. (Resilience 
research is indicating that the scale of the parish is 
optimal for support and recovery after traumatic events.)

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Building on the previous issue, all evidence points to 
the utter unsustainability of centralization. Ecology is 
an entirely localized phenomenon, albeit responding to 
climatic and geographical contexts, but operating at the 
level of the ecotope. For human settlements, the ability 
to navigate a sustainable future at the local and regional 
scales is far more critical than national and global inter-
ventions. This does not mean the two realms are mutually 
exclusive, but if regions, cities and communities become 
ecotopian, the rest of the world will follow accordingly. 
Engaged citizens that can steer a course at the local 
level and make decisions about their immediate environs 
will make better decisions than international committees 
who suffer no consequences for dysfunctional policies.

Illustration: Former centralized Soviet Union versus 
cantonized Switzerland.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Sustainable societies are much like plants and need to be 
rooted in fertile soil with access to fresh air, clean 
water and sunlight. Transportation of people and goods, 
primarily for commerce, has become a dominant contributor 
to greenhouse gas emissions under the growth model. The 
need for transportation can be significantly reduced and 
intelligently managed by investing in infrastructures that 
generate energy, food and water locally, in concert with 
ecological technologies like solar aquatic waste treatment 
and phytoremediation. Regional infrastructure and trans-
portation systems based on renewable energy systems and 
environmental services operating at the local level (e.g., 
neighbourhood composting/bio-gas production coupled with 
combined heat and power plants) are feasible scales that 
can be better adapted and flexibly managed to accommodate 
changing needs. At the root of the ecotopian vision lay 
questions about the future of work and the distribution 

of wealth. Our current systems of infrastructure and 
transportation reflect the economics of exploitation and 
consumption and are ill suited to supporting a culture 
of collaboration and cultivation.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Everything we have today and more will converge into 
regional smart grids of clean renewable energy. This will 
come about simply because the economics of energy produc-
tion have so dramatically shifted in favour of cleantech. 
More important than energy, notwithstanding the need to 
bring clean renewable energy to developing nations, is 
the stewardship of water.* It is a finite resource that 
along with fresh air and sunlight are essential to human 
existence and all living things. The ecotopian ethos 
should not stray far away from conserving and protecting 
vital resources for future generation otherwise it risks 
becoming an over intellectualized and elitist concept that 
is not rooted in ecological reality. Equitable access to 
air, water, food, clothing, shelter, education, health 
care and political self-determination are the foundations 
of utopian/ecotopian ideals - once every world citizen 
has obtained these basic needs, only then can we engage 
in higher levels of discourse.
* www.programme.worldwaterweek.org/sites/default/files/
martin-nagle_swww_presentation_v3.pdf

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Sustainability was once commonly witnessed in many regions 
of the world up to the point where the ecological footprint 
of these societies exceeded their carrying capacities 
and/or they were conquered and subjugated by cultures 
driven by notions of unbridled growth and progress. All 
sustainable societies are actually knowledge based and 
transfer this acquired wisdom to successive generations. 
Hence, sustainability looks like a cross between indigenous 
and agrarian cultures with a careful balance between the 
hinterland (ecological buffer), cultivation (food produc-
tion) and urban settlements (exchange of goods, services 
and knowledge). Ecotopia would require the redistribution 
of wealth, land and real estate so that what has been 
commoditized could return to its former state of a col-

lective resource or commons. As long as individuals can 
isolate themselves from the suffering of others, ineq-
uity will remain the dominant outcome. Guaranteed annual 
income, right to healthy housing, employment opportunity 
and access to health care and education are the primary 
instruments for transitioning to an ecotopian future. What 
would be so different from the world we live in today? The 
great divide between the haves and the have nots would 
be bridged and people would not live in fear of poverty, 
disease, homelessness, ignorance and social irrelevance.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Almost every building typology needed to shelter ecotopian 
societies exists today. There would likely be a number 
of interesting hybrid typologies that would emerge under 
emerging contexts, but nothing that would be unrecognizable 
in terms of form and function. However, the architecture 
would be focused on regenerative technologies integrated 
within buildings so that they become net contributors 
rather than consumers of resources. Buildings would be 
highly passive, harvest water, make their own energy and 
food, and fully internalize their waste streams. The carbon 
footprint of buildings would also be greatly reduced.

To accomplish this objective, buildings would be con-
structed from a combination of local, naturally occurring 
and abundant bio-materials (soil, straw, wood, etc.) and 
reclaimed/recycled materials. Materials that could not be 
reused or recycled, as well as materials that involve toxic 
processes that cannot be responsibly managed/mitigated, 
would be banned. This does not mean an end to concrete, 
steel and glass, but these materials along with bituminous 
compounds for roofing, plastics for piping, etc. would 
become highly regulated and adhere to a zero emissions/
waste stream protocol. They would become rightfully pre-
cious and responsibly managed.

The long-term trends for world population growth indi-
cate an eventual decline in the world population and a 
return to a more sustainable ecological footprint exerted 
by humans. Buildings will become a mélange of found, 
reclaimed, recycled, repurposed, old and new materials. 
As entire urban settlements are abandoned due to factors 

such as climate change (rising sea levels) and their 
inherent unsustainability (Fort McMurray, Alberta), they 
will become the building material warehouses of the future 
from which solar powered dirigibles will transport the 
resources afforded by the deconstruction of the obsolete 
and bring these to where they are needed. Nano technol-
ogy and bio-based materials will introduce new building 
fabrics that are responsive and adaptive to changing 
environmental conditions, such that buildings will become 
highly passive in terms of external energy inputs, but 
intelligently active like flowers that open and close 
according to sunlight conditions. Buildings of the future 
will become prosthetic devices emulating the behaviour 
of the ecosystem (bio-mimicry) and provide total life 
support to their inhabitants.

What we will leave behind if we choose to undo all of 
the damage we have done to the planet is a legacy of 
remediation, rehabilitation and reconciliation. The idea 
that we had the courage and conviction to abandon cen-
turies old economic and political models of exploitation 
is noble and inspiring. We would live in a world without 
style and that would be a good thing because style was 
an invention to accelerate consumption. [I am working on 
an essay entitled “The End of Style” that explores this 
concept architecturally.]

Humanity must collectively realize that ecotopia may 
ultimately be part of a natural state in the evolution 
of life on earth that requires the extinction of humans. 
Mass extinctions of species are a testament to the self-
correcting behaviour of complex adaptive systems, such 
as the global ecosystem. The sustainability of humanity 
ultimately depends on how well civilization can harmonize 
with all planetary life forms, going beyond intergen-
erational equity to achieve inter-species equity and a 
considerate sharing of natural resources.

“Almost every building 

typology needed to 
shelter ecotopian 
societies exists 

today. There would 

likely be a number of 

interesting hybrid 

typologies that would 
emerge, under emerging 
contexts, but nothing 
that would be unrecog-

nizable in terms of 
form and function.” 

Prof. Ted Kesik

‘Make Use Of What We Have’

Isak Stoddard, 
Program director  
at the Centre For 
Environmental and 
Development Studies, 
Uppsala University 
(Sweden).

katalog.uu.se/
empinfo/?id=N5-1293

I believe that humanity is in peril. Whether we soon join 
the many extinct species who once had this planet as their 
home, or merge with our own creations in the singularity 
of a futurist’s dream – our humanity, rooted in the humus 
of the earth, is wavering, flickering, disappearing. Our 
dominant extractive human culture and its many institu-
tions and faces, may need soft reform, hard reform - or 
perhaps many are beyond reform. A person who manages to 
open their senses to the more-than-human world, and lis-
tening to what they still have to say, may have a better, 
or perhaps the only, chance of dreaming a more convivial 
world into existence. To take experience seriously, seeing 
that things may be hopeless, yet determined to make them 
otherwise. These are the dreamers I am interested in, yet 
to some they may well seem dangerous.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Can it ever be either one of the two? If Ecotopia is to 
be seen only as a process, must it then not be rooted in 
improvisation, a state of immersion and reaction, stepping 
backwards into the future, carefully and humbly laying 
down images of any Eden that falls into our hands? On 
the other hand, if it is seen as an end-state, what we 
must avoid at all costs is the one-sided, single-faceted, 
incredibly strange, yet common, idea that lightness could 
exist without darkness, control without disorder, life 
without death - creating scape-goats and more others than 
you can count. 

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

It seems as if the human species has the innate capacity 
to think long-term, over many, many generations, and that 
many land-based cultures throughout history have done so. 
At the moment, I believe most of us are just choosing 
to not do so – individually and collectively. Or perhaps 
we are being so abstracted and immersed in the world of 
pokemon-go, internet-dating and cyber-confirmation that 
even the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it will not make us 
look up from our personal screens of distraction. This is 
as much about culture, cosmologies, ontologies as it is 
about politics, if not more. As long as we keep culture 
aloof, detached and far from our wild fermenting roots 
in the natural world, we will keep creating political 
institutions that remain short-sighted, anthropocentric 
and ultimately suicidal.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

I think we need to show, very practically and quickly, that 
human activity can be regenerative. In contrast with many 
destructive practices throughout human history, we have 
also done good - built top-soil, increased biodiversity 
and been stewards and care-takers on mother earth, for 
Pachamama. The fossil fuel injected, carbon-intensive, 
growth-obsessed societies many people live in today is an 
exception. And it is only a very, very short period of time 
in the history of the homo-sapiens species that we have 
accepted, and come to think of this as normal and necessary 
for living a good life. So yes, it is a great transition 
for many of us, but it is also the last few hundred years 
that is the exception, not the norm.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Providing regulations, rule of law, integrity and trust 
that can provide a growing ground for a more just, safe and 
humble trajectory for its citizens and other co-inhabitants 
of the land.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

As resource-constraints and the effects of climate change 
kick in, I believe we will see an increased localization, 
a decreased need for specialists and increased demand for 
individuals and organizations that directly can deal with 
more multi-faceted and interconnected social and ecologi-
cal challenges. I also believe this can be something to 
strive for, with the major caveat that we must counteract 
myopic and fear-based mindsets that may result with the 
above trends as a backdrop.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

I believe speed in our societies and lives is one of the 
biggest problems that is maintaining and driving the 
unsustainability of our current growth-fixated development 
paths. Long-term sustainability requires a complete overhaul 
of the current built environment and our expectations of 
being able to jet-set across the globe at speeds unhealthy 
for our sanity as well as the health of the planet.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

First and foremost I think we need to look at the demand-
side when it comes to energy. Our current use of energy 
and everything that this drives, is unsustainable in the 
long run. Replacing fossil fuel based energy systems with 
renewable, decentralized and distributed ones is of course 
important. The problem is that it is not happening. We are 
not decreasing the use of fossil fuels as we increase the 
use of renewable energy. Rather we are increasing the total 
amount of energy consumed and wrecking the planet while 
we are at it. Fossil fuels need to be quickly phased out 
and most of what is left need to stay in the ground. I do 
see promising solutions within renewable energy technology 

emerging, but they need to be coupled with a deep question-
ing of the wealthier parts of humanity’s current level of 
using energy and associated short and long-term costs.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Fortunately there are still indigenous people here on 
earth that actively and consciously are practicing a sus-
tainable way of living on the land, and daring resistance 
against those threatening their livelihoods and land. 
There are also many promising seeds to a more sustainable 
world being planted in all sorts of different contexts, 
organizations, cultures. Ecotopia would be nothing like 
what most of us, at least in the West now experience as 
the world – it would be the end of the world as we know 
it, but that might not be so bad. In fact, it might even 
be the best of all possible worlds.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

What I think we may need is an un-industrialization. A 
more convivial culture where making is as natural and 
common as eating or sleeping. Many of the technologies and 
processes that our use of fossil fuels have resulted in, 
must not be maintained by simply replacing fossil fuels 
with bio fuels – a potentially very dangerous path. What 
I do think, is that we should make use of that which we 
have already created – upcycle and find new uses for old 
infrastructure, buildings and artefacts. And I hope we may 
find the humbleness to not leave too much behind.

Dr Jacquetta Lee, 
Director of the  
PhD programmes in  
Sustainability and 
Environmental Systems 
Analysis and Senior 
Lecturer in Mechanical 
Engineering and Mater- 
ials at the University 
of Surrey (UK).

www.surrey.ac.uk/ces/people/
jacquetta_lee/

Society needs dreamers and visionaries, people who are 
prepared to live outside of the mainstream to provide 
images and stories that are ‘unthinkable’. They are the 
change-makers who show the rest what ‘could be’. However, 
dreamers are not the best people to deliver such visions.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Ectopia is neither. It is a context, that evolves as we 
interact with it. Our understanding of it changes over 
time, sometimes simple, sometimes complex but never fixed. 
It means something different to each.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

Societal transformations only take hold if there are suf-
ficient people who understand the issues and agree on a 
given process or final destination. It cannot be driven 
through political power on its own, it requires actors 
from all aspects of civil society, business and governance 
to actively lead.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

See answer to (3)

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Supportive, long term, considered transformation, holding 
equity central to change.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Both, some organisations are better centralized (e.g. 
specialist health provision), other aspects work better at 
local level (e.g. local transport, care for the elderly).

1) How do we build a more sustainable society? What 
sort of infrastructures and transport systems should 
we have? 2) What sources of clean renewable energy do 
you envisage? 3) What does sustainability look like 
in practice? How would Ecotopia actually work? What 
would be different from the world we live in today? 
4) What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction? 
What would we leave behind?

These last 4 questions are huge and cannot easily be 
answered. Some are technical in nature (energy, buildings, 
transport .etc), but technology needs to be underpinned, 
accepted and utilised by civil society. In addition, what 
works for one place is unlikely to work in an identi-
cal fashion in another (different cultures, climates, 
functional requirements). To ask what these are like in 
ecotopia is to try to remove its complexity, and what 
you will end up with is a mishmash of people preferences 
depending on where they are, how old they are, and what has 
made them the person they are. If you try to generalise, 
you will end up with a picture that does not match the 
anyones vision. Whatever is chosen needs to be selected 
on a systems level perspective, minimising the transfer 

of sustainability burdens (or costs) to other people, 
places or times. This might mean that ‘natural’ materi-
als are not always the best solution, and that sometimes 
high tech can meet the needs of a burgeoning population 
better than ‘natural’ alternatives.

Karin Malmgren, 
Founder-Director  
of Ecotopia Osterlen, 
social entrepreneurs 
with a focus on  
eco-logical community 
development (Sweden).

www.ecotopia.se

We find ourselves in the early phase of a paradigm shift 
on all levels. It is a fact that politicians, scientists, 
entrepreneurs, etc. can all now demonstrate. A turbulent 
time of change with constant junctures permeating the 
era. Whether we will be able to save what we have built 
during the industrial era in the old paradigm remains to 
be seen. But it remains the case that we must act and 
seek solutions out of the dilemma we created. Ecotopia is 
one of the choices which the movie The Planet discusses. 
See our website www.ecotopia.se/en/about-ecotopia/the-
film-the-planet/. Ernest Callenbach wrote before he died 
about the concern he felt for the future.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Ecotopia is of course a process. Everything in the new 
paradigm consists of processes and, above all, the tran-
sition from one paradigm to another. In this time we 
require an infinite number of solutions to the countless 
problems that humans have created on the planet. The new 
ideas in this time are solution-oriented rather than, 
as in the past, problem-oriented. We are moving from 
linear to circular thinking. Thus, we leave the Utopia 
of the final state in a patriarchal system and transfer 
to process-oriented thinking and particularly acting in 
constant evolution, without any claim of finality. The 
universe is infinite and we are part of the same.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 

as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

To the new paradigm, i.e. the post-industrial re-use 
society / holistic-relations society belong long-term 
rather than short-term profit-oriented and goal-oriented 
thinking. Selfishness, competition, separation, envi-
ronmental degradation, etc. arising from a purely profit 
interest belong to industrialism. If we want to survive, 
this must be replaced by self-fulfillment, collaboration, 
inclusion, environmental reconstruction, etc. on the 
basis of nature and man’s human and social rights. I do 
not believe that there are politicians and institutions 
saving us, but rather that salvation can only be based 
on ownership at the grassroots level. Yes, it requires 
changes in attitudes and related new patterns of action 
from each of us.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

All of us are already in the period of change. We do not 
need to persuade anyone. Nature is much stronger than 
we humans. One fine day, economic bubbles burst. And so 
on. We do not have the power, but rather the transition 
with its changes is occurring whether we want to or not. 
That which resists will wind up in crisis or become sick. 
Bureaucratic, static and top-down organizations are forced 
to change in order to become mobile, flexible, flat and 
customer-oriented. One need only observe the unexpected 
changes that occur daily, at a rate never seen before. 
We will not convince unless we, as Gandhi said, “Live the 
life you want others to live.”

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

I do not believe in governments as creators of a sustain-
able future but rather as role models and leaders elected 
by the citizens of the local community.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

 
Strong local communities constitute the backbone of the 
new paradigm.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

That speaks for itself: No infrastructure and systems that 
require fossil fuels and which are as self-sustaining as 
they can be.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

All those which do not constitute threats to the environment 
and are finite; instead, those which help to re-establish 
a balanced environment: algae, wave energy, small-scale 
wind turbines, etc. but especially solar energy.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Will refer here to Ernest Callenbach’s books, otherwise 
this answer will be too exhaustive.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Materials such as clay, stone, hemp, flax, etc. The mate-
rials at the site and in the area local to where we are 
building. We will leave fossil-based building materials 
and those which nature cannot break down within a life 
cycle, as well as those we cannot repurpose, behind.

Dr. Alan Marshall,
Environmental Social 
Science Program 
Department of Social 
Sciences Faculty of 
Social Sciences and 
Humanities Mahidol 
University (Thailand).

www.ecotopia2121.com

A famous line attributed to Oscar Wilde suggests “A map 
without Utopia marked upon it does not deserve to be glanced 
at”. Tinkerers look at maps of no import; tending to maps 
of mere fantasy. It’s those that strive for utopia that 
are the realists in this age of eco-catastrophe.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

From a philosophical point of view, the ‘Utopia as Process’ 
idea is inherent in any stated endpoint—since more often 
than not those proposing an endpoint prompt questions about 
how to get there. For many, utopians an endpoint scenario 
is just a snapshot in time, a suggestive chapter in the 
story of utopia. I know some people are scared of the 
ossifying and totalitarian effect of endpoint scenarios 
but in art, from a practical communicative point of view, 
the novel and the movie film, maybe, can represent this 
idea of utopia as a ‘process’ better than a painting or a 
still photograph. However, a bunch of many paintings, or 
stills, thrown together—has the same effect—if the viewer 
has the time and inspiration to view them all. 

From wider social point of view, it doesn’t matter too much 
if Utopia is regarded as an ‘end-state’ or a ‘process’, 
for it’s been represented as both/either quite success-
fully in ages past (by painters and photographers and by 
movie-makers and novelists). As long as Utopian Visions 
prompt an imagination that propels people to believe that 
there is a better way to organize the socio-political 
world—then it serves society well. 

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

Climate Change and the global environmental crises force 
people to think of the future every time they read about 
these topics in the newspapers or watch eco-disasters 
unfolding on the TV. I think many people do care about 
the future, they do hope that there are people around to 
remember them, that their grandchildren will be happy, 
rather than living in a desolate and broken-down world. 

And every day, the amount of people who learn and know 
about future challenges and the impact of global climate 
change grows. At the same, though, we hurtle towards 
ecological collapse. It’s going to be interesting to see 
which arrives first; genuine environmental awareness; or 
a world of total environmental chaos. 

Alas—I think any form of Utopia, or something akin to it, 
is improbable but that’s okay though since it’s still a 
useful idea. Without utopian ideals; without a sense of 
the best of possible worlds, and we should debate what 
the ‘best possible world’ means, we all lose a potent 
tool to define what paths humanity can possibly take in 
the future.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

I wish I could be positive about this. I wish I could 
say that progressive politics (along with environmental 
awareness and green technology) IS enough to save the 
world. Alas, I cannot say this with any confidence. Maybe, 
it is going to take a HUGE environmental calamity, where 
Miami is wiped off the map forever by a super storm, for 
example, or where Tokyo is irradiated by a huge nuclear 
catastrophe, for instance. Only then, after such a massive 
calamity, will governments start listening to ordinary 
people’s calls for change and begin a process of the 
necessary socio-political alterations—and start a ‘war 

on environmental decay’ on the scale of the ‘war on ter-
rorism’. If there is no such calamitous event, then the 
environmental crises will go on slowly -- year by year 
-- and it’s probable that the rich will just buy their 
way out of trouble — and go on living as they do now, 
leaving the poor to adjust as best they can to a hot, 
storm-battered, dried-up, disaster-ridden future. This 
sounds pessimistic, even though I hope it’s not going to 
happen, but that is why utopianism is so important to 
me — for it encourages me to explore better alternative 
futures.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

The state government has to have faith that they will not 
be voted out if they pursue environmental goals. They will 
only have such faith when the public show them the way.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Maybe the best government is NO government. Maybe anarchy 
is the best thing. For most anarchists, the big anti-
authoritarian projects the are to peacefully (and without 
the use of arms) rid the world of a) corporate power, b) 
central government, and c) national armies. Only then, 
the ‘eco-anarchists’ say, would both humanity and nature 
be peaceful and free. This freedom would give space for 
communities to make their own decisions, and these, would 
generally favour the long-term preservation of the natural 
environment rather than its destruction for short-term 
gains of power. It would also reassert the local quirky 
differences of a place over the rampant unformity imposed 
by corporations and government. The tasks the local/central 
government once performed are then dispersed out to groups 
of enthusiastic people who enjoy mastering them and then 
teaching others about them. Other tasks are dished out 
to various small businesses vetted at public assemblies 
for their trustworthiness. 

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Pedestrianism. With lots of cafes on the route to work and 
back home again. Convert all the motorways to tree-lined 

eco-corridors with bars and music cafes and creches on 
the way. Stage 1 of this process is to ridicule Jeremy 
Clarkson. That’s already started and soon I foresee the 
M1 being planted with oaks.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

When the new Chinese nuclear power plant at Hinkley 
mysteriously breaks down only a few months into service, 
finally the UK will put its money into making every house 
and home self-contained with its own solar roof and wind-
turbine. The Chinese, as well as terrorists, will find 
it much harder to disrupt the UKs economy if the energy 
supply is so dispersed.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

The Olympic Games would add tree-planting and worm-farming 
into their retinue of sports.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Camel-shit mixed with dried straw, aloe vera fibre and 
the recycled windshields of Jaguars and Aston Martins. 
As a starter, I think several truckloads of camel-shit 
from the London zoo should be dumped on the lawns near 
Westminster for passersby to hurl at the parliament 
buildings. The parliamentarians are always moaning about 
how their workplace is due for a refurbishing -- so this 
will get the process started.

For those Britons near the coast, the Triton submarines 
can be refurbished into underwater homes to adapt to 
rising sea-levels. 

Dr Alice Moncaster, 
Lecturer in  
Interdisciplinary 
Design for the Built 
Environment, and the 
Centre for Sustainable 
Development, both 
part of the Department 
of Engineering at  
the University of 
Cambridge, and Fellow 
of Newnham College 
(UK).

www.eng.cam.ac.uk/profiles/amm24

I think that it depends on what you are talking about. 
The idea of deleting everything and starting again can 
be very exciting, but I think that much of where we 
have got to has been developed gradually over the years 
through considerable intelligence and iteration based on 
evidence – ‘standing on the shoulders of giants’, all 
that. However, the ‘tinkerers’ are also those who believe 
inherently in the status quo. There is also Thomas Kuhn’s 
idea of ‘paradigm shifts’ in scientific understanding. 
Sometimes things need radical reassessment in the light 
of new information or new ideas. Sometimes we should take 
a step back and look at what we are doing, and consider 
whether something completely different would be better. I 
think this is one role of the arts – not just to reflect 
‘what is’, but to suggest ‘what could be’.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Ecotopia as a process makes more sense to me. I believe 
that as individuals and as a whole, humanity is born to 
strive and continually develop. The idea of ‘achieving’ 
an idealistic end state is, in itself, non-ideal.

How do you draw it? I’m not sure. It relates to what 
I am researching in terms of the built environment and 
the circular economy. We can see the start as mining raw 
materials from the ground, or cutting down trees; then 
we manufacture these materials into building components; 
we transport the components to site; we assemble and con-
struct them; during the life of the building we maintain, 
refurbish and replace individual parts, each of which has 
it’s own miniature life cycle starting from raw materials 

again; at the end of life, we demolish the building; we 
transport the demolished materials away; finally we process 
them again – perhaps into landfill, perhaps burning them 
for energy to feed another manufacturing process, perhaps 
recycling them (via a manufacturing process), perhaps 
reusing them as they are. We can assess this whole process, 
add up the environmental impacts of a single building, 
and produce a single number. The number, of course, isn’t 
accurate – partly because we don’t (ever) have a complete 
list of these components and processes, nor do we really 
know everything about an individual component or process, 
nor do we know what has happened – or will happen, even 
less – over the lifetime of the building, or at the end 
of life. There are too many people and too much diversity 
in all of the processes. The number is also huge. The 
environmental impact of construction is devastating. And 
this is already ignoring all of the additional impacts of 
the industries which support the process of constructing 
a building – the design firms and construction firms, 
the workers and their journeys to work, the banks which 
finance the developers, the impacts of their financial 
dealings around the world. The current industrial model is 
too distributed. This could be compared with a favela – an 
informal settlement, in which the materials and labour 
are all local, easily counted. The argument against these 
settlements is often environmental – the impact of lack 
of proper sewage treatment on local water courses, for 
instance. However the numbers suggest that the impacts 
are far lower than that of the commercial, technological, 
global construction process. As buildings become more 
sophisticated, their environmental footprint increases 
exponentially (I haven’t checked the mathematical rela-
tionship – it’s a hunch).

So how would we move towards ecotopia? Do we need to move 
progressively backwards, to individuals building their 
own home from local materials? Or are we still moving 
forwards, using our increasing technology and knowledge 
towards developing new bio-based materials (chemically 
altered bamboo, photovoltaic algae in facades) which 
enable us to develop ecosystems as we build rather than 
destroy them? 

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be

brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

After the Brexit vote has shown how very myopic many 
people’s views are of the world around them, let alone 
their views backwards to history or forwards to their 
children’s future, it isn’t at all clear. Working in a 
university though, I would say that bringing disparate 
people together into a growing and learning environment 
changes them forever. How can this be ‘imposed’ through a 
political system? Perhaps through enshrining the right for 
the time and space to think within the UN human rights. 
This was very much the understanding of Virginia Wolf in 
requiring that we have a room to think in, and of George 
Orwell who wrote of the impossibility of developing ideas 
if you are exhausted by your daily work. State educa-
tion on the whole allows little of this, instead forcing 
everyone together to learn the same facts. So perhaps 
a school is the place to start, where the adults of the 
next generation can learn how to think for themselves and 
for their futures.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

The most successful visionary building of recent times 
was Wolfgang Feist’s Passivhaus. Based on the idea that 
the building and its occupants were self-regulating in 
their need for heating energy, it has had a huge impact 
on the house building industry across the world. It is 
now a popular concept (although successfully passiv build-
ings are still very few) across not just Europe but also 
the rest of the world. How were people persuaded is a 
complex mixture of vision, argument, demonstration, and 
belief. The next revolution in the buildings industry is 
a truly zero-carbon building, in which the construction 
materials as well as the operation of the building is 
carbon-neutral, and this is the discussion which is hap-
pening throughout green building councils and academic 
establishments around the world. A vision for this will 
be a hugely powerful part of the story; as with all 
architecture, the numbers and concepts are developed as 
well as illustrated through drawings, models, and finally 
construction. The BRE innovation park in the UK shows 

just how important the physical manifestation of an idea 
is for people to believe it.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Where we live in a governed society, there is clearly a 
role for state government in all change. 

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Both – I would say rather, all - just as happens in nature.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Ones which enable increasing social equality, not rein-
force existing inequalities. So rather than spend taxes 
on upgrading roads in the commercially successful areas, 
or building high speed rail links to London (for example), 
use them to support local bus services in rural areas so 
that people can get to work cheaply and without losing 
childcare and leisure time.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Many. I’m particularly interested in using urban structures 
as energy farms; I’m currently looking at the viability 
of using photovoltaic systems integrated into long-span 
roofs, for structures such as supermarkets, warehouses 
and even airport terminals; using foundation structures 
to tap shallow ground source heat to heat the buildings 
above; and using the stack effect of ventilated facades 
to cool buildings in hot climates.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Both more and less technology – more where the technology 
is working to make life cleaner and less environmentally 
damaging, but I would like to think less where the purpose 
is to show off your wealth with the latest gadget. Less 
consumption, more though.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

As explained above, buildings can be used effectively 
as energy sources with some careful design. However the 
environmental impact of building materials is huge. 
Everything should be rethought in terms of carbon:cost 
effectiveness. I think this will encourage us to return 
to low-tech materials in many cases, including timber, 
clay and even thatch. For the developed world however 
we already have most of the buildings we need, and we 
should focus on retaining these and retrofitting them 
for future climates. If ecotopia is a place in the UK, 
it might look very similar to today, making the most of 
the built resources we already have.

Professor Mugendi  
K. M’Rithaa, 
President of the 
World Design Organ-
ization (formerly 
Icsid) and Professor 
of Industrial Design 
atthe Cape Peninsula 
University of Techno-
logy (South Africa).

www.designindaba.com/profiles/
mugendi-k-mrithaa

Utopians/ecotopians are often accused of being idle 
dreamers. The word ‘utopian’ is often used in fact as 
a term of criticism, even abuse. How do you respond to 
this? Do you think that actually it is the mere tinker-
ers, those who think a little reform at the edges - or 
even just business as usual - will be enough to deliver 
us a good future who are the real idle and dangerous 
dreamers?

One cannot imagine an alternative (and progressive) future 
without dreaming it up first. It remains utopian if it is 
confined only within the realms of imagination… for the 
vision to find expression, it must be shared with like-
minded creative thinkers with the intent of implementation 
in the real world. My functional ethos for the realisation 
of ‘ecotopianism’ is: “I participate, therefore I am”… 
It is not enough to have goodwill for a bold new initia-
tive; one must participate robustly within their community  
of practice.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is the 
great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The dispos-
sessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a process? 
It is far easier to draw images of an end-state, an 
imagined achievement, than of a process: how do we 
overcome this problem?

Ecotopia is in my humble opinion a dynamic and continuous 
process of evolution towards a higher and more progressive 
state of being for our human family. My visual representation 
would be a helix or spiral in which an iterative, cyclic 
and yet continuously evolving process occurs…

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will be 
required? What new attitudes will be required?

Design advocacy must be coupled with design activism for 
such goals to be attained. As the proverb goes: “we did not 
inherit the earth from our ancestors; we have borrowed it 
from our children [and our children’s children]”… A sense 
of social responsibility, urgency and agency is required 
wherein a new breed of design thinkers and allied creative 

problem solvers take on ‘political’ leadership. The world 
desperately needs fresh ways of thinking as we collectively 
grapple with myriad ‘wicked’ problems that characterise 21st 
century living. The world’s problems cannot be solved with 
the same logic that co-created them in the first place…

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

As Ivan Illich argues in his 1973 classic text entitled 
“Tools for Conviviality”, there must be limits to growth 
as defined in neo-liberal capitalism. The wanton resource 
waste and expansive industrialisation that has resulted 
from unbridled consumption needs to be checked. There’s 
no ‘Planet B’ – Earth is all we’ve got to sustain us as a 
human race. We must act now whilst we can to usher in an 
eco-friendly and sustainable global agenda! Ecotopianism 
can help advance social innovation and promote social 
equity and cohesion…

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

The state can offer tax incentives and rebates for research, 
policy formulation, implementation strategies, and advance-
ments in eco-friendly interventions such as the quest for 
carbon-neutrality; the green [and blue] economy; deployment 
of distributed renewable energy systems; strategies for 
mitigating climate change; and support for collaborative 
consumption [and the sharing economy] to spur growth and 
sustainable development of these sectors…

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

In my view, a ‘glocal’, decentralized and yet networked 
strategy that incorporates social media and the Internet 
of Things. The said strategy would allow for autonomy in 
organisation by local or regional chapters that are networked 
on a discursive sharing platform to exchange information, 
case studies and best practices across the world…

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort of 
infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

“I am because we are” – we need to first of all [re]build 
the sense of community and pride of place before we tackle 
the complex global challenges that face humanity. We need to 
spur local action and activate communal spirit that reminds 
us of what it means to belong to a vibrant, empathic and 
inclusive community. Only then should we attempt to [re]
connect at a global scale to maximise social impact. In 
this progressive vision, the infrastructural and transport 
provisions would prioritise pedestrianisation, mass transit, 
non-motorised mobility modes, and sustainable eco-friendly 
solutions… 

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Solar/photovoltaic, hydro, geothermal, wind and ocean 
wave sources appeal to me. They must however be generated 
and consumed via efficient distributed renewable energy 
systems – not the current centralized and highly inefficient 
electricity grid system…

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

My vision of sustainability in action is one of vibrant and 
convivial communities sharing resources and co-producing 
energy, food and other requirements as close to the point of 
consumption as possible. In my ecotopian vision, renewable 
energy has become the norm as people use efficient public 
transport. As well as non-motorised transport options where 
feasible. Additionally, communities demonstrate a participa-
tive, inclusive and empathic ethos in their engagement with 
each other. They are socially conscious and responsible as 
well as globally aware and connected…

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What mate-
rials would be used for their construction? 
What would we leave behind?

The buildings would use eco-friendly and biodegradable 
materials, be carbon-neutral in energy consumption, produce 
food and/or electricity from roofs and windows, and use 
state-of-the-art technologies to humanise their interior 
environments. Wastefulness would be left behind…

“solar/photovoltaic, 

hydro, geothermal, wind 
and ocean wave sources 
appeal to me. They must 
however be generated and 

consumed via efficient 
distributed renewable 
energy systems – not  

the current centralized  
and highly inefficient  

electricity grid system.”

Prof. Mugendi K. M’Rithaa

‘Use Natural Energy Sources’

Tim Parsons &  
Jessica Charlesworth,  
Lecturers at the Department  
of Architecture,Interior 
Architecture and Designed 
Objects at the School of the 
Art Institute of Chicago and 
co-founders of the Parsons
& Charlesworth speculative 
design studio (objects, 
exhibits, texts & images), 
Chicago (USA).

www.parsonscharlesworth.com

Utopia is, by it’s nature, unreachable, but creating 
visions of it allows us to direct our resources towards 
attaining as much of it as possible. As a set of attitudes, 
it is also constantly evolving and hence new visions are 
needed to represent those attitudes. Those who dismiss 
utopia are not dreamers – they are unable to see the power 
of dreams to change our reality.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Visions can show how movement towards ecotopia would 
evolve, and what the stages of that evolution are. Just 
as science fiction films range from near future, where 
much remains the same, to far future where the environment 
has been transformed, we should be able to envision the 
stages of ecotopia.

In terms of showing process it is also a matter of getting 
on with that process ourselves. Designers should be the 
role models for new ways of living and they can document 
this process in order to encourage others.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

Currently we are so distracted by the short term continu-
ous turnover of tragedy our only distraction capabilities 
are to react to Kardasian news. We blatantly ignore all 

climate change doomsday news articles. We are so immersed 
into the present and bombarded by the fear mongering of a 
dystopic future as depicted in the media that we can not 
fathom what one can do to focus on global life threatening 
environmental problem.

To think more long-term and imagine a future we cannot 
yet see is by its nature a complex mental challenge for 
our imaginations. According to a study conducted by psy-
chologists Dr. Daniel Gilbert and collaborators, published 
in the journal Science in 2013, they asked participants 
about their personality traits and preferences in years 
past and present, and then asked to make predictions for 
the future. When asked to predict what their personali-
ties and tastes would be like in ten years, people of 
all ages consistently played down the potential changes 
ahead. People seemed to be much better at recalling their 
former selves than at imagining how much they would change 
in the future.

“The end-of-history effect may represent a failure in 
personal imagination,” as quoted by Dan P. McAdams, a 
psychologist at Northwestern who has conducted similar 
research into the stories people construct about their 
past and future lives. He has often heard people tell 
complex, dynamic stories about the past but then make 
vague, prosaic projections of a future in which things 
stay the same.

A utopia is a reflection of one’s own circumstances hence 
can be extremely subjective. Thomas Moore’s utopia was a 
sign of his own current situation, he was married twice 
after his first wife died leaving him with four children. 
He describes a fictional island society in the Atlantic 
Ocean where this is no poverty nor idle rich and voluntary 
euthanasia. Everyone wears the same outfits, lives in 
the same types of houses and everyone goes to bed before 
8pm. In his Utopia, surplus children are sent to less 
fertile families and prospective brides are exhibited stark 
naked to prospective bridegrooms. Back in 1516, to Moore 
this was a highly desirable, perfect society but also a 
reflection on the social fabric of his time- famine, ill 
health and poverty.

A utopia can be a reflection of our embedded current 
attitudes and a dream of how life could be different – 
something to test out and experiment. An ethical spectacle 

as Stephen Duncombe mentions in “Dream: Reimagining Pro-
gressive Politics in an Age of Fantasy” – “The ethical 
spectacle is a dream put on display. It is a dream we 
can watch, think about, act within, try on for size, yet 
necessarily not realize. [ ] it is a means, like the 
dreams it performs, to imagine new ends.

However, changing attitudes, behaviours and values can 
be done over time with storytelling, knowledge sharing 
and social change. With the use of scenarios, visions, 
narratives, fictional folktales and tangible experiences, 
we can intervene by introducing subtle changes into our 
everyday lives illustrating what life might be like in 
such a way as to jolt our brains. 

Maybe if there was an innovative, ingenious, influen-
tial climate orientated political institution that never 
mentioned climate or change but had as much influence on 
individuals as Apple’s global campaigns have done in the 
past, then maybe we might get somewhere. This political 
institution could go as far as handing out free Oculus 
Rift headsets in the hope of initiating a shared group 
dream - a sort of public health campaign referencing the 
group think of Orwell’s 1984!

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

Persuasion has to come at all levels, including culture. 
The Dark Mountain Project’s manifesto talks about how 
culture needs to reflect the reality of our environmental 
circumstances so as to embed awareness and understanding. 
This means design, art, literature and film all need to be 
addressing the issue alongside governments and business.

A multi-faceted approach will be needed – visions also 
need to address how the constituents can work together 
more effectively. It is clear that government and big 
business as they are currently organized are not able 
to make the kind of sweeping changes that are needed to 
avert climate catastrophe. 

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Governments should take a much more strident role in 
regulating behavior that affects climate change, on the 
level of the individual as well as business scale. Even 
the simple matter of charging for plastic bags has an 
effect (there was an 85% drop in plastic bag use after the 
charge was introduced). The major problem is how to enact 
effective global regulation. Governments are not willing 
to introduce measures that will make their economies 
less successful compared to others, and hence the global 
climate summits have set targets that are lower than what 
is really required and without sufficient penalties for 
non-compliance.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Both

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Everything needs to shift to renewables. If we can fly 
a solar plane around the world we can move to renewable 
energy for our transport systems.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What mate-
rials would be used for their construction? 
What would we leave behind?

[These final questions are too big to address here! A 
whole project is needed. It’s not appropriate to give 
off-the-cuff answers as they will not reflect the level 
of research needed to do the subject justice.]

Jane Penty,  
Lecturer in Product, 
Ceramic and Indus-
trial Design and 
Sustainability Co-
ordinator at Central 
Saint Martins, 
University of the 
Arts London (UK).

www.arts.ac.uk/csm/people/
teaching-staff/product-ceramic-
and-industrial/jane-penty/

To become an ecotopian, first of all you need to be a 
realist. A realist in the sense that you acknowledge that 
we have a problem and what the extend of the problem is. 
If not allowing oneself to be beaten by a problem means 
being an idle dreamer, then that is what ecotopians are. 

But I see this very differently. The ecotopian is the person 
who despite understanding the nature and extent of the 
problem the planet faces is still sufficiently optimistic 
and pragmatic to look for solutions and brave enough to 
help create a new way of living that will ultimately be 
better for all.

The person who takes the time to understand a problem is 
in a better position to propose ways out of the problem 
than the one who ignores the signs or makes light of it 
and hopes that it will go away. People with this approach 
are a big part of the problem. 

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Ecotopia, effectively achieving sustainability, is a goal 
and a vision of an ideal. But it is also an attitude of 
mind characterised by a sense of equity, sufficiency, and 
collaboration whereby all living species can flourish. 

Interpreting that ideal in a single physical form with 
our current understanding in itself limits the vision. 
All our physical interpretations must be understood 
as explorations and we will need multiple and diverse 
interpretations of what 9 billion people living well on a 

finite planet in harmony with their supporting ecosystems 
and fellow creatures might look like. 

Ecotopia as an interpretation of this vision can never 
be an end state because it is not static. The process 
of achieving this vision involves a continuous cycle of 
learning through action and reflection that saves it 
from the problem of all static visions. You can only ever 
experience the journey, so that is what we must focus on.

We talk about transition as the active journey out of 
our state of unsustainability towards ecotopia. Together 
with the multiple interpretations, for a transition to be 
successful we will also need multiple debates and experi-
ments in the way of truly resilient systems or organisms. 
The notion of transition also breaks down the journey 
towards Ecotopia into smaller and achievable steps and 
goals while still being able to see these as part of the 
bigger vision. 

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

(see above for what characterises the attitude.)

Like all great movements it will require inspired leaders 
brave enough to challenge the status quo. But more impor-
tantly, it will need a groundswell of people from the 
bottom up who understand that the current systems is on 
an unnecessary course of self-destruction and are willing 
to try alternatives. 

Awakening people to the problem and bringing them on 
board towards a feasible solution is the most crucial 
step in moving this project forward. I believe that the 
deep shift of understanding and attitude needed will 
never be achieved through rationality alone, if at all. 
It will be embraced when it touches people emotionally 
and personally. It is about reconnecting every citizen 
of the world with their fellow human beings and fellow 
creatures intuitively and emotionally. And then offering 
visions of fairer and better lives that are possible in 
a steady state or degrowth economy.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

See 3 above and to add to it: 

You could say that you need to share the problem first. 
This is the difficult part with so many vested interested 
and entrenched views. Everyone needs to see the advantage 
for themselves as well as the greater good.

In order to do this we need to construct new narratives 
that people will intuitively connect with and appreciate 
as necessary and positive new ways of living. This also 
implies that we should communicate why and what the new 
rules of the game of ‘living’ need to be and how these 
can be a force for good.(see Julliet Schor - Visualising 
a Plenitude Economy)

These include scenarios where we move from time poor to 
time rich. Where the prime objective is no longer to 
accumulate financial wealth but social capital and well 
being. Where we can develop ourselves, share our skills 
and see the direct benefit of our work and contributions.

We also need multiple interpretations of what this future 
could be so that people can see which new scenarios they 
intuitively connect with. It is in the tangible inter-
pretations of these possible and multiple new scenarios 
that designers have an important role to play. 

Finally, as this is a fundamental shift in values and 
developing an intuitive understanding of sustainability 
then we need to START YOUNG. 

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future? What levels of organisation should 
societies have? Local or centralised?

An Ecotopian vision will necessarily bring into question 
many of our current forms of governance and organisation. 
Because society will be based on a new set of values and 
goals, its organisation and rules will need to change to 
reflect these values. While there are many different visions 

of ecotopia, I will focus on the common ground and highlight 
a few aspects. 

There seems to be general agreement that in order to transi-
tion to a sustainable way of living across the planet, we 
need a whole new set of economic rules and objectives. The 
economy needs to be brought back under control to fulfil its 
primary role, that is, an agreed system for the exploita-
tion, distribution and exchange of resources and services 
that supports our social and environmental aims. Not the 
reverse as we seem to have at present. 

In keeping with the plurality of views and approaches, there 
is not a singular interpretation of how the new economic 
system would work between steady state, no-growth and 
degrowth proponents, but there is plenty of common ground. 

The common ground for transition is a general acceptance 
of the need firstly to stabilise growth and then move to 
stopping or even decreasing growth globally while at the 
same time redistributing wealth. This means degrowth in 
the wealthy industrialised regions and sustainable growth 
in the under resourced regions. Generally, this calls for 
self-imposed limitations of resource-use in the agreed 
regional degrowth or controlled growth scenarios. But these 
limitations will also spark a creative revolution.

Over and above the limitations on resource use, human 
activity will move to being more in tune with the regional 
biocapacity. In this framework, the extent and nature of 
human activity is connected to the nature and capacity of 
geographical and ecological areas or bioregions rather than 
existing artificial political boundaries. 

All of this will necessitate a much more cooperative and 
less competitive approach to how we reach decisions, organise 
ourselves, and do business. The common thrust is a move 
away from highly centralised structures run by technocrats 
to more local and direct forms of governance that will 
naturally limit the size of social units. Altogether these 
social units will be highly interconnected. 

Finally, the organisation and the rules should take a 
dose of wisdom and knowledge from Daniela Meadows and be 
based on systems thinking and systems feeling’ to use John 
Thackara’s term. Ecotopia should be modelled on the proven 
complex systems that we find all around us in the natural 

and biological world. This will form the basis to create 
new ground rules and networks for communities to interpret 
in ways appropriate to their region and cultural ways. We 
will create natural abundance and resilience by not treat-
ing symptoms but getting to root causes, by building in 
feedback systems and constant learning, allowing redundancy 
and failure, and operating in fast and slow cycles. The 
transition to Ecotopia is in fact a very large biomimicry 
exercise, which by its very nature is constantly evolving.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

Thanks to intensive energy sources namely fossil fuels, 
mass mobility has been one of the most socially and eco-
nomically transforming phenomena of the 20th century. Now 
in the 21st it is taken as a given. Yet it is also one of 
our most environmentally impactful activities. 

We have built our trading models around shipping material 
and goods all around the world because it makes monetary 
sense. We commute long distances to work and the internet 
has widened our curiosity and cultural horizons so we think 
nothing of flying long distances for weekend ‘breaks’. 
Because we can. The world has truly shrunk and not just 
virtually. It will be a major challenge to change this 
behaviour if that is what is needed.

But infrastructure and transport systems, like the economy are 
there to serve our social and environmental objectives. If 
we can agree on these and set a framework, then working out 
what the role of transportation is will not be so difficult. 

We need to begin by asking ourselves, what services do 
transport systems provide? Mobility of goods and people 
yes, but to what end? Mobility will be important for coop-
eration and collaboration to thrive, but with a limited 
carbon and resource ‘budget’ we will need to sit down and 
decide on our priorities. Once we have reassessed what 
forms of transportation fit our new biocentric model there 
will be a surge to find the most efficient means to do 
this. Limitation is the fuel of creativity and ingenuity.

Certainly at a local level, human and self-powering 
transportation networks will be fundamental. Starting with 
humble pedal power, these will be further refined to blend 

in with with daily needs. Distances will be manageable and 
speeds appropriate and we will all be healthier for it.

For the medium distances, fully integrating the most 
efficient modes of travel and movement of goods with the 
greatest enjoyment and least disruption will be challenging 
but rewarding. And for longer distances, will we finally 
have solar airships, wind turbine driven ships and…? 
Altogether travel and transportation will be more about 
efficiency, appropriateness and conviviality than speed. 

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

No one knows what new adaptations of renewable technolo-
gies we may have in the future - that is the exciting 
thing about invention and ingenuity. What we do know is 
that harnessing the energy of the sun, the only ‘free’ 
and inexhaustible input we have on the planet, is the only 
sustainable way to power our activities now and in the 
future. The sun powers the wind, the waves, the tides, 
the rain, biomass growth and of course provides us with 
direct radiation. So working with all these elements will 
lead to sources of renewable and plentiful power.

Another great asset of renewable energy is its flexibil-
ity. It lends itself to big installations but also to 
decentralised, distributed and even autonomous or off-grid 
energy production. This gives scope for much more local 
but networked production and use and greater resilience.

Ultimately though, for Ecotopia, it is the levels of 
energy intensity required or desired as well as how 
these will be achieved that will be the important points  
of collective discussion as we construct new social priorities  
and relationships. 

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

In the transition period, the journey to sustainability 
will be different for different people depending on which 
part of the world and society they are born into. But 
in practice they will share the notions of sufficiency, 
responsibility, equity and collaboration that are central 
to sustainability in practice. 

For people in developing countries born into poverty and 
limited access to health, education and resources, it 
will be a time of improved access to all of these with 
better living conditions and less uncertainty.

For people currently living beyond their biocapacity, it 
will be a time of great change based on reduced consump-
tion of resources and a shift in values from quantity to 
quality. As our personal objectives will no longer be to 
accumulate wealth, we will have more time and energy for 
personal and collective development, more community and 
collaborative activities and more understanding of our 
work contribution, making it more valued and meaningful. 

For the other species and ecosystems of the world it will 
be a time of great relief as they gradually recover from 
the sustained assault they have been under for the last 
century. Embedded in the new system of bioregional activity 
there will be a deeper understanding and appreciation of 
the regions eco-system services and energy will be put 
into supporting and restoring these for mutual benefit. 

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Like transportation and other services, our buildings 
should respond to our needs and reflect our values. Given 
that we currently spend an average of 90% of our time 
indoors, their design is very important through both 
the psychological effect they have on us and the social 
activities that they facilitate. 

Our building practices would emulate living systems by 
being adaptable to changing uses, built from local mate-
rials, and repairable. All buildings would be their own 
energy providers, a natural limiter of size. Equally, 
buildings will be appropriate to their purpose – whether 
short life, temporary use or longer term social anchors. 

For the longer lived building, they should be like mighty 
trees with a fundamental and stable structure and adaptable 
and repairable limbs and tissue that can cope with being 
cut back or pruned or continue to grow in the direction 
that is most opportune. 

But buildings in Ecotopia would not only be a product 
of their local materials. Communities would invest in 
developing local knowledge and skills and share best 
practice across communities. Perhaps more importantly, 
buildings would create strong cultural connections and 
become a celebration of the resourcefulness, creativity 
and skills of their designers and makers.

“...buildings would 

create strong cultural 
connections and become  

a celebration of the 

resourcefulness, creativity 

and skills of their 

designers and makers.”

Jane Penty

‘Build From Natural Materials’

Dr Rupert Read, 
Reader in Philosophy 
at the University of 
East Anglia (UK), and 
Chair of the Green 
House think tank.

www.greenhousethinktank.org

Absolutely. It’s becoming increasingly clear that minor 
reforms in environmental policy and tweaks to regulations 
are doing little to avert the increasingly severe climate 
crisis that we are experiencing, for example. Instead, 
we need to be brave enough to imagine sweeping reforms 
to our legal system, political system, and fundamentally 
to our cultural valuation of nature. People sometimes 
call radical approaches naive, yet this is somewhat 
ironic given that the pragmatism that they champion as 
an alternative has completely failed to halt the progress 
of environmental collapse. 

In short: the only viable option now is to be utopian. 
Anything less merely guarantees a dystopian outcome.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

It is a mistake to envisage utopia/ecotopia as an end 
goal, instead it must be a continual process. The problem 
with envisaging any type of Utopia, is that one can end 
up developing an idealized version of a future that often 
becomes rigid and blind to practical concerns and new 
conflicting evidence. Instead of focusing too much on 
end-goals, I believe that time is often better spend on 
developing a new paradigm of holistic decision-making 
processes that can help us rebalance our relationship with 
the environment. For instance, much of my own recent work 
has been done on exploring the philosophy and policy role 
of the Precautionary Principle. This principle is a part 
of EU law, and states that we should be ultra conservative 
when confronted with new technologies or practices that 
pose an uncertain risk to the environment. It shifts the 

burden of proof away from proof of harm, and onto proof of 
safety. It is these sort of processes that we desperately 
need to adopt if we are to be resilient in the face of 
the twenty-first century’s threats.

I am a huge fan of THE DISPOSSESSED. I think that, as the 
question suggests, it succeeds brilliantly in replacing 
the widespread understanding of utopia as an end-state 
with a far more processual understanding of it. So, le 
Guin has overcome this problem, and so could filmic 
representations. It is slightly harder to see how an 
installation or static artwork could rise to this chal-
lenge. It will be interesting to see if/how the Ecotopia 
exhibition addresses the challenge! Perhaps by including 
text, like this…

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

As a culture we are incredibly - dangerously - present-
focussed. We discount benefits and costs not only across 
generations, but also even across our own lifetimes. Such 
an approach is profoundly dangerous, and ultimately, 
as the present environmental crisis is showing, it is 
also self-defeating and desperately dangerous. It is, in 
short, reckless. Profoundly unprecautious. To combat this 
cultural problem we need to be looking at serious reforms 
to both our legal and political structure. As I previ-
ously mentioned, some of my recent work has been on the 
Precautionary Principle. I believe that by incorporating 
a strong version of it into our law, we can prevent some 
types of future catastrophe from occurring. But we have 
to go beyond the Precautionary Principle, and look at 
reforming our political structures to account for future 
generations. I published a report in 2014 entitled ‘Guard-
ians of the Future’ that suggests what such a structure 
could look like. This is based on giving future genera-
tions representation within our democratic framework by 
having appointed individuals overseeing policy choices 
with a view to critically evaluating their impact upon 
future generations.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

In terms of convincing people to adopt these radical 
reforms, I think that we are in a reasonably good posi-
tion, historically-speaking, to do so. The promise of 
continuing economic growth increasing people’s wellbeing 
has been thoroughly debunked. Furthermore, we are already 
beginning to see the effects of catastrophic climate change 
globally, with recent floods in Britain as well as more 
devastating droughts in the global south. 

The challenge now is to communicate that many of the 
reforms we need to protect the environment, are exactly 
the reforms needed to improve people’s quality of life. 
Wealth redistribution will have to play a part in this. 
Furthermore, by linking environmental problems to tangible 
health risks, such as those posed from air pollution, we 
will be better able to communicate an ecological version 
of the future. The think tank that I chair, Green House, 
has been working on post-growth research and outreach 
in Britain. Our assembled writings on this can be found 
online here.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

Localised to the lowest level possible. One of the big 
failures with traditional socialism is that it places 
too much emphasis on centralization. Radical ecology must 
instead recognize that a resilient society is one that 
localizes production and democracy as far as is possible. 
My recent co-authored article in the Ecologist on the 
problems of the European Union explores this issue further. 
I bet that many of those participating in this exhibi-
tion feel very negative about the Brexit vote. While I 
didn’t welcome the vote, I think that such negativity is 
a mistake. The Brexit vote is an opportunity, as well as 
a crisis - an opportunity to create a more local future. 
In rejecting the gigantism of the EU, British citizens 
may have given us a great unexpected opportunity.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

Localised to the lowest level possible. One of the big 
failures with traditional socialism is that it places too 
much emphasis on centralization. Radical ecology must instead 
recognize that a resilient society is one that localizes 
production and democracy as far as is possible. My recent 
co-authored article in the Ecologist on the problems of the 
European Union explores this issue further. 
I bet that many of those participating in this exhibition 
feel very negative about the Brexit vote. While I didn’t 
welcome the vote, I think that such negativity is a mistake. 
The Brexit vote is an opportunity, as well as a crisis - an 
opportunity to create a more local future. In rejecting the 
gigantism of the EU, British citizens may have given us a 
great unexpected opportunity.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

In regards to transport, our current policies are a mess. We 
have a privatized rail system that makes rail travel often 
more expensive as car or plane. This is unacceptable, as 
instead of financially incentivizing people to travel in a 
more ecological way, we are instead incentivizing them to 
use more carbon intensive methods. Having a strong railway 
system, run for the public good and not private profit 
would be a good start at reforming our transport policy.

However, ultimately, we need to go further than that 
and also look at reducing the need for travel across 
the country. This means more devolution of industry and 
resources to the North of England, instead of having the 
economy ‘anchored’ in London.

Basically, the future is more local. There should be LESS 
transport, LESS mobility. More resilience. The kind of 
infrastructure required by nuclear power is a classic 
example of an ‘unconvivial’, necessarily centralised and 
authoritarian technology.

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Solar and wind are of course much better than fossil fuel or 
nuclear alternatives. However, greening our energy supply 
can only be part of the answer. The other side - AND THIS 

IS ACTUALLY MUCH MORE IMPORTANT - has to be reduction in 
consumption. Plus less waste / higher efficiency.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

We are so far away from a sustainable world that a com-
plete vision of what it would look like is impossible and 
unproductive. I would say however, that in order to reach 
sustainability this means confronting and rejecting the 
growth-paradigm. A sustainable society will necessarily 
be one that no longer seeks to grow the economy, but 
instead looks towards enriching people’s lives through 
growing our culture and communities.

This will necessitate reining in the corporations that 
at present dominate our economies and indeed our minds.
We can get a hint of what this future ecotopia might look 
like, by looking back at best of the past. Helena Norberg-
Hodge’s book ANCIENT FUTURES offers a brilliant sketch.

How would a sustainable future actually look? 

A localized steady-state economy. A society that is 
determined to live for the long term, and to be conscious.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

I’m not an architect! But I can tell you one thing: Ecotopia 
would/will make much more use of natural materials: I mean, 
straw, wood, stone etc. . If what we would leave behind would 
be wood etc., then this would have the great advantage that 
we wouldn’t be leaving anything behind that our descendants 
couldn’t recycle. (Whereas, plenty of plastic, never mind 
radioactive materials, can’t be recycled…)

Stephanie  
Ristig-Bressers,  
New Economy expert, 
Economy for the 
Common Good (Germany).

www.ecogood.org

The way I see it utopians are somehow very risky people. 
They dare to dream and they dare to act in order to fulfill 
their dreams. In addition they have to be resilient, 
persistent, brave, self-loving and full of love for the 
whole world. Utopians love and believe in their dreams, 
and will give a lot to make them come true. If we had no 
dreams, the world would not change, it would be boring 
and – indeed – business as usual. To be a utopian is 
to be a hero in an unwritten adventure fighting against 
dragons nobody has described before. Stories of former 
heroes can help a little bit, but in the end (or in the 
process?) the hero is alone and has to fight against his 
or her individual dragons.

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Although fairy tales often end with the sentence: “And 
they lived happily ever after.” and although our stories 
seem to have a good end, (unless the “end” is not good it 
is not the end) it is in my opinion indeed true: Utopia 
and ecotopia are a continuous process not an end state. 
For me a wave or a “spiral dynamic” in four dimensions 
could symbolize and visualize somehow this “utopian 
process state”. By thinking over this “process state” 
of utopia it also could be made visible by an image that 
seems to “pulse” – sometimes you can evoke this effect 
by an optical illusion.

From wider social point of view, it doesn’t matter too much 
if Utopia is regarded as an ‘end-state’ or a ‘process’, 
for it’s been represented as both/either quite success-
fully in ages past (by painters and photographers and by 

movie-makers and novelists). As long as Utopian Visions 
prompt an imagination that propels people to believe that 
there is a better way to organize the socio-political 
world—then it serves society well. 

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 
brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

There once was a time when we were indigenous people 
and lived in balance with nature and its resources. In 
former days it was essential for your survival that you 
respected this balance. Following the industrial revolu-
tion, we forgot to respect the importance of this balance. 
But some disciplines remind us of this attitude – for 
instance permaculture and deep ecology. If we integrate 
those principles back into our daily lives – everybody’s 
lives, not only politicians but also everybody- then we 
will be able to really care about future generations.

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

I am very convinced we should not persuade people! The 
strategy is to make them see, to make them experience 
that the world is getting richer by focusing on individual 
growth and awakening one´s potentials, not by economic 
growth. To open the people to their inner richness and 
the “biodiversity” of life itself is the key to making 
an ecotopian society possible. If one discovers this, a 
consumer lifestyle is not necessary any more because you 
experience the values of life and your own dignity. To 
develop a “Transition lifestyle” is the greatest adven-
ture you can have. So an ecotopian activist is somehow a 
hero that has to set off on the adventure a few moments 
before and makes people so curious that they start their 
own journey.

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

The state should have the role as a “frame worker”. It 
provides the heroes with the artefacts and the travel 
provisions they need in order to increase the likelihood 
that the adventure is successful. Besides, the state 
should allow as much freedom as possible. People should be 
empowered and find constructive and cooperative solutions. 
The Economy for the Common Good suggests establishing 
economic convents where people decide about the frame 
structures of their communities. 

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

On one hand it should have a focus on the local level. 
People empower themselves by developing neighbour-
hood communities, ecotopian villages. In addition, by  
focusing on the local level you can save resources and 
strengthen relationships.

On the other hand we should be aware of our global con-
nection, our connection to everyone, with our planet Earth 
and our whole universe, our “multiverse oneness”. Things 
like deep ecology, meditation practice and of course, the 
internet can help us to become aware of our unity.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

The infrastructure would be more personal, more human, 
not anonymous and not only functional anymore. Transport 
systems are more local and designed so that you can use 
fuels from renewable, raw materials or if possible no 
fuels at all (e.g. bicycle or delivery bicycle). 

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

Our energy system should be designed as a “caring energy 
system” in order to enable a balance, In this sense, we 
should only consume the amount of energy that our planet 
is able to regenerate and as such we will have enough 
resources for all of the following generations. We should 
not produce energy by coal or carbon but by sun, water 
and wind.

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Sustainability in practice is a harmonic balanced lifestyle 
– you are in harmony with yourself and your environment. 
Such a lifestyle would be very different from our fast 
paced lives today. Our world would become much calmer 
and slower. By this it also would become more human, 
more dignified, more focused on what a good, simple and 
fulfilled life really makes up. Sustainability in prac-
tice also makes it easier to find out what your purpose? 
Today´s loudness distracts you so your inner voice often 
becomes too quiet to be heard.

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

The buildings of ecotopia are beautiful and naturally 
colourful. They remind me of the architectonic work 
of Hundertwasser and of the architectural work of the 
anthroposophers? We would use more organic material and 
leave behind everything that is artificially engineered.

Dr. Fátima Vieira,  
University of Porto, Coord-
inator of the research project 
ALIMENTOPIA / Utopian Foodways; 
Coordinator of the outreach 
project PAN-Utopia 2100: 
Fighting Food Waste; Director  
of the electronic periodicals 
E-topia and Spaces of Utopia; 
Book Review Editor of Utopian 
Studies (published by Penn 
State); Director of the book 
series Biblioteca das Utopias 
(published by Afrontamento); 
former Chair of the Utopian 
Studies Society / Europe  
(Jul. 2006 – Jul. 2016).

www.utopiar500.net

We utopians are dreamers, but not at all idle or divorced 
from reality. Utopian thinking is always motivated by an 
awareness of real problems and by the ambition to solve 
them by trying new forms of organization. It is born 
out of a constant questioning of the real historical 
locus, out of a reflexive and critical examination of the 
present; in spite of its prospective dimension, it is to 
be applied to this moment where we imagine alternative 
futures for humanity.

Utopian thinking has changed over the centuries. In the 
Renaissance, utopian thinkers believed in the power of 
law to impose social order: although Humanism entailed 
a belief in human agency, it was marked by the Christian 
distrust in the possibility of human redemption from the 
Fall. 

In the Enlightenment, the utopian strategy implied an 
investment in education: progress was regarded as an 
attribute of the human beings and would be reflected in 
their ability to change social and political institutions. 

In the 19th century, Marxist utopians regarded the future 
as a promise of history and believed that only the Revolu-
tion would bring about social and political order. 

Although the 20th century was marked by dystopian thought, 
glimpses of hope were offered by utopians of the late 
1960s and the 70s (amongst which Ernest Callenbach). The 
utopian formula that was then suggested is still relevant 
to our days: since modernity has made the individual the 
centre of everything, the answer to the problems of our 
times lies in a possible change of the human being. Educa-
tion is thus the motto of contemporary utopian thinking. 

Contemporary utopian thinking, informed by an anthropo-
logical optimism, is inherently creative and experimental: 
it is in fact “pragmatic.” What the detractors of utopian 

thinking call a dream, I would call vision and ambition; 
what they call unreasonable optimism, I would call courage 
to take risks. And the result: effective social change

Is utopia/ecotopia an end-state? Or is it a process? 
(Suggesting that it can only ever be the latter is 
the great achievement of Ursula le Guin in her ‘The 
dispossessed’). How do we represent ecotopia as a 
process? It is far easier to draw images of an end-
state, an imagined achievement, than of a process: 
how do we overcome this problem?

Utopia/ecotopia is a process. The Argentinian film director 
Fernando Birri offered one of the best representations of 
this idea: utopia is on the horizon; we know that we will 
never reach it; that if we walk ten steps, it will walk 
ten steps away from us; that if we walk ten steps more, it 
will walk away ten steps further. Utopia is nevertheless 
essential to our lives, as it forces us to walk.

Utopia is the vision of alternative futures we need to 
decide the direction towards which we want to walk, but 
it is a vision that results from the transformative 
dialectic movement that our imagination establishes with 
reality. Being confronted with a thesis (the real world, 
the initial proposition), we formulate an antithesis (an 
alternative vision reacting to the proposition), thus 
reaching a synthesis reconciling the truths of both the 
thesis and the antithesis. But then this synthesis reaches 
the status of a new thesis, which is to be contradicted by 
a new antithesis, in the framework of an endless process. 
The “truths” that are offered by utopian thinking are thus 
always transitory and dynamic. We stop every ten steps to 
consider new factors and new options; and we go on with 
the awareness of the existence of several alternatives, 
several possible futures we may want to explore.

There is another factor that ensures the permanence and 
dynamics of utopia: utopian visions are often inflated by 
a “surplus of desire” (to use Ernst Bloch’s words) which 
engenders a notion of incompleteness which asserts itself 
as a vital propeller for the development of societies.

If ecotopia is ever to be achieved, it will require 
us to think far more long-term than we presently do. 
It will require us to care about future generations 
as we currently care about ourselves. How can this be 

brought about? What new political institutions will 
be required? What new attitudes will be required?

Ecotopia is a process that will only be achieved through 
utopian thinking. 

Utopian thinking comprises four modes of thinking that 
make it unique in its capacity to provide the individuals 
with a mindset that promotes social change. 

1. 
 Prospective thinking is the exploratory device of 

long-term thinking alternatives. First of all, it forces 
you to define a clear vision of the direction towards 
which you want to walk (“what do I want my society to 
be?”). It is similar, in this process, to what Michel Godet 
described, in the mid-20th century, as la prospective, a 
state of mind which entails imagination and anticipation 
that inspire hope and lead to will, and which looks at 
the future as the object of desire. Utopian thought, too, 
moves from the future to the present, as it reflects on the 
present in the light of what it may become in the future. 
Utopian thought differs from la prospective, though, in 
that it relies on a hypothesis approach, formulating the 
exploratory question “what if”? This exploratory question 
leads you to think about the future not as something that 
is bound to happen, but as a network of possibilities, 
and to reflect on the strategies, i.e. the paths that 
will have to be followed to reach them. 

2. 
Critical thinking is crucial for the decision-making 

process of the paths to take for six reasons. First, it 
ensures the accuracy, credibility, impartiality, relevance 
and substantiality of the data that will be used to vali-
date your choice after being submitted to a process of 
interpretation, analysis, evaluation, inference, explana-
tion and self-regulation. Second, it provides you with a 
sense of consequence and the capacity to revise views when 
necessary and thus redefines the horizons you are aiming 
at. Third, it makes you include, in the definition of your 
interests, the interests of other people (and reformulate 
the utopian prospective question phrasing it as “What 
do we want for our society?”. Fourth, it provides you 
with strategies to resist the influence of preconceived 
ideas. Fifth, it forces you to look for new ideas, for 
new solutions. Finally, it offers not only tools for the 
evaluation of possible paths, but also for the analysis 
of the expected results. 

3. 
Holistic thinking provides you with an awareness 

that societies work as systems, and that each aspect – 
economic, social, political, religious, ecological – is 
interconnected with the other; it is truly ecological 
in its understanding of the world: in the same way that 
ecology studies the relationships between organisms and 
the environment, holistic utopian thinking takes into 
consideration all the aspects, and it highlights the 
global dimension of problems even if they seem to have 
local origins. Holistic thinking enables true understand-
ing of societal problems as it regards ideas and thoughts 
as complex, relating simultaneously to each other by 
relationships of complementarity and antagonism. It is 
essential to Utopian thinking, as it incorporates the 
principles of multidimensional analysis and promotes at-
tentiveness to the possible consequences of the paths you 
may opt to take. It also provides you with the conviction 
that utopian paths are to be created collaboratively, 
as they demand multidisciplinary and multi-professional 
approaches. Holistic thinking is the means that we have 
at our disposal to try to understand and deal with the 
complex realities of the current ecological crisis. 

4. 
Creative thinking results from the exploratory 

question “What if…?”. By forcing you to envision new 
possibilities, creative thinking broadens your horizons 
and trains you to imagine things that are not familiar to 
your eyes, thus fostering the creation of new knowledge, 
i.e., new forms of organization. This new knowledge is 
not to be radically new, though, but to be born out of 
the combination of what already exists in new ways and 
new scales. 

Provided it is broadly promoted, utopian thinking will 
equip the individuals with a mindset that will enable 
them to formulate desirable futures, reflect on possible 
strategies to reach them, understand their context and 
evaluate the side and long-term effects of the new pos-
sibilities they may envision. This process will require 
a substantial investment in education, namely through the 
Arts and the Humanities, as integral ecological visions 
demand a new world vision informed by the progress of 
human values. We do not need to create new political 
institutions now, but rather to invest in education 
reform. The new political institutions will eventually 
be imagined and created afterwards as a result of the 
utopian thinking process; they will be committed to the 

promotion of common good and the construction of inclu-
sive societies. 

A society that can last long-term needs to be largely 
post-carbon and (almost certainly) post-‘growth’. How 
will we persuade enough people to undergo the enormous 
transition that this involves? (How) Can an ecotopian 
vision act as such a successful means of persuasion?

William Morris, the author of the celebrated utopian 
novel News from Nowhere, stood for the idea that the 
function of utopia is to educate for desire. Once people 
are equipped with a utopian mindset, the ecotopian 
visions will be naturally adopted as horizons towards 
which we all have to walk. The offer of these horizons 
of hope is indispensable, and it is, in my view, the 
most efficient way of resisting the dominant pessimistic 
representations of the Anthropocene. It is important to 
make people aware that, among other things, we are ex-
hausting the planet’s resources with our consumerism and 
that the concept of economic growth does not necessarily 
equate with sustainability, but that there is still a 
chance provided we accept that we are not independent 
of each other and from our environment, that we abandon 
our consumeristic-capitalistic mentality, change our 
consumption patterns, fight waste, and collaboratively 
create a trans-generational strategy, a strong vision to 
share, capable of engaging other people in the process.

Outside school, there are many strategies that may be 
followed to promote utopian thinking as a particular mode 
of looking at reality and interacting with it. Literature 
and the Arts (namely installations) may be instrumental 
in this process, as they may present horizons of hope and 
offer the readers / the viewers tools that will enable 
them to participate in the dialectical exploration of 
future possibilities. An investment in the creation of the 
so-called serious games may also prove to be important, 
especially if the games are interactive and incite the 
players to real action or to think of new possibilities 
of ensuring the balance between the human beings and the 
environment. The creation of virtual communities on the 
Internet may also be an engaging way of testing new ideas 
and possibilities. What is important, in the process, is 
that the individuals are not offered ready-made solutions 
but are instead engaged in the process of searching for 
new possibilities, i.e., transitory truths.

It should be noted, though, that the investment in the 
education for utopian thinking should not be an end it 
itself; the four modes of thinking that it entails are 
not doubt essential for the process of engaging the in-
dividuals in the dialectical movement that will highlight 
new possibilities to be born out of the real, but it 
should always be aided by the presentation of concrete 
examples of horizons. Ecotopia should be promoted as the 
horizon we all are to be aiming at, on pain of being 
lost amongst other ideals that may eventually emerge. 

What should be the role of the state (government) in 
setting the conditions for the transition to a more 
sustainable future?

As I said above, the answer to the problems of our times 
lies in a possible change of the human being. The state 
will thus have to invest in the creation of a curriculum 
that enables training in prospective, critical, holistic 
and creative utopian thinking and offers practical strate-
gies for overcoming the current crisis. These may include, 
for instance, in the framework of practical strategies to 
combat global warming, simple actions that may be taken 
by all the individuals, ranging from growing a tree to 
saving water or printing documents only when needed.

Although I trust that the big, significant change will 
result from a bottom-up movement and that the meaningful 
answers will emerge at a local level, it is mandatory 
that meanwhile advocators of an ecologically sound future 
put pressure on the governments to demand global action, 
namely national and international regulation on behalf 
of the environment. 

There are many things governments adopting an Earth-friend-
ly agenda may do, always having in mind the solidarity 
between the environmental, the social and the economic 
aspects: to promote zero-tolerance pollution control and 
implement strategies to fight waste; to create special 
funding programmes for research aiming at the development 
of renewable energy systems; to promote collaborative and 
trans-generational forms of consumption, just to give a 
few examples. 

This may initially be achieved through the establishment 
of incentives (of a fiscal nature, for instance) offered 
to companies and individuals and/or the establishment of 

fines and other penalties for transgressive attitudes, but 
the mere satisfaction of contributing to the sustainable 
development of the community will eventually be enough 
in the medium term, when utopian thinking becomes the 
predominant mindset.

What levels of organisation should societies have? 
Local or centralised?

I suggest we replace the concept of level, which entails 
the notion of a hierarchy, by the idea of networks, on 
which my utopian vision relies.

In the future, a participatory post-national democracy (or 
something beyond that) will prevail. Nations may subsist, 
but they will mainly work as a cultural memory archive, 
an anchor for the definition of individual and collective 
identities. Every village or city will network with vil-
lages and towns with similar profiles and concerns, many 
of them from other countries. The quest for solutions  
to common problems will engage the population of these 
villages and cities in a transnational discussion that will 
hopefully result in the production of relevant knowledge 
for the construction of a sustainable common future. 
This global approach will not prevent the existence of 
a local approach to deal with specific problems. Members 
of the communities, committed to working for the common 
good and politically empowered by an integral ecological 
education, will be attentive participants in the daily 
construction of the community.

The transition to this new form of organization will be 
gradual and natural, largely due to the efficiency of 
networks sprouting on the Internet.

There will be a variety of experimentation regarding ways 
of ensuring that every individual makes meaningful contri-
butions to the process of decision making, namely in the 
framework of the gradual implementation of an e-democracy, 
which in the future will acquire unexpected forms. The 
investment in the education of the citizens, made decades 
before, will enhance the social and political capacities 
of the human beings and will enable them to see things 
that our untrained eyes are not capable of discerning now.

To make sure that all the villages and cities will be 
walking towards the same horizon of hope, a Charter of 

Rights granting the rights to education, to gender equal-
ity, or the rights of the animals and of nature, among 
other things, will be agreed upon globally.

How do we build a more sustainable society? What sort 
of infrastructures and transport systems should we have?

The construction of a more sustainable society starts 
with the critical analysis of ecotopian visions for self-
contained communities, although the discussion may be held 
through the establishment of networks with communities 
with a similar profile, thus benefiting from experiences 
that have already succeeded elsewhere. The negotiation 
process of those visions entails the participation of 
citizens equipped with a utopian mindset, ready for 
creative, collaborative thinking. The infrastructures 
that will be needed for the development of the utopian 
visions have to be ensured by the committee administer-
ing the village or city: if the bicycle, for example, 
is to be the principal transport within the boundaries 
of the community, a transit system must be secured, and 
bicycles need to be placed in different areas so that 
people may use them in an efficient way; pedestrian zones 
have to be created, as well as local, regional, national 
and transnational systems granting easy access to buses 
and trains, and resorting to shared cars when needed. As 
ecotopian visions are to benefit from the development of 
science and technology provided they are at the service of 
the human being, they may include other forms of transport 
that cannot be predicted now. 

Other infrastructures need to be created as well to enable 
intensive recycling, waste reduction strategies, and 
sustainable agriculture, among other things. 

What sources of clean renewable energy do you envisage?

The answer that we have to offer so far is solar, wind, 
geothermal, hydroelectric and biomass energy (systematic 
use of wood as a renewable source of energy may also be 
envisaged), but an investment in research and the adop-
tion of creative utopian thinking will eventually bring 
about new forms of energy production that go beyond the 
green and blue ones. 

What does sustainability look like in practice? How 
would Ecotopia actually work? What would be different 
from the world we live in today?

Utopian visions with ecological concerns are tested in 
ecotopias, a subgenre of utopian literature that has been 
widely explored from the 1970s onwards, although an aware-
ness of the environmental implications of the Industrial 
Revolution had already been looked into by William Morris 
in News from Nowhere in 1890. 

Ernest Callenbach tested the validity of de-centralised and 
anti-authoritarian ideas within the framework of a nation 
with an intentionally weak government and flexible local 
organization, where sophisticated technology is combined 
with concerns for sustainability, namely strategies for 
avoiding waste and for promoting clean energy efficiency, 
and where the concept of economic growth is questioned. 
Also in the 70s, Marge Piercy combined ecological with 
feminist concerns, offering a model for eco-feminist 
critical visions.

Utopian literature is an efficient way of testing the 
implications of possible strategies to promote ecologically 
sustainable futures since the holistic mode of thinking 
entails the awareness that societies work as systems, 
and that if we change one aspect, all the other aspects 
will be affected. 

An investment in science-fiction writing based on eco-
logical strategies that have recently gained ground, and 
resulting from the collaborative work of writers and 
scientists, for instance, may provide us with a vision 
of how Ecotopia would actually work and how different the 
world would be from the one we live in today. 

What kind of buildings would ecotopia have? What 
materials would be used for their construction?  
What would we leave behind?

Utopian visions, because they are informed by an aware-
ness that societies work as systems, are consistent with 
the central idea or principle they are testing. Ecotopian 
visions test strategies for overcoming the longstanding 
separation of humans from nature in the Anthropocene, 
and propose a global ecological conversion that embraces 
house building as well. 

Ecotopian visions propose a variety of possibilities to 
reduce the environmental impact of buildings by bring-
ing together techniques, materials and technologies that 
enhance their environmental performance, guaranteeing the 
efficient use of energy (integrating, e.g., bio-climate 
principles), water and other resources, and reducing 
waste and pollution. What it implies leaving behind is 
architectural design and polluting synthetic products 
that harm nature; instead, ecotopian visions propose 
the adaptation of the architecture to the landscape and 
the use of natural materials, namely the replacement of 
concrete foundations by wood foundations, and the use of 
terracotta bricks and cellular concrete for the erection 
of the buildings.

Although ecotopias frequently offer visions of small, 
cooperative communities repopulating forgotten rural areas, 
we must face what futurists describe as an inevitability: 
the fact that in a not so far future the majority of the 
world population will be living in the cities.

Ecotopian big cities are thus to be envisaged as a working 
hypothesis for our future; buildings will have to incorpo-
rate the principles outlined above, and will additionally 
have to bring the rural element to the urban life. The 
vision of enormous garden-buildings, strange though it 
may seem to ecotopians, may well be the reality we will 
have to deal with in the future. Let’s just hope that 
its inhabitants will be equipped with a utopian mindset 
that makes the cities of the future a generous place, in 
social, economic and environmental terms, for the coming 
generations.

“Contemporary utopian

 thinking,informed by an
anthropological optimism,

 is inherently creative

 and experimental: it  

is in fact ‘pragmatic’. 

Whatthe detractors of 

utopian thinking call a 

dream, I would call 

vision and ambition; what 

they call unreasonable 
optimism, I would call 
courage to take risks. 

And the result: effective 

social change.”

Fatima Vieira

‘The Importance Of Utopian Thinking’

Paul Allen, of the Centre for 
Alternative Technology (UK), and 
ZeroCarbonBritain project coordinator. 
www.cat.org.uk

Monika Alleweldt, researcher at the 
Institute for Global Peace Work at the 
Tamera Peace Research Center (Portugal). 
www.tamera.org

Dr Mara-Daria Cojocaru, philosopher, 
poet and postdoctoral researcher 
in philosophical pragmatism at the 
Universities of Sheffield (UK) and  
Munich (Germany). 
maradariacojocaru.weebly.com

Professor Douglas Crawford-Brown, 
Director of the Centre for Climate 
Change Mitigation Research at the 
University of Cambridge (UK) and 
Professor Emeritus of Environmental 
Science & Policy at the University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill (USA). 
www.4cmr.group.cam.ac.uk/directory/djc

Lonny Grafman, Lecturer in Environmental 
Services Engineering at Humboldt State 
University, California (USA) and 
President of Appropedia. 
www.appropedia.org

Habitable Spaces, a sustainable farm and 
artists’ residency in Texas (USA). 
www.habitablespaces.org

Dr John Harlow, Postdoctoral Scholar in 
Sustainability at the Center for Policy 
Informatics at Arizona State University 
(USA). 
www.policyinformatics.asu.edu/content/
john-harlow

Dr Jason Hickel, Lecturer in 
Anthropology at the London School of 
Economics (UK). 
www.lse.ac.uk/anthropology/people/
hickel.Aspx

Professor Giorgos Kallis, environmental 
scientist working on ecological 
economics at ICREA, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, (Spain). 
www.icrea.cat/Web/ScientificStaff/
Georgios-Kallis--481

Professor Ted Kesik, Professor of 
Building Science at the University of 
Toronto (Canada). 

www.daniels.utoronto.ca/people/
kesikted%20 

Isak Stoddard, Program director at the 
Centre For Environmental and Development 
Studies, Uppsala University (Sweden). 
katalog.uu.se/empinfo/?id=N5-1293

Dr Jacquetta Lee, Director of the 
PhD programmes in Sustainability 
and Environmental Systems Analysis 
and Senior Lecturer in Mechanical 
Engineering and Materials at the 
University of Surrey (UK). 
www.surrey.ac.uk/ces/people/jacquetta_
lee/

Karin Malmgren, Founder-Director of 
Ecotopia Osterlen, social entrepreneurs 
with a focus on ecological community 
development (Sweden). 
www.ecotopia.se

Dr. Alan Marshall, Environmental Social 
Science Program Department of Social 
Sciences Faculty of Social Sciences 
and Humanities Mahidol University 
(Thailand). 
www.ecotopia2121.com

Dr Alice Moncaster, Lecturer in 
Interdisciplinary Design for the 
Built Environment, and the Centre for 
Sustainable Development, both part of 
the Department of Engineering at the 
University of Cambridge, and Fellow of 
Newnham College (UK) 
www.eng.cam.ac.uk/profiles/amm24

Professor Mugendi K. M’Rithaa, President 
of the World Design Organization 
(formerly Icsid) and Professor of 
Industrial Design at the Cape Peninsula 
University of Technology (South Africa). 
www.designindaba.com/profiles/mugendi- 
k-mrithaa

Tim Parsons & Jessica Charlesworth, 
Lecturers at the Department of 
Architecture, Interior Architecture 
and Designed Objects at the School of 
the Art Institute of Chicago and co-
founders of the Parsons & Charlesworth 
speculative design studio (objects, 
exhibits, texts & images), Chicago 
(USA). 
www.parsonscharlesworth.com

Jane Penty, Lecturer in Product, Ceramic 
and Industrial Design and Sustainability 
Co-ordinator at Central Saint Martins, 
University of the Arts London (UK). 
www.arts.ac.uk/csm/people/teaching-
staff/product-ceramic-and-industrial/ 
jane-penty/

Dr Rupert Read, Reader in Philosophy at 
the University of East Anglia (UK), and 
Chair of the Green House think tank. 
www.greenhousethinktank.org

Stephanie Ristig-Bressers, New Economy 
expert, Economy for the Common Good 
(Germany). 
www.ecogood.org

Dr. Fátima Vieira, Coordinator of the 
research project ALIMENTOPIA / Utopian 
Foodways; Coordinator of the outreach 
project PAN-Utopia 2100: Fighting Food 
Waste; Director of the electronic 
periodicals E-topia and Spaces of 
Utopia; Book Review Editor of Utopian 
Studies (published by Penn State); 
Director of the book series Biblioteca 
das Utopias (published by Afrontamento); 
former Chair of the Utopian Studies 
Society / Europe (Jul. 2006 – Jul. 
2016). Associate Professor at the 
University of Porto. (Portugal). 
www.utopia500.net

References:

Dresner, S. (2002). The Principles of Sustainability. London: Earthscan.

Fallam, K. (2013). De-tooling Design History: To What Purpose and for 
Whom Do We Write? Design and culture, volume 5, issue 1, pp. 13-20.

Fry, T. (2011). Design as Politics. New York: Berg.

Gorz, A. (1994). Capitalism, Socialism, Ecology. London: Verso.

Guattari, F. (2000). The Three Ecologies. Translated by I. Pindar and P. 
Sutton. London: Athlone.

Jackson, T. (2009). Prosperity without growth: economics for a finite 
planet. London: Earthscan.

Masse, A. & Miclethwaite, P. (2009) Unsustainability: towards a new 
design history, Design Philosophy Papers.

Odum, H. (1971). Environment, Power & Society. New York: Wiley 
Interscience.

Thorpe, A. (2012). Architecture and Design versus Consumerism. How 
design activism confronts growth. London: Earthscan.

Whiteley, N. (1994). Design for Society. London: Reaktion Books.

Dresner, S. (2002). The Principles of Sustainability. London: Earthscan.

Fallam, K. (2013). De-tooling Design History: To What Purpose and for 
Whom Do We Write? Design and culture, volume 5, issue 1, pp. 13-20.

Fry, T. (2011). Design as Politics. New York: Berg.

Gorz, A. (1994). Capitalism, Socialism, Ecology. London: Verso.

Guattari, F. (2000). The Three Ecologies. Translated by I. Pindar and P. 
Sutton. London: Athlone.

Jackson, T. (2009). Prosperity without growth: economics for a finite 
planet. London: Earthscan.

Masse, A. & Miclethwaite, P. (2009) Unsustainability: towards a new 
design history, Design Philosophy Papers.

Odum, H. (1971). Environment, Power & Society. New York: Wiley 
Interscience.

Thorpe, A. (2012). Architecture and Design versus Consumerism. How 
design activism confronts growth. London: Earthscan.

Whiteley, N. (1994). Design for Society. London: Reaktion Books.

