PENGUIN 

 CLASSICS

EXCELLENT WOMEN

BARBARA MARY CRAMPTON PYM (1913–1980) was a British novelist best known for her series of
satirical novels on English middle-class society. A graduate of St. Hilda’s College, Oxford, Pym
published the first of her nine novels, Some Tame Gazelle, in 1950, followed by five more books.
Despite this early success and continuing popularity, Pym went unpublished from 1963 to 1977. Her
work was rediscovered after a famous article in the Times Literary Supplement in which two
prominent names, Lord David Cecil and Philip Larkin, nominated Pym as the most underrated writer
of the century. Her comeback novel, Quartet in Autumn, was nominated for the Booker Prize.

A. N. WILSON was born in 1950 and educated at Rugby School and New College, Oxford. A fellow of
the Royal Society of Literature, he has held a prominent position in the world of literature and
journalism, winning prizes for much of his work. His most recent work of nonfiction is After the
Victorians and, of fiction, A Jealous Ghost. He lives in London.

PENGUIN BOOKS

Published by the Penguin Group

Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.

Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a

division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)

Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division

of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)

Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India
Penguin Group (NZ), cnr Airborne and Rosedale Roads, Albany, Auckland 1310, New Zealand (a

division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)

Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South

Africa

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

First published in Great Britain by Jonathan Cape Ltd 1952

First published in the United States of America by E. P. Dutton 1978

This edition with an introduction by A.N. Wilson published in Penguin Books 2006

Copyright Barbara Pym, 1952

Introduction copyright © A. N. Wilson, 2005

All rights reserved

Mr. Wilson’s introduction was published in The Folio Society’s edition of Excellent Women.

Reprinted by arrangement with The Folio Society Limited, London.

Publisher’s Note

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the

author’s imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead,

business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

eBook ISBN 9781101666258

CIP data available

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by
way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a

similar condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without

the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized

electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials.

Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.

Version_1

To My Sister

Contents

Introduction by A. N. WILSON

EXCELLENT WOMEN

Introduction

The conventional romantic novel ends with marriage. ‘Reader, I married
him . . .’ ‘She gloried in being a sailor’s wife . . .’ ‘ . . . Agnes laid her head
upon my breast, and wept; and I wept with her, though we were so happy.’
Is this not how the form of the novel demanded that the story should end,
even when, as in the case of the first two books quoted (Jane Eyre by
Charlotte Brontë and Persuasion by Jane Austen), the heroine was either
too plain or too old for the conventions of romantic fiction to consider her
marriageable? That, indeed, remains the beguiling narcotic of fantasy which
is one key ingredient to Jane Eyre’s and Persuasion’s success.

Comedy is by some definitions, indeed, a story with a ‘happy’ ending,

and one in which the girl and the boy get together. Barbara Pym is certainly
a comic writer. This book is one of her richest and most amusing. But she
very deftly turns comic tradition on its head.

Excellent Women, published in 1952, is a quiet story, but one which

places itself, by constant literary reference, very much within the
conventions of English romantic and comic fiction. The comic characters in
Barbara Pym’s world—the clumsy curate Father Greatorex, the stout jolly
parish worker Sister Blatt, the too-elegant clergy widow Mrs Gray (a latter-
day Chaucer’s Prioress), and the gang of middle-aged women who attend
the local vicar Father Malory’s church in Pimlico are superbly delineated
figures, all subtly hilarious, but, unlike so many figures in consciously
comic fiction, entirely credible as living human beings.

Read at this distance, we also feel that this is a comedy with an edge. It

is a book written in the decade which saw Iris Murdoch’s rise to fame, as a
chronicler of promiscuous and tormented love, between the married, the
unmarried, the straight and the gay; the decade which saw Kingsley Amis’s
Lucky Jim and John Braine’s Joe Lampton (Room at the Top) make their
predatory and beery advances on young women. Mildred Lathbury, the

heroine of Excellent Women, belongs to a more conservative vision, the
vanishing breed of frosty gentlewomen, yet her story does not end
conventionally.

In the last few pages of the book she is asked to dinner by a stuffy

young anthropologist named Everard Bone. It is seven years after the
ending of the Second World War, during which so many bedsits and hotel
rooms in London witnessed incongruous amours. But this couple do not
spend the last pages of the book in one another’s arms. Everard does not ask
Mildred to remove her clothes; rather, he asks her to help him read the
proofs of the anthropological book on which he is working. Hitherto,
Mildred’s emotional excitements have been limited to watching Father
Malory form an unsuitable attachment to the beautiful Mrs Gray and then
break off his engagement; and to observing the near break-up of the
glamorous couple Rockingham and Helena Napier in the flat beneath hers
in Pimlico, followed by their reconciliation. She concludes her narrative by
thinking that what with her duties, ‘protecting’ Father Malory from the
emotional advances of any other women, ‘and the work I was going to do
for Everard, it seemed as if I might be going to have what Helena called “a
full life” after all’.

There is comedy in this, for sure, but wintry comedy.

Life is first boredom, then fear.
Whether or not we use it, it goes,
And leaves what something hidden from us chose,
And age, and then the only end of age.

These lines from the poem ‘Dockery and Son’ were written eleven years
after Excellent Women by one of the novel’s most ardent fans, Philip Larkin.
It is not surprising that the two writers became friends—first very distant
penpals, then occasionally meeting for lunches or teas. They had a shared
vision. Although she was a church-goer, and indeed a pious one, and he an
atheist, they were both rather doggedly unmarried, both with their eyes
fixed firmly on the inevitability of ‘age, and then the only end of age’.
Pym’s first novel, Some Tame Gazelle, is a fantasy based on herself and her
sister. The idea for it came in her twenties, but it projects herself forward
into old age when her life is bounded by reading, church, domestic routine,
and food. There is a nihilistic sense in both Pym and Larkin that life cannot
hold out very exciting possibilities. Most human beings have limited
freedom about their choice of careers. They consider themselves lucky to

find paid employment and then become ‘stuck’ in boring jobs. They have to
choose between the loneliness of being on their own or the ultimate
unsatisfactoriness of subsuming the ego to life with another.

These choices all seem painfully clear, both in Larkin’s poetry and in

Pym. Children, if they cross the pages at all—which in Excellent Women
they do not—are confined to the margins of life. (The first outing I ever had
with Larkin, he pointed to a notice on a pub door and said they were the
three words he found most cheering: NO CHILDREN ALLOWED). Yet with no
children, however tiresome they may be, there is no future.

Bad artists, when projecting themselves into fantastical roles, have an

inclination to exaggerate their erotic allure. The classic case would be Ian
Fleming, who invented the fearless and sexually voracious James Bond.
Pym and Larkin, from their published work, both seem so muted in their
emotional response to life that one might be tempted to assume them to
have been celibates, or near celibates. As subsequent biographers revealed
to their quizzical admirers, this was not the case. Larkin might have lived
alone, until middle age, in a series of rented rooms in provincial English
towns, but he had a mouvementé emotional existence, for a long time
keeping two or even three women on the go. Pym herself had lovers.

One such, a long-term student boyfriend called Henry Harvey, gets

transmogrified into the Archdeacon in Some Tame Gazelle, where Pym
herself becomes a twittering female admirer, Miss Bede. In real life, writing
to Harvey about Excellent Women, Pym said, ‘I suppose every man I have
ever known will see himself as Rocky (the rather shallow character).’
Rockingham Napier, in this novel, is a dashing young naval officer, who is
clearly based on a figure with whom Pym had an affair in Naples during the
war. But in the book, he merely has cups of tea and flirts with Mildred
Lathbury, Pym’s churchy, starched self-projection.

I make these points to suggest that Pym’s novels are works of art which

are contrived with very exact purposes. Their comedy depends on a
recognition of life’s limitations. Pym wrote them in the 1950s, a decade of
exceptional austerity, when Britain was slowly beginning to recover from
the economic, emotional and physical devastation of a world war and the
loss of a global empire.

In this book the food alone is worthy of study. The first meal which we

hear about is supper at the vicarage with Father Malory and his sister, to
which Mildred Lathbury is invited. It is prepared by a servant, Mrs Jubb.

Tonight she set before us a pale macaroni cheese and a dish of boiled potatoes, and I
noticed a blancmange or ‘shape’, also of an indeterminate colour, in a glass dish on the
sideboard.

Not enough salt, or perhaps no salt, I thought, as I ate the macaroni. And not really

enough cheese.

It could be a description not merely of one meal in the life of Mildred
Lathbury, but also of the muted flavour which Pym deliberately creates
around her characters. This is a world where if you go out for a cooked tea
you know that the eggs ‘“wouldn’t be real”’. (This is a joke which most
younger readers would need explained. In 1952 powdered egg was still
commonplace and many foodstuffs were still rationed as during the war).
Food on that particular menu includes paste sandwiches and curried whale,
which prompts a discussion, naturally, between the incurably churchy
heroine and her friend, about the insuitability of whale as a food for church
fast days, when one should only consume fish. (‘“The whale is a
mammal.”’) We are in a world where spaghetti (other than tinned inch-long
snippets of the stuff in red sauce) is thought so sophisticated that it
completely silences the heroine when she is taken out for a restaurant meal.
(‘Perhaps long spaghetti is the kind of thing that ought to be eaten quite
alone with nobody to watch one’s struggles. Surely many a romance must
have been nipped in the bud by sitting opposite somebody eating
spaghetti?’) An ‘extravagant’ and solitary lunch back in Mildred’s flat
consists of ‘two scrambled eggs, preceded by the remains of some soup and
followed by cheese, biscuits and an apple’. Over this meal, ‘it would [have
been] a good opportunity to read some of the things I was always meaning
to read, like In Memoriam or The Brothers Karamazov, but in the end I was
reduced to reading the serial in the parish magazine’.

Wine is regarded as an extraordinary luxury, and it is warmed up in

front of gas fires. Nature itself seems to be bounded by the austere domestic
routines of these people’s horizons. ‘It was one of those sad late September
evenings when by switching on a bar of the electric fire one realises at last
that summer is over’. That is such a Larkinian sentence. This is comedy
defined by lack of future.

In this sober world, who are the Excellent Women of the excellent title?

A defining answer to the question comes when Mildred and Everard Bone
are having supper together about two-thirds of the way through the story.
Rocky’s wife, Helena, also an anthropologist, has formed an attachment to
Everard, who does not return her affections; and Helena, having left her

husband, has now gone back to her mother; meanwhile, Mildred and
Everard, fellow Anglo-Catholics, are staring bleakly at a ‘piece of fish’ on
their plates. Would Everard like to have married Helena, Mildred asks.
‘“Certainly not,” he declared. “She is not at all the kind of person I should
choose for my wife.”’ When questioned more closely, he says that he would
want to marry a ‘sensible’ person, one who would help him with his work.
He mentions an office drudge called Esther Clovis. ‘“An excellent woman
altogether.”’

‘“You could consider marrying an excellent woman?” I asked in

amazement. “But they are not for marrying”’ There follows some mild
humour—‘“You’re surely not suggesting that they are for the other
things?”’ Does this mean, Everard asks, when the joke dies, that excellent
women are not allowed to have ‘“the normal feelings”’. ‘“Oh yes,”’ is the
reply, ‘“but nothing can be done about them.”’

Excellent women are women that men take for granted. In a parish, they

are there to help make the tea, arrange flowers in the church and provide
companionship for the more boring members of the congregation with
whom the priests can’t be bothered. In offices, they again make tea, and
coffee, and do the tedious chores of indexing, proof-reading and filing.
They conceal their sexual needs, and consider it somehow unpleasant to let
them show. Those women who are openly sexually alluring do not seem to
be excellent, and do not need to bother themselves with such unselfish tasks
as washing up or making curtains. (Helena, Rocky’s wife, and the lofty ice-
queen Allegra Gray, so quizzically observed by Mildred, are not excellent
women. Do they have a happier life? Probably, but one of the points of the
book is that such happiness is beyond the emotional capacities of most
human beings of either sex).

Many twenty-first-century readers might read this novel with disbelief

and keep looking back to its date of publication. It was written after a world
war in which women had played a key role in victory. Pym herself was a
university graduate. And yet these women, who believe they have passed an
intimate emotional barrier if they so much as use someone else’s first name
rather than being ‘Miss So-and-so’, who dress dowdily and exist only to be
subservient to others, apparently accept, if a little uneasily, this idea of their
role. The struggles of the Sisterhood, from the early days of nineteenth-
century feminism, through the writings of that other Barbara Bodichon, or
George Eliot, or John Stuart Mill, or through the martyrdoms of the

suffragists of the early twentieth century, and the campaigners for fairer
deals for women, seem to have passed Mildred by. Similarly, one might ask
whether the church which she supports so enthusiastically is recognisable as
the organisation which forty years later would one day ordain women to the
priesthood?

There can be no doubt that Excellent Women depicts what is for us a

vanished world, and one which was vanishing fast as Pym depicted it. She
is like a watercolourist trying to catch the flare of a sunset before it goes.
And some reasons for the quite extraordinary deadness and flatness of
Mildred’s life are surely to be found in the sociological and political
changes brought about by the end of the Empire, and the war. Before the
Second World War, it was not only the upper classes and the rich in
England who enjoyed a privileged position which today is all but
unimaginable. The middle classes might have been poor—Mildred works
for a charity for Distressed Gentlefolk—but the class structure was firmly in
place. However, during the war class barriers began to break down. Men
doing military service, and women doing war work, came into contact with
people of many different classes. The ‘deference’ for which snobs might be
nostalgic was soon discovered by the officer classes to be highly ironic; and
the result of the 1945 General Election, a landslide for Labour in spite of
Churchill being the supposed Liberator of Europe, made it clear that the
British working people were determined never to return to the old days
when country solicitors such as Barbara Pym’s father might have one or
two servants, while the working classes lived in insanitary conditions with
no decent provision for sickness or old age.

People of Barbara Pym’s class felt especially threatened at this period.

Such ‘genteel’ types, for the rest of the century, continued to keep up old
customs and manners, and these are faithfully and comically recorded in
Pym’s fiction. (Another of the young men in this book boasts of having a
‘club’, even though Mildred suspects him of bluffing.) But this class’s
position in the world was radically altered. The church which played so big
a part in their life was, for many British people, reduntant. It is this
background which explains the very real anger which exists in Pym’s work
(as in Larkin’s) and which erupts in the latter stages of her diaries (A Very
Private Eye) and in what is perhaps her bitterest novel, Quartet in Autumn,
of 1977.

In Excellent Women, the dismay at what has happened to the genteel

middle classes and their shattered world is contained within a brittle irony.
It is a novel which we read today not only amazed at the freshness with
which it has photographed that world of post-war London, when living was
so much more austere and manners so much stiffer. It is also of a perennial
theme. Most of us do not have a burning sense of vocation. Few are blessed
with the self-confidence or self-conceit to believe that our existence, still
less our jobs, make much difference to the planet. Without even the
consolation of thinking that we have given a child to the next generation,
what is there which could be said to give our life, or life in general, any
‘point’? It is this bleak Chekhovian question which lies at the heart of
Pym’s comedy. After fifty years of social change, there are still ‘Barbara
Pym’ characters to be met in real life, people trying to maintain a bit of
dignity in the midst of humdrum lives, and deriving harmless amusement
from the foibles of others, and from trivia—imagining the lives, for
example, of those who place small ads in the Church Times.

There remain many whose lives are not as romantic as Jane Eyre’s, still

less as sexually fulfilled as Lady Chatterley’s. Dare one suggest that any
amount of social change does not alter the fact that the majority of human
beings find life emotionally unfulfilling, and humdrum, and that after a
certain point (an alarmingly early point in most human lives) one realises
there isn’t much one can do about this fact? For such as these, Pym’s fiction
is not just a slice of mild mid-twentieth-century comedy. It is a series of
snapshots of human life as actually, and pluckily, lived. That perhaps is why
her books, though so unpretentious and in some ways ‘light’, have stood the
test of time so much better than many novels by her contemporaries, who
took themselves, and life, more seriously.

A. N. WILSON

Excellent Women

CHAPTER ONE

‘Ah, you ladies! Always on the spot when there’s something happening!’
The voice belonged to Mr. Mallett, one of our churchwardens, and its
roguish tone made me start guiltily, almost as if I had no right to be
discovered outside my own front door.

‘New people moving in? The presence of a furniture van would seem to

suggest it,’ he went on pompously. ‘I expect you know about it.’

‘Well, yes, one usually does,’ I said, feeling rather annoyed at his

presumption. ‘It is rather difficult not to know such things.’

I suppose an unmarried woman just over thirty, who lives alone and has

no apparent ties, must expect to find herself involved or interested in other
people’s business, and if she is also a clergyman’s daughter then one might
really say that there is no hope for her.

‘Well, well, tempus fugit, as the poet says,’ called out Mr. Mallett as he

hurried on.

I had to agree that it did, but I dawdled long enough to see the furniture

men set down a couple of chairs on the pavement, and as I walked up the
stairs to my flat I heard the footsteps of a person in the empty rooms below
me, pacing about on the bare boards, deciding where each piece should go.

Mrs. Napier, I thought, for I had noticed a letter addressed to somebody

of that name, marked ‘To Await Arrival’. But now that she had materialised
I felt, perversely, that I did not want to see her, so I hurried into my own
rooms and began tidying out my kitchen.

I met her for the first time by the dustbins, later that afternoon. The

dustbins were in the basement and everybody in the house shared them.
There were offices on the ground floor and above them the two flats, not
properly self-contained and without every convenience. ‘I have to share a

bathroom,’ I had so often murmured, almost with shame, as if I personally
had been found unworthy of a bathroom of my own.

I bent low over the bin and scrabbled a few tea leaves and potato

peelings out of the bottom of my bucket. I was embarrassed that we should
meet like this. I had meant to ask Mrs. Napier to coffee one evening. It was
to have been a gracious, civilised occasion, with my best coffee cups and
biscuits on little silver dishes. And now here I was standing awkwardly in
my oldest clothes, carrying a bucket and a waste-paper-basket.

Mrs. Napier spoke first.
‘You must be Miss Lathbury,’ she said abruptly. ‘I’ve seen your name

by one of the door-bells.’

‘Yes, I live in the flat above yours. I do hope you’re getting comfortably

settled in. Moving is such a business, isn’t it? It seems to take so long to get
everything straight. Some essential thing like a teapot or a frying-pan is
always lost. . . .’ Platitudes flowed easily from me, perhaps because, with
my parochial experience, I know myself to be capable of dealing with most
of the stock situations or even the great moments of life—birth, marriage,
death, the successful jumble sale, the garden fête spoilt by bad
weather. . . . ‘Mildred is such a help to her father,’ people used to say after
my mother died.

‘It will be nice to have somebody else in the house,’ I ventured, for

during the last year of the war my friend Dora Caldicote and I had been the
only occupants, and I had been quite alone for the past month since Dora
had left to take up a teaching post in the country.

‘Oh, well, I don’t suppose I shall be in very much,’ said Mrs. Napier

quickly.

‘Oh, no,’ I said, drawing back; ‘neither shall I.’ In fact, I was very often

in, but I understood her reluctance to pledge herself to anything that might
become a nuisance or a tie. We were, superficially at any rate, a very
unlikely pair to become friendly. She was fair-haired and pretty, gaily
dressed in corduroy trousers and a bright jersey, while I, mousy and rather
plain anyway, drew attention to these qualities with my shapeless overall
and old fawn skirt. Let me hasten to add that I am not at all like Jane Eyre,
who must have given hope to so many plain women who tell their stories in
the first person, nor have I ever thought of myself as being like her.

‘My husband will be coming out of the Navy soon,’ said Mrs. Napier,

almost in a warning tone. ‘I’m just getting the place ready.’

‘Oh, I see.’ I began to wonder what could have brought a naval officer

and his wife to this shabby part of London, so very much the ‘wrong’ side
of Victoria Station, so definitely not Belgravia, for which I had a
sentimental affection, but which did not usually attract people who looked
like Mrs. Napier. ‘I suppose it’s still very difficult to find a flat,’ I went on,
driven by curiosity. ‘I’ve been here two years and it was much easier then.’

‘Yes, I’ve had an awful time and this isn’t really what we wanted. I

don’t at all like the idea of sharing a bathroom,’ she said bluntly, ‘and I
don’t know what Rockingham will say.’

Rockingham! I snatched at the name as if it had been a precious jewel in

the dustbin. Mr. Napier was called Rockingham! How the bearer of such a
name would hate sharing a bathroom! I hastened to excuse myself. ‘I’m
always very quick in the mornings, and on Sundays I usually get up early to
go to church,’ I said.

She smiled at this, and then seemed to feel bound to add that of course

she had no use for church-going.

We walked upstairs in silence with our buckets and waste-paper-

baskets. The opportunity for ‘saying a word’, which was what our vicar
always urged us to do, came and went. We had reached her flat, and much
to my surprise she was asking me if I would like to have a cup of tea with
her.

I don’t know whether spinsters are really more inquisitive than married

women, though I believe they are thought to be because of the emptiness of
their lives, but I could hardly admit to Mrs. Napier that at one point during
the afternoon I had arranged to be brushing my flight of stairs so that I
could peer through the banisters and watch her furniture being brought in. I
had noticed then that she had some good things—a walnut bureau, a carved
oak chest and a set of Chippendale chairs, and when I followed her into her
sitting-room I realised that she also possessed some interesting small
objects, Victorian paper-weights and snowstorms, very much like those I
had on my own mantel-piece upstairs.

‘Those are Rockingham’s,’ she said, when I admired them. ‘He collects

Victoriana.’

‘I have hardly needed to collect them,’ I said. ‘My old home was a

rectory and full of such objects. It was quite difficult to know what to keep
and what to sell.’

‘I suppose it was a large, inconvenient country rectory with stone

passages, oil lamps and far too many rooms,’ she said suddenly. ‘One has a
nostalgia for that kind of thing sometimes. But how I’d hate to live in it.’

‘Yes, it was like that,’ I said, ‘but it was very pleasant. I sometimes feel

rather cramped here.’

‘But surely you have more rooms than we have?’
‘Yes, I’ve got an attic, too, but the rooms are rather small.’
‘And there’s the shared bathroom,’ she murmured.
‘The early Christians had all things in common,’ I reminded her. ‘Be

thankful that we have our own kitchens.’

‘Oh, God, yes! You’d hate sharing a kitchen with me. I’m such a slut,’

she said, almost proudly.

While she made the tea I occupied myself by looking at her books,

which were lying in stacks on the floor. Many of them seemed to be of an
obscure scientific nature, and there was a pile of journals with green covers
which bore the rather stark and surprising title of Man. I wondered what
they could be about.

‘I hope you don’t mind tea in mugs,’ she said, coming in with a try. ‘I

told you I was a slut.’

‘No, of course not,’ I said in the way that one does, thinking that

Rockingham would probably dislike it very much.

‘Rockingham does most of the cooking when we’re together,’ she said.

‘I’m really too busy to do much.’

Surely wives shouldn’t be too busy to cook for their husbands? I

thought in astonishment, taking a thick piece of bread and jam from the
plate offered to me. But perhaps Rockingham with his love of Victoriana
also enjoyed cooking, for I had observed that men did not usually do things
unless they liked doing them. ‘I suppose the Navy has taught him that?’ I
suggested.

‘Oh, no, he’s always been a good cook. The Navy hasn’t taught him

anything, really.’ She sighed. ‘He’s been Flag Lieutenant to an Admiral in
Italy and lived in a luxurious villa overlooking the Mediterranean for the
past eighteen months, while I’ve been trailing round Africa.’

‘Africa?’ I echoed in amazement. Could she be a missionary, then? It

seemed very unlikely and I suddenly remembered that she had said she
never went to church.

‘Yes, I’m an anthropologist,’ she explained.

‘Oh.’ I was silent with wonder, and also because I was not at all sure

what an anthropologist was and could think of no intelligent comment to
make.

‘Rockingham hasn’t had to do anything much but be charming to a lot

of dreary Wren officers in ill-fitting white uniforms, as far as I can make
out.’

‘Oh, surely . . .’ I began to protest, but then decided that this was, after

all, a work well worth doing. Clergymen were often good at it; indeed, so
many of their flock wore drab, ill-fitting clothes that it came as second
nature to them. I had not realised that it might also be among the
accomplishments of naval officers.

‘I’ve got to write up my field notes now,’ Mrs. Napier went on.
‘Oh, yes, of course. How interesting . . .’
‘Well, well . . .’ she stood up and put her mug down on the tray. I felt

that I was being dismissed.

‘Thank you for the tea,’ I said. ‘You must come and see me when you

get settled. Do let me know if there’s anything I can do to help.’

‘Not at the moment, thank you,’ she said, ‘but there may be.’
I thought nothing of her words at the time. It did not seem then as if our

lives could ever touch at any point beyond a casual meeting on the stairs
and of course the sharing of a bathroom.

This last idea may have occurred to her too, for when I was halfway up

the stairs to my own flat she called out, ‘I think I must have been using your
toilet paper. I’ll try and remember to get some when it’s finished.’

‘Oh, that’s quite all right,’ I called back, rather embarrassed. I come

from a circle that does not shout aloud about such things, but I nevertheless
hoped that she would remember. The burden of keeping three people in
toilet paper seemed to me rather a heavy one.

When I got into my sitting-room I found to my surprise that it was

nearly six o’clock. We must have talked for over an hour. I decided that I
did not like Mrs. Napier very much, and then began to reproach myself for
lack of Christian charity. But must we always like everybody? I asked
myself. Perhaps not, but we must not pass judgment on them until we have
known them a little longer than one hour. In fact, it was not our business to
judge at all. I could hear Father Malory saying something of the kind in a
sermon, and at that moment St. Mary’s clock began to strike six.

I could just see the church spire through the trees in the square. Now,

when they were leafless, it looked beautiful, springing up among the
peeling stucco fronts of the houses, prickly, Victorian-gothic, hideous
inside, I suppose, but very dear to me.

There were two churches in the district, but I had chosen St. Mary’s

rather than All Souls’, not only because it was nearer, but because it was
‘High’. I am afraid my poor father and mother would not have approved at
all and I could imagine my mother, her lips pursed, shaking her head and
breathing in a frightened whisper, ‘Incense.’ But perhaps it was only natural
that I should want to rebel against my upbringing, even if only in such a
harmless way. I gave All Souls’ a trial; indeed I went there for two
Sundays, but when I returned to St. Mary’s, Father Malory stopped me after
Mass one morning and said how glad he was to see me again. He and his
sister had been quite worried; they feared I might have been ill. After that I
had not left St. Mary’s again, and Julian Malory and his sister Winifred had
become my friends.

I sometimes thought how strange it was that I should have managed to

make a life for myself in London so very much like the life I had lived in a
country rectory when my parents were alive. But then so many parts of
London have a peculiarly village or parochial atmosphere that perhaps it is
only a question of choosing one’s parish and fitting into it. When my
parents had died, within two years of each other, I was left with a small
income of my own, an assortment of furniture, but no home. It was then that
I had joined forces with my old school friend Dora Caldicote, and while she
was teaching I worked in the Censorship, for which, very fortunately, no
high qualifications appeared to be necessary, apart from patience, discretion
and a slight tendency towards eccentricity. Now that Dora had gone I
looked forward to being alone once more, to living a civilised life with a
bedroom and a sitting-room and a spare room for friends. I have not Dora’s
temperament which makes her enjoy sleeping on a camp bed and eating off
plastic plates. I felt that I was now old enough to become fussy and
spinsterish if I wanted to. I did part-time work at an organisation which
helped impoverished gentlewomen, a cause very near to my own heart, as I
felt that I was just the kind of person who might one day become one. Mrs.
Napier, with her gay trousers and her anthropology, obviously never would.

I was thinking about her as I changed to go out to supper at the

vicarage, and was glad that I was wearing respectable clothes when I met

her on the stairs with a tall, fair man.

‘You’ll have to drink gin out of a mug,’ I heard her say. ‘The glasses

aren’t unpacked.’

‘It doesn’t matter,’ he answered rather stiffly as if it mattered a great

deal. ‘I suppose you haven’t got things straight yet.’

Not Rockingham, I felt; no, it could hardly be when he was in Italy

being charming to Wren officers. Perhaps a fellow anthropologist? The bell
of St. Mary’s began to ring for Evensong and I realised that it was none of
my business who he was. It was too early to go to the vicarage, so I hurried
into church and took my place with the half-dozen middle-aged and elderly
women who made up the weekday evening congregation. Winifred Malory,
late as always, came and sat by me and whispered that somebody had sent
quite a large donation, most generous, towards the cost of repairing the west
window which had been damaged by a bomb. An anonymous donation—
wasn’t it exciting? Julian would tell me about it at supper.

CHAPTER TWO

Julian Malory was about forty, a few years younger than his sister. Both
were tall, thin and angular, but while this gave to Julian a suitable ascetic
distinction, it only seemed to make Winifred, with her eager face and untidy
grey hair, more awkward and gaunt. She was dressed, as usual, in an odd
assortment of clothes, most of which had belonged to other people. It was
well known that Winifred got most of her wardrobe from the garments sent
to the parish jumble sales, for such money as she had was never spent on
herself but on Good—one could almost say Lost—Causes, in which she
was an unselfish and tireless worker. The time left over from these good
works was given to ‘making a home’ for her brother, whom she adored,
though she was completely undomesticated and went about it with more
enthusiasm than skill.

‘If only I could paint the front door!’ she said, as the three of us went

into the vicarage after Evensong. ‘It looks so dark and drab. A vicarage
ought to be a welcoming sort of place with a bright entrance.’

Julian was hanging up his biretta on a peg in the narrow hall. Next to it

hung a rather new-looking panama hat. I had never seen him wearing it and
it occurred to me that perhaps he had bought it to keep until its ribbon
became rusty with age and the straw itself a greyish yellow. My father had
worn just such a hat and it always seemed to me to epitomise the wisdom of
an old country clergyman, wisdom which Julian could not hope to attain for
another twenty or thirty years.

‘A welcoming sort of place with a bright entrance,’ Julian repeated.

‘Well, I hope people do get a welcome even if our front door is dark and I
hope Mrs. Jubb has got some supper for us.’

I sat down at the table without any very high hopes, for both Julian and

Winifred, as is often the way with good, unworldly people, hardly noticed
what they ate or drank, so that a meal with them was a doubtful pleasure.
Mrs. Jubb, who might have been quite a good cook with any
encouragement, must have lost heart long ago. Tonight she set before us a
pale macaroni cheese and a dish of boiled potatoes, and I noticed a
blancmange or ‘shape’, also of an indeterminate colour, in a glass dish on
the sideboard.

Not enough salt, or perhaps no salt, I thought, as I ate the macaroni.

And not really enough cheese.

‘Do tell me about this anonymous donation,’ I asked. ‘It sounds

splendid.’

‘Yes, it’s really most encouraging. Somebody has sent me ten pounds. I

wonder who it can be!’ When Julian smiled the bleakness of his face was
softened and he became almost good-looking. There was usually something
rather forbidding about his manner so that women did not tend to fuss over
him as they might otherwise have done. I am not even sure whether anyone
had ever knitted him a scarf or pullover. I suppose he was neither so
handsome nor so conceited as to pretend a belief in celibacy as a protection,
and I did not really know his views on the matter. It seemed a comfortable
arrangement for the brother and sister to live together, and perhaps it is
more suitable that a High Church clergyman should remain unmarried, that
there should be a biretta in the hall rather than a perambulator.

‘I always think an anonymous donation is so exciting,’ said Winifred

with adolescent eagerness. ‘I’m longing to find out who it is. Mildred, it
isn’t you, is it? Or anyone you know?’

I denied all knowledge of it.
Julian smiled tolerantly at his sister’s enthusiasm. ‘Ah, well, I expect we

shall know soon enough who has sent it. Probably one of our good ladies in
Colchester or Grantchester Square.’ He named the two most respectable
squares in our district, where a few houses of the old type, occupied by one
family or even one person and not yet cut up into flats, were to be found.
My flat was in neither of these squares, but in a street on the fringe and at
what I liked to think was the ‘best’ end.

‘It doesn’t seem like them, somehow,’ I said. ‘They don’t usually do

good by stealth.’

‘No,’ Julian agreed, ‘their left hand usually knows perfectly well what

their right hand is doing.’

‘Of course,’ said Winifred, ‘a lot of new people have moved here since

the war ended. I’ve noticed one or two strangers at church lately. It may be
one of them.’

‘Yes, it probably is,’ I agreed. ‘The new people moved into my house

today and I met Mrs. Napier for the first time this afternoon. By the
dustbins, too.’

Julian laughed. ‘I hope that isn’t an omen, meeting by the dustbins.’
‘She seemed very pleasant,’ I said rather insincerely. ‘A bit younger

than I am, I should think. Her husband is in the Navy and is coming home
soon. He has been in Italy.’

‘Italy, how lovely!’ said Winifred. ‘We must ask them in. Don’t you

remember, dear,’ she turned to her brother, ‘Fanny Ogilvy used to teach
English in Naples? I wonder if he met her.’

‘I should think it very unlikely,’ said Julian. ‘Naval officers don’t

usually meet impoverished English gentlewomen abroad.’

‘Oh, but his wife told me that he spent his time being charming to dull

Wren officers,’ I said, ‘so he sounds rather a nice person. She is an
anthropologist, Mrs. Napier. I’m not quite sure what that is.’

‘Really? It sounds a little incongruous—a naval officer and an

anthropologist,’ said Julian.

‘It sounds very exciting,’ said Winifred. ‘Is it something to do with

apes?’

Julian began to explain to us what an anthropologist was, or I suppose

he did, but as it is unlikely that any anthropologist will read this, I can
perhaps say that it appeared to be something to do with the study of man
and his behaviour in society—particularly among ‘primitive communities’,
Julian said.

Winifred giggled. ‘I hope she isn’t going to study us.’
‘I’m very much afraid that we shan’t see her at St. Mary’s,’ said Julian

gravely.

‘No, I’m afraid not. She told me that she never went to church.’
‘I hope you were able to say a word, Mildred,’ said Julian, fixing me

with what I privately called his ‘burning’ look. ‘We shall rely on you to do
something there.’

‘Oh, I don’t suppose I shall see anything of her except at the dustbins,’ I

said lightly. ‘Perhaps her husband will come to church. Naval officers are
often religious, I believe.’

‘They that go down to the sea in ships: and occupy their business in

great waters; These men see the works of the Lord: and His wonders in the
deep,’ Julian said, half to himself.

I did not like to spoil the beauty of the words by pointing out that as far

as we knew Rockingham Napier had spent most of his service arranging the
Admiral’s social life. Of course he might very well have seen the works of
the Lord and His wonders in the deep.

We got up from the table and Julian went out of the room. There was to

be some kind of a meeting at half-past seven and I could already hear the
voices of some of the ‘lads’ in the hall.

‘Let’s go into the den,’ said Winifred, ‘and I’ll make some coffee on the

gas ring.’

The den was a small room, untidily cosy, looking out on to the narrow

strip of garden. Julian’s study was in the front on the same side, the
drawing-room and dining-room on the other side. Upstairs there were
several bedrooms and attics and a large cold bathroom. The kitchen was in
the basement. It was really a very large house for two people, but Father
Greatorex, the curate, a middle-aged man who had been ordained late in
life, had his own flat in Grantchester Square.

‘We really ought to do something about letting off the top floor as a

flat,’ said Winifred, pouring coffee that looked like weak tea. ‘It seems so
selfish, wrong, really, just the two of us living here when there must be so
many people wanting rooms now. I do hope this coffee is all right, Mildred?
You always make it so well.’

‘Delicious, thank you,’ I murmured. ‘I’m sure you’d have no difficulty

in getting a nice tenant. Of course you’d want somebody congenial. You
might advertise in the Church Times.’ At this idea a crowd of suitable
applicants seemed to rise up before me—canons’ widows, clergymen’s
sons, Anglo-Catholic gentlewomen (non-smokers), church people (regular
communicants) . . . all so worthy that they sounded almost unpleasant.

‘Oh, yes, we might do that. But I suppose you wouldn’t think of coming

here yourself, Mildred?’ Her eyes shone, eager and pleading like a dog’s.
‘You could name your own rent, dear. I know Julian would like to have you
here as much as I should.’

‘That’s very kind of you,’ I said, speaking slowly to gain time, for fond

as I was of Winifred I valued my independence very dearly, ‘but I think I’d
better stay where I am. I should be only one person and you’d really have
room for two, wouldn’t you?’

‘A couple, you mean?’
‘Yes, or two friends. Something like Dora and me, or younger people,

students, perhaps.’

Winifred’s face brightened. ‘Oh, that would be lovely.’
‘Or a married curate,’ I suggested, full of ideas. ‘That would be very

suitable. If Father Greatorex does get somewhere in the country, as I believe
he wants to, Julian will be wanting another curate and he may very well be
married.’

‘Yes, of course, they don’t all feel as Julian does.’
‘Does he?” I asked, interested. ‘I didn’t realise he had any definite

views about it.’

‘Well, he’s never actually said anything,’ said Winifred vaguely. ‘But

it’s so much nicer that he hasn’t married, nicer for me, that is, although I
should have liked some nephews and nieces. And now,’ she leapt up with
one of her awkward impulsive movements, ‘I must show you what Lady
Farmer’s sent for the jumble sale. Such good things. I shall be quite set up
for the spring.’

Lady Farmer was one of the few wealthy members of our congregation,

but as she was over seventy I was doubtful whether her clothes would really
be suitable for Winifred, who was much thinner and hadn’t her air of
comfortably upholstered elegance.

‘Look,’ she shook out the folds of a maroon embossed chenille velvet

afternoon dress and held it up against her, ‘what do you think of this?’

I had to agree that it was lovely material, but the dress was so

completely Lady Farmer that I should have hated to wear it myself and
swamp whatever individuality I possess.

‘Miss Enders can take it in where it’s too big,’ said Winifred. ‘It will do

if people come to supper, you know, the Bishop or anybody like that.’

We were both silent for a moment, as if wondering whether such an

occasion could possibly arise.

‘There’s always the parish party at Christmas,’ I suggested.
‘Oh, of course. It will do for that.’ Winifred sounded relieved and

bundled the dress away again. ‘There’s a good jumper suit, too, just the

thing to wear in the mornings. How much ought I to give for them?’ she
asked anxiously. ‘Lady Farmer said that I could have anything I wanted for
myself, but I must pay a fair price, otherwise the sale won’t make anything.’

We discussed the matter gravely for some time and then I got up to go.
There were lights in Mrs. Napier’s windows as I approached the house,

and from her room came the sound of voices raised in what sounded like an
argument.

I went into my little kitchen and laid my breakfast. I usually left the

house at a quarter to nine in the morning and worked for my gentlewomen
until lunchtime. After that I was free, but I always seemed to find plenty to
do. As I moved about the kitchen getting out china and cutlery, I thought,
not for the first time, how pleasant it was to be living alone. The jingle of
the little beaded cover against the milk jug reminded me of Dora and her
giggles, her dogmatic opinions and the way she took offence so easily. The
little cover, which had been her idea, seemed to symbolise all the little
irritations of her company, dear kind friend though she was. ‘It keeps out
flies and dust,’ she would say, and of course she was perfectly right, it was
only my perverseness that made me sometimes want to fling it away with a
grand gesture.

Later, as I lay in bed, I found myself thinking about Mrs. Napier and the

man I had seen with her. Was he perhaps a fellow anthropologist? I could
still hear voices in the room underneath me, raised almost as if they were
quarrelling. I began to wonder about Rockingham Napier, when he would
come and what he would be like. Cooking, Victorian glass paper-weights,
charm . . . and then there was the naval element. He might arrive with a
parrot in a cage. I supposed that, apart from encounters on the stairs, we
should probably see very little of each other. Of course there might be some
embarrassment about the sharing of the bathroom, but I must try to conquer
it. I should certainly have my bath early so as to avoid clashing. I might
perhaps buy myself a new and more becoming dressing-gown, one that I
wouldn’t mind being seen in, something long and warm in a rich
colour. . . . I must have dropped off to sleep at this point, for the next thing I
knew was that I had been woken up by the sound of the front door banging.
I switched on the light and saw that it was ten minutes to one. I hoped the
Napiers were not going to keep late hours and have noisy parties. Perhaps I
was getting spinsterish and ‘set’ in my ways, but I was irritated at having
been woken. I stretched out my hand towards the little bookshelf where I

kept cookery and devotional books, the most comforting bedside reading.
My hand might have chosen Religio Medici, but I was rather glad that it had
picked out Chinese Cookery and I was soon soothed into drowsiness.

CHAPTER THREE

It was several days before I saw Mrs. Napier again, although I heard her
going in and out and there seemed to be voices coming from her room
every evening. I had an idea that I might ask her in to coffee sometime but
hesitated about it because I did not quite know how to convey the
impression that it was not, of course, to become a regular thing. I wanted to
appear civil rather than friendly. One day a new roll of toilet paper of a
rather inferior brand appeared in the lavatory, and I also noticed that an
attempt had been made to clean the bath. It was not as well done as I should
have liked to see it; people do not always realise that cleaning a bath
properly can be quite hard work.

‘I suppose she did it,’ said Mrs. Morris, my ‘woman’, who came twice a

week. ‘She doesn’t look as if she could clean anything.’

Mrs. Morris was a Welshwoman who had come to London as a girl but

still retained her native accent. I marvelled as always at her secret
knowledge, when, as far as I knew, she had not yet set eyes on Mrs. Napier.

‘Kettle’s boiling, miss,’ she said, and I knew that it must be eleven

o’clock, for she made this remark so regularly that I should have thought
something was wrong if she had forgotten.

‘Oh, good, then let’s have our tea,’ I said, making the response expected

of me. I waited for Mrs. Morris to say, ‘There’s a drop of milk in this jug,’
as she always did on discovering the remains of yesterday’s milk, and then
we were ready for our tea.

‘I was cleaning at the vicarage yesterday, those rooms they’re going to

let,’ said Mrs. Morris. ‘Miss Malory was saying how she wanted you to go
there.’

‘Yes, I know, but I think it’s really better for me to stay here,’ I said.

‘Yes, indeed, Miss Lathbury. It wouldn’t be right at all for you to live at

the vicarage.’

‘Well, Father Malory and Miss Malory are my friends.’
‘Yes, but it wouldn’t be right. If Miss Malory was to go away now . . .’
‘You think it wouldn’t be quite respectable?’ I asked.
‘Respectable?’ Mrs. Morris stiffened, and straightened the dark felt hat

she always wore. ‘That isn’t for me to say, Miss Lathbury. But it isn’t
natural for a man not to be married.’

‘Clergymen don’t always want to,’ I explained, ‘or they think it better

they shouldn’t.’

‘Strong passions, isn’t it,’ she muttered obscurely. ‘Eating meat, you

know, it says that in the Bible. Not that we get much of it now. If he was a
real Father like Father Bogart,’ she went on, naming the priest of the
Roman Catholic Church in our district, ‘you could understand it.’

‘But Mrs. Morris, you’re a regular churchwoman. I thought you liked

Father Malory.’

‘Oh, yes, I’ve nothing against him really, but it isn’t right.’ She finished

her tea and went over to the sink. ‘I’ll just wash up these things.’

I watched her stiff uncompromising back which hardly seemed to bend

even though the sink was a low one.

‘Has something upset you?’ I asked. ‘Something about Father Malory?’
‘Oh, miss,’ she turned to face me, her hands red and dripping from the

hot water. ‘It’s that old black thing he wears on his head in church.’

‘You mean his biretta?’ I asked, puzzled.
‘I don’t know what he calls it. Like a little hat, it is.’
‘But you’ve been going to St. Mary’s for years,’ I said. ‘You must have

got used to it by now.’

‘Well, it was my sister Gladys and her husband, been staying with us

they have. I took them to church Sunday evening and they didn’t like it at
all, nor the incense, said it was Roman Catholic or something and we’d all
be kissing the Pope’s toe before you could say knife.’

She sat down with the drying-cloth in her hands. She looked so worried

that I had to stop myself smiling.

‘Of course,’ she went on, ‘Evan and I have always been to St. Mary’s

because it’s near, but it isn’t like the church I went to as a girl, where Mr.
Lewis was vicar. He didn’t have incense or wear that old black hat.’

‘No, I don’t suppose he did,’ I agreed, for I knew the seaside town she

came from and I remembered the ‘English’ church, unusual among so many
chapels, with the Ten Commandments in Welsh and in English on either
side of the altar and a special service on Sunday morning for the visitors. I
did not remember that they had expected or received ‘Catholic privileges.’

‘I was always church,’ said Mrs. Morris proudly. ‘Never been in the

chapel, though I did once go to the Ebenezer social, but I don’t want to have
anything to do with some old Pope. Kissing his toe, indeed!’ She looked up
at me, half laughing, not quite sure if Gladys and her husband had been
joking when they said it.

‘There’s a statue in St. Peter’s Church in Rome,’ I explained, ‘and

people do kiss the toe. But that’s only Roman Catholics,’ I said in a loud
clear voice. ‘Don’t you remember Father Malory explaining about the Pope
in his Sunday morning sermons last year?’

‘Oh, Sunday morning, was it?’ she laughed derisively. ‘That’s all very

fine, standing up and talking about the Pope. A lot of us could do that. But
who’s going to cook the Sunday dinner?’

No answer seemed to be needed or expected to this question, and we

laughed together, a couple of women against the whole race of men. Mrs.
Morris dried her hands, fumbled in the pocket of her apron and took out a
squashed packet of cigarettes. ‘Let’s have a fag, any road,’ she said
cheerfully. ‘I’ll just tell Gladys what you said, Miss Lathbury, about it being
some old statue.’

I did not feel that I had done as well as I might have in my attempt to

instruct Mrs. Morris in the differences between the Roman Church and
ours, but I did not think that Julian Malory could have done much better.

After she had gone I boiled myself a foreign egg for lunch and was just

making some coffee when there was a knock on the kitchen door.

It was Mrs. Napier.
‘I’ve come to ask something rather awkward,’ she said, smiling.
‘Well, come in and have a cup of coffee with me. I was just making

some.’

‘Thank you, that would be nice.’
We went into the sitting-room and I switched on the fire. She looked

around her with frank interest and curiosity.

‘Rather nice,’ she said. ‘I suppose this is the best from the country

rectory?’

‘Most of it,’ I said, ‘and I’ve bought a few things from time to time.’
‘Look,’ she said abruptly, ‘I was wondering if your woman, the one

who’s been here this morning, could possibly do for me at all? Perhaps on
the mornings when you’re not here?’

‘I daresay she would be glad to have some more work,’ I said, ‘and

she’s quite good. She does go to the vicarage occasionally.’

‘Oh, the vicarage.’ Mrs. Napier made a face. ‘Will the vicar call?’
‘I can ask him to, if you like,’ I said seriously. ‘He and his sister are

friends of mine.’

‘He isn’t married then? One of those . . . I mean,’ she added

apologetically as if she had said something that might offend me, ‘one of
the kind who don’t marry?’

‘Well, he isn’t married and as he’s about forty I dare say he won’t now.’

I seemed to have spent so much time lately in talking about the celibacy of
the clergy in general and Julian Malory in particular that I was a little tired
of the subject.

‘That’s just when they break out,’ laughed Mrs. Napier. ‘I always

imagine that clergymen need wives to help them with their parish work, but
I suppose most of his congregation are devout elderly women with nothing
much to do, so that’s all right. Holy fowl, you know.’

I felt that I did not like Mrs. Napier any more than I had at our first

meeting, and she was dropping ash all over my newly brushed carpet.

‘Will your husband be coming back soon?’ I asked, to break the rather

awkward silence that had developed.

‘Oh, soon enough,’ she said casually. She stubbed out her cigarette in a

little dish that wasn’t meant to be an ash-tray and began walking about the
room. ‘I know it sounds awful’, she said, standing by the window, ‘but I’m
not really looking forward to his coming very much.’

‘Oh, that’s probably because you haven’t seen him for some time,’ I

said, in a bright sensible tone.

‘That doesn’t really make any difference. There’s more to it than that.’
‘But surely it will be all right once he is here and you’ve had a little

time together?’ I said, beginning to feel the inadequacy that an unmarried
and inexperienced woman must always feel when discussing such things.

‘Perhaps it will. But we’re so different. We met at a party during the war

and fell in love in the silly romantic way people did then. You know. . . .’

‘Yes, I suppose people did.’ In my Censorship days I had read that they

did and I had sometimes wanted to intervene and tell them to wait a little
longer, until they were quite sure.

‘Rockingham is rather good-looking, of course, and everyone thinks

him charming and amusing. He has some money of his own and likes to
dabble in painting. But you see,’ she turned to me very seriously, ‘he knows
nothing about anthropology and cares less.’

I listened in bewildered silence. ‘Why, ought he to?’ I asked stupidly.
‘Well, I did this field trip in Africa when he was away and I met Everard

Bone, who was in the Army out there. He’s an anthropologist too. You may
have seen him on the stairs.’

‘Oh, yes, I think I have. A tall man with fair hair.’
‘We’ve done a lot of work together, and it does give one a special link

with a person, to have done any academic work with him. Rockingham and
I just haven’t got that.’

Did she always call him Rockingham? I wondered irrelevantly. It

sounded so formal, and yet it was difficult to know how to abbreviate it
unless one called him Rocky or used some other name.

‘Surely you and your husband have other things in common, though,

perhaps deeper and more lasting than this work?’ I asked, feeling that I
must try to take my part in this difficult conversation. I hardly liked to think
that she might also have these other things with Everard Bone. Indeed, I did
not think that I liked Everard Bone at all, if he was the person I had seen on
the stairs. His name, his pointed nose, and the air of priggishness which fair
men sometimes have, had set me against him. Also, and here I was ready to
admit that I was old-fashioned and knew nothing of the ways of
anthropologists, I did not think it quite proper that they should have worked
together while Rockingham Napier was serving his country. Here the
picture of the Wren officers in their ill-fitting white uniforms obtruded
itself, but I resolutely pushed it back. Whatever he may have had to do, he
had been serving his country.

‘Of course,’ Mrs. Napier went on, ‘when you’re first in love, everything

about the other person seems delightful, especially if it shows the difference
between you. Rocky’s very tidy and I’m not.’

So he could be called Rocky now. Somehow it made him seem more

human.

‘You should see my bedside table, such a clutter of objects, cigarettes,

cosmetics, aspirins, glasses of water, The Golden Bough, a detective story,
any object that happens to take my fancy. Rocky used to think that so sweet,
but after a while it maddened him, it was just a mess.’

‘I suppose it does get like that,’ I said. ‘One ought to be careful of one’s

little ways.’ Dora’s beaded cover on the milk jug, her love of bakelite
plates, and all the irritating things I did myself and didn’t know
about . . . perhaps even my cookery books by my bed might drive
somebody mad. ‘But surely that’s only a detail,’ I said, ‘and it ought not to
affect the deeper relationship.’

‘Of course you’ve never been married,’ she said, putting me in my place

among the rows of excellent women. ‘Oh, well . . .’ she moved towards the
door. ‘I suppose we shall go our own ways. That’s how most marriages turn
out and it could be worse.’

‘Oh, but you mustn’t say that,’ I burst out, having all the romantic ideals

of the unmarried. ‘I’m sure everything will be all right really.’

She shrugged her shoulders. ‘Thank you for the coffee, anyway, and a

sympathetic hearing. I really ought to apologise for talking to you like this,
but confession is supposed to be good for the soul.’

I murmured something, but I did not think I had been particularly

sympathetic and I certainly had not felt it, for people like the Napiers had
not so far come within my range of experience. I was much more at home
with Winifred and Julian Malory, Dora Caldicote, and the worthy but
uninteresting people whom I met at my work or in connection with the
church. Such married couples as I knew appeared to be quite contented, or
if they were not they did not talk about their difficulties to comparative
strangers. There was certainly no mention of them ‘going their own ways’,
and yet how did I really know that they didn’t? This idea raised disquieting
thoughts and doubts, so I turned on the wireless to distract me. But it was a
women’s programme and they all sounded so married and splendid, their
lives so full and yet so well organised, that I felt more than usually
spinsterish and useless. Mrs. Napier must be hard up for friends if she could
find nobody better than me to confide in, I thought. At last I went
downstairs to see if there were any letters. There was nothing for me, but
two for Mrs. Napier, from one of which I learned that her Christian name
was Helena. It sounded rather old-fashioned and dignified, not at all the

kind of name I should have imagined for her. Perhaps it was a good omen
for the future that she should have such a name.

CHAPTER FOUR

It was certainly unfortunate that Helena Napier should be out when the
telegram came. Wives ought to be waiting for their husbands to come back
from the wars, I felt, though perhaps unreasonably, when a few hours by
aeroplane can transport a husband from Italy to England.

I heard her bell being rung and then mine, and when I opened the door

and saw the boy standing there with the telegram I knew at once as if by
instinct what its news must be. The question was, when would he arrive? It
sounded as if it might be that very evening and I had heard Mrs. Napier go
out about six o’clock. She was probably meeting Everard Bone somewhere.
Ought I to try to find out where she was and let her know? I felt that I ought
to make an attempt and began searching through the telephone directory to
see if I could find his number. If I couldn’t, so much the better—I should be
saved from interfering in something which didn’t really concern me. But
there it was, a Chelsea address—there would hardly be two Everard Bones.
I dialled the number fearfully and heard it ring. ‘Hello, hello, who is that?’ a
querulous elderly woman’s voice answered. I was completely taken aback,
but before I could speak the voice went on, ‘If it’s Miss Jessop I can only
hope you are ringing up to apologise.’ I stammered out an explanation. I
was not Miss Jessop. Was Mr. Everard Bone there? ‘My son is at a meeting
of the Prehistoric Society,’ said the voice. ‘Oh, I see. I’m so sorry to have
bothered you,’ I said. ‘People are always bothering me—I never wanted to
have the telephone put in at all.’

After a further apology I hung up the receiver, shaken and mystified but

at the same time relieved. Everard Bone was at a meeting of the Prehistoric
Society. It sounded like a joke. I could hardly be expected to pursue my
enquiries any further, so I decided that I was an interfering busybody and

went upstairs to get my supper. I opened a tin of baked beans, thinking that
it would be easy and quick, for I could not rid myself of the feeling that
Rockingham Napier might arrive at any moment and that I might have to go
down and open the door. He would certainly have no latch-key and he
might not have had supper. I now began to feel almost agitated; I hurried
about the kitchen, eating the baked beans in ten minutes or less, quite
without dignity, and then washing up. I had made a cup of coffee and taken
it into the sitting-room when I heard a taxi draw up and then Mrs. Napier’s
bell ringing.

I hesitated at the top of the stairs, feeling nervous and stupid, for this

was a situation I had not experienced before, and my training did not seem
to be quite equal to it. Also, I suddenly thought of the parrot in a cage and
that was distracting.

I opened the door rather timidly, hoping that he would not be too

disappointed when he saw that I was not his wife.

‘I’m afraid Mrs. Napier is out,’ I said, ‘but I heard the bell and came

down.’

It was a good thing he began talking, for I am not used to meeting

handsome men and I am afraid that I must have been staring at him rather
rudely. And yet it was his manner that charmed me rather than his looks,
though he was dark and elegant and had all those attributes that are usually
considered to make a man handsome.

‘How very nice of you to come down,’ he said, and I could see, though

it is impossible to put into words, exactly what Helena had meant when she
talked about him putting the awkward Wren officers at their ease. ‘It’s lucky
for me you were in. I think you must be Miss Lathbury.’

‘Yes, I am,’ I said, surprised. ‘But how did you know?’
‘Helena mentioned you in a letter.’
I could not help wondering how she had described me. ‘Yes, we have

met once or twice,’ I said, ‘I live in the flat above you.’

We were going upstairs now, I leading the way and he following with

his suitcases. Fortunately the doors of their flat were unlocked and I showed
him into the sitting-room.

‘Oh, my things, how good it is to be with them again!’ he exclaimed,

going over to the bookcase and picking up one of the paper-weights which
were arranged on the top. ‘And my chairs, too. Don’t you think they’re
beautiful?’

‘Yes, they are lovely,’ I said, hovering in the doorway. ‘Do let me know

if there’s anything I can do, won’t you?’

‘Oh, please don’t go, unless you have to, that is . . . ?’ He turned his

charming smile full on me and I felt a little dazed.

‘Have you had anything to eat?’ I asked.
‘Yes, thank you. I had dinner on the train. It isn’t wise to drop in on

Helena and expect to find a meal ready or even anything in the larder. I’m
afraid we don’t always agree about the importance of civilised eating.’ He
looked round the room. ‘Quite pleasing, isn’t it? I rather feared the worst
when Helena told me where we were going to live.’

‘I’m afraid it isn’t one of the best parts of London,’ I said, ‘but I’m fond

of it.’

‘Yes, I believe it may have a certain Stimmung. If you live in an

unfashionable district you have to find at least that to make it tolerable.’

I was not quite sure what he meant. ‘I like to think of it when it was a

marsh and wild boars roamed over it,’ I ventured, remembering something I
had read in the local weekly paper. ‘And Aubrey Beardsley lived here once,
you know. There is a plaque marking his house.’

‘Oh, perfect!’ He seemed pleased. ‘That does make things rather better.

Those exquisite drawings.’

Personally I thought them disgusting, but I made a noncommittal reply.
‘It’s going to be very cold after Italy, though.’ He shivered and rubbed

his hands together.

‘I don’t know whether you would like to come up to my flat for a

while?’ I suggested. “I have a fire and was just going to make some coffee.
But perhaps you’d rather unpack?’

‘No, I should love some coffee.’
‘What a charming room,’ he said when we were in it. ‘You are

obviously a person of taste.’

I could not help being pleased at the implied compliment but felt bound

to explain that most of the furniture had come from my old home.

‘Ah, yes,’ he paused, as if remembering something, ‘from the old

rectory. Helena told me that, too.’

I went into the kitchen and busied myself making more coffee.
‘I hope you’ve had your meal?’ he said, coming in and watching me.

‘I’ve arrived at rather an awkward time.’

I explained that I had just finished supper and added that I found it

rather a bother cooking just for myself. ‘I like food,’ I said, ‘but I suppose
on the whole women don’t make such a business of living as men do.’ I
thought of my half-used tin of baked beans; no doubt I should be seeing that
again tomorrow.

‘No, and women don’t really appreciate wine either. I suppose you

wouldn’t dream of drinking a bottle of wine by yourself, would you?’

‘Of course not,’ I said, rather primly, I am afraid.
‘That’s what’s so wonderful about living out of England,’ he said,

pacing round the small kitchen, ‘such a glorious feeling of well-being,
sitting at a table in the sun with a bottle of whatever it happens to be—
there’s nothing to equal that, is there?’

‘Yes, I like sitting at a table in the sun,’ I agreed, ‘but I’m afraid I’m one

of those typical English tourists who always wants a cup of tea.’

‘And when it comes, it’s a pale straw-coloured liquid . . .’
‘And the tea’s in a funny little bag . . .’
‘And they may even bring hot milk with it . . .’
We both began laughing.
‘But even that has its own kind of charm,’ I said stubbornly; ‘it’s all part

of the foreign atmosphere.’

‘The English tourists certainly are,’ he said, ‘though there weren’t any

in Italy, of course. I think that was what was lacking, what made life so
unnatural. The sightseers were all in uniform, there were no English
gentlewomen with Baedekers and large straw hats. I missed that.’

We went on talking about Italy and then somehow I was telling him

about the neighbourhood, Julian Malory and his sister and the church.

‘High Mass—with music and incense? Oh, I should like that,’ he said. ‘I

hope it is the best quality incense? I believe it varies.’

‘Yes, I’ve seen advertisements,’ I admitted, ‘and they have different

names. Lambeth is very expensive, but Pax is quite cheap. It seems as if it
ought to be the other way round.’

‘And have you dozens of glamorous acolytes?’
‘Well . . .’ I hesitated, remembering Teddy Lemon, our Master of

Ceremonies, with his rough curly hair and anxious face, and his troop of
well-drilled, tough-looking little boys, ‘they are very nice good boys, but
perhaps you should go to a Kensington church if you want to see glamorous

acolytes. I hope you will come to our church sometimes,’ I added more
seriously, for I felt that Julian would expect me to ‘say a word’ here.

‘Oh, yes, I shall look in. I’m very fond of going to church, but I don’t

like doing anything before breakfast, you know. That’s always seemed to
me to be the great snag about religion, don’t you agree?’

‘Well, one feels that a thing is more worth doing if it’s something of an

effort,’ I attempted.

‘You mean virtue goes out of you? Ah, yes, how it does, or rather how it

would if there was any to go out of me,’ he sighed. ‘I’m sure you have so
much.’

I did not altogether like his frivolous attitude, but I could not help liking

him. He was so easy to talk to and I could see him at any social gathering,
using his charm to make people feel at home, or rather not consciously
using it, for the exercise of it seemed natural to him as if he could not help
being charming.

We were still talking about churches when we heard voices on the stairs.
‘Do excuse me,’ he said, ‘that must be Helena. Thank you so much for

being so kind to me. I hope we shall be meeting often.’ He ran out on to the
landing and down the stairs.

I put the coffee cups on to a tray and took them into the kitchen. It was a

pity, I felt, that Everard Bone should intrude on the Napiers’ reunion. Still,
Helena would no doubt be capable of managing the two of them and it was
to be hoped that Everard Bone would have the tact to go away quickly and
leave them alone. I was just starting to wash the cups when there was a
knock at the door. Rockingham stood there with a straw-covered flask of
wine in his hand.

‘We feel this is an occasion,’ he said, ‘and should like you to join us.

That is, if you approve of drinking wine at this hour.’

‘Oh, but surely you’d rather be by yourselves . . .’
‘Well, the anthropologist is with us, so it seemed a good idea to make it

a party,’ he explained.

I began taking off my apron and tidying my hair, apologising as I did so,

in what I felt was a stupid, fussy way, for my appearance. As if anyone
would care how I looked or even notice me, I told myself scornfully.

‘You look very nice,’ said Rockingham, smiling in such a way that he

could almost have meant it.

Helena and Everard Bone were in the sitting-room, she putting glasses

out and he standing over by the window. I was able to study his profile with
its sharp-pointed nose and decide that I disliked it, until he turned towards
me and stared with what seemed to be disapproval.

‘Good evening,’ I said, feeling very silly.
‘You do know each other, don’t you?’ said Helena.
‘Yes, at least I’ve seen Mr. Bone on the stairs,’ I explained.
‘Oh, yes, I do remember meeting somebody on the stairs once or twice,’

he said indifferently. ‘Was it you?’

‘Yes.’
‘How marvellous that you were here when Rocky arrived,’ said Helena

in a quick nervous tone, ‘too awful for him, coming home to an empty
house, but he said you were marvellous and I don’t believe he’s missed me
at all, have you, darling?’

She did not wait for him to answer but ran back into the kitchen to fetch

something. Rockingham was pouring the wine, so that I was left standing
awkwardly with Everard.

‘I believe you’re an anthropologist,’ I said, making what I felt was a

brave attempt at conversation. ‘But I’m afraid I don’t know anything about
anthropology.’

‘Why should you?’ he asked, half smiling.
‘It must be fun,’ I floundered, ‘I mean, going round Africa and doing all

that.’

‘“Fun” is hardly the word,’ he said. ‘It’s very hard work, learning an

impossibly difficult language, then endless questionings and statistics,
writing up notes and all the rest of it.’

‘No, I suppose it isn’t,’ I said soberly, for he had certainly not made it

sound fun. ‘But there must be something satisfying in having done it, a sort
of feeling of achievement?’

‘Achievement?’ He shrugged his shoulders. ‘But what has one done

really? I sometimes wonder if it isn’t all a waste of time.’

‘It depends what you set out to do,’ I said rather crossly, feeling like

Alice in Wonderland. I was doing very badly here and was grateful when
Rockingham came to the rescue.

‘Oh, they hate you to think they get any enjoyment out of it,’ he said

rather spitefully.

‘But I do enjoy it,’ said Helena; ‘we aren’t all as dreary as Everard. I

simply loved it. And now we’ve got to do all the writing up; that’s what
we’ve been discussing this evening. We’re to give a paper before one of the
learned societies. Miss Lathbury,’ she turned to me with unnatural
animation, ‘you simply must come and hear it.’

‘Yes, Miss Lathbury, you and I will sit at the back and observe the

anthropologists,’ said Rockingham. ‘They study mankind and we will study
them.’

‘Well, the society is in many ways a primitive community,’ said

Everard, ‘and offers the same opportunities for fieldwork.’

‘When is it to be?’ I asked.
‘Oh, quite soon, next month even,’ said Helena.
‘We must get on,’ said Everard in an irritable tone. ‘The thing will never

be ready if we don’t hurry.’

‘It must take a lot of work putting it all together,’ I said. ‘I should be

very nervous at the thought of it.’

‘Oh, well, it isn’t that. Our stuff is quite new but one wants it to be

good.’

‘Oh, certainly,’ I agreed.
‘Well, darling . . .’ Helena looked at her husband and raised her glass.

‘Isn’t it lovely to have him back again?’ she said to nobody in particular.

Everard said nothing but raised his glass politely, so I did the same.
‘More to drink!’ said Rockingham with rather forced gaiety. He came

towards me with the straw-covered flask and I let him refill my glass,
although it was by no means empty. I began to see how people could need
drink to cover up embarrassments, and I remembered many sticky church
functions which might have been improved if somebody had happened to
open a bottle of wine. But people like us had to rely on the tea-urn and I felt
that some credit was due to us for doing as well as we did on that harmless
stimulant. This party, if such it could be called, was not going well and I did
not feel socially equal to the situation. My experience, which had
admittedly been a little narrow, had not so far included anything in the least
like it. I wished that Everard Bone would go, but he was talking seriously to
Helena about some aspect of their paper, ignoring or not noticing the
awkwardness. At last, however, he said he must be going, and said good-
night quite pleasantly to Rockingham and me and rather more coldly to

Helena, mentioning that he would be ringing her up within the next few
days about the kinship diagrams.

‘We must get on,’ he repeated.
‘I shall look forward to hearing your paper,’ I said, feeling that some

effort was required and that it was up to me to make it.

‘Oh, you will find it deadly dull,’ he said. ‘You mustn’t expect too

much.’

I forebore to remark that women like me really expected very little—

nothing, almost.

‘Well, well,’ said Rockingham as we heard the front door close, ‘so that

is the great Everard Bone.’

‘Great?’ said Helena, surprised. ‘I’m afraid he was at his worst tonight.

Don’t you think he’s intolerably pompous and boring, Miss Lathbury?’ She
turned to me, her eyes shining.

‘He seems very nice and he’s certainly rather good-looking.’
‘Oh, do you think so? I don’t find fair men at all attractive.’
It seemed pointless to follow up that line, so I admitted that I had found

him difficult to talk to, but that that was not surprising since I was not used
to meeting intellectuals.

‘Oh, he’s impossible!’ she burst out.
‘Never mind, wait till you see what I’ve brought for you,’ said

Rockingham in a soothing tone as if speaking to a child. ‘I’ve got some
majolica and a pottery breakfast set packed up with my other luggage, and
the usual trifles here.’ He opened one of his suitcases and took out a bottle
of perfume, several pairs of silk stockings and some small pottery objects.
‘And you mustn’t go yet, Miss Lathbury,’ he called, seeing me moving
uncertainly towards the door. ‘I should like you to have something.’

He put a little china goat into my hand. ‘There, let it go among the

bearded archdeacons and suchlike.’

‘Oh, it’s charming—thank you so much. . . .’
I went upstairs and put it on the table by my bed. Had he been a little

drunk? I wondered. I believed the wine had made me feel a little unsteady
too, but then I was not used to it and the whole evening had a fantastic air
about it, as if it couldn’t really have happened.

I lay awake feeling thirsty and obscurely worried about something.

Well, there was really no need for me to see very much of the Napiers.
Circumstances had thrown us together this evening but tomorrow we should

all be keeping to ourselves. I did not suppose that Helena would remember
her invitation to me to hear their paper at the learned society, so I would not
expect it. I would ask Dora to stay in the Easter holidays. I couldn’t see her
getting on very well with Rockingham, or Rocky as I now thought of him.
He was not at all the sort of person either of us had been used to meeting,
yet I seemed to have found it quite easy to talk to him, I thought smugly.
But then I remembered the Wren officers and I knew what it was that was
worrying me. It was part of his charm that he could make people like that
feel at ease. He must be rather a shallow sort of person really. Not nearly so
worthwhile as Julian Malory, or Mr. Mallett and Mr. Conybeare our
churchwardens, or even Teddy Lemon, who had no social graces . . . as I
dozed off I remembered that I had forgotten to say my prayers. There came
into my mind a picture of Mr. Mallett, with raised finger and roguish voice,
saying, ‘Tut, tut, Miss Lathbury . . .’

CHAPTER FIVE

The next afternoon I was helping Winifred to sort out things for the jumble
sale.

‘Oh, I think it’s dreadful when people send their relations to jumble

sales,’ she said. ‘How can they do it?’ She held up a tarnished silver frame
from which the head and shoulders of a woman dressed in Edwardian style
looked out. ‘And here’s another, a clergyman, too.’

‘A very young curate, just out of the egg, I should think,’ I said, looking

over her shoulder at the smooth beardless face above the high collar.

‘It might almost be somebody we know,’ lamented Winifred. ‘Imagine

if it were and one saw it lying on the stall! What a shock it would be! I
really think I must take the photographs out—it’s the frames people will
want to buy.’

‘I don’t suppose their own relatives send them,’ I said comfortingly. ‘I

expect the photographs have been in the boxroom for years and nobody
knows who they are now.’

‘Yes, I suppose that’s it. But it’s the idea of being unwanted, it’s like

sending a person to a jumble sale—do you see? You feel it more as you get
older, of course. Young people would only laugh and think what a silly
idea.’

I could see very well what she meant, for unmarried women with no ties

could very well become unwanted. I should feel it even more than Winifred,
for who was there really to grieve for me when I was gone? Dora, the
Malorys, one or two people in my old village might be sorry, but I was not
really first in anybody’s life. I could so very easily be replaced. . . . I
thought it better not to go into this too deeply with Winifred, for she was of
a romantic, melancholy nature, apt to imagine herself in situations. She kept

by her bed a volume of Christina Rossetti’s poems bound in limp green
suède, though she had not, as far as I knew, had the experience to make
those much-quoted poems appropriate. I feel sure that she would have told
me if there had been someone of whom she could think when she read

Better by far you should forget and smile,
Than that you should remember and be sad . . .

‘Well, you’ll never be unwanted,’ I said cheerfully. ‘Goodness knows

what Julian would do without you.’

‘Oh, my goodness!’ She laughed as if she had suddenly remembered

something. ‘You should just see him now! He had the idea that he’d
distemper the rooms we’re going to let and he’s got into such a mess. I
started to help, but then I remembered I had to do these things, so Miss
Statham and Miss Enders and Sister Blatt are up there giving helpful
advice.’

‘Oh, dear, I should think he needs more practical help than that,’ I said.

‘May I go up and see?’

‘Yes, do. I’ll go on sorting out these things. You know, I think I shall

buy this skirt for myself,’ I heard her murmuring; ‘there’s a lot of wear in it
yet.’

The sound of women’s voices raised in what seemed to be a lamentation

led me to a large room on the top floor, where I found Julian Malory sitting
on top of a step-ladder, holding a brush and wearing an old cassock streaked
with yellow distemper. Standing round him were Miss Statham and Miss
Enders, two birdlike little women whom I tended to confuse, and Sister
Blatt, stout and rosy in her grey uniform, with a blunt no-nonsense manner.

They were all staring at a wall which Julian had apparently just finished.
‘Well, I hope it’s going to dry a different colour,’ said Sister Blatt; ‘the

one it is now would drive anyone mad.’

‘It said Old Gold on the tin,’ said Julian unhappily. ‘Perhaps I mixed it

too thickly.’

‘Of the consistency of thin cream,’ said Miss Enders, reading from the

tin. ‘That’s how it should be.’

‘Of course it’s difficult to remember what cream was like,’ said Miss

Statham. ‘I suppose thin cream might be like the top of the milk.’

‘Oh, Mildred,’ Julian waved his brush towards me in a despairing

gesture, showering everybody with drops of distemper, ‘do come to the

rescue!’

‘What can I do?’
‘Nothing,’ said Sister Blatt, almost with satisfaction. ‘I’m afraid Father

Malory has done the wall the wrong colour. The only thing will be to wait
till it’s dry and then do it over again with a lighter shade. And it looks so
streaky, too,’ she bent down and peered closely at the wall. ‘Oh dear, oh
dear, I’m afraid I shouldn’t care to live with walls that colour.’

‘I believe it does dry lighter,’ I said hopefully.
‘I wish I’d got the boys’ club to do it,’ said Julian. ‘I’m afraid I’m no

good at practical things. I always think it must be such a satisfying feeling,
to do good work with one’s hands. I’m sure I’ve preached about it often
enough.’

‘Ah, well, we aren’t meant to be satisfied in this world,’ said Sister

Blatt; ‘perhaps that’s what it is.’

Julian smiled. ‘It seems a little hard that I shouldn’t be allowed even this

small satisfaction, but I’ve certainly learnt humility this afternoon, so the
exercise will have served some purpose. It looked so easy, too,’ he added
sadly.

‘Oh, well, things are never as easy as they seem to be,’ said Miss

Statham complacently.

‘No, they certainly are not,’ agreed Miss Enders, who was a dressmaker.

‘People often say to me that they’re just going to run up a cotton dress or a
straight skirt, but then they find it isn’t as easy as it looks and they come
running to me to put it right.’

‘I wish you could put this right, Miss Enders,’ said Julian, drooping on

the top of his ladder.

‘Look,’ I called out, ‘it is drying lighter, and quite evenly too. I suppose

it would naturally be darker when it was wet.’

‘Why, so it is,’ said Sister Blatt. ‘It’s quite a nice colour now.’
‘Mildred, how clever of you,’ said Julian gratefully. ‘I knew you would

help.’

‘Well, well, now that we’ve seen you on your way we may as well be

going on ours,’ said Sister Blatt good-humouredly.

‘Thank you for your help and advice,’ said Julian with a touch of irony.
‘Is Father Malory going to attempt the ceiling?’ asked Miss Statham in

a low voice.

‘That’s the most difficult part,’ said Miss Enders.

‘Oh, well, as a clergyman he will naturally wish to make the attempt,’

said Sister Blatt, with a jolly laugh. ‘Perhaps Miss Lathbury will help him.
I’m afraid the ladder would hardly bear my weight,’ she added comfortably,
looking down at her grey-clad bulk. ‘In any case, I believe the ceiling
should have been done before the walls. If you do the ceiling now, Father,
the walls will get splashed with white.’

‘So they will,’ said Julian patiently. ‘Excellent women,’ he sighed,

when they had gone. ‘I think we will knock off for tea now, don’t you?’

‘You could ask for volunteers from the choir or the boys’ club to finish

it,’ I suggested. ‘I’m sure Teddy Lemon would be good at that kind of thing.
Men love messing about with paint and distemper.’

‘I suppose I am not to be considered as a normal man,’ said Julian,

taking off his yellow-streaked cassock and draping it over the step-ladder,
‘and yet I do have these manly feelings.’

We found Winifred in the hall with a case of stuffed birds.
‘Look,’ she said, ‘from Mrs. Noad—the usual.’
‘The house must be quite bare of birds considering that she sends some

to every sale,’ I remarked.

‘Oh, there are plenty more,’ said Julian. ‘I believe these come from the

lumber-room. There are even finer specimens in the hall, some quite
menacing with raised wings. These are very small ones, almost like
sparrows.’

‘Oh, they’ll go like hot cakes,’ said Winifred; ‘there’s always

competition to buy them. Let’s go and have tea.’

Tea at the vicarage was a safer meal than most and today there was even

a rather plain-looking cake.

‘I must ask the Napiers if they have any jumble,’ I said. ‘He may have

some old civilian suit that he doesn’t want or even a uniform with the
buttons and braid removed.’

‘One hears that so many husbands coming back from the war find that

their civilian clothes have been devoured by moth,’ said Winifred seriously.
‘That must be a dreadful shock.’

‘Oh, the women should look after that sort of thing,’ said Julian.

‘Mothballs, camphor and so on,’ he added vaguely. ‘I believe it’s perfectly
possible to keep the moth at bay. Do you think Mrs. Napier has done her
duty in that respect?’

‘I don’t know,’ I said slowly, for it occurred to me that perhaps she had

not. I could not imagine her doing these methodical wifely things.

‘Have you met him yet?’ Winifred asked.
‘Oh, yes, he’s charming. Good-looking, amusing and so easy to talk to.

I’m very much taken with him.’

‘It sounds almost as if you have fallen in love with him,’ said Julian

teasingly, ‘if he has made such a favourable first impression.’

‘Oh, that’s ridiculous!’ I protested. ‘I’ve only met him once and he’s

probably younger than I am. Besides, he’s a married man.’

‘I’m very glad to hear you say that, Mildred,’ said Julian more seriously.

‘So many people nowadays seem to forget that it should be a barrier.’

‘Now, Julian, we don’t want a sermon,’ said Winifred. ‘You know

Mildred would never do anything wrong or foolish.’

I reflected a little sadly that this was only too true and hoped I did not

appear too much that kind of person to others. Virtue is an excellent thing
and we should all strive after it, but it can sometimes be a little depressing.

‘Pass Mildred something to eat,’ said Winifred.
‘I hope she knows us well enough to help herself without being asked,’

said Julian, ‘otherwise I’m afraid she would get very little.’

I took another piece of cake and there was a short lull in the

conversation, during which I considered Julian’s suggestion that I might
have fallen in love with Rockingham Napier. It was of course quite
impossible, but I certainly felt the power of his charm, and I should often
have to remind myself of the awkward Wren officers and how he had made
them feel at ease in the Admiral’s villa. But I have never been very much
given to falling in love and have often felt sorry that I have so far missed
not only the experience of marriage, but the perhaps even greater and more
ennobling one of having loved and lost. Of course there had been a curate
or two in my schooldays and later a bank-clerk who read the Lessons, but
none of these passions had gone very deep.

‘And now,’ said Julian, taking advantage of the silence, ‘I have an

announcement to make.’

‘Oh, what is it?’ we both exclaimed.
‘I believe I have found a tenant for our flat.’
‘Oh, Julian, how exciting!’ Winifred waved her hands in an impulsive

movement and knocked over the hot-water jug. ‘Do tell us who it is!’

‘Is it somebody really suitable?’ I asked.

‘Most suitable, I think,’ said Julian. ‘She is a Mrs. Gray, a widow.’
‘That sounds excellent. A Mrs. Gray, a widow,’ I repeated. ‘I can just

imagine her.’

‘Oh, so can I!’ said Winifred enthusiastically. ‘A neat little person of

about sixty, rather nicely dressed.’

‘Well, I’m afraid you’re quite wrong,’ said Julian. ‘I should think she is

very little older than Mildred. And she is tall, but nicely dressed, I dare say;
you know I don’t really notice such things.’

‘But where did you find her?’ I asked. ‘Did you advertise in the Church

Times?’

‘No, that was not necessary. She is actually living in this parish, in

furnished rooms at the moment. You may have seen her in church, though
she told me she always sat at the back.’

‘Oh, really? I wonder . . .’ Winifred began to enumerate all the strangers

she had noticed lately, but somehow we did not seem to be able to identify
Mrs. Gray. Julian’s description was vague enough to fit any of two or three
women we could remember having noticed as strangers.

‘How did she know about the flat?’ I asked.
‘She went to Miss Enders to have a dress altered and I suppose they got

talking. Then she mentioned the matter to Father Greatorex and he told me.
She felt she did not like to approach me directly. She is a clergyman’s
widow, you see,’ Julian added, as if this would explain a delicacy not
usually displayed by people engaged in the desperate business of flat-
hunting.

‘Oh, good,’ I exclaimed involuntarily, for I had an inexplicable distrust

of widows, who seem to be of two distinct kinds, one of which may be
dangerous. I felt that Mrs. Gray sounded very definitely of the safer kind.

‘I gather that she hasn’t much money,’ said Julian, ‘so I hardly know

what would be a fair rent to ask. I found I couldn’t bring myself to mention
it, and neither, apparently, could she.’

‘Well, really, I should have thought that would have been her first

question,’ I said, thinking what a remarkable delicate conversation they
must have had. ‘She can hardly expect to get three rooms for nothing. You
must be careful she doesn’t try to do you down.’

‘Oh, Mildred,’ Julian looked grieved, ‘you wouldn’t say that if you had

seen her. She has such sad eyes.’

‘No; I’m sorry,’ I mumbled, for I had been forgetting that she was a

clergyman’s widow.

‘Of course we don’t want to make any profit out of it,’ said Winifred,

‘so I’m sure we can come to some friendly arrangement. Perhaps I could
discuss it with her; it might be less embarrassing with a woman.’

Julian looked at his sister doubtfully and then at me. ‘Of course Mildred

would be the ideal person,’ he said.

‘You mean because I’m used to dealing with impoverished

gentlewomen?’ I asked. ‘But I’m afraid it’s made me develop a rather
suspicious attitude. You see, we sometimes get people who aren’t genuine
and every case has to be carefully investigated.’

‘Really, how distressing! I had no idea people would try that sort of

thing.’

‘How terrible!’ said Winifred. ‘It always saddens me when I hear of

wickedness like that. Especially among gentlewomen.’

‘Yes, perhaps one does expect rather more of them,’ I agreed, ‘but I can

assure you it does sometimes happen.’ The Malorys often gave me a feeling
that I knew more of the wickedness of the world than they did, especially as
I had learned much of the weaknesses of human nature in my Censorship
work, but so much of my knowledge was at second hand that I doubted
whether there was much to choose between us in worldly wisdom. But I did
feel that they were simpler and more trusting by nature than I was.

‘Oh, I expect I shall be able to manage it quite satisfactorily,’ said

Julian. ‘It would hardly be fair to expect Mildred to deal with something
that doesn’t concern her at all.’

‘I will if you like,’ I said doubtfully, ‘but of course it’s not really my

business.’ I did not then know to the extent I do now that practically
anything may be the business of an unattached woman with no troubles of
her own, who takes a kindly interest in those of her friends.

‘We must look out for Mrs. Gray in church,’ said Winifred. ‘I think I

know who she is. I believe she sometimes wears a silver fox fur.’

‘I thought Julian said she hadn’t much money,’ I said, ‘though of course

the fur might have been left over from more prosperous days.’

‘It’s a rather bushy fur,’ said Winifred. ‘Perhaps it isn’t silver fox at all. I

don’t know much about these things.’

‘I don’t think she was wearing a fur when I saw her,’ said Julian, ‘but

she did appear to be nicely dressed.’

‘I hope she won’t distract you from writing your sermons, Julian,’ I said

jokingly. ‘We shall probably notice a marked falling off in your preaching
when Mrs. Gray moves in.’

Julian laughed and got up from the table. ‘I must go back to my

distempering,’ he said, ‘or the place won’t be habitable. I shall enjoy it now
that I know the colour dries lighter. I have certainly learnt something this
afternoon.’

Winifred smiled affectionately after him as he left the room. ‘Men are

just children, really, aren’t they. He’s as happy as a sandboy when he’s
doing something messy. Now, Mildred, perhaps we could get on with
pricing these things for the sale?’

We spent a contented half hour going through the jumble and

speculating about Mrs. Gray.

‘Julian didn’t really tell us what she was like,’ lamented Winifred.
‘No, but I suppose women of my sort and age are difficult to describe,

unless they’re strikingly beautiful, of course.’

‘Oh, wouldn’t that be lovely,’ Winifred pushed back her untidy grey

hair, ‘if she were strikingly beautiful!’

‘Oh, I don’t know,’ I said. ‘Perhaps it would if she could be nice as

well, but one feels that beautiful people aren’t always.’

‘But she’s a clergyman’s widow. . . .’
‘Oh, dear,’ I laughed, ‘I’d forgotten that.’ It seemed like a kind of magic

formula. ‘So she’s to be beautiful as well as good. That sounds almost too
much. We don’t know how her husband died, do we? She may have driven
him to his grave.’

Winifred looked rather shocked, so I stopped my foolish imaginings and

went on pricing the worn garments, stuffed birds, old shoes, golf clubs,
theological books, popular dance tunes of the ’thirties, fenders and
photograph frames—jumble in all its glory.

‘I wonder . . .’ said Winifred thoughtfully, ‘I wonder what her Christian

name is?’

CHAPTER SIX

Lent began in February that year and it was very cold, with sleet and bitter
winds. The office where I dealt with my impoverished gentlewomen was in
Belgravia, and it was my custom to attend the lunchtime services held at St.
Ermin’s on Wednesdays.

The church had been badly bombed and only one aisle could be used, so

that it always appeared to be very full with what would normally have been
an average congregation crowded into the undamaged aisle. This gave us a
feeling of intimacy with each other and separateness from the rest of the
world, so that I always thought of us as being rather like the early
Christians, surrounded not by lions, admittedly, but by all the traffic and
bustle of a weekday lunch-hour.

On Ash Wednesday I went to the church as usual with Mrs. Bonner, one

of my fellow workers, who was drawn more by the name of the preacher
than by anything else, for, as she confessed to me, she loved a good sermon.
We had hurried over our lunch—a tasteless mess of spaghetti followed by a
heavy steamed pudding, excellent Lenten fare, I felt—and were in our seats
in good time before the service was due to begin. We had made our way
through the ruins, where torn-down wall tablets and an occasional urn or
cherub’s head were stacked in heaps, and where, incongruous in the middle
of so much desolation, we had come upon a little grey woman heating a
saucepan of coffee on a Primus stove.

Mrs. Bonner settled herself down comfortably with the anticipation of

enjoyment and peered round at the people coming in, as if she were at a
fashionable wedding. I am afraid that she cannot have found them very
interesting, for they were a mixed collection of office-workers and passers-
by, together with the elderly ladies and dim spinsters who form a proportion

of church congregations everywhere. The vicar stood at the door, a gaunt
figure in his rusty black cassock, while his wife fussed over the new
arrivals, trying to prevent them from following their natural inclination to
crowd into the back of the church, leaving no room for late-comers.

I sat quietly, sometimes turning my head, and it was on one of these

occasions that, to my surprise and dismay, I found myself looking straight
at Everard Bone, who was coming in at that moment. He looked back at me
but without any sign of recognition. I suppose I was indistinguishable from
many another woman in a neutral winter coat and plain hat and I was
thankful for my anonymity. But he was unmistakable. His tall figure, his
well-cut overcoat, his long nose and his fair hair were outstanding in this
gathering of mediocrity. I felt that I could almost understand the attraction
he might have for the kind of person who is drawn to the difficult, the
unusual, even the unpleasant.

‘What a handsome man—though his nose is a shade too long,’ said Mrs.

Bonner in a loud whisper, as Everard took his seat a few rows in front of us.

I did not answer but I found that I could not help thinking about him. He

was certainly the last person I should have expected to see here. I suppose I
was ignorant enough to imagine that all anthropologists must be
unbelievers, but the appearance of Everard Bone had shaken my
complacency considerably. And yet, of course, it might be that he was here
in a professional capacity, observing our behaviour with a view to
contributing a note on it to some learned journal. I should have to ask
Helena about it the next time I saw her.

A grey little woman—perhaps the same one who had been brewing

coffee in the ruins—took her seat at the harmonium and played the first line
of a Lenten hymn. The singing was hearty, if a little ragged, and as I sang I
began to feel humble and ashamed of myself for my unkind thoughts about
Everard Bone. He was certain to be a much nicer person and a better
Christian than I was, which would not be difficult. Besides, what reason had
I for disliking him? His pointed nose and the fact that I had found him
difficult to talk to? His friendship or whatever it was with Helena Napier?
The last, certainly, was none of my business.

The preacher was forceful and interesting. His words seemed to knit us

together, so that we really were like the early Christians, having all things in
common. I tried to banish the feeling that I should prefer not to have all
things in common with Everard Bone but it would keep coming back,

almost as if he was to be in some way my Lenten penance, and I was quite
upset to find myself near him as we crowded out of the church.

‘Oh dear, oh dear,’ whispered Mrs. Bonner loudly, ‘a very interesting

sermon, but what a lot of talk about sin. I suppose it’s only to be expected at
the beginning of Lent, but it’s all so miserable, don’t you think?’

I could think of no suitable comment and her loud whispering

embarrassed me, for I was afraid that Everard Bone’s attention would be
attracted and that he might recognise me. But I need not have feared, for
after standing uncertainly outside the church for a second or two, he walked
quickly away in the opposite direction from the one we were taking.

‘I can understand that man packing the churches,’ went on Mrs. Bonner.

‘He certainly has a forceful personality, and yet I can’t believe we’re really
so wicked.’

‘No, but we have to be made to realise it,’ I said unconvincingly, for we

certainly seemed harmless enough, elderly and middle-aged people with
one or two mild-looking younger men and women. Indeed, Everard Bone
had been the only person one would have looked at twice.

‘Of course a lot of very good people aren’t religious in the sense of

being church-goers,’ persisted Mrs. Bonner.

‘No, I know they aren’t,’ I agreed, feeling that at any moment she would

begin talking about it being just as easy to worship God in a beechwood or
on the golf links on a fine Sunday morning.

‘I must admit I always feel the presence of God much more when I’m in

a garden or on a mountain,’ she continued.

‘I’m afraid I haven’t got a garden and am really never on a mountain,’ I

said. Was it perhaps likely though, that one might feel the presence of God
more in Whitehall or Belgrave Square, than say, Vauxhall Bridge Road or
Oxford Street? No doubt there was something in it.

‘A garden is a lovesome thing, God wot,’ said Mrs. Bonner rather half-

heartedly. ‘Well, we must certainly go next week. It’s interesting having a
different preacher every time—one never knows what will turn up.’

When I got home it occurred to me that I might ask the Napiers whether

they had anything suitable for the jumble sale, which was to be held the
next Saturday. It also occurred to me that I might find out something about
Everard Bone and why he had been at the service. Of course it was nothing
to do with me but I was curious to know. Perhaps if I did know I should
understand and like him better.

As I walked upstairs past the Napiers’ flat I could hear that they were in,

for they always seemed to keep their doors half open. Now their voices
were raised in what seemed to be an argument.

‘Darling, you are filthy,’ I heard Rocky say, ‘putting down a hot greasy

frying-pan on the linoleum!’

‘Oh, don’t fuss so!’ came her voice from the sitting-room.
I was just creeping slowly and guiltily past, feeling as if I had been

eavesdropping, when Rocky came out of the kitchen with a cloth in his
hand and invited me in to have some coffee with them.

I went into the sitting-room where Helena was sitting writing at a desk.

Pieces of paper covered with diagrams of little circles and triangles were
spread around her.

‘That looks very learned,’ I said, in the feeble way that one does.
‘Oh, it’s just kinship diagrams,’ she said rather shortly.
Rocky laughed and poured out the coffee. I had the impression that

Helena was annoyed with him for having invited me in.

‘You mustn’t mind if I get on with this,’ she said. ‘Our paper is due to

be read soon and there’s a lot to do.’

‘I expect you’ll be quite relieved when it’s over,’ I said.
‘I shall be,’ said Rocky. ‘At the moment I have to do all the cooking and

washing up. I’m worn out.’

‘Well, you’re not in the Admiral’s villa now, and anyway it won’t be

long. I thought you liked cooking, darling,’ said Helena in an edgy voice.

I felt rather uncomfortable. I suppose married people get so used to

calling each other ‘darling’ that they never realise how false it sounds when
said in an annoyed or irritable tone.

‘I wonder if you could let me have anything for the jumble sale on

Saturday?’ I asked quickly. ‘Old clothes, shoes or anything?’

‘Oh, I’ve always got lots of junk. It will be a good chance to get rid of

it,’ said Helena without looking up from her writing. ‘I’ll look out some
things this evening.’

‘I’ve got a pair of shoes and a suit that the moth got,’ said Rocky, with a

glance at his wife. ‘I’ll bring them to you tonight. Everard Bone is coming
to talk to Helena about the paper.’

‘Oh, I saw him today,’ I said in what I hoped was a casual tone.
‘Did you?’ Helena turned round from her desk, her face animated.

‘Yes, I’ve been to the Lent service at St. Ermin’s and I saw him there. I

was quite surprised. I mean,’ I added, not wanting to sound smug, ‘I was
surprised because one doesn’t usually see anyone one knows there.’

‘You mean you don’t expect anthropologists to go to church, Miss

Lathbury,’ said Helena. ‘But Everard is a convert, quite ardent, you know.’

‘I thought converts always were ardent,’ said Rocky. ‘Surely that’s the

point about them? The whole set-up is new and interesting to them. Did he
get converted in Africa, seeing the missionaries going about their work?
One would have thought it might have the opposite effect.’

‘Oh, no,’ I protested, ‘they do such splendid work.’
‘Splendid work,’ Rocky repeated, savouring the words, ‘how I love that

expression! It has such a very noble sound. Perhaps Miss Lathbury is right
—it may have been the sight of his fellow anthropologists that sent him
over to the other side.’

‘Well, it wasn’t in Africa,’ said Helena, not sounding amused. ‘I think it

happened when he was at Cambridge, though he never talks about it.’

‘Perhaps it is rather an awkward thing,’ said Rocky. ‘In many ways life

is easier without that.’

‘Of course it is more of an intellectual thing with him,’ said Helena. ‘He

knows all the answers.’

‘We certainly want people like that,’ I said. ‘The Church needs

intelligent people.’

‘I should think so,’ said Helena scornfully. ‘All those old women

swooning over a good-looking curate won’t get it anywhere.’

‘But our curate isn’t good-looking,’ I said indignantly, visualising

Father Greatorex’s short stocky figure in its untidy clothes. ‘He isn’t even
young.’

‘And anyway, why should the Church want to get anywhere?’ said

Rocky. ‘I think it’s much more comforting to think of it staying just where it
is.’

‘Wherever that may be,’ Helena added.
I made a faint murmur of protest, but it was rather faint, for between the

two of them I hardly knew where I was, though Rocky’s attitude seemed the
more sympathetic. ‘I’m afraid we aren’t all very intelligent about our
religion,’ I said, slightly on the defensive, ‘we probably don’t know many
of the answers and can’t argue cleverly. And yet I suppose there’s room for

the stupid as well,’ I added, for I was thinking of the lines in Bishop
Heber’s hymn,

Richer by far is the heart’s adoration,
Dearer to God are the prayers of the poor.

Though obviously He must be very pleased to have somebody as clever as
Everard Bone.

‘Did he speak to you?’ Helena asked.
‘Oh, no, I don’t think he saw me, or if he did he didn’t recognise me.

People don’t, you know. I suppose there’s really nothing outstanding about
me.’

‘Dear Miss Lathbury,’ Rocky smiled, ‘how completely untrue!’
Once more I was transported to the terrace of the Admiral’s villa and

took my place among the little group of Wren officers. Naturally, I did not
know what to say.

‘Why shouldn’t we call you Mildred?’ said Rocky suddenly. ‘After all,

we shall probably be seeing a lot of each other and I think we’re going to be
friends.’

I felt a little embarrassed but could hardly refuse him.
‘And you must call us Helena and Rocky? Could you do that?’
‘Yes, I think so,’ I said, wondering when I should begin.
‘And you can call Everard Bone Everard,’ said Helena, suddenly

laughing.

‘Oh, no,’ I protested; ‘I can’t imagine that ever happening.’
‘You should have spoken to him after the service,’ she said, ‘made some

comment on the sermon or something. He’s very critical.’

‘He hurried away,’ I explained, ‘so I had no chance to, even if he had

recognised me.’

‘Oh, it is nice having you living above us,’ said Helena surprisingly.

‘Just think who we might have had, some dreary couple, or “business
women” or a family with children, too awful.’

I hurried upstairs feeling lighthearted and pleased. I was a little amused

to think that my having seen Everard Bone at the Lent service should have
made me into a nice person to have living above them. For Helena’s sake, if
not for my own, I ought perhaps to make some friendly overture if he were
there next week. I could make it a Lent resolution to try to like him. I began
imagining the process, what I should say and how he would respond. Some

comment on the preacher or the weather, or a friendly enquiry about the
progress of his work would be an obvious beginning.

I stood by the window, leaning on my desk, staring absentmindedly at

my favourite view of the church through the bare trees. The sight of Sister
Blatt, splendid on her high old-fashioned bicycle like a ship in full sail,
filled me with pleasure. Then Julian Malory came along in his black cloak,
talking and laughing with a woman I had not seen before. She was tall and
rather nicely dressed but I could not see her face. It suddenly occurred to
me that she must be Mrs. Gray, who was coming to live in the flat at the
vicarage. I watched them out of sight and then went into the kitchen and
started to wash some stockings. I had a feeling, although I could not have
said why, that she was not quite what we had expected. A clergyman’s
widow . . . she has such sad eyes. . . . Perhaps we had not imagined her
laughing with Julian, I could not put it more definitely than that.

CHAPTER SEVEN

I was formally introduced to Mrs. Gray at the jumble sale on the following
Saturday afternoon. She was behind one of the stalls with Winifred, who
was looking very pleased and animated, rather reminding me of a child who
has asked ‘Will you be friends with me?’ and has been accepted.

Mrs. Gray was, as I had supposed from my first brief glimpse of her,

good-looking and nicely dressed, rather too nicely dressed for a
clergyman’s widow, I felt, remembering many such whom I had met before.
Her quiet manner suggested self-sufficiency rather than shyness and there
was something secret about her smile, as if she saw and thought more than
she would ever reveal.

‘You will have to tell me what to do,’ she said, addressing Winifred and

me, ‘though I suppose jumble sales are the same the world over.’

‘Oh, we get a tough crowd,’ said Winifred gaily. ‘This isn’t a very nice

part, you know, not like Belgravia. I’m afraid a lot of the people who come
to our sales never put their noses inside the church.’

‘Do you think they have jumble sales in Belgravia?’ asked Mrs. Gray;

‘that hadn’t occurred to me.’

‘I believe St. Ermin’s has one occasionally,’ I said.
‘One likes to think of Cabinet Ministers’ wives attending them,’ said

Mrs. Gray, with what seemed to me a rather affected little laugh.

Winifred laughed immoderately and began rearranging the things on the

stall. She and Mrs. Gray were in charge of the odds-and-ends or white
elephant stall. The stuffed birds made a magnificent centre-piece,
surrounded by books, china ornaments, pictures and photograph frames,
some with the photographs still in them. Winifred had removed the
Edwardian lady and the young clergyman, but others had escaped her and

now seemed to stare out almost with indignation from their elaborate
tarnished settings, an ugly woman with a strained expression—perhaps a
governess—a group of bearded gentlemen in cricket clothes, a wayward-
looking child with cropped hair.

‘Oh, look,’ I heard Winifred exclaiming, ‘those poor things! I thought

I’d taken them all out.’

‘Never mind,’ Mrs. Gray said in a soothing tone as if she were speaking

to a child, ‘I think the people who buy the frames don’t really notice the
photographs in them. I remember in my husband’s parish . . .’

So her husband had had a parish, I thought. Somehow I had imagined

him an Army chaplain killed in the war. Perhaps he had been elderly, then?
After this I could hear no more, for Mrs. Gray’s voice was quiet and Sister
Blatt was upon me. I was glad that I should have her help at the clothing
stall, always the most popular. Each garment had been carefully priced, but
even so there would be arguments and struggles among the buyers and the
usual appeals for one of us to arbitrate.

The sale was being held in the parish hall, a bare room with green

painted walls, from which an oil painting of Father Busby, the first vicar,
looked down to bless our activities. At least, we liked to think of him as
doing that, though if one examined the portrait carefully it appeared rather
as if he were admiring his long bushy beard which one hand seemed to be
stroking. A billiard table, a darts board and the other harmless amusements
of the boys’ club stood at one end of the hall. Behind the hatch near the
door Miss Enders, Miss Statham and my Mrs. Morris, apparently no longer
troubled about birettas and Popes’ toes, were busy with the tea urns. Julian
Malory, in flannels and sports jacket, supported by Teddy Lemon and a few
strong ‘lads’ waited near the doors to stem the rush when they should be
opened. Father Greatorex, wearing a cassock and an old navy blue overcoat
of the kind worn by Civil Defence workers during the war, stood
uncertainly in the middle of the room.

Sister Blatt looked at me and clicked her teeth with irritation. ‘Oh, that

man! How he gets on my nerves!’

‘He certainly is rather useless at jumble sales,’ I agreed, ‘but then he’s

so good, saintly almost,’ I faltered, for I really had no evidence to support
my statement apart from the fact that his habitual dress of cassock and old
overcoat seemed to indicate a disregard for the conventions of this world
which implied a preoccupation with higher things.

‘Saintly!’ snorted Sister Blatt. ‘I don’t know what’s given you that idea.

Just because a man takes Orders in middle age and goes about looking like
an old tramp! He was no good in business so he went into the Church—
that’s not what we want.’

‘Oh, come now,’ I protested, ‘surely you’re being rather hard? After all,

he is a good man. . . .’

‘And Mr. Mallett and Mr. Conybeare, just look at them,’ she went on in

a voice loud enough for our two churchwardens to hear. ‘It wouldn’t do
them any harm to soil their hands with a little honest toil. Teddy Lemon and
the boys put up all the trestles and carried the urns.’

‘Yes, Sister, we found everything had been done when we put in an

appearance,’ said Mr. Mallett, a round jolly little man. ‘It was quite a blow,
I can tell you. We had hoped to be able to help you ladies. But they also
serve who only stand and wait, as the poet says.’

‘You certainly came early enough,’ said Sister Blatt with heavy

sarcasm.

‘The early bird catches the worm,’ said Mr. Conybeare, a tall stringy

man with pince-nez.

‘Now, Mr. Conybeare, I hope you’re not suggesting that there’re any

worms here,’ giggled Miss Statham from behind the hatch. ‘You’ll catch
something else if you don’t get out of the way. And don’t think I’m going to
give you a cup of tea till you’ve earned it. . . .’

But at that moment, Julian, watch in hand, ordered the doors to be

opened. The surging crowd outside was kept in check by Teddy Lemon and
his supporters, while Julian took the three-pences for admission; but once
past him they rushed for the stalls.

‘Talk about landing on the Normandy beaches,’ said Sister Blatt, ‘some

of our jumble sale crowd would make splendid Commandos.’

The next few minutes needed great concentration and firmness. I

collected money, gave change and tried at the same time to rearrange the
tumbled garments, settle arguments and prevent the elderly from being
injured in the crush.

Sister Blatt was free with advice and criticism. ‘You’ll never get into

that, Mrs. Ryan,’ she called out derisively to a stout Irishwoman, a Roman
Catholic incidentally, who was always in the front of the queue for our
sales.

Mrs. Ryan laughed good-humouredly and clutched the flowered

artificial silk dress she had picked up. Her soft brogue beguiled me, as
always, so that I listened, fascinated, not knowing what she said. I just
caught the words ‘a lovely man’ as she went off with her dress.

Sister Blatt was laughing in spite of herself. ‘Well, really, that woman

has a nerve, inviting me over to their jumble sale next week and telling me
that their new priest, Father Bogart, is a lovely man! As if that would attract
me!’

‘Oh, but think how it does and how it has done, that kind of thing.

Whence would the Church be if it hadn’t been for a “lovely man” here and
there? It’s rather nice to think of churches being united through jumble
sales,’ I suggested. ‘I wonder if the Methodists are having one too?’

‘Churches united through jumble sales?’ said Julian, coming up to our

stall. ‘Well, we might do worse.’ He glanced round at the crowd, less
struggling than it had been half an hour ago, with satisfaction. ‘You didn’t
persuade your friends the Napiers to come?’ he asked me.

‘I’m afraid I didn’t try,’ I admitted. ‘They sent some things but

somehow I just couldn’t imagine them here. It wouldn’t be the right kind of
setting for them.’

Julian glanced round at the dingy green walls. ‘Well, I suppose we all of

us think that we’re worth a better one.’

‘Except for Father Greatorex,’ said Sister Blatt spitefully. ‘He’s quite in

his place here. He hasn’t done a thing all afternoon. And why doesn’t he
take his coat off? He must be boiled.’

‘Oh, look,’ I said, ‘he’s taking tea to Miss Malory and Mrs. Gray.’
‘Well, that completely out of character,’ said Sister Blatt.
‘You can hardly blame him for wanting to do it,’ said Julian, watching

the little group with interest. ‘I wonder if they have cakes? He would hardly
be able to carry everything at once. I think I had better go and help.’

I saw him go to the hatch, come away with a plate of brightly-coloured

iced cakes and then offer one to Mrs. Gray.

Sister Blatt and I looked at each other.
‘Well,’ I began rather doubtfully, ‘the vicar is always charming to new

parishioners, or he ought to be. That’s a known thing.’

‘But we hadn’t got any tea,’ she pointed out indignantly. ‘I think it was

extremely rude of him to ignore us like that. All because of a new face.

Make new friends but keep the old,

One is silver, the other gold . . .’

she recited. ‘Perhaps we shouldn’t value ourselves as highly as that, but all
the same . . .’

‘Yes, I think he did rather forget his manners,’ I agreed. ‘Of course,

Mrs. Gray is going to live in his house, you know, so perhaps he feels that
the relationship between them should be especially cordial.’

‘Oh, rubbish! I never heard such far-fetched excuses.’
‘Oh-ho, jealous are you, Sister?’ said Mr. Mallett roguishly. ‘You’d

better go and get your tea before all the cakes go.’

‘You mean before you and Mr. Conybeare eat them all,’ said Sister

Blatt. ‘I expect you’ve been tucking in for hours.’

‘Now you ladies, run along. I’ll look after the stall,’ said Mr. Mallett,

picking up a dress and holding it up against himself in a comic manner. ‘I’ll
guarantee that business will look up now that I’m in charge.’

‘Yes, I think we can safely leave the stall now,’ I said, with a backward

glance at the tumbled garments lying on the bare boards of the table. An old
velvet coat trimmed with moth-eaten white rabbit, a soiled pink georgette
evening dress of the nineteen-twenties trimmed with bead embroidery, a
mangy fur with mad staring eyes priced at sixpence—these things were
‘regulars’ and nobody ever bought them.

At the tea hatch, too, trade had slackened and we were able to talk as we

ate and drank. Mrs. Morris’s sing-song voice could be heard above the
others: ‘Lovely antique pieces they’ve got. I said what about giving them a
bit of polish and he said oh yes a good idea, but she said not to bother, it
was the washing up and cleaning that was the main thing.’

I knew that she was talking about the Napiers, but though my natural

curiosity would have liked to hear more, I felt I could hardly encourage her.
Is it a kind of natural delicacy that some of us have, or do we just lack the
courage to follow our inclinations?

‘Of course he’s been in the Navy,’ said Mrs. Morris.
‘Yes, Lieutenant-Commander Napier was in Italy,’ I said in a rather loud

clear voice, as if trying to raise the conversation to a higher level.

‘How nice,’ said Miss Enders. ‘My sister once went there on a tour, my

married sister, that is, the one who lives at Raynes Park.’

‘Such a nice young man, he is, Mr. Napier,’ said Mrs. Morris. ‘Too good

for her, I shouldn’t wonder.’

My efforts had obviously not been very successful but I did not feel I

could try again.

‘The Italians are very forward with women,’ declared Miss Statham.

‘Of course it’s unwise to walk about after dark in a foreign town anywhere
when you’re alone.’

‘Pinch your bottom they would before you could say knife,’ burst out

Mrs. Morris, but the short silence that followed told her that she had gone
too far. Strictly speaking, she was socially inferior to Miss Enders and Miss
Statham; it was only her participation in parish activities that gave her a
temporary equality.

‘Of course my sister had her husband with her,’ said Miss Enders stiffly,

‘so there couldn’t be anything like that.’

Sister Blatt let out a snort of laughter.
‘Excuse me . . .’ Julian came up behind us with some empty cups and

saucers which he put down on the hatch.

‘Did you get some of my home-made sandwich cake, Father?’ asked

Miss Statham anxiously. ‘I particularly wanted you to try it.’

‘Yes, thank you, delicious,’ he murmured absently.
‘I don’t think he did, you know,’ said Miss Enders to me in a low tone.

‘He only took a plate of fairies and iced buns.’

‘Perhaps Father Greatorex did,’ I suggested.
‘If you ask me, I think Mr. Mallett and Mr. Conybeare had most of it.

They were the first to have their tea. And I did see Teddy Lemon take a
piece.’

‘I’m sure he deserved a good tea,’ I said. ‘He worked very hard.’
‘Oh, yes, Mr. Mallett and Mr. Conybeare didn’t do a hand’s turn. Just

got in everybody’s way as usual.’

The group started to break up and we went back to the stalls to tidy

them. Another jumble sale was over.

Winifred came up to me, her eyes shining. ‘Oh, Mildred,’ she breathed,

‘what do you think her name is?’

I said I had no idea.
‘Allegra!’ she told me. ‘Isn’t that lovely? Allegra Gray.’
I found myself wondering if it was really Mrs. Gray’s name, or if she

had perhaps adopted it instead of a more conventional and uninteresting
one. ‘Wasn’t Allegra the name of Byron’s natural daughter?’ I asked.

‘Byron! How splendid!’ Winifred clasped her hands in rapture.

‘I’m not sure that it was splendid,’ I persisted.
‘Oh, but Byron was such a splendid romantic person,’ said Winifred,

‘and that’s the main thing, isn’t it?’

‘Is it really?’ I asked, still determined that I would not be forced to

admire Mrs. Gray. ‘Doesn’t one look for other qualities in people?’

‘Oh, Mildred, you’re so practical,’ laughed Winifred. ‘Of course I’ve

always been silly and romantic—it’s just how you’re made.’

I thought of the Christina Rossetti in its limp green suède cover. When I

am dead, my dearest . . . when there had perhaps never been a dearest.
Weren’t we all a little like that? I began to consider the people I knew in
terms of splendour and romance. I had certainly known very few who could
be described as splendid and romantic. Clergymen could and should be left
out of it straight away, I felt, and that didn’t leave many others. Only Rocky
Napier and Everard Bone, perhaps, who were both good-looking in their
different styles. Rocky had charm, too, and must have seemed a splendidly
romantic person to a great many women.

I crept quietly up to my flat and began to prepare supper. The house

seemed to be empty. Saturday night . . . perhaps it was right that it should
be and I sitting alone eating a very small chop. After I had washed up I
would listen to Saturday Night Theatre and do my knitting. I wondered
where the Napiers were, if they were out together, or if Helena was with
Everard Bone. My son is at a meeting of the Prehistoric Society . . . I began
to laugh, bending over the frying-pan. There was certainly nothing romantic
about him, but was he perhaps just a little splendid?

CHAPTER EIGHT

During the next few weeks the weather improved and suddenly it was
almost spring. The time came round for my annual luncheon with William
Caldicote, the brother of my friend Dora. This was always something of a
ceremonial occasion and dated from the days when Dora, and perhaps even
William himself, had hoped that ‘something might come of it’. But as the
years had passed our relationship had settled down into a comfortable dull
thing. I do not remember when it was that I first began to realise that
William was not the kind of man to marry, and that I myself did not mind in
the very least. It now seemed so natural that if we were in a taxi together he
should express the emotion that it was a relief to sit down rather than that it
was pleasant to be alone with me. His care for his food and drink, too, was
something I accepted and even found rather endearing, especially as I
benefited from it myself. I could always be sure of a good meal with
William.

He worked in a Ministry somewhere near Whitehall and was now a

rather grey-looking man in the late thirties, with surprisingly bright beady
eyes. We always met in a restaurant, one in Soho where he was known, and
as I hurried towards it—for I was a little late—I began thinking that
William wasn’t really the most suitable person to be having luncheon with
on this fresh spring day. Surely a splendid romantic person was the obvious
companion? The blue sky full of billowing white clouds, the thrilling little
breezes, the gay hats of some of the women I met, the mimosa on the
barrows—all made me feel disinclined for William’s company, his
preoccupation with his health and his food and his spiteful old-maidish
delight in gossip.

He was in a fussy mood today, I could see, as he went rather petulantly

through the menu. The liver would probably be overdone, the duck not
enough done, the weather had been too mild for the celery to be good—it
seemed as if there was really nothing we could eat. I sat patiently while
William and the waiter consulted in angry whispers. A bottle of wine was
brought. William took it up and studied the label suspiciously. I watched
apprehensively as he tasted it, for he was one of those men to whom the
formality really meant something and he was quite likely to send the bottle
back and demand another. But as he tasted, he relaxed. It was all right, or
perhaps not that, but it would do.

‘A tolerable wine, Mildred,’ he said, ‘unpretentious, but I think you will

like it.’

‘Unpretentious, just like me,’ I said stupidly, touching the feather in my

brown hat.

‘We really should have a tolerable wine today. Spring seems to be

almost with us,’ he observed in a dry tone.

‘Nuits St. Georges,’ I read from the label. ‘How exciting that sounds!

Does it mean the Nights of St. George? It conjures up the most wonderful
pictures, armour and white horses and dragons, flames too, perhaps a great
procession by torchlight.’

He looked at me doubtfully for a moment and then, seeing that I had not

yet tasted my wine, began to explain that Nuits St. Georges was a place
where there were vineyards, but that not every bottle bearing the name on
its label was to be taken as being of the first quality. ‘It might,’ he said
seriously, ‘be an ordinaire. Always remember that. A little learning is a
dangerous thing, Mildred.’

‘Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring,’ I went on, pleased at being

able to finish the quotation. ‘But I’m afraid I shall never have the chance to
drink deep so I must remain ignorant.’

‘Ah, Pope at Twickenham,’ sighed William. ‘And now Popesgrove is a

telephone exchange. It makes one feel very sad.’ He paused for a moment
and then began to eat with great enjoyment.

It was certainly an excellent luncheon and what we were having did not

appear to be on the menu. After we had been eating for some time and had
satisfied our first brutish hunger, he began to ask me about myself, what I
had been doing since the last time we met, whether there had been any
interesting cases before my committee.

‘How I should love to do work of that kind,’ he said, ‘I feel that I almost

have a natural gift for it. You see, I would understand so well what these
unfortunate gentlepeople had lost. The great house in Belgrave Square with
the servants bringing up trays from the basement, the Edwardian country
house parties with visiting foreign royalties, the villa at Nice or Bordighera
for the winter months . . .’

‘Oh, but the people we have to deal with aren’t usually as grand as that,’

I said, marveling at William’s understanding, when he and Dora, the
children of a doctor, had been brought up in a Birmingham suburb. ‘They
are gentlepeople, of course, but more like us, daughters of clergymen or
professional people, who may have been comfortably off but never really
wealthy.’

‘A pity, I mean that you don’t get the grander kind, because the greater

the fall the more poignant the tragedy.’

‘Yes, I suppose so.’ I remembered reading something of the kind at

school when we had been studying Shakespeare’s tragedies. ‘But we do
have some very tragic cases,’ I said, ‘and I’m afraid there is nothing at all
dramatic about them, poor souls.’

‘Ah, yes.’ He became serious, but then seemed to brighten up. ‘Tell me

about the new people who have come to live in your house.’

I began to describe the Napiers, rather hesitantly, for I did not want to

make too much of their disagreements as I knew that William with his love
of gossip and scandal would seize eagerly on any scrap. Not that it really
mattered, I supposed, and as I went on talking I must have become less
cautious for I found myself, rather to my dismay, insisting that he was much
too nice for her.

“But, my dear, that’s so often the way,’ said William, ‘one should never

be surprised at it. All these delightful men married to such monsters, such
fiends.’

‘Oh, Mrs. Napier isn’t like that,’ I protested, ‘it’s just that he is

exceptionally nice.’

I suppose it must have been the Nuits St. Georges or the spring day or

the intimate atmosphere of the restaurant, but I heard myself to my horror,
murmuring something about Rocky Napier being just the kind of person I
should have liked for myself.

There was a marked silence after I said this, during which I looked

round the restaurant with detachment, noticing a waiter concocting some

dish over a flame at a side table, a man leaning across to touch the hand of
the girl sitting opposite him, and I suddenly felt irritated with William for
being so grey and fussy and Dora’s brother whom I had known for years.

‘But my dear Mildred, you musn’t marry,’ he was saying indignantly.

‘Life is disturbing enough as it is without these alarming suggestions. I
always think of you as being so very balanced and sensible, such an
excellent woman. I do hope you’re not thinking of getting married?’

He stared across the table at me, his eyes and mouth round and serious

with alarm. I began to laugh to break the unnatural tension which had
arisen, and also at Dora’s idea, which I believe she still cherished, that
William and I might marry one day.

‘Oh, no, of course not!’ I said. ‘I’m so sorry if I alarmed you. Why, I

don’t know anyone suitable, to begin with.’

‘What about the vicar?’ asked William suspiciously.
‘Father Malory? Oh, he doesn’t believe in marriage for the clergy, and

in any case he isn’t really the kind of person I should want to marry,’ I
assured him.

‘Well, that’s a relief,’ said William. ‘We, my dear Mildred, are the

observers of life. Let other people get married by all means, the more the
merrier.’ He lifted the bottle, judged the amount left in it and refilled his
own glass but not mine. ‘Let Dora marry if she likes. She hasn’t your talent
for observation.’

I suppose I should have felt pleased at this little compliment but I was

somehow irritated. In any case, it was not much of a compliment, making
me out to be an unpleasant inhuman sort of person. Was that how I
appeared to others? I wondered.

‘What news have you of Dora?’ I asked, to change the subject. ‘I’m

afraid I owe her a letter.’

‘Oh, a lot of news.’ He spread out his hands with an expansive gesture

and leaned back in his chair. ‘Much seems to happen in that little world.
And yet I suppose a girls’ school has as much happening in it as most
worlds and the undercurrents are more deadly.’

‘Oh? Anything in particular?’
William leaned forward and his small beady eyes gleamed with delight.

‘Unpleasantness,’ he whispered dramatically.

‘Oh, dear, what about?’ I asked, but I was not surprised, for there

seemed to be so much of it at Dora’s schools. I had at times found myself

wondering disloyally whether she did not perhaps invite it.

‘Something about the girls wearing hats in chapel, or not wearing hats

—it doesn’t really matter which. Oh, the infinite variety and complication
of that little world! The greater things, birth, death and copulation are just
passed by as if they were nothing.’

‘Well, they don’t really have things like that in a girls’ school, at least

not often,’ I said, my thoughts going back to an occasion in my own
schooldays when a mistress had died and her coffin had been placed in the
chapel, ‘and then only death.’

‘Oh, not the other things!’ said William, now in high good humour. ‘But

supposing they did!’

I stirred my coffee, feeling embarrassed, particularly as his voice had a

penetrating quality.

‘Of course Miss Protheroe is rather difficult to get on with,’ I ventured.

‘I’ve only met her once, but she seemed to me the kind of person I
shouldn’t like to have to work with myself.’

‘But poor Dora is so irritating, too,’ said William. ‘I can never bear her

for more than a week-end.’

We were standing outside on the pavement. After the warm rosy gloom

of the restaurant, the fresh spring air was like another bottle of wine. There
was a barrow full of spring flowers just opposite.

‘Oh, look, mimosa!’ I exclaimed, though not with any hope that

William would buy me any. ‘I must have some.’

‘It always reminds me of cafés in seaside towns, all dried-up and

rattling with the bottles of sauces on the table,’ said William, standing by
while I bought a bunch.

‘Yes, I know the fluffiness doesn’t last long, but it’s so lovely while it

does.’

‘You seem unlike yourself today,’ he said disapprovingly. ‘I hope it

wasn’t the Nuits St. Georges.’

‘You know I’m not used to wine, particularly in the middle of the day,’ I

said, ‘but it’s rather pleasant to be unlike oneself occasionally.’

‘I don’t agree. They’ve moved me to a new office and I don’t like it at

all. Different pigeons come to the windows.’

‘I’ve never been in your office,’ I said boldly, ‘may I come back with

you and see it?’

‘Oh, the prison, you mean, with its stone walls and iron bars, which the

poet tells us do not a prison make. Yes, you may come if you like.’

We walked into Trafalgar Square and then into an anonymous-looking

entrance in a back street somewhere beyond it. Grey-looking men like
William, some even greyer, were hurrying in. He greeted one or two of
them; they seemed to have double-barrelled names like Calverley-Hibbert
and Radcliffe-Forde, but they did not look any the less grey for all that.

‘Here we are!’ William flung open a door with his name on it and I went

in. Two elderly grey men were sitting at a table, one with a bag of sweets
which he hastily put away into a drawer, the other with a card-index which
he naturally did not attempt to conceal. William did not acknowledge them
in any way nor did they take any notice of him. He sat down at an enormous
desk in the centre of the room, which had two telephones on it and a line of
wire baskets, importantly labelled and stacked with files. I had no very clear
idea of what it was that he did.

‘This is a nice room,’ I said, going to the window, ‘and what a lovely

desk you have.’ I felt embarrassed at the presence of the grey men and did
not quite know what to say. But suddenly a rattling sound, as if a trolley
was being wheeled along the corridor, was heard and the two men leaped
up, each carrying a china mug.

‘Oh, excuse me,’ said William, leaping up too and taking a china mug

from a drawer in his desk, ‘I think I hear the tea.’

He did not offer to get me any, nor did I feel I really wanted any as it

was barely three o’clock. I wondered why the grey men, who were
obviously of a lower grade or status than William, had not fetched his tea
for him, but perhaps there was a rigid etiquette in these matters. Also,
knowing William’s fussiness, it was quite likely that he would insist on
fetching his own tea. I began to wonder whether important-sounding people
like Calverley-Hibbert and Radcliffe-Forde were also at this moment
hurrying along corridors with mugs. Perhaps even the Minister himself was
joining in the general scramble. I went on standing by the window and
looked out at the view which was of another office building, perhaps the
same Ministry, where there were rows of uncurtained windows and the
activities of the rooms were exposed as if it was a doll’s house. Grey men
sat at desks, their hands moving among files; some sipped tea, one read a
newspaper, another manipulated a typewriter with the uncertain touch of
two fingers. A girl leaned from a window, another combed her hair, a third

typed with expert speed. A young man embraced a girl in a rough playful
way and she pulled his hair while the other occupants of the room looked
on encouragingly . . . I watched, fascinated, and was deep in contemplation
when William and his underlings came back with their steaming mugs.

‘Is that another Ministry across there?’ I asked.
‘Ah, yes, the Ministry of Desire,’ said William solemnly.
I protested, laughing.
‘They always look so far away, so not-of-this-world, those wonderful

people,’ he explained. ‘But perhaps we seem like that to them. They may
call us the Ministry of Desire.’

At that moment a clock struck a quarter past three. William jumped up,

and picking up a paper bag from one of the wire trays, walked over to the
window and flung it open. There was a whirring of wings and a crowd of
pigeons swooped down on to the flat piece of roof outside the window.
Some hopped up on to the sill and one even came into the room and
perched on William’s shoulder. He took two rolls from the paper bag and
began to crumble them and throw the pieces among the birds.

One of the grey men looked up from his card-index and gave me a faint,

as it were pitying, smile.

‘Does this happen every afternoon?’ I asked William.
‘Oh, yes, and every morning too. I couldn’t get through the day without

my pigeons. I feel like one of those rather dreadful pictures of St. Francis—
I’m sure you and Dora had one at school—but it’s a good feeling and one
does so like to have that.’

I could not help smiling at the association of St. Francis with a civil

servant, but I had not known about William’s fondness for pigeons and
there was something unexpected and endearing about it. He seemed so
completely absorbed in them, calling them by names, encouraging this one
to come forward and telling that one not to be greedy, that I decided that he
had forgotten all about me and it was time to go home.

‘I really ought to be going now,’ I said. ‘I must be keeping you from

your work,’ I added, with no thought of irony until after I had said it.

William returned to his desk and opened a file. ‘You must come and see

my new flat,’ he said, mentioning an address in Chelsea which seemed
familiar.

I thanked him for my luncheon and walked away, carrying my bunch of

mimosa down the bare corridors. Of course, I remembered as I waited for a

bus, Everard Bone and his mother lived in that street, that was why the
address had seemed familiar. What a good thing I had not said anything to
William about Helena Napier and Everard Bone, though it was unlikely that
he would know them. My son is at a meeting of the Prehistoric
Society. . . . I heard again Mrs. Bone’s querulous voice and smiled to
myself.

When I reached the front door of my house I saw Rocky Napier

approaching from the other side of the street.

‘Mimosa!’ he exclaimed. ‘Why didn’t I think of that?’
‘I couldn’t resist it,’ I said. ‘It makes one think. . . .’
‘Of Italy and the Riviera, of course.’
‘I’ve never been there,’ I reminded him; ‘it’s just that it seemed such a

lovely day and I felt I wanted it.’

‘Yes, that’s a better reason.’
We walked upstairs together. As we came to his door some impulse

made me unwrap the flowers. I saw that the bunch divided easily into two
branches. ‘Do have a piece,’ I said, ‘I should like you to.’

‘How sweet of you and how like you,’ he said easily. ‘Have you got

anything nice for tea? I haven’t.’

‘I don’t think I have particularly,’ I said, my thoughts going inside my

cake tin with a harlequin on the lid and remembering only a small wedge of
sandwich cake there.

‘I know, let’s be daring and go out to tea.’
I stood holding the mimosa. ‘We must put this in water first.’
‘Yes, put it in our kitchen.’ He took it from me, filled a jug with water

and put it on the draining-board.

We went out again to a café he knew, a place I had never discovered,

where they had good cakes. But it hardly seemed to matter about the cakes.
Perhaps it was because I had had a large and rather late luncheon, but I
didn’t feel very hungry. He was so gay and amusing and he made me feel
that I was gay and amusing too and some of the things I said were really
quite witty.

It wasn’t till afterwards that I remembered the Wren officers. By that

time it was evening and I was back in my own kitchen, wondering what to
have for supper. I suddenly realised, too, that we had left all the mimosa in
the Napiers’ kitchen. I could hardly go and ask him to give me back my half
of it. Anyway, Helena had come in and I could hear them laughing together.

I shouldn’t have gossiped to William in that naughty way, and in Lent, too.
It served me right that I should have no mimosa to remind me of the spring
day, but only a disturbed feeling which was most unlike me. There was a
vase of catkins and twigs on the table in my sitting-room. ‘Oh, the kind of
women who bring dry twigs into the house and expect leaves to come on
them!’ Hadn’t Rocky said something like that at tea?

CHAPTER NINE

Rocky returned my half of the mimosa next morning, when I was hurrying
to go out to my work. It had lost its first fluffiness and looked like the café
table decoration that William disliked. The spring weather had also gone
and Rocky himself appeared in a dressing-gown with his hair ruffled. I felt
too embarrassed to look at him and put my hand out through the half open
kitchen door and took the mimosa quickly, putting it in the vase with the
twigs and catkins.

On the bus I began thinking that William had been right and I was

annoyed to have to admit it. Mimosa did lose its first freshness too quickly
to be worth buying and I must not allow myself to have feelings, but must
only observe the effects of other people’s.

I sat down at my table and began going grimly through a card-index of

names and addresses. Edith Bankes-Tolliver, 118 Montgomery
Square . . . that was quite near me. I wondered if she came to our church.
Perhaps Julian would know her. . . . I really ought to make a list of the
distressed gentlewomen in our district and try to visit them. Most of them
lived alone and it was quite likely that I might be able to do some shopping
for them or read to them or even just sit and let them talk. . . . I was deep in
thoughts of the good works I was going to immerse myself in, when Mrs.
Bonner came into the room and reminded me that it was Wednesday and
that we had arranged to go to the lunchtime service at St. Ermin’s. This
meant that we had to hurry over our lunch—unlike yesterday’s meal, it
could not, I felt, be called luncheon—which we had at a self-service
cafeteria near the church. Our trays rattled along on a moving belt at a
terrifying speed, so that at the end of it all I found myself, bewildered and
resentful, holding a tray full of things I would never have chosen had I had

time to think about it, and without a saucer for my coffee. Mrs. Bonner,
who always came to such places, had done much better and began
explaining to me where I had gone wrong.

‘You get the saucer after you’ve taken a roll, if you have one. I

generally don’t as we are told not to waste bread, and before you get the hot
dish,’ she said, as we stood with our trays looking for two vacant places.

‘Oh, that must be where I went wrong,’ I said, looking down at the

bullet-hard roll which I was sure I was going to waste. ‘I think one ought to
be allowed a trial run-through first, a sort of dress rehearsal.’

Mrs. Bonner laughed heartily at the idea and at that moment saw two

places at a table with two Indian gentlemen. ‘I shouldn’t go here if I were
alone,’ she whispered before we sat down, ‘you never know, do you, but I
think it’s all right if you have somebody with you.’

Our companions certainly looked harmless enough and were evidently

students of some kind, as they appeared to be discussing examination
results. I listened fascinated to their staccato voices and the way they kept
calling each other ‘old boy’. They took no notice of us whatsoever and I do
not think Mrs. Bonner need have feared even if she had been alone.

We settled ourselves and our food at the table and I paused for a

moment to draw breath before eating. The room was enormous, like
something in a nightmare, one could hardly see from one end of it to the
other, and as far as the eye could see was dotted with tables which were all
full. In addition, a file of people moved in through a door at one end and
formed a long line, fenced off from the main part of the room by a brass
rail.

‘Time like an ever-rolling stream
Bears all its sons away . . .’

I said, more to myself than to Mrs. Bonner. ‘This place gives me a hopeless
kind of feeling.’

‘Oh, it’s quite cheap and the food isn’t bad if you don’t come here too

often,’ she said, cheerfully down-to-earth as always. ‘It’s useful if you’re in
a hurry.’

‘One wouldn’t believe there could be so many people,’ I said, ‘and one

must love them all.’ These are our neighbours, I thought, looking round at
the clerks and students and typists and elderly eccentrics, bent over their
dishes and newspapers.

‘Hurry up, dear,’ said Mrs. Bonner briskly, ‘it’s twenty past already.’
The Indians had left us by now so I ventured to tell her what I had been

thinking.

She looked up from her chocolate trifle, rather shocked. ‘Oh, I don’t

think the Commandment is meant to be taken as literally as that,’ she said
sensibly. ‘We really ought to be going, you know, or we shan’t get a good
seat. You know how crowded the church gets.’

We managed to find places rather near the back and Mrs. Bonner

expressed doubts as to whether we should be able to hear—the man last
week had mumbled rather. Today the preacher was to be Archdeacon
Hoccleve, a name that was unknown to me, and I guessed that he would be
some old country clergyman who would certainly mumble. But I was
completely wrong. He was an elderly man, certainly, but of a handsome and
dignified appearance and his voice was strong and dramatic. His sermon too
was equally unexpected. Hitherto the Lenten series had followed a more or
less discernible course, but Archdeacon Hoccleve departed completely from
the pattern by preaching about Judgment Day. It was altogether a most
peculiar sermon, full of long quotations from the more obscure English
poets, and although the subject may in itself have been a suitable one for
Lent, its matter and the manner of its delivery occasioned dismay and
bewilderment rather than any more suitable feelings. It was also much
longer than the sermons usually were, so that some of the office workers,
who no doubt had stringent lunch hours, could be seen creeping out before
it was finished.

Mrs. Bonner was disgusted. ‘That talk about the Dies Irae,’ she said,

‘that’s Roman Catholic, you know. It ought not to be allowed here. Not that
he seemed very High in other ways, though. I couldn’t make him out at all.
Some of the things he said were really quite abusive.’

We were by now at the church door, moving slowly out. I had been so

absorbed and astonished by the sermon that I had forgotten to look for
Everard Bone and I now saw that he was standing almost beside me. I
remembered my resolution to try to think well of him and to make some
friendly advance if the opportunity should arise. I felt that there could never
be a better one than the extraordinary sermon we had just heard.

‘Good afternoon,’ I said quietly; ‘what did you think of the sermon?’
He looked down at me with a puzzled expression and then his rather

austere features softened into a smile. ‘Good afternoon,’ he said. ‘I’m afraid

I was so busy trying to keep myself from laughing that I was hardly able to
take it in. I had always thought that grown-up people should have no
difficulty in keeping their composure, but I know differently now.’

We were standing by ourselves, for Mrs. Bonner, seeing that I was

talking to a man, had slipped tactfully away. But I knew that I should have
to face her questionings, unspoken though they might be, at the office next
day. For she was both inquisitive and romantic and could not bear that
anyone under forty should remain unmarried.

‘Yes, it was certainly most unexpected,’ I said, liking him better for

admitting to a human failing. ‘How is your paper getting on?’ I asked,
trying to put an interested note into my voice.

‘Oh, we are giving it in two or three weeks’ time. I believe you wanted

to come and hear it, but I shouldn’t advise you to. It will be frightfully dull.’

‘Oh, but I should like to hear it,’ I said, remembering that Rocky and I

had been going to observe the anthropologists.

‘Well, Helena can get you an invitation,’ he said. ‘And now, if you’ll

excuse me, I really must hurry off. Perhaps I shall see you there.’

I felt that I had made a slight advance, that an infinitesimal amount of

virtue had gone out of me, and although I did not really like him I did not
feel as actively hostile to him as I had before. But how was it possible to
compare him with Rocky? All the same, I told myself sternly, it would not
do to go thinking about Rocky like this. Yesterday, with the unexpected
spring weather and the wine at luncheon there had perhaps been some
excuse; today there was none. The grey March day, the hurried unappetising
meal and the alarming sermon made it more suitable that I should think of
the stream of unattractive humanity in the cafeteria, the Judgment Day, even
Everard Bone.

I decided to call in at the vicarage on my way home to see Winifred. It

seemed a long time since I had had a talk with her and she would be
interested to hear about the sermon.

I rang the bell and Mrs. Jubb came to the door. Miss Malory was

upstairs with Mrs. Gray, helping her to get settled in. Perhaps I would like
to go up to them?

I walked slowly upstairs, pausing on the first landing by the picture of

the infant Samuel which hung in a dark corner and wondering if I should
not turn back after all, for a talk with Winifred and Mrs. Gray was not quite
the same as the talk with Winifred which I had intended. But I decided that

as Mrs. Gray was coming to live at the vicarage I might just as well get to
know her, so I went on and knocked at a door from behind which I heard
voices.

‘Oh, it’s Miss Lathbury; how nice!’ Mrs. Gray herself opened the door. I

looked beyond her into the room which Julian had been distempering not
many weeks earlier. It was now attractively furnished and there was a coal
fire burning in the grate. Winifred was crouching on the hearth-rug, tacking
up the hem of a curtain.

‘Hasn’t Allegra made this room nice, Mildred?’ she said as I came in.

‘You’d never recognise it as being the same place.’

‘Well, Winifred has helped me so much,’ said Mrs. Gray. ‘You know

what a lot there is to do when you move.’

I agreed, noting to myself that they were now ‘Allegra’ and ‘Winifred’

to each other, and being surprised and, I was forced to admit, a little
irritated. ‘Moving is certainly a business,’ I observed tritely, ‘but you seem
to have everything beautifully arranged.’ I remembered that I had not
helped Helena Napier with the hems of her curtains when she moved in. I
had merely peered through the banisters at her furniture being taken in and
had only offered to help when it seemed almost certain that there would be
nothing for me to do. What a much nicer character Winifred was than I!
And yet perhaps the circumstances were a little different. One could hardly
offer to help complete strangers, especially when they were as independent
as Helena Napier. ‘Can’t I help with the curtains?’ I asked.

‘Well, that would be most kind.’ The words hardly seemed to be out of

my mouth before Mrs. Gray had picked up another pile of curtains which
were to be shortened along the line of the pins. I was a little dismayed, as
we often are when our offers of help are taken at their face value, and I set
to work rather grimly, especially as Mrs. Gray herself was not doing
anything at all. She was sitting gracefully in an arm-chair, stroking back her
hair which was arranged at the back of her head in a kind of Grecian knot.
This style, together with her pale oval face and rather vague graceful air,
made her appear like a heroine in an Edwardian novel. There was
something slightly unreal about her.

‘I’m afraid I’m not very good at sewing,’ she said, as if in explanation

of her idleness, ‘but I can at least be making a cup of tea. I do hope you can
stay, Miss Lathbury?’

‘Thank you, I should like to.’

She went out of the room and I could hear her filling a kettle and

collecting china. I also heard a step on the stairs and Julian’s voice saying
‘May I come up? I can hear the attractive rattle of tea things. I hope I’m not
too late?’

He did not come straight into the room where we were, but stayed to

talk to Mrs. Gray in the kitchen. Winifred and I sat with our curtains, not
speaking. I could feel that we were both wanting to talk about Mrs. Gray,
but that was naturally quite impossible at that moment.

‘One of these curtains seems a little longer than the other,’ I remarked in

a loud, stilted tone. ‘I wonder if they were hung up or just measured with a
tape? You often find when you come to hang them that there’s some
inequality in the length.’

Julian came into the room carrying a tray with crockery, bread-and-

butter, jam and a cake. Mrs. Gray followed with the tea.

‘Isn’t it fun, just like a picnic,’ said Winifred from her seat on the

hearth-rug.

‘I really ought not to be eating your jam, Mrs. Gray,’ I protested in a

way one did in those days. ‘I like plain bread-and-butter just as well, really
I do.’

‘Oh, please have some of this,’ she said. ‘It isn’t really my ration, it was

a present from Father Greatorex.’

‘What, does Greatorex make jam?’ asked Julian. ‘I never knew he had

such accomplishments.’

‘Oh, no,’ Mrs. Gray laughed; ‘just imagine it, the poor old thing! This

was made by his sister who lives in the country. It’s really delicious.’

‘How nice of him to give it to you,’ I said, ‘it’s certainly lovely jam.’
‘Oh, Allegra’s the sort of person people want to give things to,’ said

Winifred enthusiastically. ‘Mildred, doesn’t this hearth-rug look familiar to
you?’

I glanced at it and then realised to my surprise that I had seen it

somewhere before. In the vicarage, surely, perhaps in Julian’s study?

‘Yes, it’s the one out of Julian’s study,’ said Winifred.
‘Terribly kind of him, wasn’t it?’ said Mrs. Gray. ‘I hadn’t got one

suitable for this room and I just happened to be admiring it in Father
Malory’s study, quite innocently of course, when he gave it to me!’

‘It looks much nicer in Mrs. Gray’s room than it did in my study,’ said

Julian, ‘and anyway a rug isn’t really necessary in a study.’

I noted with interest that they were still ‘Mrs. Gray’ and ‘Father

Malory’ to each other. ‘It certainly matches this carpet very well,’ I
ventured.

‘Yes, but it matched Father Malory’s carpet too,’ said Mrs. Gray. ‘It was

really very self-sacrificing of him to give it to me.’

Julian murmured a little in embarrassment.
‘Of course,’ went on Mrs. Gray in a clear voice as if she were making a

speech, ‘I always feel that one ought to give men the opportunity for self-
sacrifice; their natures are so much less noble than ours.’

‘Oh, do you think so?’ asked Winifred seriously. ‘I have known some

very fine men.’

Julian smiled indulgently, but said nothing. I felt it was not a very

suitable remark for a clergyman’s widow to have made, though it was
certainly amusing in a rather cheap way.

‘I really must be going now,’ I said in a voice that may have sounded a

little chilly.

‘Oh, Mildred, you haven’t finished your curtains,’ said Winifred.
‘No I’m sorry, I’m afraid I haven’t.’
‘I know, why don’t you come to tea on Friday and finish them then?’

suggested Mrs. Gray, smiling rather sweetly.

‘Thank you, that would be nice,’ I said, very much taken aback. I had

not really imagined that she would expect me to finish the curtains.

‘Then you can see the rest of my little flat,’ said Mrs. Gray. ‘It isn’t

really on show yet, but I hope to have got it tidy by then.’

‘Shall I come down with you?’ asked Julian.
‘Oh, please don’t bother. I’ll let myself out,’ I said. I hurried down the

stairs, feeling that I had made an ungraceful exit. The three upstairs seemed
so self-sufficient, as if they did not want me there. Was I annoyed because
Mrs. Gray seemed to be getting on so well with the Malorys? I asked
myself. It surely could not be that I was jealous? No, I dismissed that
disturbing thought from my mind as quickly as it came in. Today was
obviously not a good day, that was it. It had not started well and it would
not end well. But I could at least save something of it by going home and
doing some washing.

‘Hullo! You look like a wet week at Blackpool,’ Sister Blatt’s jolly

voice boomed out of the dusk.

‘Do I?’ I said, forced to smile in spite of everything.

‘Been to the vicarage?’
‘Yes.’
‘Oh, they’re always with Mrs. Gray now, those two,’ said Sister Blatt

bluntly. ‘I wanted to see Father Malory about the Confirmation classes but
he was helping her to put up curtain rods.’

‘Well, the Malorys are such friendly helpful sort of people,’ I said.
She snorted and I watched her hoist herself slowly on to her bicycle and

move off to perform some good work. Then I went back to my flat and
collected a great deal of washing to do. It was depressing the way the same
old things turned up every week. Just the kind of underclothes a person like
me might wear, I thought dejectedly, so there is no need to describe them.

CHAPTER TEN

At last the day came when Helena and Everard were to read their paper
before the Learned Society. I had been afraid that she would forget her
promise to invite me, but she came up to my flat the evening before and we
arranged what time we should go. There was a tea party first to which
guests could be taken.

‘The new President will be in the Chair,’ said Helena rather formally.

‘He is such an old man that it’s a wonder he hasn’t been President before,
but then there are a lot of the old ones. It will be our turn soon.’

I was a little preoccupied with what I should wear. I did not think it

likely that a meeting of a Learned Society would be in any sense a
fashionable gathering, but I was anxious not to disgrace the Napiers and had
taken the bold step of buying a new hat to go with my brown winter coat
even before I knew definitely that I was to go. Helena was very elegant in
black. ‘One mustn’t look like a female anthropologist,’ she explained.

‘It wouldn’t matter if you looked like some of those American girls,’

said Rocky. ‘They know how to dress.’

‘Trust you to notice that,’ she said rather sourly.
‘I notice everything. Especially Mildred’s charming new hat.’
I accepted the compliment as gracefully as I could, but I was

sufficiently unused to having anybody make any comment on my
appearance to find it embarrassing to have attention drawn to me in any
way.

‘Nothing is more becoming than a velvet hat,’ Rocky went on, ‘and the

brown brings out the colour of your eyes which look like a good dark
sherry.’

‘Everard will meet us there,’ said Helena rather impatiently. ‘We shall

have a few last minute things to discuss, so perhaps you would look after
Mildred?’ she added, turning to her husband. ‘I think we had better take a
taxi.’

The premises of the Learned Society were not very far from St. Ermin’s

and I pointed it out to Helena on the way.

‘Why, isn’t it a ruin?’ she asked. ‘Fancy having services in a ruin! I

should feel there was something particularly holy about that.’

I explained that one aisle was undamaged and that we had the services

there, but I suppose she must have been nervous at the idea of the paper, for
she did not seem to be listening and a minute or two afterwards the taxi
drew up outside a good solid-looking Victorian house, with the brass plate
of the Learned Society on its door.

In the hall Helena signed a book for us and we went upstairs to the

library where the tea party was to be held. Everard Bone, looking elegant
and rather cross, was standing by the door.

‘I thought you were never coming,’ he said to Helena, and then nodded

‘good afternoon’ to Rocky and me in a cursory way.

‘I think we had better retire to a corner and observe the Learned

Society,’ said Rocky, guiding me over to where a table was spread with
cups and saucers and plates of food.

‘What a lot of strange-looking people,’ I whispered.
‘Nobody seems to be eating yet,’ Rocky observed, ‘but I think we had

better station ourselves near the food. I dare say these types are little better
than primitive peoples when it comes to eating.’

‘My dear sir, I fear we are even worse,’ said an elderly man with a large

head, who was standing near us. ‘The so-called primitive peoples have an
elaborate order and precedence in eating but I’m afraid that when we get
started it’s every man for himself.’

‘The survival of the fittest?’ Rocky suggested.
‘Yes, perhaps that is it. I hope we shall remember our manners

sufficiently to offer refreshment to the ladies first,’ continued the old man,
with a little bow in my direction. ‘Ah, here is our excellent Miss Clovis
with the teapot.’ He turned away and busied himself with cups and saucers.

‘Do you think he is going to bring some to us?’ I asked Rocky.
‘Well, after what he has just said I should think he will surely bring you

a cup of tea.’

But we were wrong, for he quickly helped himself to tea, collected an

assortment of sandwiches and cakes on a plate and retired to the opposite
corner of the room. We watched other elderly and middle-aged men doing
the same, though one was held back by an imperious woman’s voice calling
‘Now, Herbert, no milk for Miss Jellink, remember!’

Rocky and I joined in a general scramble and took our spoils to a

convenient bookcase where we could put our cups down on a shelf.

‘These are quite obviously the books that nobody reads,’ said Rocky,

studying their titles. ‘But it’s a comfort to know that they are here if you
ever should want to read them. I’m sure I should find them more
entertaining than the more up-to-date ones. Wild Beasts and their Ways;
Five Years with the Congo Cannibals; With Camera and Pen in Northern
Nigeria; Sunshine and Storm in Rhodesia. I wish people still wrote books
with titles like that. Nowadays I believe it simply isn’t done to show a
photograph of “The Author with his Pygmy Friends”—we have become too
depressingly scientific.’

‘You might write a book about your adventures in Italy,’ I suggested. ‘It

might well have such a title.’

We amused ourselves by discussing the variations on this theme and

while we were in the middle of our fantasies Everard and Helena came up
to us and began to point out some of the more eminent persons present. The
President was a tall mild-looking old man with a white wispy beard, in
which some crumbly fragments of meringue had lodged themselves. In his
younger days he had apparently written some rather startling pamphlets
about the nature of the universe.

‘I believe his father turned him out of the house,’ said Everard. ‘You

see, he was a Methodist Minister and when he found out that his son was a
militant atheist I suppose it became awkward.’

‘That old man an atheist!’ I exclaimed, unable to believe that anyone

who looked so mild and benevolent should be what always sounded such a
very wicked and startling thing. ‘But he looks so unlike that. More like a
bishop, really.’

‘Or an old-fashioned picture of God,’ suggested Rocky. ‘I like to

imagine the scene in the Victorian household, the father’s wrath and the
mother’s tears, those dreadful scenes at the breakfast table. And yet, what
does it all matter now? In a few years’ time they will all be together in
Heaven.’

‘Oh, darling,’ said Helena impatiently, ‘how ridiculous you are.

Afterwards I’ll introduce you to some of the really worthwhile people here.
Apfelbaum, Tyrell Todd, and Steinartz from Yale—the new generation.’

‘They sound delightful,’ said Rocky gravely.
‘I think we should be going in,’ said Everard. ‘The President seems to

be moving.’

We now followed them into a room adjoining the library where a

number of people were already sitting. I noticed that the front rows were
basket chairs and that one or two elderly men and women had settled
themselves comfortably. One old man wore a purple muffler wound round
his neck; an old woman took a piece of multi-coloured knitting from a raffia
bag and began to work on it.

Rocky and I took our seats somewhere in the middle of the room on the

harder chairs. The younger people sat here, girls with flowing hair and
scarlet nails and youths with hair almost as flowing and corduroy trousers. I
noticed one or two Americans, serious-looking young men with rimless
glasses and open notebooks, and a group of Africans, talking in a strange
language. There was a buzz of unintelligible conversation all around us.

‘What an interesting-looking lot of people,’ I said, ‘quite unlike

anything I’m used to.’

‘You can understand people saying that it takes all sorts to make a

world,’ said Rocky. ‘One wonders if quite so many sorts are necessary.’

‘It must be wonderful to have an interest in some learned subject,’ I

said. ‘This seems to be a thing that old and young can enjoy equally.’

Rocky laughed. ‘I don’t think Helena or Everard would approve of that

attitude. You make it sound like a game of golf. And remember, we aren’t
here to enjoy ourselves. The paper will be long and the chairs hard. I think
our ordeal is about to begin.’

The President had now risen to his feet and was introducing Helena and

Everard in a vague little speech. It almost sounded as if he thought they
were husband and wife, but he smiled so nicely through his wispy beard
that nobody could possibly have taken offence. Everard and Helena sat to
one side of him, while a stocky red-haired young man, who had been
pointed out to us as the Secretary, took notes.

‘And now I will leave our young friends to tell their own tale,’ said the

President. ‘Their paper is entitled . . .’ he fumbled with a pair of gold-
rimmed spectacles and then read in a clear deliberate voice some words

which conveyed so little to me at the time that I am afraid I have now
forgotten them. Doubtless the title is recorded somewhere in the archives or
minutes of the Learned Society.

I looked hopefully towards the lantern which stood at the back of the

room, but it did not seem as if there were going to be any slides. The
Americans’ pencils were poised over their notebooks, the elderly lady put
down her knitting for a moment. Helena Napier stood up and began to
speak. I can only say that she ‘began to speak’ for I very soon lost the
thread of what she was saying and found myself looking round the room,
studying my surroundings and companions.

The room was very high with a lincrusta ceiling and an elaborate

mantelpiece of brawn-like marble. Long windows opened on to a balcony
and through them I could just see the tender green of a newly unfolded tree
in the square gardens. It seemed strange that we should all be sitting indoors
on such a lovely day. But I must not look out of the window; this was a
great occasion and I was a privileged person. It was certainly a pity that my
lack of higher education made it impossible for me to concentrate on
anything more difficult than a fairly straightforward sermon or committee
meeting. Helena’s voice sounded so clear and competent that I was sure that
what she was saying was of great value. Rocky must be very proud of her. I
noticed the Americans writing furiously in their books. It was a pity I had
not thought of reading up the subject a little; that would have been far more
to the point than buying a new hat. It was humiliating to realise that
everybody in the room but me understood and was able to take an
intelligent interest in what Helena was saying. I fixed my eyes on her with a
fresh determination to concentrate, but then my attention was distracted by
the old lady with her knitting. I saw that the knitting drooped slackly from
her hands and that her head was bowed forward on her breast. Then I saw it
suddenly jerk up. She had been asleep. This revelation gave me some
comfort and I began looking round the room again, this time at the gold-
lettered boards with the names of those who had won a particular medal or
had been benefactors of the society in some way. I read down the list,
fascinated. 1904—Herbert Franklin Crisp, 1905—Egfried Stummelbaum,
1906—Edward Ellis Darwin Rumble, 1907—Ethel Victoria Thorneycroft-
Nollard . . . A woman, in 1907! What had she done to win this medal? What
must she have been like? I imagined her in a long skirt, striding through the
jungle, fearlessly questioning natives who had never before seen a white

woman. A kind of Mary Kingsley, but perhaps even more remarkable in
that she was an anthropologist, the kind of thing a woman would not
naturally be, especially in 1907. Perhaps she was among the elderly people
in the basket chairs, she might even be the one knitting and dozing. . . . I
was so absorbed in my speculations that I did not notice that Helena had
stopped speaking, until I was aware of Everard Bone standing up in her
place and saying, as far as I could judge, very much the same sort of thing
that Helena had already said. He spoke exceptionally well, hardly
consulting his notes at all, and once or twice a ripple of laughter ran through
the audience as if he had made a joke. I took this opportunity of studying
him dispassionately, wondering what it was that made Helena’s eyes sparkle
when his name was mentioned. He was certainly very clever and handsome,
too, in his own way, but there was no warmth or charm about his
personality. I began imagining him as a clergyman and decided that he
would make a good one. His rather forbidding manner would be useful to
him. I realised that one might love him secretly with no hope of
encouragement, which can be very enjoyable for the young or
inexperienced.

When Everard had finished, the President, who looked as if he too had

been dozing, got up and made a kindly speech. ‘And now, I am sure there
are many points you are eager to discuss,’ he went on, ‘who is—ah—going
to start the ball rolling?’

There was the usual embarrassed silence, nobody liking to be first.

Some chairs scraped on the floor and a woman sitting along our row pushed
past us and went out. She was carrying a string-bag, containing a
newspaper-wrapped bundle from which a fish’s tail protruded. Helena
smiled nervously. Everard took off his horn-rimmed spectacles and covered
his eyes with his hand.

‘Ah, Dr. Apfelbaum—first in the field,’ said the President in a relieved

voice and everybody sat back in their chairs and looked up expectantly.
How dreadful it would have been, I thought, if nobody had wanted to ask a
question.

Dr. Apfelbaum was a stocky man of Teutonic appearance. What he said

was quite unintelligible to me, both from its content and because of his very
marked foreign accent, but Everard dealt with him very competently. Now
that the ball was rolling, other speakers followed in quick succession. In
fact, they were jumping up and down like Jacks-in-the-boxes, hardly

waiting for each other to finish. It seemed that they had all ‘done’ some
particular tribe or area and could furnish parallels or contradictions from
their own experience.

‘I shall just let it flow over me,’ said Rocky, but this was not always

possible. There was, at one point, a sharp exchange between Dr. Apfelbaum
and a stout dark-haired woman, and an apparently irrelevant question from
the old man in the purple muffler provoked hearty laughter.

‘No ceremonial devouring of human flesh?’ he repeated in a

disappointed tone, and sat down, shaking his head and muttering.

At last the meeting appeared to be at an end. Helena took Rocky away

and began to introduce him to various people. I stood rather awkwardly by
the door, wondering whether I ought to go home now or whether it would
seem discourteous not to thank Helena and Everard for inviting me. The
people round me seemed to have settled down into little groups, many of
which were carrying on learned discussions.

‘Well, what did you think of it? I’m afraid you must have been very

bored?’

Everard Bone had broken away from a group of Americans and was

standing by my side. I was grateful to him for rescuing me though I could
think of no conversation beyond a polite murmur and was quite sure that he
was wanting to get back to discussing his paper with people who were able
to.

‘I think I must be going home now,’ I said. ‘Thank you very much for

asking me.’

‘Oh, I expect we shall be going somewhere for dinner,’ he said vaguely.

‘You may as well come too.’

‘Well, I haven’t really anything to eat at home,’ I began, but then

stopped as I realised that a dreary revelation of the state of one’s larder was
hardly the way to respond to an invitation to dinner. ‘I should like to join
you if I may.’

‘I wish they’d hurry up,’ said Everard, looking over to where Helena

and Rocky were talking to a group of people.

‘They are just like everybody else, really,’ I said, half to myself. ‘That

old woman knitting, she went to sleep.’

‘That was the President’s wife,’ said Everard, ‘she always does.’
‘Did she work with him in the field?’ I asked.
‘Good Heavens, no! She knows nothing at all about anthropology.’

‘Didn’t she even do the index or the proof-reading for one of his books?

You know what it often says in a preface or dedication—“To my wife, who
undertook the arduous duty of proof-reading” or making the index.’

‘She may have done that. After all, it’s what wives are for.’ He suddenly

smiled and I remembered my Lenten resolution to try to like him. It was
getting a little easier but I felt that at any moment I might have a setback.

‘God, how I want a drink!’ said Helena in her characteristic way. She

and Rocky had now joined us.

‘I hope God is listening,’ said Rocky, ‘because I do too. I was very

much afraid that those people were going to join us for dinner.’

‘I think you were rude to them,’ said Helena crossly, ‘otherwise they

might have done and we could have had some interesting conversation for a
change.’

‘Are there any of the conveniences of civilisation in this place?’ asked

Rocky.

‘Yes, of course there are. Everard will show you. Perhaps you would

like to come with me, Mildred?’ said Helena.

I followed her upstairs and into a room which had ‘Ladies’ printed on a

card on the door. The first thing that caught my eye inside was a rolled-up
Union Jack. This seemed a little out of place, as did the portraits of native
chiefs which were stacked against the walls under the wash basins.

‘There isn’t nearly enough storage space here, as you may have

gathered,’ explained Helena. ‘This room is the repository for any junk that
can’t go anywhere else.’

‘It seems in character with the rest of the place,’ I remarked.
‘So does the fact that there is neither soap nor towel,’ said Helena. ‘We

are at our most primitive here, but after all it is only the basic needs that
have to be supplied.’

‘Well, that’s the main thing,’ I said feebly.
‘At least we don’t have a brooding old woman who expects you to drop

sixpence into a saucer,’ said Helena. ‘I always think those women must see
real drama, when you realise what scenes are enacted in ladies’
cloakrooms.’

‘Yes, I suppose things do go on there,’ I agreed. I remembered girlhood

dances where one had stayed there too long, though never long enough to
last out the dance for which one hadn’t a partner. I didn’t suppose Helena
had ever known that, and yet it was in its way quite a deep experience.

‘It used to be worse, somehow, during the war,’ said Helena. ‘I

remember once—oh, it was so depressing—there was just a dim blue bulb
that made everything look ghastly and I was never going to see him any
more. When I came out he was going to tell me that it was all over—you
know the kind of thing, tears and whisky and then going out into that awful
darkness.’

As I did not know I could only go on tidying my hair in a sympathetic

silence. Helena came to the mirror and began doing something to her
eyelashes with a little brush. ‘Everard seems to like you,’ she remarked
carelessly.

‘Oh, I’m sure he doesn’t. I can never think of anything to say to him.’
‘You think Rocky is much more attractive, don’t you?’
‘Well, yes, I do think he is nicer,’ I said confusedly, for I was not used to

discussing people in such terms. And yet I supposed that if I was honest
with myself I should have to admit that ‘attractive’ was a better word than
‘nice’, and expressed my feeling about Rocky more accurately. But it was
wrong to talk like this, and I wished Helena would stop or that I had gone
home and left the three of them to have dinner together. ‘I suppose we’d
better not keep them waiting too long,’ I said, in an attempt to stop the
conversation from going any further.

‘Oh, it won’t do them any harm, but I could certainly do with a drink,’

said Helena. ‘Come along.’

I followed her downstairs, feeling like a dog or some inferior class of

person.

The men were standing waiting for us in the hall. Whatever

conversation they may have been having appeared to be at an end now, and
they hurried us out rather unceremoniously leaving us to walk a little way
behind them. I suppose they were too hungry and tired of waiting to think
anything of it, but it did not seem a very good beginning to the evening.

Eventually we reached a restaurant and were shown to a table. Some

drinks were ordered and one was handed to me. It was something very
strong, made with gin, I think. I sipped cautiously while Rocky and Everard
argued over the wine list. They were nearly as fussy as William, though in a
different way, and I began to think that it would really be much easier if we
just had water, though I lacked the courage to suggest it.

When the first course came, it turned out to be spaghetti of a

particularly long and rubbery kind. Rocky showed me how to twist it round

my fork but I found it very difficult to manage and it made conversation
quite impossible. Perhaps long spaghetti is the kind of thing that ought to be
eaten quite alone with nobody to watch one’s struggles. Surely many a
romance must have been nipped in the bud by sitting opposite somebody
eating spaghetti?

After that ordeal some meat was brought and the wine with it, and

conversation started again. Rocky began to ask frivolous questions about
the paper.

‘What was that about a man being expected to sleep with an unmarried

sister-in-law who is visiting his house?’ he asked.

‘That’s called a joking relationship,’ said Everard precisely.
‘Not exactly what one would call a joke,’ said Rocky, ‘though it could

be fun. It would depend on the sister-in-law, of course. Does he have to
sleep with her?’

‘Oh, Rocky, you don’t understand,’ said Helena impatiently. It was

obvious that she and Everard did not appreciate jokes about their subject.

‘I wonder if the study of societies where polygamy is a commonplace

encourages immorality?’ asked Rocky seriously, turning to Everard. ‘Would
you say that it did?’

‘There is no reason why it should,’ said Everard.
“Do anthropologists tend to have many wives at the same time?’ he

went on. ‘Have you found that?’

‘They would naturally tend to conceal such things,’ said Everard with a

half smile, ‘and one could hardly ask them.’

‘Oh, they are drearily monogamous,’ said Helena, ‘and very virtuous in

other ways too. Much better than many of these so-called good people who
go to church.’ She turned a half-amused, half-spiteful glance towards me.

‘Well, Mildred, what do you say to that?’ asked Rocky.
‘Church-goers are used to being accused of things,’ I said. ‘I have never

found out what exactly it is that we do or are supposed to do.’

‘We are whited sepulchres,’ said Everard. ‘We don’t practice what we

preach. Isn’t that it, Helena?’

‘One expects you to behave better than other people,’ said Helena, ‘and

of course you don’t.’

‘Why should we? We are only humans, aren’t we, Miss Lathbury?’
It seemed now as if we had changed sides. Before, Helena and Everard

had been ranged against Rocky and me—now Everard was my partner. I

have never been very good at games; people never chose me at school when
it came to picking sides. But Everard had no choice. This state of affairs
continued through dinner and afterwards when we went out into the street.
Everard and I walked together, almost as if he had arranged it that way, but
it cannot have been for the pleasure of my company, as our conversation
was very poor.

‘Do you live near here?’ I asked, knowing that he did not.
‘No, I live in Chelsea. I suppose one would hardly call it near.’
‘No, but it isn’t as far away as if you lived in Hendon or Putney.’
‘That would be further, certainly.’
We walked a few steps in silence. I could hear Rocky and Helena

having an argument in low angry tones.

‘Do you live in a house or a flat?’ I asked in a loud desperate voice.
‘I did live in my mother’s house after I came out of the Army, but I’ve

just moved into a flat of my own, quite near.’

‘You were lucky to find one.’
‘Yes, I know the person who owns the house and one of the tenants

happened to be leaving.’ He stood by a bus-stop. ‘I think I can get a bus
from here.’

Helena and Rocky had caught us up and we stood in a little group by the

bus-stop. Good-nights and thanks were exchanged.

‘Will you ring me up?’ said Helena to Everard.
‘I shall probably be away for a few days,’ he said vaguely.
At a meeting of the Prehistoric Society? I wondered.
‘Aren’t you coming to the next meeting?’ Helena persisted. ‘Tyrell Todd

is reading a paper on pygmies.’

‘Oh, pygmies—well, I don’t know.’
At that moment Everard’s bus came and he got on to it without looking

back.

Rocky found a taxi and we drove most of the way in silence, or rather

Helena was silent while Rocky and I discussed the evening or as much of it
as could be discussed.

‘You and Everard seemed to be having an interesting conversation,’ said

Helena at last. ‘Was he declaring himself or something?’ Her tone was
rather light and cruel as if it were the most impossible thing in the world.

‘He was telling me about his new flat,’ I said lamely.

‘Actually he might do very well for Mildred,’ said Rocky. ‘Had we

thought of that? Obviously, we must find her a good husband.’

‘The driver seems to be going past our house,’ I said. ‘Did you tell him

the number?’

‘Oh, this will do.’ Rocky tapped on the glass and we got out. We were

rather far from our own door, and just as we were walking past the parish
hall, Teddy Lemon and a group of lads came out, laughing and talking in
their rough voices. My heart warmed towards them, so good and simple
with their uncomplicated lives. If only I had come straight home after the
paper. This was Julian’s boys’ club night and I could have been there
serving in the canteen—much more in my line than the sort of evening I
had just spent.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Love was rather a terrible thing, I decided next morning, remembering the
undercurrents of the evening before. Not perhaps my cup of tea. It would be
best not to see too much of the Napiers and their disturbing kind of life, but
to meet only people like Julian and Winifred Malory and Dora Caldicote,
from whom I had had a letter that morning. She hinted vaguely at
‘unpleasantness’ at school, perhaps the affair William had told me about,
and asked if she might come and stay with me for a part of her Easter
holiday. So I busied myself getting the little spare-room ready, arranging
daffodils in a bowl on the mantelpiece and putting out the rather useless
little embroidered guest towels. The room looked pretty and comfortable,
like an illustration in one of the women’s magazines. I knew it would not
look like that for long after Dora’s arrival and was a little sad when I went
to talk to her over her unpacking and saw the familiar bulging canvas bag
and her hair-net lying on the mantelpiece.

‘Why, Mildred,’ she exclaimed, ‘what have you done to yourself? You

look different.’

No compliments, of course; Dora was too old and honest a friend ever

to flatter me, but she had the power of making me feel rather foolish,
especially as I had not realised that she might find any difference in my
appearance since the last time we met. I suppose I had taken to using a little
more make-up, my hair was more carefully arranged, my clothes a little less
drab. I was hardly honest enough to admit even to myself that meeting the
Napiers had made this difference and I certainly did not admit it to Dora.

‘You must be trying to bring William up to scratch,’ she said, ‘is that

it?’

I laughed gratefully.

‘There’s not much you can do when you’re over thirty,’ she went on

complacently. ‘You get too set in your ways, really. Besides, marriage isn’t
everything.’

‘No, it certainly isn’t,’ I agreed, ‘and there’s nobody I want to marry

that I can think of. Not even William.’

‘I don’t know anyone either, at the moment,’ said Dora.
We lapsed into a comfortable silence. It was a kind of fiction that we

had always kept up, this not knowing anyone at the moment that we wanted
to marry, as if there had been in the past and would be in the future.

‘How’s school?’ I asked.
‘Oh, Protheroe and I aren’t on speaking terms,’ said Dora vigorously.

She was a small, stocky person with red hair, not at all like her brother, and
could look very fierce at times.

‘I’m sorry to hear that,’ I said. ‘But I should imagine Miss Protheroe is

rather difficult to get on with.’

‘Difficult! It’s a wonder that woman keeps any of her staff.’
‘What happened?’
‘Oh, well, I let my form go into chapel without hats one morning, and

you know how she is about that sort of thing. Of course I’ve no use for any
of this nonsense. . . .’ I let Dora go on but did not really listen, for I knew
her views on Miss Protheroe and on organised religion of any kind. We had
often argued about it in the past. I wondered that she should waste so much
energy fighting over a little matter like wearing hats in chapel, but then I
told myself that, after all, life was like that for most of us—the small
unpleasantnesses rather than the great tragedies; the little useless longings
rather than the great renunciations and dramatic love affairs of history or
fiction.

‘What would you like to do this afternoon?’ I asked. ‘Shall we go

shopping?’

Dora’s face brightened. ‘Oh, yes, that would be nice.’
Later, as we were trying on dresses in the inexpensive department of a

large store, I forgot all about the Napiers and the complications of knowing
them. I was back in those happier days when the company of women
friends had seemed enough.

‘Oh, dear, this is too tight on the hips,’ said Dora, her ruffled head and

flushed face emerging through the neck of a brown woollen dress.

‘I’m not sure that it’s your colour,’ I said doubtfully. ‘I’ve come to the

conclusion that we should avoid brown. It does the wrong kind of things to
people over thirty, unless they’re very smart. When my brown coat is worn
out I shall get a black or a navy one.’

‘Now you’re talking like a fashion magazine,’ said Dora, struggling

with the zip-fastener. ‘I’ve always had a brown wool dress for every day.’

Yes, and look at you, I thought, with one of those sudden flashes of

unkindness that attack us all sometimes. ‘Why not try this green?’ I
suggested. ‘It would suit you.’

‘Good Heavens, whatever would people at school say if I appeared in a

dress that colour?’ Dora exclaimed. ‘I shouldn’t know myself. No, I’ll just
ask for the brown in a larger size. It’s just what I want.’

They had the dress in a larger size which was now a little too large, but

Dora seemed perfectly satisfied and bought it. ‘I don’t know what’s the
matter with you, Mildred,’ she complained. ‘You never used to bother much
about clothes.’

‘Where shall we have tea?’ I asked, changing the subject because I felt

myself unable to give a satisfactory explanation.

‘Oh, the Corner House!’ said Dora enthusiastically. ‘You know how I

enjoy that.’

We made our way to one of these great institutions and found ourselves

in an almost noble room with marble pillars and white and gold decorations.
The orchestra was playing Si mes vers avaient des ailes and I was back in
imagination in some Edwardian drawing-room. How had they been able to
bear those songs? I wondered. Sometimes we could hardly bear them now,
although we might laugh at them, the nostalgia was too much. I felt
suddenly desolate in Dora’s company.

She was studying the menu with a satisfied expression on her face.

‘Scrambled eggs,’ she read, ‘but of course they wouldn’t be real. Curried
whale, goodness, you wouldn’t feel like having that for tea, would you? I
had an argument about it the other day with Protheroe—you know how
strictly she keeps Lent and all that sort of nonsense—well, there she was
eating whale meat thinking it was fish!’

‘Well, isn’t it?’
‘No, of course it isn’t. The whale is a mammal,’ said Dora in a loud

truculent tone. ‘So you see it can hardly count as fish.’

The waitress was standing over us to take our order. ‘Just tea and a cake

for me,’ I murmured quickly, but Dora took her time and ordered various
sandwiches.

‘Was there unpleasantness about the whale?’ I asked unkindly.
‘Oh, no. I think Protheroe was rather upset though. I couldn’t help

feeling it was one up to me—paid her back for all that fuss about wearing
hats in chapel.’

The orchestra started to play a rumba and I to pour out the tea. Dora

opened a sandwich and looked inside. ‘Paste,’ she declared. ‘I tell you
what, Mildred, how would it be if we went down to the Old Girls’ Reunion
on Saturday? You know they’re dedicating the window in memory of Miss
Ridout? Had you thought of going?’

‘Oh, is it this Saturday? I had a notice about it, of course, but hadn’t

realised it was so soon. It would be a nice expedition,’ I ventured. ‘The
spring flowers would be out.’

We discussed the expedition further as we rode along Piccadilly on the

top of a bus. The sun was out and there were still people sitting on chairs in
the park.

‘It looks odd to see a clergyman holding somebody’s hand in public,’

said Dora chattily. ‘I don’t know why, but it does.’

‘Where?’ I asked.
‘Look—there,’ she said, pointing out a couple lolling in deckchairs.
‘Oh, but it can’t be!’ I exclaimed, but there was no doubt that the

clergyman was Julian Malory and that the hand he was holding was Allegra
Gray’s.

‘How do you mean it can’t be?’ said Dora looking again. ‘He certainly

was holding her hand. Why, isn’t it Julian Malory? What a joke! Who’s he
with?’

‘She’s a widow, a Mrs. Gray, who’s come to live in the flat at the

vicarage.’

‘Oh, I see. Well, I suppose there’s nothing wrong in that?’
‘No, of course there isn’t,’ I said rather sharply. It was just thoroughly

unsuitable, sitting there for everyone to see, not even on the hard iron chairs
but lolling in deckchairs. ‘Fancy going into the park to hold hands, though,
it seems rather an odd thing to do.’

‘Well, I don’t suppose they went there expressly for that purpose,’ said

Dora stubbornly. ‘They probably went for a walk and decided to sit down

and then somehow it came about. After all, holding hands is quite a natural
affectionate gesture.’

‘How do you know?’ I heard myself say.
‘Mildred! What is the matter with you? Are you in love with the vicar or

what?’ she said, so loudly that the people in front of us nudged each other
and sniggered.

‘No, of course not,’ I said in a low angry tone, ‘but it seems so

unsuitable, the whole thing. Winifred and everything, oh, I can’t explain
now.’

‘Well, I don’t see what you’re making such a fuss about,’ said Dora,

maddeningly calm. ‘It’s a lovely day and she’s very attractive and a widow
and he’s not married, so it’s all right. I see quite a little romance blowing
up.’

By the time we had got off the bus we were arguing quite openly. It was

foolish and pointless but somehow we could not stop. I saw us in twenty or
thirty years’ time, perhaps living together, bickering about silly trifles. It
was a depressing picture.

‘After all a clergyman is a man and entitled to human feelings,’ Dora

went on.

It was obvious to me now that she was in a kind of mood to disagree

automatically with everything I said, for usually she maintained that
clergymen didn’t count as men and therefore couldn’t be expected to have
human feelings.

‘Julian isn’t the marrying sort,’ I persisted. ‘Anyway, Mrs. Gray

wouldn’t be at all suitable for him.’

‘Oh, I think you’ve had your eye on him for yourself all this time,’ said

Dora in an irritating jocular tone. ‘That’s why you’ve been smartening
yourself up.’

It was useless to deny it, once she had got the idea into her head. I was

grateful to see the grey bulk of Sister Blatt looming before us as we reached
the church.

‘Hullo,’ she said as we came up to her. ‘What on earth’s happened to

Father Malory?’ she asked. ‘Evensong’s in five minutes and there’s no sign
of him. Miss Malory said he was going to a meeting at S.P.G. House this
afternoon. It must have been a very long one.’ She laughed. ‘You don’t
think he’s had a sudden call to the Mission Field, do you?’

‘Surely he would have come back here first and let us know?’ I said.

‘Oh, well, I dare say Father Greatorex will turn up,’ said Sister Blatt

cheerfully and went into church.

Dora giggled. ‘We could tell her where Father Malory is, couldn’t we,

Mildred? I think we should blackmail him.’

We went into the house. Dora decided to do some washing before

supper and within half an hour the kitchen was festooned with lines of
depressing-looking underwear—fawn locknit knickers and petticoats of the
same material. It was even drearier than mine.

At supper we talked about our old school, William, and matters of

general interest. Julian Malory was not mentioned again. I was in the
kitchen making some tea when there was a knock at the door and Rocky’s
head peeped round.

‘Helena has gone to hear a paper about pygmies,’ he said, ‘and I’m all

alone. May I come in?’

‘Yes, do,’ I said, in a confused way, embarrassed by the washing

hanging up.

‘My friend Dora Caldicote is here,’ I said, as he threaded his way

through the lines of dripping garments.

‘Oh, what fun!’ he said lightly. ‘Are you going to give me some

coffee?’

‘Well, we were having tea,’ I said, feeling a little ashamed, both of the

tea and of myself for feeling ashamed of it, ‘but I can easily make you some
coffee.’

‘No, indeed you won’t. I love tea.’
‘You are Mildred’s old school chum,’ he said to Dora in a teasing way.

‘I’ve heard all about you.’

Dora flushed and smiled. Oh, the awkward Wren officers, I thought,

seeing them standing on the balcony at the Admiral’s villa. How they must
have blossomed under that charm!

Rocky was standing by the window. ‘There’s your vicar,’ he said.

‘Would there be a service now?’

‘Is he alone?’ asked Dora.
‘Yes, very much so, and wearing rather a becoming cloak. I always

think I should look rather well in one of those.’

‘We saw him holding somebody’s hand in the park this afternoon and

Mildred was rather upset,’ said Dora gaily. ‘Poor man, I didn’t see why he
shouldn’t.’

‘Oh, but we can’t have that,’ said Rocky. ‘I always look on him as

Mildred’s property. But never mind,’ he turned towards me, ‘I don’t
suppose his hand would be very pleasant to hold. We’ll find somebody
better for you.’

‘He was supposed to be in church taking Evensong,’ said Dora, who

would not leave the subject.

‘Oh, the poor man, I can imagine nothing more depressing on a fine

weekday evening. Wondering if anybody will come or getting tired of
seeing just the same faithful few. Why don’t we go out and have a drink?’
he asked in a bored way.

‘Not after drinking tea, thank you. I don’t think I should feel like it,’ I

said.

‘Dear Mildred, you must learn to feel like drinking at any time. I shall

make myself responsible for your education.’

So of course we did go. Dora had cider and got rather giggly with

Rocky, telling him stories about our schooldays which I found
embarrassing. I, in my wish to be different and not to be thought a school-
marm, had said I would have beer, which turned out to be flat and bitter,
with a taste such as I imagine washing-up water might have.

‘Mildred is sad about her vicar,’ said Rocky. ‘We’ll find her an

anthropologist.’

‘I don’t want anyone,’ I said, afraid that I was sounding childish and

sulky but quite unable to do anything about it.

‘If Everard Bone were here we might persuade him to hold your hand,’

he went on teasingly. ‘How would you like that?’

For a moment I almost did wish that Everard Bone could be with us. He

was quiet and sensible and a church-goer. We should make dull stilted
conversation with no hidden meanings to it. He would accept the story of
Julian and Mrs. Gray in the park without teasing me about it; he might even
understand that it was a worrying business altogether. For it was. If Julian
were to marry Mrs. Gray what was to happen to Winifred? I was quite sure
now that he did intend to marry her and could not imagine why I had not
seen it all along. Clergymen did not go holding people’s hands in public
places unless their intentions were honourable, I told myself, hoping that I
might perhaps be wrong, for clergymen were, as Dora had pointed out,
human beings, and might be supposed to share the weaknesses of normal
men. I worried over the problem in bed that night and wondered if I ought

to do anything. I suddenly remembered some of the ‘Answers to
Correspondents’ in the Church Times, which were so obscure that they
might very well have dealt with a problem like this. ‘I saw our vicar holding
the hand of a widow in the park—what should I do?’ The question sounded
almost frivolous put like that; what kind of an answer could I expect?
‘Consult your Bishop immediately’? Or, ‘We feel this is none of your
business’?

CHAPTER TWELVE

By the time Saturday came things seemed better. It was a sunny day and
Dora and I were to go to our old school for the dedication of the window in
memory of Miss Ridout, who had been headmistress in our time. In the
train we read the school magazine, taking a secret pleasure in belittling
those of the Old Girls who had done well and rejoicing over those who had
failed to fulfil their early promise.

‘“Evelyn Brandon is still teaching Classics at St. Mark’s, Felixstowe,”’

Dora read in a satisfied tone. ‘And she was so brilliant. All those prizes she
won at Girton—everyone thought she would go far.’

‘Yes,’ I agreed, ‘and yet in a sense we all go far, don’t we? I mean far

from those days when we were considered brilliant or otherwise.’

‘Oh, I don’t think you and I have altered much.’
‘Well, we haven’t got shingled hair and waists round the behind still.

Isn’t it depressing, really, to think that we remember those fashions? It
seems very unromantic to have been young then.’

‘But, Mildred, we were only twelve or thirteen then. Look, here’s a bit

about you—“M. Lathbury is still working part-time at the Society for the
Care of Aged Gentlewomen”,’ she read. ‘That doesn’t sound much better
than Evelyn Brandon.’

‘Yes, of course, that is what I do,’ I agreed, but somehow it seemed so

inadequate; it described such a very little part of my life. ‘Of course,’ I went
on, ‘some people do write more details about themselves, don’t they, so that
one gets more of a picture of their lives.’

‘Oh, yes. Here’s a bit about Maisie Winterbotham: do you remember

her, red hair and glasses? She married a missionary or something. “M.
Arrowsmith (Winterbotham) writes from Calabar, Nigeria, that her husband

is opening a new mission station on the Imo River, ‘My third child (Jeremy
Paul) was born out here, so that what with Christopher and Fiona still at the
toddling stage I really have my hands full. Luckily I have a wonderful
African nurse for them. I ran into Miss Caunce in Lagos, but came on here
immediately.’”’ Dora giggled. ‘The Caunce would be enough to make
anyone leave a place immediately. Oh, look, we’re nearly there!’

My heart sank as I recognised familiar landmarks. I could almost

imagine myself a schoolgirl again, arriving at the station on a wet
September evening for the autumn term and smelling the antiseptic smell of
the newly scrubbed cloakrooms.

‘Oh, look, there’s Helen Eggleton and Mavis Bush. . . .’ Dora was

leaning out of the window as the train drew into the platform. It seemed as
if most of the Old Girls had chosen the same train for there was quite a
crowd of us getting out of it. Now the printed news in the magazine seemed
to come alive. ‘M. Bush is doing Moral Welfare work in Pimlico. . . . H. B.
Eggleton is senior Domestic Science mistress at St. Monica’s, Herne
Hill . . .’ Now one saw them and they were very much as one had
remembered them. There were older women too, some of whom might have
been grandmothers, and younger ones whose rather too smart clothes
indicated that they had left school only very recently. The staff were
comfortingly the same. Miss Lightfoot, Miss Gregg, Miss Davis . . . it
seemed that they had not aged at all, but there were one or two new
mistresses, younger than we were, mere girls.

Tea was served in the hall before the dedication service and there was

an opportunity for conversation, or rather exchange of news, for it could
hardly be called conversation, consisting as it did of phrases like ‘What’s
so-and-so doing now? Are you still teaching? Fancy old Hurst getting
married!’

After tea we moved rather soberly in the direction of the chapel to

inspect the new window before the ceremony. The chapel had been built in
1925 and was in a rather cold modern style with white walls, uncomfortable
light oak chairs and rather a lot of saxe blue in carpets and hangings. Here
Dora and I had been confirmed at the age of fifteen and here we had knelt,
uncomfortably, expecting something that never quite came. Certainly I
myself had no very inspiring memories of school religion. Only agonised
gigglings over certain lines in hymns and psalms and later a watchfulness to
reprove those same gigglings in the younger girls. I supposed that Dora and

I, who had both been fat as schoolgirls, could now stand side by side
singing

Frail children of dust,
And feeble as frail,

without a tremor or the ghost of a smile. It was rather sad, really.

The window to be dedicated was by a modern stained-glass artist and in

keeping with the rest of the chapel. It showed the figure of a saint with the
name OLIVE STURGIS RIDOUT in Gothic lettering, her dates and a Latin
inscription. We stood in front of it in a reverent silence, which was
unbroken save for an occasional admiring comment. After a few minutes
we took our places for the service which was to be conducted by the school
chaplain. In our day he had been a tall good-looking middle-aged man, a
canon of the town’s cathedral, with whom all of us were more or less
secretly or openly in love. Then his visits had been eagerly looked forward
to, but now, perhaps wisely, things appeared to be different, for the chaplain
was a fussy little man, bald and wearing pince-nez. He conducted a suitable
form of service and gave a short address, extolling the virtues of Miss
Ridout, the Sturge, we had called her, after her middle name. Suddenly I
was moved and felt the tears pricking at the back of my eyes. The Sturge
had been a good woman and very kind to me; she had had a keen sense of
the ridiculous too, which I had not appreciated until I had grown up. I
imagined her now smiling down on us from some kind of Heaven, perhaps
a little sardonically.

Going back in the train Dora and I were both in an elegiac mood and

started reminiscing. We no longer belittled our successful contemporaries or
rejoiced over our unsuccessful ones. For after all, what had we done? We
had not made particularly brilliant careers for ourselves, and, most
important of all, we had neither of us married. That was really it. It was the
ring on the left hand that people at the Old Girls’ Reunion looked for.
Often, in fact nearly always, it was an uninteresting ring, sometimes no
more than the plain gold band or the very smallest and dimmest of
diamonds. Perhaps the husband was also of this variety, but as he was not
seen at this female gathering he could only be imagined, and somehow I do
not think we ever imagined the husbands to be quite so uninteresting as they
probably were.

‘Fancy anyone marrying old Hurst!’ said Dora, as if reading my

thoughts. ‘I wonder what on earth her husband can be like?’

‘How can we ever know? A little dim man going bald but very kind and

good-tempered? An elderly clergyman, perhaps a widower? Or even
somebody distinguished and handsome? It might be any of those.’

We fell into a melancholy silence. It was dark now and the train went

slowly. Every time I looked out of the window we seemed to be passing a
churchyard.

Within the churchyard side by side
Are many long low graves,

I thought, but once we passed a large cemetery and there was something
less comfortable about the acres of tombstones, relieved occasionally by a
white marble figure whose outstretched arms or wings looked almost
menacing in the dim light.

I turned the pages of the school magazine and found something

sympathetic to my mood, an obituary notice of an Old Girl who had been at
the school from 1896 to 1901. Dorothy Gertrude Pybus, ‘D.G. or Pye to her
friends’, with her eager face, her love of practical jokes, her splendid work
at St. Crispin’s, and then the poem of an embarrassing badness, a confused
thing about mists and mountain tops rather in the style of ‘Excelsior’ . . . all
these details and obscure personal references moved me deeply so that I
hardly knew whether to laugh or cry. Dora and I were obviously not old
enough yet, but there might come a time when one of us might write an
obituary for the other, though I hoped that neither of us would be rash
enough to attempt a poem.

There was a young woman in the carriage with us, but we did not realise

she had come from the school until Dora drifted into conversation with her.
She told us that she had left school at the beginning of the war and had
afterwards served in the Wrens.

‘I was awfully lucky and got sent to Italy,’ she babbled. ‘Marvellous

luck—I was there over a year.’

‘Did you know Rockingham Napier?’ I asked idly. ‘He was in an

Admiral’s villa somewhere, I believe.’

‘Did I know Rocky—the most glamorous Flags in the Med.? Why,

everyone knew him!’

I looked at her with a new interest. She had not seemed to be the kind of

person who could have had any interesting experiences, one wouldn’t have
given her a second glance, but now I saw her on the terrace of the Admiral’s
villa in that little group.

‘You had white uniforms,’ I ventured.
‘Oh, goodness, yes! And they never fitted properly until they had

shrunk with washing or been altered. Mine were like sacks on me at first.
We were invited to cocktails at the Admiral’s villa the day after we arrived
and Rocky Napier was awfully kind to us. You see, it was his job to arrange
the Admiral’s social life and be nice to people.’

‘I’m sure he did it well,’ I murmured.
‘Oh, yes,’ she said gaily. ‘People used to fall in love with him but it

only lasted about a month or two, usually. After that one saw what a
shallow kind of person he really was. He used to take people up for a week
or two and then drop them. We Wren officers used to call ourselves the
Playthings—sometimes we were taken off our shelf and dusted and looked
at, but then we were always put back again. Of course, he had an Italian girl
friend, so you see . . .’

‘Yes, of course . . .’ An Italian girl friend, yes, that was to be expected. I

wondered if Helena had known or minded, and then decided that it was
probably naïve of me to look at it like that.

‘Men are very strange,’ said Dora complacently. ‘You never know what

they’ll be up to.’

‘No,’ I agreed, for that seemed a comfortable way of putting it. ‘Of

course all men aren’t like that,’ said the Wren officer. ‘There were some
very nice Army officers out there too.’

‘And didn’t they have Italian girl friends?’
‘Oh, no. They used to show you photographs of their wives and

children.’

I looked at her suspiciously but she appeared to be quite serious.
The train drew into the station and we prepared to get out.
‘By the way, I hope Rocky Napier isn’t a bosom friend of yours or a

relation? Perhaps I ought not to have said what I did.’

‘Oh, not a bosom friend,’ I said. ‘He and his wife live in the same house

as I do and he always seems very pleasant.’ After all, what did it matter
what this depressing woman thought of him? She had only seen him in
falsely glamorous surroundings.

The train drew up at a platform and we went our separate ways.
‘Well, there you are,’ said Dora in a satisfied tone. ‘I thought as much. I

wasn’t a bit surprised to hear that about him. We’ve had a lucky escape, if
you ask me.’

A lucky escape? I thought sadly. But would we have escaped, any of us,

if we had been given the opportunity to do otherwise?

‘Perhaps it’s better to be unhappy than not to feel anything at all,’ I said.

‘Oh Love they wrong thee much
That say thy sweet is bitter . . .’

Dora looked at me in astonishment. ‘I think I’d just like to go into the

Ladies,’ she said, ‘before we get the bus home.’

I followed her meekly although I did not really want to go myself. It

was a sobering kind of place to be in and a glance at my face in the dusty
ill-lit mirror was enough to discourage anybody’s romantic thoughts.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

The next few weeks passed uneventfully. Rocky was as charming as ever,
but I was careful to say to myself ‘Italian girl friend’ or ‘rather a shallow
sort of person’ whenever I saw him, so that I might stop myself from
thinking too well of him. He and Helena had managed to acquire some kind
of a country cottage and were now spending quite a lot of time there. He
told me that he had started to paint again but I could not make anything of
the specimens of his work that he showed me. I did not see Everard Bone at
all and soon forgot all about him and my efforts to like him. Dora went back
to school with her brown woollen dress and I settled down to my
gentlewomen in the mornings and the routine of home and church for the
rest of the day. It seemed that the spring had unsettled us all but now that
summer had come we were our more sober selves again. I did not see Julian
Malory and Allegra Gray holding hands anywhere, although it was obvious
that she was very friendly with both Julian and Winifred, and Winifred
continued to be enthusiastic about her.

‘Allegra’s going to help me about my summer clothes,’ she said. ‘She

has such good taste. Don’t you think so, Mildred?’

I agreed that she always looked very nice.
‘Yes, and she’s even smartening Julian up. Haven’t you noticed? She’ll

probably start on Father Greatorex next.’

‘Are you all getting on well together in the house?’ I asked. ‘You don’t

find that you have lost any of your independence having somebody living
above you?’

‘Oh, no, it’s really like having Allegra living with us. We’re in and out

of each other’s rooms all the time.’

It was a Saturday morning and we had assembled in the choir vestry

before decorating the church for Whit-Sunday. It was the usual gathering,
Winifred, Sister Blatt, Miss Enders, Miss Statham and one or two others.
The only man present, apart from the clergy, was Jim Storry, a feeble-
minded youth who made himself useful in harmless little ways and would
sometimes arrange the wire frames on the window-sills for us or fill jam
jars with water.

The vestry was a gloomy untidy place, containing two rows of chairs, a

grand piano and a cupboard full of discarded copies of Hymns Ancient and
Modern—we used the English Hymnal, of course—vases, bowls and
brasses in need of cleaning.

‘Well, well, here we all are,’ said Julian in a rather more clerical tone

than usual. ‘It’s very good of you all to come along and help and I’m
especially grateful to all those who have brought flowers. Lady Farmer,’ he
mentioned the only titled member remaining in our congregation, ‘has most
kindly sent these magnificent lilies from her country home.’

There was a pause.
‘Is he going to say a prayer?’ whispered Sister Blatt to me, and as

nobody broke the silence I bent my head suitably and waited. But the words
Julian spoke were not a prayer but a gay greeting to Allegra Gray, who
came in through the door at that moment.

‘Ah, here you are, now we can start.’
‘Well, really, were we just waiting for her?’ mumbled Sister Blatt.

‘We’ve been decorating for years—long before Mrs. Gray came.’

‘Well, she is a newcomer, perhaps Father Malory thought it more polite

to wait for her. I dare say he will help her.’

‘Father Malory help with the decorating! Those men never do anything.

I expect they’ll slink off and have a cup of coffee once the work starts.’

We went into the church and began sorting out the flowers and deciding

what should be used where. Winifred, as the vicar’s sister, had usurped the
privilege of a wife and always did the altar, but I must confess that it was
not always very well done. I had graduated from a very humble window
that nobody ever noticed to helping Sister Blatt with the screen, and we
began laboriously fixing old potted-meat jars into place with wires so that
they could be filled with flowers. Lady Farmer’s lilies were of course to go
on the altar. There was a good deal of chatter, and I was reminded of
Trollope’s description of Lily Dale and Grace Crawley, who were both

accustomed to churches and ‘almost as irreverent as though they were two
curates’. For a time all went peacefully, each helper was busy with her
particular corner, while Julian and Father Greatorex wandered round giving
encouragement, though no particular help, to all.

‘That’s it!’ said Julian as I placed a cluster of pinks into one of the

potted-meat jars. ‘Splendid!’

I did not feel that there was anything particularly splendid about what I

was doing and Sister Blatt and I exchanged smiles as he passed on to Miss
Statham and Miss Enders at the pulpit. It was at this point that I heard
Winifred and Mrs. Gray, who were both doing the altar, having what
sounded like an argument.

‘But we always have lilies on the alter,’ I heard Winifred say.
‘Oh, Winifred, why are you always so conventional!’ came Mrs. Gray’s

voice rather sharply. ‘Just because you’ve always had lilies on the altar it
doesn’t mean that you can never have anything else. I think these peonies
and delphiniums would look much more striking. Then we can have the
lilies in a great jar on the floor, at the side here. Don’t you think that would
look splendid?’

I could not hear Winifred’s reply but it was obvious that the flowers

were going to be arranged in the way Mrs. Gray had suggested.

‘Of course she’s been a vicar’s wife,’ said Sister Blatt, ‘so I suppose

she’s used to ordering people about and having her own way with the
decorations.’

‘I suppose it’s really a question of whether a vicar’s sister should take

precedence over a vicar’s widow,’ I said. ‘I don’t imagine that books of
etiquette deal with such refinements. But I didn’t realise Mrs. Gray’s
husband had been a vicar—I thought he was just a curate and then an Army
chaplain.’

‘Oh, yes, he had a parish before he became a chaplain. They say he was

a very good preacher, too, very slangy and modern. But I have heard,’ Sister
Blatt lowered her voice as if about to tell me something disgraceful, ‘that he
had leanings . . .’

‘Leanings?’ I echoed.
‘Yes, the Oxford Group movement. He had tendencies that way, I

believe.’

‘Oh, dear, then perhaps . . .’

‘You mean that it was just as well that he was taken, poor man?’ said

Sister Blatt, finishing my sentence for me.

‘Do you think Mrs. Gray will marry again?’ I asked craftily, wondering

if Sister Blatt had seen or heard anything.

‘Well, who, that’s the point, isn’t it? She’s an attractive woman, I

suppose, but there aren’t really any eligible men round here, are there?’

‘What about the clergy?’
‘You mean Father Greatorex?’ asked Sister Blatt in astonishment.
‘He did give her a pot of jam.’
‘Well, well, that’s certainly news to me.’
‘And Father Malory gave her a hearth-rug,’ I went on, unable to stop

myself.

‘Oh, that moth-eaten old thing out of his study? I shouldn’t think that

means anything. Besides, Father Malory wouldn’t marry,’ said Sister Blatt
positively.

‘I don’t know. We have no reason for thinking that he wouldn’t.

Anyway, widows nearly always do marry again.’

‘Oh, they have the knack of catching a man. Having done it once I

suppose they can do it again. I suppose there’s nothing in it when you know
how.’

‘Like mending a fuse,’ I suggested, though I had not previously taken

this simple view of seeking and finding a life partner.

It was just as well that we were interrupted here by Miss Statham,

asking if we had any greenery to spare, for our conversation had not been at
all suitable for church and I really felt a little ashamed.

The church looked as beautiful as its Victorian interior would allow

when we had finished decorating. The altar was striking and unusual and
the lilies stood out very well, so that even if Lady Farmer had been present,
which she was not, she would not have thought that they had been
overlooked.

The next morning we were all singing Hail Thee Festival Day, as the

procession wound round the church, and the smell of incense and flowers
mingled pleasantly with the sunshine and birdsong outside. The Napiers
were away and I was feeling peaceful and happy, as I had felt before they
came and disturbed my life. As I walked out of the church Mrs. Gray came
up to me. We were both wearing new hats for Whitsuntide, but I felt that

hers with its trimming of fruit was smarter and more unusual than mine
with its conventional posy of flowers.

‘Oh, dear, that is a difficult hymn,’ she said, ‘the one we had for the

procession.’

‘But so beautiful,’ I said, ‘and well worth singing even if one falters a

little in the verse part sometimes.’

‘I was wondering if you’d have lunch with me one day,’ said Mrs. Gray

suddenly and surprisingly.

‘Lunch?’ I asked as if I had never heard of the meal, for I was

wondering whatever could have induced her to want to have lunch with me.
‘Thank you, I should like to very much.’

‘Of course tomorrow is Whit-Monday, so perhaps we had better say

Tuesday or Wednesday—if you’re free, that is?’

‘Oh, I’m always free,’ I said unguardedly. ‘Tuesday would suit me very

well. Where shall I meet you?’

She named a restaurant in Soho which I had often seen from the outside.

‘Would that be convenient for you? At one-fifteen, say?’

I went back to my flat puzzling a little about this friendly overture. I

was sure that she did not really like me, or at best thought of me as a dim
sort of person whom one neither liked nor disliked, and I did not feel that I
really cared for her very much either. Still, this was no doubt an interesting
basis for social intercourse and we might even become friends. The people I
was going to become friendly with! It made me laugh to think of them and I
began playing with the idea of bringing them together. Everard Bone and
Allegra Gray—perhaps they might marry? It would at least take her away
from Julian, unless he was really determined to have her. Did the clergy
display the same determination in these matters as other men? I wondered. I
supposed that they did. And who would win if it came to a fight—Julian or
Everard Bone?

On Whit-Monday I decided to tidy out some drawers and cupboards and

possibly begin making a summer dress. I always did these tidyings on
Easter and Whit-Mondays, but somehow not at any other time. It seemed to
be connected with fine weather rather than the great Festivals of the Church
—a pagan rather than a Christian rite.

I started with the pigeon-holes of my desk, but I did not get very far

because I came upon a bundle of old letters and photographs which set me
dreaming and remembering. My mother in a large hat, sitting under the

cedar tree on the rectory lawn—I would be too young to remember the
exact occasion but I knew the life, even to the shadowy curate who could be
seen hovering in the background, his features a little blurred. Then there
was one of Dora and me at Oxford, on the river with William and a friend.
Presumably the friend, a willowy young man of a type that does not look as
if it would marry, had been intended for Dora, as William was regarded as
my property. But what had happened that afternoon? I could not even
remember the occasion now.

I opened a drawer and came upon a large and solemn-looking studio

portrait (in sepia) of the young man with whom I had once imagined myself
to be in love, Bernard Hatherley, a bank clerk who occasionally read the
Lessons and who used to be included with the curates in Sunday evening
supper parties. The face reminded me a little of Everard Bone, except that
the features were less striking. It seemed incredible to remember now how
often at nineteen I had pressed my cheek against the cold glass, and I found
the recollection embarrassing, turning from it quickly and from the
remembrance of myself hurrying past his lodgings in the dusk, hoping yet
fearing that I might see his face at the window, his hand drawing aside the
lace curtain of his first floor sitting-room. ‘Loch Lomond’, Victoria
Parade . . . I could still remember the name of the house and street. He had
given me the photograph one Christmas and I had given him an anthology
of poetry, which seemed an unfair exchange, my gift being so much more
revealing than his. It had all seemed rather romantic, hearing him read the
Lessons at Evensong, seeing him by chance in the town or through the open
door of the bank, and then the long country walks on Saturday afternoons
and the talks about life and about himself. I did not remember that we had
ever talked about me. Eventually he had gone on a holiday to Torquay and
things were not the same after that. I had suffered, or I supposed that I had,
for he had not broken the news of another attachment very gracefully.
Perhaps high-principled young men were more cruel in these matters
because less experienced. I am sure that Rocky would have done it much
more kindly.

I got up stiffly, for I had been crouching uncomfortably on the floor. I

bundled the letters and photographs back and decided that it would be more
profitable to make tea and cut out my dress. Tidying was over now until
next Easter or Whitsuntide.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

I dressed rather carefully in preparation for my lunch with Mrs. Gray and
my appearance called forth comments from Mrs. Bonner, who assumed that
I was going to have lunch with ‘that good-looking man you spoke to after
one of the Lent services’. She was disappointed when I was honest enough
to admit that my companion was to be nobody more exciting than another
woman.

‘I did hope it was that young man,’ she said. ‘I took a liking to him—

what I saw, that is.’

‘Oh, he’s not at all the kind of person I like,’ I said quickly. ‘And he

doesn’t like me either, which does make a difference, you know.’

Mrs. Bonner nodded mysteriously over her card-index. She was a great

reader of fiction and I could imagine what she was thinking.

I was punctual at the restaurant and I had been waiting nearly ten

minutes before Mrs. Gray arrived.

‘I’m so sorry,’ she smiled, and I heard myself murmuring politely that I

had arrived too early, as if it were really my fault that she was late.

‘Where do you usually have lunch?’ she asked. ‘Or perhaps you go

home to lunch as you only work in the mornings?’

‘Yes, I do sometimes—otherwise I go to Lyons or somewhere like that.’
‘Oh, dear, Lyons—I don’t think I could! Far too many people.’ She

shuddered and began looking at the menu. ‘I think we should like a drink,
don’t you? Shall we have some sherry?’

We drank our sherry and made rather stilted conversation about parish

matters. When the food came Mrs. Gray ate very little, pushing it round her
plate with her fork and then leaving it, which made me feel brutish, for I
was hungry and had eaten everything.

‘I’m like the young ladies in Crome Yellow,’ she said, ‘although it isn’t

so easy nowadays to go home and eat an enormous meal secretly. What was
it they had? A huge ham, I know, but I don’t remember the other things.’

I did not really know what she was talking about and could only ask if

she would like to order something else.

‘Oh, no, I’m afraid I have a very small appetite naturally. And then

things haven’t been too easy, you know.’ She looked at me with a
penetrating gaze that seemed to invite confidences.

It made me feel stiff and awkward as if I wanted to withdraw into my

shell. But I felt that I had to say something, though I could produce nothing
better than ‘No, I suppose they haven’t.’

At that moment the waiter came with some fruit salad.
‘I don’t suppose you have had an altogether easy life, either.’ Mrs. Gray

continued.

‘Oh, well,’ I found myself saying in a brisk robust tone, ‘who has, if it

comes to that?’ It began to seem a little absurd, two women in their early
thirties, eating a good meal on a fine summer day and discussing the
easiness or otherwise of their lives.

‘I haven’t been married, so perhaps that’s one source of happiness or

unhappiness removed straight away.’

Mrs. Gray smiled. ‘Ah, yes, it isn’t always an unmixed blessing.’
‘One sees so many broken marriages,’ I began and then had to be honest

with myself and add up the number of which I had a personal knowledge. I
could not think of a single one, unless I counted the Napiers’ rather unstable
arrangement, and I hoped that Mrs. Gray would not take me up on the point.

‘Yes, I suppose you would see a good deal of that sort of thing in your

work,’ she agreed.

‘In my work?’ I asked, puzzled. ‘But I work for the Care of Aged

Gentlewomen.’

‘Oh,’ she smiled, ‘I had an idea it was fallen women or something like

that, though I suppose even a gentlewoman can fall. But now I come to
think of it, Julian did tell me where you worked.’

She said the name casually but it was obvious that she had been waiting

to bring it into the conversation. I imagined them talking about me and
wondered what they had said.

‘Julian has asked me to marry him,’ she went on quickly. ‘I wanted you

to be the first to know.’

‘Oh, but I think I did know, I mean I guessed,’ I said rather quickly and

brightly. ‘I’m so glad.’

‘You’re glad? Oh, what a relief!’ She laughed and lit another cigarette.
‘Well, it seems a very good thing for both of you and I wish you every

happiness,’ I mumbled, not feeling capable of explaining any further a
gladness I did not really feel.

‘That really is sweet of you. I was so afraid . . . oh, but I know you’re

not that kind of person.’

‘What were you afraid of?’ I asked.
‘Oh, that you’d disapprove. . . .’
‘A clergyman’s widow?’ I smiled. ‘How could I possibly disapprove?’
She smiled too. It seemed wrong that we should be smiling about her

being a clergyman’s widow.

‘You and Julian will be admirably suited to each other,’ I said more

seriously.

‘I think you’re marvellous,’ she said. ‘And you really don’t mind?’
‘Mind?’ I said, laughing, but then I stopped laughing because I suddenly

realised what it was that she was trying to say. She was trying to tell me
how glad and relieved she was that I didn’t mind too much when I must
surely have wanted to marry Julian myself.

‘Oh, no, of course I don’t mind,’ I said. ‘We have always been good

friends, but there’s never been any question of anything else, anything more
than friendship.’

‘Julian thought perhaps . . .’ She hesitated.
‘He thought that I loved him?’ I exclaimed, in rather too loud a voice, I

am afraid, for I noticed a woman at a nearby table making an amused
comment to her companion. ‘But what made him think that?’

‘Oh, well, I suppose there would have been nothing extraordinary in it if

you had,’ said Mrs. Gray slightly on the defensive.

‘You mean it would be quite the usual thing? Yes, I suppose it might

very well have been.’

How stupid I had been not to see it like that, for it had not occurred to

me that anyone might think I was in love with Julian. But there it was, the
old obvious situation, presentable unmarried clergyman and woman
interested in good works—had everyone seen it like that? Julian himself?
Winifred? Sister Blatt? Mr. Mallett and Mr. Conybeare? Of course, I
thought, trying to be completely honest with myself, there had been a time

when I first met him when I had wondered whether there might ever be
anything between us, but I had so soon realised that it was impossible that I
had never given it another thought.

‘Oh, I hope you weren’t worrying about that,’ I said in a hearty sort of

way to cover my confusion.

‘No, not worrying exactly. I’m afraid people in love are rather selfish

and perhaps don’t consider other people’s feelings as much as they ought.’

‘Certainly not when they fall in love with other people’s husbands and

wives,’ I said.

Mrs. Gray laughed. ‘There you are,’ she said, ‘one does see these

broken marriages.’

‘Winifred will be delighted at your news,’ I said.
‘Oh, yes, dear Winifred,’ Mrs. Gray sighed. ‘There’s a bit of a problem

there.’

‘A problem? How?’
‘Well, where is she going to live when we’re married, poor soul?’
‘Oh, I’m sure Julian would want her to stay at the vicarage. They are

devoted to each other. She could have the flat you’ve been living in,’ I
suggested, becoming practical.

‘Poor dear, she is rather irritating, though. But I know you’re very fond

of her.’

Fond of her? Yes, of course I was, but I could see only too well that she

might be a very irritating person to live with.

‘That’s why I was wondering,’ Mrs. Gray began and then hesitated.

‘No, perhaps I couldn’t ask it, really.’

‘You mean you think that she might live with me?’ I blurted out.
‘Yes, don’t you think it would be a splendid idea? You get on well, and

she’s so fond of you. Besides, you haven’t any other ties, have you?’

The room seemed suddenly very hot and I saw Mrs. Gray’s face rather

too close to mine, her eyes wide open and penetrating, her teeth small and
pointed, her skin a smooth apricot colour.

‘I don’t think I could do that,’ I said, gathering up my bag and gloves,

for I felt trapped and longed to get away.

‘Oh, do think about it, Mildred. There’s a dear. I know you are one.’
‘No, I’m not,’ I said ungraciously, for nobody really likes to be called a

dear. There is something so very faint and dull about it.

The waiter was hovering near us with a bill, which Mrs. Gray picked up

quickly from the table. I fumbled in my purse and handed her some silver,
but she closed my hand firmly on it and I was forced to put it back.

‘The very least I can do is to pay for your lunch,’ she said.
‘Does Julian know this? About Winifred, I mean?’ I asked.
‘Heavens, no. I think it’s much better to keep men in the dark about

one’s plans, don’t you?’

‘Yes, I suppose it is,’ I said uncertainly, feeling myself at a disadvantage

in never having been in the position to keep a man in the dark about
anything.

‘I’m sure you and Winifred would get on frightfully well together,’ said

Mrs. Gray persuasively.

‘She could live with Father Greatorex,’ I suggested frivolously.
‘Poor dears; I can just imagine them together. I wonder if there could be

anything in that, or would it be quite impossible? What do women do if
they don’t marry,’ she mused, as if she had no idea what it could be, having
been married once herself and about to marry again.

‘Oh, they stay at home with an aged parent and do the flowers, or they

used to, but now perhaps they have jobs and careers and live in bed-sitting-
rooms or hostels. And then of course they become indispensable in the
parish and some of them even go into religious communities.’

‘Oh, dear, you make it sound rather dreary.’ Mrs. Gray looked almost

guilty. ‘I suppose you have to get back to your work now?’ she suggested,
as if there were some connection, as indeed there may well have been,
between me and dreariness.

‘Yes,’ I lied, ‘I have to go back there for a while. Thank you very much

for my lunch.’

‘Oh, it was a pleasure. We must do it again some time.’
I walked away in the direction of my office and, when I had seen Mrs.

Gray get on to a bus, went into a shop. I had a feeling that I must escape
and longed to be lost in a crowd of busy women shopping, which was why I
followed blindly the crowd of busy women shopping, which was why I
followed blindly the crowd that surged in through the swinging doors of a
large store. Some were hurrying, making for this or that department or
counter, but others like myself seemed bewildered and aimless, pushed and
buffeted as we stood not knowing which way to turn.

I strolled through a grove of dress materials and found myself at a

counter piled with jars of face-cream and lipsticks. I suddenly remembered
Allegra Gray’s smooth apricot-coloured face rather too close to mine and
wondered what it was that she used to get such a striking effect. There was
a mirror on the counter and I caught sight of my own face, colourless and
worried-looking, the eyes large and rather frightened, the lips too pale. I did
not feel that I could ever acquire a smooth apricot complexion but I could at
least buy a new lipstick, I thought, consulting the shade-card. The colours
had such peculiar names but at last I chose one that seemed right and began
to turn over a pile of lipsticks in a bowl in an effort to find it. But the colour
I had chosen was either very elusive or not there at all, and the girl behind
the counter, who had been watching my scrabblings in a disinterested way,
said at last, ‘What shade was it you wanted, dear?’

I was a little annoyed at being called ‘dear’, though it was perhaps more

friendly than ‘madam’, suggesting as it did that I lacked the years and poise
to merit the more dignified title.

‘It’s called Hawaiian Fire,’ I mumbled, feeling rather foolish, for it had

not occurred to me that I should have to say it out loud.

‘Oh, Hawaiian Fire. It’s rather an orange red, dear,’ she said doubtfully,

scrutinising my face. ‘I shouldn’t have thought it was quite your colour.
Still, I think I’ve got one here.’ She took a box from behind the counter and
began to look in it.

‘Oh, it doesn’t matter really,’ I said quickly. ‘Perhaps another colour

would be better. What would you recommend?’

‘Well, dear, I don’t know, really.’ She looked at me blankly, as if no

shade could really do anything for me. ‘Jungle Red is very popular—or Sea
Coral, that’s a pretty shade, quite pale, you know.’

‘Thank you, but I think I will have Hawaiian Fire,’ I said obstinately,

savouring the ludicrous words and the full depths of my shame.

I hurried away and found myself on an escalator. Hawaiian Fire, indeed!

Nothing more unsuitable could possibly be imagined. I began to smile and
only just stopped myself from laughing out loud by suddenly remembering
Mrs. Gray and the engagement and the worry about poor Winifred. This
made me proceed very soberly, floor by floor, stepping on and off the
escalators until I reached the top floor where the Ladies’ Room was.

Inside it was a sobering sight indeed and one to put us all in mind of the

futility of material things and of our own mortality. All flesh is but as

grass . . . I thought, watching the women working at their faces with savage
concentration, opening their mouths wide, biting and licking their lips,
stabbing at their noses and chins with powder-puffs. Some, who had
abandoned the struggle to keep up, sat in chairs, their bodies slumped down,
the hands resting on their parcels. One woman lay on her couch, her hat and
shoes off, her eyes closed. I tiptoed past her with my penny in my hand.

Later I went into the restaurant to have tea, where the women, with an

occasional man looking strangely out of place, seemed braced up, their
faces newly done, their spirits revived by tea. Many had the satisfaction of
having done a good day’s shopping and would have something to gloat over
when they got home. I had only my Hawaiian Fire and something not very
interesting for supper.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

On my way home, I was just passing the vicarage when Julian Malory came
out.

‘Congratulations,’ I said, ‘I’ve just heard your news.’
‘Thank you, Mildred, I wanted you to be among the first to know.’
I felt that the ‘among’ spoilt it a little and imagined a crowd of us, all

excellent women connected with the church, hearing the news.

‘I had lunch with Mrs. Gray,’ I explained.
‘Ah, yes.’ He paused and then said, ‘I thought it would be better, easier,

more suitable, that is, if you heard the news from her.’

‘Oh, why?’
‘Well, for one thing I thought it would be nice if you got to know each

other better, become friends, you know.’

‘Yes, men do seem to like the women they know to become friends,’ I

remarked, but then it occurred to me that of course it is usually their old and
new loves whom they wish to force into friendship. I even remembered
Bernard Hatherley, the lay-reader bank clerk, saying about the girl he had
met on holiday in Torquay, ‘You would like her so much—I hope you’ll
become friends.’ But as I had been at home in my village and she had been
in Torquay the acquaintance had never prospered.

‘Well, yes, naturally one likes everybody one is fond of to like each

other,’ said Julian rather feebly.

‘Yes, of course,’ I agreed, feeling that I could hardly do otherwise. ‘I

expect Winifred is very pleased, isn’t she?’

‘Oh, yes, although she did once say that she hoped—I wonder if I can

say what she hoped?’ Julian looked embarrassed, as if he had said more
than he meant to.

‘You mean . . .’ I did not quite like to go any further.
‘Ah, Mildred, you understand. Dear Mildred, it would have been a fine

thing if it could have been.’

I pondered on the obscurity of this sentence and gazed into my basket,

which contained a packet of soap powder, a piece of cod, a pound of peas, a
small wholemeal loaf and the Hawaiian Fire lipstick.

‘It’s so splendid of you to understand like this. I know it must have been

a shock to you, though I dare say you weren’t entirely unprepared. Still, it
must have been a shock, a blow almost, I might say,’ he laboured on, heavy
and humourless, not at all like his usual self. Did love always make men
like this? I wondered.

‘I was never in love with you, if that’s what you mean,’ I said, thinking

it was time to be blunt. ‘I never expected that you would marry me.’

‘Dear Mildred,’ he smiled, ‘you are not the kind of person to expect

things as your right even though they may be.’

The bell began to ring for Evensong. I saw Miss Enders and Miss

Statham hurrying into church.

‘I’m sure you’ll be very happy,’ I said, my consciousness of the urgent

bell and hurrying figures making me feel that the conversation should come
to an end.

But Julian did not appear in any hurry to go.
‘Thank you, Mildred, it means a great deal to me, your good wishes, I

should say. Allegra is a very sweet person and she has had a hard life.’

I murmured that yes, I suppose she had.
‘The fatherless and widow,’ said Julian in what seemed a rather fatuous

way.

‘Is she fatherless too?’
‘Yes, she is an orphan,’ he said solemnly.
‘Well, of course, a lot of people over thirty are orphans. I am myself,’ I

said briskly. ‘In fact I was an orphan in my twenties. But I hope I shan’t
ever be a widow. I’d better hurry up if I’m going to be even that.’

‘And I had better hurry into Evensong,’ said Julian, for the bell had now

stopped. ‘Are you coming or do you feel it would upset you?’

‘Upset me?’ I saw that it was no use trying to convince Julian that I was

not heartbroken at the news of his engagement. ‘No, I don’t think it will
upset me.’ Perhaps the consciousness that I was already an orphan and not

likely to be a widow was enough cause for melancholy, I thought, as I put
my basket down on the pew beside me.

We were the usual little weekday congregation, though Mrs. Gray was

not with us. It seemed almost as if the service might be a kind of
consolation for the rejected ones, although I did not imagine that Miss
Enders or Miss Statham or Sister Blatt had ever been in the running.

After the service I went home and cooked my fish. Cod seemed a

suitable dish for a rejected one and I ate it humbly without any kind of
sauce or relish. I began trying to imagine what it would have been like if
Julian had wanted to marry me and was absorbed in these speculations
when there was a knock at the door and Rocky came in.

‘I’m all alone,’ he said, ‘and hoping that you will offer me some coffee.’
‘Yes, of course,’ I said, ‘do come in and talk to me.’
‘Helena has gone to a memorial service, or rather, the equivalent of

one.’

‘Can there be such a thing?’
‘I gather so. You remember the President of the Learned Society where

they read their paper? Well, he died suddenly last week and this is in
commemoration of him.’

‘Oh, dear, how sad.’ I was really sorry to think that the benevolent-

looking old man with crumbs in his beard was no more.

‘He dropped down dead in the library—the kind of way everybody says

they’d like to go.’

‘But so suddenly, with no time for amendment of life . . .’ I said. ‘What

form will the service take?’

‘Oh, I gather it’s a sort of solemn meeting. Fellow anthropologists and

others will read out tributes to him. One feels that they ought to sing
Rationalist hymns as he was so strong in the movement.’

‘But do they have hymns?’
‘I think they may very well have done in the early days. Most of them

had a conventional Victorian childhood and probably felt the need for
something to replace the Sunday services they were rejecting.’

‘Poor old man,’ I murmured. And of course the old lady knitting and

dozing in the basket chair would now be a widow, I thought, which led me
on to remember Julian’s engagement. ‘I’ve heard a piece of news today,’ I
said. ‘Julian Malory is to marry Mrs. Gray.’

‘The fascinating widow whose hand he was holding in the park?’ asked

Rocky. ‘Poor Mildred, this is a sad day for you.’

‘Oh, don’t be ridiculous!’ I said indignantly. ‘I didn’t care for him at all

in that way. I never expected that he would marry me.’

‘But you may have hoped?’ said Rocky looking at me. ‘It would be a

very natural thing, after all, and I should think you would make him a much
better wife than that widow.’

‘She is a clergyman’s widow,’ I reminded him.
‘Oh, then she is used to loving and losing clergymen,’ said Rocky

lightly.

‘Widows always do marry again,’ I said thoughtfully, ‘or they very

often do. It must be strange to replace somebody like that, though I suppose
one doesn’t actually replace them, I mean, not in the way you buy a new
teapot when the old one is broken.’

‘No, my dear, hardly in that way.’
‘It must be a different kind of love, neither weaker nor stronger than the

first, perhaps not to be compared at all.’

‘Mildred, the coffee has loosened your tongue,’ said Rocky. ‘I’ve never

heard you talk so profoundly. But surely you’ve been in love more than
once, haven’t you?’

‘I don’t know,’ I said, conscious of my lack of experience and ashamed

to bring out the feeble memory of Bernard Hatherley reading the Lessons at
Evensong and myself hurrying past his lodgings in the twilight.

‘Once you get into the habit of falling in love you will find that it

happens quite often and means less and less,’ said Rocky lightly. He went
over to my bookcase and took out a volume of Matthew Arnold which had
belonged to my father.

‘Yes! In the sea of life enisled,
With echoing straits between us thrown,
Dotting the shoreless watery wild,
We mortal millions live ALONE,’

he read. ‘How I hate his habit of emphasising words with italics! Anyway,
there it is.’

‘What a sad poem,’ I said. ‘I don’t know it.’
‘Oh, there’s a lot more.’
‘Father used to be so fond of Matthew Arnold,’ I said, rather hoping that

Rocky would not read aloud any more; I found it embarrassing, not quite

knowing where to look, ‘and I love Thyrsis and The Scholar Gipsy.’

‘Ah, yes,’ Rocky shut the book and flung it down on the floor. ‘Long

tramps over the warm green-muffled Cumnor hills. How one longs for that
world. I can imagine your father striding along with a friend. But I don’t
think they’d have taken much notice of the poem I read to you. Healthy
undergraduates would have no time for such morbid nonsense.’

‘No, perhaps not. And then, of course, my father was a theological

student.’

Rocky sighed and began pacing round the room. I suppose it was a

compliment to me that he made no effort to hide his moods, but I did not
really know how to deal with him.

‘The other day I met somebody who knew you,’ I said brightly, ‘or

rather who had known you in Italy. She was a Wren officer.’

‘What was her name?’ he asked with a faint show of interest.
‘Oh, I don’t know. She was tall with greyish eyes and brown hair, not

pretty but quite a pleasant face.’

‘Oh, Mildred,’ he looked at me seriously, ‘there were so many. I

couldn’t possibly recognise her from that description—“not pretty but quite
a pleasant face”—most Englishwomen look like that, you know.’

I realised that it was probably how I looked myself and was sad to think

that after a year or two he might not remember me either.

‘I think she rather liked you,’ I said tentatively. ‘She may even have

been a little in love with you.’

‘But, Mildred, there again,’ said Rocky gently, ‘there were so many. I

know I can be honest with you.’

‘Poor things,’ I said lightly. ‘Did you throw them any scraps of

comfort? They may have been unhappy.’

‘Oh, I’m sure they were,’ he said earnestly, ‘but that was hardly my

fault. I was nice to them at the Admiral’s cocktail parties, naturally, that was
part of my duty. I’m afraid women take their pleasures very sadly. Few of
them know how to run light-hearted flirtations—the nice ones, that is. They
cling on to these little bits of romance that may have happened years ago.
Semper Fidelis, you know.’

I burst out laughing. ‘Why, that’s our old school motto! Dora and I used

to have it embroidered on our blazers.’

‘How charming! But of course it has a kind of school flavour about it.

Or it might be the title of a Victorian painting of a huge dog of the Landseer

variety. But it’s very suitable for a girls’ school when you consider how
faithful nice women tend to be. I can just see you all, running out on to the
asphalt playground at break after hot milk or cocoa in the winter or
lemonade in the summer.’

‘We didn’t have an asphalt playground. Still, I suppose Semper Fidelis

would remind one of that rather than of a past love,’ I said. ‘I suppose it
was too much to expect that you would remember that girl.’

The conversation seemed to come to an end here. Rocky stood by the

door and thanked me for the coffee. ‘And your company too,’ he added.
‘You really must come and see our cottage now that the weather is nice. It
needs a woman’s hand there and Helena isn’t really interested. Perhaps I
should never have married her.’

I stood awkwardly, not knowing what to say, I, who had always prided

myself on being able to make suitable conversation on all occasions.
Somehow no platitude came, the moment passed and Rocky went down to
his own flat.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

One evening a few days later I was coming out of my office at six o’clock
when I noticed Everard Bone, standing and looking in a nearby shop
window. I was thinking of hurrying past him as I was not very well dressed
that day—I had had a ‘lapse’ and was hatless and stockingless in an old
cotton dress and a cardigan. Mrs. Bonner would have been horrified at the
idea of meeting a man in such an outfit. One should always start the day
suitably dressed for anything, she had often told me. Any emergency might
arise. Somebody—by which she meant a man—might suddenly ring up and
ask you out to lunch. Although I agreed with her in theory I found it
difficult to remember this every morning as I dressed, especially in the
summer.

‘Mildred—at last!’ He turned round and faced me, but his voice

betrayed the irritation of one who has been waiting for a long time rather
than any pleasure at the sight of me. ‘I thought you were never coming out.
Don’t people usually work till five?’

‘I don’t usually work in the afternoons at all,’ I said, ‘but some of our

staff are away on holiday and I’m helping out. I hope you haven’t been
waiting here on other evenings?’

‘No; I found out that you were working this afternoon.’
‘Really? But how?’
‘Oh, there are ways of finding out things,’ he answered shortly.
‘But you could have telephoned me and saved yourself this trouble,’ I

said, wondering why he should want to see me and whether I ought to feel
flattered.

‘Let’s go and have a drink, shall we?’ he asked.

I looked down at myself doubtfully, but he seemed impatient to be off,

so I followed a step behind him, my string bag with its loaf of bread and
biography of Cardinal Newman dangling at my side. I had certainly not
expected to have any engagement that evening. We passed ruined St.
Ermin’s and I saw the grey-haired lady who played the harmonium hurrying
out, also with a string bag. I wondered if she too had a biography of
Cardinal Newman—I could see that she had a loaf and a large book that
might well have been a biography.

‘Omar Khayyam,’ I murmured to myself, ‘only it was a book of verse,

wasn’t it?’ And Everard Bone wasn’t very suitable for the ‘Thou’ and
although we were going to have a drink it probably wouldn’t be wine. So it
was not really like Omar Khayyam at all.

‘Let’s go in here, shall we?’ he said, stopping at a public-house near St.

Ermin’s, but he was already opening the door before I could say whether I
wanted to or not.

I am not used to going into public-houses, so I entered rather timidly,

expecting a noisy, smoky atmosphere and a great gust of laughter. But
either it was too early or the house was too near the church, for all that I
saw and heard was two elderly women sitting in a corner together talking in
low voices and drinking stout, and a young man, whom I recognised as the
curate of St. Ermin’s without his clerical collar, having what seemed to be
an earnest conversation with the woman behind the bar. I could not call her
a barmaid, for she was elderly and of a prim appearance. I felt that she
probably cleaned the brasses in St. Ermin’s when she wasn’t polishing the
handles of the beer pumps.

‘Good Heavens,’ murmured Everard, ‘isn’t it quiet? I suppose it’s

early.’

‘Yes, I expect most people hurry away from this district at this time.’
‘Well, we needn’t stay long. What would you like to drink?’
‘Beer,’ I said uncertainly.
‘What kind of beer?’
‘Oh, bitter, I think,’ I said, hoping that it wasn’t the kind that tasted like

washing-up water, but not being certain.

When it came I found that it was and I was a little annoyed to see that

Everard himself had a small glowing drink that looked much more
attractive than mine. He shouldn’t have asked me what I wanted just like

that, I thought resentfully; he should have suggested various things, as
Rocky would certainly have done.

I took a sip of my bitter drink and looked round the room. Being so near

St. Ermin’s gave it an almost ecclesiastical air, especially as there was much
mahogany, and I was fanciful enough to imagine that I even detected a faint
smell of incense. A few more people had come in now and were drinking
very quietly and soberly, almost sadly, sitting on a black horsehair bench or
at one of the little tables. I stared into the fireless grate, filled now with
teazles and pampas grass, and wondered why I should be sitting here with
Everard Bone. He was silent too, which did not help matters, and the other
people in the bar were so quiet that it was difficult to think of having a
private conversation, assuming that we had anything private to talk about,
which seemed unlikely.

‘I’m reading a biography of Cardinal Newman,’ I began, feeling that I

could hardly have chosen a more unsuitable topic of conversation for a
convivial evening’s drinking.

‘That must be very interesting,’ he said, finishing his drink.
‘Yes, it is really,’ I faltered. ‘One has great sympathy for him, I think.’
‘Rome, yes, I suppose so. One can see its attraction.’
‘Oh, that wasn’t what I really meant,’ I said, with really very little idea

of what I had meant. ‘More as a person . . .’ my sentence trailed off
miserably and there was now complete silence in the room.

Everard stood up holding his glass. ‘You don’t seem to like that drink,’

he said, suddenly becoming less withdrawn. ‘What do you really like?’

‘What you had looked nice.’
‘I rather doubt if you would like it. I’ll get you something like gin and

orange or lime—they’re quite harmless.’

I felt somewhat humiliated but was glad when he came back from the

bar with a gin and orange for me, and after I had taken a sip or two I felt
quite cheerful.

‘Why did you say you wanted bitter when you obviously don’t like it?’

Everard asked.

‘I don’t know, really, I thought it was the kind of thing people did drink.

I’m not really used to drinking much myself.’

‘Well, you stay as you are. It isn’t the kind of thing one wants to get

used to,’ he said, in what I thought was rather a priggish way. ‘You’re better
off reading about Cardinal Newman.’

I laughed. ‘When I was at school we were sometimes allowed to choose

hymns, but miss Ridout would never let us have Lead, kindly light—she
thought it was morbid and unsuitable for schoolgirls. Of course we loved
it.’

‘Yes, I can imagine that. Woman are quite impossible to understand

sometimes.’

I pondered over this remark for a while, asking myself what it could be

going to lead up to, and then wondered why I had been so stupid as not to
realise that he wanted to say something about Helena Napier. It was not for
the pleasure of my company that Everard Bone had asked me out this
evening—or rather not even asked me and given me the chance of
appearing better dressed and without my string bag, but had waylaid me in
the street.

‘I suppose each sex finds the other difficult to understand,’ I said, doing

the best I could. ‘But perhaps one shouldn’t expect to know too much about
other people.’

‘One can’t always help knowing,’ said Everard. ‘Some things are so

obvious and stand out even to the most imperceptive.’

I reflected that we could not go on indefinitely in this cryptic way, it

was altogether too much of a strain. I took a rather large sip of my drink and
said boldly, ‘I feel perhaps that women show their feelings for men without
realising it sometimes.’

‘Have you noticed that too?’
‘Why, yes,’ I said, rather at a loss. ‘It’s often a difficult thing to

conceal.’

‘But it ought to be concealed,’ he said irritably, ‘especially when the

whole thing is quite impossible and the feeling isn’t returned in the same
way. If they are really going to separate, the whole thing may become most
awkward and unpleasant.’

‘What are you talking about?’ I asked, startled.
‘Oh, you must know that I mean the Napiers. Helena has been behaving

in a most foolish and indiscreet way.’

‘I’m afraid I haven’t seen much of her lately,’ I said, as if I could

somehow have prevented her.

‘She came to my flat the other night after ten o’clock, alone, and stayed

for nearly three hours talking, although I did everything I could to get her to
go.’

I felt I could hardly ask what methods he had employed.
‘Of course I had to go out with her eventually to find her a taxi—you

will agree that I could hardly have done less than that,’ Everard continued.
‘By that time it was nearly one o’clock and naturally I didn’t expect to see
many people about, let alone anyone who knew both of us.’

‘And did you?’ I asked, feeling that the story was really getting quite

exciting.

‘Yes, it could hardly have been more unfortunate. We were just coming

out of the house when who should walk by but Apfelbaum and Tyrell Todd
—the last two people I should have expected or chosen to see.’

‘Oh, Tyrell Todd’s the man who gave the paper on pygmies, isn’t he?’ I

asked, in an honest effort to place him. ‘And Apfelbaum kept asking
questions after your paper.’

Everard looked annoyed at this irrelevant interruption, so I said

soothingly, ‘I don’t see why you should worry about seeing them. I am sure
they would think nothing of it. Anthropologists must see such very odd
behaviour in primitive societies that they probably think anything we do
here is very tame.’

‘Don’t you believe it. Tyrell Todd revels in petty gossip.’
I stopped myself from making the facetious observation that possibly it

was his work among the pygmies that had made him small-minded and
petty, and went on to ask reassuring questions.

‘But what were they doing together so late? It may well have been

something disgraceful. Did they speak to you?’

‘No, they just said “Good evening” or words to that effect. I think we

were all a little surprised.’

‘Four anthropologists meeting unexpectedly in a London square at one

o’clock in the morning,’ I said. ‘There does seem to be something a little
surprising about that.’

‘You make everything into a joke,’ said Everard resentfully, but with the

suspicion of a smile.

‘Well, I think the whole things sounds slightly ridiculous. If you can see

it like that perhaps you won’t worry about it.’

‘But Helena is so indiscreet and from what I’ve seen of Rockingham I

shouldn’t imagine he would be likely to behave in a very sensible way,
either.’

‘No,’ I murmured, ‘I don’t think you would exactly call him sensible.’

‘On the other hand, it is unlikely that he would want a divorce,’ said

Everard thoughtfully.

‘Oh, no,’ I exclaimed, shocked out of the pleasant haze into which the

drink had lulled me, ‘and I suppose you would not want to marry Helena
even if she were free. I mean, divorce would be against your principles.’

‘Naturally,’ he said stiffly. ‘And I don’t love her, anyway.’
‘Oh, poor Helena. I think she may love you,’ I said rashly.
‘I’m sure she does,’ said Everard in what seemed to be a satisfied tone.

‘She has told me so.’

‘Oh, no! Not without encouragement! Do women declare themselves

like that?’

‘Oh, yes. It is not so very unusual.’
‘But what did you tell her?’
‘I told her that it was quite impossible that I should love her.’
‘You must have been rather startled,’ I said. ‘Unless you had expected

it, and perhaps you had if it can happen. But it must have been like having
something like a white rabbit thrust into your arms and not knowing what to
do with it.’

‘A white rabbit? What do you mean?’
‘Oh, if you don’t see I can’t explain,’ I said. I gathered my string bag to

me. ‘I think I had better be going home now.’

‘Oh, please don’t go,’ said Everard. ‘I feel you are the only person who

can help. You could perhaps say something to Helena.’

‘I say something? But she wouldn’t listen to me.’
We stood up and went out together.
‘I’m sorry,’ said Everard. ‘Why should you be brought into it, really? I

just thought you might be able to drop a hint.’

‘But men ought to be able to manage their own affairs,’ I said. ‘After all

most of them don’t seem to mind speaking frankly and making people
unhappy. I don’t see why you should.’

We walked on in silence.
‘I should be very distressed if I thought I had purposely made anybody

unhappy,’ said Everard at last.

There seemed to be nothing more to say. I was to tell Helena that

Everard Bone did not love her. I might just as well go home and do it
straight away.

We came to St. Ermin’s. ‘I wonder if anybody is making coffee on a

Primus in the ruins?’ I asked idly.

‘Do people do that?’
‘Oh, yes, that little woman who plays the harmonium.’
‘Yes, she looks as if she might.’
We had suddenly forgotten about Helena Napier and were talking quite

easily about other things.

‘I promised to go and have dinner with my mother tonight,’ said

Everard. ‘Perhaps you would like to come too?’

I decided that I might as well put off telling Helena that Everard did not

love her for an hour or two at least, so we got into a taxi and drove to a dark
red forbidding-looking house in a street of similar houses.

‘My mother is a little eccentric,’ he said as we got out of the taxi. ‘I just

thought I should warn you.’

‘I don’t suppose I shall find her any more odd than many people I have

met,’ I said, feeling that it was not perhaps a good beginning to the evening.
‘I’m sorry I’m not more suitably dressed. If I had known . . . only, things do
seem to happen so unexpectedly.’

‘You seem to be very nicely dressed,’ said Everard without looking.

‘And my mother never notices what anybody is wearing.’

An old bent maidservant opened the door and we went in. There was a

good deal of dark furniture in the hall and a faintly exotic smell, almost like
incense. The walls were covered with animals’ heads and their sad or fierce
eyes looked down on us.

‘Perhaps you would care to wash your hands, miss?’ said the maid in a

hushed voice. She led me upstairs and into a bathroom, with much marble
and mahogany and a stained-glass window. I began to think that it was
perhaps suitable that I was carrying a biography of Cardinal Newman in my
string bag, and as I washed my hands and tidied my hair I found myself
thinking about the Oxford Movement and the architecture associated with
it. But then I was seized with a feeling of alarm, waiting outside the
bathroom door on a dark landing, then creeping down the stairs and
wondering where I should go when I got to the bottom. I was surprised to
see that Everard was standing in the hall waiting for me, turning over a heap
of old visiting cards that lay in a brass bowl on an antique chest.

‘Mother will be in the drawing-room,’ he said, opening a door.

I found myself in a room with two women, one of whom was standing

by the fireplace while the other was sitting on the edge of a chair with her
hands folded in her lap.

‘This is my mother,’ said Everard, leading me towards the standing

woman, who was tall with a long nose like his own, ‘and this is—er . . .’ he
glanced at the nondescript woman sitting on the edge of her chair who
might really have been anybody or nobody, and then back to his mother.

‘It’s Miss Jessop, dear,’ she said.
‘Oh, yes, of course.’
Miss Jessop! I remembered my telephone conversation with Mrs. Bone

and looked at the nondescript woman with new interest. If it’s Miss Jessop, I
can only hope you’re ringing up to apologise. . . . She did not look like the
kind of person who could possibly do anything for which an apology might
be demanded. What had she done? I supposed I should never know.
Presumably all was now well between her and Mrs. Bone.

We all murmured politely at each other and Mrs. Bone did not seem to

be at all eccentric. I was beginning to think that Everard had misjudged his
mother when she suddenly said in a clear voice, ‘Miss Jessop and I are very
much interested in the suppression of woodworm in furniture.’

‘I should think it’s very important,’ I said. ‘I know a lot of our furniture

at home got the worm in it. There didn’t seem to be anything we could do
about it.’

‘Oh, but there is a preparation on the market now which is very

effective,’ said Mrs. Bone, clasping her hands together almost in rapture. ‘It
has been used with excellent results in many famous buildings.’ She began
to enumerate various Oxford and Cambridge colleges and well-known
churches and cathedrals. ‘It has even been used in Westminster Cathedral,’
she declared.

‘Not Westminster Cathedral, surely, Mother,’ said Everard. ‘The wood

isn’t old enough.’

‘Westminster Abbey, perhaps,’ I suggested.
‘Oh, well, it was something to do with Westminster,’ said Mrs. Bone.

‘Wasn’t it, Miss Jessop?’ She turned towards her with a rather menacing
look.

Miss Jessop seemed to agree.
‘I think we had better have some sherry,’ said Everard, going out of the

room.

I thought I had better revive the conversation which had lapsed, so I

commented on the animals’ heads in the hall, saying what fine specimens
they were.

‘My husband shot them in India and Africa,’ said Mrs. Bone, ‘but

however many you shoot there still seem to be more.’

‘Oh, yes, it would be a terrible thing if they became extinct,’ I said. ‘I

suppose they keep the rarer animals in game reserves now.’

‘It’s not the animals so much as the birds,’ said Mrs. Bone fiercely. ‘You

will hardly believe this, Miss—er—but I was sitting in the window this
afternoon and as it was a fine day I had it open at the bottom, when I felt
something drop into my lap. And do you know what it was?’ She turned
and peered at me intently.

I said that I had no idea.
‘Unpleasantness,’ she said, almost triumphantly so that I was reminded

of William Caldicote. Then lowering her voice she explained, ‘From a bird,
you see. It had done something when I was actually sitting in my own
drawing-room.’

‘How annoying,’ I said, feeling mesmerised and unable even to laugh.
‘And that’s not the worst,’ she went on, rummaging in a small desk

which stood open and seemed to be full of old newspapers. ‘Read this.’ She
handed me a cutting headed OWL BITES WOMAN, from which I read that an
owl had flown in through a cottage window one evening and bitten a
woman on the chin. ‘And this,’ she went on, handing me another cutting
which told how a swan had knocked a girl off her bicycle. ‘What do you
think of that?’

‘Oh, I suppose they were just accidents,’ I said.
‘Accidents! Even Miss Jessop agrees that they are rather more than

accidents, don’t you, Miss Jessop?’

Miss Jessop made a quavering sound which might have been ‘Yes’ or

‘No’ but it was not allowed to develop into speech, for Mrs. Bone broke in
by telling Everard that Miss Jessop wouldn’t want any sherry.

‘The Dominion of the Birds,’ she went on. ‘I very much fear it may

come to that.’

Everard looked at me a little anxiously but I managed to keep up the

conversation until Mrs. Bone declared that it was dinner time. ‘You had
better be going home, now, Miss Jessop,’ she said. ‘We are going to have
our dinner.’

Miss Jessop stood up and put on her gloves. Then, with a little nod

which seemed to include all of us, she went quietly out of the room.

‘I eat as many birds as possible,’ said Mrs. Bone when we were sitting

down to roast chicken. ‘I have them sent from Harrods or Fortnum’s, and
sometimes I go and look at them in the cold meats department. They do
them up very prettily with aspic jelly and decorations. At least we can eat
our enemies. Everard, dear, which was that tribe in Africa which were
cannibals?’

‘There are several thousand tribes in Africa, Mother,’ said Everard

patiently, ‘and many of them have been and probably still are cannibals.’

‘But surely the British Administration have stamped it out?’ I asked.
‘Certainly they have attempted to,’ said Everard. ‘And the missionaries

have also done a lot to educate the people.’

‘Yes, I suppose that would make them see that it was wrong,’ I said

feebly, wondering whether anthropologists really approved of these old
customs being stamped out.

‘Missionaries have done a lot of harm,’ said Mrs. Bone firmly. ‘The

natives have their own religions which are very ancient, much more ancient
than ours. We have no business to try to make them change.’

‘My mother is not a Christian,’ said Everard, perhaps unnecessarily.
‘The Jesuits got at my son, you know, Miss—er—’ said Mrs. Bone,

turning to me. ‘They will stop at nothing, those Jesuits. You would hardly
believe the things that go on in their seminaries. I can lend you some very
informative pamphlets if you are interested.’

I was by now in a state of considerable confusion and wished that

Everard would make some attempt to lead the conversation into normal
channels, though I realised that this would probably be quite impossible. It
occurred to me that I had been bearing the full burden of the evening, and at
half-past nine I began to feel both tired and resentful and decided that I
would go home.

‘You seem to have made a favourable impression,’ he said, as I stuffed

some pamphlets about woodworms and Jesuits into my string bag with
Cardinal Newman and the loaf. ‘Most people are quite incapable of
carrying on a conversation with my mother. I admired the way you did it.’

‘Oh, but I’m used to coping with people,’ I said. ‘Being a clergyman’s

daughter is a good training.’ It was only people like the Napiers who were
beyond my experience. ‘It is splendid that your mother should have so

many interests in her life,’ I said. ‘So often elderly people think only of
themselves and their illnesses.’ Birds, worms and Jesuits . . . it might almost
have been a poem, but I could not remember that anybody had ever written
it.

‘Yes, her life is quite busy, I suppose, but she is getting rather difficult

now.’

‘Who is Miss Jessop?’ I asked.
‘Oh, I don’t know; just some woman who comes to see my mother

sometimes,’ said Everard vaguely. ‘She is quite often there.’

‘But does she never speak?’
‘Oh, I don’t know. It would be such a help if you could say something

to Helena. You remember what we were talking about earlier in the
evening.’

It seemed to have been a very long evening, but I did remember and the

memory depressed me.

‘A sensible person, with no axe to grind,’ Everard was saying, almost to

himself.

I accepted this description of myself without comment. ‘But what could

I say?’ I protested. ‘The occasion may not arise and even if it did I still
shouldn’t know.’

‘Oh, surely, words would come,’ said Everard impatiently. ‘You said

you were used to coping with people.’

I did not attempt to explain that my training had not fitted me for this

kind of a situation. But I saw myself, having no axe to grind, calling in on
the Napiers as I went up to my flat and making the attempt. But Rocky
would be there, so of course it wouldn’t do. And when I passed their door
their voices seemed to be raised as if they were having an argument. I am
afraid it was impossible not to hear some of the things they were saying, but
I cannot bring myself to record them here. I think I hurried up to my kitchen
and made a cup of tea and then went to bed trying to take my mind off the
situation by thinking about Miss Jessop and her curious relationship with
Mrs. Bone. I wondered if I should ever hear her speak or know why an
apology had been demanded from her.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

The next day I worked until lunchtime and came home at about half-past
one. This was the only time when the offices on the ground floor of the
house where I lived seemed to show any signs of life. Typewriters were
clacking, telephones ringing, and a man was dictating a letter, weighing
each word, or so it appeared, though the words that came to my ears
through the open door seemed to be hardly worth such ponderous
consideration.

Above this it was very quiet, so I guessed that the Napiers must be out,

but when I passed their kitchen I could hear the gas hissing and there was a
smell of something burning. I knocked on the half-open door but there was
no answer, so I went in. I found one of the gas rings full on and on it a
saucepan of potatoes which had boiled dry and were now sticking to the
bottom in a brownish mass. I dealt with them quickly but the saucepan was
in a very bad state. I ran some water into it so that it could soak. I noticed
with distaste and disapproval that the breakfast things and what appeared to
be dishes and glasses from an even earlier date were not washed up. The
table by the window was also crowded; there were two bottles of milk, each
half-full, an empty gin bottle, a dish of butter melting in the sun, and a plate
full of cigarette stubs. I felt very spinterish indeed as I stood there, holding
the burnt saucepan in my hand.

‘The potatoes—I forgot them.’ Rocky was standing behind me in the

doorway.

‘Yes, you did,’ I said rather sharply. ‘The gas was full on and they

boiled dry. I’m afraid the saucepan’s ruined.’

‘Oh, the saucepan,’ Rocky said, passing his hand over his brow with a

gesture of weariness that seemed to me rather theatrical. ‘There have been

other things to think about besides saucepans.’

‘Oh. Is anything the matter?’ I asked, moving towards him, still holding

the saucepan in my hand.

‘Yes, I suppose so. Helena has left me.’ He went into the sitting-room

and sank into an armchair. I stood helplessly by him, trying to think of
something to say or do, but he took no notice of my faltering words of
sympathy. I looked round the room and saw that another saucepan had
evidently been put down on a polished walnut table, where it had burnt an
unsightly mark.

‘That was the last straw, the table,’ he said. ‘She put a hot saucepan

down on the table. Such a trivial thing, I suppose you might think, but
typical of her lack of consideration. And all the washing-up left for days
sometimes until Mrs. Morris came. . . .’ He rambled on, cataloguing her
faults while I sat by him not liking to interrupt. At last I was conscious of a
feeling something like hunger stirring in me, for it was now about two
o’clock, and I began to wonder whether Rocky had had any lunch.

‘Lunch? I haven’t thought about it,’ he said. ‘Perhaps one doesn’t on

these occasions.’

‘I’m sure you should eat something,’ I said. ‘Why don’t you come up to

my flat, which is tidier than this, and I will clear up these things
afterwards.’

He followed me apathetically and began to tell me what had happened.

It appeared that they had had a quarrel when he was getting lunch and that
Helena had run out of the house, saying that she was never coming back.

‘I went after her,’ Rocky said, ‘but she must have got into a taxi,

because there was no sign of her. So eventually I just came back here.’

‘But surely she will have to come back? Did she take anything with her,

any luggage?’

‘I don’t know. I shouldn’t think so.’
‘But where could she have gone?’ I persisted, feeling that somebody

ought to be practical.

‘To Everard Bone, I suppose,’ said Rocky indifferently.
‘No, surely not!’ I exclaimed. That must not happen. The irrelevant and

unworthy thought crossed my mind that he would think I had failed in my
duty and I should be blamed. But I had really had very little time in which
to tell Helena that Everard did not love her; I had been meaning to say
something at the first opportunity. And yet, in a way, I could not help

feeling that it would serve him right if she did arrive on his doorstep and
cause him embarrassment. ‘If she has gone to him,’ I said, ‘she will have
arrived by now. I will ring up his flat and find out.’

I was a little taken aback when Everard himself answered me, though I

don’t know who else I had expected, and could only stammer out the news
and ask if Helena had come to him.

‘No, she certainly has not,’ he said, his voice full of alarm. ‘In any case,

I am leaving for Derbyshire immediately.’

‘Derbyshire?’ I repeated stupidly. It seemed such an unlikely place.
‘Yes, the Prehistoric Society is holding a conference there,’ he said

quickly.

‘You will be able to hide in a cave,’ I said, giggling in the nervous way

one does sometimes at a moment of crisis. I composed myself before going
back to Rocky, who was still reclining in a chair.

‘She isn’t with Everard Bone,’ I said, ‘so perhaps she will be back soon,

unless there are any friends of hers I could ring up for you?’

‘Oh, no, don’t bother. One can’t go ringing up people all over London.’
‘Well, I may as well get lunch,’ I said. ‘I’m afraid it will be something

very simple, but you must eat.’

Rocky followed me into my kitchen and stood under the line of

washing, which I noticed with irritation had become too dry to be ironed
comfortably. He began pulling down the garments and making jokes about
them, but I felt that this was not the time for coyness or embarrassment, so I
took no notice of him.

I washed a lettuce and dressed it with a little of my hoarded olive oil

and some salt. I also had a Camembert cheese, a fresh loaf and a bowl of
greengages for dessert. It seemed an idyllic sort of meal that ought to have
been eaten in the open air, with a bottle of wine and what is known as
‘good’ conversation. I thought it unlikely that I should be able to provide
either the conversation or the wine, but I remembered that I had a bottle of
brandy which I kept, according to old-fashioned custom, for ‘emergencies’
and I decided to bring it in with the coffee. I could see my mother, her lips
slightly pursed, saying, ‘For medicinal purposes only, of course. . . .’ But
now respectable elderly women do not need to excuse themselves for
buying brandy or even gin, though it is quite likely that some still do and
perhaps one may hope that they always will.

Rocky began to eat with a show of appetite, but the conversation he

made was not ‘good’ conversation.

‘She couldn’t even wash a lettuce properly,’ he said, ‘let alone prepare a

salad like this.’

I did not know what answer to make and we continued to eat in silence

on my part. The brandy seemed to rouse him a little further, though to no
great heights, but what he said was pleasing to me personally.

‘Mildred, you really are the most wonderful person,’ he said, turning his

gaze on me. ‘I don’t know what I should do without you.’

You do very well without me, I thought, with a flash of impatience, and

will continue to do well.

‘To think that you should have come in just at this moment, this awful

crisis, and given me a delicious lunch.’ He closed his eyes and lay back in
his chair. ‘I really couldn’t have borne to have got lunch myself.’

‘Oh, it was nothing,’ I said, feeling that no other answer could be given.

‘Anybody else would have done the same.’ And perhaps even a less
attractive man than Rocky would have a devoted woman to prepare a meal
for him on the day his wife left him. A mother, a sister, an aunt, even . . . I
remembered an advertisement I had once seen in the Church Times
—‘Organist and aunt require unfurnished accommodation; East Sheen or
Barnes preferred’. Rather fishy, I had thought it, probably not his aunt at all,
though surely the kind of people who expressed a preference for East Sheen
or Barnes could hardly be anything but highly respectable?

‘What are you smiling at?’
I started guiltily, for I had temporarily forgotten the dreadful thing that

had happened. ‘I’m sorry,’ I said. ‘I didn’t realise I was smiling.’

‘You are almost cheering me up,’ said Rocky resentfully. ‘I suppose

everyone must have a friend to comfort them at times like this.’

‘Not everybody,’ I said, thinking of the many rejected ones who lived in

lonely bed-sitting-rooms with nobody to talk to them or prepare meals for
them. I told Rocky of my thought.

‘They could always wash stockings or something,’ he said callously.

‘Assuming of course, that they are women, and it’s usually women who live
in bed-sitting-rooms.’

‘And are rejected,’ I added.
‘Well, yes, it all hangs together somehow, doesn’t it? Of course my

position is hardly the same. You mustn’t think that I have been rejected.’

We sat there almost bickering until the church clock struck a quarter to

four.

‘Tea,’ said Rocky, ‘I think I should like some tea now.’
‘Yes, of course,’ I said, going meekly to the kitchen. I was just filling

the kettle when my bell rang. ‘Oh, dear, who can that be?’ I asked.

‘Perhaps Helena has also come to you for comfort,’ said Rocky. ‘I think

it would be more suitable if you answered the door, just in case, you know.’

He continued to loll in the armchair, so there was nothing for me to do

but hurry downstairs, feeling rather flustered and irritated. I’m afraid my
dismay must have shown in my face when I opened the front door and
found Julian Malory standing there, for his expression altered and he
hesitated before coming in.

‘I was just going to make some tea,’ I said, as we walked upstairs, ‘so

you’re just in time.’

‘Ah, tea,’ he said. ‘I had hoped to be in time for that.’
I did not tell him that Rocky Napier was with me and the expressions of

the two men when they saw each other was something that made me smile,
Rocky frowning and sulky and Julian puzzled and dismayed. Rocky rose
rather ungraciously and offered Julian his armchair, though in a half-hearted
manner. Julian accepted it. Rocky then flung himself down on the sofa. At
this point I hurried out to see if the kettle was boiling and by the time I had
come back with the tea the two men were engaged in some sort of a
conversation about Italy. Julian was asking about the church of Santa
Chiara in Naples and quoting a poem about Palm Sunday, but Rocky said
that the church had been destroyed by bombs and the poem always
depressed him anyway.

I began to pour out tea. As so often happens at a moment of crisis, there

was something wrong with it. It seemed much too weak and flowed in what
a poet might call an amber stream from the imperfectly cleaned spout of the
silver teapot. Mrs. Morris had been neglecting her duty and I should have to
‘speak’ to her.

‘Ah, what a treat, China tea!’ Julian exclaimed.
I have often wondered whether it is really a good thing to be honest by

nature and upbringing; certainly it is not a good thing socially, for I feel
sure that the tea-party would have been more successful had I not explained
that the tea was really Indian which I had unfortunately made too weak.
Thus, instead of feeling that I had provided a treat for them the two men

seemed resentful and embarrassed, almost as if I had done it on purpose. I
stirred the pot despairingly and offered to go and make some more, but
neither of them would hear of it. Rocky was polite but impatient and Julian
polite but disappointed, almost grieved.

It seemed to me that both men appeared at their worst that afternoon, as

if they had the effect of bringing out the worst in each other, unless it was
that I had never before had the opportunity of observing each of them
dispassionately. Rocky seemed shallow and charming in an obvious and
false way, and his sprawling on the sofa seemed to me both affected and
impolite. Julian, on the other hand, appeared to have no charm at all, not
even of an obvious kind. By the side of Rocky he seemed pompous and
clerical, almost like a stage clergyman, his voice taking on an unctuous
quality which it did not usually possess. ‘She worships at St.
Mary’s. . . . The other morning, after I had said Mass . . .’ even his
conversation seemed stilted and unnatural. This had the effect of making
Rocky flippant, so that although Julian made an effort to respond to his little
jokes about the best quality incense and glamorous acolytes, there was a
kind of hostility between them, and I felt almost as if I were the cause of it.
It was unusual, certainly, for me to be alone with two men even when each
of them was the property of some other woman, but I could not make
anything of the opportunity.

I fussed over the weak tea, regretted that I had not bought another cake

or some tomatoes or a cucumber to make sandwiches, wished passionately
that I had been a more brilliant conversationalist. As it was, Rocky had now
lapsed into silence and Julian was looking around him with frightened,
suspicious glances. What was the matter with him? I wondered. There was
surely nothing compromising or embarrassing about the situation? And then
I saw what it was that was upsetting him—the brandy bottle was still on the
mantelpiece, looking very large and shocking among my small ornaments
and the picture postcards of Exmoor and North Wales, where Mrs. Bonner
and another woman from my office respectively were spending their
holidays. I supposed that on all the occasions when Julian had visited me
before he had never seen a brandy bottle on the mantelpiece.

‘Have you made any plans for your wedding?’ I asked, anxious to make

light conversation.

‘Oh, yes, we are hoping to be married quite soon,’ said Julian gratefully.

‘And we do want all the congregation of St. Mary’s and all our friends to

come to the wedding.’

‘I suppose you mean what are known as “regular communicants”?’

asked Rocky. ‘Mildred may have told you that I can’t do with religion
before breakfast. Would those who have just been to Evensong be eligible?
They might surely count as friends?’

‘Oh, anybody, really, all well-wishers, of course,’ said Julian in an

embarrassed but jocular manner. ‘We want everybody to rejoice with us.’

‘I should certainly like to do that,’ said Rocky. ‘You see, I do wish you

well, and as my wife has just left me the very least I can do is to hope that
yours will not do the same.’

Julian dropped half of the slice of cake he was holding on to the floor

and stooped quickly to pick up the fragments.

I took off the lid of the teapot and peered into its depths, but without

hope. I supposed that the shock he had suffered should be enough to excuse
Rocky’s curious behaviour but it made me feel rather uneasy.

‘My dear fellow,’ Julian began in a confused way, ‘I really am most

awfully distressed . . . but surely you must be mistaken? Some
misunderstanding, perhaps, or a quarrel. . . . Why, I saw Mrs. Napier only
this morning.’

‘Oh, these things happen quickly when they do happen,’ said Rocky,

who now seemed to be almost enjoying himself. ‘After all, somebody must
have seen her for the last time—perhaps it was you.’

‘This is most distressing news—there must be something we can do.’

Julian was now pacing about the room, frowning.

I began piling cups and saucers on to a tray. I suppose it was cowardly

of me, but I felt that I wanted to be alone, and what better place to choose
than the sink, where neither of the men would follow me?

I started in my own kitchen where the lunch and tea things were quickly

washed and dried, but then I moved down to the Napiers’ with the idea of
making some order out of the confusion there. No sink has ever been built
high enough for a reasonably tall person and my back was soon aching with
the effort of washing up, especially as yesterday’s greasy dishes needed a
lot of scrubbing to get them clean. My thoughts went round and round and
it occurred to me that if I ever wrote a novel it would be of the ‘stream of
consciousness’ type and deal with an hour in the life of a woman at the
sink. I felt resentful and bitter towards Helena and Rocky and even towards
Julian, though I had to admit that nobody had compelled me to wash these

dishes or to tidy this kitchen. It was the fussy spinster in me, the Martha,
who could not comfortably sit and make conversation when she knew that
yesterday’s unwashed dishes were still in the sink. Martha’s back must have
ached too, I thought grimly, noticing that the plate rack needed scrubbing
and the tea-cloths boiling.

At last everything was done except for the saucepan with the burnt

potatoes. I looked hopelessly around for something to scrape it with.

‘Clean glasses?’ came Rocky’s voice from outside the door. ‘Are there

any?’

‘Yes, in the cupboard,’ I said. ‘I’ve just washed them.’
‘There was some gin,’ said Rocky, delving among a cluster of bottles in

a corner. ‘I suppose we could drink your brandy?’

‘Oh, yes, do.’
‘Ah, this is better.’ He held up a straw-covered flask of wine. ‘The vicar

and I are really getting on rather well. I like him. It’s a pity you didn’t marry
him, Mildred, you’d have made a pleasant pair. Come and have a drink with
us when you’ve finished that saucepan. We’re upstairs in your room.’

I sat down on a chair in the Napiers’ kitchen, ready to feel tired and

resentful, but suddenly something came to the rescue and I began to see the
funny side of it. Then the telephone rang. It was Helena.

‘Oh, thank goodness, it’s you, Mildred,’ she said. ‘I couldn’t bear it to

be Rocky after all the things he said. Listen, I’m staying with Miss Clovis.’

‘Miss Who?’
‘Miss Clovis—you remember her, surely? She works at the Learned

Society.’

‘Oh, of course.’ Our excellent Miss Clovis with the tea. Did she also

give sanctuary to runaway wives?

‘She has offered to collect some of my things. I was wondering if you

could pack a suitcase for me and meet her at Victoria Station under the
clock?’

I agreed to do this, mainly because it seemed simpler to agree. I was to

pack a few necessities and slip out of the house without letting Rocky know
what I was doing, though I could tell him later that Helena was with Miss
Clovis.

It was not very easy to find the things Helena had asked for; all the

drawers in the bedroom were so untidy that it was difficult to know what
was supposed to be where, but at last I had packed the case and was waiting

at the appointed place at Victoria, feeling rather foolish, as if I were about
to elope with somebody myself.

It was the rush hour and droves of people hurried by me to catch their

trains. Men in bowler hats, with dispatch cases so flat and neat it seemed
impossible that they could contain anything at all, and neatly rolled
umbrellas, ran with undignified haste and jostled against me. Some carried
little bundles or parcels, offerings to their wives perhaps or a surprise for
supper. I imagined them piling into the green trains, opening their evening
papers, doing the crossword, not speaking to each other . . .

‘Miss Lathbury?’ A crisp voice interrupted my fantasies and the stocky

figure of Miss Clovis was standing at my side.

‘Yes. I’ve brought the things Mrs. Napier asked for.’
‘Splendid!’ She took the case from me with a firm gesture.
‘I hope she’s all right?’ I asked.
‘Oh, perfectly—now that she’s got away from that brute of a husband.’
I wanted to protest but hardly knew what to say. I was surprised that

such a person as Miss Clovis appeared to be should express herself so
conventionally.

‘She will be quite safe with me,’ she went on chattily. ‘I have a cosy

little flat on top of the Society’s premises, you know.’

Pictures of savage chiefs and a rolled-up flag in the lavatory, I thought,

but perhaps she would have a bathroom of her own.

‘I do hope that Mrs. Napier will soon return to her husband,’ I said

firmly. ‘He is very upset.’

‘You think the separation may be only temporary?’ said Miss Clovis,

looking disappointed. ‘I hadn’t gathered that at all. He will go to the
country where I believe he has a cottage and she will return to the flat.
That’s what I understood.’

‘Oh, I see. Well, I hope they will meet again and talk it over before

doing anything so drastic.’ I could not admit to Miss Clovis that apart from
anything else I did not want Rocky to go away.

‘Well, I must be going,’ said Miss Clovis. ‘Thank you for bringing the

things. I will let you know if there are any developments. I believe Mr.
Bone is in Derbyshire?’

‘Oh, surely this has nothing to do with him?’ I exclaimed in alarm. ‘I’m

certain he wouldn’t want to be concerned in it.’

‘For the sake of anthropology,’ declared Miss Clovis, grasping her

umbrella and brandishing it as if it were a weapon or a banner. ‘There is a
great bond between those who have worked together in the field—their
work on matrilineal groupings, most valuable, a real contribution . . .’ She
lowered her voice confidentially. ‘There was that affair of Dr. Medlicott and
Miss Etty—I don’t know if you heard about it—I always feel that I brought
them together. His wife didn’t like it at first. Still, there you are.’ She
nodded briskly and was off.

I stood for a moment in a kind of daze and then made my way slowly

home. I was just approaching Grantchester Square when I saw two men
going into the public-house at the end of it. They were Rocky Napier and
Julian Malory. Well, let them go, I thought. It was somehow a comfort to
know that they had made friends over a glass of wine. A comfort for them,
though not for me, I decided, unable to face the thought of returning to the
flat to wash their empty glasses which they had no doubt left in my sitting-
room. It would be better to call in at the vicarage and see Winifred.

I had just rung the bell when it occurred to me that Allegra Gray would

probably be there and I should have turned back had not Winifred herself
opened the door almost immediately.

‘Oh, Mildred, how nice! You hardly ever come to see us now,’ she

complained. ‘Since Allegra and Julian became engaged, things haven’t been
the same, somehow. But she’s gone to supper with a friend in Kensington
tonight and Julian’s out somewhere, so I’m all alone. You look upset, dear.
Has anything happened?’

‘I almost wish the Napiers hadn’t come to live in my house,’ I said.

‘Things were much simpler before they came.’

Winifred did not ask any questions but under the influence of a cup of

tea her tongue was loosened. We began talking about ‘old times’ as they
now seemed to be. ‘Oh, Mildred,’ she blurted out, ‘sometimes I wish
Allegra hadn’t come to live here, either!’

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

Rocky behaved rather dramatically the next day, packing suitcases and
going round his flat marking various articles of furniture and small objects
which were to be sent after him to his cottage in the country. When I came
home after lunch I found him almost ready to go.

He came up to me with a list in his hand.
‘We may as well get it quite clear,’ he said. ‘I shall want to have my

own things with me and you can hardly be expected to know exactly which
they are.’

‘I?’ I exclaimed in surprise.
‘Oh, yes, I imagine you will be here, won’t you? I have asked the

remover’s men to come on Saturday morning so that you will be able to
supervise them.’

‘Yes, of course,’ I said weakly. ‘I suppose they couldn’t be expected to

do it alone. About what time will they be coming?’

‘Oh, I told them to come really early, about eight o’clock. Then Helena

can come back on Sunday or Monday if she wants to. You might ring up
Miss Clovis and tell her so’—I had of course told him where Helena was
—‘and then everything will be as it was.’

I wanted to protest, not so much about the furniture-removing and the

part I was to play in it, as about his idea that everything could then be as it
had been before. But no words came. I wondered if he would suggest that
we had tea together before he went, but he did not say anything and
somehow I did not feel inclined to offer to make any. I suppose I did not
want him to remember me as the kind of person who was always making
cups of tea at moments of crisis.

‘Goodbye, Mildred; we’ll meet again, of course,’ he said casually. ‘You

must come and stay at my cottage one week-end.’

‘I should like to,’ I began, wondering even as I said it if it would be

quite proper. But obviously no such thought had occurred or would ever
occur to Rocky. ‘You will remember which pieces of furniture are to come,
won’t you?’ were his last words to me.

After he had gone I stood looking out of the window until his taxi was

out of sight.

The effects of shock and grief are too well known to need description

and I stood at the window for a long time. At last I did make a cup of tea
but I could not eat anything. There seemed to be a great weight inside me
and after sitting down for a while I thought I would go into the church and
try to find a little consolation there.

I opened the door rather timidly and went in. I was relieved to see that

there was nobody else there and I sat down hopelessly and waited, I did not
know for what. I did not feel that I could organise my thoughts but I hoped
that if I sat there quietly I might draw some comfort from the atmosphere.
Centuries of devotion leave their mark in a place, I knew, but then I
remembered that it was barely seventy years since St. Mary’s had been
built; it seemed so bright and new and there were no canopied tombs of
great families, no weeping cherubs, no urns, no worn inscriptions on the
floor. Instead I could only read the brass tablets to past vicars and
benefactors or contemplate the ugly stained glass of the east window. And
yet, I thought after a while, wasn’t the atmosphere of good Victorian piety
as comforting as any other? Ought I not be as much consoled by the thought
of our first vicar, Father Busby—Henry Bertram Busby and Maud
Elizabeth, his wife—as by any seventeenth-century divine? I was half
unconscious of my surroundings now and started when I heard a voice
calling my name.

‘Miss Lathbury! Miss Lathbury!’
I looked up almost guiltily as if I had been doing something disgraceful

and saw Miss Statham creeping towards me. She held a polishing-cloth and
a tin of Brasso in her hand.

‘You were sitting so still, I thought perhaps you’d had a turn.’
‘A turn?’ I repeated stupidly.
‘Yes, been taken ill, you know. I said to myself as I came out of the

vestry, “Why, there’s Miss Lathbury sitting there. I wonder what she’s

doing? It isn’t her week for the brasses and it’s too early for Evensong.”
Then I thought you must be ill.’

‘No, I’m all right, thank you,’ I said smiling at Miss Statham’s reasons

for my presence in church. ‘I was just thinking something over.’

‘Thinking something over? Oh, dear . . .’ she let out a stifled giggle and

then clapped her hand over her mouth fearfully. ‘I’m sorry, Miss Lathbury, I
didn’t mean to laugh really. Only it seemed a bit funny to be sitting here on
a nice afternoon thinking things over. Wouldn’t you like to come home with
me and have a cup of tea?’

I refused as graciously as I could and Miss Statham went off to do her

brasses. My little meditation in the church was at an end; obviously I could
not go on with it now. Had the church been older and darker and smaller,
had it perhaps been a Roman Catholic church, I thought wickedly. . . . But it
was no use regretting it; the fault lay in myself. Nevertheless, I did feel a
little calmer and better able to face furniture removals and whatever else
might be in store for me.

When I got home Mrs. Morris was cleaning my sitting-room. It was

really her day for the Napiers, but she had finished their work sooner than
usual and expressed surprise at the tidiness of the kitchen.

‘Only the breakfast washing up to do and a few odd plates,’ she said.

‘Usually it’s all the meals from the day before and glasses—you’d think
they lived on wine.’

I explained that I had done some washing up the previous afternoon.

‘Mrs. Napier is away,’ I said delicately, ‘so she wasn’t able to do it.’

‘And she wouldn’t do it even if she was here,’ said Mrs. Morris

emphatically. ‘He’s always the one to do things in the house. The next thing
is we’ll have the vicar washing up. Just wait till he’s married and you’ll
soon see.’

‘You don’t think that men should help with the housework?’ I asked.
She gave me a look but said nothing for a moment. ‘Not a clergyman,

Miss Lathbury,’ she said at last, shaking her head.

‘You think they have enough burdens to bear without that?’
‘I don’t know about burdens,’ she said doubtfully, ‘but that Mrs. Gray

will lead him a dance, I don’t mind telling you. A widow! What happened
to her first? That’s what I’d like to know!’ She opened the window and
shook the mop vigorously out of it.

‘Oh, I think he was killed in the war,’ I said.

Mrs. Morris shook her head again.
‘You told me, Miss Lathbury, that the vicar wasn’t a marrying man,’ she

said accusingly.

‘Well, I had always thought he wasn’t,’ I admitted. ‘But we’re

sometimes mistaken, aren’t we?’

‘A pretty face,’ said Mrs. Morris; ‘well, she has got that. But what’s his

poor sister going to do? What about poor Miss Winifred? Hasn’t she made a
home for him for all these years? Given up the best years of her life to
making him comfortable?’

I could think of no ready answers to her challenging question, especially

when I remembered with some uneasiness what Winifred had hinted at the
other evening. Not that she had exactly said anything against Allegra Gray,
but she seemed less enthusiastic than she had been.

‘I wouldn’t put it quite like that, Mrs. Morris,’ I said at last. ‘I think

Miss Malory has liked to make a home for her brother. After all, it was the
natural thing for her to do, as I suppose it would be for most women.’

‘You haven’t made a home for a man, Miss Lathbury,’ Mrs. Morris went

on, her tone full of reproach so that I felt as if I had in some way failed in
my duty.

‘Well, no,’ I admitted, ‘though after my mother died I kept house for my

father for a short time. But then he died too and I’ve been by myself ever
since, except when Miss Caldicote was here.’

‘It’s not natural for a woman to live alone, without a husband.’
‘No, perhaps not, but many women do and some have no choice in the

matter.’

‘No choice!’ Mrs. Morris’s scornful laugh rang out. ‘You want to think

of yourself a bit more, Miss Lathbury, if you don’t mind me saying so.
You’ve done too much for Father Malory and so has Miss Winifred and in
the end you both get left, if you’ll excuse me putting it plainly.’

‘Yes, I suppose you’re right,’ I said, smiling, for really she was right. It

was not the excellent women who got married but people like Allegra Gray,
who was no good at sewing, and Helena Napier, who left all the washing
up. ‘I can’t change now. I’m afraid it’s too late.’ I felt it would not sound
very convincing if I said that I hadn’t really wanted to marry Julian Malory.
I was obviously regarded in the parish as the chief of the rejected ones and I
must fill the position with as much dignity as I could.

‘You’re not bad-looking,’ said Mrs. Morris quickly and then looked

shocked, as if she had gone too far. She bent down, unhooked the bag from
the Hoover and shook out a great mound of dust on to a newspaper. ‘Things
happen, even at the last minute,’ she said mysteriously. ‘Not that you’d
want to marry a man who’d been divorced. Too much of this old divorce,
there is,’ she muttered, going out into the kitchen with the bundle of dust. I
heard her say that there was a drop of milk in the jug that would do for my
tea.

She left me feeling a little shaken, almost as if I really had failed in

some kind of duty and must take immediate action to make up for it. I must
go to Julian and not do things for him and then he might reject Allegra and
marry me. As for Rocky, in his cottage surrounded by nettles, perhaps it did
not matter how much I did for him since he could never be regarded as a
possible husband. Too much of this old divorce. But then I smiled at myself
for the heavy seriousness of my thoughts. Had the Wren officers had their
dreams too? I wondered. Had they imagined Rocky wifeless and turning to
them for comfort or had they always known they were just playthings, taken
down from their shelves only when he wanted an evening’s diversion? I
could not flatter myself that I had done even that for him.

I also had a limp suède-bound volume of Christina Rossetti’s poems

among my bedside books.

Better by far you should forget and smile,
Than that you should remember and be sad. . . .

It was easy enough to read those lines and to be glad at his smiling but
harder to tell myself that there would never be any question of anything
else. It would simply not occur to him to be sad.

It must not be poetry that I read that night, but a devotional or even a

cookery book. Perhaps the last was best for my mood, and I chose an old
one of recipes and miscellaneous household hints. I read about the care of
aspidistras and how to wash lace and black woollen stockings, and I learned
that a package or envelope sealed with white of egg cannot be steamed
open. Though what use that knowledge would ever be to me I could not
imagine.

CHAPTER NINETEEN

It seemed odd to be able to enter the Napiers’ flat freely and to treat their
possessions almost as if they had been my own. Rocky’s list made it quite
clear what was to be moved—the big desk, the Chippendale chairs, the
gate-legged table and then the smaller objects, paper-weights and snow-
storms and some china. Even the books were to be sorted out, leaving only
Helena’s forbidding-looking anthropological works and a few paper-backed
novels. The rooms would be bare and characterless when these things were
gone, but even now they looked impersonal and depressing. I wondered if I
ought to attempt to tidy the desk, whose pigeon-holes were stuffed with
papers, and I did make an effort, conscious all the time that I might come
across something which was none of my business. I daresay I hoped that I
might but my curiosity was not gratified. There were no love-letters, no
diaries, no photographs, even. The pigeon-holes contained only bills and
Helena’s anthropological notes. The love-letters from the Wren officers had
no doubt been crumpled up and thrown into the waste-paper-basket after a
perfunctory reading. But perhaps they had been wise enough not to tell their
love. It seemed to me that the natural inclination of women to assume a
Patience-on-a-monument attitude was a kind of strength, though judging by
what Everard Bone had told me they sometimes gave away their advantage
by declaring themselves.

I took care to be up before eight o’clock on the Saturday morning, but it

was after half-past nine when the remover’s men arrived. There were three
of them, two cheerful and strong-looking, and the third, perhaps as befitted
his position as foreman, wizened and melancholy and apparently incapable
of carrying anything at all.

He shook his head when he saw the big desk.

‘We’ll never get that round the corner of the stairs,’ he declared.
I pointed out that it could be taken to pieces, but he had his moment of

triumph when the bottom half of the desk was pulled away from the wall
and a fine powdering of sawdust was revealed on the carpet.

‘Worm,’ he said. ‘I knew it as soon as I set eyes on it.’
‘Oh, dear,’ I said feebly, feeling that it might almost be my fault. ‘I

wonder if Mr. Napier knows about that.’

‘I shouldn’t think he does. You never know what goes on at the back,

unless you’re an expert. I’ve been handling furniture for over forty years, of
course.’

‘I suppose there’s nothing we can do about it now?’ I asked, thinking of

Everard Bone’s mother but feeling that it would hardly be any use to
telephone her now. I should have to mention it to Rocky in a letter.

‘Hundreds of them,’ said the foreman, tapping the little holes with his

finger and watching the fine dust pour out. ‘We shall be lucky if it doesn’t
fall to pieces. It rots the whole piece, madam. It’s probably riddled with
them.’

‘Amazing how those little insects get in, boring all those neat little

holes,’ I commented fatuously.

‘Ah,’ he smiled for the first time, ‘that’s just what they don’t do,

madam. It’s surprising the number of people that think that. The holes are
made when the beetles come out—that’s what it is.’

‘Oh, really? That’s interesting,’ I murmured.
‘Slowly, now,’ he called, as the two strong men lifted the base of the

desk as easily as if it had been made of cardboard. I was relieved to see that
it did not fall to pieces, but the episode had disturbed me. It was
disconcerting to think that worms or beetles could eat their way secretly
through one’s furniture. Something is rotten in the state of
Denmark. . . . Men have died and worms have eaten them, but not for
love. . . . ‘Perhaps you would like a cup of tea?’ I suggested.

This proved to be a good idea and the rest of the things were taken away

smoothly and without incident. The foreman was able to carry a cushion
downstairs but otherwise took little part in the proceedings. After I had seen
the van go away I went upstairs to my flat to eat a melancholy lunch. A
dried-up scrap of cheese, a few lettuce leaves for which I could not be
bothered to make any dressing, a tomato and a piece of bread-and-butter,
followed by a cup of coffee made with coffee essence. A real woman’s

meal, I thought, with no suggestion of brandy afterwards, even though there
was still a drop left in the bottle. Alcohol would have made it even more of
a mockery.

I had just finished when the telephone bell rang. It was Miss Clovis,

asking if I would care to take tea with her and Mrs. Napier.

‘No doubt you will have something to report?’ she asked eagerly.
‘Oh, yes, the furniture has just gone.’
‘What, all of it?’ she asked in alarm.
‘Oh, no, just Mr. Napier’s own things. The flat is quite habitable now

for Mrs. Napier whenever she likes to come back.’

A snorting noise came down the telephone.
‘That man! I think it’s the limit. Anyway, Miss Lathbury, I shall expect

you about four o’clock.’

I was a little apprehensive at entering the premises of the Learned

Society alone and felt quite nervous as I pushed open the heavy door, whose
dark carvings might have been the work of some primitive sculptor. On the
stairs I met an old bearded man, and I thought for a moment that it was the
old President, until I remembered that he was dead. He stood aside
courteously for me to pass and said, beaming and nodding, ‘Ah, miss, er—
hard at work, I see.’

‘Oh, yes,’ I beamed and nodded back at him.
‘It would be pretty hot in New Guinea now, eh?’ he chuckled as I

mounted the flight of stairs above him.

‘Yes, it certainly would be,’ I called out, confident that this was a safe

answer to make.

‘Oh, good. I was just going to make tea.’ Miss Clovis emerged from a

door with a kettle in her hand. ‘Do go on into the sitting-room—it’s the
door in front of you.’

I went into the room indicated, but then drew back, thinking that I had

entered a library or store-room by mistake, for the floor was littered with
books which seemed to have overflowed from the tall shelves which lined
three of the walls. There were also several dark wooden images, some with
fierce and alarming expressions. In the middle of the books and images sat
Helena Napier, wearing a crumpled cotton dress and apparently busy
sorting a mass of notes in typescript and sprawling handwriting.

We greeted each other stiffly, for I could not help feeling selfconscious

at being, as it were, the last person to see her husband, and she may have

had something of the same feeling.

‘You look busy,’ I began.
‘Has he taken the furniture?’ she asked bluntly.
‘Oh, yes; it went this morning.’
Miss Clovis came in with a teapot which she put down on a low table on

which a rough attempt at laying tea had been made, with three odd cups and
saucers, a loaf of bread, a pot of jam and a slab of margarine still in its
paper. Helena must feel quite at home here, I thought spitefully.

‘Dig in,’ said Miss Clovis. ‘I’ve got a cake somewhere, left over from

the Society’s last tea-party.’ She produced a tin from behind one of the
images. I wondered whether there had been a tea-party since the one I had
been to in the spring, for the cake, when it was put out, looked weeks or
even months old. Fortunately, however, it was a shop cake made of
substitute ingredients and I had learned from my own experience that such
cakes would keep almost indefinitely.

‘I met such a nice old man on the stairs,’ I said. ‘He had a grey beard

and looked very much like the old President, the one who died.’

‘Oh, that would be old Hornibrook—New Guinea, 1905,’ said Helena

shortly.

‘How sad that was, the old President dying,’ I said.
‘Oh, well, in the midst of life we are in death,’ said Miss Clovis

casually, cutting a thick slab of bread.

‘Yes, of course, he went so suddenly.’
‘Suddenly with meat in his mouth,’ said Miss Clovis.
‘Oh, surely . . .’
‘Ah, I can see you aren’t an antiquarian, Miss Lathbury,’ said Miss

Clovis triumphantly, ‘or you would know your Anthony à Wood better. In
the beginning of this month I was told that Henry Marten died last summer,
suddenly with meat in his mouth, at Chepstow in Monmouthshire,’ she
quoted. ‘But that’s the way they go. The President was standing in the
library and was just reaching up to take Dynamics of Clanship among the
Tallensi out of a shelf, when he fell.’

‘What a splendid title for a book,’ I remarked. ‘Perhaps not a book for

an old man to read, though. Who is to be the new President?’

‘Tyrell Todd,’ said Helena. ‘You may remember him at our do.’
‘Oh, yes, he talked about pygmies.’

‘He is a young man,’ said Miss Clovis. ‘New brooms sweep clean, or so

they say.’

The conversation now turned into an exchange of views about various

personalities whose names meant nothing to me. I am afraid Miss Clovis
brought out little tit-bits of scandal about them and she and Helena seemed
to be enjoying themselves very much. I began to wonder why I had been
asked to tea as they made so little attempt to entertain me.

At last there was a pause and I made a remark about the books and

images, asking if they belonged to Miss Clovis.

‘Good Heavens, no,’ said Miss Clovis. ‘The late President’s widow

gave them. She could hardly wait to get them out of the house. I suppose
they were just so much junk to her.’

‘Oh, yes; I think I remember her.’ The old woman nodding in her chair

and falling asleep over her knitting. How she must have disliked those
images, nasty malevolent-looking things, some with dusty unhygenic raffia
manes. Perhaps they had even come between her and the man she had
married. I wondered if she had had to have them in her drawing-room,
though even if they had been relegated to his study they must have been a
continual worry to her, especially at spring-cleaning time. ‘I suppose you
are glad to have his relics,’ I said. ‘Will his wife’s name go up on the board
among the list of benefactors?’

‘I suppose it will have to,’ said Miss Clovis, ‘though I doubt if she will

ever have the pleasure of seeing it there. I’m sure she won’t attend any of
our meetings now that her husband is dead.’

‘I wonder if she feels a great sense of freedom,’ I said, more to myself

than my companions. ‘Perhaps she never really understood the papers and
wasn’t interested, and now she need never come again. Or perhaps she feels
lost without the discipline of sitting through them and will find nothing to
take its place.’

‘Well, she certainly hasn’t got your church-going and good works,’ said

Helena quite genially.

‘Oh, did he take even that from her?’ I asked, shocked by the idea that

she could now have been the backbone of some parish, one of the
invaluable helpers of some overworked vicar, had not her husband made her
an unbeliever. ‘Oh, the wicked things men do, leaving her nothing for her
old age, not even anthropology!’

‘You put yourself too much in other people’s places,’ said Helena. ‘I

believe she is quite happy pottering about her garden and reading novels. To
be free and independent, that’s the thing.’

‘But surely you don’t want that when you’re old?’ I protested. ‘Would

you know what to do with freedom and independence if it came so late in
life?’

‘Well, all I can say is that I’m thankful I never got myself tied up with

any man,’ said Miss Clovis.

Helena looked at her doubtfully, perhaps wondering, as I was, whether

Miss Clovis had ever had the opportunity of entering into this bondage.

‘You will do better work without your husband,’ said Miss Clovis. ‘You

will now be able to devote your whole life to the study of matrilineal kin-
groups.’

I could not help pitying Helena, condemned to something that sounded

so uninteresting, and she may have pitied herself a little as she said bitterly,
‘You should have said higher things. Isn’t that what one usually devotes
one’s life to? Come along, Mildred, it’s time we were going now.’

I thanked Miss Clovis, who seemed unwilling to let Helena go, and we

went down the stairs with Helena’s suitcase and a small evil-looking image,
which was given to me to carry. I felt awkward when people in the bus
started to stare and giggle and I had to sit with it in my lap, trying vainly to
cover it with my gloves and handbag.

As we approached the house Julian Malory came towards us. I had

imagined that the sight of Helena would frighten him away, but he stood his
ground.

‘I am sorry to hear of this trouble between you and your husband, Mrs.

Napier,’ he said. ‘I think you should go back to him and talk things over.’

We were all—even Julian, I think—so taken aback at his boldness that

for a moment nobody said anything. I myself was full of admiration for
him, for I had not expected that he would speak so frankly. I had imagined
he would make some trivial social remark and that our encounter would end
with remarks about the weather.

‘Well, he has gone into the country,’ said Helena, without her usual self-

possession. ‘And there are difficulties, you know.’

‘There are always difficulties in human relationships,’ said Julian. ‘You

won’t think I am trying to interfere, I hope, but I do think you should see
him. And if there is anything I can do for you, please let me know.’

Helena thanked him in an embarrassed way and we went into the house.

I felt almost as if I ought to apologise for Julian’s boldness, as if he and all
the clergymen were my personal responsibility, and perhaps they were
when I was up against unbelievers. I could not help feeling glad that he had
spoken.

‘I suppose he felt he ought to say something,’ said Helena in a detached

way. ‘It must be a bore having to go about doing good, saying a word here
and there. I didn’t realise they ever did anything like that, though.’

‘Oh, yes, Julian certainly has the courage of his convictions,’ I said. ‘I

believe he and Rocky had a drink together the other night. I saw them going
into the pub at the end of the square.’

‘Really, Mildred, the things you see happening! Is there anything that

escapes you?’

‘Well, I couldn’t help seeing them. I just happened to be passing. I

expect they had a talk and Rocky would feel more at ease talking to a man
than he would to me. I suppose there must be times when men band
together against women and women against men. You and Miss Clovis
against Julian and Rocky, and I like the umpire in a tennis match.’

Helena laughed, but when we reached her sitting-room she exclaimed

angrily, ‘But my chairs have gone! Really, this is too bad. And the desk too!
Mildred, why did you let them go?’

‘I’m sorry,’ I said meekly. ‘Rocky gave me a list of the furniture that

was to go and I just followed his instructions.’

‘Oh, you were always on his side!’ she burst out. ‘Anyway, those chairs

were a wedding present to both of us. He had no right to take them.’

‘Yes, it is difficult, when something is given as a wedding present,’ I

said. But how could people foresee the separation of a happy pair and
always give presents that could if necessary be easily divided? Surely that
was too cynical a view for even the most embittered giver to take of
marriage?

Helena darted here and there in the flat, missing objects which she

claimed as hers. ‘Mildred, you’ll have to write to him,’ she declared, sitting
down in the one armchair that was left.

‘I write to him? Wouldn’t it be better if you did?’
‘Oh, I certainly couldn’t do it myself. You know him and he might take

more notice of a letter from you. Otherwise I might ask Esther Clovis to do
it, or even Everard.’

‘Oh, I don’t think you should ask him,’ I burst out, suddenly

remembering that I had never had the opportunity of telling Helena, as he
had bidden me to, that he did not love her. But it hardly seemed to matter
now. ‘Anyway,’ I went on, ‘he’s at a conference of the Prehistoric Society
in Derbyshire, so it wouldn’t be much use.’

‘Oh, that,’ said Helena impatiently. ‘I can’t think why he bothers with

archaeology. All this dabbling won’t get him anywhere.’

‘I shouldn’t have thought he dabbled,’ I said. ‘He gives me the

impression of being a very definite kind of person.’

‘How do you mean?’ asked Helena suspiciously.
‘Well, he knows what he wants or doesn’t want,’ I floundered. ‘I should

think he has—er—very high principles.’

‘Oh, he doesn’t believe in divorce, if that’s what you mean,’ said Helena

in a light tone. ‘And naturally he imagined that if I quarrelled with Rocky I
should go rushing to him. That’s why he went to Derbyshire, of course.’

I was a little taken aback at her summing-up of the position and must

have shown it in my face, for she laughed and said, ‘Oh, yes, men are very
simple and obvious in some ways, you know. They generally react in the
way one would expect and it is often rather a cowardly way. I should think
Everard was most alarmed when he heard that Rocky and I weren’t getting
on very well. He doesn’t really care twopence about prehistory, you know.
He always uses the society as an excuse, just because I don’t happen to be a
member myself.’

This seemed to me rather a waste of a subscription and there was

something altogether comic about the thought of a man hiding from a
woman behind a cloak of prehistory.

‘I met his mother,’ I said, hoping to change the subject. ‘She seems

rather odd.’

‘Yes, she is odd, but then people’s mothers usually are, don’t you

think?’ said Helena. ‘I suppose there’s really no reason why Everard and I
should ever meet again, except at the Society. It would be more dramatic,
really, if we didn’t for about ten years, and then we should be like the pair
in that sonnet that people always think of when they part from somebody,

Be it not seen in either of our brows,
That we one jot of former love retain.’

‘I dare say you wouldn’t still love a person after ten years,’ I suggested,

‘so you wouldn’t retain one jot of former love, anyway, and that would
spoil the excitement of the meeting.’

‘Yes, one would have nothing to conceal and would probably wonder

how one could ever have felt anything at all. It would be better if I forgot all
about Everard, I suppose, since he obviously doesn’t intend to have
anything more to do with me.’

‘Yes, of course, it would. But forgetting isn’t very easy,’ I said

doubtfully.

‘I suppose you have perhaps had to forget somebody too?’ asked

Helena, equally doubtful.

‘Oh, yes,’ I said cheerfully, thinking of Bernard Hatherley, but unwilling

to bring such a poor thing out into the open after so many years. ‘I suppose
everybody does at some time in their lives.’

‘I was wondering if you were rather fond of Rocky,’ said Helena, with

what seemed to me unsuitable frankness. ‘People do fall in love with him,
you know.’

‘Oh, you mean the Wren officers?’ I said, with an attempt at laughter.
‘Yes, they certainly did, but that was only to be expected. Rocky looked

so fine in his uniform and was kind to them at parties and danced with them
all in turn. But you have seen him much more as he really is. And I know he
likes you very much. He has said so several times.’

This was very little consolation to me and the whole subject of the

conversation was a most uncomfortable one, I felt.

‘Perhaps I had better get down to writing that letter about the furniture,’

I said firmly. ‘If you could give me a list of things you want sent back, I
might start it tonight.’

‘Oh, yes,’ Helena stood up, ‘that would be a great help. I wonder if your

vicar would take me out for a drink? He did say that I was to let him know
if there was anything he could do for me, didn’t he?’

‘I’m not sure that was quite the kind of thing he meant,’ I said, ‘though

if he takes Rocky to have a drink I don’t see why he shouldn’t take you. But
I rather think tonight is his boys’ club night.’

CHAPTER TWENTY

A list of furniture is not a good beginning to a letter, though I dare say a
clever person with a fantastic turn of mind could transform even a laundry
list into a poem.

I sat for a long time at my desk, unable to put pen to paper, idly turning

the pages of a notebook in which I kept accounts and made shopping lists.
How fascinating they would have been, had they been mediaeval shopping
lists! I thought. But perhaps there was matter for poetry in them, with their
many uncertainties and question marks. ‘Rations, green veg., soap flakes,
stamps,’ seemed reasonable enough and easily explained, but why ‘red
ribbon?’ What could I have wanted red ribbon for? Some daring idea for
retrimming an old hat, perhaps; if so it had been stillborn, for I knew that I
had never bought any and that it was unlikely anyway that I should wear a
hat trimmed with red ribbon. As for ‘egg poacher?’—that was an unfulfilled
dream or ambition to buy one of those utensils that produce a neat artificial-
looking poached egg. But I had never bought it and it seemed likely that on
the rare occasions when I had a fresh egg to poach I should continue to
delve for it in the bubbling water where the white separated from the yolk
and waved about like a sea anemone. Sometimes I had noted down places
or shops to visit. I came across the name of a well-known Roman Catholic
bookshop, also with a question mark. I do not think I had ever bought
anything there, but I remembered going into it at Christmas, when the
basement, with its brightly coloured plaster figures, seemed to offer a
peaceful refuge from the shopping crowds.

I went on turning the pages until I was reduced to studying old gas and

electricity bills, but I knew that I could not brood over such trivia
indefinitely and at last, after several false starts, I managed to produce some

kind of a letter, beginning ‘Dear Rocky,’ stating the facts and giving the list
of furniture and ending ‘I hope you are settling down well, Yours ever,
Mildred.’ The ending had cost me more anxious thought than was justified
by the result, but I believed that ‘yours ever’ was the correct way to finish a
friendly letter to a person for whom one was supposed to have no particular
feelings. I dare say there would have been no harm in sending my love, but
I could not bring myself to do this.

Rocky’s answer, when it came, was characteristic and had obviously

cost him no anxious thought at all.

‘Dearest M.,’ he wrote, ‘Helena is quite wrong about all this and the things I have taken

are definitely MINE. As for the Blue Casserole, I admit that she bought it, but only to
replace one of mine which Everard Bone broke. So let’s have no more of this nonsense.

‘I hope you are well and that the church is flourishing, also Father Malory—ought I to

write Fr.? All those Sundays after Trinity must be tedious but I suppose there will come an
end sometime!

‘You must come and see me some time and (if fine) I will give you lunch in my wild

garden with an amusing wine.

‘In haste and with lots of love,

‘R.’

I brooded over this letter with pleasure and sadness, but after I had

learned its contents nearly by heart the chief impression that remained was
one of surprise. I could not imagine Everard Bone breaking a casserole! It
was a silly trivial thing, but every time I thought of it I smiled, sometimes
when I was by myself in a street or in a bus.

As I had expected, Helena received the letter with indignation and

decided that she would have no further communication with her husband
but would go home and stay with her mother in Devonshire. I had not
expected that she would behave in this conventional way and somehow
liked her better for it. So it seemed that my part in the unhappy affair was at
an end, and I could only hope that something would occur to make them
come to their senses. I began to think that if I went to see Rocky I might be
able to bring them together again; I saw myself playing a rather noble part,
stepping into the background when they were reunited and going quietly
away to make a cup of tea or do some washing or ironing. But although
Rocky had said that I must go and see him some time, he had not suggested
any definite date and I did not like to invite myself.

It was the middle of August now, a difficult time in the church. There

were, as Rocky had pointed out, all those Sundays after Trinity; even the

highest church could not escape them and it was sometimes difficult to
remember whether we were at Trinity eight, nine or ten. Then too, Julian
Malory was away, leaving Father Greatorex in charge, and we were like a
rudderless ship. There was no sermon on Sunday mornings and little things
seemed to go wrong—sparks came out of the censer and alarmed some of
the older members of the congregation; one of the little acolytes tripped
over his too long cassock and fell down the steps, causing the others to
dissolve into giggles. One Sunday Teddy Lemon went to Margate for the
week-end, and Mr. Conybeare, looking like an angry bird, was called up out
of the congregation to act as Master of Ceremonies. It was the organist’s
holiday too, and although Sister Blatt made a valiant attempt to take his
place those peculiarly unnerving noises that only a church organ can
produce would keep bursting out.

Julian and Winifred had gone on holiday with Allegra Gray to a farm in

Somerset. I could not help feeling that they were an ill-assorted trio, but
perhaps Julian had not thought it quite proper to go on a holiday alone with
his fiancée and there was always the problem of what to do with Winifred. I
could have offered to go somewhere with her myself had I not been pledged
to go away with Dora Caldicote in September, as I did every year. I began
to look forward to my holiday as never before. I felt that I needed to get
away from all the problems—mostly other people’s—with which I had been
worried in the last few months. If I could look at them from a distance they
might solve themselves. Helena would forget about the furniture, Allegra
Gray would turn out to be the perfect wife for Julian, Winifred would marry
or enter a religious community. Even the woodworms in the back of
Rocky’s desk would be destroyed and their ravages arrested by the
application of that remedy Mrs. Bone had been talking about.

One day towards the end of August I was coming out of my office at

one o’clock when I saw Everard Bone standing looking in a shop window
some distance away. My immediate reaction was one of irritation. What
was he doing? If he wanted to see me, why couldn’t he telephone and
arrange a meeting in a normal way? I remembered the last time we had met,
I in my old cotton dress and no stockings, with Cardinal Newman and a loaf
in my string bag. Today I was at least wearing a respectable dress and had
no domestic shopping with me. I had planned to hurry home and finish a
dress I was making for my holiday, so, imagining that he had not seen me, I
turned and walked briskly in the opposite direction. I heard the sound of

somebody running after me but I did not look round. Then my name was
called and I had to stop and feign surprise.

‘Oh, it’s you,’ I said ungraciously.
‘Yes, I’ve been waiting for you. I hoped you would have lunch with

me.’

‘Why didn’t you write or telephone, then?’
‘Well, it didn’t occur to me till this morning. I’ve been away you see. A

little archaeological tour in the Dordogne.’

‘Have you been hiding in a cave?’ I asked.
‘I have been in some caves, certainly,’ he replied. ‘But I don’t know

why you should think I have been hiding.’

‘Oh, it doesn’t matter,’ I said, feeling rather ashamed. ‘I was only

making a kind of joke. I thought anthropology was your subject anyway.’

‘Yes, but it all links up, you know. Archaeology seems to fit in better

with a holiday.’

‘There are stone circles in Brittany, aren’t there?’ I began, trying to

show an intelligent interest. ‘And then of course there’s always
Stonehenge.’ I remembered that my father had been interested in
Stonehenge, and I seemed to see us all sitting round the dinner-table, my
mother and father, a curate—I could not remember which curate—and a
canon and his wife. We were having a conversation about Stonehenge and
suddenly all of the lights had gone out. The curate had let out a cry of alarm
but the canon’s voice went on without a tremor—I could hear it now—just
as if nothing had happened. My mother got up and fussed with candles and
the canon went on explaining his theory of how the great stones had been
carried to Salisbury Plain. It was an impressive performance and had been
rewarded, or so it seemed to me, by a bishopric not long afterwards.
Thinking about it after all these years, I smiled.

‘Yes, there’s always Stonehenge,’ said Everard rather stiffly.
We walked on in silence until we came to an area where there were

restaurants.

‘You haven’t said in so many words that you will have lunch with me,’

said Everard, ‘but as we seem to be going in the right direction I assume
that you will.’

‘Oh, well, I suppose so,’ I said indifferently and then realised that I was

not behaving very well. It seemed too late to apologise and I felt resentful
towards him for bringing out the worst in me, but I made some attempt.

‘You must think me very impolite,’ I said, ‘but the worst side of me seems
to be coming out today. It does seem to have been coming out more lately.’

‘I expect you are upset at all this happening,’ he said.
‘Yes, I suppose I might make that excuse. It is upsetting when things

happen to friends.’

We went into a restaurant and were shown to a table. It was not until we

were sitting down that I realised that it was the restaurant where I had had
lunch with William Caldicote in the spring.

‘What exactly has happened?’ he asked casually.
‘Rocky is in the country and Helena has gone home to her mother in

Devonshire.’

‘Oh, that is a relief,’ he said, taking up the menu and ordering lunch

with rather less fuss than William did.

‘I don’t really know that one should have expected anything else.

Women who quarrel with their husbands usually do go home to their
mothers, if they have mothers.’

‘I certainly gave her no encouragement,’ said Everard, almost in a

satisfied tone.

‘Oh, I’m sure you didn’t,’ I said, contemplating my hors d’œuvres. ‘I

can’t imagine you doing such a thing.’

‘Of course,’ he went on, with a note of warning in his tone, ‘I shall

probably marry eventually.’

‘Yes, men usually do,’ I murmured.
‘The difficulty is finding a suitable person.’
‘Perhaps one shouldn’t try to find people deliberately like that,’ I

suggested. ‘I mean, not set out to look for somebody to marry as if you
were going to buy a saucepan or a casserole.’

‘You think it should just be left to chance? But then the person might be

most unsuitable.’

The idea of choosing a husband or wife as one would a casserole had

reminded me of Rocky’s letter and his allegation that Everard had broken
one of his casseroles. I suppose a smile must have come on to my face, for
he said, ‘You seem to find it amusing, the idea of marrying somebody
suitable.’

‘I wasn’t really smiling at that. It was just that I couldn’t imagine you

breaking a casserole.’

‘Oh, that,’ he said rather irritably. ‘Helena had put it in the oven to

warm and when I took hold of it it was so hot that I dropped it.’

‘Yes, I could imagine it happening in that way, with a perfectly

reasonably explanation. It was a pity you didn’t use the oven cloth,’ I
suggested.

‘But it had only been in the oven a few minutes. Besides, I don’t think

there was an oven cloth.’

‘I always have mine hanging on a nail by the side of the cooker.’
‘Well, you’re a sensible person. It’s just the kind of thing you would

have.’

Oh, dear, one was to be for ever cast down, I thought, brooding over the

piece of fish on my plate. If I had been flattered by Everard’s invitation to
lunch I was now put in my place as the kind of person who would have an
oven cloth hanging on a nail by the side of the cooker.

‘Would you have married Helena if she had not been married already?’ I

asked boldly.

‘Certainly not,’ he declared. ‘She is not at all the kind of person I should

choose for my wife.’

‘What would she be like, that Not Impossible She?’ I asked.
‘Oh, a sensible sort of person,’ he said vaguely.
‘Somebody who would help you in your work?’ I suggested.

‘Somebody with a knowledge of anthropology who could correct proofs
and make an index, rather like Miss Clovis, perhaps?’

‘Esther Clovis is certainly a very capable person,’ he said doubtfully.

‘An excellent woman altogether.’

‘You could consider marrying an excellent woman?’ I asked in

amazement. ‘But they are not for marrying.’

‘You’re surely not suggesting that they are for the other things?’ he said,

smiling.

That had certainly not occurred to me and I was annoyed to find myself

embarrassed.

‘They are for being unmarried,’ I said, ‘and by that I mean a positive

rather than a negative state.’

‘Poor things, aren’t they allowed to have the normal feelings, then?’
‘Oh, yes, but nothing can be done about them.’
‘Of course I do respect and esteem Esther Clovis,’ Everard went on.

‘Oh, respect and esteem—such dry bones! I suppose one can really have

such feelings for somebody but I should have thought one would almost
dislike a person who inspired them. Anyway, Miss Clovis must be quite a
lot older than you are, and then she looks so odd. She has hair like a dog.’

Everard laughed. ‘Yes, so she has.’
I now felt ashamed at having made him laugh by an unkind criticism of

the excellent Miss Clovis, so I tried to change the subject by commenting
on the other inhabitants of the restaurant in what I hoped was a more
charitable way. But he would not agree with me that this woman was pretty
or that one elegant, and we lapsed into an uncomfortable silence which was
broken by a voice behind me saying my name.

It was William Caldicote.
I introduced him to Everard and then William took command of the

conversation.

‘Thank goodness some of one’s friends are unfashionable enough to be

in town in August,’ he said, ‘then one needn’t feel quite so ashamed, though
I suppose nowadays women don’t feel that they must go about veiled and in
dark glasses and sit in their houses behind drawn blinds.’

‘No, I think there are a good many people who have to stay in London

during August,’ I said, remembering the bus queues and the patient line of
people moving with their trays in the great cafeteria.

‘Yes, even people like ourselves,’ William agreed. ‘But what my poor

mother would have said!’

I thought for a moment of old Mrs. Caldicote sitting comfortably in the

ugly drawing-room of her villa in a Birmingham suburb, but I did not
remind William of how she had liked to visit London in August—her
‘annual jaunt’ she called it—to stay at one of those garishly decorated
hotels which used to be, and perhaps still are, the Mecca of provincial
visitors, especially when the tips were often included in the bill and they
were thus saved that embarrassment. My father had preferred a quiet
depressing hotel near the British Museum, where he could be near the
reading-room and perhaps meet another clergyman who had been up at
Balliol in the very early nineteen-hundreds.

‘Yes, August is not a pleasant month in London,’ said Everard stiffly.

‘So many libraries and museums seem to be closed.’

‘One’s club is being cleared,’ chanted William, ‘so inconvenient.’

‘But Lyons Corner House is always open,’ I reminded him, trying to

remember which was William’s club or even if he really had one. He could
hardly be on his way there now, for I noticed that he was carrying two rolls
in his hand.

‘Bread for my pigeons,’ he explained. ‘I feed them every afternoon;

Mildred knows the ritual. Well, Mildred, I suppose you will be going on
your holiday with Dora, as usual. We must have luncheon together when
you get back,’ he added, with a suspicious glance at Everard.

In the autumn? I thought and nearly said it aloud, for our annual

luncheon was always in March or April.

‘Yes, that would be nice,’ I said. ‘Dora and I will send you a postcard.’
‘Oh, I do like to be the kind of person people send postcards to,’ said

William, ‘those anonymous “views” with too much sea or too many
mountains, or your window marked with a cross, or even those rather
naughty ones of fat ladies on donkeys.’ He waved the roll at us and hurried
away.

‘Who was that?’ asked Everard politely.
‘The brother of a school friend of mine. He’s a civil servant in some

Ministry. I’ve known the Caldicotes for years.’

‘I thought he might be a friend of the Napiers. Have you any more news

of them?’ he asked rather too casually.

‘Oh, Rocky is in the country and Helena has gone to her mother in

Devonshire,’ I began, ‘but I’ve already told you that. And I have had to
write letters about furniture and arrange for it to be moved.’

‘There is no question of any—er—proceedings?’ he asked delicately.
‘You mean a divorce? Oh, I don’t think so. I certainly hope not.’
‘No, one doesn’t approve of divorce,’ said Everard, rather in William’s

manner. ‘But it seems a bad sign, all this moving of furniture, if it’s only a
temporary quarrel.’

‘Oh, dear, perhaps the remover’s men will have to bring it all back again

—I hadn’t thought of that. And perhaps this time the worm-eaten desk
really will fall to pieces.’

Everard looked puzzled.
‘When they came to move Rocky’s desk it was all worm-eaten at the

back,’ I explained. ‘I nearly telephoned your mother to ask her what to do.’

‘Oh, my mother has been in Bournemouth for the past fortnight,’ said

Everard quickly, as if he could not bear that any of the Bone family should

be associated even with the Napiers’ furniture.

‘Then it would have been no use my telephoning her,’ I said, putting on

my gloves and gathering up my bits and pieces. ‘Thank you very much for
my lunch.’

‘It has been so nice seeing you,’ he said, rather too politely to be

sincere, I felt. ‘We must meet again after you come back from your holiday.
I hope you will enjoy it.’

I thanked him but did not offer to send him a postcard, for Everard,

unlike William, did not seem to be the kind of person one sent postcards to.
Although, I reflected, if one should happen to come across something of
anthropological or archaeological interest, some stone circle or barrow or
curious local custom, perfectly serious, of course, no jokes about windows
marked with a cross or fat ladies, it might be quite well received.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

‘Of course it rains a great deal in Austria and Switzerland in the mountains
and even in Italy at certain times of the year,’ said Dora cheerfully, as we
stood at the window of the hotel lounge gazing at the steady downpour.

‘And in Africa and India, too,’ I added.
‘Yes, but there the wet and dry seasons are carefully defined,’ said Dora

in a schoolmistress’s tone. ‘It depends on the monsoons and other things.’

‘We might go and look at the Abbey this afternoon,’ I suggested, ‘as it’s

so wet.’

‘Oh, well, I suppose so,’ said Dora, who did not really like looking at

buildings but was an indefatigable tourist. ‘We can go on the bus.’

The bus-stop was just outside the hotel and there were already a few

people waiting when we got there. A crowd of little black priests from a
nearby Roman Catholic seminary came and waited in the queue behind us.
Dora nudged me. ‘Like a lot of beetles,’ she whispered. ‘I hope we don’t
have to sit near them. I bet they’ll try and push in front of us.’

The bus was half full when it came and some of the priests were left

behind. Dora looked down gloatingly from our superior position on the top
deck. ‘Serve them right,’ she said. ‘The Pope and all those Dogmas of his!’

‘Oh, poor things,’ I protested, pitying the dripping black priests who

would have to wait another twenty minutes. ‘It’s not their fault.’

‘I suppose the Abbey will be swarming with priests and nuns,’ Dora

went on, with a fierce gleam in her eye.

‘Well, naturally there will be a good many. After all, it must be like a

kind of pilgrimage for them and it’s certainly rather wonderful to think that
the Abbey was built by the monks themselves. I expect there will be quite a
number of ordinary tourists as well, though.’

After a ride of about half an hour we got off the bus and found ourselves

in what seemed to be open country with no sign of an Abbey anywhere. A
woman came up to me and asked me the way. ‘I think it must be
somewhere along here,’ I said, indicating what seemed to be the only path.

‘Oh, thank you,’ she said. ‘I hope you didn’t mind my asking, but you

looked as if you would know the way.’

I pondered on the significance of this as we walked along in a straggling

file, led by Dora and me. Even the priests had accepted our leadership. This
seemed a solemn and wonderful thing.

‘You’d think they’d have a signpost saying “This way to the Abbey” or

an arrow pointing,’ grumbled Dora in a satisfied way. ‘I wonder if we’ll be
able to get a cup of tea there? I expect they’ll have thought of every way of
making money.’

As we rounded the next bend in the lane we came upon a rather new-

looking building of an ecclesiastical appearance.

‘That must be it,’ said Dora.
‘Yes, I think so,’ I said, relieved that it had shown itself at last, for it

would indeed have been a dreadful thing if I had led priests astray. ‘I
suppose we can join a conducted party.’

‘Oh, if you like,’ said Dora, ‘though I’d rather poke about by myself.

You can be pretty sure they won’t want to show us everything,’ she hinted
darkly. ‘Like those tours of Russia.’

Parties of tourists arriving in cars and buses or on foot filled the space in

front of the Abbey. There was a large car-park and Dora nudged me and
pointed to a notice which said LADIES and another which said TEAS. ‘I told
you the whole place would be commercialised,’ she said.

I did not answer, for by now we were inside the Abbey and I was almost

overwhelmed by the sudden impression of light and brilliance. The walls
looked bright and clean, there was a glittering of much gold and the
lingering smell of incense was almost hygienic. Not here, I thought, would
one be sentimentally converted to Rome, for there was no warm rosy
darkness to hide in, no comfortable confusion of doctrines and dogmas; all
would be reasoned out and clearly explained, as indeed it should be.

A neat-looking monk with rimless glasses took charge of our party or

rather the group of people in which we found ourselves, for we were an ill-
assorted company—a few young soldiers in uniform, a priest or two,
middle-aged and young ‘couples’, a cluster of what seemed to be Anglo-

Catholic ladies of the kind who might advertise their services as
companions in the Church Times, and a crowd of nondescript or
unclassifiable bodies, among whom I supposed I should have to include
Dora and myself, though I dare say I should have been quite happy with the
Anglo-Catholic ladies.

We moved from place to place with reverence and admiration while our

guide explained the history and meaning of this or that in a kind patient
voice.

‘I don’t suppose any of you are Catholics,’ he said smoothly, ‘so you

may not understand about Our Lady.’

I saw the Anglo-Catholic ladies gather more closely together, as if to

distinguish themselves from the rest of the group. They seemed to be
whispering indignantly among themselves and one looked almost as if she
were about to protest. But in the end, perhaps remembering their manners
or the difficulty of arguing with a Roman, they calmed down and listened
patiently with the rest of us.

Dora was looking particularly fierce, though for different reasons, and I

was afraid that she might challenge our guide at any moment and start an
argument, but evidently she too thought better of it and moved sulkily on to
the next point of interest.

‘Of course it’s no use saying anything to them,’ she muttered. ‘They’ve

got it all off pat and just recite it like parrots. I’m tired of being led round
like this. I’m going to explore on my own.’

When we had finished our tour I found her waiting outside the Abbey,

her eyes gleaming triumphantly.

‘I hope you didn’t put any money in any of those boxes,’ she said.

‘They’ve got a shop round the corner to sell rosaries and images and all
sorts of highly-coloured junk. I can’t imagine why anybody should want to
buy such stuff.’

I tried to explain that Roman Catholics and even non-Romans found

these things comforting and helpful to their faith, but Dora would not be
convinced.

‘Parts of the place are roped off,’ she said in a low voice. ‘One certainly

isn’t allowed to see everything here. I wonder what goes on there?’

‘That must be the monks’ enclosure,’ I said. ‘One would hardly expect

to be able to go in among them.’

‘Oh, I shouldn’t want to,’ said Dora huffily. ‘Nothing would induce me

to.’ She grasped her umbrella and waved it like a sword.

‘Well, then, we may as well find somewhere to have tea. After spiritual

comes bodily refreshment.’

‘I’m afraid I didn’t get any spiritual refreshment,’ said Dora. ‘Quite the

reverse, the smell of that incense made me feel quite ill. It would probably
penetrate into the tea place here and anyway I don’t fancy the look of it.
Could we find somewhere on the way back, do you think?’

‘Yes, there’s a nice village we came through,’ I suggested. ‘It’s where

Helena Napier’s mother lives, as a matter of fact, and Helena is staying with
her now. Don’t you remember that black and white café we saw from the
bus?’

‘Oh, Ye Olde Magpie? Yes, we might try that.’
‘You never know,’ I ventured, ‘we might even see Helena.’
‘Oh, you can’t keep away from those Napiers,’ said Dora good-

humouredly. ‘Though somehow I don’t think it’s Helena you really want to
see.’

I could think of no suitable answer to make to this, so let Dora think

what she liked. Rocky’s easy and obvious charms were in themselves a kind
of protection, for no sensible person could be supposed to feel anything for
him. I had to admit to myself that the thought of seeing Helena did not
please me particularly, but it seemed a kind of duty to Everard Bone to find
out what was happening to her and what, if any, were the latest
developments.

I had hardly expected to come upon her as quickly as we did, standing

outside Ye Olde Magpie with a shopping basket.

After we had greeted each other with suitable exclamations of surprise

and even a certain amount of pleasure, she said, ‘Mother sent me out to buy
cakes. The vicar is coming to tea.’

‘That will be a nice change for you,’ said Dora brightly, and, I thought,

impertinently.

‘Oh, but didn’t you know? I get on splendidly with clergymen. Father

Malory was quite taken with me—wasn’t he, Mildred?—and asked me to
let him know if there was anything he could do for me.’

‘They always say that,’ said Dora, ‘and hope to goodness there won’t

be. It’s part of their duty.’

‘Oh, come,’ I said, but feebly, I’m afraid, ‘Julian Malory certainly does

a lot of good and so do many other clergymen. He would even have taken
Helena out for a drink if that was what she really wanted.’

‘Only it happened to be his boys’ club night and it always would be

something like that, wouldn’t it?’ asked Helena rather sadly. ‘Mother is a
real holy fowl. She and Mildred would get on splendidly.’

‘Like a house on fire,’ said Dora inevitably.
‘Won’t you come in here and have a cup of tea with us?’ I suggested.

‘It’s only a quarter to four and I don’t suppose the vicar will be punctual,’ I
added, with no possible means of knowing.

‘You should really come to tea with us,’ said Helena, hesitating, ‘but it

might be a little embarrassing. Perhaps I will just have a cup, then.’

We went into the café and sat down at an unsteady little round table

which was just too small for three people. After what seemed a long time, a
young woman with flowing hair and dark red nails came to take our order.

Helena ignored Dora and began questioning me. Had I seen Rocky?

Had he written to me? Had I visited him at his cottage? I answered ‘No’ to
all these questions, and added, ‘he did say something about my going to see
him, but nothing has been arranged yet.’

‘Oh, I expect he has forgotten all about it,’ said Helena. ‘That would be

just like him.’

‘Yes, I expect he has forgotten.’ I bowed my head and peered into the

teapot. It had been assumed that I should pour out and until the young
woman brought us more hot water I could not have a full cup of tea.

‘You must go and see him,’ said Helena, ‘or at least you must write. We

really must make up this stupid quarrel or whatever it is. You can’t imagine
how bored and miserable I am here.’

‘I expect your mother is glad to have you,’ I said helpfully.
‘Oh, yes! Nothing has been touched in my old room, so terribly

depressing. The girlish white painted furniture and the hollyhock chintz—
even photographs of old loves on the mantelpiece.’

‘I think white painted furniture is nice in a bedroom,’ said Dora. ‘Do try

a piece of this sandwich cake. It’s really good.’

‘Imagine finding photographs of old loves on the mantelpiece after all

these years,’ Helena went on, refusing the cake.

‘Yes, it must be a little unnerving,’ I agreed, seeing as usual Bernard

Hatherley’s face, the sepia print a little faded behind the glass, yet not faded

enough to be romantically Victorian. ‘Didn’t you think of putting them
away in a box or a drawer before you left home? It would seem quite decent
and suitable to find them there.’

‘Oh, you know how it was in the war. Things did get left.’ Helena stood

up. ‘I must go now. Look, there’s the vicar already. He must be on his way
to our house.’

I looked through the window and saw a round jolly-looking little man

hoisting himself up on to a bicycle. ‘Does he,’ I began, ‘I mean, will he—
have been told about things?’

‘Oh, Mildred, your delicacy is wonderful!’ Helena laughed for the first

time that afternoon. ‘I am sure Mother has already told him all. She can
never keep anything from a clergyman.’

‘Well, they are often able to help, as I’ve said before.’
‘Oh, you can help much better than any vicar. Promise me that you will

write to Rocky soon and tell him about me.’

I said I would try to do this.
‘But soon, Mildred. I may already have lost him to one of the Wren

officers. And think how noble your position will be, a mediator, a bringer-
together of husbands and wives.’

I agreed that it certainly did sound noble, but like so many noble

occupations there was something a little chilly about it.

Dora and I sat in silence for a little while after Helena had gone.
‘Well, well,’ said Dora at last, in her comfortable manner which seemed

to dispose of difficulties, ‘some people don’t seem to know when they’re
well off. It sounds delightful, I think.’

‘What sounds delightful?’
‘Her room with the white painted furniture and the hollyhock chintz. Of

course at school we have bed-sitting-rooms so one can’t have anything
really dainty-looking, but I was thinking of getting a new divan cover this
autumn and possibly curtains to match. I’ve got a brown carpet, you
remember, and my colour scheme has usually been blue and orange. What
do you think, Mildred?’

‘Oh, hollyhock chintz would look charming,’ I said absently.
‘You don’t think it would be too much? Having curtains as well?’
‘Oh, no, of course not.’
‘I might not be able to get hollyhock, though I shall have to see what

there is, of course.’

‘Yes, you will have to see what there is.’
‘There seems to be a little garden at the back here. Shall we go out and

look at it?’ said Dora, springing up from the table. ‘It seems to have stopped
raining now.’

We walked out through the back of the café into another room, also full

of unsteady little round tables, but empty now. It was damp, cold and silent
and the tables needed polishing. On one wall there was a spotty engraving
of a Byronic-looking young man who reminded me of Rocky. The room led
out into a romantic little garden, shut in with high walls covered with
dripping ivy.

‘Oh, what a gloomy place!’ exclaimed Dora. ‘You’d think they could

brighten it up with a few striped umbrellas.’

‘Oh, we do have umbrellas in the season, madam,’ said the waitress in

an offended tone. She had followed us in with our bill, as if fearing that we
might escape without paying for our tea. ‘But of course we aren’t doing
many lunches and teas now, you see, the season’s really over.’

Yes, I thought sadly, the season was really over and in the little garden I

could see the last rose of summer. ‘This must be an old house,’ I said,
‘almost Elizabethan.’

‘I don’t know about that, madam, but of course it’s called Ye Olde

Magpie, so it must be old,’ said the girl. ‘It’s a pity they don’t spend a bit of
money on it and make it more modern. The kitchen’s terrible.’

‘I don’t feel like going in that garden,’ said Dora. ‘It looks a bit damp to

me. You don’t want to go out, do you?’

‘No, not really.’ I could see a little lawn and a stone cupid with ivy

growing on it and it seemed rather too melancholy. ‘I wonder if they have
any picture postcards of this garden?’

‘Oh, to send to William, you mean?’
‘Yes, perhaps to William, but I’ve already sent him one.’
‘Oh, you mustn’t overdo it, or he’ll think you’re running after him.’
I agreed that I mustn’t and imagined William’s beady eyes, round and

alarmed. But there were no postcards of Ye Olde Magpie at all, and even if I
had been bold enough to send one to Rocky I should not have been able to
say anything about the last rose of summer and the ivy-mantled cupid.

‘We should just catch the five o’clock bus,’ said Dora, ‘if it isn’t too full

of those awful priests.’

When we reached the bus-stop we were a long way behind in the queue

and when the bus came it took only half a dozen people. I noticed a group
of priests looking down on us from the upper deck and I felt that somehow
the Pope and his Dogmas had triumphed after all.

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

A week later I sat at my desk trying to compose a letter to Rocky. It was
one of those sad late September evenings when by switching on a bar of the
electric fire one realises at last that summer is over. I had been sitting for
over half an hour, listening to the heavy rain falling outside rather than
writing, for I did not know what to say. It had been difficult enough to write
about the furniture but it seemed infinitely harder to know how to tell
Rocky that Helena regretted their quarrel and that they must come together
again, that he must take her back. And yet, who was to take who back? That
was the point, for I had forgotten, if I had ever really known who was to
blame. The inability to wash a lettuce properly, the hot saucepan put
carelessly down on the walnut table . . . it seemed now as if it had been
nothing more than that. But there was Everard Bone—where did he come
into it? His position now seemed to be merely that of an anxious onlooker,
who did not want to become involved in any ‘unpleasantness’. I smiled to
myself as I remembered the carefully worded postcard I had sent him. A
Dolmen on Dartmoor—at least the title was pleasing. ‘We walked here
today—I wonder if you know it? A lovely spot. Luckily it was a clear day
so we had an excellent view. All good wishes—M. Lathbury.’ With that
ambiguous signature, which was one I never normally used, I might have
been man or woman, though the wording of the card was perhaps not very
masculine. William Caldicote had been luckier in my choice for him, a fine
picture of the Diamond Jubilee bandstand, with a few little jokes which it
would be tedious to repeat here. I had not been able to find a suitable card
for Rocky.

‘Dear Rocky . . .’ I turned back to the letter with determination and

wrote on a fresh sheet of paper. ‘I have just come back from my holiday in

Devonshire and happened to see Helena there.’ That was a good clear
beginning. I would say that she seemed unhappy and bored, then I might
ask how he was and what he was doing. The next thing would be to
introduce a more personal note—‘You may think it very interfering, but it
does seem to me . . .’ What seemed to me? I wondered, listening to the rain
which had suddenly become heavier, and why should he take any notice of
what I said?

The shrill sound of my door-bell made me start as if somebody had fired

a pistol shot at my back. Who could be calling now? Not that it was very
late—barely half-past nine—but I could not think of anybody likely to visit
me unexpectedly and on such a wet night. I went down to answer the bell
rather unwillingly, but hearing the rain drumming on a skylight I hurried,
realising that whoever it was must be getting very wet standing by the door.

I had just started to turn the handle when I heard my name being called.

It was Winifred Malory’s voice. I had certainly not expected it to be her, for
I had imagined that she and Julian and Allegra would all be cosily together
in the vicarage, from which I felt myself to be somehow excluded these
days.

‘Oh, Mildred, thank goodness you’re in!’
I drew her quickly into the hall and saw that she was soaking wet. Then

I noticed that she was wearing only a thin dress without a hat or coat and
that on her feet were what looked like bedroom slippers, now sodden with
rain.

‘Winifred! Whatever are you doing dressed like that? You must be mad

coming out without even an umbrella.’ I suppose I must have spoken
sharply, for she drew back as if she would go out again and I saw that she
was crying. So I led her up to my sitting-room and put her in an armchair in
front of the fire. I found myself turning on the second bar and plugging in
the electric kettle for a cup of tea, almost without thinking what I did.

‘I couldn’t stay in the house a minute longer with that woman!’

Winifred burst out.

‘What woman?’ I asked stupidly, thinking as I did so how melodramatic

Winifred sounded, talking about ‘that woman’ as if she were in a play or a
novel.

‘Allegra Gray,’ she stammered in a burst of tears.
I was so astonished that I could think of nothing to say, but wondered

irrelevantly if I was to be caught with a teapot in my hand on every

dramatic occasion.

‘But I thought you were such friends . . .’ was all I could say, when

words came out last.

‘Oh, we were at first, but how was I to know what she was really like?

It’s such a terrible thing to be deceived by a person, to think they’re
something and then find they’re not.’

Of course it all came out then, all I had always felt myself about Allegra

Gray but with apparently no justification. It seemed that the friction
between her and Winifred had started quite a long time before they went on
holiday together.

‘You remember those flowers Lady Farmer sent for the church at

Whitsuntide?’

‘Oh, yes, lilies, weren’t they?’
‘Yes. Well, Allegra and I were doing the altar and naturally I felt that the

lilies should go there, but she had the idea of putting them on the floor at
the side and having peonies and delphiniums on the altar. I told her we
never had peonies on the altar and naturally Lady Farmer would expect the
flowers she sent to be used for the altar. . . .’

I suddenly felt very tired and thought how all over England, and

perhaps, indeed, anywhere where there was a church and a group of
workers, these little frictions were going on. Somebody else decorating the
pulpit when another had always done it, somebody’s gift of flowers being
relegated to an obscure window, somebody’s cleaning of the brasses being
criticised when she had been doing them for over thirty years. . . . And now
Lady Farmer’s lilies on the floor and peonies on the altar, an unheard-of
thing! But here, of course, there was more to it. The little friendly
criticisms, the mocking which had gradually become less good-humoured
—‘Winifred, you really must do something about your clothes. . . . Have
you made any plans for when Julian and I are married? Where are you
going to live?’ And then the suggestions flung out, the settlement in the
East End, the religious community—‘Dear Winifred, you’re just the kind of
person who would have a vocation, I feel’—or the cheap and comfortable
guest-house in Bournemouth, full of elderly people. . . .

‘But Mildred, I’m not elderly! I’m only a year or two older than she is.’

Winifred’s voice came at me plaintively and I reassured her that of course
she was not elderly.

‘I’d always thought we could live together so happily, the three of us. I

never imagined any other arrangement. Julian never gave any hint of it.’

‘No, he wouldn’t, of course,’ I said. ‘This may sound a cynical thing to

say, but don’t you think men sometimes leave difficulties to be solved by
other people or to solve themselves? After all, married people do like to be
left on their own,’ I said as gently as I could. ‘Didn’t it occur to you that
perhaps you ought to find somewhere else to live after they were married?’

‘No, I’m afraid it didn’t, but then I haven’t known many married

people. And it never occurred to me that Julian would marry. Men are so
strange,’ she said, in a pathetic puzzled way, as if she were finding it out for
the first time. ‘He always said he would never marry. You see, Mildred, I
always used to think it would be so nice if you and he . . .’

‘Oh, there was never any question of that,’ I said quickly. ‘Where was

Julian when all this happened this evening? Surely he didn’t let you run out
of the house in the rain?’

‘Oh, no, it’s his boys’ club night and he went out immediately after

supper, otherwise Allegra would never have said the things she did. She
was always nice to me when he was there. He thinks she has such a sweet
nature.’

‘Yes, men are sometimes taken in. They don’t ever quite see the terrible

depths that we do.’ The Dog beneath the Skin, I thought, and then
remembered that it was the name of a clever play William Caldicote had
once taken me to, so perhaps it didn’t apply here.

We sat in silence for a while and I thought of the unfinished letter to

Rocky lying on my desk. ‘What time will Julian be back?’ I asked. ‘I had
better come back to the vicarage with you when you’re quite sure he will be
there.’

‘Oh, but, Mildred, I hoped I could come and live with you,’ said

Winifred with appalling simplicity.

For a moment I was too taken aback to say anything and I knew that I

must think carefully before I answered. Easy excuses, such as the difficulty
of finding a whole pair of clean sheets that didn’t need mending, would not
do here. I had to ask myself why it was that the thought of Winifred, of
whom I was really very fond, sharing my home with me filled me with
sinking apprehension. Perhaps it was because I realised that if I once took
her in it would probably be for ever. There could be no casting her off if my
own circumstances should happen to change, if, for example, I ever thought

of getting married myself. And at the idea of getting married myself I began
to laugh, for it really did seem a little fantastic.

Winifred noticed my amusement and smiled a little uncertainly. ‘Of

course it may be too much to ask,’ she faltered, ‘but you’ve always been so
kind to me. I should pay, of course,’ she added hastily.

The truth was, I thought, looking once more at the letter on my desk

which could not now be finished tonight, that I was exhausted with bearing
other people’s burdens, or burthens as the nobler language of our great
hymn-writers put it. Then, too, I had become selfish and set in my ways and
would surely be a difficult person to live with. I could hardly add that the
bed in my spare-room was hard or that Dora might want to come and stay
with me. I must obviously make a gesture towards helping Winifred.

‘But of course you must stay for a night or two,’ I said, ‘at least until we

see how things are going to turn out.’

She thanked me and then we were both silent for a time, as if thinking

over the implications of the last part of the sentence. I felt better after I had
made this offer and together we looked out a pair of sheets and some
blankets. We had just finished making up the bed in the spare-room, when
the front door bell rang again, urgently and impatiently.

I went down and found Julian Malory outside the door. He was hatless

and had flung round his shoulders one of those black speckled
mackintoshes which seem to be worn only by clergymen. He looked
worried and upset. I could not think why he should be carrying a couple of
ping-pong bats in his hand, until I remembered that it was his boys’ club
night.

‘Where’s Winifred?’ he asked sharply. ‘Have you seen her this

evening?’

‘Oh, yes, she is here,’ I said. ‘She is going to stay a night or two with

me—after what happened,’ I added, feeling awkward.

‘That’s quite impossible,’ said Julian quickly. ‘You must see that it is.’
We were walking upstairs and as I switched landing lights on and off I

racked my brains to discover why it should be impossible for Winifred to
stay a night or two with me.

‘Don’t you see,’ he went on, ‘Mrs. Gray and I cannot stay alone in the

vicarage. It would be most awkward.’

‘But she could keep her own flat, surely?’ I said, wondering why he was

calling her ‘Mrs. Gray’ and not ‘Allegra’.

‘Even so, we are still under the same roof.’
‘Oh, don’t quibble so,’ I said, impatient of his talk of roofs. ‘Nobody

would think anything of it. You are both respectable people, and after all
you are engaged to be married.’

‘The engagement is broken off,’ said Julian flatly, laying down the ping-

pong bats rather carefully on the kitchen table.

I hardly know what happened next, but eventually we were all sitting

down and I was trying to console both Julian and Winifred, who seemed to
be in tears again. It occurred to me that I might have to put them both up for
the night and I began to wonder how it could be managed. I should have to
sleep on the narrow sofa in the sitting-room, unless I used one of the
Napiers’ beds.

Julian did not tell us very much about what had happened. It appeared

that he had come in and asked where Winifred was and then the whole story
had come out. I should never know exactly what had passed between him
and Allegra Gray. There are some things too dreadful to be revealed, and it
is even more dreadful how, in spite of our better instincts, we long to know
about them. I found myself worrying about irrelevant details—who had
actually done the breaking off, had she given him back the ring, and how
did it come about that he was still carrying the ping-pong bats, which he
had presumably taken from the boys’ club to the vicarage, when he came to
my flat? Had he perhaps been holding them in his hand all the time the
dreadful scene was going on? I knew that things like that could happen. . . .

At that moment the telephone rang. It was Mrs. Jubb who looked after

the Malorys at the vicarage. I handed the receiver to Julian and heard him
say ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ once or twice in answer to what seemed like a great
flood of conversation from the other end.

‘Well, she’s gone,’ he said, turning towards us. ‘She left the house ten

minutes ago with a small suitcase. Mrs. Jubb thought I ought to know.’

Winifred gave a kind of moan and began to cry again.
I looked at Julian questioningly and he nodded.
‘Come, Winifred,’ I said, ‘you’ve had enough for tonight. You must go

to bed and I’ll bring you a hot drink and something to make you sleep.’

She came with me willingly enough and when I had settled her as

comfortably as I could, I returned to Julian, who was sitting despondently
by the electric fire.

‘Where will she have gone at this time of night?’ I asked, almost fearing

that the bell might ring and I should find her outside my own door.

‘Oh, she has a friend in Kensington who will put her up. I expect she

has gone there.’

‘What sort of a friend?’
‘Oh, an unmarried woman with her own flat. A very sensible person, I

believe.’

I lay back and closed my eyes, for I was very tired. I wondered if Mrs.

Gray’s friend was tired too. I imagined her in the tidy kitchen in her
dressing-gown, just putting on the milk for her Ovaltine and being startled
by the front door bell ringing and wondering who on earth it could be
calling so late. And now she would have to sit up half the night, listening
and condoling.

‘What does she do?’
‘What does who do?’ asked Julian rather irritably.
‘This friend with the flat in Kensington.’
‘Oh, I’m not sure. She is a civil servant of some kind, I believe. I think

she has quite a good job.’

‘I suppose Mrs. Jubb knows what has happened?’
‘Oh, I imagine she will have gathered that something is wrong. I

suppose everybody will know tomorrow, but these things can hardly be
concealed.’

‘Are you going to put an announcement in The Times?’
‘Oh, does one do that?’ asked Julian vaguely. ‘I should hardly have

thought it was necessary.’

‘Well, it might save embarrassment, and there is nothing dishonourable

about it, I mean nothing to be ashamed of,’ I said. ‘It is much better to have
found out now rather than later.’

‘Yes, that’s what people say, isn’t it? I suppose one must bear the

humiliation of having made a mistake. I obviously had no idea of her true
character. You see, I thought her such a fine person.’

She was certainly very pretty, I thought, but I did not say it. I could not

add to the burden of his humiliation by pointing out that he may have been
taken in, like so many men before him, by a pretty face.

‘Of course it was mostly my fault,’ Julian went on. ‘I can see that now.’
‘Well, I imagine there are always faults on both sides, though one

person may be more to blame than the other. But I’m sure you need not

reproach yourself for anything you did.’

‘Thank you, Mildred,’ he said, with a faint smile. ‘You are very kind. I

don’t know what we’d do without you.’

‘Perhaps clergymen shouldn’t marry,’ I said, realising that Julian was

now a free man again and that we ladies of the parish need no longer think
of ourselves as the rejected ones. But the thought did not, at that moment,
arouse any very great enthusiasm in me. Perhaps I should feel differently in
the morning when I was less tired.

‘Some seem to manage it very successfully,’ said Julian rather sadly.
I could think of nothing to say beyond suggesting that he could always

have another try, but this did not seem to be quite the moment to say it.

‘I know the kind of person I should like to marry,’ he went on, ‘and I

thought I had found her. But perhaps I looked too far and there might have
been somebody nearer at hand.’

I stared into the electric fire and wished it had been a coal one, though

the functional glowing bar was probably more suitable for this kind of
occasion.

‘I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,’ said Julian softly.
Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs, I continued to myself,

feeling the quotation had gone wrong somewhere and that it was not really
quite what Julian had intended.

‘That’s Keats, isn’t it?’ I asked rather bluntly. ‘I always think Nor What

Soft Incense would be a splendid title for a novel. Perhaps about a village
where there were two rival churches, one High and one Low. I wonder if it
has ever been used?’

Julian laughed and the slight embarrassment which I had felt between us

was dispelled. He stood up and began to make preparations for going. He
put on his speckled mackintosh, but seemed to forget about the ping-pong
bats on the kitchen table, nor did I like to remind him. I went to bed
immediately after he had gone, but I did not sleep very well. In my dreams
Allegra Gray came to my house with a pile of suitcases, Rocky stood by the
electric fire and asked me to marry him, but when I looked up I saw that it
was Julian in his speckled mackintosh. I woke up feeling ashamed and
disappointed and made a resolution that I would take Winifred her breakfast
in bed.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

There was a kind of suppressed excitement about Mrs. Morris’s manner
next morning and she went about her work smiling and almost nodding to
herself, occasionally glancing at me and then at Winifred with an
expression of triumph on her face. I could see that she was longing to get
Winifred out of the way and when, after we had drunk our mid-morning cup
of tea, Winifred asked if I would mind if she went over to the vicarage to
see if Julian was all right, I was almost as eager as Mrs. Morris to see her
go.

‘Well, Miss Lathbury, now what’ve you got to say?’
She stood with her back to the sink, her hands on her hips. I felt unequal

to the note of challenge in her voice, as if I were about to perform before a
critical audience and was certain that I should not fulfil expectations.

‘It’s all been so sudden,’ I said feebly. ‘I hardly know what to say.’
‘Ah, but that’s how it goes. Getting engaged and breaking it off. One

minute it is and the next it isn’t.’

I had to agree that this was certainly so.
‘I hardly know what really happened,’ I said.
‘Oh, well, if that’s it,’ she said comfortably, ‘I’ve had it all from Mrs.

Jubb. She heard every word.’

‘Oh, dear, I do hope she wasn’t listening at the door.’
‘Listening at the door? Goodness, you could hear it all over the house.

Mrs. Gray, that is, not a word out of the vicar. Only a sort of muttering, she
said. Oh, it was terrible!’

I was glad that Julian had preserved his dignity, as, indeed, I knew he

would, even with the ping-pong bats in his hand.

‘She said she’d had quite enough being married to one clergyman, and

something about them not knowing how to treat women and no wonder.’
Mrs. Morris paused, a little puzzled. ‘I don’t know what it was no wonder
about, Mrs. Jubb didn’t say. And then she went on about Miss Winifred, oh,
it was shocking the things she said.’

‘What kind of things?’ I found myself asking.
‘Oh, well, Mrs. Jubb didn’t say exactly or maybe she didn’t hear but she

said it sounded something terrible. Not bad words, you know,’ said Mrs.
Morris, lowering her tone and looking at me a little fearfully, ‘if you see
what I mean. Not the kind of things with bad swear words, but dreadful
things. And then Mrs. Gray ran screaming upstairs to her flat and he went
out of the house very quickly. And then she came running down again with
a case packed and went away somewhere, Mrs. Jubb didn’t seem to know
where.’ Mrs. Morris looked at me hopefully to supply this missing
information.

‘To a friend in Kensington, I believe,’ I said, thinking that although I

shouldn’t be talking like this to Mrs. Morris, it was better that she should
know some of the truth.

‘Kensington, well,’ said Mrs. Morris, sounding more Welsh than usual

in her excitement. ‘And when Mr. Malory, Father Malory, I should say, got
back he looked terrible, Mrs. Jubb said. I should think he’d been walking
the streets, distracted,’ said Mrs. Morris, adding something of her own. ‘I
shouldn’t be surprised if he hadn’t been down by the river.’

I could hardly believe that sitting quietly by my electric fire could have

given Julian such a terrible appearance, unless, of course, he had not gone
straight home when he left me. ‘He was here with Miss Malory and me,’ I
said.

‘Oh, he knew who to turn to,’ said Mrs. Morris, beaming. ‘Didn’t I tell

you, Miss Lathbury? He knew who his true friend was, the poor soul. A pity
he didn’t see it before. But a thing often happens like that, some terrible
calamity and we get some kind of a revelation. Like St. Paul, isn’t it?’

‘Well, perhaps, not quite . . .’ I began, but I was unable to stem the flow

of her Welsh eloquence.

‘The scales fell from his eyes and he saw her for what she really was

and you for what you really was, and oh, the difference! To think he’d been
so blind all this time, groping in darkness . . .’

‘I hardly think . . .’

‘Not knowing black from white, but a lot of men is like that. And a

clergyman’s just the same as other men, isn’t he, only he wears his collar
back to front, that’s all, really, isn’t it?’

I did not think it worth pointing out that there were perhaps more subtle

differences between clergymen and others than the wearing of the collar
back to front.

‘Well, look at us, this won’t get the work done, will it, Miss Lathbury?’

she said suddenly, seizing the wet mop and swilling it vigorously in the
bucket. ‘But I’m not surprised at this. I saw it coming.’

I was not quite clear as to what it was that Mrs. Morris had seen

coming, but I decided that we had talked enough about it. Was I then to
marry Julian? Was that what she had seen coming? Would he propose to
me, after a decent interval, of course, and should we make a match of it and
delight the parish? It sounded ideal, but somehow morning had not brought
any more enthusiasm than the night before. I still thought of myself as one
of the rejected ones and I could not believe that he loved me any more than
I loved him. Of course I liked and admired him, perhaps I even respected
and esteemed him, as Everard Bone did Esther Clovis. But was that
enough? In any case, it was indecent, wicked, almost, to be thinking of such
things now. There must surely be some practical help I could give. What
was to happen to Mrs. Gray’s furniture and possessions? Was a go-between
needed, or a letter-writer? Letter-writing reminded me of the unfinished
letter to Rocky Napier which was still lying on my desk. Gritting my teeth,
as it were, I determined to get it out of the way, and sat down there and then
and did it. I hardly knew what I wrote and spent no time on subtleties. I told
him the news about Julian and Mrs. Gray and made that an excuse for my
careless writing.

When I had posted the letter, I walked towards the shops to buy some

things to eat. I was walking back with my string bag full of uninteresting
food, when I saw Sister Blatt advancing towards me on her bicycle. She
lowered herself carefully off it and blocked the pavement, so that I could
not help stopping and talking to her.

‘Well, well,’ she said, waiting for me to begin.
‘Well,’ I repeated, ‘there really seems to be nothing to say. It’s all very

upsetting, isn’t it?’

‘Oh, I’m sorry for Father Malory, of course, though I never liked the

woman, but good comes out of everything.’

‘Yes, I suppose it does,’ I said uncertainly, for although I believed that it

did I thought that it was surely a little soon for any to be apparent yet.

‘I am to have Mrs. Gray’s flat,’ said Sister Blatt triumphantly. ‘A friend

of mine from Stoke-on-Trent is coming to work in Pimlico, so near, you
see, and we have been wanting to get a place together and now this has
happened.’

‘A ram in a thicket, in fact,’ I said, feeling like Mrs. Morris and St. Paul.
‘Exactly.’ Sister Blatt nodded vigorously. ‘Just what I said to Father

Malory this morning. I went to the vicarage as soon as I heard the news.
You see, I realised that it might be awkward for them being under the same
roof, so I put forward my idea as a solution to the difficulty. As it happened,
she had gone away.’

‘To a friend in Kensington,’ I murmured.
‘Yes, much the best thing for all concerned. You’re looking tired,’ she

said suddenly. ‘Your face is quite grey. You must take care of yourself.’
And with these encouraging words, she swung herself up on to her bicycle
and rode majestically away.

I am tired, I said to myself, as I walked upstairs, and my face is quite

grey. Nobody must come near me. I would have a rest this afternoon, for
Winifred had gone back to the vicarage and was comforting Julian. I felt a
little sorry for him, surrounded as he would be by excellent women. But at
least he would be safe from people like Mrs. Gray; Sister Blatt would
defend him fiercely against all such perils, I knew. Perhaps it might after all
be my duty to marry him, if only to save him from being too well protected.

I made myself what seemed an extravagant lunch of two scrambled

eggs, preceded by the remains of some soup and followed by cheese,
biscuits and an apple. I was glad that I wasn’t a man, or the kind of man
who looked upon a meal alone as a good opportunity to cook a small
plover, though I should have been glad enough to have somebody else cook
it for me. After I had washed up I went gratefully to my bed and lay under
the eiderdown with a hot-water-bottle. I had finished my library book, and
thought how odd it was that although I had the great novelists and poets
well represented on my shelves, none of their works seemed to attract me. It
would be a good opportunity to read some of the things I was always
meaning to read, like In Memoriam or The Brothers Karamazov, but in the
end I was reduced to reading the serial in the parish magazine, and
pondering over the illustrations, one of which showed a square-jawed

young clergyman in conversation with a pretty young woman, as it might be
Julian and Mrs. Gray, except that Julian wasn’t square-jawed. The caption
under the picture said, ‘I’m sure Mrs. Goodrich didn’t mean to hurt your
feelings about the jumble sale’. I finished the episode with a feeling of
dissatisfaction. There was some just cause or impediment which prevented
the clergyman from marrying the girl, some mysterious reason why Mrs.
Goodrich should have snubbed her at the jumble sale, but we should have to
wait until next month before we could know any more about it.

I turned back to the parish news. There was a warning from our

treasurer about our financial position. Julian’s letter to his flock was short
and uninteresting. The servers had had a very enjoyable day at Southend; all
those who had brought gifts and helped to decorate the church for Harvest
Festival were thanked; there was to be a working-party to mend the
cassocks, ‘commencing on the first Tuesday afternoon in October’. I was
distressed that Julian should use the word ‘commence’, but I suppose I must
have dropped off to sleep somewhere here, for there was a long gap
between the announcement about the cassocks and my next conscious
thought, which was that I was thirsty and that it must be teatime.

I was just finishing tea when the telephone rang. I let it ring for quite a

long time before I lifted the receiver warily and held it to my ear, wondering
whose voice would come out of it and what it would ask me to do. It was a
man’s voice, a pleasant voice, but for the moment I could not think whose.

‘Hullo, Mildred. This is Everard.’
I was instantly suspicious. I had hardly even realised that we called each

other by our Christian names but I supposed that after all this time we
probably did, though I was not conscious of ever having called him
Everard.

After a few formal preliminaries, during which each asked how the

other was, and gave and received an answer, there was a pause. What does
he want? I wondered, and waited for him to say.

‘I rang up to ask if you would come and have dinner with me in my flat

this evening. I have got some meat to cook.’

I saw myself putting a small joint into the oven and preparing

vegetables. I could feel my aching back bending over the sink.

‘I’m afraid I can’t tonight,’ I said baldly.
‘Oh, I’m sorry.’ His voice sounded flat and noncommittal, so that it was

impossible to tell whether he really minded or not. ‘Perhaps some other

time?’ he added politely.

‘Yes, that would be nice,’ I said. But perhaps then he wouldn’t have any

meat. Although there was a telephone line between us, I felt embarrassed
and ashamed at my lie and was convinced that he must know from my
voice that I was not telling the truth.

There was another pause. He did not suggest any other evening but said

he would ring again some time.

‘Thank you for the postcard,’ he added.
‘Oh, it was nothing,’ I said foolishly, for indeed it was nothing. ‘There

isn’t any news,’ I added.

‘News?’ he sounded puzzled. ‘What kind of news?’
‘About the Napiers.’
‘Oh, would there be?’
‘Well, there might have been. . . .’
Our conversation seemed about to trail off very miserably and then I

blurted out, ‘Our vicar has broken off his engagement.’

‘Oh, that’s rather a good thing, isn’t it?’
‘Yes, I suppose it is, really.’
‘I imagined you would think so.’ His voice sounded as stiff and

unfriendly as in the days when we had first met.

‘I’m sorry about the meat,’ I said, trying to infuse life into our now

nearly dead conversation.

‘Why should you be sorry about it?’
‘Do you know how to cook it?’
‘Well, I have a cookery book.’
There can be no exchange of glances over the telephone, no breaking

into laughter. After a few more insincere regrets and apologies we finished
and I hung up the receiver, thinking that the telephone ought never to be
used except for the transaction of business. I paced about my sitting-room,
feeling uneasy and yet not quite knowing why. I had not wanted to see
Everard Bone and the idea of having to cook his evening meal for him was
more than I could bear at this moment. And yet the thought of him alone
with his meat and his cookery book was unbearable too. He would turn to
the section on meat. He would read that beef or mutton should be cooked
for so many minutes per pound and so many over. He would weigh the little
joint, if he had scales. He would then puzzle over the heat of the oven,
turning it on and standing over it watching the thermometer go up. . . . I

should have been nearly in tears at this point if I had not pulled myself
together and reminded myself that Everard Bone was a very capable sort of
person whose life was always very well arranged. He would be quite equal
to cooking a joint. Men are not nearly so helpless and pathetic as we
sometimes like to imagine them, and on the whole they run their lives better
than we do ours. After all, Everard knew quite a lot of people he could ask
to dinner and was probably even now ringing them up. If I could not come,
no doubt somebody else would be only too glad to. But then another
thought came into my mind. Why had I assumed that I was the first person
he had telephoned that evening? I might very well have been the last. There
must be many people whom he knew better than he did me and with whom
he would rather spend an evening. For some reason that I could not
understand, for I believe I have always had a modest opinion of myself, I
found this a disturbing thought. It seemed as if it was necessary for me to
know that I had been the first choice, but I did not see what I could do about
it. I did not look forward to my evening at home, and all the useful and half-
pleasant things I had planned to do, like ironing and sewing and listening to
the wireless, seemed uninteresting and unnecessary. In the end I decided to
go over to the vicarage to see if there was anything I could do there.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

‘Mildred, darling . . . how wonderful to see you!’

I was quite unprepared for Rocky’s effusive greeting and embrace. I was

unprepared for his appearance at all at that moment, for I had had no answer
to the letter I had written to him some time ago, and I had begun to think
that I had offended him by my well-meaning efforts to bring him and
Helena together again. It is a known fact that people like clergymen’s
daughters, excellent women in their way, sometimes rush in where the less
worthy might fear to tread.

‘Hullo, Rocky,’ was all I could say.
‘You don’t seem very pleased to see me.’
‘Oh, I am, but it’s so unexpected. . . .’
‘Surely nice things always are?’ He stood looking at me, confidently

charming. I noticed that he was holding a bunch of chrysanthemums.

‘These are for you,’ he said, thrusting them at me. I saw that the stems

had been broken very roughly and that they were not tied together at all.

‘Are they out of your garden?’ I asked.
‘Yes; I snatched them as I was hurrying for the train.’
Somehow they seemed a little less desirable now. He had not chosen

them, had not gone into a shop for that purpose, they had just happened to
be there. If he had gone into a shop and chosen them . . . I pulled myself up
and told myself to stop these ridiculous thoughts, wondering why it is that
we can never stop trying to analyse the motives of people who have no
personal interest in us, in the vain hope of finding that perhaps they may
have just a little after all.

‘Helena said that I must bring you some flowers and these happened to

be in the garden,’ he went on, leaving me in no doubt at all.

‘Thank you, they’re lovely,’ I said. ‘Is Helena with you, then?’
‘Yes, of course. After getting your letter, I wrote to her and we met.’
‘I hope you didn’t think it interfering of me?’
‘Of course not. I know how you love contriving things,’ he smiled.

‘Births, deaths, marriages and all the rest of it.’

Perhaps I did love it as I always seemed to get involved in them, I

thought with resignation; perhaps I really enjoyed other people’s lives more
than my own.

We were standing in one of our usual talking places, the entrance to my

kitchen. I could feel Rocky looking at me very intently. I raised my eyes to
meet his.

‘Mildred?’
‘Yes?’
‘I was hoping . . .’
‘What were you hoping?’
‘That you might suggest making a cup of tea. You know how you

always make a cup of tea on “occasions”. That’s one of the things I
remember most about you, and surely this is an “occasion”?’

So he did remember me like that after all—a woman who was always

making cups of tea. Well, there was nothing to be done about it now but to
make one.

‘Oh, certainly,’ I said. ‘And anyway it is nearly teatime, I mean, the

conventional hour for drinking tea.’

‘You never came down to visit me at my cottage. Why?’
‘Well, you didn’t ask me.’
‘Oh, but people mustn’t wait to be asked. Other people came.’
‘Did any of the Wren officers come?’ Had they had luncheon in the wild

garden with a bottle of some amusing little wine? I was very much afraid
that they might have done.

‘Wren officers?’ Rocky looked puzzled for a moment and then laughed.

‘Oh, yes, one or two. But of course they weren’t in their uniforms, so one
regarded them as human beings. Oh, lots of people came. I was very social.
Had you imagined me there all alone?’

‘I don’t know, really. I didn’t think.’ I was unwilling to remember or to

tell him how I had imagined him. ‘Of course, men don’t tend to be alone, do
they? I think we talked about it before some time.’

‘Oh, surely! Haven’t we tired the sun with talking on every possible

subject?’

The tea was made now and it was as strong as it had been weak on the

day Helena had left him. I wondered why it was that tea could vary so, even
when one followed exactly the same method in making it. Could the
emotional state of the maker have something to do with it?

We sat in silence for a while, brooding over our strong tea, and then I

began to ask him about the furniture which had been moved and whether he
was going to have it all brought back again.

‘Oh, no, we have decided to settle in the country,’ he said. ‘We don’t

really like this place very much.’

‘No; I suppose the associations . . .’
‘The rest of the stuff can quite easily be packed up and sent after us,

can’t it?’

‘Oh, yes, that can easily be arranged,’ I said in a consciously bright

tone. ‘I wonder who will take your flat?’

‘Somebody respectable, I hope, as you have to share the bathroom.

Couldn’t you advertise in the Church Times for a couple of Anglo-Catholic
ladies? That’s really what you want.’

‘Yes, I suppose it is.’ I hoped I did not show how depressed I felt at the

idea of this future. But then I remembered that it was not within my power
to decide who the new tenants should be. The landlord would arrange that,
though I supposed that had I known anyone in need of a flat I could put in a
word for them.

‘What news?’ asked Rocky, taking the last chocolate biscuit. ‘Has

anything exciting happened in the parish?’

‘Julian Malory has broken off his engagement,’ I said. ‘I think I told

you that when I wrote.’

‘Oh, of course, the vicar, your vicar. But that’s splendid; now he can

marry you. Isn’t that just what we wanted?’

‘If he had wanted to marry me he could have asked me before he met

Mrs. Gray,’ I pointed out.

‘Oh, not necessarily. It often happens that a person is rejected or passed

over and then their true worth is seen. I always think that must be very
romantic.’

‘It could be romantic if you had been the person to do the rejecting, but

one doesn’t like to be the person to have been rejected,’ I said uncertainly,

feeling that I must be giving Rocky the impression that I really did want to
marry Julian. ‘Anyway, there has never been any question of anything more
than friendship between us.’

‘How dull. Perhaps you could marry the other one, the curate?’
I explained patiently that Father Greatorex was not really suitable, not

the kind of person one would want to marry.

‘Let me stay as I am,’ I said. ‘I’m quite happy.’
‘Well, I don’t know. I still feel we ought to do something,’ said Rocky

vaguely.

I got up and took the tea tray into the kitchen.
‘Have you seen our friend Everard Bone at all?’ Rocky called out.
Immediately he asked this, I realised that there had been a little nagging

worry, an unhappiness, almost, at the back of my mind. Everard Bone and
his meat. Of course it sounded ridiculous put like that and I decided that I
would not mention it to Rocky. He would mock and not understand. It made
me sad to realise that he would not understand, that perhaps he did not
really understand anything about me.

‘I had lunch with him some time ago,’ I said. ‘He seemed very much as

usual.’

‘I imagine he will be both relieved and disappointed when he knows

that Helena and I have come together again,’ said Rocky complacently. ‘I
think he found the situation a little alarming.’

‘It was rather awkward for him,’ I said. ‘Or it might have been.’
‘Poor Helena, it was one of those sudden irrational passions women get

for people. She is completely disillusioned now. When he should have been
near at hand to cherish her she found he had fled to a meeting of the
Prehistoric Society in Derbyshire! Do you know how that happens?’

‘You mean being disillusioned? Yes, I think I can see how it could.

Perhaps you meet a person and he quotes Matthew Arnold or some
favourite poet to you in the churchyard, but naturally life can’t be all like
that,’ I said rather wildly. ‘And he only did it because he felt it was
expected of him. I mean, he isn’t really like that at all.’

‘It would certainly be difficult to live up to that, to quoting Matthew

Arnold in churchyards,’ said Rocky. ‘But perhaps he was kind to you at a
moment when you needed kindness—surely that’s worth something?’

‘Oh, yes, certainly it is.’ Once more, perhaps for the last time, I saw the

Wren officers huddled together in an awkward little group on the terrace of

the Admiral’s villa. Rocky’s kindness must surely have meant a great deal
to them at that moment and perhaps some of them would never forget it as
long as they lived.

Rocky stood up. ‘Well, thank you for my tea. Helena is coming back at

the week-end. I must go and do some shopping at the Army and Navy
Stores before they close. What are you doing this evening?’

‘I have to go to a meeting in the parish hall to decide about the

Christmas bazaar.’

‘To decide about the Christmas bazaar,’ Rocky mimicked my tone. ‘Can

I come too?’

‘I think it would bore you.’
‘Why do churches always have to be arranging bazaars and jumble

sales? One would think that was the only reason for their existence.’

‘Our church is very short of money.’
‘Perhaps I should give it a donation as a kind of thank-offering,’ said

Rocky lightly. ‘Though I should really prefer to give something more
permanent. A stained-glass window—the Rockingham Napier window—I
can see it, very red and blue. Or some money to buy the best quality
incense?’

‘I’m sure that would be most acceptable.’
‘Well, perhaps I will. I must hurry now—goodbye!’
After he had gone I stood looking out of the window after him. I seemed

to remember that I had done this before, and not so very long ago. But my
thoughts on that occasion, though more melancholy had been somehow
more pleasant. Now I felt flat and disappointed, as if he had failed to come
up to my expectations. And yet, what had I really hoped for? Dull, solid
friendship without charm? No, there was enough of that between women
and women and even between men and women. Of course, if he had not
been married . . . but this suggested a situation altogether too unreal to
contemplate. In the first place, I should probably never have met him at all,
and I should certainly not have enjoyed the privilege of preparing lunch for
him on the day his wife left him or of making all those cups of tea on
‘occasions’. This thought led me to worry again about Everard and his meat
and how I had refused to cook it for him, and it was a relief when the
church clock struck and I realised that it was time to go to the meeting in
the parish hall.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

Perhaps there can be too much making of cups of tea, I thought, as I
watched Miss Statham filling the heavy teapot. We had all had our supper,
or were supposed to have had it, and were met together to discuss the
arrangements for the Christmas bazaar. Did we really need a cup of tea? I
even said as much to Miss Statham and she looked at me with a hurt, almost
angry look, ‘Do we need tea?’ she echoed. ‘But Miss Lathbury . . .’ She
sounded puzzled and distressed and I began to realise that my question had
struck at something deep and fundamental. It was the kind of question that
starts a landslide in the mind.

I mumbled something about making a joke and that of course one

needed tea always, at every hour of the day or night.

‘This teapot’s heavy,’ she said, lifting it with both hands and placing it

on the table. ‘You’d think one of the men might help to carry it,’ she added,
raising her voice.

Mr. Mallett and Mr. Conybeare, the churchwardens, and Mr. Gamble,

the treasurer, looked up from their business, which they were conducting in
a secret masculine way with many papers spread out before them, but made
no move to help.

‘I see it is done now by the so-called weaker sex,’ said Mr. Mallett. ‘I

think Miss Statham has got everything under control.’

‘Come on now,’ she said, ‘make room for your cups of tea. You’ve got

the table so cluttered with papers and your elbows on it too. You’ll be
knocking something over. Anyone would think you weren’t interested in
having a cup.’

‘Oh, we are that, all right,’ said Mr. Conybeare. ‘Just you pour it out,

Miss Statham, and we’ll soon make room.’

Miss Statham and I served the men and the other ladies and then sat

down ourselves. Winifred Malory was at home with a bad cold and Julian
had not yet arrived, which added considerably to the enjoyment of all
present, as the broken engagement could be discussed freely and without
embarrassment. It was the first time since it had happened that there had
been any kind of parish gathering.

‘Of course a man can carry it off with more dignity, a thing like that,’

said Miss Statham, putting a knitted tea-cosy on the teapot. ‘Anyone who
wants a second cup can help themselves. A man doesn’t feel the shame that
a woman would.’

‘After all, he can easily ask somebody else—after a decent interval, of

course,’ said Miss Enders.

‘Once bitten, twice shy,’ said Mr. Mallett. ‘I should say he was well out

of it. Not that she wasn’t a charming lady in her way. But if he’s got any
sense Father Malory won’t go asking anyone else in a hurry. He’ll know
when he’s well off.’

‘Really, Mr. Mallett, it’s a good thing your wife isn’t here,’ said Miss

Statham indignantly. ‘Whatever would she think to hear you talking like
that?’

‘My good lady leaves the thinking to me,’ said Mr. Mallett, amid

laughter from the men.

‘What does the vicar want with a wife, anyway?’ asked Mr. Conybeare.

‘He’s got his sister and you ladies to help him in the parish.’

‘Oh, well, what a question!’ Miss Statham giggled. ‘He’s a man, isn’t

he, and all men are alike.’

There followed some rather embarrassing badinage between Miss

Statham and the two churchwardens in which I was quite unable to join,
though I envied her the easy way she had with them. Their joking was
broken up by the arrival of Sister Blatt, looking very pleased with herself.

‘Well,’ she said, sitting down heavily and beaming all over her face, ‘it’s

a disgrace, I never saw anything like it.’

We asked what.
‘The way Mrs. Gray left that kitchen in the flat. You know the

remover’s men have been in today to take away her furniture. Oh, my
goodness, there was food in the larder, been there weeks! And dishes not
washed up, even!’

‘She left in rather a hurry,’ I pointed out. ‘I don’t suppose she thought of

washing up before she went.’ People did tend to leave the washing up on
the dramatic occasions of life; I remembered only too well how full of dirty
dishes the Napiers’ kitchen had been on the day Helena had left.

‘But, Miss Lathbury, dear, that wouldn’t account for the mess there was.

Tins half used and then left, stale ends of loaves, and everything so
dirty. . . . I never thought she was the right wife for Father Malory and I
often said so too. I’m afraid she was a real viper.’

‘In sheep’s clothing,’ added Mr. Mallett. ‘Now, is the vicar going to

honour us with his presence tonight or is he not?’

‘I dare say he’s forgotten and is playing darts with the boys next door,’

said Miss Statham. ‘Would anyone like to go and see?’

I said that I would, and, bracing myself to meet the pandemonium went

into the main part of the hall, where Julian, surrounded by a crowd of lads,
was playing darts. It seemed a pity to interrupt the game and drag him off to
our dull meeting and the cold stewed tea and he seemed to come rather
unwillingly.

‘What is it, Mildred?’ he asked. ‘The bazaar meeting? Good heavens,

I’d forgotten all about it!’

He took his place at the head of the table and accepted a cup of the

stewed tea absent-mindedly. Everybody was quiet now as if out of respect
for Julian’s new status brought about by the broken engagement.

‘I’m sorry to have kept you waiting,’ he said. ‘Now, what exactly is the

purpose of this meeting?’

‘It might have been to decide on a wedding present from the parish,’

whispered Sister Blatt to me. ‘What a good thing we hadn’t started to
collect the money!’

The treasurer cleared his throat and began to explain.
‘Ah, yes, the Christmas bazaar,’ said Julian lightly. ‘Well, I suppose it

will follow its usual course. Do we really need to have a meeting about it?’

There was a shocked silence.
‘He’s not himself,’ whispered Miss Statham.
‘Why not let us decide about the bazaar?’ I suggested boldly. ‘Why

don’t you go back to the boys? I could see that you were having a very
exciting darts match with Teddy Lemon.’

‘Yes, I was beating him for once, too,’ said Julian. ‘If you’ll excuse me,

I think I will go back.’ He got up from the table and went off, leaving his

tea unfinished.

‘Well, really, I’ve never heard of such a thing,’ said Miss Statham. ‘The

vicar has always presided at the meeting to arrange about the Christmas
bazaar—it’s been the custom ever since Father Busby’s time.’

‘Well, Miss Statham, if you can remember what went on in the

eighteen-seventies when Father Busby was vicar, the rest of us must retire,’
said Sister Blatt genially.

‘But it’s so irresponsible,’ protested Miss Statham, ‘especially when you

consider how important the bazaar is in these days.’

‘I am reminded of nothing so much as the Emperor Nero fiddling while

Rome is burning,’ said Mr. Mallett.

‘Now then, Mr. Mallett, who said anything about Rome,’ said Sister

Blatt. ‘We’re not there yet, you know.’

‘Not like poor Mr. and Mrs. Lake and Miss Spicer,’ said Miss Enders.
There was a short silence as is sometimes customary after speaking of

the dead, though in this case the people referred to might have been thought
to have met with a fate worse than death, for they had left us and been
received into the Church of Rome.

‘Oh, well, I was speaking metaphorically, as is my wont,’ said Mr.

Mallett.

‘One might say that Father Malory’s conduct this evening reminds us of

the behaviour of Sir Francis Drake, going on and playing bowls when the
Armada was sighted,’ suggested Mr. Conybeare.

‘But that was supposed to be a good thing, a brave thing,’ said Miss

Enders.

‘I think perhaps Father Malory is doing a good thing,’ I said.
‘But he didn’t even finish his cup of tea,’ protested Miss Statham.
‘Well, it was rather stewed,’ said Sister Blatt.
‘Perhaps this unfortunate affair has turned his head,’ said Miss Statham

mysteriously. ‘We shan’t know what to expect now.’

‘He might take it into his head to enter a monastic order or to become a

missionary,’ said Miss Enders, almost gloating at the prospect.

‘People often do strange things when they’ve had a disappointment,’

agreed Miss Statham. ‘He might ask the Bishop to put him in the East End.’

‘Or in a country parish,’ said Miss Enders.
There seemed to be no end to the things that Julian might do, from

making a hasty and unsuitable marriage and leaving the Church altogether

to going over to Rome and ending up as a Cardinal.

‘Well, ladies,’ said Mr. Mallett at last, ‘what about this bazaar? Isn’t it

the purpose for which two or three are gathered together?’

‘Oh, well, as Father Malory said, it can just follow its usual course,’

said Miss Statham rather impatiently. ‘I imagine the stall-holders will be as
usual?’ There was a note of challenge in her voice as she looked round the
table, for it was known that she herself had always taken charge of the
fancy-work stall, which was considered to be the most important.

‘Oh, yes, we leave it to you ladies to fight all that out,’ said Mr. Mallett,

recoiling in mock fear. ‘We men will just do the hard work, eh?’

‘Of course we could ask Father Greatorex to preside,’ said Miss Enders

doubtfully.

‘Oh, that man! A fat lot of good he’d be,’ said Sister Blatt. ‘I think

we’ve really done quite well on our own.’

‘Without benefit of clergy,’ said Mr. Conybeare.
‘But we don’t really seem to have decided anything,’ I said. ‘When is

the bazaar to be? Have we settled the date?’

‘Oh, well, it will be when it always is,’ said Miss Statham.
‘When is that?’
‘The first Saturday in December.’
‘Is it always then?’
‘Oh, yes, it always has been as long as I can remember.’
‘Since the days of Father Busby, eh?’ said Mr. Mallett jovially.
Miss Statham ignored him, perhaps she was tired of his joking or

considered the date of the bazaar to be no matter for joking.

‘It is not a movable feast, then?’ asked Mr. Conybeare.
‘Well, there isn’t any better date, is there?’ said Miss Statham sharply.

‘It must be on a Saturday and a week or two before Christmas.’

We agreed that no better date than the first Saturday in December could

be imagined, and I felt rather guilty for having raised doubts in anybody’s
mind. But I still felt dissatisfied, as if the evening had been wasted. Surely
there was something we could discuss, some resolution we could carry?

‘What stall shall I help with?’ I asked.
They looked at me with such surprise that I began to think that perhaps I

had been infected by Julian’s strange behaviour.

‘Why surely you will help me with the fancy stall?’ said Miss Statham.

‘Like you did last year and the year before. Unless you’d prefer to do

anything else?’

I hesitated, for there was an uneasy feeling in the air, as if umbrage were

about to be taken. ‘Of course I will help you, Miss Statham,’ I said quickly.
‘I was only wondering if there was anything else that needed doing. The
hoop-la or the bran-tub,’ I suggested feebly.

‘But Teddy Lemon and the servers will look after that sort of thing,’

said Miss Statham, as if it were beneath our dignity; ‘they always do.’

‘Yes, so they do. I’d forgotten.’
‘Money needs to be spent,’ said Mr. Gamble, making himself heard for

the first time. ‘You must bring some of your rich friends, Miss Lathbury.’

‘I dare say that Mrs. Napier could afford to spend a bit of money on us,’

said Miss Statham.

‘I’ve often seen her smoking cigarettes in the street and going into the

Duchess of Granby,’ said Miss Enders, in a mealy-mouthed sort of way.

‘Well, why shouldn’t she?’ I burst out. ‘You can hardly expect her to

come and spend money at our bazaar if that’s the way you feel about her.’

‘Oh, I didn’t say anything, Miss Lathbury,’ said Miss Enders huffily.

‘I’m sure I didn’t mean to offend.’

‘I suppose these cups should be washed,’ I said, standing up.
‘Oh, yes, and the big urn ought to be refilled. The lads will want

something,’ said Miss Statham.

The men went on smoking and chatting while we gathered the cups

together and struggled to fill the heavy urn between us. They belonged to
the generation that does not think of helping with domestic tasks.

‘Poor Father Malory. I suppose it was all for the best,’ said Sister Blatt,

waiting with a drying-cloth in her hand. ‘We are told that everything
happens for the best, and really it does, you know.’

‘When one door shuts another door opens,’ remarked Miss Statham.
‘Yes, of course. Perhaps a door will open for Father Malory.’
At that moment a door did open, but it was only a group of lads headed

by Teddy Lemon coming out of the hall. When they saw that we were
washing up they withdrew hastily, with some scuffling and giggling.

‘Perhaps he will throw himself into the boys’ club,’ suggested Sister

Blatt. ‘After all, it is a splendid thing to work among young people.’

I found myself beginning to laugh, I cannot think why, and turned the

conversation to Sister Blatt’s friend, who was to share the vicarage flat with
her.

‘I wonder if Father Malory will get engaged to her?’ said Miss Statham

in a sardonic tone.

‘Oh, no, my friend isn’t at all the type to attract a man,’ said Sister Blatt

with rough good humour. ‘There won’t be any nonsense of that kind.’

‘Well, well, then everything will be as it was before Mrs. Gray came,

then.’

‘Nothing can ever be really the same when time has passed,’ I said,

more to myself than to them, ‘even if it appears to be from the outside. And
didn’t I tell you, the Napiers are leaving? So there will be new people in my
house and things won’t be at all the same.’

‘Oh, I wonder who they will be?’ asked Miss Statham eagerly.
‘I don’t know yet. Somehow I think they will be women who will come

to our church.’

‘Then there might be danger there,’ said Sister Blatt in a satisfied tone.

‘I shall have to keep my eye on Father Malory.’

‘That’s right, Sister,’ said Mr. Mallett, overhearing the tail-end of our

conversation. ‘Where would we be, I’d like to know, if you ladies didn’t
keep an eye on us?’

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

It was easier saying goodbye to Rocky the second time. He and Helena
seemed almost sorry to be going and were very nice to me. They asked me
down to their flat the evening before they were to go and Rocky opened a
bottle of wine. Seeing them together, gay, frivolous and argumentative,
made me feel smug and dull, as if meeting them had really made no
difference to me at all.

‘You must look after poor Everard Bone,’ said Helena. ‘Oh, how he

needs the love of a good woman!’

‘I’m glad you are not claiming that your love was that, darling,’ said

Rocky flippantly. ‘Personally, I can’t imagine anything I should like less
than the love of a good woman. It would be like—oh—something very cosy
and stifling and unglamorous, a large grey blanket—perhaps an Army
blanket.’

‘Or like a white rabbit thrust suddenly into your arms,’ I suggested,

feeling the glow of wine in me.

‘Oh, but a white rabbit might be rather charming.’
‘Yes, at first. But after a while you wouldn’t know what to do with it,’ I

said more soberly, remembering that I had had this conversation about
white rabbits with Everard Bone.

‘Poor Mildred, it’s really rather too bad to suggest that the love of a

good woman is dull when we know that she is so very good,’ said Helena.

‘And not at all dull,’ said Rocky in his expected manner. ‘But Mildred is

already pledged to the vicar, and after his unfortunate experience you must
surely agree that he has first claim.’

‘Oh, he’s surrounded by good women,’ I said.

‘I think he’s nice,’ said Helena, ‘but it always seems to be his boys’ club

night, so one would never get taken out for a drink.’

‘He and I had a drink together once,’ said Rocky. ‘We had a long talk

about Italy.

Because it is the day of Palms,
Carry a palm for me,
Carry a palm in Santa Chiara,
And I will watch the sea. . . .’

He began pacing round the room, touching the bare walls and looking out
of the uncurtained windows. ‘I wonder who will be sitting in this room a
month from tonight?’ he mused. ‘I wonder if they will feel any kind of
atmosphere? Should we carve our names in some secret place? One longs to
have a bit of immortality somewhere.’

‘You were going to give a memorial stained-glass window to the

church,’ I reminded him.

‘Yes, but that’s rather an expensive way of doing it. Besides, I feel it

would be such a very hideous window.’

‘Well, then you said you would give some money to buy incense.’
‘Good heavens, so I did.’ He took out his wallet and handed me a pound

note which I put away quickly in my bag.

‘That won’t make you remembered,’ said Helena; ‘it will go up in the

air and be lost. I suppose we should write something on a window-pane
with a diamond ring. Here, Rocky,’ she took a ring from her finger, ‘try
with this.’

‘When my grave is broke up again
Some second guest to entertain,’

chanted Rocky, ‘but perhaps a line of Dante would be better, if I could
remember one.’

‘I only know “abandon hope all ye who enter here,”’ I said, ‘which

doesn’t seem very suitable, and that bit about there being no greater sorrow
than to remember happiness in a time of misery.’

‘Ah, yes,’ Rocky clapped his hands together, ‘that’s it!

Nessun maggior dolore,
Che ricordarsi del tempo felice
Nella miseria.’

‘It seems an unkind way to greet new arrivals,’ I said doubtfully.

‘Oh, don’t you believe it—people love to recall happiness in a time of

misery. And anyway, they won’t know what it means.’

‘Quite a lot of people who were in Italy during the war must have learnt

Italian,’ I pointed out.

‘But not Dante! The noble Allied Military didn’t get much further than a

few scattered imperatives, but they might have got as far as asking if dinner
was ready and they probably knew the names of a few wines.’

‘Unless they had Italian mistresses,’ said Helena.
‘Oh, then they domesticated them and taught them English,’ said Rocky

coolly.

‘I don’t suppose the new tenants will understand it anyway,’ I mumbled

quickly.

‘Of course I haven’t the patience to do this really properly,’ said Rocky,

looking at what he had written, ‘the lettering isn’t very good, but at least we
shall feel we’ve left something to be remembered by.’

‘But you don’t need to. People aren’t really forgotten,’ I said, not

wanting to be misunderstood but certain that I should be.

Rocky gave me one of his characteristic looks and smiled.
‘What will you do after we’ve gone?’ Helena asked.
‘Well, she had a life before we came,’ Rocky reminded her. ‘Very much

so—what is known as a full life, with clergymen and jumble sales and
church services and good works.’

‘I thought that was the kind of life led by women who didn’t have a full

life in the accepted sense,’ said Helena.

‘Oh, she’ll marry,’ said Rocky confidently. They were talking about me

as if I wasn’t there.

‘Everard might take her to hear a paper at the Learned Society,’

suggested Helena. ‘That would widen her outlook.’

‘Yes, it might,’ I said humbly from my narrowness.
‘But then she would get interested in some little tribe somewhere and

her life might become even more narrow,’ said Rocky.

We discussed my future until a late hour, but it was hardly to be

expected that we should come to any practical conclusions.

The next day I saw them off and turned back a little sadly into the quiet

empty house, wondering if I should ever see them again. Of course there
had been the usual promises to write on both sides and I was invited to visit
them whenever I liked.

It seemed that husbands and wives could part and come together again,

and I was glad that it should be so, but what happened after that? It is said
that people are refined and ennobled by suffering and one knows that they
sometimes are, but would Helena have learned to be neater in the kitchen,
or Rocky to share her interest in matrilineal kin-groups? It seemed as if this
was at once too little and too much to expect from the experience they had
been through, and I felt myself incapable of looking into their future. All I
could do was to be prepared to receive Helena if she should ever appear on
my doorstep with a suitcase, though perhaps that was Esther Clovis’s
privilege.

In the meantime, I began to think about Everard Bone and even to wish

that I might cook his meat for him. I had a wild idea that I might join the
Prehistoric Society, if only I knew how to set about it. It would probably be
easier to belong to this than to the Learned Society, whose members must
surely have some knowledge of or interest in anthropology. But anybody
could scrabble about in the earth for bits of pottery or wander about on
moors looking for dolmens, or so it seemed to me in my innocence. Then a
more practical idea came into my head. I was supposed to keep Everard up-
to-date with news about the Napiers; perhaps he did not know that they had
become reconciled and left London to live in the country. Why had he not
telephoned me? Was it possible that he had gone away, or was lying ill,
alone in his flat with nobody to look after him? Here my imaginings began
to follow disconcertingly familiar lines. Well, at least I should see him in
Lent, I told myself sensibly, at the lunchtime services at St. Ermin’s. I
remembered that there was a poem which began Lenten is come with love to
town, and with a feeling of shame I hastened to look it up in the Oxford
Book of English Verse. But it was one of the very early ones, ‘c. 1300’, and
although there was a glossary of unfamiliar words at the bottom of the page,
the poem did not really comfort me.

Deowes donketh the dounes,
Deores with huere derne rounes

Domes forte deme;

I read; that would teach me not to be so foolish.

Some days later I was walking near the premises of the Learned

Society; in other words, I was doing what I had so often done in the days of
Bernard Hatherley. The walk along Victoria Parade in the gathering
twilight, the approach to ‘Loch Lomond’, the quick glance up at the lace-

curtained window, the hope or fear that a hand might draw the curtain aside
or a shadowy form be seen hovering behind it . . . is there no end to the
humiliations we subject ourselves to? Of course, I told myself, there was no
reason why I shouldn’t be walking past the premises of the Learned Society,
it was on the way to a dozen places. So I did not bow my head in shame as I
approached the building but even looked up to see a bearded man step out
on to the balcony, and Everard Bone and Esther Clovis coming out of the
front door.

Esther Clovis . . . hair like a dog, but a very capable person, respected

and esteemed by Everard Bone, and, moreover, one who could make an
index and correct proofs. I felt quite a shock at seeing them together,
especially when I noticed Everard taking her arm. Of course they were
crossing the road and any man with reasonably good manners might be
expected to take a woman’s arm in those circumstances, I reasoned within
myself, but I still felt very low. I decided that I would go and have lunch in
the great cafeteria where I sometimes went with Mrs. Bonner. It would
encourage a suitable frame of mind, put me in mind of my own mortality
and of that of all of us here below, if I could mediate on that line of patient
people moving with their trays.

‘Mildred! Didn’t you see me?’
Everard sounded a little annoyed, as if he had had to hurry to catch me

up.

‘I didn’t think you’d seen me,’ I said, startled. ‘Besides, you had

somebody with you.’

‘Only Esther Clovis.’
‘She’s a very capable person. What have you done with her?’
‘Done with her? I happened to come out with her and she was meeting a

friend for lunch. Are you going to have lunch? We may as well have it
together.’

‘Yes; I was gong to,’ I said, and told him where I had thought of going.
‘Oh, we can’t go there,’ he said impatiently, so of course we went to a

restaurant of his choice near the premises of the Learned Society.

Naturally the meal did not come up to my expectations, though the food

was very good. I found myself wondering how I could have wanted so
much to see him again, and I was embarrassed at the remembrance of my
imaginings of him, alone and ill in his flat with nobody to look after him.
Nothing more unlikely could possibly be imagined.

The conversation did not go very well and I began telling him about the

people with their trays in the great cafeteria and suggesting that it would
have done us more good to go there to be put in mind of our own mortality.

‘But I’m daily being put in mind of it,’ he protested. ‘One has only to sit

in the library of the Learned Society to realise that one’s own end can’t be
so very far off.’

After that things went a little better. I told him about the Napiers and he

invited me to go to dinner with him at his flat. I promised that I would cook
the meat and I felt better for having done so, for it seemed like a kind of
atonement, a burden in a way and yet perhaps because of being a burden, a
pleasure.

Just as we were leaving the restaurant two men came and sat down at a

table near us. I did not need to be told who they were.

‘Apfelbaum and Tyrell Todd,’ said Everard in a low voice. ‘I dare say

you remember who they are.’

‘Oh, yes, you and Helena met them once at one o’clock in the morning

and you were all so surprised. I often think of that—it makes me laugh.’

‘Well, nothing came of it,’ said Everard rather stiffly. ‘I suppose it was

amusing, really. I expect they will be more interested to see me with
somebody they don’t know. You must come and hear Todd talking about
pygmies some time.’

‘Thank you—I should like that very much,’ I said.
I went home rather slowly, imagining myself having dinner with

Everard at his flat; then I saw myself at the Learned Society, listening to
Tyrell Todd talking about pygmies. I was just getting up to put an
extraordinarily intelligent and provocative question to the speaker, when I
realised that I was nearly home and that there was a furniture van outside
the door. As I approached it I was able to take note of some of its contents
which were lying forlornly in the road. There were some oak chairs and a
gate-legged table, an embroidered fine-screen and a carved chest, the kind
of ‘good’ rather uninteresting things that people of one’s own kind might be
expected to have. I guessed that the owners were probably a couple of
women like Dora and myself, perhaps, though I had no means of knowing if
they were older or younger.

I walked quietly up the stairs, not wanting to meet them yet, but I was

just passing what I shall always think of as the Napiers’ kitchen when a
sharp but cultured woman’s voice called out, ‘Is that Miss Lathbury?’

I stood transfixed on the stairs and before I had time to answer a small

grey-haired woman, holding a tea-caddy in her hand, put her head out of the
door.

‘I’m Charlotte Boniface,’ she announced. ‘My friend Mabel Edgar and I

are just moving in—as you can see.’ She gave a little laugh.

Another pair of women, I thought with resignation, feeling a little

depressed that my prophecy had come true, but telling myself that after all
they were the easiest kind of people to have in the house.

‘Edgar!’ called Miss Boniface into the other room. ‘Come and meet

Miss Lathbury, who lives in the flat above us.’

A tall grey-haired woman holding a hammer in her hand came out and

smiled in a mild shy sort of way.

‘Come in and have a cup of tea with us, Miss Lathbury,’ said Miss

Boniface.

I went into the sitting-room which had a carpet on the floor and a few

pieces of furniture spread about in an uncertain way. Miss Edgar was
standing on a step-ladder hanging pictures, dark-looking reproductions of
Italian Old Masters.

‘Do excuse me,’ she said. ‘I always have to hang the pictures because

Bony can’t reach. These walls don’t seem to be very good, the plaster
crumbles when you knock nails in.’

‘Oh, dear,’ I said conventionally, feeling relieved that there was nothing

I could do about it. ‘I hope you will like this flat.’

‘Oh, it will be wonderful to have a home at last, to have our own things

around us,’ said Miss Edgar. ‘And I think we shall be happy here. We have
found an omen,’ she lowered her voice almost to a whisper and pointed in
the direction of the window.

I saw Rocky’s lines from Dante scratched on the glass.
‘What is it?’ I asked.
‘Our Beloved Dante,’ said Miss Boniface reverently. ‘Could anything

be happier? Those wonderful lines.’ And she quoted them with a rather
better accent than Rocky had managed.

‘Whoever engraved them has made a small mistake,’ said Miss Edgar.

‘He or she has written Nessun maggiore dolore—it should of course be
Nessun maggior dolore, without the final ‘e’, you see. Still, perhaps this
person was thinking of Lago di Maggiore, no doubt it was the memory of a

happy time spent there. It would be interesting to know how the lines came
to be engraved on the window—there must be a story behind it.’

I decided that I could not reveal the circumstances and the conversation

turned to other things. I learned that Miss Boniface and Miss Edgar had
lived in Italy for many years and were now eking out their small private
incomes by teaching Italian and doing translations. They fired questions at
me, speaking sometimes individually and sometimes, or so it seemed, in
unison. I told them of a laundry, a grocer and a butcher where they might
register, and we went on to discuss the bathroom arrangements in some
detail. They were much more businesslike than the Napiers had been and
insisted that we should have a rota for cleaning the bath.

‘All right,’ I said; ‘shall I do it one week and you the next?’
‘Oh, no, there are two of us. We shall do two weeks and you will do

one, and so on.’

The question of the toilet-paper was not openly discussed as it had been

with Helena, but I noticed later that a new roll had appeared, hung in a
distinctive place. It seemed as if Miss Boniface and Miss Edgar were going
to be very pleasant and co-operative, a real asset to the parish, in fact.

‘And where is the nearest Catholic Church?’ asked Miss Edgar.
‘Oh, very near, not two minutes’ walk away,’ I said. ‘Father Malory and

his sister are friends of mine. He was engaged to be married, but it was
broken off,’ I added chattily.

I thought they looked a little surprised at this, and then it suddenly

dawned on me that perhaps they meant Roman Catholic, so I hurried to
explain myself.

‘Oh, well, mistakes will happen,’ said Miss Edgar pleasantly. ‘Of course

we know about Westminster Cathedral, but there must surely be a church
nearer than that.’

‘Oh, yes, there is—St. Aloysius, and Father Bogart is the priest there. I

believe he is a very nice man.’ ‘A lovely man’ was how Mrs. Ryan had
described him at the jumble sale and I had often seem him on his bicycle, a
fresh-faced young Irishman, waving to a parishioner or calling out ‘Bye-bye
now!’ as he left one after a conversation.

I gathered that they had ‘gone over’ in Italy, which seemed a suitable

place to do it in, if one had to do it at all.

‘There was really no English church where we were,’ said Miss

Boniface almost apologetically, ‘or at least, it was just a room in a house,

you know, not at all inspiring.’

‘There was an altar at one end, I suppose it was the east,’ said Miss

Edgar doubtfully, ‘but you could see that it was just a mantelpiece with the
fireplace below it.’

‘We didn’t care for the priest either—Mr. Griffin—he was very Low,’

said Miss Boniface.

‘And the congregation was rather snobbish and unfriendly,’ said Miss

Edgar. ‘You see, Bony and I were governesses and they were mostly titled
people living in Italy for their own pleasure.’

‘Oh, yes, I can understand that,’ I said obscurely, and I did understand

their feeling although their reasons appeared to be hardly adequate; no
doubt there had been other and deeper ones, but I could not expect to be
told about those.

‘I do hope you will let me know if there is anything I can do for you,’ I

said, as I got up to leave. ‘Perhaps I can lend you cooking things and have
you got bread and milk?’

It seemed that they had everything, but we parted on very cordial terms.

I could see us having interesting religious discussions, I thought, as I went
upstairs to get ready for supper with Winifred and Julian Malory.

‘It seems a strange coincidence,’ I said, ‘but I remember coming to

supper here just after Helena Napier moved in.’

‘Yes, and Julian had just received the anonymous donation for the

restoration fund,’ said Winifred.

‘Did you ever find out who gave it?’ I asked.
‘Oh, it was Allegra Gray,’ said Julian lightly. ‘Didn’t I tell you?’
‘No, I don’t think I ever knew. And I don’t think I should have guessed.

I thought she was supposed to be poor,’ I added, remembering the
extraordinarily delicate conversation about the rent which Julian had
reported to us.

‘That made the giving all the more praiseworthy,’ said Julian.
At this moment an unworthy thought occurred to me. Supposing I had

given an anonymous donation of, say, twenty pounds, would Julian have
got engaged to me? Had Allegra Gray regretted the donation when the
engagement was broken off or had she simply not thought of it? Perhaps
she was one of those generous people who do not remember when they
have given money or think about it when it is gone . . . I stopped suddenly,
remembering Rocky thrusting a pound note into my hand on the evening

before they left. I supposed I must have put it into my bag and forgotten all
about it.

‘Julian,’ I said, ‘I’ve done a terrible thing. Rocky Napier gave me a

pound, he said it was to buy the best quality incense, and I forgot about it!’ I
rummaged in my bag and found that it was still there folded up among a
jumble of ration books, shopping lists, old letters and the other things that
collect in bags.

‘How nice of him,’ said Julian. ‘I thought him a charming fellow. I’m so

glad he made up that silly quarrel with his wife—she was very charming,
too. Do you know, Mildred, I met her when I was coming out of church one
evening and we went and had a drink together.’

‘She never told me that. She complained that it was always your boys’

club night,’ I said, admiring Helena for having managed it. ‘I shall miss
them. The new people seem quite nice, though, two middle-aged spinsters.’

‘Ah, yes, very suitable.’ Julian nodded and became rather clerical again.

‘Church-goers, I’ve no doubt.’ He seemed resigned to the prospect of them.

‘I’m not sure about that,’ I laughed. ‘You’ll have to ask Father Bogart

about it.’

‘Bogart, is it now? Are they after being Romans?’ asked Julian, his

relief making him break into an Irish brogue.

‘I’m afraid so,’ I said, almost as if it were my fault. ‘But you wouldn’t

grudge him a couple of gentlewomen, I’m sure. He hasn’t many such in his
flock.’

‘I thought they looked very nice,’ said Winifred. ‘I happened to be

passing when they were down talking to the furniture men. I hope we shall
be able to be friends.’

‘They’ve lived in Italy for many years,’ I said.
‘Italy! Oh, how lovely!’ Winifred clasped her hands and I heard the

familiar note of enthusiasm in her voice. Looking forward a little, I could
almost imagine a time when Winifred might want to become a Roman
Catholic and I wondered if I should be there to help with the crisis. That
was something that had not so far fallen within my experience of helping or
interfering in other people’s lives, and I wondered whether I should be
capable of dealing with it.

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

Some time before the evening when I was to go to dinner at Everard Bone’s
flat, the idea came into my mind that of course Esther Clovis would be
there. It seemed the most likely thing in the world, especially as Everard
was writing an article for a learned journal and was also busy on a book
about his field-work in Africa. I should find her there correcting proofs or
making an index, and the idea did not please me. I decided that I would try
to make myself look like the kind of person who could not possibly do
either, but it was not very easy. My normal appearance is very ordinary and
my clothes rather uninteresting, but the new dress I had bought showed an
attempt, perhaps misguided, to make myself look different. It was black, a
colour I had never worn before except when I was in mourning after my
parents’ death. I had often seen Helena in black, but her fair hair and
complexion set it off better than my mousy colouring, and she had the
knack of enlivening it with some brilliant touch of colour or ‘important
jewel’ as one was told to do in the women’s magazines. I had no important
jewels except for a good cameo brooch which had belonged to my
grandmother, so I fastened this at the front of the little collar, brushed my
hair back rather more severely than usual and looked altogether exactly the
kind of person who would be able to correct proofs or make an index. Still,
I reflected, Esther Clovis, with her dog’s hair, would probably be wearing a
tweed suit and brogues. At least I should provide a contrast.

As I was going out of the house, I met Miss Statham walking towards

the church.

‘Hullo, dear,’ she said, peering at me with a doubtful expression on her

face. ‘What’ve you done to your hair?’ she asked at last.

‘I don’t know,’ I said feebly. ‘Nothing, really.’

‘It looks sort of scraped back as if you were going to have a bath,’ she

said cheerfully. ‘If you don’t mind my saying so, it looked better the way
you did it before.’

‘How did I do it before?’
‘Oh, I don’t know, really, but it was softer somehow, more round the

face.’

Well, it was too late to do anything about it now and perhaps Miss

Statham’s opinion was not worth bothering about. Softer, somehow, more
round the face . . . who wanted to look like that? Certainly she herself was
no oil-painting, as Dora would say.

Suddenly she moved towards me and took my arm. “I knew I had

something to tell you,’ she said. ‘I just popped into Barker’s on Saturday
morning and who do you think I saw? You’ll never guess!’

‘Mrs. Gray?’ I suggested.
‘There, and I thought I’d surprise you! Well, anyway,’ she went on,

recovering quickly from her disappointment, ‘I felt a bit awkward and was
going to walk past—she was looking at some underwear, you see—but, oh
no, she came after me and began asking me what news in the parish and all
about everybody and Father Malory, even—I didn’t know what to say.’

‘Well, you could have told her about the Christmas bazaar.’
‘Oh, I did and she said she might even come to it! You’d think she’d

have a little shame, wouldn’t you? Anyway, it seems that she’s found a flat
already, in the best part of Kensington, that’s what she said—oh, a much
higher-class district than this. And there are three or four Anglo-Catholic
churches, all within ten minutes’ walk and less.’

‘An embarras de richesse,’ I said.
‘What, dear? Anyway, the one she’s decided to go to has a vicar and two

assistant priests and they’re none of them married! She told me that. They
all live together in a clergy house.’

‘Goodness me, I suppose they need to band together to protect

themselves and each other,’ I said.

‘That’s what I thought,’ said Miss Statham. ‘I’d almost feel like warning

them to look out.’

‘Oh, I expect she’s tired of clergymen,’ I said. ‘To have been married to

one and engaged to another, isn’t that perhaps enough?’

‘Well, I suppose you get a liking for a particular type of man,’ said Miss

Statham tolerantly, ‘though they aren’t all as nice as Father Malory, I must

say.’

The bell started to ring for Evensong and Julian hurried out of the

vicarage into the church.

Miss Statham clapped her hand over her mouth and giggled. ‘Talk of the

devil,’ she exclaimed, and hurried into church after him.

I went on my way feeling a little less confident than when I had set out,

though the interest of hearing about Allegra Gray helped a little to take my
mind off my appearance. I felt more kindly disposed towards her now that
she was removed from us and I did not grudge her the flat in the best part of
Kensington or the three unmarried priests. I had no doubt that she would
eventually marry one of them.

I got off the bus and turned into the street where Everard’s flat was, only

to find that I had walked straight into William Caldicote.

‘Why, it’s Mildred,’ he said, ‘but I hardly recognised you. You have a

rather more triste appearance than usual—what is it?’ He stood back and
contemplated me. ‘The hair, perhaps? The sombre dress?’ He shook his
head. ‘Impossible to say, really.’

‘Do you think it an improvement?’ I asked apprehensively.
‘An improvement? Ah, well, I should hardly presume to express that

kind of an opinion. You mean an improvement on the way you usually
look? But how do you usually look? One scarcely remembers. Where are
you going now? Were you perhaps coming to see me?’

I thought I detected a note of alarm in his voice, so hastened to reassure

him.

‘Ah, perhaps it’s just as well. I should not have been able to entertain

you as I should have liked. I have a small bird en casserole in the oven, but
it is such a very small bird, and now I am hurrying to my wine merchant,
who should still be open, because I have just discovered, to my chagrin, that
I have nothing but white wine in my little cellar!’

‘How dreadful,’ I murmured. ‘I suppose you will buy a bottle of Nuits

St. Georges?’

‘Well, possibly. He has one or two quite drinkable burgundies. My only

fear is that it will scarcely be chambré by the time I shall want to drink it.’

‘Well, why don’t you put the bottle by the fire or into some hot water

for a few minutes?’ I suggested. ‘That should warm it up.’

‘Warm it up! Mildred, my dear, you mustn’t say such things. One can’t

stand the shock. I might have expected such a remark from poor Dora but

never from you.’

I felt obscurely flattered. ‘If you are dining alone,’ I suggested, ‘nobody

need know about it.’

‘Yes, you’re right, of course. There’s sometimes quite a pleasure in

secret vice. One can feel really rather wicked and at the same time have the
satisfaction of not harming anybody else—if that is a satisfaction.’

‘Oh, surely,’ I said. ‘And now I really must go. I’m supposed to be

having dinner with somebody and I shall probably have to help with the
cooking.’

‘How very anxious for you,’ said William. ‘I always like to have full

control of a meal or no part in it at all. I’d rather not see people adding
Bovril to the gravy and doing dreadful things like that.’

We parted with mutual expressions of anxiety about the meal which

each of us was going to eat, though William seemed a little complacent
about his bird, I thought.

When I rang the bell at Everard’s flat, I realised that I was late. Miss

Statham and William had each delayed me a little, but it was better than
being too early and having to walk slowly past the house in the dark, hoping
I should not be seen from an upper window.

‘Oh, there you are,’ Everard said as he opened the door. Not exactly a

welcoming speech but I knew him well enough now to realise that he never
did appear pleased to see anybody.

‘I’m afraid I’m a little late,’ I said, taking off my coat and hanging it in

the hall which had, I noticed with a slight shock, several fierce-looking
African masks hanging on one wall. There was no looking-glass, which was
just as well, and I waited with resignation for Everard to make some
comment on my appearance. But to my relief none came, and after a time I
realised that he evidently did not think I looked any different from usual.
Unless, of course, he was too polite to say anything.

He led me into a sitting-room where I noticed a decanter of sherry on a

low table and a bottle of red wine by the gas-fire. I suppose I must have
looked at it rather pointedly, remembering my conversation with William,
for Everard commented on it.

‘I know what you are looking at,’ he said, ‘and I know it’s one of the

unforgivable sins. I can only hope you’ll forget what you have seen and let
it be a secret between us.’

‘I think perhaps that everybody puts wine by the fire secretly,’ I said. ‘I

don’t think I should ever have known it was wrong if William Caldicote
hadn’t told me. But what about the meat? Oughtn’t it to go in the oven?’

‘Oh, the woman got everything ready for me. She has put something in

the oven,’ he said vaguely. ‘A bird, a chicken or something. I expect it will
be all right. Perhaps you would help to take it out—at about half-past seven,
I believe.’

‘Is it in a casserole?’
‘Oh, would it be? Then I dare say it is.’
‘And is there an oven cloth?’
He looked a little worried for a moment but then a smile broke through.

We sat down by the fire and he gave me a glass of sherry.

‘It should be hanging on a nail by the cooker, shouldn’t it?’ he said. ‘I

seem to remember that.’

Not an inspiring conversation, I thought, but it would do. We sat quite

peacefully drinking sherry until I suddenly remembered about Esther
Clovis. No doubt she would be arriving just before dinner, when I was
taking the casserole out of the oven. No woman is at her best when taking
something out of the oven, and I couldn’t even correct proofs or make an
index.

‘Where is Miss Clovis?’ I asked.
He looked surprised. ‘At home, I imagine. Where else should she be?’
‘I thought she might be coming to dinner.’
‘To dinner? Would you have liked me to invite her? I’m afraid I didn’t

think of it.’

‘I thought you respected and esteemed her.’
‘Oh, certainly I do, but that doesn’t mean that I should want to ask her

to dinner.’

There was a silence, during which I looked round the room, which was

pleasant but in no way remarkable or unusual. There was a large desk, a
great many books and papers, but no photographs and nothing interesting
on the mantelpiece, apart from a card announcing the autumn programme of
the Learned Society.

‘How is your mother?’ I asked.
‘Oh, quite well, thank you.’
‘And Miss Jessop?’
‘Miss Jessop?’

‘You know, the person who was in the room that evening when I had

dinner with you.’

‘I’m afraid I don’t know anything about her.’
‘I think it may be time to see to that casserole,’ I said, getting up. ‘It’s

just on half-past seven.’

It turned out to be a very nice bird and I am sure that even William’s

could not have been better. The red wine was perfectly chambré and our
conversation improved quite noticeably, so that by the time we were sitting
drinking coffee by the purring gas-fire the atmosphere between us was a
pleasant and cosy one.

‘I should be interested to see the article you said you were writing for

the Learned Journal,’ I said.

‘Oh, it’s very dull; I shan’t inflict that on you.’
‘Well, what about your book, then? How is it getting on?’
‘I have just had some of the proofs and then of course the index will

have to be done. I don’t know how I’m going to find time to do it,’ said
Everard, not looking at me.

‘But aren’t there people who do things like that?’ I asked.
‘You mean excellent women whom one respects and esteems?’
‘Yes, I suppose I did mean something like that.’
There was a pause. I looked into the gas-fire, which was one degree

better than the glowing functional bar into which I had gazed with Julian.

‘I was wondering . . .’ Everard began, ‘but no—I couldn’t ask you.

You’re much too busy, I’m sure.’

‘But I don’t know how to do these things,’ I protested.
‘Oh, but I could show you,’ he said eagerly; ‘you’d soon learn.’ He got

up and fetched a bundle of proof sheets and typescript from the desk. ‘It’s
quite simple, really. All you have to do is to see that the proof agrees with
the typescript.’

‘Well, I dare say I could do that,’ I said, taking a sheet of proof and

looking at it doubtfully.

‘Oh, splendid. How very good of you!’ I had never seen Everard so

enthusiastic before. ‘And perhaps you could help me with the index too?
Reading proofs for a long stretch gets a little boring. The index would make
a nice change for you.’

‘Yes, it would make a nice change,’ I agreed. And before long I should

be certain to find myself at his sink peeling potatoes and washing up; that

would be a nice change when both proof-reading and indexing began to
pall. Was any man worth this burden? Probably not, but one shouldered it
bravely and cheerfully and in the end it might turn out to be not so heavy
after all. Perhaps I should be allowed to talk to Mrs. Bone about worms,
birds and Jesuits, or find out who Miss Jessop really was and why an
apology had been demanded from her.

‘It should be interesting work,’ I said rather formally and began to read

from the proof sheet I was holding. But as I read a feeling of despair came
over me, for it was totally incomprehensible. ‘But I don’t understand it!’ I
cried out. ‘How can I ever know what it really means?’

‘Oh, never mind about that,’ said Everard, smiling. ‘I dare say you will

eventually. But don’t you remember the late President’s wife?’

‘Why, of course, that’s a comfort,’ I said, seeing myself once more in

that room at the Learned Society where the old lady was sitting in a basket
chair in the front row with her knitting. The lecture flowed over her head as
she sat there, her needles clicking and then dropping from her hand as her
head fell forward on to her breast. She was asleep, but it didn’t matter.
Nobody thought anything of it or even noticed when her head jerked up
again and she looked about her with unseeing eyes, wondering for the
moment where she was. After all, she was only the President’s wife, and
she always went to sleep anyway.

And then another picture came into my mind. Julian Malory, standing

by the electric fire, wearing his speckled mackintosh, holding a couple of
ping-pong bats and quoting a not very appropriate bit of Keats. He might
need to be protected from the women who were going to live in his house.
So, what with my duty there and the work I was going to do for Everard, it
seemed as if I might be going to have what Helena called ‘a full life’ after
all.

THE END

Looking for more?

Visit Penguin.com for more about this author and a complete

list of their books.

Discover your next great read!

