Len Deighton 
Funeral in Berlin 
 
 
 

 
ALLEN W. DULLES (then director C. I. A.): 'You, Mr Chairman, may have seen 
some of my intelligence reports from time to time?' 
 
MR KHRUSHCHEV: 'I believe we get the same reports - and probably from the 
same people?' 
 
MR DULLES: 'Maybe we should pool our efforts?' 

 
MR KHRUSHCHEV:'Yes. We should buy our intelligence data together and save 
money. We'd have to pay the people only once?' 
 
 

 
--News item, September 1959  

 
'But what good came of it at last?' Quoth little Peterkin. 

 
"Why, that I cannot tell' said he:--'But 'twas a famous victory.' 

 
'If I am right the Germans will say I was a German and the French will say I was a 
Jew; if I am wrong the Germans will say I was a Jew and the French will say I was a 
German.' 
 
 

 
--ALBERT EINSTEIN  

 
--DR R. LEWINSOHN, The Career of Sir Basil Zaharoff  

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 
 
Saturday, October 5th 

 
IT was one of those artificially hot days that they used to call 'Indian summer'. It was no 
time to be paying a call to Bina Gardens, in south-west London, if there was a time for it. 
 
Outside the house I sought there was a bright card tied to the railings with green 
twine. On it in large exact capitals was penned 'Lost - Siamese cat. Answers to the name 
Confucius. ' 
 
Answers what? I walked up the steps where the sun was warming up a pint of 
Jersey and a banana-flavour yoghurt. Tucked behind the bottles a Daily Mail peeped its 
headline 'Berlin a new crisis?'. There were buttons on that doorpost like on a pearly king's 
hat but only one said 'James J. Hallam, F. R. S. A. ' in a flowing copperplate; that was the 
one I pressed. 
 
'You haven't seen Confucius?' 

 
'No, ' I said. 

 
'I only missed him last night. ' 

 
'Really, ' I said, feigning warm interest. 

 
'The bedroom window doesn't close properly, ' said Hallam. He was a gaunt-faced 
man of about forty-five well preserved years. His dark-grey flannel suit was baggy and in 
the lapel of it he wore three neat discs of egg yolk, like the Legion of Honour. 
 
'You will be one of Dawlish's little men, ' he said. 

 
He exposed a white palm and I walked into the cool stone hall while he closed the 
daylight out. 
 
He said, 'Could you let me have a shilling - the gas will go any moment. ' 

 
I gave him one and he galloped away with it. 

 
Hallam's room was tidy the way a cramped room has to be. He had a desk that 
was a sink and a cupboard that was a bed and under my feet a battered kettle on a gas ring 
was sending Indian signals to the bookcase. Flies were whining in great bed-spring 
spirals of sound, then going to the window to beat on it with their feet. Through the 
window there was a large section of grey brick wall; on it there were two perfect 
rectangles of white sunlight reflected from some high sunny place. I moved three Bartok 
L. P. s and sank into a mutilated chair. Hallam turned on the tap in the disguised sink and 
there was a chugging sound like a bronchial road-drill. He rinsed the cups and wiped 
them on a tea-cloth that depicted the changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace in 
primary colours. There was a clink as he set the cups into their ordained saucers. 
 
'Don't tell me. You've come about the Semitsa business, ' he said to the gas meter 
as he poured boiling water on to the Darjeeling. 'You like Darjeeling?' 
 
'Darjeeling's O.K., ' I said. 'What I'm not so keen about is you batting that name 
about like that. Have you ever heard of the Official Secrets Act?' 
 
'My dear boy, I am trussed up with the O. S. Act twice a year like a very old and 
intractable turkey. ' He put half a dozen wrapped sugar pieces on the table and said, 'You 
won't take milk in Darjeeling': it wasn't a question. He sipped his unsweetened tea from 
an antique Meissen cup; around mine it said 'British Railways S. R. ' in brown grot 
letters. 
 
'So you are the man who is going to make Semitsa defect from the Moscow 
Academy of Sciences and come to work in the west; no, don't tell me. ' He waved down 
my protest with a limp palm. 'I'll tell you. In the last decade not one Soviet scientist has 

defected westward. Did you ever ask yourself why?' I unwrapped one of the sugar pieces; 
the paper had 'Lyons Corner House' printed on it in small blue letters. 
 
'This fellow Semitsa. A member of the Academy. Not a party member because he 
doesn't need to be; Academy boys are the top dogs - the new elite. He probably gets 
about six thousand roubles [Over £2, 000.] a month. Tax paid. On top of that he can keep 
any money he gets for lecturing, writing or being on TV. The lab. restaurants are fabulous 
-fabulous. 
 
He has a town house and a country cottage. He has a new Zil every year and when 
he feels in the mood there is a special holiday resort on the Black Sea which only the 
Academy people use. If he dies his wife gets a gigantic pension and his children get 
special educational opportunities in any case. He works in the Genetics of Molecular 
Biology department where they use refrigerated ultra centrifuges. ' Hallam waved his 
sugar cube at me. 
 
'They are one of the basic tools of modern biology and they cost around ten 
thousand pounds each. ' 
 
He waited while that sank in. 

 
'Semitsa has twelve of them. Electron microscopes cost around fourteen thousand 
pounds each, he... ' 
 
'O.K.,' I said. 'What are you trying to do, recruit me?' 

 
'I'm trying to let you see this situation from Semitsa's point of view, ' said Hallam. 
'His biggest problems at this moment are likely to be whether to give his son a 
Zaporozhets or a Moskvich motor car for a twenty-first birthday present, and deciding 
which of his servants is stealing his Scotch whisky. ' 
 
Hallam unwrapped the sugar cube and ate it with a loud crunching noise. 

 
'What are you offering him? Have you seen those semi-detached houses they are 
putting the Porton people into? And as for the labs., they are little more than hard-board 
shacks. He'll think it's the prison camp and keep asking when he gets released,' Hallam 
tittered. 
 
'O.K.,' I said. 'That's enough dialectical materialism for one cup of Darjeeling. 
Just tell me if your people at the Home Office will do your bit if we deliver him to you.' 
 
Hallam tittered again and extended a finger like he was tapping me on the nose. 

 
'You get him first, that's all I'm saying. We'd love to have him. He's the best 
enzyme man in the world today, but you just get him first.' 
 
He popped another piece of sugar in his mouth and said, 'We'd just love him, love 
him.' 
 
One of the flies was beating on the window trying to escape; the sound of its 
buzzing wings rose to a loud frantic hammering. The tiny body smashing itself against 
the glass made faint clinks. As the energy oozed out of it, it sank down the glass, kicking 
and fluttering in fury at the force that had solidified the very air. Hallam poured more tea 
and dug around inside one of his little cupboards. He moved a packet of Omo and a wad 
of travel agents' literature. The top leaflet showed people waving out of a bus which was 
parked in the Alhambra and said 'Suntraps of Spain' in blobby lettering. Across the side 
of the bus it said, 'For as little as 31 guineas.' He found a brightly coloured packet and 
gave a little yap of triumph. 
 
'Custard creams,' he said. 

 
He arranged two of them on an oval dish. 'I don't eat breakfast on Saturdays. 
Sometimes I go down the El Mokka for a sausage-and-chip lunch but quite often I 
manage with a biscuit.' 
 
'Thanks,' I said. I took one. 

 
'You can't trust the waiter there, though,' said Hallam. 

 
'In what way?' I said. 

 
'They pad the bills,' said Hallam. 'Last week I found a shilling for bread and butter 
slipped in.' He picked up the final few biscuit crumbs with a moistened finger-tip. 
 
Outside in the hall I could hear a woman's voice saying, 'If I've told you once I've 
told you a thousand times - no bicycles.' 
 
I couldn't hear the man's voice properly but the woman's voice said, 'Outside - 
that's what we pay road taxes for.' 
 
Hallam said, 'I never have bread and butter.' 

 
I sipped my tea and nodded while Hallam opened the window for the fly. 

 
Hallam said, 'And what's more he knows it.' Hallam gave a little laugh at the irony 
of life with an emphasis on the frailty of human nature. 
 
'He knows it,' said Hallam again. Suddenly he said to me, 'You aren't sitting on 
my Bartoks by any chance?' 
 
Hallam counted his records in case I had hidden a couple in my raincoat. He 
collected the cups and stacked them near the sink ready for washing. 
 
He plucked back his sleeve to commune with a large wristwatch. He looked at it 
for a second or so before he carefully undid the grimy leather strap. The glass was 
scratched with a thousand tiny scratches and one or two deep ones. The green hands had 
come to rest at 9.15. Hallam held the watch to his ear. 
 
'It's 11.20,' I told him. 

 
He shushed me and his eyes rolled gently to demonstrate the expertise with which 
he was listening to the silent mechanism. 
 
I could take a hint. Hallam had the door open before I had even said 'Well I 
must...' 
 
He walked behind me through the hall to make sure that I didn't steal the lino. A 
fanlight over the entrance let a William Morris design in coloured sunlight fall across the 
stone floor. Fixed against one wall was a pay telephone with notices and old undelivered 
mail marked 'Inland Revenue' tucked behind the telephone directories. One notice said 
'Miss Mortimer is away in Spain on business.' It was written in lipstick on the back of a 
used envelope. 
 
At waist level the old brown wallpaper had suffered a series of horizontal white 
gashes. From the floor under them Hallam picked up a tin that had the words 'Acme 
Puncture Outfit' enmeshed in a design of scrolls, daisies and bicycle wheels. He made a 
clicking noise with his tongue and put the tin on top of the A-D telephone directory. 
 
Hallam gripped the huge street door with two hands. Another notice on it said 
'Slamming this at night disturbs early risers.' The Daily Mail and the yoghurt were still in 
the same position and from farther down the street I could hear the clink of milk bottles. 
 
Hallam offered me a hand like a dead animal. 'Best enzyme man,' he said. 

 
I nodded. 'In the world,' I said, and eased sideways through the partly open door. 

 
'Give him this,' said Hallam. He pushed a wrapped cube of Lyons sugar into my 
hand. 

 
'Semitsa?' I said very quietly. 

 
'The milkman's horse, you silly. There. Friendly creature. And if you do see 
Confucius...' 
 
'O.K.,' I said. I walked down the steps into the hot dusty sunlight. 

 
'My goodness. I haven't paid you back for the gas-meter shilling,' said Hallam. It 
was a simple statement of fact; he wasn't turning his pockets out. 
 
'Donate it to the R. S. P. C. A.,' I called. Hallam nodded. I looked around but there 
was no sign of Confucius anywhere. 
 
ROBIN JAMES HALLAM 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
 
 
Saturday, October 5th 
 
AFTER his visitor had left Hallam looked in the mirror again. He was trying to guess his 
age. 
 
'Forty-two,' he said to himself. 

 
His hair was all there, that was one good thing. A man with plenty of hair looked 
young. It would need a little colouring of course but then colouring his hair was 
something he had thought of doing for years before he had this problem of finding a new 
job. 'Brown,' he thought, 'a mousy brown.' So that it wouldn't be too obvious; no point in 
going in for one of those really bright colours because it would be spotted as phoney in 
two minutes. He turned his head and tried to see how much of his profile he could see in 
reflection. He had a lean, very aristocratic Anglo-Saxon face. The nose had sharp ridges 
and the cheekbones were tight under his skin. A thoroughbred. He often thought of 
himself as a racehorse. It was a pleasant thought and one that was easily associated with 
acres of green grass, horse shows, grouse-shooting, hunt balls, elegant men and 
bejewelled women. He liked to think of himself in that context even though his function 
as a thoroughbred was nearer the seat of government. He liked that; the seat of 
government. Hallam laughed at his reflection and his reflection laughed back in a 
friendly, dignified, handsome way. He decided to tell someone at the office but it was 
difficult to decide which of them would appreciate the joke -so many of them were 
dullards. 
 
Hallam walked back to the gramophone. He stroked the shiny immaculate veneer 
top and took pleasure in the silent way it opened; well-made - British made. He selected a 
record from his large collection. They were all there, all the finest composers of the 
twentieth century, Berg, Stravinsky, Ives. He selected a recording of a work of 
Schonberg. The shiny black disc was impeccable. It was as hygienic and dustfree as as 
as... why wasn't there anything as clean as his records? He put it on the gramophone and 
applied the pick-up head to the merest brim of the record. He did this skilfully. There was 
a faint hissing noise, then the room was suddenly full of rich sounds: 'Variations for wind 
band'. He liked it. He sat well back in his chair, fidgeting his back to find the exact 

position of maximum comfort like a cat. 'Like a cat' he thought and he was pleased with 
that thought. He listened to the plaited threads of the instrumental sounds and decided 
that when the music stopped he would have a cigarette. After both sides, he thought: after 
I've played both sides I will have a cigarette. He rested back in the chair again, pleased 
with the self-imposed discipline. 
 
He thought of himself as a monk-like person. Once, in the toilet at the office, he 
had heard one of the junior clerks refer to him as an 'old hermit'. He had liked that. He 
looked around at his cell-like room. Every item there had been carefully chosen. He was 
a man who understood quality in the old-fashioned sense of the word. How he despised 
those people who have a fancy modern oven and then only heat frozen super-market food 
in it. All he had was a gas ring but it was what you cooked on it that counted. Fresh 
country eggs and bacon, there was nothing in the world to beat that. Cooked carefully, 
cooked in butter even though he wasn't a man given to extravagance. Few women 
understood how to cook eggs and bacon. Or anything else. He remembered a 
housekeeper he had had at one time, she always broke the yolks of the eggs and had tiny 
black burnt specks on the whites. She didn't clean the pan properly. It was as simple as 
that. She didn't clean the pan properly. The times he had told her. He walked across to the 
washbasin and looked in the mirror. 'Mrs Henderson,' he mouthed the words, ' 
 
'you simply must clean the pan with paper - not with water - thoroughly before 
you fry eggs and bacon.' He gave a pleasant smile. It wasn't a nervous smile, on the other 
hand it wasn't the sort of smile that encouraged argument. It was in fact exactly the right 
sort of smile for this situation. He rather prided himself on his ability to provide the right 
sort of smile for every occasion. 
 
The music was still playing but he decided to have a cigarette anyway, he 
certainly wasn't going to become a slave to his own machine. What he decided to do was 
to compromise. He could have a cigarette but it would be one of the Bachelor brand - the 
cheap ones that he kept in the large cigarette box for visitors. He rather prided himself on 
his ability to compromise. He went across to the cigarette box. There were four in there. 
He decided not to take one of those. Four was about right. Yes. He got a Player's No .3 
from a box of twenty that he kept in the cutlery drawer. 'Thirty-nine,' he thought 
suddenly. 'That's what I shall give as my age.' 
 
The sound ended abruptly. Hallam took the record and washed it and dressed it 
and put it to bed with tender devotion. He remembered the girl who had given him the 
record. That red-haired girl he met at the awful Saddle Room. A pleasant girl in a way. 
American, volatile, rather incoherent in her speech mannerisms, but then Hallam 
supposed that there were no proper schooling facilities in America. He felt sorry for the 
girl. No he didn't. He didn't feel sorry for any girls, they were all... carnivorous. What's 
more some of them were none too clean. He thought about this man that Dawlish had just 
sent along to see him; he wouldn't be at all surprised if he had been to school in America. 
Hallam picked up the Siamese cat. 
 
'Where is your little sister?' he asked her. If only they could talk. They were more 
intelligent than many humans. The cat stretched its legs and the long claws sank into the 
shoulder of Hallam's suit and dragged at it with a tearing sound. 
 
'Secret Service man?' thought Hallam. He laughed out loud and the cat looked up 
in surprise. 
 
'Upstart,' said Hallam. 

 
He put a finger against the cat's ear. The cat purred. An upstart from Burnley - a 
supercilious, anti-public-school technician who thought he was an administrator. 
 
'We must do our duty,' said Hallam quietly to himself. It was the duty of men in 
Government; they mustn't be too influenced by the personalities of Government servants. 
He preferred to think of the Secret Service man as a Government servant rather like the 
man with the wart who did the savings bank accounts at the Post Office. He said 
'Government servant' aloud and thought of all the ways he could work the phrase into the 
next conversation he had with that man. 
 
Hallam put the Player's No .3 into his real ebony cigarette holder. He lit it while 
watching himself in the mirror. He parted his hair a little more towards the centre. He 
might as well lunch at the coffee bar. They did a very fine egg and chips there. The waiter 
was Italian and Hallam always ordered in Italian. Not very trustworthy the Italians, 
Hallam decided, it's all a matter of breeding. He sorted out his change and put ninepence 
in his ticket pocket for a tip. He gave a final look round before leaving. Fang was asleep. 
The ashtray that his visitor had used was brimming with cigarette ends. Foreign, coarse, 
cheap, inferior cigarettes. 
 
Hallam picked up the ashtray with a shudder and tipped the contents into the little 
bin where the tea-leaves went. He felt in many ways the type of cigarette that man 
smoked typified him. So did the man's clothes, they were mass-produced, off-the-peg 
clothes. Hallam decided he did not like the man that Dawlish had sent to see him. He 
didn't like him at all. 
 
Where pieces are used to protect other pieces, there will be high casualty rate. 
Better by far to assign only pawns to supporting roles. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
 
Saturday, October 5th 
 
'BEST enzyme man in the world,' I said. 
 
I heard Dawlish cough. 

 
'Best what?' he said. 

 
'Enzyme man,' I said, 'and Hallam would just love him.' 

 
'Good,' said Dawlish. I flipped the switch of my squawk box and turned back to 
the documents on my desk. 
 
'Edmond Dorf,' I read. 

 
I riffed through the battered British passport. 

 
'You are always saying that foreign names are more convincingly English,' said 
my secretary. 
 
'But not Dorf,' I said, 'especially not Edmond Dorf. I don't feel like an Edmond 
Dorf.' 
 
'Now don't go metaphysical on me,' said Jean. 'Whom do you feel like?' 

 
I liked that 'whom' - you've got to pay real money these days to get a secretary 
that could say that. 

 
'Eh?'I said. 

 
'What sort of name do you feel like?' said Jean very slowly and patiently. It was a 
danger signal. 
 
'Flint McCrae,' I said. 

 
'Act your age,' said Jean and she picked up the Semitsa file and walked towards 
the door. 
 
'I'm not being horrible Edmond Dorf,' I said a little louder. 

 
'You don't have to shout,' said Jean, 'and I'm afraid the travel vouchers and tickets 
are ordered. Berlin has been told to expect Edmond Dorf. If you want it changed now you 
must do it yourself unless I leave the Semitsa work.' 
 
Jean was my secretary, really it was her job to do as I told her. 

 
'O.K.,' I said. 

 
She said, 'Let me be the first to congratulate you on a wise decision, Mr Dorf,' and 
left the room quickly. 
 
Dawlish was my boss. He was around fifty, slim and meticulous like a well-bred boa-
constrictor. He moved with languid English grace across the room from his desk and 
stood staring out into the jungle of Charlotte Street. 
 
'They thought one wasn't serious at first,' he said to the window. 

 
'Uh huh,' I said; I didn't want to appear too interested. 

 
'They thought I was joking - even the wife thought I wouldn't go through with it.' 
He turned away from the window and fixed me with a mocking gaze. 'But now I've done 
it and I don't intend to kill them off.' 
 
'Is that what they want you to do?' I said. I wished I had been listening more 
closely. 
 
'Yes,' he said, 'and I'm not going to do it.' He walked across to me in the big 
leather armchair like Perry Mason appealing to the jury. 'I like weeds. It's as simple as 
that. Some people like one sort of plants and some people like others. I like weeds.' 
 
'They are easy to cultivate,' I said. 

 
'Not really,' said Dawlish sharply. 'The most powerful ones tend to strangle the 
others. I've got hedge parsley, comfrey, meadow cranesbill, primroses... it's just like a 
country lane. That's what a garden should look like, a country lane, not a damned by-
pass. One has wild birds and butterflies. It's something to walk in; not one of these things 
with flower-beds, laid out like a cemetery.' 
 
'I agree,' I said. I agreed. 

 
Dawlish sat down at his antique desk and arranged some typewritten sheets with 
file cards that his secretary had brought from the I. B. M. machine. He aligned all the 
paper-work in geometrical patterns with his pencils and stapling machine and then began 
to polish his spectacles. 
 
'And thistles,' said Dawlish. 

 
'Pardon?' I said. 

 
'I've got a lot of thistles,' said Dawlish, 'because they attract butterflies. Later we'll 
have tortoise-shells, red admirals, yellow brimstones, perhaps even commas. Fabulous. 
The weed-killers are destroying life in the country - it's a disgrace.' He picked up one of 
the folders and began to read it. He nodded once or twice and then put it down. 
 
'I rely on you to be discreet,' he said. 

 
'That sounds like a change of policy,' I said. Dawlish sprinkled a, cold smile over 
me. He wore the sort of spectacles that customs men tap for hollow noises. He rested 
them on his large ears and then tucked a handkerchief as big as a bedsheet into his cuff. It 
was a signal that we were what Dawlish called 'on parade'. 
 
Dawlish said, 'Johnnie Vulkan'. Then he rubbed the palms of his hands together. 

 
I knew the sort of thing Dawlish was going to complain about now. We had other 
people in Berlin, of course, but Vulkan was the one we always used; he was efficient, 
understood what we needed, he knew the Berlin layout and, most important, he was noisy 
enough to draw attention away from our residential boys whom we preferred to let lie 
fallow as long as possible Dawlish was saying'... can't expect any of our people to be 
saints...' I remembered Vulkan. He could deliver a bomb or a baby and smile as he did it. 
 
'... no orthodox way of collecting information and there never can be... ' Vulkan 
may have had a mixed political background but he knew Berlin. He knew every cellar, 
bandstand, bank account, brothel and abortionist from Potsdam to Pankow. Dawlish 
sniffed loudly and rubbed his hands again. 
 
'Even earning additional payments need not be out of the question but unless he 
gives us full details of these associations he will no longer enjoy the protection of this 
department.' 
 
'Protection,' I said. 'What sort of protection have we ever offered him? The only 
protection he ever had from us was old-fashioned money. People like Vulkan are in 
danger - physical danger - every moment of every day. The only weapon they have is 
money. If Vulkan is always asking for more, it's worth considering the motives.' 
 
'Men like Vulkan don't have motives,' said Dawlish. 

 
'Don't misunderstand me. Vulkan is working for us -however remotely - and one 
will work like the very deuce to see that he is looked after, but don't move this discussion 
into the sublime world of philosophy. Our friend Vulkan changes his motive every time 
he comes through that East Berlin checkpoint. When men become double agents it's just a 
matter of time before they lose their grip on reality. They begin to drown in a sea of 
confusion. Any piece of information they can snatch at will keep them afloat and alive for 
a few more hours.' 
 
'You want to write Vulkan off?' 

 
'Not at all,' said Dawlish, 'but one does want to keep him in a cul-de-sac. A fellow 
working against us can be very useful if we have him in a nice sterile test-tube.' 
 
'You are being a bit complacent,' I said. Dawlish raised an eyebrow. 

 
'Vulkan is good,' I said. 'Look at his record .1948: his blockade prediction was 
with this department eleven weeks before FOIU [Foreign Office Intelligence Unit.] and 
fifteen weeks before Ross had heard anything. He can't do that if you are selecting his 
drinking companions.' 
 
'Wait now...' said Dawlish. 

 
'Let me finish, sir,' I insisted. 'The point I'm making is, that the moment Vulkan 
feels we are putting him on ice he'll shop around for another job. Ross at the War Office 
or O'Brien at the P.O. will whip him into the Olympia Stadion [West Berlin H.Q.. M.I.6 
use the offices.] and that's the last we will see of him. Certainly they will all tut-tut and 
agree with you at the Combined Intelligence Meetings but they'll go behind your back 
and employ him.' 
 
Dawlish touched his finger-tips together and looked at me sardonically. 

 
'You think I am too old for this job, don't you?' 

 
I said nothing. 

 
'If we decide not to continue with Vulkan's contract there is no question of leaving 
him available for the highest bidder.' 
 
I didn't think old Dawlish could make me shiver. 

 
The Berlin Defence is a classic defence by means of counterattack. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 
 
Sunday, October 6th 
 
THE parade ground of Europe has always been that vast area of scrub and lonely villages 
that stretches eastward from the Elbe - some say as far as the Urals. But half-way 
between the Elbe and the Oder, sitting at attention upon Brandenburg, is Prussia's major 
town -Berlin. 
 
From two thousand feet the Soviet Army War Memorial in Treptower Park is the 
first thing you notice. It's in the Russian sector. In a space like a dozen football pitches a 
cast of a Red Army soldier makes the Statue of Liberty look like it's standing in a hole. 
Over Marx-Engels Platz the plane banked steeply south towards Tempelhof and the thin 
veins of water shone in the bright sunshine. The Spree flows through Berlin as a spilt pail 
of water flows through a building site. The river and its canals are lean and hungry and 
they slink furtively under roads that do not acknowledge them by even the smallest 
hump. Nowhere does a grand bridge and a wide flow of water divide the city into two 
halves. Instead it is bricked-up buildings and sections of breeze-block that bisect the city, 
ending suddenly and unpredictably like the lava flow of a cold-war Pompeii. 
 
Johnnie Vulkan brought a friend and a black Cadillac to meet me at Tempelhof. 

 
'Major Bailis, U. S. Army,' said Johnnie. I shook hands with a tall leathery 
American who was buttoned deep into a white Aquascutum trench coat. He offered me a 
cigar while the baggage was being checked. 
 
'It's good to have you with us,' said the major and Johnnie said the same. 

 
'Thanks,' I said. 'This is a town where one needs friends.' 

 
'We've put you into the Fruhling,' the major said. 'It's small, comfortable, 
unobtrusive and very, very Berlin.' 
 
'Fine,' I said; it sounded O.K. 

 
Johnnie moved quickly through the traffic in the sleek Cadillac. Cutting across the 
city from west to east is a ten-lane highway that successive generations have named 
'Unter den Linden' and 'Strasse des 17. Juni' and once was a gigantic path leading through 
the Brandenburger 'For to the royal palace. 
 
'We just call it Big Street,' said the American as Johnnie moved into the fast lane. 
In the distance the statue on the 'For glinted gold in the afternoon sun, beyond it in the 
Soviet sector a flat concrete plain named Marx-Engels Platz stood where communist 
demolition teams had razed the Schloss Hohenzollern. 
 
We turned towards the Hilton. 

 
Just a little way down the street beyond the shell of the Gedachtniskirche with its slick 
modern tower - like a tricky sort of hi-fi speaker cabinet - apeing the old broken one is 
Kranzlers, a cafe that spreads itself across the Kurfiirstendamm pavement. We ordered 
coffee and the U. S. army major sat on the far side of the table and spent ten minutes 
tying the laces of his shoes. Across in the 'Quick Cafe' two girls with silver hair were 
eating Bockwurst. 
 
I looked at Johnnie Vulkan. Growing older seemed to agree with him. He didn't 
look a day over forty, his hair was like a tailored Brillo pad and his face tanned. He wore 
a well-cut Berlin suit of English pinhead worsted. He leaned back in his chair and pointed 
a finger lazily towards me. His hand was so sunburned that his nails seemed pale pink. 
He said, 'Before we start, let's get one thing clear. No one here needs help; you are 
superfluous to requirements as far as I am concerned. Just remember that; stay out of the 
way and everything will be O.K. Get in the way and...' He shrugged his shoulders. 'This 
is a dangerous town.' He kept his hand pointing into my face and gave a flash of a smile. 
 
I looked at him for a moment. I looked at his smile and at his hand. 

 
'Next time you point a finger at someone, Johnnie,' I said, 'remember that three of 
your fingers are pointing back at you.' He lowered his hand as though it had become 
heavy. 
 
'Stok is our contact,' he said quietly. 

 
I was surprised. Stok was a Red Army colonel in State Security. [K. G. B. 

 
(see Appendix 4).] 'It's official then?' I asked. 'An official exchange.' 

 
Vulkan chuckled and glanced at the major. 

 
'It's more what you might call extra-curricular. Official but extra-curricular,' he 
said again, loud enough for the American to hear. The American laughed and went back 
to his shoelace. 
 
'The way we hear it, there is a lot of extra-curricular activity here in Berlin.' 

 
'Dawlish been complaining?' Vulkan asked, captiously. 

 
'Hinting.' 

 
'Well, you tell him I'll have to have more than my present lousy two thousand a 
month if it's exclusive service he's after.' 
 
'You tell him,' I said. 'He's on the phone.' 

 
'Look,' said Vulkan, his solid gold wristwatch peeping out from the pristine cuff. 
'Dawlish has no idea of the situation here. My contact with Stok is...' Vulkan made a 
movement with his cupped hand to indicate a superlative. 
 
'Stok is one thousand times brighter than Dawlish and he runs his show from on 
the spot, not from an office desk hundreds of miles away. If I can bring Semitsa over the 
wire it will be because I personally know some important people in this town. People I 
can rely on and who can rely on me. All Dawlish has to do is collect the kudos and leave 
me alone.' 
 
'What I think Dawlish needs to know,' I said, 'is what Colonel Stok will require in 
return if he delivers Semitsa - what you call - over the wire.' 
 
'Almost certainly cash.' 

 
'I had a premonition it would be.' 

 
'Wait a minute, wait a minute,' said Vulkan, loud enough to bring the American 
out of his reverie. 'Major Bailis is the official U. S. Army observer for this transaction. I 
don't have to put up with dirty talk like that.' 
 
The American took off his sun-glasses and said, 'Yes, siree. That's the size of it.' 
Then he put his glasses back on again. 
 
I said, 'Just to make quite sure that you don't promise anything we wouldn't like: 
make sure I'm there at your next meeting with comrade Colonel Stok, eh?' 
 
'Difficult,' said Johnnie. 

 
'But you'll manage it,' I said, 'because that's what we pay you for.' 

 
'Oh yes,' said Vulkan. 

 
When a player offers a piece for exchange or sacrifice then surely he has in mind 
a subsequent manoeuvre which mil end to his advantage. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5 
 
 
Monday, October 7th 
 
BRASSIERES and beer; whiskies and worsteds; great words carved out of coloured 
electricity and plastered along the walls of the Ku-damm. This was the theatre-in-the-
round of western prosperity: a great, gobbling, yelling, laughing stage crowded with fat 
ladies and dwarfs, marionettes on strings, fire-eaters, strong men and lots of 
escapologists. Today I joined the cast,' I thought. 'Now they've got an illusionist.' Beneath 
me the city lay in huge patches of light and vast pools of darkness where rubble and grass 
fought gently for control of the universe. 
 
Inside my room the phone rang. Vulkan's voice was calm and unhurried. 

 
'Do you know the Warschau restaurant?' 

 
'Stalin Alice,' I said; it was a well-known bourse for information peddlers. 

 
'They call it Karl Marx Alice now,' said Vulkan sardonically. 'Have your car 
facing west in the car park across the Alice. Don't get out of your car, flash your lights. 
I'll be ready to go at 9.20. O.K.?' 
 
'O.K.,'I said. ' 

 
I followed the line of the canal from the Berlin Hilton to Hallesches 'For U-Bahnstation, 
then turned north on to Friedrichstrasse. The control point is a few blocks north. I flipped 
a passport to the American soldier and an insurance card to the West German policeman, 
then in bottom gear I moved across the tram tracks of Zimmerstrasse that bump you into 
a world where 'communist' is not a dirty word. 
 
It was a warm evening and a couple of dozen transients sat under the blue neon 
light in the checkpoint hut; stacked neatly on tables were piles of booklets and leaflets 
with titles like 'Science of the G. D. R. in the service of Peace', 'Art for the People' and 
'Historic Task of the G. D. R. and the future of Germany'. 
 
'Herr Dorf.' A very young frontier policeman held my passport and riffed the 
corners. 'How much money are you carrying?' 

 
I spread the few Westmarks and English pounds on the desk. He counted them 
and endorsed my papers. 
 
'Cameras or transistor radio?' 

 
At the other end of the corridor a boy in a leather jacket with 'Rhodesia' painted 
on it shouted, 'How much longer do we have to wait here?' 
 
I heard a Grepo say to him, 'You'll have to take your turn, sir - we didn't send for 
you, you know.' 
 
'Just the car radio,' I said. 

 
The Grepo nodded. 

 
He said, 'The only thing we don't allow is East German currency.' He gave me my 
passport, [To catch people with stolen passports, or people who spend nights in the East, 
the passports are often marked with a tiny pencil spot on some prearranged page.] smiled 
and saluted. I walked down the long hut. The Rhodesian was saying, 'I know my rights,' 
and rapping on the counter but everyone else was staring straight ahead. 
 
I walked across to the parking bay. I drove around the concrete blocks, a Vopo 
gave a perfunctory glance at my passport and a soldier swung the red-and-white striped 
barrier skywards. I drove forward into East Berlin. There were crowds of people at 
Friedrichstrasse station. People coming home from work, going to work or just hanging 
around waiting for something to happen. I turned right at Unter den Linden - where the 
lime trees had been early victims of Nazidom; the old Bismarck Chancellery was a 
cobweb of rusty ruins facing the memorial building where two green-clad sentries with 
white gloves were goose-stepping like Bismarck was expected back. I drove around the 
white plain of Marx-Engels Platz and, at the large slab-sided department store at 
Alexanderplatz, took the road that leads to Karl Marx Alice. 
 
I recognised the car park and pulled into it. Karl Marx Alice was still the same as 
when it had been Stalin Alice. Miles of workers' flats and state shops housed in seven-
storey Russian-style architecture, thirty-foot-wide pavements and huge grassy spaces and 
cycle tracks like the M1. 
 
In the open-air cafe across the road, lights winked under the trees and a few 
people danced between the striped parasols while a small combo walked their baby back 
home with lots of percussion. 'Warschau', the lights spelled out and under them I saw 
Vulkan get to his feet. He waited patiently until the traffic lights were in his favour before 
walking towards the car park. A careful man, Johnnie; this was no time to collect a 
jaywalking ticket. He got into a Wartburg, pulled away eastward down Karl Marx Alice. 
I followed keeping one or two cars between us. 
 
Johnnie parked outside a large granite house in Kopenick. I edged past his car and 
parked under a gas lamp around the corner. It was not a pretty house but it had that mood 
of comfort and complacency that middle-class owners breathe into the structure of a 
house along with dinner-gong echoes and cigar smoke. There was a large garden at the 
back and here near the forests and the waters of Muggelsee the air smelled clean. 
 
There was just one name-plate on the door. It was of neat black plastic: 'Professor 
Eberhard Lebowitz', engraved in ornate Gothic lettering. Johnnie rang and a maid let us 
into the hall. 
 
'Herr Stok?' said Johnnie. 

 
He gave her his card and she tiptoed away into the interior. 

 
In the dimly lit hall there stood a vast hallstand with some tricky inlaid ivory, two 
clothes-brushes and a Soviet officer's peaked hat. The ceiling was a complex pattern of 
intaglio leaves and the floral wallpaper looked prehensile. 
 
The maid said, 'Will you please come this way?' and led us into Stok's drawing-
room. The wallpaper was predominantly gold and silver but there were plenty of things 
hiding the wallpaper. There were aspidistras, fussy lace curtains, shelves full of antique 
Meissen and a cocktail cabinet like a small wooden version of the Kremlin. Stok looked 
up from the 2i-inch baroque TV. He was a big-boned man, his hair was cropped to the 
skull and his complexion was like something the dog had been playing with. When he 
stood up to greet us his huge hands poked out of a bright red silk smoking-jacket with 
gold-braid frogging. 
 
Vulkan said, 'Herr Stok; Herr Dorf,' and then he said, 'Herr Dorf; Herr Stok,' and 
we all nodded at each other, then Vulkan put a paper bag down on the coffee table and 
Stok drew an eight-ounce tin of Nescafe out of it, nodded, and put it back again. 
 
'What will you drink?' Stok asked. He had a musical basso voice. 

 
'Just before we move into the chat,' I said, 'can I see your identity card?' 

 
Stok pulled his wallet out of a hip pocket, smiled archly at me and then peeled 
loose the stiff white card with a photo and two rubber stamps that Soviet citizens carry 
when abroad. 
 
'It says that you are Captain Maylev here,' I protested as I laboriously pronounced 
the Cyrillic script. 
 
The servant girl brought a tray of tiny glasses and a frosted bottle of vodka. She 
set the tray down. Stok paused while she withdrew. 
 
'And your passport says that you are Edmond Dorf,' said Stok, 'but we are both 
victims of circumstance.' 
 
Behind him the East German news commentator was saying in his usual slow 
voice, '... sentenced to three years for assisting in the attempt to move his family to the 
West.' Stok walked across to the set and clicked the switch to the West Berlin channel 
where a cast of fifty Teutonic minstrels sang 'See them shuffle along' in German. 'It's 
never a good night, Thursday,' Stok said apologetically. He switched the set off. We 
broke the wax on the fruit-flavoured vodka and Stok and Vulkan began discussing 
whether twenty-four bottles of Scotch whisky were worth a couple of cameras. I sat 
around and drank vodka until they had ironed out some sort of agreement. Then Stok 
said, 'Has Dorf got power to negotiate?' - just like I wasn't in the room. 
 
'He's a big shot in London,' said Vulkan. 'Anything he promises will be honoured. 
I'll guarantee it.' 
 
'I want lieutenant-colonel's pay,' Stok said, turning to me, 'for life.' 

 
'Don't we all?'I said. 

 
Vulkan was looking at the evening paper; he looked up and said, 'No, he means 
that he'd want the U. K. Government to pay him that as a salary if he comes over the 
wire. You could promise that, couldn't you?' 
 
'I don't see why not,' I said. 'We'll say you've been in a few years, that's five 
pounds four shillings a day basic. Then there's ration allowance, six and eight a day, 
marriage allowance, one pound three and something a day, qualification pay five shillings 
a day if you get through Staff College, overseas pay fourteen and three and... you would 
want overseas pay?' 

 
'You are not taking me seriously,' Stok said, a big smile across his white moon of 
a face. Vulkan was shifting about on his seat, tightening his tie against his Adam's apple 
and cracking his finger joints. 
 
'All systems go,' I said. 

 
'Colonel Stok puts up a very convincing case,' said Vulkan. 

 
'So does the "find the lady" mob in Charing Cross Road,' I said, 'but they never 
come through with the Q. E. D.' 
 
Stok threw back two vodkas in quick succession and stared at me earnestly. He 
said, 'Look, I don't favour the capitalist system. I don't ask you to believe that I do. In fact 
I hate your system.' 
 
'Great,' I said. 'And you are in a job where you can really do something about it.' 

 
Stok and Vulkan exchanged glances. 

 
'I wish you would try to understand,' said Stok. 'I am really sincere about giving 
you my allegiance.' 
 
'Go on,' I said. 'I bet you say that to all the great powers.' 

 
Vulkan said, 'I've spent a lot of time and money in setting this up. If you are so 
damn clever why did you bother to come to Berlin?' 
 
'O.K.,' I told them. 'Act out the charade. I'll be thinking of words.' 

 
Stok and Vulcan looked at each other and we drank and then Stok gave me one of 
his gold-rimmed oval cigarettes and lit it with a nickel-silver sputnik. 
 
'For a long time I have been thinking of moving west,' said Stok. 'It's not a matter 
of politics. I am just as avid a communist now as I have ever been, but a man gets old. 
 
He looks for comfort, for security in possessions.' Stok cupped his big boxing-
glove hand and looked down at it. 'A man wants to scoop up a handful of black dirt and 
know it's his own land, to live on, die on and give to his sons. We peasants are a weak 
insecure segment of socialism, Mr Dorf.' He smiled with his big brown teeth, trimmed 
here and there with an edge of gold. 'These comforts that you take for granted will not be 
a part of life in the East until long after I am dead.' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 'We have decadence now - while we are young enough to enjoy it.' 

 
'Semitsa,' said Stok. He waited to see what effect it would have on me. It had 
none. 
 
'That's who you are really interested in. Not me. Semitsa.' 

 
'Is he here in Berlin?' I asked. 

 
'Slowly, Mr Dorf,' said Stok. 'Things move very slowly.' 

 
'How do you know he wants to come west?' I asked. 

 
'I know,' said Stok. 

 
Vulkan interrupted, 'I told the colonel that Semitsa would be worth about forty 
thousand pounds to us.' 
 
'Did you?' I said in as flat a monotone as I could manage. 

 
Stok poured out his fruit vodka all round, downed his own and poured himself a 
replacement. 
 
'It's been nice talking to you boys,' I said. 'I only wish you had something I could 
buy.' 
 
'I understand you, Mr Dorf,' said Stok. 'In my country we have a saying, "a man 
who trades a horse for a promise ends up with tired feet".' He walked across to the 
eighteenth-century mahogany bureau. 

 
I said, 'I don't want you to deviate from a course of loyalty and integrity to the 
Soviet Government to which I remain a friend and ally.' 
 
Stok turned and smiled at me. 

 
'You think I have live microphones planted here and that I might attempt to trick 
you.' 
 
'You might,' I said. 'You are in the business.' 

 
'I hope to persuade you otherwise,' said Stok. 'As to being in the business: when 
does a chef get ptomaine poisoning?' 
 
'When he eats out,' I said. 

 
Stok's laugh made the antique plates rattle. He groped around inside the big 
writing-desk and produced a flat metal box, brought a vast bunch of tiny keys from his 
pocket and from inside the box reached a thick black file. He handed it to me. It was 
typed in Cyrillic capitals and contained photostats of letters and transcripts of tapped 
phone calls. 
 
Stok reached for another oval cigarette and tapped it unlit against the white page 
of typing. 'Mr Semitsa's passport westward,' he said putting a sarcastic emphasis on the 
'mister'. 
 
'Yes?'I said doubtfully. 

 
Vulkan leaned forward to me. 'Colonel Stok is in charge of an investigation of the 
Minsk Biochemical labs.' 
 
'Where Semitsa used to be,' I said. It was coming clear to me. 'This is Semitsa's 
file, then?' 
 
'Yes,' said Stok, 'and everything that I need to get Semitsa a ten-year sentence.' 

 
'Or have him do anything you say,' I said. Perhaps Stok and Vulkan were serious. 

 
A bad bishop is one hampered by his own pawns. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 
 
 
Monday, October 7th 
 
GOING along the Unter den Linden wasn't the fastest way of getting to the checkpoint 
but I had to keep to the main roads in order to find my way about. I saw the 'S' signs on 
the Schnellstrasse and moved up to the legal 60 k.p.h. As I came level with the old 
Bismarck Chancellery, black and gutted in the bright velvet moonlight, a red disc was 
moving laterally across the road ahead. It was a police signal. I stopped. A Volkspolizei 
troop carrier was parked at the roadside. A young man in uniform tucked the signal baton 
into the top of his boot, walked slowly across to me and saluted. 
 
'Your papers.' 

 
I gave him the Dorf passport and hoped that the department had gone to the 
trouble of getting it made up by the Foreign Office and not been content with one of the 
rough old print jobs that the War Office did for us. 
 
A Skoda passed by at speed without anyone waving it down. I began to feel I was 
being picked on. Around at the rear of the Taunus another Vopo shone a torch on the U. 

S. Army plates and probed the beam across the rear seat and floor. My passport was 
slapped closed and it came through the window accompanied by a neat bow and salute. 
 
'Thank you, sir,' said the young one. 

 
'Can I go?' I said. 

 
'Just switch on your lights, sir.' 

 
'They're on.' 

 
'Main beams must be on here in East Berlin. That is the law.' 

 
'I see.' I flicked the switch on. The troop carrier glowed in the fringe of the beam. 
It was just a traffic cop doing a job. 
 
'Good night, sir.' I saw a movement among the dozen policemen on the big open 
bus. By now Johnnie Vulkan had also passed me. I turned left on to Friedrichstrasse and 
tried to catch up with him. 
 
Johnnie Vulkan's Wartburg was some fifty yards ahead of me as I drove south on 
Friedrichstrasse. As I reached the red-striped barrier the sentry was handing Johnnie his 
passport and lifting the pole. The American sector was just a few feet away. He allowed 
the Wartburg through, then lowered the boom and walked round to me, hitching the 
automatic rifle over his shoulder, so that it clanged against his steel helmet. I had the 
passport handy. Beyond the barrier the low hardboard building that was the control post 
was a mass of red geraniums. In front of it two sentries exchanged words with Vulkan, 
then they all laughed. The laughter was loud in the still night. A blue-uniformed 
Grenzpolizist clattered down the steps and ran across to my car. 
 
'You are wanted inside,' he said to the sentry in his shrill Saxon accent. 'On the 
phone.' He turned to me. 'Won't keep you a moment, sir,' in English; 'I am sorry for the 
delay,' but he took the sentry's automatic rifle to hold just the same. 
 
I lit a Gauloise for myself and the Grepo, and we smoked and stared across the 
hundred yards that separated us from the little walled island that is West Berlin and we 
thought our different thoughts or maybe the same ones. 
 
It was less than two minutes before the Vopo returned. He said would I please get 
out of the car and leave the keys where they were. There were three soldiers with him. 
They all had automatic rifles, none of which were slung on anyone's shoulder. I got out of 
the car. 
 
They walked me a few yards west on Leipziger where no one in the west sector 
could see us no matter how high on the ladder they were. There was a small green van 
parked there. On the door was a little badge and the words 'Traffic Police'. The motor was 
running. I sat between the German soldiers and one of them offered me a strange-tasting 
cigarette which I lit from the stub of my Gauloise. No one had searched me, put on 
handcuffs or made a formal statement. They had merely asked me to come along; no one 
was using coercion. I had agreed to go. 
 
I watched the street through the rear windows. By the time we reached 
Alexanderplatz I had a pretty good idea of where we were headed. A couple of blocks 
away was Keibelstrasse: the Polizei Praesidium. 
 
In the cobbled centre courtyard of the Praesidium I heard the sound of half a 
dozen marching men. Words of command were shouted and the rhythm of the boots 
varied. I was in a room on the first floor. It was thirty-three steps above the main 
entrance, where a guard in an armoured glass cubicle must press a small button to unlock 
the entrance gate. The aged wooden seat upon which I sat backed up against the cream-

painted wall; there were two well-thumbed copies of Neues Deutschland lying on it. To 
my right a large window had the view divided into square spaces by solid-looking bars. 
Behind the desk was a middle-aged woman, her hair drawn tightly back into a bun. Every 
action on the desk brought the loud rattle of a large bunch of keys. I knew there must be a 
way out. None of those young fellows on late-night TV would find it any sort of 
dilemma. 
 
The grey-haired woman looked up. 'Are you carrying any sort of knife or 
weapon?' Her eyes glinted clearly behind the thick circular lenses. 
 
'No,' I said. 

 
She nodded and wrote something on a sheet of paper. 

 
'I mustn't be late back,' I said. Which didn't seem so hilarious a thing to say at that 
time. 
 
The grey-haired woman locked each drawer of her desk and then left the room, 
carefully fixing the door wide open to preclude my taking a short walk around the filing 
cabinet. I sat there for five minutes, maybe ten. The whole situation was curiously simple 
and matter-of-fact, like waiting for a driving-licence renewal at County Hall. When the 
grey-haired woman came back she had my passport in her hand. She gave it to me. She 
didn't smile but it seemed friendly just the same. 
 
'Come,' she said. 

 
I went with her down the long cream corridor to a room at the extreme western 
wing of the building. The decor too was like County Hall. She tapped gently on a large 
door and without waiting for a reply motioned me through. It was dark inside the room 
with just enough light filtering through the window from the courtyard to see where the 
desk was. From behind the desk there was a sudden red glow like an infra-red flash-bulb. 
As my eyes grew accustomed to the dark I saw that the far side of the room was filled 
with a silvery sheen. 
 
'Dorf,' said the voice of Stok. It boomed almost like an amplifier. There was a 
click from his desk; the yellow tungsten light came on. 
 
Stok was sitting behind his desk almost obscured by a dense cloud of cigar 
smoke. There was Scandinavian-style East German furniture in the room. On the table 
behind me there was a Hohner simple button-key accordion, piles of newspapers, and a 
chessboard with some of the pieces fallen over. There was a folding bed near the wall 
with two army blankets on it and high leather boots placed together at the head. Near the 
door was a tiny sink and a cupboard that might have held clothes. 
 
'My dear Dorf,' said Stok. 'Have I caused you great inconvenience?' 

 
He emerged from the cigar smoke in an ankle-length black leather overcoat. 

 
'Not unless you count being scared half to death,' I said. 

 
'Ha ha ha,' said Stok, then he exhaled another great billow of cigar smoke like a 
4.6.2 pulling out of King's Cross. 
 
'I wanted to contact you,' he spoke with the cigar held between tight lips, 'without 
Vulkan.' 
 
'Another time,' I said, 'write.' 

 
There was another tap at the door. Stok moved across the room like a wounded 
crow. The grey-haired one brought two lemon teas. 
 
'There is no milk today I am afraid,' said Stok; he drew the overcoat around him. 

 
'And so Russian tea was invented,' I said. 

 
Stok laughed again in a perfunctory sort of way. I drank the scalding hot tea. It 
made me feel better, like digging your finger nails into your palm does. 
 
'What is it?'I said. 

 
Stok waited while the grey-haired one closed the door behind her. Then he said, 
'Let's stop quarrelling, shall we?' 
 
'You mean personally?' I said. 'Or are you speaking on behalf of the Soviet 
Union?' 
 
'I mean it,' said Stok. 'We can do far better for ourselves if we co-operate than if 
we obstruct each other.' Stok paused and smiled with studied charm. 
 
'This scientist Semitsa is not important to the Soviet Union. We have other 
younger men with newer and better ideas. Your people on the other hand will think you 
marvellous if you can deliver him to London.' Stok shrugged his shoulders at the idiocy 
of the world of politics. 
 
'Caveat emptor?' I said. 

 
'Not half,' said Stok in a skilful piece of idiom. 'Buyer watch out.' Stok rolled the 
cigar across his mouth and said, 'Buyer watch out,' a couple of times. I just drank the 
lemon tea and said nothing. Stok ambled across to the chessboard on the side-table, his 
leather coat creaking like a windjammer. 
 
'Are you a chess player, English?' he said. 

 
'I prefer games where there's a better chance to cheat,' I said. 

 
'I agree with you,' said Stok. 'The preoccupation with rules doesn't sit well upon 
the creative mind.' 
 
'Like communism?' I said. 

 
Stok picked up a knight. 'But the pattern of chess is the pattern of your capitalist 
world. The world of bishops and castles, and kings and knights.' 
 
'Don't look at me,' I said. 'I'm just a pawn. I'm here in the front rank.' Stok grinned 
and looked down at the board. 
 
'I'm a good player,' he said. 'Your friend Vulkan is one of the few men in Berlin 
who can consistently beat me.' 
 
'That's because he is part of the pattern of our capitalist world.' 

 
'The pattern,' said Stok, 'has been revised. The knight is the most important piece 
on the board. Queens have been made... impotent. Can you say impotent of a queen?' 
 
'On this side of the wall you can say what you like,' I said. 

 
Stok nodded. 'The knights - the generals - run your western world. General 
Walker of the 24th Infantry Division lectured all his troops that the President of the 
U.S.A. was a communist.' 
 
'You don't agree?' I asked. 

 
'You are a fool,' boomed Stok in his Boris Godunov voice. 

 
'I am trying to tell you that these people...' He waved the knight in my face. '... 
look after themselves.' 
 
'And you are jealous?' I asked seriously. 

 
'Perhaps I am,' said Stok. 'Perhaps that's it.' He put the knight back and he pulled 
the skirt of his overcoat together. 
 
'So you are going to sell me Semitsa as a little bit of private enterprise of your 
own?' I said. 'If you'll forgive the workings of my bourgeois mind.' 
 
'You live only once,' said Stok. 

 
'I can make once do,' I said. 

 
Stok heaped four spoonfuls of coarse sugar into his tea. He stirred it as though he 
was putting an extra rod into an atomic pile. 'All I want is to live the rest of my life in 
peace and quiet - I do not need a lot of money, just enough to buy a little tobacco and the 
simple peasant food that I was brought up on. I am a colonel and my conditions are 
excellent but I am a realist; this cannot last. Younger men in our security service look at 
my job with envy.' He looked at me and I nodded gently. 'With envy,' he repeated. 
 
'You are in a key job,' I said. 

 
'But the trouble with such jobs is that many others want them too. Some of my 
staff here are men with fine college diplomas, their minds are quick as mine once was; 
and they have the energy to work through the day and through the night too as once I had 
the energy to do.' He shrugged. 'This is why I decided to come to live the rest of my life 
in your world.' 
 
He got up and opened one of the big wooden shutters. From the courtyard there 
was the beat of a heavy diesel engine and the sound of boots climbing over a tailboard. 
Stok thrust his hands deep in his overcoat pockets and flapped his wings. 
 
I said, 'What about your wife and your family, will you be able to persuade them?' 

 
Stok continued to look down into the courtyard. 'My wife died in a German air 
raid in 1941, my only son hasn't written to me for three and a half years. What would you 
do in my position, Mr Dorf? What would you do?' 
 
I let the sound of the lorry rumble away down Keibelstrasse. 

 
I said, 'I'd stop telling lies to old liars for a start, Stok. Do you really think I came 
here without dusting off your file? My newest assistant is trained better than you seem to 
think I am. I know everything about you from the cubic capacity of your Westinghouse 
refrigerator to the size your mistress takes in diaphragms.' 
 
Stok picked up his tea and began to batter the lemon segment with the bowl of his 
spoon. He said, 'You've trained well.' 
 
'Train hard, fight easy,' I said. 

 
'You quote Marshal Suvarov.' He walked across to the chessboard and stared at it. 
'In Russia we have a proverb, "Better a clever lie than the foolish truth".' He waved his 
teaspoon at me. 
 
'There was nothing clever about that clumsy piece of wife-murder.' 

 
'You're right,' said Stok cheerfully. 'You shall be my friend, English. We must 
trust each other.' He put his tea down on the desk top. 
 
'I'll never need an enemy,' I said. 

 
Stok smiled. It was like arguing with a speak-your-weight machine. 

 
'Truthfully, English,' he said, 'I do not want to defect to the West but the offer of 
Semitsa is a genuine one.' He sucked the spoon. 
 
'For money?' I asked. 

 
'Yes,' said Stok. He tapped the fleshy palm of his left hand with the bowl of the 
spoon. 
 
'Money here.' He closed his hand like a vault. 

 
Knights can pass over squares controlled by enemy forces. Knights always end 
their move on a square of the opposite colour. 
 
 

 
CHAPTER 7 
 
 
Tuesday, October 8th 
 
THERE was plenty of activity at Checkpoint Charlie. Photo-flashes sliced instants from 
eternity. The pavement shone with water and detergent under the press-men's feet. Way 
down towards Hallesches 'For a U. S. military ambulance flasher sped towards the 
emergency ward and was all set to change direction to the morgue. 
 
One by one the reporters gunned their V. W. s and began composing tomorrow's 
headlines in their minds. 'Young Berliner killed in wall crossing' or 'Vopos Gun Down 
Wall-Hopper' or 'Bloody Sidewalk Slaying at the Wall'. Or maybe he wouldn't die. 
 
I waved the insurance papers at the guard box and moved gently through. It's not 
far to Hallesches 'For - a district of pimps and brothels -and that's where I had to go next. 
 
An ill-lit doorway gave on to a steep stone staircase. There were a dozen grey 
metal post-boxes in the hallway. On one of them it said, 'Bureau for the rehabilitation of 
German Prisoners of War from the East'. There were no letters inside. I doubt if there 
ever had been. I walked up the stairs and pressed a small buzzer. I had a feeling that, even 
had I not pressed it, the front door would have opened. 
 
'Yes?' said a calm young man in a dark-grey flannel suit. I used the words of 
greeting which London had provided. 
 
'This way, please,' said the young man. The first room was like a dentist's waiting 
room. There were lots of periodicals, lots of chairs and very little else except a distinct 
lack of privacy. They left me there for a few moments before they took me inside. I was 
ushered through the door only to find another door - a steel one -facing me. The second 
door was locked and I stood nervously in the tiny 'cupboard' which was lit by a blinding 
overhead light. There was a soft whirr and then the steel door moved open. 
 
'Welcome to the Feldherrnhugel,' [Feldherrnhugel: the mound upon which the 
commanding generals stood to direct the battle.] said the calm young man. 
 
It was a large room lit by blue neon tubes that produced a soft hum. There was a 
bookcase full of files and several pull-down maps hung on the wall. Two long metal 
tables were crammed with phones of various colours, a TV screen, and a powerful radio 
receiver. Four young men sat along one table. They were very like the man who had 
opened the door; young, pale, cleanshaven and white-shirted, they might represent the 
new prosperous Germany but they were also representatives of something rather older. 
This was a cell of the Gehlen Bureau. [Later the B.N.D. or Federal German Intelligence 
Service, but still generally referred to as the 'Gehlen Bureau'. See Appendix 2.] From here 
men were spirited in to the D.D.R. [Deutsche Demokratische Republik.] or spirited out. 
These were the men that the East Germans said were Nazis and the ones that Bonn never 
talked of at all. 
 
I wasn't exactly a welcome visitor but I represented a section of the Gehlen 
Organisation income; they gave me coffee. 
 
One of the identical men slid into steel-rimmed spectacles and said, 'You need us 
to help you out.' It had a discreet layer of insult. I sipped the Nescafe. 

 
'Whatever you need - the answer is, yes we can do it,' the spectacled one said. He 
passed me a small jug of cream. 'What is it that you need done first?' 
 
'I'm trying to decide between having Dover encircled and Stalingrad subjugated.' 

 
Steel spectacles and the other two men smiled, perhaps for the first time. 

 
I fed them some Gauloises and then we got down to business. 

 
'I need something moved,' I said. 

 
'Very well,' said Steel Spectacles. He produced a small tape machine. 

 
'Place of consignment's origin?' 

 
'I'd try to arrange that to your convenience,' I said. 

 
'Excellent.' He clicked the switch on the mike. 'Origin nul,' he said. 

 
'To?' he asked me. 

 
'Channel ports,' I said. 

 
'Which one?' 

 
'Any,' I said. He nodded again and repeated my answer into the tape recorder. We 
were getting on fine together. 
 
'Size?' 

 
'One human,' I said. No one batted an eyelid; he immediately said, 'Willing or 
unwilling?' 
 
'I'm not sure yet,' I said. 

 
'Conscious or unconscious?' 

 
'Conscious willing or unconscious unwilling.' 

 
'We prefer conscious,' said Spectacles before relaying it on to the tape. 

 
The phone rang. Spectacles spoke into the mouthpiece in a rapid series of orders, 
then two of the Gehlen boys slipped into dark raincoats and hurried for the door. 
 
'A shooting at the wall,' Spectacles said to me. 

 
'No kidding,' I said. 

 
'Right at Checkpoint Charlie,' said Spectacles. 

 
'One of your boys?' I asked. 

 
'Yes, just a courier,' said Spectacles. He uncupped the phone; the caller was to 
wait there and phone back if he wasn't contacted in thirty minutes. He hung up. 
 
'We are the only people who get anything done here in Berlin,' Spectacles said. 
The other man, blond with a large signet ring said, 'Ja'. Then Spectacles and he nodded to 
each other. 
 
'Since Hitler?' I almost said, but I swallowed the words with a second cup of hot 
coffee. Spectacles produced a street map and clipped a piece of transparent acetate across 
the face of it. He began marking circles here and there across the east side of the city. 
 
'These are the sort of places we favour as jumping-off places,' he said. 

 
'Not too near the Sektor boundary and within a mile of the Soviet Zone. Things 
can heat up very quickly in this burg, especially if you grab someone hot. Sometimes we 
prefer to put our cargo on ice in the zone somewhere. Anywhere from Lubeck to Leipzig.' 
Spectacles had a smooth American accent and here and there it came through his lucid 
Rhineland German. 
 
'We will need at least forty-eight hours' notice,' said Spectacles. 'But after that we 
will be responsible even if we take longer to actually do the movement. Do you have any 
questions?' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 'What's the procedure if I want to contact your people and I am in the 
East?' 
 
'You phone a Dresden number and they will give you an East Berlin number. It 
changes every week. The Dresden number changes sometimes too. Check with us before 
you go over.' 
 
'O.K. but does anyone have phones going across the city of Berlin?' 

 
'Officially one. It connects the Russian Command in Karlshorst with the Allied 
Command in the Stadion here in West Berlin.' 
 
'Unofficially?' 

 
'There have to be lines. The water, electricity, sewage and gas authorities all have 
lines to speak to their opposite number in the other half of the city. There could be an 
emergency but they are not officially recognised.' 
 
'And you don't ever use these lines?' 

 
'Very seldom.' There was a buzz. He flipped a switch on his desk. I heard the 
voice of the calm young man say, 'Yes. Good evening,' and another voice, 'I'm the man 
you were expecting from Dresden.' Spectacles clicked another switch and the TV screen 
flashed blue. I could see the waiting room as a short man entered it and I saw him enter 
the brightly-lit cupboard. Spectacles swung the TV receiver around so that I couldn't see 
it. 
 
'Security,' he said. 'It wouldn't give you much confidence if we let you penetrate 
another operation, would it?' 
 
'You're damn right it wouldn't,' I said. 

 
'So if that's all,' said Spectacles, closing a big ledger with a snap. 

 
'Yes,' I said. I could take a hint. 

 
He said, 'You will act as Vulkan's case officer [Case officer: In the American 
system of espionage (from which the Gehlen Bureau had borrowed the term) the case 
officer is the go-between connecting Washington to the agent in the field. He is generally 
empowered to vary slightly the aims and objects of the operation and always controls 
payment. In the case of the above operation I did not act as Vulkan's case officer in the 
strict sense of the term, since a case officer keeps well concealed and does not reveal 
himself to other units.] for this operation. His code name is "King". Your code name will 
be...' he looked down at his desk. '... Kadaver.' 
 
'Corpse,' I said. 'That's very chummy.' 

 
Spectacles smiled. 

 
I thought about 'King' Vulkan when I got back to the Fruhling. I was surprised that he 
was one of the best chess players in Berlin but he was full of surprises. I thought about 
my code name - Kadaver - and about Kadavergehorsam, which is the sort of discipline 
which makes a corpse jump up and salute. I poured a Teacher's and stared down at the 
screaming shining lights. I had begun to get the feel of the town; both sides of the wall 
had wide well-lit streets separated by inky lakes of darkness. Perhaps this was the only 
city in the world where you were safer in the dark. 
 
Skilful use of knights is the mark of the professional player. 

CHAPTER 8 
 
 
Tuesday, October 8th 
 
EXAMINE closely the eyes of certain bold young men and you'll see a frightened little 
man staring anxiously out. Sometimes I saw him in Vulkan's eyes and at other times I 
wasn't so sure about it. He carried himself like an advert for hormone pills; his muscles 
rippled under well-cut lightweight wool suits. His socks were silk and his shoes were 
made on a personal last by a shop in Jermyn Street. Vulkan was the new breed of 
European man: he spoke like an American, ate like a German, dressed like an Italian and 
paid tax like a Frenchman. 
 
He used all the Anglo-Saxon idioms with consummate skill and when he swore 
did it with calmand considered timing and never with frustration or rage. His Cadillac 
Eldorado was a part of him; it was black with real leather upholstery, and the wooden 
steering wheel, map-reading lights, hi-fi, air-conditioning and radio phone were 
unobtrusive, but not so unobtrusive that you could fail to notice them. There were no 
woolly tigers or plastic skeletons, no pennants or leopard-skin seat-covers in Vulkan's 
car. You could scrape the surface of Johnnie Vulkan however you liked; he was gold as 
deep as you cared to go. 
 
The commissionaire at the Hilton saluted and said, 'Shall I park the 
Strassenkreuzer, sir?' He spoke in English and, although the term street-cruiser is an 
uncomplimentary word for American cars, Johnnie liked it. He flipped him the car keys 
with a practised movement of the fingers. Johnnie walked ahead of me. The tiny metal 
studs that he affected in his shoes made a rhythm of clicks across the marble. The 
discreetly shaded light fell across the carefully-oiled rubber-plants and shone on the 
Trinkgeld of the girl in the newspaper stand where they sold yesterday's Daily Mail and 
Playboy and coloured postcards of the wall that you could send to friends and say, 'Wish 
you were here'. I followed Vulkan into the bar where it was too dark to read the price-list 
and the piano player felt his way among the black and white keys like someone had 
changed them all around. 
 
'Glad you came?' Vulkan said. 

 
I wasn't sure I was. Vulkan had changed almost as much as the city itself. Both 
found themselves in a permanent state of emergency and had discovered a way of living 
with it. 
 
'It's great,' I said. 

 
Johnnie sniffed at his bourbon and downed it like it was medicine. 'But you 
thought it would be different by now,' he said. 'You thought it would all be peacetime, 
eh?' 
 
'It's too damn peacetime for my liking,' I said. 'It's too damn "sundowners on the 
veranda" and "those infernal drums, Carruthers". There are too many soldiers being 
Brahmins.' 
 
'And too many German civilians being untouchables.' 

 
'I was in the Lighthouse cinema in Calcutta once,' I said. 'They were showing 
Four Feathers. When the film came to that section when the beleaguered garrison could 
hold out no longer, across the horizon came a few dozen topees piping "Over the seas to 

Skye", some short-muzzle Lee Enfields saying, "Cor blimey", and some gay young 
sahibs with punkah wallahs in attendance.' 
 
'They put the tribesmen to flight,' said Vulkan. 

 
'Yes,' I said, 'but in the cinema the Indian audience cheered as they did it.' 

 
'You think we are cheering on our Allied masters?' 

 
'You tell me,' I said and I looked around and listened to English speech and drank 
the sherry that cost twice the price it would fetch anywhere else this side of the wall. 
 
'You English,' said Vulkan. 'You live out there in the middle of that cold sea 
surrounded by herring. How will we ever get you to understand? June the sixth, 1944, 
was D-Day; up till then you British had lost more people in wartime traffic accidents than 
you had lost in battle, [In the first four years of war British casualties (including P.O.W.s 
and missing) were 387,996. The number killed and injured in traffic accidents was 
588,742.] while we Germans had already suffered six and a half million casualties on the 
Eastern front alone. Germany was the only occupied country that failed to produce a 
resistance organisation. It failed to produce one because there was nothing left; in 1945 
we had thirteen-year-old kids standing where you are standing now, pointing a bazooka 
down the Ku-damm waiting for a Joseph Stalin tank to clank out of the Grunewald. So 
we fraternised and we collaborated. We saluted your private soldiers, gave our houses to 
your non-coms and our wives to your officers. We cleared the rubble with our bare hands 
and didn't mind that empty lorries passed us coming back from your official brothels.' 
 
Vulkan ordered two more drinks. A girl with too much make-up and a gold lame 
dress tried to catch Vulkan's eye, but when she saw me looking took a tiny mirror from a 
chainmail bag and gave her eyebrows a working over. As Vulkan turned to me he spilled 
his bourbon over the back of his hand. 
 
'We Germans didn't understand our role,' he said. He licked the whisky from his 
hand. 'As a defeated nation we were to be forever relegated to being customers - supplied 
by the Anglo-American factories - but we didn't understand that. We began to build 
factories of our own, and we did it well because we are professionals, we Germans, we 
like to do everything well - even losing wars. We became prosperous and you English 
and Americans don't like it. There has to be a reason that lets you keep your nice cosy 
feeling of superiority. It's because we Germans are toadies, weaklings, automatons, 
masochists, collaborators or------lickers that we are doing so well.' 
 
'You are breaking my heart,' I said. 'Drink,' said Vulkan and downed his most 
recent one with lightning speed. 'You aren't the one I should be shouting at. You 
understand better than most, even though you hardly understand at all,' 
 
'You are too kind,' I said. 

 
At about 10 p.m. a bright-eyed boy that I had seen at the Gehlen Bureau flashed 
his cuffs at the bartender and ordered a Beefeater martini. He sipped at it and turned 
slowly to survey the room. He caught a sight of us and gulped at his drink. 
 
'King,' he said quietly. 'Here's a surprise.' 

 
It was like finding a cherry in a sweet martini; a big surprise but you raise hell if 
it's not there. 
 
'I'm Helmut,' said the bright-eyed boy. 

 
'I'm Edmond Dorf,' I said; two can play at that game. 

 
'Do you want to speak in private?' Vulkan said. 

 
'No,' said Helmut politely and offered his English cigarettes. 'Our latest employee 
is, alas, in a traffic accident.' 
 
Vulkan produced a gold lighter. 

 
'Fatal?' asked Vulkan. 

 
Helmut nodded. 

 
'When?'said Vulkan. 

 
'Next week,' said Helmut. 'We bring him around the corner [Helmut used the 
expression 'Urn die Ecke bringen', which in Germany means to kill.] next week.' I noticed 
Vulkan's hand flinch as he lit the cigarette. 
 
Helmut noticed it too, he smiled. To me he said, 'The Russians are bringing your 
boy into the city in two weeks from next Saturday.' 
 
'My boy?' I said. 

 
'The scientist from the Academy of Sciences Biology Division; he will probably 
stay at the Adlon. Isn't that the man you want us to move?' 
 
'No comment,' I said. It was very annoying and this boy was making the most of 
it. He flashed me a big smile before giving his teeth a rebore with the Beefeater martini. 
 
'We are arranging the pipeline now,' he added. 'It would help us if you supply 
these documents from your own sources. You will find all the data there.' He handed me 
a folded slip of paper, shot his cuffs a couple of times to show me his cuff-links, then 
finished his martini and vanished. 
 
Vulkan and I looked across the rubber-plants. 

 
'Gehlens Wunderkinder,' said Vulkan. 'They're all like him.' 

 
In certain circumstances pawns can be converted into the most powerful unit on 
the board. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 9 
 
 
Tuesday, October 8th 
 
I PUT the Gehlen request for documents on the teleprinter to London and marked it 
urgent. The paper said: Name: Louis Paul BROUM National Status: British Nationality 
of Father: French Profession: Agricultural Biologist Date of birth: August 3rd, 1920 
Place of birth: Prague, Czechoslovakia Residence: England Height: 5 ft 9 ins Weight: 11 
st 12 Ib Colour of eyes: brown Colour of hair: black Scars: 4-inch scar inside of right 
ankle Documents required. 
 
1. British Passport issued not before beginning of current year. 

 
2. British Driving Licence. 

 
3. International Driving Permit. 

 
4. Current Insurance Policy on a motor vehicle in British Isles. 

 
5. Motor Vehicle Registration Book (for same vehicle). 

 
6. Diners' Club credit card (current). 

 
CHAPTER 10 
 
 
JOHN AUGUST VULKAN 
 
 
Wednesday, October 9th 
 
'OH BOY,' thought Johnnie Vulkan Edelfresswelle - a great calorific abundance of 
everything but faith - and quite frankly it was great. There were times when he saw 
himself as an untidy recluse in some village in the Bavarian woods, with ash down his 
waistcoat and his head full of genius, but tonight he was glad he had become what he had 
become. Johnnie Vulkan, wealthy, attractive and a personification of Knallharte - the 
tough, almost violent quality that post-war Germany rewarded with admiring glances. 
The health cures at Worishofen had tempered him to a supple resilience and that's what 
you needed to stay on top in this town - this was no place for an intellectual today, 
whatever it may have been in the 'thirties. 
 
He was glad the Englishman had gone. One could have too much of the English. 
They ate fish for breakfast and always wanted to know where they gave the best rate of 
exchange. The whole place was reflected in the coloured mirror. The women were 
dressed in sleek shiny gowns and the men were wearing 1,000-mark suits. It looked like 
those advertisements for bourbon that one saw in Life magazine. He sipped his whisky 
and eased his foot on to the foot-rail of the bar. Anyone coming in would take him for an 
American. Not one of those crummy stringers who hung around writing groundless 
rumours with 'Our special correspondent in Berlin' on the dateline, but one of the 
Embassy people or one of the businessmen like the one sitting against the wall with the 
blonde. Johnny looked at the blonde again. Boy, oh boy! he could see what kind of 
suspender belt she was wearing. He flashed her a smile. She smiled back. A fifty-mark 
lay, he thought, and lost interest. He called the barman and ordered another bourbon. It 
was a new barman. 
 
'Bourbon,' he said. He liked to hear himself saying that. 'Plenty of ice this time,' 
he said. The barman brought it and said, 'The right money, please, I am short of change.' 
The barman said it in German. It made Vulkan annoyed. 
 
Vulkan tapped a Philip Morris on his thumbnail and noticed how brown his skin 
was against the white cigarette. He put the cigarette in his mouth and snapped his fingers. 
The bloody fool must have been half-asleep. 
 
Along the bar, there were a couple of tourists and a newspaper writer named 
Poetsch from Ohio. One of the tourists asked if Poetsch went across to the 'other side' 
very much. 
 
'Not much,' Poetsch said. 'The Commies have me marked down on their black 
list.' He laughed modestly. Johnnie Vulkan said an obscene word loud enough for the 
barman to look up. The barman grinned at Johnnie and said, 'Mir kann keener.' [Mir kann 
keener: you can't fool me (a typical Berliner comment).] Poetsch didn't speak German so 
he didn't notice. 

 
There were lots of radio men here tonight: Americans with the blunt accents of 
their fathers who spoke strange Slav dialects over the jammed night air. One of them 
waved to Vulkan but didn't beckon him across there. That was because they considered 
themselves the cultural set of the city. Really they were mental lightweights equipped 
with a few thousand items of cocktail-time small talk. They wouldn't know a string 
quartet from a string vest. 
 
The barman lit his cigarette for him. 

 
'Thanks,' said Johnnie. He made a mental note to cultivate the barman in the near 
future, not for the purpose of getting information - he hadn't sunk to that peanut circuit 
yet - but because it made life easier in a town like this. He sipped his bourbon and tried to 
think of a way to appease London. Vulkan felt glad that Daw-lish's boy was heading back 
to London. He was all right as the English go, but you never knew where you were with 
him. That's because the English were amateurs -and proud of it. There were some days 
when Johnnie wished that he was working for the Americans. He had more in common 
with them, he felt. 
 
All around there was a rumble of courteous conversation. The man with nose, 
moustache and spectacles that looked like a one-piece novelty was an English M. P. He 
had the managerial voice that the English upper class used for hailing taxis and 
foreigners. 
 
 
'But here in the actual city of Berlin,' the Englishman was saying, 'taxes are 
twenty per cent below your West German taxes and what's more your chaps at Bonn 
waive the four per cent on transactions. With a bit of wangling they will insure your 
freight free and if you bring in steel you have it carted virtually without charge. No 
businessman can afford to overlook it, old chap. What line of business you in?' The 
Englishman brushed both ends of his moustache and sniffed loudly. 
 
Vulkan smiled to a man from the Jewish Documentation Section. That was a job 
Vulkan would enjoy, but the pay was very small, he heard. The Jewish Documentation 
Section in Vienna collected material about war crimes to bring ex-S. S. men to trial. 
There was plenty of work about, Vulkan thought. He looked through the tobacco smoke; 
he could count at least five ex-S. S. officers in here at this moment. 
 
'Best thing that ever happened to the British motor car industry.' The 
Englishman's loud voice cut the air again. 
 
'Your Volkswagen people felt the draught in no time. Ha ha. Lost a source of 
cheap labour and found the trade union johnnies dunning them for money. What 
happened? Up went the price of the Volkswagen. Gave our chaps a chance. Say what you 
like, best thing that ever happened to the British motor car industry, that wall.' 
 
Johnnie fingered the British passport in his pocket. Well, the wall didn't make 
much difference to him. He preferred it in fact. If the communists hadn't stopped all their 
riff-raff streaming across here in search of jobs, then where would they have got people 
to work in the factories? Johnnie knew where they would have got them: from the East. 
Who wanted to go swimming out on the Muggelsee and have it full of Mongolians and 
Ukrainians? Lot of chance there would be then of restoring East Prussia, Pomerania and 
Silesia to Germany. Not that Vulkan gave a damn about the 'lost territories' but some of 
these loud-mouths, who did, shouldn't shout about the wall so much. 

 
There was a girl from Wedding. He wondered whether it was true what they said 
about her chauffeur. It was a strange place for a girl like her to live, horrible low-class 
district. That tiny house with the TV set over the bed. He had put that Scots colonel on to 
her. What was it he had said afterwards about her wanting a 2i-inch model with colour 
and remote control? Vulkan remembered how the whole bar had laughed at the time. 
Vulkan blew her a kiss and wrinkled his eyes in greeting. She waved a small gold-mesh 
evening bag at him. She was still sexy, Vulkan thought, and in spite of all his resolution 
found himself sending the barman across to her with a champagne cocktail. He wrote a 
little note to go with it. He wrote the note with a small gold propelling pencil on the back 
of an engraved visiting card. 
 
'Take dinner with me,' he wrote. He debated whether to add a query but decided 
that women hate indecision. Domination was the secret of success with women. 
 
'Will join you later,' he added, before giving it to the barman. 

 
Two more people had joined Poetsch down at the far end of the bar; a man and a 
girl. The man looked English. Poetsch said, 'You saw it, did you? We call it the "wall of 
shame", as you know. I'd like to show it to every living person in the world.' 
 
A man called 'Colonel Wilson' winked at Vulkan. To do this, 'Colonel Wilson' 
had to remove a large pair of dark glasses. Around his left eye and upper cheek there was 
a mesh of scars. Wilson slid a cigar along the bar to Vulkan. 
 
'Thanks, Colonel,' Vulkan called. Wilson was an ex-corporal cook who had got 
his scars from spluttering fat in a mess hall in Omaha. It was a good cigar. 'Colonel' 
wouldn't be such a fool as to give him a cheap one. Vulkan smelled it, rolled it and then 
decapitated it scientifically with a small flat gold cigar-cutter that he kept in his top 
pocket. A gold guillotine. An amalgam of sharp steel and burnished gold. The barman lit 
the cigar for him. 
 
'Always with a match,' Vulkan told him. 'A match held a quarter of an inch away 
from the leaf. Gas lighters never.' The barman nodded. Before Vulkan had the cigar 
properly alight, 'Colonel' had moved alongside him at the bar. 'Colonel Wilson' was six 
feet one-and-a-half inches of leathery skin encasing meaty sinew, packed dense like a 
well-made Bockwurst. His face was grey and lined; his hair trimmed to the skull. He 
could have made a living in Hollywood playing in the sort of film where the villains have 
thick lips. He ordered two bourbons. 
 
Vulkan could hear Poetsch saying, 'Truth - I'm fond of saying - is the most potent 
weapon in the arsenal of freedom. ' Poetsch was fond of saying that, Vulkan thought. He 
knew that 'Colonel Wilson' wanted something. He drank the bourbon quickly. 'Colonel 
Wilson' ordered two more. Vulkan looked at the barman and tipped his head a millimetre 
towards the girl from Wedding. The barman lowered his eyelids. It was one of the great 
things about this town, thought Vulkan, this sensitivity to signs and innuendo. He heard 
the English M. P. 's voice, 'Good heavens, no. We have a few tricks left up our sleeve I 
can tell you. ' The English M. P. chortled. 
 
The British were deadly, Vulkan decided. He remembered his last visit there. The 
big hotel in Cromwell Road, and the rain that never stopped for a week. A nation of 
inventive geniuses where there are forty different types of electrical plug, none of which 
works efficiently. 
 
Milk is safe on the street but young girls in danger, sex indecent but 
homosexuality acceptable, a land as far north as Labrador with unheated houses, where 

hospitality is so rare that 'landlady' is a pejorative word, where the most boastful natives 
in the world tell foreigners that the only British shortcoming is modesty. 
 
Vulkan winked to the girl from Wedding. She smoothed her dress slowly and 
touched the nape of her neck. Vulkan turned to 'Colonel Wilson' and said, 'O.K., what's 
on your mind?' 
 
'I want thirty-nine Praktika cameras; with the f/2 lens.' 

 
Vulkan reached for a piece of ice from the canister on the bar. The piano-player 
did a fancy cadenza and stopped playing. Vulkan put his cigar in his mouth and clapped 
his hands. His face scowled at the ribbon of smoke. Several people joined in the applause. 
Vulkan said, 'Do you?' still looking at the piano-player. 
 
'Good price and in dollars,' said Colonel Wilson. There was no reply from 
Vulkan. 
 
Wilson said, 'I know that you don't do that kind of thing for a living; but this is a 
special favour for a friend of mine. It's more of a memento - you know, a camera 
smuggled out of the East - these guys like that kind of thing.' 
 
'What guys?' said Vulkan. 

 
'Trade delegation,' said Wilson. 

 
'Thirty-nine,' said Vulkan reflectively. 

 
'It would be no trouble to you,' said Wilson. 'Just bring them with you when you 
come back with a Russian. You are the only guy I know who ever rides through 
Checkpoint Charlie with a Russian.' He laughed nervously. 
 
'Thirty-nine must be the delegation of American radio and TV producers. 

 
Poetsch is running that, isn't he?' 

 
'Aw,' said Wilson, 'don't go yelling it around. I told you in strict confidence. If 
you can deliver them before...' 
 
'You told me nothing,' said Vulkan. 'I told you. I'm not a camera dealer, tell 
Poetsch that.' 
 
'Leave P's name out of this.' 

 
Vulkan gently blew smoke at Wilson, saying nothing. 

 
'Don't cross me, Vulkan,' Colonel Wilson said. 'You don't want me spilling it to 
your British pal that I'm no longer a U. S. Army major.' 
 
'No longer,' said Vulkan gleefully, almost choking on his drink. 

 
'I can make plenty of trouble,' said Wilson. 

 
'And you can make a one-way trip through the wire,' said Vulkan quietly. 

 
They stared at each other. Wilson swallowed to moisten his throat and turned 
back to his drink. 
 
'O.K. Johnnie,' Wilson said over his shoulder. 'No hard feelings, eh, pal?' 

 
Johnnie pretended not to hear and moved along the bar calling for another 
bourbon. 
 
'Two?' said the barman. 

 
'One will be enough,' said Johnnie. 

 
He could see Wilson's face in the mirror; it was very pale. He could see the girl 
from Wedding too, touching the hair at the nape of her neck like she didn't know she was 
straining her brassiere. She crossed her legs and smiled at his reflection. 
 
'Poetsch,' Johnnie thought. 

 
He had wanted to get something on Poetsch, if only to cut down his ranting at the 
bar. He could hear his voice now. Poetsch was saying, 'The very same people who made 
the great little TV film about the tunnel. The whole thing was paid for by the TV 
company, N. B. C. And what I'm saying, folks, is that those fifty-nine people who 
escaped owe their very freedom to our American system of unshackled enterprise and 
bold corporate drive...' There were a couple of favours Poetsch could do for Johnnie 
Vulkan. Johnnie relished the idea of telling Poetsch about them; even the girl from 
Wedding wasn't a better prospect than that. 
 
The lounge was beginning to fill up now. Vulkan leaned back against the bar, 
tensed his muscles and relaxed. It was good to feel he knew them all and that even 
Americans like 'Colonel Wilson' couldn't take advantage of him. Johnny Vulkan could 
pick out the tarts and the queens, the hustlers and the fairies. He knew all the heavies 
waiting assignment: from the nailers-up of notices to the nailers-up of Christs. He saw the 
girl from Wedding trying to catch his eye. Poetsch's crowd had grown too. There was that 
elderly English queer with the dyed hair, and a stupid little Dresdener who thought he 
was going to infiltrate the Gehlen Bureau - except that Johnnie had told them all about 
him last week. He wondered whether Helmut had been serious about having the 
Dresdener killed in a traffic accident. It was possible. King was right as a code name 
Vulkan decided; they acknowledged his stature by allotting it to him. Freudian. King 
Vulkan of Berlin. 
 
He supposed the red-haired girl talking to Poetsch now was the one Poetsch had 
mentioned to him; the girl from Israeli Intelligence. 
 
'Boy, oh boy!' thought Vulkan. 'What a town this is!' and he eased his way down 
the bar towards them, smiling at Poetsch. 
 
Zugzwang: to move a chess piece under duress. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 11 
 
 
London, Thursday, October l0th 
 
I MOVED into top as I passed Parliament Square. The night was young and it had 
nothing much to do. Tiny moons moved across St James's Park playing tiddly-winks with 
the shiny leaves, and the speedometer moved up to nudge sixty. The radio-telephone 
called me back to earth. It was the Charlotte Street Control Room: 'Message for you oboe 
ten from Northern Car Hire. [Our radio procedure is designed to make an eavesdropper 
think we are a taxi service. For this same reason our car pool uses radio-equipped taxi-
cabs with the flags always set at 'hired'.] Do you read me? Over.' 
 
'Loud and clear. Let's have it.' 

 
'Message from Mr D. You are to contact Mr Hallam at Betty's Club. Is that roger? 
Oboe ten. Over.' 
 
'Only too roger.' 

 
'Observe your r/t procedure, oboe ten. Your customer will ask you for change of 
ten shillings. You will have four half-crowns ready for him. Is that roger? Over.' 

 
'What are you talking about? What's Hallam want ten bob for?' 

 
'Oboe ten. Observe procedure please. I am giving you your introduction formality 
for this customer. Is that roger? Over.' 
 
'I don't know what you are talking about,' I said. 'Phone me at home later on. On 
the landline. O.K.?' 
 
The Scots operator's nerve broke before I got to Hyde Park Corner. 

 
'For Christ's sake. Oboe ten. You know what the Home Office people are like. He 
wants you to give him four half-dollars so that he knows who you are.' 
 
'What do you mean "so that he knows who I am"? I saw Hallam only the other 
day. Who the hell is he going to think I am if I don't give him four half-crowns -James 
Bond?' 
 
'Please just give him the half-crowns, oboe ten.' 

 
'I don't know how many make ten bob,' I said, but the operator didn't come back 
on the air again. Inside the car the radio shone with a faint green spot of light. I turned the 
volume and filled the car with big band sound as a volley of raindrops spattered across 
the windscreen. 
 
Betty's was one of a small set of London clubs that have been going over twenty 
years on a mixed membership, face up to the financial crisis of imminent closure once a 
year but never get around to pasting the corners of the wallpaper back into place. Next to 
the magazine rack, a brown-haired man was slugging shillings into a one-armed bandit 
without letting go of his Tuborg lager. The crash of the machine punctuated some gentle 
Sinatra. Without looking at me he sensed my approach, but he continued to watch the 
spinning oranges and pineapples. 
 
'Got change often bob?' he said. Before I could reply, the fruit machine gave three 
neat clicks and then a shudder as shillings showered into the metal tray. 
 
'Looks like you won't be needing change now,' I said. 

 
He turned suddenly and grasped my cuff. His watery brown eyes stared into mine 
for a long time before he said, 'Don't you believe it, dear. I still do.' It was Hallam, the 
man from Bina Gardens, but his hair was now a rich brown colour. He scooped up the 
shillings and showered them into his already sagging pockets. 
 
'First-rate for the gas meter,' he said. I held four half-crowns extended towards 
him while he spent five minutes trying to pry apart two ten-shilling notes that were only 
one. Reluctantly he gave it to me. Then he took his time fitting the base of a Player's No 
.3 into a four-inch holder. I flicked a Swan Vesta alight with my thumbnail and he nosed 
his fag down into the fire and flame. He was well alight before he spoke. 
 
'Stok and the Gehlen boys are both being helpful?' 

 
'Both being very helpful,' I said. 'Did you ever find Confucius?' 

 
'Yes,' said Hallam. 'The fickle creature came back to me Tuesday morning, very 
early. So dirty; heaven knows where he had been. So independent the Siamese. I really 
should buy a collar for him but it seems so cruel.' Somehow he got four syllables into 
'cruel'. 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
I had a street map of Berlin in my pocket. I moved a couple of ashtrays and a vase 
of plastic tulips and spread it across the table. 
 
'Stok will bring Semitsa into East Berlin somewhere within this rectangle.' I drew 
a very light pencil mark just north of Alexanderplatz. 

 
'He will tell me where later. If I don't like it, I can fix somewhere else in the same 
district.' Hallam had his Tuborg wrapped around his face but I knew he was taking in 
every word. 
 
'Why don't you make the Russkies bring him down to Marienborn and hand him 
over the West German frontier?' he asked. 
 
'Not possible,' I said. 

 
He nodded. 

 
'Outside Stok's district. How foolish of me. Very well then. You have Semitsa - or 
you think you have him -here.' He stabbed the street map. 
 
'Now,' I said, 'from there the Gehlen boys will post him special delivery to West 
Berlin.' 
 
Then what?' asked Hallam. 

 
'If I know anything about the Gehlen boys they will delay the transfer at least 
twenty-four hours so that they can pump Semitsa for anything that might be useful to 
them. Then using the documents that your Home Office people are going to provide we 
bring him to London as a naturalised British subject returning home.' 
 
'How will the Gehlen people move him across the wall?' said Hallam. 

 
'You know better than to ask that and so do I,' I said. 'If I ask, they'll just tell me a 
lot of reasonably creative lies.' 
 
'Did you give me my change?' he said. 

 
'Yes I did,', I said, 'four half-crowns.' 

 
Hallam opened his wallet and counted his paper money. 

 
'The Home Office won't release the documents until one of our own people 
actually sees Semitsa in the flesh in West Berlin.' I could see the slack red lining of his 
watery eyes. He swung his chin from side to side to emphasise the negative and his jaw 
opened to repeat the decision. 
 
'You see why... 'he began. 

 
I reached out and with my finger-tips gently closed Hallam's mouth. 'You 
wouldn't want to see Semitsa's flesh,' I said. 'You don't like flesh, do you, Hallam? It isn't 
nice.' 
 
' His face flushed like dipped litmus. I went across to the bar, bought two XO 
brandies and set one in front of Hallam. His face was still red. 
 
'Just have the papers ready, love,' I said. 'I'll manage.' 

 
Hallam poured the brandy down his throat and his eyes watered more than ever as 
he nodded agreement. 
 
Every piece has its mode of attack but only a pawn will attack en passant. 
Similarly only a pawn can be captured in this manner. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 12 
 
 
Thursday, October l0th 
 

WHEN I left Hallam I drifted north. The Saddle Room was rocking until the spurs jingled 
and a girl with a back-combed bouffon of red hair was twisting with obsessive grace on a 
table top which put her ten inches above floor level, not allowing for the back-combing. 
Her feet knocked the glasses to the floor with rhythmic abandon. No one seemed to mind. 
I walked as far as the stairs and peered into the smoke and noise. Two girls with large but 
tight white sweaters narcissistically twisted back to back. I poured two or three double 
whiskies into the back of my throat, watched the floor and tried to forget what a crummy 
trick I had pulled on Hallam. 
 
It was still raining outside. The doorman and I looked around for a taxi. I found 
one, gave the doorman a florin and climbed in. 
 
'I saw it first.' 

 
'What?' I said. 

 
'I saw it first,' said the girl with the back-combed bouffon. She said it slowly and 
patiently. She was about five foot ten, light in complexion, nervous of movement, dressed 
with skilful simplicity. She had a rather wide, full mouth and eyes like a trapped doe. 
Now she kneaded her face around while querulously telling me yet again that she'd seen 
the cab before I had. 
 
'I'm going towards Chelsea,'she said, opening the door. 

 
I looked around. The bad weather had driven cabs into hiding. 'O.K.,' I said, 'hop 
in. We'll do your journey first.' 
 
The cab pulled into a tight lock and my new friend eased her back-combing on to 
the leatherwork with a sigh. 
 
'Cigarette?' she said and flicked the corner of a pack of Camels with a skill that I 
can never master. I took one and brought a loose Swan Vesta match from my pocket. I 
dug my thumbnail into the head and ignited it. She was impressed and stared into my 
eyes as I lit the cigarettes. I took it pretty calmly, just like I didn't have a couple of 
milligrammes of flaming phosphorus under the nail and coming through the pain 
threshold like a rusty scalpel. 
 
'Are you in Advertising?' she said. She had a soft American accent. 

 
'Yes,' I said, 'I'm an account executive with J. Walter Thompson.' 

 
'You don't look like any of the Thompson people I know.' 

 
'That's true,' I said. 'I'm the vanguard of the button-down shirt mob.' She gave a 
polite little laugh. 'Where in Chelsea?' the driver called. She told him. 'It's a party,' she 
said to me. 
 
'Is that why you have that bottle of Guinness in your pocket?' I asked. 

 
She tapped it to make sure it was still there. 'Ghoul,' she said smiling. 'That's to 
wash my hair in.' 
 
'In Guinness?' I said. 

 
'If you want body,' she said patting her hair. 

 
'I want body,' I said. 'Believe me, I do.' 

 
'My name is Samantha Steel,' she said politely. 'People call me Sam.' 

 
Roman Decoy: a piece offered as bait to save a hazardous situation. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 13 

 
 
London, Friday, October 11th 
 
CHARLOTTE STREET runs north from Oxford Street and there are few who will blame 
it. By mid-morning they are writing out the menus, straining yesterday's fat, dusting the 
plastic flowers and the waiters are putting their moustaches on with eyebrow pencils. 
 
 
I waved to Wally who runs the delicatessen across the road before turning into the 
doorway marked, among other things, 'Ex-Officers' Employment Bureau', by a smooth 
polished brass plate. In the hall the same floral wallpaper had moved ever nearer autumn. 
The first-floor landing smelled of acetone and from behind a doorway marked 'Acme 
Films Cutting Rooms', I could hear the gentle purr of a movie projector. The next floor 
pretended to be a theatrical tailor so that we could buy, alter or make any kind of uniform 
we needed. This is where Alice sat. Alice was the cross between librarian and concierge. 
Anyone who thought they could do anything in that building without having Alice's 
approval should just try doing it. 
 
'You are late, sir,' Alice said. She was thumping the lid into a caterer's-size 
Nescafe tin. 
 
'Right as always, Alice,' I said. 'I don't know what we'd do without you. ' I 
climbed towards my office. From the dispatch department came the mournful trombone 
solo of 'Angels Guard Thee' as the C. W. S. Brass Band played their part in the dispatch 
department's ceaseless record recital. Jean was waiting on the stairs. 'Coming in late,' she 
said. 
 
'It's one of the B flat cornets,' I explained, 'clipping the notes.' 

 
'I mean you are coming in late.' She put my old raincoat on a wooden hanger that 
had the words 'stolen from typing pool' burned into the surface. 
 
'How do you like it?' Jean said, 'the office.' 

 
I looked around at the balding carpet, Jean's teak desk and the gleaming new I. B. 
M. typewriter, and then I saw it. There was a large spiky indoor plant on the window sill. 
 
'It's lovely,' I said. The leaves were long and prickly, the bright green giving way 
to a dull yellow at the thorny edge. All it did as far as I could see was block just a little 
more of the already inadequate grey London daylight. 'Lovely,' I said again. 
 
'Mother-in-law's Tongue,' said Jean, 'that's what it's called.' 

 
'Don't stretch my credulity too far,' I said. 

 
'That's what Dawlish said when he saw your expense sheet for last month.' 

 
I unlocked my 'In' tray. Jean had already sifted most of it. The worst was the 
political reading matter. Long foolscap translations of excerpts from L'Unita, Party 
Information [A Peking publication for Party Executives.] and two other information 
sheets had been waiting there for nearly a week. It was a job no one else could do for 
you. 
 
'It was that bill at The Ivy,' Jean said. I signed the two information sheets as read 
and put them into the 'Out' tray. It was the only way to fight it down. 
 
'I told you he would notice that it was my birthday,' Jean said. 

 
'Stop gnawing your knuckles,' I said. 'I can handle grannie.' 

 
'Ha ha,' said Jean. 'Well, don't fire him.' 

 
'I'll make the jokes,' I said. 'What have you done about this Paul Louis Broum 
business?' 
 
'I've passed the request for documents to Home Office. I then sent Interpol a blue 
[Blue is a code request for information. Other codes include Red for a criminal arrested 
and ready for extradition, Black for an unidentified corpse. Bertillon is a speaking-
portrait system. There is also a synoptic index with a colour tag for each sixth of the face. 
] with instructions for a Bertillon if they find anything. No reply so far. Grannie wants 
you to go down to Acme Films at ten fifteen when they will screen all the film we have 
of Red Army people who work for the Karlshorst Security Control Area. Dawlish himself 
would like you to see him after that at eleven o'clock. You have no lunch appointments. I 
will order some sandwiches from Wally's if you wish. Hallam at the Home Office phoned 
and wanted to see you. I said you would call in to see him between ten and ten thirty 
tomorrow morning. You are confirmed on tomorrow evening's flight to Berlin and I have 
checked with your hotel there. All O.K.' 
 
I said, 'You wonderful creature.' 

 
Jean put a dozen letters on my desk, her arm brushed my shoulder and I caught 
the faint drifting perfume of Arpege. 
 
'I can't make it tonight,' I said. 

 
'The top three should be ready for the eleven o'clock collection. The requisitions 
don't matter.' 
 
'I was looking forward to it,' I said, 'but there's this damn business with the Steel 
girl.' Jean walked towards the door. She stood there for a moment looking at me. I 
detected the faint angry flush in her cheek only because I knew her so well. The severity 
of her straight-sided shirt-style dress emphasised her feminine stance. 
 
'I am Circe,' she said. 'All who drink of my cup turn into swine.' She turned to go. 
'You are no exception.' She threw the word over her shoulder like spilled salt. 
 
'Be reasonable, Jean,' I said, but she had gone. 

 
Dawlish had the only office with two windows in the building. You didn't need 
dark glasses there but on the other hand you didn't need a flashlight either. Dawlish was 
always buying pieces of antique furniture. Every now and again he would say he had 
business to attend to and everyone would know that he was coming back with a writing-
desk or an aspidistra-stand from Portobello Road. 
 
So Dawlish's office was like a junk shop. There was an antique umbrella stand 
and an antique desk under a green-shaded Victorian lamp. Across one wall stood a 
bookcase with glass doors; inside was a shiny leather set of Dickens with only Martin 
Chuzzlewit missing. Dawlish got the set for twenty-five shillings. Martin Chuzzlewit 
wasn't one of Dickens's best as Dawlish was always saying. On the other wall, where the 
big I. B. M. machine stood, there were two cases of butterflies -one had a cracked glass - 
and photographs of various Civil Service cricket teams in which the granular unwrinkled 
face of Dawlish could be recognised. 
 
On October 1st the coal fires were lighted. A freezing September or a scorching 
October made no difference. A small cardboard box marked 'OMO', bulging with coal 
eggs, stood in coal dust in the hearth. I pulled the leather armchair nearer to the flickering 
fire. This tiny fireplace had been built when Britain's fleets steamed the world on coal 
and when diplomacy largely consisted of sending them somewhere. 

 
Dawlish read my report. He pinched the bridge of his nose and without looking up 
said, 'I notice everyone's getting at you again.' 
 
Alice brought coffee, set it down on Dawlish's desk and left without a word. 

 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
Dawlish passed me a cracked cup with pink flowers around the rim. 'Tell me 
about Stok,' he said. 'Ginger biscuit?' 
 
I shook my head. 'I'm getting too fat,' I said. 'Stok is just doing a job.' 

 
Dawlish was holding his cup and saucer at eye level. 

 
'Not bad for one-and-six each,' he said. 'They are German porcelain: quite old.' 

 
I watched the little islands of Nescafe powder spin ever smaller in the swirl of hot 
water. 
 
'Don't you think they are beautiful?' Dawlish said. 

 
'They aren't exactly the Portland vase but they're O.K. for Nescafe.' 

 
'Is Stok good at his job?' 

 
'I think he is,' I replied. 'Much too good to think that I'd go for that clumsy cover 
story about his wife being dead. Either he wanted me to discover the lie so that I'd be 
more likely to believe his subsequent story - ' Dawlish brought his coffee across to the 
chair near the fire and sat down. 'Or?' he said. He took his pipe to pieces and blew loudly 
through each component. 
 
'Or he thought I wasn't bright enough to... ' Dawlish was looking at me with a 
particularly stupid expression. 
 
'Very funny,' I said. 

 
Dawlish assembled his pipe. 

 
'And this description that the Gehlen people want on the document.' He looked at 
the flimsy green teleprinter message. 'What's wrong with Broum as a cover name for 
Semitsa?' 
 
'Nothing except that I don't like being pushed around. I don't mind them 
mentioning one or two things they want - I understand that they are preparing other 
documents - but this sheet they've given us is almost a biography.' 
 
'You are just piqued personally.' Dawlish produced a two-pound bag of sugar. 

 
'Perhaps you're right,' I said. 'I don't like the Gehlen mob treating me like an 
employee.' 
 
'But what would be their purpose in wanting such documents? Not to sell them, 
they have plenty of money.' 
 
I shrugged and put three spoonfuls of sugar into my coffee. 

 
'That's how you put on weight,' said Dawlish. 

 
That's right,' I said. 

 
'And the girl?' said Dawlish. 'What have you found out about the girl, Samantha 
Steel?' 
 
'It's probably a phoney name anyway but there are no green or white cards at the 
Yard. [In Scotland Yard's C. R. O. files, a green card indicates a suspected person with no 
criminal record. White cards are used for ordinary criminal records.] Nor anything at 
Central Register.[Central Register is the Government's intelligence file on suspected 
persons and for those of national importance - trade union officials, scientists, directors of 
large companies, etc.] She's American; I've put a teleprinter request through to 
Washington.' 

 
'What a performance,' said Dawlish. 'You never think of the expense. It'll all end 
up like that other girl. In the end you found she had a press agent just dying to send 
biography and pictures to anyone who asked for them.' 
 
'This girl followed me,' I said. 'It was clumsy and it was obvious; we can't just 
ignore it.' 
 
'You are quite sure?' 

 
'Quite sure,' I said. 

 
'Umm,' said Dawlish grudgingly. 'Well, you may be right; we can't be too careful. 
Check on her.' 
 
'I already am,' I said patiently. 

 
'And see her again,' said Dawlish. 

 
'Don't worry about that,' I said. 'I may as well get something out of this job, if it's 
only entertainment.' 
 
'Did you check on Mr Vulkan's playmate?' asked Dawlish. 

 
'Yes,' I grinned. 'There is no Major Bailis. U. S. Army Records said the 
description fitted a civilian layabout named Wilson. He was there just to impress me, I 
suppose. He's a character, that Vulkan.' 
 
'He's a rogue,' said Dawlish. He grabbed his bag of sugar and got up. 'Well, this 
won't do. Everything else O.K.?' 
 
'My electric fire doesn't work,' I said. 'I'm freezing downstairs and Jean said you 
were unhappy about my expenses. Was I too extravagant?' 
 
'Being extravagant is just a state of mind, my boy,' he said, 'and so is being cold. 
Just see what you can do about both.' 
 
I was a bit relieved. 'What I'd like is an interest-free loan of eight hundred quid to 
buy a new car,' I said. 
 
Dawlish gently packed tobacco into the bowl of his pipe with a match. He put the 
pipe into his mouth before looking up at me. 
 
'Yes,' he finally said. He lit the pipe with great care. 

 
'Yes I want it or yes I can have it?' I said. 

 
'Yes, everything they say about you is true,' said Dawlish. 'Go away and let me 
work.' 
 
'What about the decision on Stok's forty thousand pounds?' I said. 

 
'Ah,' said Dawlish. 'That's what has been giving you ideas above your station.' He 
let go with a great puff of smoke. 
 
'We might lose him,' I said. Dawlish prodded the match into the pipe bowl. 

 
I added, 'The Egyptian Intelligence people will buy Semitsa like a shot if they get 
wind of it.' 
 
'That's what's worrying me,' said Dawlish, showing no trace of worry whatsoever. 
'The Egyptians collect German scientists, don't they?' 
 
'Yes.' 

 
'Our Zurich people had better watch MECO [MECO: Mechanical Corporation, 
155 Birmendorferstrasse, Zurich. An agency which buys jet planes, missiles and talent on 
behalf of the Egyptian Government] - that's who will be handling the deal if there is one.' 
 
'Yes,' I said again. 

 
'Very well,' said Dawlish. 'Keep an ear to the ground. If you send Jean up with a 
War Office Armoury chit I'll give you a signature for a pistol.' 

 
'Thank you, sir,' I said. It was unprecedented. If Dawlish thought I needed a gun, I 
was living on borrowed time. 
 
'For God's sake be circumspect with it. It's a hell of a responsibility for me.' 

 
'I'll bear you in mind if anyone starts shooting at me,' I said. 'I'll take it over to H. 
O. and bump off Hallam tomorrow morning for a start.' 
 
'Hallam.' Dawlish looked up suddenly. 'Leave Hallam alone,' he said. 

 
'You haven't been threatening him, have you?' 

 
'I leaned on him a tiny bit,' I admitted. 'We nearly had H. O. running this whole 
project.' 
 
'Don't do anything like that,' said Dawlish. He took out a large white handkerchief 
and polished his spectacles. 'I don't care what else you do; but treat Hallam with kid 
gloves.' 
 
'I think he'd go more for green velvet with sequins,' I said, but Dawlish just puffed 
smoke. 
 
I went downstairs and tried to get the Ministry of Works fire going. Chico came 
in. 
 
'I've got a file from A. E. A. S. D.' 

 
'What?'I said. 

 
'Atomic Energy Authority, Security Department,' Chico said. 

 
'That's better,' I said. 'You've been watching those spy films on TV again. So 
what?' 
 
'What do I do with it?' 

 
'Pass it on somewhere,' I said. 

 
'It's marked immediate.' 

 
'Then pass it on immediately.' Chico smiled sheepishly, tucked the file under his 
arm and walked across to the window. He really only wanted to kill time till lunch. Chico 
was a delicate bloom from an old family tree. He had too much forehead and not enough 
chin to be handsome and he carried himself in that sort of crouch that Englishmen adopt 
to avoid humiliating their more stunted brethren. He looked round my office furtively. 
 
'Is it true about the old man's garden?' 

 
'Is what true?' I grunted without looking up, although I guessed what was coming. 

 
'One of the chaps across at the War House said that Grannie grows weeds.' Jean 
came in to get something from the filing cabinet; she waited for my reply. 
 
I said, 'Mr Dawlish has achieved considerable status as an amateur botanist. He's 
written a number of books including Forest Marsh and Moor Plants and The Dehiscent 
Capsule of the Penny cress in the Seeding Cycle. Has become something of a specialist 
on meadow and hedgerow flowers. What do you expect him to grow in his garden? 
Tomatoes?' 
 
'No sir,' said Chico. 'Golly, I didn't know he was an expert on weeds.' 

 
'Hedgerow flowers we usually say. And don't call Mr Dawlish "Grannie".' 

 
'Yes, hedgerow flowers. Those friends of mine didn't know that.' 

 
'One of these days, Chico,' I said, 'you are going to face up to the fact that those 
friends of yours in what you persist in calling the War House know nothing about 
everything. They are as ignorant as you are. You should do something about it. Go down 
to the library and read a book.' 
 
'Do you have any particular book in mind, sir?' 

 
'Start at A or the shelf nearest the door and see what you can learn by Christmas.' 

 
'You're joking, sir.' 

 
'I never joke, Chico. The truth is quite adequately hilarious.' Jean found the file 
and left the office without saying anything, which is generally a bad sign in one way or 
another. 
 
Chico came round the desk. 'What are you marking?' he said. 

 
'Confidential,' I said. 'If you've got no work to do, fix the electric fire. The plug 
has gone wrong.' 
 
'Yes sir. I'm rather good at that sort of thing.' 

 
He picked up the fire and unscrewed the plug with a sixpence. I went back to It 
pays to increase your word power. 'What does "sibling" mean, Chico?' I asked. 
 
'No idea, sir.' He'd spent three years at Cambridge getting his gown tangled in 
bicycle chains and he couldn't do the Daily Telegraph crossword without cheating. There 
was silence until he began to tell me the plot of a film he'd seen the night before. I made a 
note of the title. 
 
Chico gave me the plug. 'I've lost the very tiny screw under your desk, sir,' Chico 
said. 
 
'Beat it, Chico,' I said. 'I need the oxygen.' 

 
He made for the door. 'And take your bloody file with you,' I said. 'You're not 
passing it on to me.' 
 
The outside phone rang. It was a clear G. P. O. line without gimmicks that we 
have listed as the 'Ex-Officers' Employment Bureau'. 
 
'It's Sam,' said the caller. 

 
'Not Sam, Sam the...' 

 
'Samantha,' she said. 'Samantha Steel.' 

 
'Hello, how are you?' 

 
'You should know,' she said. 

 
'Just as great without eyebrows,' I said. 

 
'That's what the milkman said this morning.' 

 
'A man of fine judgment.' 

 
'Are you coming over?' 

 
'Yes, I'll come across and get you right away.' 

 
'Come across, you ghoul, but don't count on anything.' 

 
J'adoube: a word used to indicate that a player intends to touch a piece but not 
move it. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14 
 
 
Friday, October 11th 
 
SAMANTHA lived in the sort of road where driving schools teach people to turn round. 
Beyond the Sickertian backwaters of Camden Town there is a salient of quiet houses 

where once lived the mistresses of Victorian businessmen who couldn't get one in 
Hampstead. 
 
The ivy-encrusted fortress was set well back into the garden, and a modern sign, 
'Heathview House - service flats', looked odd tacked to the Gothic entrance. Statuary in 
the garden glowered motionless through the shrubbery like jungle-trained guerrillas. I 
pushed open the turquoise front door and stepped in. Stained glass printed great shapes of 
thin sunlight across the marble floor like someone had been hurling bottles of ink around. 
Whoever had divided the house into flats was making enough money out of it to put 
framed prints and fresh flowers in the hall. A tall Gothic tracery window, rich with a 
tortuous pattern of huge yellow flowers, illuminated the staircase. The light held the 
dusty air in suspension and I climbed the stairs like a fly fighting its way out of amber. 
 
The door at the top of the stairs bore a typewritten card: 'S. Steel.' I pressed the 
bell-push and heard a noise like someone had walked into a xylophone. 
 
Samantha Steel came to the door wearing a bathrobe and a towel around the head. 

 
'Who are you?' she said. 'The Fuller Brush man?' 

 
'I'm from American Express,' I said. 'It's O.K. to drink the local water.' 

 
'I was in the tub,' she said. 

 
'Maybe I can help.' 

 
'Yes,' she said. 'Go and build two drinks and give one to me.' 

 
I walked into the lounge. It was about thirty foot of ankle-high carpeting from silk 
wall to silk wall. The cocktail cabinet was in the corner. I opened it and was socked in the 
head by pink neon. I groped inside the cabinet among a platoon of bottles, mixed a 
martini and slammed ice into it. 
 
The bathroom was all mosaics and radiant heating. A low marble table held three 
dozen bottles of lotion and salts and above that there was a huge pink mirror and a 
complexity of stainless steel shower fittings. 
 
The bathtub was made of some sort of black stone. Samantha was in it. She was 
wearing half a dozen bracelets and a string of pearls. 
 
'Don't stand there. Gimme the drink,' said Sam. Five feet ten inches isn't very tall, 
but when it's horizontal in a black bath it takes you a devil of a time to look at it. 
 
I said, 'Do you always wear your accessories in the bath?' 

 
She grinned. 'Accessories always - jewellery sometimes.' She sipped the drink. 
'The hell you put in it?' 
 
'Vermouth and gin,' I said. 

 
'It's filthy,' she said. 'Pour it away and do it again.' 

 
I brought her a much stronger mix. She downed it in one gulp and climbed from 
the bath dripping and dancing across the carpeting, gleaming with silver, diamonds and 
wet skin. She began to dry herself in a brisk, sexless sort of way. 
 
'Put some music on,' she yelled, draping a huge red bath towel around herself. I 
opened the gramophone and switched it on. The pickup arm moved across the black 
shiny disc and Claire Austin sang 'I'm Through With Love' like she meant it and the 
backing was all a backing could be. Sam had picked up her cigarettes and I was ready to 
give her a light. 
 
'Down, ghoul. None of that, buddy boy.' 

 
'I was just going to light your cigarette,' I said. 

 
'I'll manage,' she said. She flicked the corner of the Camels pack, put the cigarette 
in her mouth and lit it. She inhaled the smoke with a cheek-sunken concentration and 
blew a great warm happy cloud of smoke across the room. Her eyes were enormous and 
they studied me carefully as I sat on the sofa. The room was furnished with the sort of 
expensive, impersonal taste that landlords save for wealthy foreign transients. There were 
lots of satin-shaded table lamps and glass ashtrays as big as hand basins, Sam walked 
across to the sofa where I sat. 
 
'You are the best thing that happened to me in this crummy town,' she said. 
'Where were you hiding?' 
 
'I was waiting outside the Overseas League,' I said. 'But you never showed up.' 

 
She sat down next to me. Her skin was warm and damp and her body smelled of 
fresh talcum powder and Pepsodent. 
 
'You can kiss me,' she said. Her head lolled back on the sofa and her eyes closed. 
I did it without hurry. 
 
She got to her feet. 'I'm not a crumpled five-pound note,' she said. 'I don't need 
smoothing out.' 
 
She walked across to the cocktail cabinet stroking her upper arms and using her 
elbows to keep the towel in place. She poured herself a drink and turned round to face me 
with a charming, big, dentifrice-ad, smile. She said, 'There's a new kind of tranquillizer 
on the market; it doesn't soothe you...' 
 
'It makes you enjoy being tense,' I finished sourly. She nodded and tipped her 
drink into her face. 
 
'This isn't the ladies' bridge club,' I said. 'Any time that entertaining me becomes a 
strain just let me know.' She nodded again and gave me a long hard look. The player was 
still emitting the silk-and-sandpaper voice of Claire Austin. 
 
'Stop pouting and put some clothes on,' I said. She came across and kneeled on the 
sofa. Her forehead was large and under it her milky grey eyes studied each part of my 
face in turn. When she smiled her face wrinkled far too much, but now when she spoke 
her voice was fresh and childlike and there was none of the hardness left. 
 
'If you say so,' she said. I kissed her very gently on the lips. 

 
'I say so,' I said. 'Get dressed and we'll take a ride into the English countryside.' 

 
'After that?' she said. 

 
'A concert or a theatre.' 

 
'After that?' 

 
'Dinner.' 

 
'After that?' 

 
'We'll see,' I said. She smiled wickedly. Then as suddenly her mood changed. 'I'd 
like a concert best,' she said. 'At the Royal Festival Hall it's... ' 
 
'Charles Ives and Alban Berg,' I finished. 

 
'And Schonberg,' she said. 'They are playing Schonberg's "Variations for wind 
band". It's my very favourite. Do let's go. I'll wear my flame chiffon dress. Can we?' 
 
'Certainly,' I said. 'It will be easy to get tickets; no one seems to like modern...' 
She kissed me again and a strand of hair was mixed into our kiss. As she pulled her head 
back from me her eyes were shiny - not with soft dewy teardrops but wet as though she 
had bathed her eyes - and long strands of hair were gummed across her cheeks. I waited 
for her to say something that would match the soft vulnerability of her damp smudged 

face. She said nothing. I had a feeling that she had never said anything without first 
considering the consequences. Or perhaps once she had. 
 
She pushed my chest away roughly and yelled, 'My neutralizer.' 

 
'What?' I said. She broke away from my embrace. 

 
'My neutralizer,' she said again. 'My home perm, I should have put it on ten 
minutes ago. Now it'll be all frizzy.' 
 
She disappeared into the bathroom, unwrapping the towel from her hair and 
leaving a long stream of monosyllabic Anglo-Saxon four-letter words. I removed a long 
silky hair from my mouth and poured myself another drink. The hair had been dyed but 
what was unusual about that? 
 
Even a pawn can make a 'double attack'. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 15 
 
 
Friday, October 11th 
 
DAMP leaves shone underfoot like a million newly struck pennies. Ferns had shrivelled 
to intricate bronze abstract sculptures and shiny leaves were suspended magically in 
space from invisible twigs. 
 
The pub wasn't yet in sight and we stood for a moment in the churchyard listening 
to the whining and rustling and looking at the gravestones which shone in the failing 
light. Samantha read the large curlicue lettering aloud, Praises on stones are titles vainly 
lent. A man's good name is his best monument. Thomas Merrick. Died August 15, 1849. 
 
She moved through the soft light like a wraith. 'Here's a crazy one,' she called. 

 
Here lies the dust of Billy Paine. Whole undisturbed may he remain. On this date 
that he was slain, Many a kind thought died in Paine. 
 
From underfoot the sweet smell of damp grass rose like perfume. Birds were still 
singing in the trees that stood across the major surgery of sunset like massed artery 
forceps. Sam insisted upon looking into the tiny church. The door opened with a 
vibratory screech. A small hand-lettered notice pinned to the door read: 'All brass rubbing 
suspended until further notice.' Inside the semi-precious light of the stained glass softly 
dusted the smooth, worn pews, and a complex of brass candlesticks glinted like a 
mediaeval oil refinery. Sam held my hand very tightly. 
 
'You are the best thing that ever happened to me,' she said as though she meant it. 

 
The pub was crowded when we got there. Men in rough-knit cardigans were lying 
at attention in the best armchairs and making a big thing about being local residents. 
 
'I say, Mabel,' one of them shouted to the barmaid, 'how's about another noggin of 
the usual all round?' A man with a paisley scarf tucked inside an open-necked shirt was 
saying, 'He's the best damn photographer in the country but he's a thousand guineas a 
shot.' 
 
A man with suede chukka boots said, 'Our deep-frozen fish-fingers nearly beat 
him. I said, "Make the beastly things out of plaster, old boy; we'll get the piping-hot 
effect by burning incense." We did too. Ha, ha! Put the sales up six and three-quarter per 

cent and he got sonic kind of Art Director's award.' He laughed a deep, manly laugh and 
sloshed down some beer. 
 
Sam hadn't let go of my hand. We walked across to the bar and sat on the high 
stools where girls with camel coats and cowboy boots and black tights were drinking 
Pimms Number 1 and exchanging West End hairdressers. 
 
'Two large bitters,' I said. Through the window the moon was yellow like a low-
power bulb in a blue velvet room. 
 
'Do you ever imagine what it would be like to be on the moon?' Sam said. 

 
'Nearly all the time,' I said. 

 
'Serious,' she squeezed my hand, 'serious, ghoul.' 

 
'What would it be like?' I asked. 

 
'Spooky but wonderful,' she said. 

 
'Like you,' I said and meant it. 

 
Sam picked up her bitter and pulled a face at me. Outside there was the brutal 
noise of a sports car starting. It scattered a little gravel against the window and broke 
wind into the damp night air. 
 
Sam was right about the Schonberg 'Variations for wind band'. I'd wanted to go 
on account of the Charles Ives 'Three places in New England', because I liked the crazy 
military band sequence, but the Schonberg was something else again. Everyone likes to 
convert people to something they like. Sam was no exception. She was being laughing 
and loving and little-girlish. I was a sucker for erudite little girls. We had dinner in 
Kensington in a poky little two-room place where the menu is as big as a newspaper and 
everything that can be flambe is flambe. 
 
We moved through the powdered shoulders and borrowed evening suits and Sam 
felt out of place because she didn't have elbow-length gloves with jewelled bangles over. 
 
'Don't worry,' I said. 'You've got a great face.' 

 
She poked her tongue out at me. 

 
'Don't be sexy,' I said and the waiter heard me and Sam blushed like a beetroot, 
which surprised me. 
 
We both liked the same things. We both liked oysters without lemon. 'I like 
oysters without dressing,' Sam said. 
 
I raised my eyebrows at the waiter but Sam saw me and gave me a vicious kick in 
the ankle. The steak was O.K. and I was strong-willed enough not to hit the sweet-trolley 
too hard. We'd finished coffee by half past midnight and as we drove home I parked the 
car near the Serpentine in the Park. Sam said that if we were on the moon we could see 
which half of the world was sleeping. 
 
'And we'd be the only people who could still see the sun,' I said. 

 
'I would love that.' It began to rain as I restarted the car. 

 
'Come and explain why at my place,' I suggested. 

 
'My place,' she said. 'I still haven't got my eyebrows.' 

 
'Tomorrow I'll buy a complete range of eyebrow pencils and keep them in my 
flat,' I promised. She held my arm tight. 
 
I rang the chimes at Sam's front door. 'Don't do that,' Sam said. 'I have quiet 
neighbours.' She opened the door with a flourish and flipped the light switch. 
 
It wasn't hard to recognise the signs. Burglars open chests beginning with the 
bottom drawer, so that they don't have to waste time shutting each to get at the next. Sam 

stood looking at the mess - clothes everywhere and wine spilled across the rug. She 
trapped her lower lip under her teeth and flung it forward in a heartfelt monosyllabic 
obscenity. 
 
'Shall I phone the police?' I asked. 

 
'The police,' said Sam scornfully. 'You mean that your police in England won't 
trample around the place like idiots, ask a million questions and end up doing sweet F. 
A.?' 
 
'They will,' I said. 'But they are very nicely-spoken.' 

 
Sam said she would like to be alone. 

 
'Whatever you wish,' I said, for I knew how she felt. 

 
When I got back to my flat I phoned Sam. She didn't seem nervous or too 
distressed. 
 
'She seems O.K.,' I said to Austin Butterworth, after replacing the receiver. 

 
'Good,' he said. Austin was sitting well back in my most comfortable armchair 
supping my favourite whisky and being as modest as hell. 'Run of the mill job,' he was 
saying. 'French window with slide bolts - child's play. People are so silly. You should see 
my place, that's really well protected against burglars.' 
 
'Is it?'I said. 

 
'Of course,' said Ossie, 'you have to pay to have the best protection but it beats me 
why people are so mean. After - that's when they get properly equipped, after they've 
been done.' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'I made a lot of mess,' said Ossie. 

 
'I noticed,' I said. 

 
'Modus operandi,' said Ossie mysteriously. 'Sometimes I'm neat, sometimes I'm 
messy. It keeps the Yard puzzled.' 
 
'I'll bet it does.' 

 
'Mind you,' said Ossie, 'thanks for the old one-two on the door bell. I'd quite 
forgotten how the time was. I had to scarper when I heard you at the door.' He tugged at 
his nose and gave a little smile. 
 
'What did you make of it?' 

 
'Well,' said Ossie cautiously. 'Unmarried girl living alone. Lots of men friends. 
Gets three hundred dollars per week from Chase Manhattan Bank, New York.' 
 
I nodded. 

 
'United Nations Plaza Branch,' said Ossie. He was proud of being thorough. 

 
'U. S. passport in name of Samantha Steel. Israeli passport in name of Hanna 
Stahl showing same girl but with blonde hair. Quite a lot of jewellery - expensive stuff,' 
no rubbish. Real mink coat. Real. I could get a thousand quid for it. So legit., it would be 
worth three or four.' 
 
'Would it?' I said. I poured more refreshment and Ossie removed his boots and a 
pair of scarlet socks which he arranged in the fireplace. 
 
'I don't say she's a whore,' said Ossie, 'but she's got a good standard of living.' His 
socks were steaming in the heat of the fire. 'Educated,' said Ossie. 
 
'Yes?'I said. 

 
'All kinds of books - psychology, poetry, all sorts of stuff.' 

 
I went and made coffee while Ossie dried his feet. 

 
Outside the weather was terrible; the rain trickled constantly against the windows 
and there was a hollow drumming sound as torrents of it roared along the guttering and 
spilled over in great sheets that crashed on to the concrete of the back garden. By the time 
I returned with the coffee, Ossie had unpacked his little Gladstone bag. There were a 
couple of tiny jemmies and a Stilson wrench and a lot of lock-picking devices that Ossie 
had made himself. There were two yellow dusters, a pair of carpet slippers and a Polaroid 
Automatic 100 camera. 
 
'Like this,' said Ossie. He held the set of Polaroid photos for me. Only one of them 
was of interest: a view of a box-room showing a bench with a monocular microscope - a 
professional-looking job with revolving objectives and some simple chemical gear - 
mounted specimens and test tubes. It was the titles of the books on the bench that I 
wanted to see. 
 
'It's no good,' I said. 'I can't read the tides even with a glass. Don't you remember 
any of them?' 
 
'I told you,' said Ossie. 'I was going to write some of the titles down when I heard 
you bash the door bell. I can go back - it's easy.' 
 
'No, don't do that. Just try and remember one title.' 

 
We sat there, with me looking at Ossie's funny bulbous old face and Ossie's bright 
little eyes gazing in the fire and trying to recollect the brief glimpse of the books. 
 
'For instance,' I prompted, 'did any one of them say "enzyme"?' 

 
'Luvaduck,' said Ossie, his face glowing with a huge smile of content. 'That's it, 
you've said it, "enzymes", they nearly all were about enzymes.' 
 
He couldn't remember the full titles but I knew he wouldn't make them up. He 
was one of the best B & E [B & E: Breaking and entering.] men we had and one of our 
most reliable retainers. 
 
'How did you know?' said Ossie. 

 
'I just guessed,' I said. 'She just seemed the sort of girl who would be interested in 
enzymes.' 
 
Every pawn is a potential queen. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 16 
 
 
Whitehall, Saturday, October 12th 
 
'WONDERFUL at coronations.' 
 
'I'll bet,' I said. 

 
'You can see them for miles. I was here for the Victory procession too. Quite 
lovely.' 
 
'We'd better start... ' 

 
'Would you like to come up here on Armistice Sunday?' Hallam asked. 'It's a most 
impressive sight.' 
 
'Yes,'I said.'Now about...' 

 
'A moment,' said Hallam. He went across to the desk and spoke into his bright-
green telephone. 
 
'We'd like a nice cup of creamy coffee, Phyllis. Will you tell Mrs Meynard? The 
nice china, Phyllis, I have a visitor.' 
 
Hallam's office was on the top floor. There was a great view along Whitehall, and 
under us the Cenotaph was dotted with lines of starlings. The office was well furnished, 
as Whitehall offices go; it had rush matting over the Ministry of Works lino and there 
were blue curtains, two Cezanne prints and a basketwork chair that had gone to seed. 
Hallam sorted through his files to find two manilla dossiers and a booklet. The booklet 
was a Ministry of Agriculture publication called Chemicals for the Gardener. Hallam 
opened one of the dossiers. It said 'Special Import Licences' in a Roman typeface and 
under that, neatly biro'd, was the name 'Mr Semitsa'. 
 
'We call all official requests for false documents "import licences",' Hallam 
explained. He tapped the other dossier with a sharp bony finger. 'And this is a report from 
- ' he read, 'Advisory Committee on Poisonous Substances.' 
 
'You are the most poisonous man I know,' I said cheerfully. 

 
'You're being naughty,' said Hallam, 'I thought we'd agreed to get along nicely 
together. It will be to the advantage of both of us in the long run, you know.' He smiled 
what he thought was a winning smile. He was dressed in Home Office uniform today - 
black jacket, pin-stripe trousers, stiff white collar and an Old Mill Hillian tie. 
 
'Gehlen's people told me that Semitsa should come into Berlin two weeks from 
today,' I said. 
 
'Oh, we know all about that,' said Hallam airily. 

 
'How?' I asked. 

 
'Oh, you people from Charlotte Street. You're all secrecy and bad manners. 
Grannie Dawlish is the worst of all.' I nodded. 
 
'We call him Grannie Dawlish here, you know.' 

 
'You just did,' I said. 

 
'Semitsa isn't a secret agent, my dear chap. He is giving a talk at Humboldt 
University on "Synthetic Insecticides - the development of resistance in Pests to D.D.T.". 
He gives the talk on Tuesday the 29th, so he'll arrive some time the previous week-end. I 
got all that from A.D.N.[A.D.N.: East German official news agency.] It isn't secret. 
What's more, I would wager you he'll stay at the Hotel Adlon.' 
 
'Now you are guessing,' I said. 

 
'Not at all,' said Hallam. 'That's where Humboldt usually put their top-rank guest 
lecturers.' He produced his cigarette holder. 'Can you let me have a cigarette?' he asked. I 
brought out a packet of Gauloises, tore the corner and offered them.. 
 
'French?' Hallam said. 'They're rather coarse, aren't they?' As he was lighting it 
there was a tap at the door. An aged crone in a floral apron limped painfully across the 
carpet. 
 
'Put it down there, Mrs Meynard, that's lovely: and chocolate digestive too. My 
goodness, we don't deserve it.' Hallam moved a large jug of cut flowers to make room for 
the coffee tray. 
 
The aged crone smiled a big smile and locked an errant forelock into a curler in 
embarrassment. 
 
'How's your back today, Mrs Meynard?' Hallam asked. 

 
'I think it will rain, sir,' she said. 

 
'Never wrong, our Mrs Meynard,' Hallam said to me proudly. 

 
'Really?' I said. 'She should be on the Air Ministry roof.' Mrs Meynard grinned, 
picked up three cups and saucers from the window sill and said to Hallam, 'You owe me 
two weeks' coffee money, Mr Hallam sir.' 
 
'Two weeks?' asked Hallam. 'Are you sure?' 

 
'Yes sir,' said Mrs Meynard very shortly. 

 
Hallam produced a small leather purse, undid the flap with great care and shook 
coins into his hand like they were segments of the Dead Sea Scrolls. 
 
'Two? said Hallam, hoping for a final reprieve. 

 
'Sir,' said Mrs Meynard, nodding firmly. 

 
He sorted through the money like he didn't want the light to get at it, gave Mrs 
Meynard two half-crowns and said 'Keep the change', rather grandly. 
 
'There'll be another shilling,' said Mrs M. 'You're forgetting the three lots of 
biscuits.' Hallam gave her the money and she left, but Hallam was gazing at the door for a 
long time. He felt quite certain that he had paid her last week. 
 
'For Christ's sake, Hallam,' I said. 'Let's get down to it. Why do we want to mess 
about bringing an insecticide expert here?' 
 
'Please keep still,' Hallam said. 'Isn't that chair comfortable?' He poured out the 
coffee from a fine Dresden china pot and passed me a cup that didn't sell for one and six 
in Portobello Road. 
 
'It isn't so comfortable that I want to sit here all week trying to get you to answer 
two or three simple questions.' 
 
'Biscuits?' he said. 

 
'No thanks,' I said shortly. 

 
Hallam wrinkled his nose. 'Go on,' he said. 'They're chocolate.' As Hallam 
stretched his sleeve, I noticed the large gold Jaeger-le-Coultre wristwatch. 
 
'New watch?' I said. 

 
Hallam stroked the sleeve over his watch. 'I saved up for it,' he said. 'It is nice, 
isn't it?' 
 
'You are a man, Hallam,' I said - I watched his face, as I paused -'of the most 
impeccable taste.' His eyes shone with delight as he busily arranged papers on his desk. 
 
He said, 'I don't know if I'm allowed to tell you all this - it's very secret.' It was 
Hallam having a little joke. I gave him a nod and a smile. 
 
'You know that this Semitsa chap is an enzyme specialist. Is that too strong for 
you?' 
 
'No,' I said. 'Go on talking.' 

 
Hallam clasped his thin hands behind his head and swung gently from side to side 
in his swivel chair. As the light from the window moved across his features, I could see 
the handsome ground plan of his bombed-out face. Now the powdery skin, sun-lamped to 
a pale nicotine colour, was supported only by his cheek-bones, like a tent when the guy 
ropes are slackened. 
 
'Do you know what D. D. T. is?' Hallam asked. 

 
'Tell me.' 

 
'It's one of a group we call chlorinated hydrocarbons. These tend to persist in the 
soil. They all persist in body fats too. You probably have one-twentieth of a gram of D. 
D. T. in your body fat right now.' 
 
'Is that bad?' 

 
'It may well be,' said Hallam, 'but many Americans have five times as much as 
that. Frankly, some of our people here are a little alarmed. Anyway, the other group that 
Semitsa has done so much on is called the organo-phosphorus group. They don't persist - 
they break down very quickly.' 
 
'That's nice,' I said. 

 
'Yes,' said Hallam. He sipped a little coffee and then settled the cup into the 
saucer like he was landing a damaged helicopter. 
 
'Where does Semitsa's knowledge of enzymes come in?' I asked. 

 
'Good question,' said Hallam. 'That's the important part. You see, two of this last 
group - Parathion and Malathion - work by depressing the production of an enzyme 
named cholinesterase. This kills the insect. The great advantage Parathion and Malathion 
have over D. D. T. is that at present insects haven't been able to develop resistance to 
them the way they have to D. D. T.' He drank a little coffee. 
 
'And that's important?' 

 
'Very important,' said Hallam. 'Semitsa's research doesn't sound very dramatic, 
but agriculture is the keystone of our island heritage.' He smiled a big supercilious 
porcelain smile. 'Emerald isle and all that.' He popped a piece of sugar into his mouth. 
 
 
'And that's what you sent for me for?' I said. 

 
'Not in even the slightest way, my dear boy. You brought up that little subject, 
didn't you now?' He crunched the sugar into oblivion. 
 
I nodded. Hallam said, 'It's a political matter we want to talk about.' He put an 
elastic band around the Semitsa file and tripped carefully through the filing cabinet with 
his finger-tips until sliding it down into its rightful position. 
 
'Colonel Stok. That's what I want to talk to you about...' He sniffed loudly and 
tapped his long cigarette holder on the inkstand. 
 
'Can you let me have another one of those French cigarettes. They are rather... ' 
He searched for a word. '... exotic.' 
 
'Don't develop a taste for them,' I said. 'When this pack's gone, you'll be buying 
your own.' Hallam smiled and lit up. 
 
'Stok,' I said. 

 
'Ah yes,' said Hallam. 'We are rather interested in Stok.' 

 
'Grannie' Dawlish, I thought. That was pretty good, coming from Hallam. 

 
Hallam looked up and raised a bony finger. ' "War is a continuation of politics..." 
You know what Clause-witz tells us.' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 'I'll have to have a word with Clause-witz. He keeps on saying that 
same thing over and over.' 
 
'Now now,' said Hallam. He waggled the bony finger. 

 
He picked up a slip of paper from his desk, read it through quickly, then said, 'We 
need to know to what extent Chekists [See Appendix 4: Soviet Security System.] like 
Stok are happy with the idea of the Party being in complete control of the land. Also 
whether in five years' time the Army expect to have regained an elite position. As you 

know there is this constant change of balance in their influence.' Hallam moved his flat 
palms up and down like scale pans. 
 
'A love-hate relationship,' I said. 

 
'Beautifully put,' said Hallam. 'Well, our political forecast people are rather keen 
on this sort of information. They say that when the Army people are feeling confident we 
can expect the cold war to blow hot. When the Party are firmly in the saddle, we get 
lessening of tension.' Hallam made a little movement of the fingers. as though brushing a 
fly away from his head. 'They like all that sort of thing downstairs.' He obviously thought 
them eccentric. 
 
'So you don't believe that Stok will defect,' I said. 

 
Hallam raised his chin and looked down his long nose at me. 'You've rumbled that 
already, surely. You aren't a complete fool.' He rubbed a finger along his nose. 'So why 
take me for one?' He rearranged the dossiers. 'Stok's an interesting case, you know; a real 
Old Guard Bolshie. He was with Antonov-Ovseyenko in the storming of the Winter 
Palace in '17; you understand what that means in Russia.' 
 
'It means you are an expendable hero,' I said. 

 
'I say, that's rather good,' said Hallam. He took out a gold propelling pencil. 'In an 
absolute nutshell. I'll write that down. "Expendable hero", that's what Stok is all right.' He 
popped another piece of sugar into his mouth and began to write. 
 
A knight can be used to simultaneously threaten two widely spaced units. (This is 
called a lfork\) If one of these threats is against a king the other piece must inevitably be 
lost. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 17 
 
 
Saturday, October 12th 
 
THE grey stones of the Cenotaph shone in the hard wintry sunlight as I surrendered my 
Home Office pass and stepped into Whitehall. In Horse Guards Avenue and right along 
to the Thames Embankment, hollow tourist buses were parked and double-parked. 
 
The red-cloaked Horse Guards sat motionless clutching their sabres and thinking 
of metal polish and sex. In Trafalgar Square pigeons were enmeshed in the poisonous 
diesel gauze. 
 
A cab responded to my wave by carving abruptly through the traffic. 

 
I said: 'Henekey's, Portobello Road.' 

 
'Portobello Road,' said the cab-driver, 'where the beatniks go?' 

 
'Sounds like it,' I said. The driver jammed the flag down and pulled abruptly back 
into the traffic. A man in a Mini shouted, 'You stupid bastard!' at my driver and I nodded 
agreement. 
 
Henekey's is a great barn of a place, bare enough not to be spoiled by the odd 
half-glass of best bitter being spilled across the floor; cashmere, suede, straw, leather and 
imitation leather jostle, jabber and posture with careful narcissism. I bought a double 
Teacher's and edged through the crowd. 

 
A girl with Edwardian hair and science-fiction breasts produced a Copenhagen 
teapot from a huge straw basket. '... I said you're a bloody old robber...' she was saying to 
a man with a long beard and a waisted denim jacket, "who said, 'Academic training is the 
final refuge of the untalented.' The girl put the teapot away, fluttered her big sooty eyes 
and said, 'I wish you'd told the silly old------that.' She retied the belt of her leather coat 
and took a packet of Woodbines from the man's jacket pocket. 
 
'I'll throttle him,' she said. 'He is the biggest... ' she described the man in 
Chatterleyan terms while the un-academic man held a pint glass of stout to his lips and 
studied his reflection with loving skill. 
 
I sipped my drink and watched the door. There was still no sign of Sam. Behind 
me the man with the denim and beard was saying '... I'll tell you who I feel like when I 
smoke it. I feel like Hercules, Jason, Odysseus, Galahad, Cyrano, D'Artagnan and Tarzan 
with a football-pool cheque in my pocket.' The sooty-eyed girl laughed and tapped her 
straw bag to be sure the teapot was still there. The bearded man looked at me and said, 
'You waiting for Samantha Steel?' 
 
'Could be,' I said. 

 
'Yeah,' he said, studying my clothes and face carefully. 'He said you'd look a bit 
square.' 
 
'I'm as square as a cube root,' I said. The sooty girl had a high-pitched giggle. 

 
'Here's an oblong for you,' said the bearded man. He gave me an envelope. Inside 
was a sheet of paper with 'Dear Mr Kadaver, All the papers must be at our Berlin office 
by Monday a. m. or we can't guarantee delivery.' There was a signature that I couldn't 
decipher. 
 
'What did he look like, the man who gave you this?' I asked. 

 
'Like Martin Bormann,' said the bearded man. He laughed briefly and plucked the 
paper from my hand. 'I said I'd destroy this for him because we don't want it getting in the 
wrong hands.' 
 
'What is it?' said the sooty girl. 

 
'------off,' said the bearded man. 'This is business.' 

 
He folded the sheet of paper and tucked it into his denim pocket. 'Here's your tart 
now,' he said affably to me. Samantha was twisting her head trying to see me across the 
room. 
 
Samantha said 'Hello David' to the bearded man and 'Hello Hettie' to the sooty girl 
who was studying Sam's leather boots too carefully even to notice. Then she said 'Hello' 
to about a dozen other poets, painters, writers, art directors (with organisations known 
only by their initials), and occasionally a model or a photographer. No one was 
introduced as a secret agent; not even David. 
 
Mate: a word from Old French meaning to overpower or overcome. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 18 
 
 
Saturday, October 12th 
 

SAM drove me back to her place in a white Sunbeam Alpine. The flat was tidied and the 
small rug upon which the wine had spilled had been taken away for cleaning. She 
clattered around in the kitchen and I could hear the whirr of an electric can-opener. I 
wandered into Samantha's bedroom. The dressing-table was crowded with pint-size 
bottles of Lanvin, Millot and Givenchy, torn pieces of cotton wool, gold hair-brushes, 
cleansing cream, half a cup of cold coffee, witch hazel, skin food, hand lotion, roll-on 
deodorant, scissors, tweezers, six different nail polishes, seven bright bottles of eye 
make-up from green to mauve, a capsule containing silver paint and a large bowl full of 
beads and bracelets. In a silver frame there was a photo of a blond man in very small 
knitted swimming-trunks. I picked up the frame. The photo was a little too small and slid 
down to reveal the top of another man's head. The photo underneath was a studio portrait, 
well lit and carefully printed; it leaned into the frame at a forty-five-degree angle, like 
film stars like to lean. In bold loopy writing it said: 'To Samantha with immortal love. 
Johnnie Vulkan.' 
 
Long, slim hands gripped my chest from behind and I felt the soft, fragrant shapes 
of Sam press herself tightly against me. 
 
'What are you doing in my bedroom?' she said. 

 
'Looking at photos of your lovers,' I said. 

 
'Poor Johnnie Vulkan,' she said. 'He's still madly in love with me. Does it make 
you insanely jealous?' 
 
'Insanely,' I said. 

 
We stood there very close, watching our reflection in the dressing-table mirror. 

 
On the bed there was a selection of toys. There was a huge moth-eaten teddy bear, 
a black velvet cat with a damaged ear and a small cross-eyed alligator. 
 
'Aren't you getting a little too old for cuddly toys?' I asked. 

 
'No,' she said. 

 
I said, 'Who needs cuddly toys?' 

 
'Don't do that,' she said, then, 'Men use women as cuddly toys, women use babies 
as cuddly toys and babies use cuddly toys as cuddly toys.' 
 
'Really?'I said. 

 
'Now now,' said Sam and ran a finger-nail up my spine muscle. Her voice became 
a whisper. 'There are four stages of a love affair. First there is the stage of being in love 
and liking it.' Her voice was muffled by my shoulder. 'That's this stage.' 
 
'How long's it likely to last?' 

 
'Not long enough,' said Sam. 'The other stages soon follow.' 

 
'What stages?' I said. 

 
'There's being in love and not liking it,' said Sam. 'That's the second one. Then 
there is not being in love and not liking that. And finally there is not being in love and 
liking that - you are over it then - cured.' 
 
'Sounds great,' I said. 

 
'You have to be make-believe tough,' Samantha said. 'I'm serious and it makes me 
sort of sad. If people in love synchronised their movements through those stages... ' She 
snuggled deeper into my shoulder. 'We'll stay at the first stage for ever. No matter what 
calls us away, we'll stay up here on the moon. O.K.?' 
 
'O.K.' 

 
'No. I'm serious.' 

 
'Looks like we're first here on the moon,' I said. 

 
Sam said, 'Just think of all those poor dopes down on earth who can't see that 
great sun.' 
 
'It's really frying us,' I said. 

 
'Stay still,' said Sam. 'Don't do that. I have a can of corn on the stove; it will burn.' 

 
'Corn,' I said, 'is expendable.' 

 
One can escape from check by removing hostile pieces or interposing oneself. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 19 
 
 
Berlin, Saturday, October 12th 
 
I GAVE the doorman at the Fruhling my bags and stepped out in search of supper. It was 
late, the animals in the zoo had settled down but next door in the Hilton they were just 
becoming fully awake. Near by the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church clanged gently and 
around it came a white V. W. bus, its hoo-haw siren moaning and its blue light flashing a 
priority. Cars halted as the bus bearing the words 'Military Police U. S. Army' roared 
past, its fan whining. 
 
Maison de France is on the corner of Uhlandstrasse not far away. I was hungry. It 
was a good night for walking but the pressure was rising and rain was in the air. The neon 
signs gloated brightly across the beleaguered city. On the Ku-damm the pavement cafes 
had closed their glass sides tight and turned on the infra-red heating. In the glass cases 
diners moved like carnivorous insects. Here the well-dressed Insulaner [Insulaner: 
islanders - Berliners' name for themselves] ate, argued, bartered and sat over one coffee 
for hours until the waiters made their annoyance too evident. Outside, the glittering 
kiosks sold magazines and hot meat snacks to the strollers, while double-decker cream 
buses clattered up and down, and nippy V. W. s roared and whined around the corners 
past the open-topped Mercedes that drove lazily past, their drivers hailing and shouting to 
people they recognised and to quite a few that they didn't. 
 
Knots of pedestrians paraded at the traffic crossings and at the given signal 
marched obediently forward. Young men in dark woollen shirts parked and played jazz 
on their car radios and waited patiently while their white-haired girl friends adjusted their 
make-up and decided which club they would like to go to next. 
 
Two men were eating Shashlik at a corner kiosk and listening to a football match 
over a transistor radio. I crossed half of the wide street; down the centre of it, brightly 
coloured cars were parked in a vast row that reached as far as the Grunewald. High above 
I could see the lights of the Maison de France restaurant. 
 
I heard footsteps behind. It was one of the men from the kiosk. I was between two 
parked cars. I turned and let the weight of my back fall upon the nearest car, flattening 
the palms of my hands against the cold metal. He was a bald-headed man in a short 
overcoat. He was so close behind me that he almost collided with me when I stopped. I 
leaned well back and kicked at him as hard as I could. He screamed. I smelled the rich 
meaty Shashlik as he stumbled forward out of balance. I groped towards the scream and 

felt the wooden Shashlik skewer drive into the side of my left hand. The man's bald head 
smashed against the window of the other car. The safely glass shattered into milky 
opacity and I read the words 'Protected by Pinkertons -Chicago Motor Club' on a bright 
paper transfer. 
 
He held his head in his hand and began lowering it to the ground like a slow-
motion film of a touchdown. He whimpered softly. 
 
From the kiosk the second man came running, shouting a torrent of German in the 
ever-comical accent of Saxony. As he began to cross the roadway towards me there was 
another 'hoo-haw' of police sirens and a V.W. saloon with blue flasher and spotlight full 
on came roaring down the wide street. The Saxon stepped back on to the pavement, but 
when the police car had flashed past he ran towards me. I drew out the 9-mm. FN 
automatic pistol [The Browning FN automatic has now replaced the -38 revolver as 
standard Issue.] that the War Office Armoury had made such a fuss about and used my 
left hand to slam the slide back and put a cartridge into the breech. An edge of pain 
travelled along my palm and I felt the sticky wetness of blood. I was crouched very low 
by the time the Saxon got to the rear of the car. Just inches to the left of my elbow, the 
whimpering man said, 'But we have a message for you.' He rocked gently with the pain 
and blood ran down the bald head like earphones. 
 
'Bist du verruckt, Englander?' 

 
I wasn't mad I told him, as long as he kept his distance. The Saxon called again 
from the rear of the Buick. They had a message for me 'from the Colonel'. In that town I 
knew several colonels but it was easy to guess who they meant. 
 
The man sitting on the ground whimpered and, as a car's headlights rolled past, I 
saw his face was very white. The blood moved down the side of his head. It glued his 
fingers together and moved slowly to form new patterns like a kaleidoscope. Little 
puddles of it formed in the wrinkles of his shiny ears and splashed on his knitted tie like 
tomato soup. 
 
I took the written address from the Saxon with apologies. These were no B-
picture heavies, just two elderly messengers. I left them there in the middle of the Ku-
damm, the Saxon and his half-conscious friend. They would never find a taxi on a 
Saturday night, especially now that rain had begun. 
 
Enemy territory is that area of the board within one-move range of opposing 
forces. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 20 
 
 
Saturday, October 12th 
 
I WASHED the gash that the wooden skewer had made in my hand and bound it with 
Elastoplast but it began to bleed again before I reached the check post at Friedrichstrasse. 
Inside there was a good-natured argument going on. A red-faced man waving an Irish 
passport said,'... neutral and we have always stayed neutral.' 

 
The Grepo said, 'Not only does your Government not recognise the Deutsche 
Demokratische Republik but the U.S.S.R. has been waiting forty-five years for your 
Government to recognise them.' 
 
' They returned my passport after only a perfunctory glance. I could have taken an 
M-6o tank through, let alone my 9-mm. FN pistol. 
 
As I stepped out into the rain I heard the Irishman " say, 'Marry in haste, repent at 
leisure - that's what we always say.' 
 
Karlshorst is the Russian part of East Berlin; the Kommandatura is here and most 
of the Russians reside here. The address the Saxon had given me was a narrow street to 
the south of the district. The rain beat down in earnest and there were no pedestrians 
anywhere. The lightning lit up the whole sky in flashes and it was by the light of one of 
them that I saw the street name. It was a cobbled alley, on each side of which were tiny 
narrow-fronted shops. The wooden shutters were shiny in the rain and number twelve 
was even more deserted-looking than the others. 
 
I put my pistol in my jacket and pulled the Elastoplast tighter. The blood was 
seeping under the adhesive part and making smudge marks on my cuff. I knocked at the 
door. Everywhere the windows were dark and the only light came from the gas lamps in 
the street. As I knocked again the door creaked slowly open. I pulled a flashlight from my 
pocket and shone it around the cracked plaster walls. I found the switch but it gave no 
light. 
 
To my left a well-oiled door opened on to a large room. In the centre of the room 
the two huge gleaming discs of a bandsaw reflected back the light of my torch. In the 
corner was a tall chain mortiser. Around the base of each machine the floor was 
reinforced with concrete, and rusty bolts held the carefully oiled machines in true. Across 
one wall, planks were stacked and the aroma of cut wood clung to the water vapour on 
the damp night air. There was no one there. I opened a cupboard and pointed the gun at a 
broom and a tin of polish. Ahead of me the main corridor ended in a narrow twisting 
staircase. I held the torch well to one side of my movements and eased the first pressure 
on the automatic. The torch was slimy with blood and a droplet flicked in the lamp beam 
before soaking softly into the sawdust. The stairs creaked. I tested each step with part of 
my weight as I moved down. The wooden steps were thick with sawdust and the cellar 
floor crackled under foot with a deep autumnal carpet of shavings. 
 
I moved the light slowly across the wall. I could smell the sweet, sappy scent of 
freshly cut wood. In Prussian orderliness the framesaws, London hammers, try squares, 
pad saws, chisels, rasps and shining bottles of stains and polishes were arranged 
geometrically in their rightful place above the veneering press. Five long joiners' benches 
were arranged in the centre of the cellar. Upon them were rusty pots of fish-glue and thin 
slivers of veneer. 
 
The end of the cellar was kept clear. There was a tiny gas ring with an enormous 
kettle used for bending the veneer. Six cracked cups were draining upside down on a tea-
cloth; on one of them it said 'A present from Dresden'. 
 
A handful of countersunk screws and a heavy screwdriver on the heavy table at 
the end marked where the metal fittings joined the woodwork. Directly overhead was a 
trapdoor and a hoist, as they were altogether too big for the staircase; there were six of 
them leaning against the wall, shining and polished lovingly and ready for use. 

 
These coffins were very elaborate. Their lids were as deep as the base and around 
them was the embossed scrollwork of leaves and flowers that culminated in six " vast 
metal handles. I tapped each of the great cases; one two three four five six. The last one 
wasn't hollow, and before the sound of my rapping had ceased to echo around the walls 
the lid fell away from it and hit the floor with an echoing crash. I flashed the torch into 
the silken cavity and levelled my gun. The torch beam fell upon the shape of a uniformed 
man crammed tightly into the straight-sided casket. Before I had studied the face the 
medals and gold wire insignia told me that it was Stok. 
 
He giggled. 'I frightened you, English, admit it, I frightened you.' 

 
'You frightened me so much that I nearly gave you six extra navels,' I said. I put 
the pistol into my pocket and helped extricate the broad shoulders of Stok from the 
coffin. 
 
'You'd better come to England to die,' I said. 'Our coffins widen out at the 
shoulders.' 
 
'Yes?' Stok dusted the sawdust from his summer uniform and found his peaked 
cap under the nearest joiners' bench. He switched four neon lights into action. 
 
'What's the joke, Stok?' I said. 

 
Stok slapped the coffin with the flat of his hand. 'It's for Semitsa,' he said. 'Look.' 
He pointed to the inside of the coffin. Holes had been bored through the intricate 
embossed patterns of the lid. 
 
Stok slapped the coffin again. 'One of the few real quality places left this is; 
quality.' He rapped the side. 'Elm wood,' he said, 'soundly constructed of twenty-
millimetre seasoned timber. Waterproofed, waxed and upholstered with satin-covered 
calico. Side sheets, robe and shroud. Robust electro-brassed handles, inscribed or written 
name-plate, brass closing-screws, lid ornaments, end-rings, silk cords and tassels.' 
 
'Yes,' I said. Stok walloped me on the back playfully and laughed. 

 
'Two hundred marks,' he said, 'but don't worry. It will come out of my forty 
thousand pounds.' Stok smiled again. His face was carved of pink sandstone, his features 
worn smooth by a millennium of pilgrims' hands. He opened a blouse pocket and 
produced a buff-coloured form. 
 
'This is a form by means of which relatives claim the body of a deceased person. 
Sign here.' Stok jabbed the form with a finger like a Lyons sausage - slightly overdone. 
 
I brought out my fountain pen but hesitated to use it. 

 
'Give your hotel as your address and sign it "Dorf". Why are you so cautious, you 
English? You will only be Dorf for a few more days.' 
 
'It's those days I'm worrying about,' I said. Stok laughed and I signed the paper for 
him. 
 
'You've cut your hand, English,' Stok said. 

 
'Opening oysters,' I said. 

 
'So,' said Stok. 

 
'It's a real decadent life we live over there,' I told him. Stok nodded. 

 
He said, 'We will pass Semitsa, in this, through Checkpoint Charlie in three 
weeks' time; 5 p.m., Monday, November the fourth. Now what about the arrangements 
for the money?' Stok produced a packet of Dukat cigarettes. I took one and lit up. 

 
'When your Government has positively agreed the payment of the money you will 
signal so by having Victor Sylvester play "There's a small Hotel" on his Overseas Service 
programme of the B. B. C. If the deal's not on, he doesn't play it. O.K.?' 
 
'You're too damned wholesale, Stok,' I said. 'It would do you good to face some of 
my difficulties for a week. I'm not sure that I can do that.' 
 
'Not sure if you can make this man Sylvester play "There's a small Hotel"?' said 
Stok incredulously. 
 
'Not sure if I can stop him,' I said. 

 
'Your capitalism,' said Stok. He nodded sagely. 'How can it ever work?' He 
removed a woodshaving from his sleeve. 'There is a village in Africa where the tribesmen 
stand in the deep crocodile-infested water, fishing. They send the fish they catch for 
barter to the next village where the main industry is manufacturing wooden legs.' 
 
Stok laughed loudly until I had to join in. 

 
'That's capitalism,' said Stok. He tapped my arm. 

 
'I heard a very good joke the other day.' He was speaking very softly now as 
though there was a chance of us being overheard. 'Ulbricht is going about incognito 
testing his own popularity by asking people if they like Ulbricht. One man he asks says, 
"Come with me." He takes Ulbricht on a train and a bus until they are deep in the Saxon 
hills near the Czechoslovak border. They walk in the country until they are many 
kilometres from the nearest house and then they finally stop. This man looks all around 
and whispers to Ulbricht, "I personally," the man says, "don't mind him at all." ' Stok 
roared with laughter again. 'I don't mind him at all,' said Stok again, pointing at his own 
chest and laughing hysterically. 
 
'Look, Stok,' I said. 

 
'Alexeyevitch,' said Stok. 

 
'Look, Alexeyevitch,' I said. 'I don't have to come over here to find out the truth 
about capitalism.' 
 
'Do you not?' said Stok. 'Perhaps you'll find you do.' 

 
'Why, what's the next revelation?' I said. 'More pranks in coffins?' I finished the 
cigarette in silence. 
 
Stok's eyes went suddenly narrow. He prodded my chest viciously. 

 
'We know how mature you are, and how sophisticated you are. Otherwise you 
wouldn't choose to work with bandits like Vulkan and criminals like Gehlen. You make 
me sick, English.' 
 
I took out my cigarettes. Hallam hadn't left me with many but I offered Stok one. 
The yellow match flame reflected in his eyes as he lit them. He began to speak quietly 
again. 
 
'They are making a fool of you, English,' Stok said. 'They all have their roles to 
play except you. You are expendable.' 
 
'There goes that word again,' I said. 'Someone was saying the same thing about 
you only the other day.' 
 
'I am expendable, English, but not until the game is over. You are expendable the 
moment Gehlen gets the documents for Semitsa.' He looked at me closely. 'What do you 
think the Gehlen organisation is, English? You think it's something to do fetch-and-carry 
jobs for your Government?' 
 
'They will do most things; for money,' I said. 

 
'For real money, yes,' said Stok. He eased his bottom on to the bench and became 
very confidential. 'You know how much twenty-one billion dollars is, English? It's what 
the U. S. Government spent on armaments in one year. Do you know who gets it, 
English? The General Dynamics Corporation got one and a quarter billion; and just four 
other corporations got about a billion each. That's real money, isn't it?' 
 
I said nothing. 

 
Stok said, 'Over eighty per cent of the twenty-one billion dollars is spent without 
the big businesses doing any competitive bidding. Are you following me?' 
 
'I'm way ahead,' I said. 'But what's it to do with you?' 

 
'Tension here in Berlin is a lot to do with me - it's my job. Your military men are 
pushing that tension as hard as they can go. I'm trying to reduce the tension in every way 
I can.' 
 
'You don't reduce it,' I said. 'You play a tune on it like a gipsy minstrel.' 

 
Stok sighed histrionically. 

 
'Look, my friend. Next year, lots of your military friends will be retiring into big 
capitalist businesses that make armaments. Most of them have signed the contracts 
already...' 
 
'Wait a minute,' I said. 

 
'I won't wait a minute,' said Stok. 'We know what's happening. We spend a lot of 
trouble and money finding out. The type of job your generals retire into depends upon 
how many big orders for armaments they place. A state of tension makes it easy to order 
guns. Gehlen provides the tension - it increases the demand - just like an advertising 
agency. That's the kind of people who are twisting you around their fingers.' 
 
'Vulkan said...' 

 
'Don't tell me anything Vulkan said.' Stok spat the words out like bloody teeth. 
'He's a filthy little Fascist.' 
 
Stok moved near to me and began to speak quietly as though he was sorry he had 
got excited. 
 
'I know Vulkan is a brilliant man and I know he's clever at political debate but 
believe me, English, he is at heart a Fascist.' 
 
I began to see what a clever con-man Johnnie Vulkan was. It was no part of my 
job to tell Stok that Vulkan had a brain like a whale's throat - huge but straining out only 
shrimp-size thoughts. I said, 'Then why do you deal with him?' 
 
'Because he's helping me make a fool of the Gehlen organisation.' 

 
'And of me?' 

 
'Yes and of you, English. Try and find your friend Vulkan this night. Ask your 
friends at the U. S. State Department. Ask your friends at Gehlen's office. Ask everyone 
you know, English, and when you come to a dead end come to the Friedrichstrasse 
Kontrollpunkt or anywhere on the East Berlin phone system and phone me in my office. 
I'll tell you where he is and I'll be the only one to tell you the truth.' 
 
'We have a deodorant ad. that uses the same pitch,' I said. 

 
Try it then,' said Stok. 

 
'I might,' I said. I walked across the room without looking back and went upstairs 
to my car. I saw Stok's big shiny Volga parked a little way farther down the street and 
beyond it two T-54 tanks and an infantry carrier. On my way to Friedrichstrasse I passed 

a banner that read 'Learning from the Soviet Union means learning to triumph.' I was 
beginning to see what they meant. 
 
I phoned everyone I knew that night to check on Vulkan. I phoned everyone from 
the Berlin Documents Centre to Onkel Toms Hutte U-bahn Station. Everywhere the reply 
was the same, Vulkan wasn't there, they didn't know where he was and no one knew 
when he was expected. Some of the sources really didn't know, who can say which. 
 
I looked through the glass panel of the telephone booth at the grey hardboard and 
potted plants of the East German control hut. 
 
'It's the African fisherman speaking,' I said into the phone. 

 
'Who are you calling?' said the girl, to whom strange names came as no surprise. 

 
'It's either an artificial-limb manufacturer or a crocodile,' I said. 'I can't remember 
which.' 
 
I heard the girl repeat that, then I heard Stok's booming laugh as he came to the 
phone. 
 
'Hendaye-plage,' said Stok, 'near the Spanish border.' 

 
'Stay tuned to Victor Sylvester,' I said and rang off. The Grepo who had given me 
the East German coin for the phone waved me good night as I turned around and 
travelled the ten yards back into the Western Sector where the signs were more likely to 
say 'komm gut heim'. 
 
The king may well be moved to a well-protected spot away from danger. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 21 
 
Hendaye-plage, France. Monday, October 14th THE road along the plage was marbled 
with drifting sand. The sun was bright but lifeless as it lowered itself wearily behind the 
mauve hills. For miles the lonely beach wandered with just one dog for company until the 
cold wind became too much even for playful dogs. The casinos and hotels were shuttered 
and stained with the dribbling rust of early winter rain. 
 
From one glass-encased restaurant on the Boulevard de la Mer came the doleful 
clack of a typewriter. I passed the padlocked kiosk where the torn sign said 'laces' and 
went through the glass door. A young girl in a pink smock looked up from the accounts. 
 
She brought me coffee and I stared out at the grey confluence of sky and sea, 
growing pink in the light of the setting sun. For another six months the sea would go on 
practising for summer, coming in each day to smooth out the sand like some fussy old 
chambermaid making the bed. 
 
'Do you have any guests?' I asked wearily. 

 
'Yes.' The girl's smile was gentle and faintly mocking. 'A Monsieur King and his 
wife.' 
 
Checkmate remains the ultimate aim of every player. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 22 
 

 
Monday, October 14th 
 
IN the long dining-room a dozen tables were carefully arranged, even though only three 
guests were expected to dine. Across the bar were Cinzano ashtrays and shiny equipment 
for making 'le cocktail': strainers, shakers, fruit-knife and swizzle-sticks. Behind the bar 
were rows of bottles, undisturbed since last summer. The tile floor reflected the cold 
evening air and from the ceiling I heard the chambermaid thumping pillows as my bed 
was made up for me. 
 
The girl in the pink smock had put away the typewriter and changed into a black 
dress. 'What would you like to drink?' she asked. I poured two Suzes into my face in 
rapid succession while we agreed how few people came there in the winter. From the 
kitchen I heard the crinkle of boiling fat and the swish of things being dropped into it. 
Yesterday they arrived, who knew how long they were staying; she joined me in a second 
Suze, the third one I took up to my room. When I came down for dinner the other guests 
had arrived back. 
 
Vulkan had a cashmere overcoat over his lightweight Savile Row suit - his tie was 
Dior and his shirt creamy silk. 
 
'Hello, Mr King,' I said. 'Introduce your friend.' 

 
'This is Samantha,' said Johnnie Vulkan. Samantha said 'Hello'. 

 
King's Gambit is an opening in which his own side's pawns are sacrificed. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 23 
 
 
Monday, October 14th 
 
DINNER was eaten quietly: codfish in the Basque style. Then Johnnie said, 'Do you have 
to follow me?' 
 
I said, 'I came on business - there's been some difficulty.' 

 
'Difficulty?' said Vulkan. His jaws ceased to chew the codfish. 

 
'Have you swallowed a bone?' I asked. 

 
'No,' said Vulkan. 'What difficulty?' 

 
'Nothing much,' I said. 'But Gehlen keeps asking for the documents...' 

 
'Why haven't you let them have them?' 

 
'London's spelled the name wrongly,' I said. 'They spelled it B. R. O. O. M. when 
it should be... ' 
 
'I know what it should be,' Vulkan said very loudly, then quietly added, 'The 
stupid, stupid, stupid, bastards.' 
 
'It matters then,' I said. 

 
'It certainly does.' 

 
'I had it correct when I sent it,' I said. 

 
'I know, I know,' said Vulkan in a preoccupied way. 'I might have guessed it 
would all go wrong.' " 

 
The waitress came from the kitchen; she saw Vulkan's plate with only half the 
fish eaten. 
 
'Didn't you like it?' she said. 'Shall I bring you something else?' 

 
'No,' said Vulkan. 

 
'There is entrecote or ris de veau.' 

 
'Ris de veau,' said Samantha. 

 
'Ris de veau,' I said. 

 
'Ris de veau,' said Vulkan, but his mind was far away. 

 
We sat in the bar for the coffee and brandy. Samantha had an English newspaper and she 
gave me a sheet of it. Finally Vulkan leaned across from his chair. 
 
'Can you wire London and tell them to do another set?' 

 
'Certainly, Johnnie, anything you say. You know that.' 

 
Vulkan slapped me on the knee. 

 
'That's what we'll do then.' He smiled a big smile. 'Trust London to mess it all up 
after we do all this work.' 
 
I shrugged. 'When you've worked directly for London as long as I have, you see 
their good points and their bad ones. You end up just being glad you aren't on piece-
work; and start striking heavily into the expenses.' I downed the last of my brandy. 
 
'You are right,' said Vulkan. He shouted for the waitress and ordered three treble 
brandies, just to show how well he understood the point I had made. 
 
'What about the cash for Stok?' Vulkan said. 'He'll want cash, you know.' 

 
'No kidding,' I said. 'I was going to try using my Diners' Club card on him.' 

 
Vulkan laughed lightly and rubbed his hands. 

 
'You see,' said Vulkan. 'This trip to Hendaye is to do with the Semitsa deal.' 

 
'I don't want to...' 

 
Vulkan waved his hand. 'I don't have to keep it secret. It's just that in the past I 
have found it best to compartmentalise my contracts. It's something I learned in the War.' 
 
The War,' I said. 'What did you do in the War, Johnnie?' I asked. 

 
'What everyone did, I suppose,' said Johnnie. 'I did as I was told.' 

 
I said, 'Some people were told to do some pretty fantastic things.' 

 
'I did plenty of things I'm not proud of,' said Johnnie. 'I was a guard in a 
concentration camp at one time.' 
 
'Really,' said Samantha. 'You never told me that.' 

 
'There's no point in denying it,' Johnnie said. 'A man has to live with the things he 
does. I suppose everyone has skeletons in the cupboard. I never did anything terrible. I 
never tortured anyone or killed anyone and I never saw any atrocities take place, but I 
was part of the system. Unless there had been men like me going on duty in the control 
towers and sitting up there in the freezing cold wind drinking bad coffee and stamping 
about trying to keep warm - unless there had been little men like me, there couldn't have 
been all the rest of it. I'm ashamed of the part I played but so, if he is honest, is the 
factory worker and the policeman and the railway guard, they were all bits of the system 
too. We should all have overthrown the system, shouldn't we?' 
 
Johnnie looked at me provocatively. I said nothing but Samantha said, 'Yes, you 
should. You shouldn't have had to wait while those generals messed around. The whole 

nation should have recoiled with shock at the things that were done to Jewish 
shopkeepers in the 'thirties.' 
 
'Yeah,' said Johnnie in a low growl. 'That's what I keep on hearing, how we 
should have overthrown Hitler. That's because all the stupid people who say so don't 
know what they are talking about. What do you mean "overthrow" - you mean that one 
morning I come on guard duty and shoot the sergeant?' 
 
Samantha was getting the brunt of Johnnie's wrath. 'Perhaps it would have been a 
start,' she said quietly. 
 
'Yeah,' said Johnnie. 'Great start. The sergeant had a wife and six kids. He was an 
old-time Social Democrat. He hated all Nazis and was crippled with frostbite that he had 
caught in Smolensk in 1942.' 
 
'Someone else then,' said Samantha. 

 
'Sure,' said Johnnie sarcastically. 'At random, eh?' and he laughed a laugh that told 
you that even if he went on talking all night you would never understand what it was like 
to be inside a concentration camp, especially as a guard. 
 
'I was glad I was in the camp,' said Johnnie viciously. 'Glad, do you hear? 
Because if I hadn't been with the concentration camp unit I would have been in the 
fighting line on the Eastern Front. It was a good job in the camp. A plum job. Everyone 
wanted that job. Do you think that the whole of Germany was queueing up to fight 
Bolshevism? That's what you Americans would like to believe, eh? Well they weren't - 
except for the crackpots in the S. S. Everyone with an ounce of intelligence was trying to 
get a job a long way from the fighting line even if he couldn't eat his lunch for the stink 
of the cremation ovens.' 
 
Samantha pressed the palms of her hands over her ears and Johnnie laughed 
another of his laughs. It was more eloquent than anything he could say. 
 
A skewer is an attack along a straight line. As the first piece avoids capture it 
exposes the second, real target to the full force of the attack. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 24 
 
Monday, October 14th - Tuesday, October 15th WE all went to bed at half past eleven: or 
I suppose it would be more correct to say that none of us went to bed at half past eleven, 
although we all said good night and went through the motions. I put on my sheepskin-
lined raincoat and stood out on the plage with the wind screaming around me like 
demented seagulls. 
 
'It just has to be,' I was thinking at 1.15 a.m. The yeasty smell of the ocean had 
moved closer on the evening tide. 
 
At 2 a.m. I was thinking the same thing but it was 2.30 a.m. before anything 
happened. Along the front came two bright headlamps. The fact that they were not yellow 
helped me guess that they were from across the border. It was a white Citroen DS 19. The 
tyres shot the final inch with a crunch as it halted on the sandy road. The chauffeur 
jumped out smartly and opened the rear door as Vulkan came down the steps. The light 
above the rear seat showed the other passenger to be a white-haired man of about fifty, 
but without binoculars it wasn't possible to discern more. Vulkan got in hurriedly and I 

saw him look back up at my bedroom window. The chauffeur closed the door quietly, got 
in, and they drove away. 
 
I went back to the hotel wondering who in Spain was chic enough to afford a 
Citroen with San Sebastian number plates and a chauffeur who would wear sunglasses at 
2.30 a.m. 
 
I closed the hotel door silently. I stepped into a small room at the foot of the stairs 
that held the toilet, a bucket, two mops, four packs of Omo, three raincoats, two 
umbrellas and a pay phone. I had two phone calls to make; the first call was to suggest 
the Gare St Jean as a meeting place; the second call was to spread the description of the 
San Sebastian number plates among people who would really care. There is no point in 
just wondering about the things that puzzle us. 
 
I finished the phone calls without switching on the electric light. 

 
From overhead I heard stiletto heels move quickly across the room. I left the 
phone off the hook to avoid making any sound and moved across the porch silently in my 
rubber shoes. 
 
I walked out along the moonlit sea front. The phosphorescent breakers crumbled 
into shimmering lace-work and the moon was an overturned can of white paint that had 
spilled its contents across the sea. As I looked back towards the hotel, the front door shot 
a long trapezium of yellow light across the sandy path. A girl's figure made a brief 
shadowgraph in the light, then hurried along the sea front. 
 
Samantha was fully dressed. Ear-rings to eyeshadow proclaimed that she had not 
been to bed. 
 
'Johnnie's gone,' she said. 

 
'Gone where?' I asked. 

 
She buttoned her neck deeper into the big coat. 'Just gone,' she said. 'He said he 
was going downstairs. Then I heard a car drive away.' 
 
We both stood looking at each other for a long time. 

 
'I'm cold,' she said, 'and I'm frightened.' 

 
I began to walk back towards the hotel. 

 
'Johnnie's car is still there,' said Samantha. She hurried to catch me up and walked 
alongside me. 'What he said last night - was that all true?' 
 
'All true,' I said. 

 
'But what, wise guy? I can hear the sneer.' 

 
'No sneer,' I said. 'People seldom report facts wrong. What they distort is their 
relationship to the facts. It's possible to describe the charge of the Light Brigade whether 
you were on the leading charger or at the other end of the valley brewing up tea.' 
 
'You're so sharp,' said Sam. 

 
'Now who's sneering?' 

 
'Look. Vulkan's a bright boy, whether you like him or not. He's written an 
analysis of Bartok's string quartets which will shatter the music world when it's 
published.' 
 
'Look,' I said. 'If you want to buy a subscription to Vulkan's fantasy-of-the-month 
club, go ahead, but I've been inoculated against moonshine.' I was walking quickly and 
Samantha had to make a hop, skip and jump every few steps to keep alongside. She 
grabbed my arm. 

 
'Is that the same moon that we were voted lunar candidates of?' she asked softly. 
'Didn't we get elected after all?' 
 
'We did,' I said, 'but I'm demanding a recount.' I pulled my arm free and opened 
the glass door. The dining-tables with their shiny plates and conical napkins were bright 
yellow in the dim light. Sam overtook me on the stairs and, fumbling in her handbag, 
produced the key by the time we reached her room. She swung the door open. On the bed 
was a grey leather travelling case and there was another at the side of the wardrobe. One 
was empty. I reached for the other. There was a small packet of Kleenex and a shoe-horn 
inside. There were clothes inside the wardrobe and I quickly examined them, prodding 
and twisting the shoulder padding and listening for the crackle of paper at the seams. 
 
On the dressing-table there were bottles of Cologne, nail varnish, mascara, face-
powder, shampoo, suede-cleaning brushes, packets of cotton wool, sun-glasses and 
cigarettes. I held the open case under them and swept them into it with my elbow. From 
the dressing-table drawers I shovelled up handfuls of Samantha's underwear, transparent 
packets of nylons, flat-heeled shoes with gold straps and a cardboard box containing two 
diamond rings, a silver bangle, a jewelled wrist-watch and some assorted cheap beads. I 
stretched out my hand towards her without looking up. 
 
'Handbag,' I said. 'Purse.' 

 
She still had it in her hand and now she opened it and studied the contents 
carefully. She removed two cigarettes, lit them and passed one lighted Camel and the 
shiny patent leather handbag to me. 
 
I riffed quickly through it. I removed a green American passport in the name of 
Samantha Steel and twenty-two very new crisp 100 N.F. notes. 
 
I put the notes and the passport into my pocket. 

 
'I thought that we had something special,' said Samantha. She looked shorter than 
five foot ten now. She was the All-American innocent, lost and betrayed in big bad 
Europe. 
 
'We still have it,' I said. 'But this is business - let's not mix it with pleasure.' 

 
'I've had all the business I need for a century,' said Samantha. 'When do I see the 
pleasure?' 
 
'I'll see what I can do,' I said. I grinned and got a faint movement at the corner of 
her mouth. 
 
'I'd like you to know...' 

 
'Save it, Sam,' I said. 'I'm giving you a twenty-four carat deal when all I have to 
do, as far as my office is concerned, is lift the phone.' 
 
She nodded and unzipped the side of her dress. She removed the dress unhurriedly 
like a Girl Guide at a medical. Her eyes were waterlogged. 'It's the smoke,' she said. 'I 
should never smoke when I'm tired. It wrecks my eye make-up.' She smiled and planted 
three inches of unsmoked Camel into the Cinzano ashtray. She walked across the room in 
her black underwear, oblivious of my eyes. She carefully selected a red-striped wool 
dress from the wardrobe. 'It does things for me, red,' she said. 
 
'That's right,' I said. 

 
She held the dress high above her head. 'I may as well look my best.' The dress 
dropped over her head like a candle-snuffer. Then suddenly she fought against the 
enveloping fabric in a sudden panic of constricted elbows until her hair shook itself 
nervously into the light again. 

 
'Stay here,' I said. 'I'm going to my room and I'll fix both the bills.' 

 
'You're a goddam cool ghoul,' she said in neither admiration nor bitterness. She 
stared at her reflection while mauling her face around. 
 
I had no baggage in my room. I waited downstairs to see if Samantha was taking 
the thing sensibly. 
 
I stepped out on to the porch and looked down the road. There was no sign of any 
movement except for the patter of sand that the sea wind was driving into the doorway. I 
finished my cigarette on the porch while the freezing night air was purging the last 
heaviness of the wine from my head. I stared towards the headland that stretched along 
the western horizon; only a few yards beyond it was Spain. The crippled, stunted trees 
along the plage pointed there. 
 
The cases went on to the back seat of the Mercedes 220 SE. I put the heater on 
and we both sat quietly listening to the noise of the fan. I started up and the car bumped 
down over the kerb. The plage was dark and, apart from the howl of the wind, silent. It 
wasn't until we turned on to the main road that I switched on the lights. The speedometer 
changed colour as I put the accelerator down and chased after the long horns of yellow 
light. 
 
'Looks like you got the booby prize,' said Samantha. 

 
'Looks like it,' I agreed. 

 
'You really wanted Johnnie, didn't you?' 

 
'If you say so,' I said. 

 
'You are determined to be discreet, aren't you?' 

 
'Perhaps,' I said. Then Sam snorted with bad temper and fished out her Camels. 

 
'Cigar lighter is the first one after the radio,' I said, 'but don't be mad if your eye 
make-up runs.' We drove in silence for a long time. Then Samantha said, 'You're cuter 
than Vulkan.' She leaned across and gave me a perfunctory kiss on the ear lobe. 
'Personally,' she went on, 'I think you are a doll. Vulkan on the other hand... ' She was 
speaking slowly and quietly as though working out her attitude as she told me, 'Vulkan is 
a thorough-going, dyed-in-the-wool, black-hearted, London-shrunk, copper-bottomed 
bastard.' She didn't raise her voice even slightly. 'But Vulkan is a genius. Vulkan has a 
mind like a diamond while you have a mind like glass.' 
 
'Commercial diamond versus hand-cut crystal glass,' I said. 'So I am typecast as 
the loser?' 
 
'It's a one-horse race,' said Samantha with finality. 

 
The greatest tribute you can pay to a secret agent is to take him for a moron. All 
he has to do is to make sure he doesn't act too exactly like one. That was my concern 
now. 
 
It's about two hundred kilometres along the N.10 to Bordeaux, but it's a good road 
and in the early hours only the odd market truck, decked with a multitude of lights, and 
the slower long-distance stuff from San Sebastian across the frontier shared the road with 
us. Samantha slept for at least half the journey, which took about three and a half hours; 
there was no need to burn up any road-speed records nor to get the man I was going to 
see out of bed. After Bayonne there is just good, sealed, wide road all the way through 
the great sullen Landes to Bordeaux. As far as the horizon the seedlings parade, the 
saplings posture, regiments of stumps march and counter-march. Oceans of standing 
timber await the executioner's axe and the occasional scoured black desert of destruction 

marks the passage of a terrible fire. Behind Sam's head the graticule of trees glowed with 
a fiery foliage, like a badly-printed colour photo with the red block out of register. 
 
Twig after twig shone red with the hoar frost of dawn until the sun's corona mixed 
gold with lead and by some inverse alchemy made clear blue morning., I doused the 
headlights in the outer periphery of Bordeaux's suburbs. We began to see lonely cyclists 
moving with the stiff precise arrogance that early risers acquire. The end walls of houses 
held gigantic faded advertisements for aperitifs, and a cat's-cradle of wires caged the 
cobbled streets. I drove to the Gare St Jean and parked in front of it. The town had its 
head under a blanket of cloud. 
 
I parked beyond the bus shelter. The cyclopean eye of the Gothic railway station 
showed 7 a.m. and outside the Hotel Faisan the cane chairs leaned drunkenly against the 
Formica tables. Workmen were darting into the Bar Brasserie and downing a glass of 
something warming on their way to work. The roar and clang of a slow-moving dust-cart 
could be heard from close by and an old woman in black was slopping pails of water 
across the pavement and scrubbing at it with a broom. 
 
'Wake up,' I said, and almost before she was awake Sam was opening a small 
compact and watching herself dab colours and lotions on her skin. 
 
Two black-clad police motor-cyclists who had been talking outside the Hotel 
Faisan pulled on their white gauntlets, eased their black leather belts, tugged down the 
hem of their jackets and in choreographic unison leaned lovingly across their machines, 
stabbed at the kick-starters and with a graceful jete and plie moved forward. Gathering 
speed they leaned into the curve of the road and sped away past the vibrating wooden 
doors and shutters, leaving a trail of exhaust smoke in the cold air. Samantha shivered. 
 
'Can we have coffee?' she said. I nodded. 

 
The tiny bar was crowded. A dozen men in bleu de travail were drinking, talking 
and breathing garlic fumes and Gauloise smoke into the limited air space. Two of the 
men made room for us and someone near the door made a joke about him making a pass 
at the foreign girl. I asked for two coffees with milk in English. You can never despise 
the conversation of men who work in shipping, if eavesdropping is your stock-in-trade. 
 
'It's not too late,' I said to Samantha. 'Even now.' 

 
'To work for you?' she said. I nodded. She said, 'On this date that he was slain 
Many a kind thought dies in Paine.' 
 
I said, 'Stone cold dead in the graveyard.' 

 
'I like the work I do already.' She was fencing around, not sure how much I knew. 
It was a woman's game and she began to enjoy it. 'I couldn't possibly give that up now,' 
she said. 
 
'No one will suggest you do,' I said archly. 

 
Samantha gave a snort of rage that made conversation there cease for thirty 
seconds. 'You are a cynical swine,' she said. 
 
I smiled and drank my coffee quietly. The sky was even darker. She smoked the 
usual half-inch of Camel before dropping it on to the floor and giving it the stiletto-heel 
treatment. 'You can scram now,' I said. I gave her her passport. 
 
'Give me my money, buddy boy.' 

 
'That's not part of the deal,' I said. 'You've got your baggage. Don't look a gift 
horse in the mouth, peach blossom. Take off.' 
 
'I don't understand,' Samantha said. 'You bring me all this way before saying it.' 

 
'D.S.T. [See Appendix 5.] offices are not open in the middle of the night, but...' I 
looked at my watch.'... my boyo will be in his office in seventeen minutes' time.' 
 
'You sadist.' 

 
'You've got me all wrong,' I said. 'You've committed no crime against France. 
They are only going to treat you as an undesirable alien, stamp "nul" on your passport 
and heave you on to the first ship or plane pointing towards the North American 
continent. I could have had you picked up in London. They would give you a, much 
tougher time.' 
 
Samantha described me in one pithy indelicate word. 

 
'Flattery will get you nowhere,' I said. But Sam just repeated the same word in a 
paucity of invention. 
 
'Phone some friends - reversing the charges,' I said. 'You must have someone in 
the vicinity who will give you a helping hand.' I leaned towards her and smiled gently. 
'But don't put your pretty little head into this operation any more because Helena 
Rubinstein doesn't make anything that will stick a head back on to shoulders.' 
 
Samantha walked behind me to the car. I reached her baggage out of the rear seat 
and put it on the ground. The engine was still warm and the Bosch fuel injector fired me 
across the station yard in violent acceleration. 
 
In the driving mirror I saw Samantha standing alone. Her big military-style 
greatcoat of olive mohair was buttoned high against the cold, and grey knitted socks 
came to just below the knee. 
 
As I steered towards the Cours de la Marne two middle-aged men in belted 
raincoats came out of the Hotel Faisan and walked towards Samantha. 
 
Corridor mate: when a king can only move along an expected route, he can be 
trapped by closing the corridor. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 25 
 
 
Tuesday, October 15th 
 
SHE was an elderly woman dressed in the black dress that was obligatory in a French 
Government office. She wheeled an aged art-nouveau trolley in front of her. On the 
trolley were two dozen cups and saucers, metal filters, some spoons, an earthenware pot 
with a lid, a gas bottle and a huge stainless steel drum inside which the clear blue gas-
flame could be glimpsed. As she carefully removed the lid from the earthenware jar, a 
strong smell of dark roasted coffee climbed out. She measured the expensive grains into 
the filters and placing one on each of our cups poured scalding water on to it. She placed 
two wrapped sugars alongside each cup and wheeled the tinkling clanking juggernaut 
through the door. 
 
'I don't know that she works for West German Intelligence but what else can you 
suggest?' I asked him. 
 
Grenade opened the lid of his filter and grimaced at the pain. 'Every day I burn 
my fingers.' He dropped a sugar cube into his coffee, looked up and said, 'I know your 

"plausible voice of the simple man" and I know that you are just using us for your own 
ends.' 
 
'So forget her,' I said. 'Forget I ever said anything about Vulkan, the girl or Louis 
Paul Broum.' 
 
Grenade wrote something on his notepad. 

 
'And, as you well know, I can't do that; no more than you could if we were sitting 
in jour office with the roles reversed. Tell me.' He lifted the lid again. 'It's ready now. 
Why did you take so much trouble with this girl and yet let the man go free?' 
 
Through the french windows the sky was almost black. I looked around at 
Grenade's office: the brown-stained wainscoting, the plaster walls discoloured in patches 
near the ceiling and the old-fashioned metal radiators under which a rash of cream-
coloured pimples proclaimed the haste of a clumsy painter. On the wall a pendulum 
paced the glass confines of its cage. 
 
'We still need the man,' I said. On Grenade's desk was a wrought-metal device 
like a toy merry-go-round; the 'riders' were shiny bulbous rubber stamps. Grenade spun 
the merry-go-round. He laughed a soft little laugh. 'Ask me,' he said. 'I can't bear the 
suspense.' 
 
'Well naturally,' I said, 'we would like you to let him move freely at least for the 
next week or so, but I'd like you to take a look at him, tell me what he's carrying, then let 
him go.' 
 
Grenade shook his head and smiled; the first drops of rain smacked the window. 
'It's not undeserved, you know, this reputation you Englishmen have gained.' 
 
'You can have the girl,' I said indignantly. 'She'll show you the whole network if 
you play her right. All I want...' 
 
Grenade waved a long bony hand at me. 'It's a bargain if you answer me one 
question.' He didn't wait to see if I agreed. 'But the truth now, don't try to deceive me or I 
shall be angry.' It had begun to rain steadily and a complex rivulet of water was moving 
under the french window. 
 
'You'll have the truth or silence,' I said. The radiator made a noise like a machine 
gun. Grenade stretched out a long thin elegant leg and, steadying his hands on the desk, 
gave it a powerful kick. The noise stopped. Still looking at the painted metal radiator, 
Grenade said, 'How did you know that we had Vulkan under surveillance?' 
 
'I knew that STASI [East German Intelligence Security Service. ] knew where the 
girl was. In fact, they deliberately leaked the information to us. It seemed probable that if 
they had had a consort watch [Consort watch: knowing where someone is (e. g. by 
bribing a concierge) but not necessarily watching them all the time.] on this girl you 
would be watching the watchers and the watched.' Grenade gave me a deep bow of mock 
dignity and mock gratitude. A fierce gust of wind made the glass of the french window 
move in its frame. 
 
'If they had told me that the girl was in Paris, I wouldn't have jumped to any such 
conclusion. But Hendaye; if you dropped an "h" in your paternoster they'd know out as 
far as the three-mile limit.' 
 
Grenade kicked the central heating again and said, 'Sounds all right.' 

 
I polished my spectacles and tried to look like the respectable type of Englishman. 
I wondered how much of it Grenade swallowed. It wasn't too far from the truth but then 
no lie worth the name ever was. I had got the tip from East Germany even though it was 

from Red Army Command Security and not from STASI. He had said that Hendaye was 
the place, although he had talked of the man, not the girl. What about the girl? Working 
for West German Security certainly made it hang together better as far as Grenade was 
concerned. As for the girl, she had to start looking out for herself one day. 
 
Grenade got up from his desk and walked across to a roll-front cabinet. Out of it 
he slid a drawer of a card file index. He took one card back to his desk. He read the card 
through and flipped it to scan the back. 'Right then,' he said. 'We'll do that for you.' Like a 
man promising delivery on a vacuum cleaner. 
 
I stood up abruptly and resting the flat of my palm upon his desk I leaned my face 
close to him. I noticed a small scar on his forehead and the way hair grew from only one 
nostril. 'You'll be thanking me for doing you a favour the next time you are in London,' I 
said softly. 
 
Grenade languidly spun the merry-go-round, selected a rubber stamp and printed 
the word 'Nul' on the back of my hand. 'Don't press your luck,' he said, then he offered his 
thin hand across the desk and shook my hand firmly. 'Take care,' he said, 'it's a nasty 
vicious city.' 
 
'I'll only be in Berlin a few more days,' I said. 

 
'I meant London,' he said dryly. He rang a small bell on his desk and a slight 
young man with a haircut en brosse and rimless spectacles opened the door. 
 
'Albert will take you down,' said Grenade. 'It will save all sorts of complications 
at the door. We have gone terribly secret since the last time you were here.' Grenade 
smiled again. 
 
I followed Albert down the staircase that curved around the inside of the huge 
stair-well. Halfway down I heard Grenade's voice. I looked up the great vertical tunnel 
into the glare of an overhead skylight. Grenade was leaning over the balcony. He looked 
minute in this great stone building, full of carefully penned archives and aged bureaucrats 
scratching quietly in a silence broken only by the clink of nib against inkwell. Grenade 
called again, almost whispering the words, 'As a liar, my friend, you are incorrigible.' The 
perspective of the great curves of balustrade repeated themselves as far as infinity, like 
the echoes of Grenade's whisper. I saw his head prise a way through one of the smallest 
rings and smile. 
 
'The word,' I said, 'is professional.' I started again down the staircase of this 
Caligarian cabinet. I knew that it would take ages to get that marking ink off my hand. I 
rubbed it self-consciously. 
 
The skilled player memorises and uses the classic sequences of the games of 
masters. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 26 
 
 
Tuesday, October 15th 
 
BORDEAUX occupies a special semantic importance in the minds of all Frenchmen (as 
Munich does to Britons). 

 
In 1871, in 1914 and in 1940 Bordeaux was the city to which the French 
Government fled, yelling 'Stand firm!' over their shoulder. Each large hotel knew the 
influx of folding chairs and filing cabinets, typewriters and armed sentries. As I drove 
past them I remembered June 1940; Bordeaux was the halfway house between Verdun 
and Vichy. 
 
I pressed the accelerator; at this stage of the game, speed had acquired an 
importance. I moved the Mercedes Benz 220 SE through the gear box. The steering was 
sensitive at high speeds and the hydraulic damper on it made the controls quietly 
accurate. Most of the traffic was slow stuff setting out from Bordeaux and after half an 
hour the road was mine. I kept the speedometer at 150 k.p.h. for long stretches and told 
myself over and over that it wasn't a morning wasted. 
 
I passed the Casino on Hendaye-plage and eased down the Boulevard de la Mer as 
unobtrusively as I knew how. I bumped up the kerb and parked in the exact position I had 
been before. Vulkan's Cadillac Eldorado was in the same position too. There was no sign 
of movement anywhere even at 10.40 a.m. I pushed open the front door. From the kitchen 
there was the noise of a kettle being filled. I went up to my room. The 'Do not disturb' 
notice was still on the doorknob. I turned the key and pushed the door gently open, 
standing a little behind the door-frame. I went through everything they taught me at 
Guildford but there was no need - Vulkan was still miles away. I poured myself a stiff 
whisky from a bottle in my case. I set the alarm mechanism on my wristwatch for dinner 
time and went to bed.,There was nothing more I could do for the time being. It was just a 
matter of letting matters simmer. When something came to the boil I would hear the 
rising steam. 
 
Any move that attacks a hostile king is known as check. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 27 
 
 
Tuesday, October 15th 
 
THE hammering on my door came at 6.30 p.m. Johnnie Vulkan was standing there 
looking angry and sad. 
 
'Come in,' I said. I turned round to find him still glaring. I glared back but since 
my eyes were slits he didn't detect it. 
 
'I've been to the police station,' he said. His cashmere overcoat was slung over his 
shoulders and the sleeves hung limp like broken limbs. 
 
'Really?' I said like a man trying to make polite conversation. 'Why?' 

 
'I've been given the third degree,' he said. He ran a hand through his grey hair and 
looked around my room for hidden policemen. 
 
'Why?' I said. 'You must have done something to irritate them.' I began to dress. 

 
'Irritate them!' he spoke loudly. 'I work for your Government for one thing.' 

 
'Well, surely you didn't tell them that.' I yawned. 'Are you sitting on my tie?' 

 
'Of course not,' said Johnnie. 'I didn't tell them anything.' He was getting angry. 
'They've been asking me all sorts of questions' - he looked at his huge gold wristwatch - 
'for four hours.' 
 
'You must be gasping.' I poured him a drink of whisky. 

 
'I'm not,' he said, which was odd, because he downed the Scotch like a man dying 
of thirst. 'I'm not hanging around here,' he said. 'I'm going back to Berlin.' 
 
'Just as you say,' I said. 'I'm trying to help.' 

 
He gave me a spiteful look. I said, 'Come along, Johnnie. Either tell me what it's 
all about or don't tell me at all, but you can't expect me to believe that the police took you 
to the station because they didn't like the way you parted your hair.' 
 
Vulkan sat on the bed. I poured him another drink and my wristwatch alarm 
sounded. 'I came down here to consult a man. I went to see him last night. He lives in 
Spain.' 
 
I tried to look like a man who is just listening to someone else's trouble to be 
polite. 'This man,' Johnnie went on, 'I was in the army with him.' 
 
'In the concentration camp?' I said. 

 
'Yes. He was the camp doctor. I've known him for years. The French have got 
their knife into him, I suppose. When he was driving me back here, they refused him 
entry at the frontier and hauled me out of the car.' 
 
'Oh,' I said like a man to whom it is suddenly made clear. 'You have been across 
into Spain and they stopped you at the border.' 
 
'Yes,' said Johnnie. 

 
'Well,' I said. 'I shouldn't worry about it. It's just a routine check.' 

 
They sounded a little bell downstairs to tell us that the dinner was cooked. I 
finished dressing hurriedly and Vulkan drank a lot of whisky. Dinner wasn't any too jolly 
because Vulkan was as miserable as sin. One of the policemen had told him that 
Samantha had been asked to leave the country because her papers weren't in order. 'What 
papers?' Vulkan kept asking and I really couldn't tell him. 
 
'Everything has gone wrong on this job,' said Johnnie after the coffee had arrived. 
He stretched his legs and studied the toes of his expensive Oxford shoes. 'I try to keep 
everyone happy...' He made a surrender motion with the palms of his hands. 
 
'Try to make everyone happy,' I said, 'and you'll wind up a rich mediocrity; but 
you'll never get anything done that is worth doing.' 
 
Johnnie stared at me for a long time, fixing me with his eyes until I began to think 
he had gone off his trolley. 
 
'You are right,' he said finally. He went back to studying the toes of his shoes and 
he said 'You are right' two or three more times. I poured him coffee. He thanked me, still 
in this abstract mood, then he said, 'London will be mad at me now?' 
 
'Why?'I asked. 

 
'Well,' he said. He moved his arm like he was trying to throw his hand away. 
'Messing about down here on my own affairs instead of being in Berlin when you needed 
to know about the name on the documents. Sometimes I feel I'm not cut out for this life. I 
should be writing music, not having a one-man war with London. London could murder 
me.' 

 
'London has no personality,' I said. 'Believe me, I know them very well. They're 
just like one big computing machine. Put a success story in one end; money and 
promotion come out the other.' 
 
'O.K.,' Johnnie interrupted. He fixed me with that glare again. 'They want this 
man, Semitsa - then, by God, I'll get him.' 
 
'That's the boy,' I said, but I don't know how I got any kind of enthusiasm into my 
voice. 
 
Development for its own sake is insufficient. There must be a keen purpose in 
every move. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 28 
 
 
London, Thursday, October 17th 
 
'IT'S no good trying to blame Hallam,' Dawlish was saying. 'He's given you more co-
operation and information than you could reasonably ask for. Good Lord, you should 
have worked with the Home Office people when I was seconded to them.' 
 
'Let's not talk about when coppers wore high hats,' I said. 'I've got my problems 
now - I don't want to hear your chilling experiences.' 
 
'And bringing the San Sebastian people into this -it's a grave error of judgment. 
Grenade's people will have listened to the whole thing.' 
 
'Don't worry about Grenade,' I said. 'I gave him that girl and said she was working 
from Bonn. That was quite enough to have them all busy for a couple of days.' 
 
'You don't have to sit here and try and sort it all out,' said Dawlish. 'You just make 
a lot of trouble right across Europe and leave it for me to curtsy, kiss your hand, 
apologise, explain that we all make mistakes sometimes and carry the can for you.' 
 
'You do it so well,' I said. I turned to go. 

 
'Another thing,' said Dawlish, 'that young Chillcott-Oakes came up here the other 
day babbling about books and thistle stamens. Couldn't understand a word of it except 
that he'd got it from you.' 
 
'I just said that you were interested in wild flowers,' I said. 'It's true, isn't it?' 

 
Dawlish began to move items off the top of his desk like he was going to climb on 
it and do a Gopak. It was a sign of deep emotion. 
 
'Do you know, even the wife likes it now? People have heard about it and they 
come to see it. They come to scoff. I know they do, but they stay to admire and one or 
two people have me brought plants. I have cornflowers - I don't know why I didn't think 
of those right from the start. I have some lovely scarlet pimqernel, corn camomile (you 
may know that better as mayweed)...' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
Dawlish was looking into the far, far distance now as his crop paraded slowly 
before his eyes. 'Sweet alyssum, galinsoga, the yellow ox-eye daisy and some quite 
remarkable grasses, and wild birds and butterflies.' 

 
'You aren't going to encourage pests then. You aren't going to have wire-worms 
and Colorado beetles,' I said. 
 
'No,' said Dawlish. 

 
'What about poisonous plants?' I said. 'What about foxglove and monk's-hood or 
deadly nightshade and wild arum or some of that great agaric fungus? Deadly as hell.' 
 
Dawlish shook his head. 

 
He switched his squawk box on and asked Alice for a dossier he needed, then, 
switching the box off for a moment, he said: 'Whatever else you conclude, right or 
wrong, don't make any mistake about Hallam. He's a damn good chap; whatever you may 
feel about him personally, the H. O. would hardly function without him. Leave him well 
alone or you will be tackling me -in person.' 
 
I nodded. Dawlish passed me a flimsy message form. 'I would appreciate it if in 
future you didn't request even routine information from field units without permission. 
You don't understand...' He waved the flimsy sheet. 'These things cost us a fee.' 
 
'O.K.,' I said. Dawlish had a happy knack of indicating when a meeting was at an 
end, even though he would often feign surprise when one made towards the door. 
 
'I say,' he said. 'All that twaddle about my writing books and meadow flowers.' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
Dawlish shrugged in embarrassment. 'Good of you,' he said and suddenly busied 
himself with work on his desk top. 
 
Players who relish violence, aggression and movement often depend upon the 
Spanish Game. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 29 
 
 
Thursday, October 17th To 
 
Unspec. field unit via London Immediate Destination: W. O. O. C. (P) 
Source: Cato 
 
Further to your query. The number plate you mention is that of Dr Ernst Mohr who is 
under a four-year surveillance. (Future queries should refer to him as Thrush.) Your 
(London) records will show a detailed account. Briefly: height: 6' 1" Weight: 12 stone 12 
Ibs/Eyes: brown/Hair: almost bald. No scars or distinguishing marks. Born Leipzig 1921. 
Qualified as Dr (of medicine) Leipzig 1941. Entered German Army 1941. Served in base 
hospitals in Germany 1941-4. Served in Eastern Front 1944-5. Captured Hamburg 1945. 
Witness at British Army War Crimes Enquiry Hamburg 1946 (ref: 275/Crime/nn). 
Released to work British military hospital 1946. Released to work in German civilian 
hospital 1946. Under contract to Bonn Government (Intelligence, not Gehlen) 1948. 
Began work as representative radium therapy machinery 1948. Assigned to Northern 
Spain as radium therapy equipment salesman 1949. Began buying land locally (N. Coast 
Spain) 1951. Resigned radium equipment company 1953. Began forming Spanish 
companies 1953. Married Spanish citizen 1953 .2 children. 

 
Dr Ernst Mohr is now a Spanish citizen. He continues to submit reports to Bonn 
but we think that this is known to Madrid with whom he has probably come to an 
agreement. Bonn has him marked as a very low credulity. 
 
He spent five hours with JV on date you mention and French immigration have 
since refused him entry. We assume this is your contact point. We have nothing of JV on 
record here. Trust this is of some help. 
 
 
 
CATO 16 
 
Range in chess is measured not by distance but by the number of squares to which a legal 
move can be made. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 30 
 
 
Thursday, October 17th 
 
I TOOK the message sheet down to my office and read it again twice. I looked quickly 
through my 'In' tray, then the phone rang. The operator said that Hallam had phoned 
twice in the last half hour. Did I want to be connected? Yes. 
 
'Hello, Hallam here. Special Import Service.' 

 
'They tell me that you are after me.' 

 
'Go along with you,' said Hallam. 'I'm not after you.' We both had a jolly good 
giggle about that. Then I said, 'Well, what is it?' 
 
'Just to tell you that everything is ready.' 

 
'Every what thing is ready?' 

 
'Customs, immigration, car will be available for you at Southampton or Dover. 
We have a guest house near Exeter. He'll go there for a week or so.' Hallam's voice trailed 
off. 
 
'Oh yes,' I said. 

 
'That's why we'd prefer Southampton,' said Hallam. 

 
'Well, isn't that cosy?' I said. 'Is he going to bring his own hot-water bottle?' 

 
'These things have to be attended to,' said Hallam in his snotty voice. 'It's not a bit 
of use you being upstage about the domestic arrangements. You'd look rather silly 
standing on the deck of the cross-Channel packet holding the hand of a "refused entry".' 
 
'Not half as silly as I'd look holding hands with...' 

 
'Now now,' said Hallam sternly and rang off. 

 
I spoke the remainder of my sentence into the dead phone as Jean came in. She 
said 'Hallam?' and put two cups of coffee on my desk. 
 
'Right on the button,' I said. 

 
'You mustn't let him get you down,' she said. 

 
'He's so irritating,' I said. 

 
'You think he doesn't know that?' said Jean. 'He's just like you; he takes a perverse 
delight in irritating people.' 
 
Do you really think so?' 

 
'It's obvious,' said Jean. 

 
'Do you know I never realised that? I'll have to revise my attitude to the chintzy 
old bastard.' I passed her the message from Cato 16 and began to drink my Nescafe-
flavoured hot water. Jean read the message carefully. 
 
'It's interesting,' she said. 

 
'In what way?' I said. 

 
'I don't know,' she said. 'But it must be interesting because you asked for it. It's 
meaningless to me.' 
 
'I don't want to destroy your pathetic faith,' I said, 'but it's meaningless to me too.' 

 
'What did you expect?' Jean said. 

 
'I don't know quite. I suppose I hoped it would exactly fit the description that 
Gehlen gave me for the Broum documents, or that Vulkan would come into the resume 
somewhere.' 
 
'Perhaps he does,' said Jean, 'if you examine it closely enough. This Eastern front 
section. He and Vulkan were probably stationed in the same concentration camp unit, just 
as Vulkan says.' 
 
'I suppose he might,' I said grudgingly. 'It's just that I was hoping for some big 
dramatic development.' 
 
'But you are always telling me not to hope for some big dramatic development,' 
said Jean. 
 
'You don't do as I do. Do as I tell you.' 

 
Jean pulled a face at me and read the message through again. 'Do you want me to 
check his records through for any mention of Vulkan?' I hesitated. 'Things are very quiet 
just now,' Jean said. 'I'm having my hair done twice a week.' 
 
'If you will find Mohr's file equally therapeutic, go ahead,' I said. 'I'll be happy to 
give an authorization for the records clerk.' 
 
'See how your plant has grown,' said Jean. 'All that part there is new leaf.' 

 
I took Jean to lunch at the Trattoria Terrazza where we had lunched the first day 
we met. We sat in the swish downstairs room and drank Campari sodas and I threw my 
waistline to the wind and had a vast portion of lasagne and followed it with chicken Kiev. 
Franco the proprietor brought us grappa with the coffee and we sat and talked about Soho 
and about Billy Big and Harry the Hanger Man and what the cross-eyed man from the 
fish shop shouted at the traffic warden. I leaned back and surveyed the empty wine 
bottles and the full ashtrays and wondered how I could get a job as a Michelin Guide 
inspector. 
 
'You wouldn't like it,' Franco said. 

 
'Wouldn't he?' said Jean. 'You don't know him.' 

 
I just sat there smiling and fighting down the belches. There is not much point in 
going back to the office at 4.30 p.m. so I took Jean to see a film that the Sundays said was 
a poetical experience. All I got out of it was cramp. 
 
Jean was being motherly. She had bought a bag of groceries in Soho and we went 
back to her flat in Gloucester Road after the pictures and cooked them. 

 
Jean's flat is as draughty as a lettuce basket. We went into the kitchen and sat 
there with the oven full on and the oven door open, beating eggs and boiling artichokes 
while Jean read the directions from a cooking article in the Observer. I had just begun to 
warm up a little when the phone went. Jean answered but it was for me. 
 
'Been trying to get you since four o'clock this afternoon,' the Charlotte Street 
switchboard said petulantly. 
 
'I was in the toilet,' I said. 

 
'It's the D.S.T. [See Appendix 5.] Bordeaux office. You don't have a scrambler 
there, I suppose, sir?' 
 
'No,' I said. 'This is Miss Tonnesson's private number.' 

 
'Then when I reconnect with your Bordeaux party I shall have to scramble here 
and put it through to you in clear.' 
 
'O.K.,' I said, but apparently I wasn't being appreciative enough. 

 
'It's against orders really, sir. You should come to the nearest phone with a 
scrambler: that's the instructions. It's only because I've spoken with the Fremantle 
exchange supervisor and had him handle the call personally that I can risk it.' 
 
'Well, it's certainly very kind of you to do that for me. I'll certainly be most 
discreet in my conversation.' 
 
'There's no need to be sarcastic, sir. I'm only doing my job.' 

 
I said nothing and there were a series of noises as Charlotte Street hooked itself 
into the official Government cross-Channel phone cable. Suddenly there was a din of 
unscrambled noise before Charlotte Street switched the scrambler into the circuit, then 
Grenade's voice said '... lucky to do it. However you'll just have to rely on Albert's 
memory. You hear me O.K.?' 
 
'O.K.,' I said. 'Go ahead.' 

 
'If he enters France again we will arrest him,' said Grenade. 

 
'The hell you will,' I said. 'On what charge?' 

 
'I'll tell you,' said Grenade. 'Until we spoke together, your friend was just a name 
buried deep in our files. Just someone we were interested in; but if he conies back here 
again we will charge him with terrorism and murder and I daresay we will be able to find 
a few war crimes if we dig around carefully.' 
 
'Can you be a little more explicit?' I asked. 

 
'I'm sending you the usual written sheet,' said Grenade. 

 
'But who did he murder?' I asked, 'and when?' 

 
'End of 1942, he murdered a member of the Vichy Government,' said Grenade. 

 
'Why?'I asked. 

 
'Because he was in the F. T. P.,' [Francs-Tireurs et Partisans: World War Two 
French resistance network organised by the Communist Party and kept entirely separate 
from all others.] said Grenade. 'It was a political assassination.' 
 
'Go on,' I said. 

 
'Arrested by Vichy militia in Colmar in February 1943. We have the old war-time 
docket here, I'll send you a photostat of it. Claimed to be a German citizen and was sent 
for trial to Germany. We have no record of any of that, of course. Albert's got a hell of a 
memory, he says he got off with a prison term.' 
 
'Albert would have to have a hell of a memory,' I said. 'It must have all happened 
when Albert was about five.' 

 
'Albert used to be downstairs in the archives. He has a memory for documents. 
You know what I meant,' said Grenade and chuckled. 
 
'I'm staggered,' I said. 'You mean to tell me that John Vulkan was a communist 
and killed a member of the Vichy Government. I just can't believe it.' 
 
'I'm not talking about Vulkan,' said Grenade. 'We all know what Vulkan is. He is 
one of your riot squad, eh? I'm talking about Broum.' 
 
'Broum?' I said in amazement. 

 
'We were all surprised. I thought this man Broum was another figment of your 
over-active imagination. I told Albert so.' 
 
'Oh no,' I said. 

 
The operator cut in and said were we finished as the line was in great demand and 
I told her to wait. There was a buzz and Grenade was saying '... complaining that his girl 
friend was missing. Ha. We knew that he was one of your boys but he kept his mouth 
shut, I can tell you,' There was a pause. Then Grenade said, 'We know perfectly well that 
Vulkan works for you.' 
 
I grunted. Then Grenade said, 'Admit it, my friend. Tell the truth for once. You 
will find it an invigorating experience.' 
 
'We pay his wages,' I said guardedly. 

 
Grenade gave a triumphant little hoot of laughter. 'Very good, my friend. A subtle 
distinction and in the case of your friend Vulkan a necessary distinction.' He laughed 
again. 
 
'Where is Broum now?' I asked. 

 
'No trace,' said Grenade. 'Why don't you start doing a little work for yourself? 
Routine enquiries. Get your weight down a little.' 
 
'Thank you, operator,' I said. 'You can disconnect us now.' 

 
Grenade shouted, 'Albert drinks Dimple Haig.' 

 
'Don't tell me your staff problems,' I said, 'You are a hard man,' said Grenade. 

 
'Inside that layer of fatty tissue,' I said. Then the operator disconnected us. 

 
Jean flung a clean tablecloth to me and brought supper. I told her the content of 
Grenade's call. 
 
'Why does it make any difference who this man Broum is or what he did in the 
war? Our task is just to move one man named Semitsa from East Berlin to London.' 
 
'You oversimplify things as always,' I said. 'If it was as simple as that Carter 
Paterson would be doing it. The reason we are involved is because we want to learn as 
much about Karlshorst in general and Stok in particular as we can. Secondly, I have to 
know to what extent Vulkan is reliable, to what extent we can trust him if something 
really serious blows up. Thirdly, we don't know nearly enough about the Gehlen set-up; 
what's its allegiance to Bonn; to the State Department; to the U. S. Army...' 
 
'To us,' Jean said. 

 
'Even to us,' I agreed. 'And then there's Semitsa, the crux of the whole problem. 
When he crosses Zimmerstrasse he will be Paul Louis Broum and armed with enough 
evidence to defy anyone to disprove it. That's why I want to know who Broum was and 
why Semitsa should be so desperately anxious to become him.' 
 
'How are you going to start?' Jean asked. 

 
'"Begin at the beginning," as the Queen said to Alice, "Go on to the end. Then 
stop."' Paul Louis Broum was born in Prague. 

 
Czech Defence: a sequence in which pawn is matched with pawn but the queen's 
bishop tips the balance. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 31 
 
 
Monday, October 21st 
 
IF anyone ever decided to illustrate Hans Andersen with photographs he would start in 
Prague. The heights of the city are a fairy tale of spiky spires; Hradcany castle and the 
steeple of St Vitus stare down to where the fourteenth-century Karluv bridge tucks the 
Three Ostriches tavern under its arm before crossing the calm blue Vltava. The older 
parts of the city are a maze of tiny twisting streets illuminated by gas lights and so hilly 
that a careless driver can find himself tobogganing down steep stone steps. It was twilight 
and the city looked like a dusty Christmas tree. I parked my hired Skoda car and walked 
back towards the Three Ostriches tavern. The steps were worn to a glassy smoothness 
and the inside was like something whittled three lessons before Pinocchio. The overhead 
beams were painted with red and green vine leaves and varnished with about five 
hundred years of tobacco smoke. A tiny radio balanced over the tiled stove was beating 
out 'Walking my baby back home' with enough violence to make the potted geraniums 
quiver. The tables were as crowded as a Stakhanovite work schedule and merry groups of 
men shouted for slivovice, borovicka or Pilsner Urquell, and the waiters kept a tally of 
their progress by marking each man's beer-mat with strange pencil marks. 
 
Harvey was sitting in the corner drinking and talking. Harvey was a typical 
Foreign Service officer. He changed his shirt three times a day and used talc with a 
masculine perfume. He was a short, thickset, city-bred American, his arms a little too 
long and his hair cut short enough to disguise his receding hairline. His skin was nearer to 
olive than to any other colour. His face followed every syllable of the conversation and 
would grow serious or flash a sudden smile in response to the mood of the talking. It was 
this animation of his face muscles that made him good-looking - not handsome - but 
definitely good-looking. 
 
'Less viable than the Munich project,' he was saying as I reached his table. He 
nodded to me to sit down. He didn't introduce me. 
 
The man with him nodded and removed a signet ring from his finger and put it 
back again with considerable skill. 
 
Harvey said, 'But I'd opt for it just the same.' He had that soft Boston accent that 
Americans acquire when they work for the State Department. 
 
When the other man spoke it was in a light whisper. He said, 'Wages escalate, 
Harvey. You'd think that would make it better but it doesn't. It's counter-productive. I'll 
advertise again.' He turned to me. 'So long,' he said. Then he said, 'So long' to Harvey and 
drifted through the door like a smoke cloud. 
 
'What was all that New Frontier jargon, Harvey?' I asked. 

 
Harvey swept a small glassful of slivovice over his tonsils. 'We all talk like that 
now,' Harvey said. 'It's so the British won't understand.' 

 
'We never understood before,' I said. When the waiter had brought two tall, ice-
cold Pilsen lagers, Harvey said, 'You know, I thought I knew this town once. My old man 
was always telling me about the old country and even before I stepped on the boat to 
Europe I thought of Americans as aliens. But the longer I stay here, the less I understand.' 
Harvey laid his hand limply face up on the table in a supplicating gesture. 
 
'I need a maid: check?' 

 
'Check,' I said. 

 
'For three weeks I'm trying to get a local girl to help with work around the 
apartment. It's not hard work but can I get one? No, sir. They tell me that no one does 
domestic work any more - "only in capitalist countries", they tell me. Today I said to one, 
"I thought the function of the communist state was to dignify labour, not to denigrate it."' 
 
'Did you get the girl to work for you?' 

 
'Negative,' Harvey said. 

 
'You should take a lesson from European diplomacy,' I said. 'The purpose of 
political debate is to achieve results, not to win arguments.' 
 
Harvey sank his lager in one long draught. Outside there was the constant noise of 
tram-bells and traffic-cop whistles. 'Slivovice,' said Harvey. 'How about a slivovice 
before I take you to see him?' 
 
'None for me, Harvey, and none for you. Let's go. I'm starved.' Harvey wanted his 
slivovice but I knew the danger signs. Harvey was determined to get very drunk. We left 
Harvey's new Dodge where it was under the trees in Na Kampe, and took my Skoda 
which gave me a better excuse for insisting that I drive. We drove out through the dusty 
area of rebuilding with Harvey slouched well back in his seat saying 'Right' and 'Left' and 
'Straight on' every now and again. 
 
The roads out of Prague are lined with cherry trees; in the spring the blossom 
follows the road like smoky exhaust and in the summer it is not unusual to see a driver 
standing on top of his lorry munching at the fruit. Now it was autumn and the trees had 
just the last few tenacious leaves hanging on like jilted lovers. Here and there young girls 
or tiny children dressed always in trousers attended to a cow or a goat or a few geese. 
High-wheeled bullock carts moved ponderously along the narrow roads and sometimes a 
big truck filled with mocking gesticulating girls being taken home from their work in the 
fields. Their clothes weren't peasant weaves and hand-printed headscarves but hard-
wearing trousers, mass-produced blouses, and plastic scarves. 
 
Ahead of us was an ancient car with a bulbous brass radiator and landau 
coachwork. I overtook it only to find ahead of me a red and white diagonally striped pole 
with a sign 'Objizd'ka' on it. Diversion. 
 
'I thought our luck couldn't last,' said Harvey. 'Now we'll encounter something 
that will make the previous three miles look like the Washington Turnpike.' 
 
I opened my mouth to speak just as we hit the first of the pot-holes. We battled 
against flint with rubber, and beat mud into cake-mix with our treads. We scraped a way 
between trees and bored a hole through a great rolling cloud of white dust. We climbed 
back on to the main road again like the sole survivors of a shipwreck. 
 
'Do you know where you are?' said Harvey. 

 
'No idea.' 

 
'Good,' he said and fell back in his seat. 'Don't want the whole British colony to 
find the place.' The road became paved. Ahead of us was a tiny group of houses. 

 
'What are they going to come here in - half-tracks?' I asked. 

 
'You'll love it,' said Harvey. 'Turn in here. Decelerate.' 

 
I stopped the car and let one of those heavy trucks with two trailers that they call 
'road trains' pass us, then pulled into the side entrance. To the left a range of hills was 
summit-deep in mist and ahead the road curved to skirt a forest. On the corner house a 
vast oval-shaped traffic mirror with a red and gold frame pictured the intersection in 
distorted reflection. Above it, looking like something wrenched out of the H. M. V. 
trademark, was a loudspeaker that spoke the words of government. Across the front of the 
brown stone building on the left the name of the pre-communist proprietor could still be 
read in the faded paintwork from which solid wooden letters had been taken down. From 
the first floor there hung a plastic sign. As we looked at it in the gathering dusk it was 
switched on. We read the words 'State Hotel'. 
 
At the side entrance a small boy in a pink sweatshirt was pulling open the 
enormous wooden doors. I drove through into the cobbled courtyard and the noise of the 
engine sent a flock of white geese cackling and calling in flat-footed rage to the far side 
of the yard where chopped logs were stacked in neat wooden honeycombs. The boy 
pointed to the open-sided barn and I drove under it and shook Harvey fully awake. 
Suspended under the roof of the barn was a huge horse-sled, spun with cobwebs and dust. 
The courtyard was growing dark and through the back windows of the hotel I could see 
the kitchen and the dining-room lit by blue neon. 
 
Clouds of steam rolled out of the kitchen door and tiptoed stealthily across the 
cobblestones, diminishing at every step like shy ghosts. The kitchen's stone floor was 
shiny with moisture and plump women with handkerchiefs drawn tight around their heads 
stepped in and out of the noise and steam like a team of formation dancers. 
 
From the restaurant came a heavy sweet smell of beer. The plastic table-tops 
supported countless leather elbows and at the counter the standard meal of one hundred 
grammes of goulash was being carefully and lawfully measured by a cheerful woman in a 
stained apron. Except for the waitresses there were no women to be seen in the dining-
room. Harvey led the way right through with scarcely a falter. Upstairs there was a 
powerful smell of antiseptic. Harvey knocked at a door on the first floor and waved me 
inside. 
 
It was a tiny room. Lenin shared the floral wallpaper with the local football team. 
There was a glass-fronted dresser containing mass-produced local glassware, five 
uncomfortable wooden chairs that had been moved there from the dining-room after 
suffering minor damage, and a table. On the hand-embroidered cloth were three place-
settings of plain white china with the government hotel symbol, three tumblers and two 
unlabelled bottles of local wine which glowed like garnets in front of a large paraffin 
lamp. 
 
 
At the far side of the table was the dark vole-like man Harvey had brought me 
here to see - Jan-im-Gluck -Lucky Jan. The girl brought us the roast goose and heavy dry 
dumpling slices almost as soon as we sat down. 
 
Harvey poured two glasses and finished the bottle himself. 

 
Harvey probably knew how to carve a goose but it was his co-ordination that 
proved such a handicap. We all got large torn pieces of hot, crisp, juicy, oily goose and 
we had a large plate of those breadrolls that come with great chunks of sea-salt and poppy 

seeds baked to the top of them. There was slivovice which Harvey liked and tiny pots of 
Turkish coffee of which he wasn't so fond. We ate in greedy silence. 'Why can't I have 
American coffee?' he asked me, and he took the oil lamp and left the room while the old 
man and I talked about the price of butter in England, the role of the trade unionist in U. 
S. politics and what became of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. When Harvey came back 
he was shouting 'Obsazeno, obsazeno'. [Obsazeno: occupied. ] He pointed a finger in no 
definite direction and said, 'Why is it that in this damned god-forsaken country, where 
everyone is filling out small rectangular forms in triplicate, there is never any god-
damned paper in the w. c.?' 
 
Without smiling the old man said, 'Because someone has filled it out in triplicate.' 

 
'Affirmative,' said Harvey. He let the weight of his fist bring it down on to the 
table with a thump that made the dishes jump. 'That's right.' And having solved the 
problem he put his head on his hands and went to sleep. 
 
The old man looked at him and said, 'If God had made the world for humans we 
would have alcohol that made the head clearer instead of drowsy and the tongues of men 
more articulate instead of slurred. For it is when a man has consumed alcohol that he has 
the most important things to say.' 
 
'Who did God make the world for?' I asked, 'if not for humans?' 

 
The old man spoke more sharply. 'For building speculators and generals, any fool 
knows that.' 
 
I smiled but the old man's face was unchanging. 

 
'Did,' I nodded my head towards Harvey, 'tell you what I wanted to talk to you 
about?' 
 
Jan-im-Gluck took a slim metal case from his pocket. It was worn smooth and 
burnished like a flat pebble from the seashore. He prised a thumbnail into its edge and it 
opened to reveal a silk interior of royal purple in which the serpentine coils of a pair of 
spectacles nestled. He put them on. 
 
The old man took the oil lamp with two hands, turned up the wick just a fraction 
of an inch, and held it near my face. The lamp illuminated the old man's face too. The 
skin had the texture of a jute sack so that a small scar went almost undetected in the 
coarseness of the complexion. The few days' growth of white bristles across his lower 
face shone silver in the light. His eyes were bright and moved quickly behind the bent 
spectacles that were artfully placed upon his nose to allow him to look over them when 
he preferred to do so. As his head turned in the lamplight, the circular spectacle glasses 
took turns to become silver pennies and clear again to reveal the small black eyes behind 
them. He nodded his way out of the spectacles and put them back into the cloth lining of 
the metal case. 
 
'It's my job to investigate war crimes,' I said. 

 
Wizened was about the only word you could apply to him. He would have been 
tall if he ever stood upright, he would have been thin if he had ever removed the layers of 
black overcoat, and may have been bald under the wide-brimmed black hat of orthodox 
Judaism. 
 
'War crimes?' he repeated. 'What war is it that you speak of?' 

 
'The Second World War that finished in 1945,' I said. 

 
'It finished then, did it?' he said. 'I wish someone had told me. I'm still fighting it.' 

 
I nodded. He wrapped a layer of overcoat across his knees. 

 
He said, 'We all have to, you see. Every Jew has won a desperate battle against 
the world the day he is born. For a Jew, you see, just existing - he squeezed the word 
through his palate - 'just existing is a triumph; a victory against fascism.' His eyes moved 
slowly from my shoes to my head without any sort of rudeness. 'So they are still sending 
men to write legal papers so that lawyers can talk about war crimes. Every crime is a 
holiday if you are a lawyer, eh?' He laughed soundlessly, his small eyes shining and his 
crisp little hand patting his knee. 
 
'I want to talk about Treblinka Camp,' I said. 

 
He closed his eyes. 'Then either you have never been there,' he paused, 'or you are 
a German.' He added hurriedly, 'Not that I bear any ill will to Germans... ' 
 
'Nor me,' I said. 'In fact many of my best friends are anti-semites.' 

 
'Meschugge,' said the old man, 'ganz meschugge.' [ganz: completely; meschugge 
(Yiddish): batty, crazy, nuts.] He slapped his thigh and cackled. Harvey snored. The old 
man turned to examine Harvey. There was a huge tuft of cotton wool poking out of the 
old man's ear in a demoniacal fashion. 
 
'Camp Treblinka,' I said, to prompt the old man. 

 
'Yes,' he said. 'They were using monoxide gas there. It's not efficient.' He smiled 
like a crack in the lino. 'At Auschwitz they managed things better. They moved with the 
times. With Cyclon B they killed two and a half million at Auschwitz - they could never 
have done that with monoxide. Never.' 
 
'It's about Paul Louis Broum,' I said. 'You knew him.' 

 
The old man spoke with deliberation, choosing each word like a lawyer. His voice 
was shrill and yet digfied. 'I did. Yes. I knew Broum.' 
 
'Well,' I said, 'did you know him well?' 

 
'Well?' said Jan-im-Gluck. He thought about it. 'I knew him ill. That's the only 
way you know anyone in a concentration camp. You watch the ones that are taken away 
to die and you are happy because you are left alive. That's our guilt, you see; all Europe 
suffers from a feeling of guilt. That is why the world is so spiteful. The ex-gaoler 
remembers someone he has beaten or selected for beating, the people who watched us 
move through the towns remember that they forgot five minutes afterwards, and we 
victims remember that we were happy to see our friends die because it meant that we 
lived. So you see we are all racked with guilt.' 
 
'About Broum,' I said. 

 
'Ah,' the old man cried. 'My conversation embarrasses you because you too feel 
it.' 
 
'If the world is guilty,' I said, 'who remains to pass judgment?' 

 
The old man patted his knee and said, 'Ganz meschugge.' 

 
'Can you tell me about Broum's life in prison?' I said. 

 
'Better than that,' said Jan-im-Gluck. 'I'll tell you of his death.' 

 
'Tell me about that,' I said. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 32 
 
 

JAN-IM-GLUCK 
 
IT was moving-day at the camp. Everyone suspected that the Russians were getting 
closer but there was no way to find out. 
 
At the week-end the Germans detonated the crematoria in explosions that went on 
all night. Sunday was devoted to burning down half the huts, which meant that on Sunday 
night each remaining hut was twice as crowded as usual. Scarcely anyone slept that night; 
it was early summer and the windows were shuttered to make the sentries' job easier. 
Inside the huts the temperature was unbelievable. Most of the huts put two or three 
unconscious people out of the front door the next morning before the march had even 
begun. 
 
One side of the camp was a railway siding. All the sick were taken there just after 
dawn. Someone asked a guard what was happening and he said that the sick were being 
taken to Siedlce by train, but that all the others must march. The sick left before the food 
was distributed; it was an ominous sign.. The next group to leave were the children. They 
were marched away before the shutters were taken down from the huts, but everyone was 
listening. 
 
The remainder of the prisoners formed up in the main compound. There was an 
acrid smell of burnt wood and burnt bedding. Great pieces of soot floated on the air like 
dandelion seeds. The guards were all carrying new automatic rifles and outside the gate 
there was a large group of soldiers. They wore camouflage smocks and steel helmets and 
were dirty and unshaven. They were front-line troops, not Waffen S. S. The guards had 
formed up near by too, but the two sorts of soldiers didn't speak to each other. Each 
prisoner was given four raw potatoes and some hard dried meat. Some of the prisoners 
got extra potatoes but only those in the front rank. They began to eat the food as they 
walked out of the gate. 
 
Everyone knew that they were walking westwards because the shadows stretched 
very long and very thin in front of them as they walked. They walked for two hours, then 
they rested, then they walked for another two hours. The second or third time they 
stopped, there was the distant sound of heavy artillery. It was very faint and, when the 
march recommenced, the sound of moving feet made it impossible to hear. 
 
At noon the soldiers and guards lit fires and began to cook food that came out of 
the carts that were being hauled by manpower. They spoke and laughed together. The 
soldiers didn't speak to the prisoners at first. It was as though the very existence of the 
concentration-camp prisoners embarrassed them; that although they were guarding them 
they didn't want to admit that the prisoners existed. The first soldier to have a 
conversation with any prisoner was a middle-aged Latvian who heard two prisoners 
speak his language. They exchanged the names of their birthplaces, then marched in an 
awkward silence until one of the regular guards came near to them. Then the soldier 
moved farther down the marching column. Later he brought a small piece of tobacco for 
his countrymen; they chewed it but it made them feel sick, for their stomachs were not 
strong enough for such things. 
 
In the fields there were only women. They attended to their work and seldom 
turned to watch the great shuffling army. In the villages there was no one to be seen at all, 
but if a prisoner watched carefully he saw a movement of lace curtain or a door opening 
an inch or two. 

 
There were many crucifixes at the roadside and some of the prisoners would 
shake their fists as they passed. One man spat. Broum said, 'Do not blaspheme,' and the 
man replied, 'Our very existence is a blasphemy.' Then the man who had spat shouted a 
prayer as loud as he could shout and a guard came along and hit the prisoner. Broum 
called to the guard, 'Don't strike him, let him grow weary.' Strangely enough the guard 
moved away and the man who had spat became quiet. 
 
Soon after that, other men began to tire and fall to the rear of the column. It was a 
long line, the tail of it seldom visible to the men at the front, so that they didn't know 
what happened to those who lagged behind, but all day there had been the sound of rifle 
shots. Some said that the soldiers were shooting birds and hares for food. 
 
Jan and Broum found themselves walking side by side. Broum began to talk. 
They talked about their days in the prison camp and the prisoners they both remem bered. 
Later Broum began to talk of his life before he came to the camp. This was unusual; 
origin and family were topics prisoners preferred to leave undiscussed. At first Jan 
thought that he must be some sort of Kapo employed to ferret information, but he seemed 
more interested in speaking of himself than in discovering facts about Jan. 
 
Broum's father was a Frenchman who came to Czechoslovakia to work in the 
wine business. His mother was a member of one of the best Jewish families in Prague. 
'I'm a Jewish Roman Catholic,' Broum said to Jan. 'I was ten before I realised that not 
everyone in the world has a Jewish mother and a Catholic father.' At home they mostly 
spoke German although his mother also spoke fluent French. 
 
Broum's mother was an accomplished amateur musician and sometimes would 
participate in the musical soirees they regularly held. His father used these occasions to 
get silently drunk, sitting glassy-eyed in the back of the room and none of the guests 
dared to turn round. 
 
Broum was studying at the German University in Prague until 1940, when the 
Germans expelled him because he was half-Jewish. Even then he had no strong political 
ideas, not even feeling hatred for the Nazis after he was expelled. He described himself as 
a 'political virgin'. 
 
He found it impossible to get a job - not because the Nazis were persecuting him 
but because the Czechs were anxious not to provoke them. Ironically the job he finally 
got was working for the Nazis direct. The fall of France brought an urgent need for 
French-speaking interpreters. Broum went to France as a civilian interpreter for the 
Wehrmacht. 
 
Even as a civilian Broum found himself a member of the master race: a strange 
and frightening experience for a young man visiting his father's native land for the first 
time. Broum became an interpreter with the H.Q. group 312 Geheime Feldpolizei in 
Caen. The job of that unit was investigating crimes committed by local civilians against 
the German Army. 
 
Many of the French prisoners reminded Broum of his father. In spite of himself, 
he became emotionally involved in their fate. Sometimes he was ordered to be present as 
a witness at executions, sometimes information was gained only by torture and as a 
translator he was required to be present. 
 
Broum began to dread each day's work. Sometimes he would stay awake all night 
knowing that the moment he fell asleep morning would arrive next. Indigestion became 
stomach pains - the stomach being the focal point of fear - and these developed into 

severe abdominal cramps. Sometimes he used his fast, fluent French to slip a word of 
sympathy or advice into the translations. The word spread that Broum was a sympathetic 
German. For some time Broum played a double game, revealing pieces of information 
that he would never have got had the prisoners not trusted him to a limited extent. 
 
Finally Broum cracked. Perhaps the local French knew enough to blackmail him. 
Perhaps he started out as a betrayer but stayed as a believer. In any case he made contact 
with local resistance leaders. He reported to them regularly: train times, barge 
concentrations, movements of prisoners and rations. When his position became too 
precarious the French resistance gave him false papers and sheltered him in Douai with a 
Jewish family. Broum became a Jew in manners and thought. He passed him self off as a 
Frenchman but eventually he was caught - as they were all caught - by betrayal. 
 
He was passed from civil prison in France to Wehrmacht prison in Holland to 
civil prison in Essen. No one knew quite what to do with a half-French, half-German 
civilian who had deserted from the Army, until he told them how proud he was to be a 
Jew. He was a figure that attracted legends as a magnet attracts iron filings. Stories were 
told of Broum's close friendship with Goering until Goering coveted Broum's wife - or in 
other stories his art collection - and had him imprisoned. There were stories that made 
Broum a relative of Pierre Laval, in jail as a hostage for the latter's collaboration. Some 
stories insisted that Broum was a member of the German General Staff who had been 
secretly working for the Russians. Whatever the truth was, it had brought Broum to 
Treblinka. It was an extermination camp but Broum found ways to stand aside from the 
stream of prisoners who entered and died within a week. Jan too earned his nickname. 
The art of survival - the old man said - was the only Jewish art form. 
 
The great dirty column of ragged, smelly prisoners kept moving west. There were 
several, times when the old man Jan would have slipped behind and solved the riddle of 
the rabbit guns but for the voice and the arm of Broum. The column halted before it was 
dark. Fires were built but there were no axes to chop wood and the food didn't last long. 
 
The prisoners were counted endlessly, when all the totals tallied the food was 
distributed. Each prisoner got three raw beets and a slice of black bread which they were 
permitted to dip into a canister of hot soup. One man dropped his bread into the soup. He 
was a strong, intelligent man but he wept like a child. The guards laughed. The prisoners 
crowded together in vast groups -some of a hundred or more - and shared their body heat 
to stay alive. 
 
All night the horizon flickered with gunfire. All night long men were getting to 
their feet and flailing their bodies to move their thin blood. As dawn broke the guards 
ordered everyone to their feet. Some didn't get to their feet; the cold had nibbled the last 
calories of life away from them. Counting began. The live moved hastily away from the 
dead. Broum was one of the dead. The cold hadn't killed him; he had, they said, been 
strangled. No prisoner was surprised, for Broum had many enemies, but the Germans 
were surprised and angry. Death was something which only they dispensed. They began 
to ask questions. They wanted to know who slept near Broum. Jan-im-Gluck had slept 
beside him and had heard nothing and seen nothing. Jan-im-Gluck said nothing to 
anyone. An S. S. medical officer examined the body and then questioned five suspects. 
Jan was one of the thousands of prisoners who looked on. The wind was screaming and 
tugging at the flaps of their clothes like an angry child. The officer questioned each 
suspect in turn. Sometimes the words were audible to the watchers but generally the wind 

tore the words away from the wide-moving jaws. The prisoners watched with unseeing 
eyes the moving mouths of the men; not hearing, understanding or caring that they were 
arguing, pleading, crying for their lives. 
 
Some of the guards grew impatient at this lengthy attempt at justice. They pointed 
to the enormous column of men and to the horizon and they too wasted their pleas upon 
the deaf ear of the wind. The officer sent two of the suspects back into the ranks and 
motioned for the other three to kneel. They knelt. He drew his pistol without haste and 
shot the first man in the neck. He stepped forward and shot the next man in the neck, the 
third man got to his feet and began shouting - his hands cupped to carry his voice better. 
The officer shot him in the chest. 
 
As the column began to move again Jan-im-Gluck noticed that the man next to 
him was covered in blood and tiny splinters of bone. He had been standing in the front 
row. Three soldiers pulled the executed men to the side of the road and the S. S. officer 
looked pleased as he threw an army greatcoat over the body of Broum who had caused it 
all. The prisoners were pleased that something had been decided, for as they walked the 
circulation began again in their cramped frozen limbs. 
 
Two hostile bishops can be used to block the advance of passed pawns since 
between them they control access to all squares of both colours. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 33 
 
 
Monday, October 21st 
 
I SHOOK Harvey and his head revolved on his folded arms until his cherubic features 
smiled at me sideways. 
 
'Let's go,' I said. Harvey reached for the bottle of slivovice. 

 
'Come along, Harvey,' I said and unlocked his fingers from around the neck of the 
bottle. The old man blew his nose loudly into a handkerchief that was covered with the 
cross-hatching of meticulous darns. 
 
The night was as clear as a planetarium. Once outside Harvey did a little gavotte 
and sang a tuneless, improvised song. 
 
'You've got to escalate or even quantify, For pre-emptive counter-strateg-y-y-y-y.' 

 
The cross-country detour was softened by the independent suspension of the 
slivovice. When we turned on to the sealed surface of the main road to Prague we began 
to pick up speed. 
 
'Did you hear all that, Harvey?' I asked. 

 
'What do you think I am?' said Harvey. 'A goddamned snooper?' 

 
'Yes,' I said and Harvey laughed and belched and went back to sleep until I woke 
him up. 
 
'Something ahead,' I said. 

 
'An accident,' said Harvey. He was sober. Harvey could get drunk like some 
people cat-nap. There was a vehicle with its lights on and a red and white illuminated 
bull's-eye device was swinging in blurred arcs across the road. 

 
I stopped the car. The man holding the signalling light was wearing a white crash-
helmet, leather riding-breeches and a brown leather jacket with huge stiff red epaulettes. 
He tucked the signalling-lamp into the top of his black jackboots as I wound down the 
window. He looked at us both, then said in German, 'Who is the owner of this vehicle, 
please?' 
 
He examined the insurance papers and the documents the hire company had given 
me and then he went over each page in our passports and tugged at the binding. Behind 
him was a motor-cycle and sidecar and on the far side of the road a jeep-like vehicle 
without lights. The man in the crash-helmet took our papers over to the jeep and I could 
hear the music of the voices; the questions were vibrato and flute-like Czech, but the 
decisions were played on a Russian bassoon. The two men in the jeep climbed out on to 
the road. One was dressed in the very English style of a Czech army officer, the other 
wore the uniform of a Russian corporal. They held the papers on the bonnet of the jeep 
and studied them with a flashlight before climbing back in. Then -still without switching 
on its lights - the jeep reversed at full speed a matter of twenty feet. Then the corporal 
gave it full lock and it roared up the road, taking the pot-holes in easy style. 
 
'Follow,' said the man in the white crash-helmet, pointing after the jeep. 

 
'Better follow it, boy,' said Harvey. 'There go our passports and in this country an 
American passport is worth more than a sixteen-ounce can of instant coffee.' 
 
The jeep turned down a wide fire lane. We turned off the road after it; the rough 
ground hammered the suspension. Above us the tips of the firs almost closed out the stars 
as we sped down the long claustrophobic track like bugs in a hair-brush. Through the fire 
gaps I caught glimpses of rolling countryside, dusty in the white moonlight. The jeep 
slowed and in a clearing ahead a soldier in a brown anorak was waving a torch. It was a 
large clearing and a small farm fitted snugly into a corner of it. Inside the hollow feudal 
plan of the farmhouse a cobbled courtyard held half a dozen soldiers, some motor-cycles 
and a close-harmony quartet of dogs. I parked behind the jeep and climbed out of the car. 
A soldier pointed from the back seat of the jeep, the curved magazine of a Model 58 
Assault gun peeping from his cradled arms. We obeyed his signal and stepped through 
the small door. 
 
The building into which we were ushered had one simple wooden table standing 
amid straw, three hens moving sleepily and a staircase leading up to a landing where the 
army officer was standing. As we entered the doorway he said 'Good evening' in English. 
Harvey turned to me and began to relight his cigarette. Americans don't often relight an 
inch of cigarette so I watched Harvey's lips. He mouthed, 'O. B. Z. ' [O. B. Z.: Obranne 
Zpravodajestvi - security police of the army.] under the cloak of his cupped hands. I 
didn't nod. 
 
The Czech army officer pointed to two grey weather-beaten chairs and Harvey 
and I sat. Harvey had thrown his match down and the officer went across to where it lay 
and planted a carefully polished boot on it. 
 
He looked at Harvey in an admonishing way that could have meant anything from 
'I wish this was your neck' to 'That's how fires start'. The Czech officer had a face like a 
half-erased pencil drawing. His skin and his eyes were grey. His forehead was tall and his 
ears, nose and chin a little too long, like a wax doll that has been out in the sun. Behind 
him on the stairs was the Russian corporal intent on opening a bottle. The corporal smiled 

widely at us. 'English,' he said. 'What a wonderful surprise, poputchik.' [poputchik 
(Russian): fellow-traveller (lit. and fig.).] 'You know this guy?' said Harvey. 
 
'Colonel Stok,' I said. 'Red Army Security Berlin.' 

 
Stok pulled down the front of his brown soldiers' summer-issue blouse with its 
corporal's insignia. 
 
One of the Czech soldiers brought in four thimble-size glasses and a plain tin the 
size of a floor polish tin. 
 
'Only the best we have for you, English,' said Stok. The Czech smiled a tight 
smile, fixed like a piece of sadistically applied sticking-plaster; the slightest relaxation 
might rip his ears off. Stok prised the tin open. 'Beluga,' he said, holding it out to me. 
'They sent me Ocietrova at first but I said, "This is for a special foreign guest. We must 
have Beluga".' Inside the tin were the light-grey veiny spheres of caviare, almost as big as 
a tiny pea. Stok opened a packet of small wafers and spooned a large portion on to each. 
He poured the vodka until the tiny glasses brimmed above the rim. Stok held up a glass. 
'To travellers,' said Stok. 
 
'Let's make it motorists,' I said. 

 
The Czech ripped the sticking-plaster smile off with a sudden unexpected jerk. He 
would do himself an injury doing that one day. 
 
'To motorists,' said Stok, 'all over the world.' We all drank and as Stok refilled the 
glasses he said, 'Here in Prague they say that although the traffic police are communists, 
the drivers are fascists, which would be all right if it were not that the pedestrians are 
anarchists.' 
 
Stok was bubbling over with gaiety. He prodded Harvey and said, 'I tell you a 
joke. The factory workers say that it's impossible to do anything right. If you arrive five 
minutes early you are a saboteur; if you arrive five minutes late you are betraying 
socialism; if you arrive on time they say, "Where did you get the watch?" ' Stok laughed 
and spilled his drink. The Czech officer looked at him in shy disbelief and offered round 
his packet of Memfis cigarettes. 
 
'Another,' said Stok. 'Capitalism is the exploitation of man by man. Yes? Well 
socialism is exactly the reverse.' 
 
Everyone laughed and swilled down another drink. Harvey was getting quite 
merry. He said to Stok, 'Where do you get all these gags - Readers' Digest?' 
 
Stok grinned. 'No, no, no, no - from people. That one about capitalism and 
socialism - we arrested a man for telling that this morning.' Stok laughed his booming 
baritone laugh till the tears came into his eyes. 
 
Harvey said to me softly, 'Is he kidding?' 

 
'Who knows?' I said. 

 
The Czech walked under the oil lamp. Beside the huge gasometer of Stok he 
looked like a walk-on for La Boheme. He had a pair of soft leather gloves. He dragged 
them on and smoothed the creases around the fingers and flapped the cuffs backwards 
and forwards as he walked. 
 
'Eat, drink,' Stok roared. The Czech began to shovel the caviare down like an 
automaton. Stok's word was law. 
 
We munched into the caviare, spooning it on to the wafer biscuits. 

 
'To Henry Ford,' said Harvey holding up his glass. 

 
Stok was doubtful. 'If Henry Ford had been born in the Soviet Union, he would be 
a name I could drink to.' 
 
'If Henry Ford had been born in the Soviet Union,' said Harvey, 'he would still be 
making bicycles.' Stok laughed. 
 
Harvey lifted his glass again. 'Henry Ford, philan thropist.' The Czech officer 
asked what the word meant and Stok translated it. Harvey belched and smiled. It angered 
Stok. 
 
Stok said, 'You Americans are generous and we Russians are not. This is what 
you wish to say. Well, it is true that we do not give other nations gifts and bribes. We do 
not give them nuclear weapons. We give them very little money and very few guns. What 
we give other nations is encouragement. Encouragement and ideas. No amount of guns 
can fight ideas. In China, Laos and Cuba you have discovered that.' Stok nodded to 
emphasise the point. 
 
'In China,' said Harvey, 'you have discovered it too.' 

 
There was a moment of tension. I proposed an old Russian toast, 'To my wife and 
my girl friend and to the woman I have yet to meet. I carry gifts for all three.' 
 
Stok slapped his thigh in delight. We drank. 

 
Then there was a toast to sputniks, the inventor of vodka, detour signs wherever 
they may be found, Shakespeare, Howard Johnson's ice cream (twenty-eight different 
flavours), and that 'famous English cathedral, St Pancras'. Then Stok held his glass up and 
proposed 'Czechoslovakia'. 
 
'To Czechoslovakia,' I said. 'The best beer and animated films in the world. Where 
abortion is legal, homosexuality no offence and a divorce costs only ten pounds.' 
 
'I never know when you joke,' said Stok. 

 
'Nor do I,' I said. I downed the drink and, so did the others. Stok refilled the 
glasses and said, 'Death to the fascists.' 
 
Harvey said 'Fascists', quietly. He looked around. 

 
'There is a deal of semantic confusion around that word. A sort of implied, inbuilt 
suggestion that there is a special counterproductive network of every bully, crook, 
swindler, rapist and short-order artist in the world confronting the gentle, honest, helpful, 
long-suffering, scholarly, underpaid remainder.' Harvey swayed slightly and tapped his 
chest violently. 'Fascism is something in here. Right here in everyone in the world.' Stok 
and the Czech officer were looking at Harvey in surprise. 
 
Harvey held his glass of vodka and, drawing himself up to a position of attention, 
said in a slow, dignified voice, 'We will drink to the death of fascism in Washington, in 
London... ' He waved his head at each town. 'In Prague and in Moscow.' He tapped the 
chests of each of us as he repeated the towns again. By a small error of judgment I got 
Prague and the Czech officer got London and Harvey had trouble finding a Washington 
chest until he remembered his own. 
 
'Yes,' said Stok dully. It was a situation that well fitted the native land of Kafka 
and the Good Soldier Schweik. There were more toasts after that but Stok had lost a lot of 
his bounce. 
 
'Disadvantageous confrontation,' Harvey pronounced when we were back in the 
car. 
 
Two huge trucks rattled past towards the state factory, the huge painted 
registration numbers on their sides almost obscured by dirt. I waited until the dust and 

dense black exhaust fumes drifted out of my headlight beams, then began the return trip 
to Prague. 
 
'Do you think he knew?' Harvey kept asking me. 'Is that what he meant by 
poputchik?' 
 
'Don't worry about it,' I said. He was dying to talk. 

 
'You are right,' Harvey said and dozed lightly as we drove back to Prague. 

 
There were still plenty of people around when I parked outside the hotel. Here 
and there were groups of people in heavy overcoats sitting on wicker chairs in sidewalk 
cafes and making like it was Paris. The fat man in the kiosk was selling hot dogs to 
hungry pedestrians who all had transistor radios or battered brief-cases; some had both. 
Through the trees, big red and green neon signs were flashing and making strange 
abstract patterns in the shiny sides of passing trams. 
 
'Coffee,' said Harvey and I nodded, because I knew that he would burst if he 
didn't say what I already knew but would pretend to be surprised about. 
 
The hotel foyer was full of brown aspidistras and green silver, the floor was 
visible through the holes in the carpet, and a gnome-like clerk was turning the pages of a 
vast dusty ledger. In the centre of the foyer were twelve pieces of plaid-patterned 
matching luggage, two small children in bright yellow sweatshirts, a woman in a grey 
woollen dress with a large leather handbag and a frail-looking man in large spectacles 
and a golf jacket. 
 
'Cold, cold, froid, say, Janie - what's the German for cold?' He turned to us as we 
entered. 'Hey, look, will you tell this guy that we got to bath the kids and we need hot 
water? The hot water tap in the bathroom just isn't working at all. Will you tell him...' 
 
Harvey looked faintly annoyed that he'd been so easily tagged as an American. He 
said in German to the man behind the desk, 'He needs hot water.' The clerk said, 'By the 
time the idiot has his luggage upstairs the hot water will be running.' 
 
The tourist said, 'You tell him that back home the health authorities would close a 
place like this down -the whole place is filthy.' 
 
Harvey said to the clerk, 'The gentleman's mother was born in Prague - he says it's 
like coming home.' To the American he said, 'The management regret the counter-
productive difficulty with the thermostat but if you return to your room the water will be 
running hot in a moment or so.' 
 
'And tell him not to ask for someone to carry his baggage,' said the clerk. 'He's not 
in the land of slavery now.' 
 
The tourist said, 'We have just the same trouble with our furnace at home.' 

 
Harvey said, 'I am afraid the baggage porter's mother is sick. If you could possibly 
manage a flexible response in order not to escalate the difficulties.' 
 
'Sure,' said the tourist and he began to explain the whole thing to his wife while I 
grappled with the controls of the ancient lift. The tourist's wife said to Harvey, 'What time 
do the stores close downtown?' 
 
Harvey said, 'I'm a stranger here.' The lift began to ascend. 

 
'They are going to fire me,' Harvey said when we were finally in my room. 

 
I opened the bottle of Black Label that I had bought on the plane. Harvey bounced 
full length on the hard bed with a great rumble of straining metal, and sang a snatch of his 
song, 'You've got to escalate or even quantify,' but he was no longer really drunk. 
 
'Official?'I asked. 

 
'More or less,' said Harvey. 'The last time I went to see the Embassy Security 
Officer, he gave me a printed form called "The Foreign Service Retirement and Disability 
System". What's more they've got me working in the visa section with an F.S.O .8 [F.S.O 
.8: Foreign Service Officer, 8th Grade. Grades go from 1 to 8 .8 is lowest.] leaning over 
my shoulder all day.' 
 
'And Jindriska?' I said. 

 
Harvey got to his feet and walked across to the wash basin. He selected a cake of 
soap from my open case. He sniffed at the soap. 'Lemon,' he said. 
 
'Yes,' I said. He sniffed the soap again and then began to wash his hands. 'She 
wants to stay here in some ways,' Harvey said. 'But she will do as I ask. There's no point 
in my persuading her to go Stateside when there's no slight chance of the State 
Department giving her a visa.' 
 
'You work in the visa department,' I said. 

 
'That's just what they are waiting for,' said Harvey. He continued to wash his 
hands with Freudian preciseness. '.., Hell, they're right. I'm not complaining. I'm in the 
Political section, I've got no business falling in love with a Czechoslovak girl, but.. ' He 
pulled a face at me in the mirror. 
 
'Maybe I should marry her,' I said. 'That would make her a British subject. Then 
you'll have no trouble.' Harvey wasn't in a laughing mood. 'Yeah,' he said and continued 
to wash his hands until they had all but disappeared into great white boxing-gloves of 
sudsy lather. 'You see,' he said quietly, 'that's why those two comedians tonight gave me 
the jitters. I don't know what I'd do if I found that Jindriska was... working for...' 
 
'Harvey,' I said sharply, 'don't get so maudlin. Just treat your work like a mistress: 
don't tell your wife about it wherever she was born.' Harvey grinned. I said, 'Stop trying 
to wash your troubles away and come and have a drink.' I was wondering where I would 
get another friendly contact in Prague half as good as Harvey. 
 
He rinsed and dried his hands a little awkwardly, smiled and took his drink. Down 
the corridor I could hear the American tourist saying, 'Jiminy, Jane, there are no darned 
curtains at the window. I wonder which room those two guys are in.' We heard him walk 
down the corridor in our direction. He stopped, then he called, 'Is there a fellow 
American hereabouts?' 
 
We listened to him calling all along the corridor. Then I said to Harvey, 'Where 
do I meet this second guy who was in Treblinka camp?' 
 
'Jan-im-Gluck's brother,' said Harvey, 'they hate each other.' He went and stared 
through the dingy lace into Wenceslas Square. 'But if you want to see the death of your 
guy in writing he'll be in the Pinkas synagogue at ten thirty in the morning. That's in the 
Stare Mesto near the Ghetto section. There are several synagogues there but Pinkas is 
where he'll be.' 
 
'I'll be there,' I said. I poured Harvey another drink. 'I wish I knew what Stok was 
thinking,' said Harvey. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 34 
 
 

COLONEL ALEXEYEVITCH OLEG STOK 
 
 
Monday, October 21st 
 
'It's not my job to think,' said Stok. 'I employ youngsters to do that; their minds aren't so 
cluttered up with knowledge.' He eased his boots off and flexed his toes in front of the 
stove. Stok could pick things up with his toes when he was a kid. It was a long time since 
he had demonstrated that. They had a different set of values nowadays and not only about 
prehensile toes. 
 
'Veal I'm having,' said the Czech officer whose name was Vaclav. 

 
'Anything you have,' said Stok. He wasn't a fussy man. Something hot to eat, 
something cold to drink and a bed - with sheets if possible - and he wouldn't complain. 
 
'Veal and strawberries,' said Vaclav. Stok nodded. 

 
'They are tinned,' said Vaclav. 

 
'Good God, man, I'm not Tsar Nicholas. Just heat it and bring it in.' Stok wished 
he hadn't said 'God'; he'd probably given the wrong impression the other way now. 
Vaclav went out to the kitchen. Stok lit up. He relished the taste of Makhora. He made a 
point of smoking fancy things when he was talking to Westerners but the coarsest 
Russian tobacco was what he enjoyed most. 
 
Vaclav came back with two plates of meat. He had prepared them himself; he 
hoped Stok would understand. There was no chance of getting servants, they were all 
working in the factories. The last one went back to the farm, could you imagine that? 
 
'Easily,' said Stok. 'The only place anyone gets a square meal in this country.' 

 
'I wouldn't say that,' said Vaclav but he relaxed into a smile. 

 
'You can say anything you want when I have my boots off,' Stok said. 'That's what 
I tell all my people. Anything I hear while my boots are off is off the record, privileged 
you might say.' 
 
Vaclav slipped his shoes off. He wasn't sure if Comrade Colonel Stok expected 
him to do that but they were damp anyway. He turned them soles upwards near the stove. 
He didn't want them to lose shape, for even in Czechoslovakia where shoes were a major 
industry - the Gottwaldov factory that used to be Data turning out thousands of pairs - 
even here there was no excuse for waste. He stuffed the inside of the shoe with strips torn 
from Lidova Demokracie. 'Don't use that,' Stok bellowed. 
 
Vaclav looked down at the torn paper. He had torn Walther Ulbricht into two 
irregular halves. 
 
'Pravda is what I use,' Stok boomed. 'It's best for boots, seems to draw the 
moisture out somehow.' Vaclav smiled; he knew he was being teased. 
 
Stok ate his veal and drank the whole of his lager in one go. 

 
'You don't waste time,' said Vaclav. 

 
'I had one knocked over once,' Stok said, and roared with laughter. 

 
Vaclav arranged the complicated system of dampers on the large white porcelain 
stove and the fire began to whine and crackle. 
 
'You should come up to Berlin,' said Stok. 'It's damned comfortable up there, I can 
tell you. They know how to look after themselves, Vaclav, these Germans. Sometimes I 
wonder how we managed to beat them.' 

 
'The Nazis?' said Vaclav. 

 
'Oh we still haven't beaten them,' 

 
' said Stok. 'The Germans I meant.' 

 
Germans. What went wrong with Lenin's dream of a marriage between the 
Russian and German proletariat? The same thing that went wrong with lesser marriages 
the image of illusion is shattered by the hammer of reality. It was all very well extending 
the hand of friendship to the German proletariat until you found them in Wehrmacht 
uniform burning down your village. It went wrong then. Stok nodded to himself. 
 
'I hate Germans,' said Vaclav. 'I was in the R. G. [R. G.: Revolucni Garda. This 
was a punitive group formed at the end of the war, to kill Germans for revenge. They 
operated mostly in the German-settled Sudeten parts of Czechoslovakia. Around the R. 
G., the S. T. B. (Statni Bezpec-post) or Security Police was formed. Vaclav is a member 
of O. B. Z. (Obranne Zpravodajstvi) - the military version of S. T. B.] at one time.' 
 
Stok raised his eyebrows as though he hadn't known. 'We knew what to do with 
Germans,' Vaclav went on. 'The lucky ones took just their hand-luggage and went across 
the border in cattle trucks. Three million of them. They were glad to go. That's what to do 
with Germans.' 
 
'That's what we did,' said Stok. That's what we did wrong, he thought to himself. 
Lenin would never have agreed to the forced shift of factories and populations. Stok 
looked at Vaclav's pale eyes. He's a Stalinist, Stok decided. They all are, the Czechs. 
Pushing the Germans across the border was a piece of pure Stalinism. 
 
'The Germans are the wild animals of Europe, whatever sort of flag they carry.' 

 
'Germans are more complex than that. I could give you a dozen examples.' Stok 
pulled his fleshy chin. 'I am faced with a problem at this moment, which is a matter of 
understanding the German character, and quite honestly, Vaclav, I don't know whether 
I'm a fit man to do it.' 
 
'A man that stormed the Winter Palace?' said Vaclav. 

 
'Ah,' said Stok smiling, 'the number of times I have stormed that Winter Palace. 
But it's no good, my boy. We can't go on storming our Winter Palaces for ever. We must 
storm new Palaces every day, for that's how we are judged, upon last week's desk work, 
not upon the night I had a little too much to drink and couldn't see the danger involved in 
charging riflemen with a rake. We don't want any more Winter Palaces, Vaclav, as I told 
that young fool tonight; ideas will infiltrate the most heavily fortified citadel.' Stok 
nodded to himself and fingered the flesh under his chin as though trying to tear it free. 
 
'Ideas travel,' Stok said. Both ways, he added to himself. He thought of the young 
tough that poor Major Bykovsky had for a son. He wore leather jackets and pointed shoes 
and sat in his room getting ancient American jazz records word-perfect. Some say he 
wrote to film stars in Hollywood. There should be a dossier on him, Stok thought, but 
he'd known Bykovsky since 1926; it would break his heart. When he got back to Berlin 
he would enquire into the whole business again. These sort of sloppy sentimental 
inefficiencies were a betrayal of all he believed in. But still... 
 
'All societies contain within themselves the germ of their own destruction,' Vaclav 
said. 
 
'That's about it,' said Stok. Not very bright, Vaclav, Stok thought. Even his quotes 
from Marx were wrong. There was a radio playing near by. 'The Motherland hears, the 
Motherland knows.' Stok softly sang a few bars. 

 
'Have you been often to the West?' Vaclav asked. 

 
'Often,' said Stok. 

 
'I too have visited the West,' said Vaclav. Stok sipped his lemon tea and nodded. 
'You lived in Bayswater - a district of London - during the war,' said Stok. Then he 
laughed a deep-throated laugh. 'Don't blush, my son.' 
 
Vaclav was angry at himself for being even slightly embarrassed. 'I went to join 
the Free Slovak forces on the orders of Moscow.' 
 
'That's right,' said Stok, still grinning. He knew all about Vaclav. 

 
'I enjoy a trip to the West,' said Vaclav. He was like a defiant child, thought Stok. 
'Why not, lad?' 
 
'But the fundamental inequality is what spoiled any pleasure there might be in 
material things. How can there ever be justice there?' 
 
'We are policemen, Vaclav; and policemen can't get mixed up with justice. It's 
bad enough being mixed up with the law.' Vaclav nodded but did not smile. 
 
Vaclav said, 'But as citizens we must consider such things. Inequality in the eyes 
of the state is the overwhelming sin of capitalism and will be responsible for its 
downfall.' 
 
'Sin?' asked Stok. Vaclav had the pale features of a young priest, thought Stok. 
Although he wriggled with embarrassment, Vaclav continued, 'It's what makes our 
Socialist Republic strong: the guarantee of humanity, fraternity, justice and prosperity for 
all. In the West the one-sided invidious processes of commerce which dominate the 
system inevitably end in militarism, in which truth and justice are suppressed by 
corruption.' 
 
He's like my own young men, thought Stok, well provided with answers. Stok 
pushed his feet against the hot porcelain of the stove and watched the steam rise from his 
damp socks. 
 
'Not to believe in justice because of corruption is like not believing in marriage 
because of infidelity,' said Stok. 'A system works according to the kind of people running 
it. Even fascism would be acceptable if it was run by angels. Marxism assumes that 
countries are run by men - corruptible men.' 
 
'Are you directed to ask me questions?' said Vaclav. To test me?' 

 
'May my right hand lose its cunning,' roared Stok, 'if I abused my job and your 
hospitality.' 
 
Vaclav nodded. Then, putting on his formal voice, he said, 'Comrade Colonel, 
what was the purpose of the meeting tonight?' 
 
'There was no purpose,' said Stok without a pause. 'It's just a matter of letting 
them know we have our eyes upon them.' 
 
'You never intended to arrest them.' 

 
He was a mass round-up man, this Czech. He'd use an armoured division to 
shadow a suspect and wonder why he vanished. 'He's not a black marketeer,' Stok said. 
'He is an employee of the British Government. This is all a matter of probing gently. Like 
a brain operation, Vaclav. A hammer and chisel is all right for getting through the skull, 
but after that you have to be delicate.' Stok pronounced it as though the word itself was 
fragile. 
 
'Yes,' said Vaclav. Yes, thought Stok. He'd never understand in a million years. 
He wondered how the Englishman would ever manage, had he an assistant of this calibre. 

 
There was a long silence. Stok helped himself to some slivovice. 

 
'He seemed not very...' Vaclav groped for a word. '... professional.' 

 
'In our business,' said Stok with a chuckle, 'that's the very height of 
professionalism. In fact it wouldn't surprise me if the Englishman came just to show us 
that they are probing.' 
 
'Probing what?' 

 
'Why must you be so unfeeling, my boy? Just probing: the situation, the way we 
work, the way we think.' Some of us, he corrected himself. 
 
'I understand,' said Vaclav. 

 
'Get a drink,' said Stok. 'You're like an unemployed undertaker.' 

 
Vaclav said, 'I have some Western gramophone records that we can play.' 

 
'My oath,' thought Stok. He was going to be another jazz fan like Bykovsky's brat. 
'The Aitchison, Topeka and the Santa Fe' and The Dark Town Poker Club' were two 
songs that Bykovsky's boy sang in word-perfect American. What an awful idea. 
 
'Ideas travel,' said Stok, 'and there is nothing any of us can do about that except 
listen.' 
 
'Yes,' said Vaclav. He didn't fetch the records, to Stok's relief. 

 
Stok curled his toes around the warm metal of the poker. Vaclav watched him 
without seeing. 
 
'This girl the American wants to marry. Is she working for you?' 

 
'No,' said Vaclav. 

 
'Now don't lie to me, you young blackguard,' Stok said loudly. 

 
'No,' said Vaclav quietly. They smiled at each other. 

 
'You can like people,' said Stok, 'without going into detail.' Stok's mind roamed 
off to old General Borg. A desiccated old Prussian general, who would have thought that 
one could have made a friend of him? At first he'd only visited Borg because he was 
going to make a play for the elder daughter. Stok tugged at his chin again. And now here 
he was, the younger girl's Pate. A fine old fuss there would be if that leaked out. Pate - an 
old-fashioned godfather instead of having her attend the Jugendweihe ceremony that the 
Communist regime held instead. 
 
Stok thought of all those books and papers, room after room of documents that the 
poor girl collated and dusted. He knew that flat as well as any place in the world; it was 
perhaps the only place he could really call home. The greater part of his time he spent in 
his office, devoid of anything that could be construed as even the simplest bourgeois 
comfort. As for the great ocean liner of a place in Kopenick that one of his staff had 
furnished to impress visiting officials, well! It gave him the shudders just to go inside the 
door. No, Borg's place was the nearest thing to a home. 
 
It had been difficult to keep up with the old man or his daughter at first. This 
division, that army corps 'wheeling southward on the Don', 'counter-offensive pinching 
out by concentric attack'. He had only been a captain during the war, and that only for the 
final seven weeks. Old Borg always spoke to him like he had the ear of Stalin. Stok 
remembered an American tourist that he had questioned a couple of months back. When 
Stok asked him where he had travelled on holiday, the tourist said, 'I don't know until I 
develop the film.' 
 
Stok had laughed at the time. He knew how true that could be. He had never 
known what he had done in the war until old Borg had explained it to him. The old man 

wouldn't last long, Stok thought. He didn't know what Heidi would do when he died. 
Heidi, thought Stok, I don't know what I will do when the old man dies. Stok wondered 
what the old man would say to the idea of him marrying Heidi. It was a stupid idea and 
Stok rejected it from his mind. His toes gripped the warm metal of the poker but it 
slipped from the grasp of the damp sock. 
 
'German man,' said Vaclav. 

 
'What did you say?' said Stok. 

 
'You started to tell me about a problem you have with a German man,' Vaclav 
said. 
 
'Did I?' said Stok. He must try and cure himself of this tendency to daydream. 

 
'Oh, yes,' said Stok. 'Well, the problem is this. If you have a German Jew, what is 
he?' 
 
'I do not understand,' said Vaclav. 

 
'It's quite simple,' said Stok loudly. 'Is he primarily a Jew, or is he primarily a 
German? Upon that depends what he will do in a certain situation. That's why we keep 
dossiers, my dear Vaclav, to provide matter for anticipatory calculations. My guess is that 
if a man behaves in a certain flashy, unscrupulous way for long enough he will develop 
behaviour patterns of that sort, no matter what fantasy life he may lead about retiring to a 
monastery or university or wherever errant capitalist intellectuals end up.' 
 
'So you have decided what to do?' said Vaclav. 

 
'In these tricky cases I always do the same thing,' said Stok. 'I make my plans 
upon the basis of everyone being untrustworthy.' 
 
Vaclav admired that solution. It had a certain historic ring to it. 'What about the 
Englishman tonight?' said Vaclav. 'Is he another problem?' 
 
'English?' said Stok. 'No, no, no.' He poured himself another drink. He'd had too 
many, he knew, but one more wouldn't make all that difference. ' "English" is a 
professional just like you and me. Professionals never make problems.' Stok curled his 
toe round the warm poker and lifted it. 
 
In mediaeval times it was the aim of players to annihilate every opponent instead 
of checkmating the king. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 35 
 
 
Tuesday, October 22nd 
 
TEREZIN. BELZEC. OSVETIM. GLIWICE. MAJDANEK. SOBIBOR. BERGEN-
BELSEN. IZBICA. FLOSSENBURG. GROSSROSEN. ORANIENBURG. 
TREBLINKA. LODZ. LUBLIN. DACHAU. BUCHENWALD. NEUENGAMME. 
RAVENSBRUECK. SACHSENHAUSEN. NORDHAUSEN. DORA. MAUTHAUSEN. 
STRASSHOF. LANDSBERG. PLASZOW. OHRDRUS. HERZOGENBUSCH. 
WESTER-BORK. 
 
The Pinkas Synagogue is a tiny grey stone fifteenth-century building, its Gothic 
Renaissance interior bare of all furnishings except the carefully painted lettering. 

 
The walls of the little synagogue seem grey, grey with an intricate pattern of tiny 
writing. Jammed together like the victims themselves, and written with obsessional 
clarity, are the names of the camps and of the dead. The grey wall stretches away like 
infinity and the lines of names are as hushed as a Nuremberg rally. 
 
The man I had come to see tapped the stone wall at shoulder height. Under the 
scarred finger tip I read the name Broum. As his finger moved in the cool light the name 
was revealed, hidden, revealed and then hidden again as his hand rested over it. 
 
'The best book is the world,' said Josef-the-gun, 'that's what the Talmud tells us; 
the best book is the world.' His hand made a curious turning movement. He looked at it 
like a stage conjurer, proud that by opening his fist he could make fingers materialise. He 
looked at the wall as though he had produced that too from his sleeve and he tapped it to 
show what a solid manifestation it was. 
 
'I know what you are going to say,' said Josef-the-gun. His voice sounded 
indecently loud. 
 
'What?'I asked. 

 
'Now you understand for the first t-t-t-t-t-time.' I could see the tip of his tongue 
vibrate as he stuttered, 'That's what they all say and, believe me, it sounds silly.' 
 
'Is that what they all say?' 

 
'One man said "I went to St Peter's before I understood Luther and I had to come 
here to understand Hitler".' 
 
'Understand,' I said, 'that's a complicated word, "understand".' 

 
'That's right,' said Josef-the-gun. He moved suddenly like a trout in a patch of 
sunlight. 
 
'What is there to understand? You write a numeral six, put six zeros behind it and 
you call it "Jewish Dead". You write six zeros behind a numeral seven, and you call that 
"Russian Civilian Dead". You change the first numeral to three and you have a symbol 
for murdered Russian prisoners. Five: it's Polish corpses. Understand? Why, it's simple 
mathematics. Just name it as the nearest round million.' I said nothing. 'So you are 
inquiring about Broum?' he said finally. He removed his wide-brimmed black hat and 
studied the band of it as though he had some secret message inside. 
 
'Broum,' I said. 'Yes. Paul Louis Broum.' 

 
'Ah yes,' said the man; ' 

 
'Paul Louis Broum.' He emphasised the given names carefully, 'That's the voice of 
officialdom all right.' And he gave a secret little smile, then ducked and bobbed away like 
he thought I was about to strike him. 'Broum,' he said again; he rubbed his chin and 
moved his eyeball up into his forehead in an attitude of deep thought. 'And you saw Jan-
im-Gluck yesterday.' 
 
'Harvey took me there,' I said. 

 
'Yes, yes, yes,' he said still rubbing his chin. 'Well, my brother is an old man... ' 
He stopped rubbing his chin long enough to make a little circular motion with his index 
finger.'... it happens to us all as we get older.' 
 
'He seemed lucid enough,' I said. 

 
'I meant no d-d-d-disrespect,' said the man. He ducked away again. I realised that 
some of the physical movements were to cover his stuttering. 
 
'You knew Broum?' I asked. 

 
'Everyone knew him,' said the man. 'People like that, everyone knows them, no 
one likes them.' 
 
'What do you mean?' I asked. 'People like what?' 

 
'Very rich people,' said the man. 'Didn't you know he was v-v-v-very rich?' 

 
'What's the difference,' I asked, 'rich or poor?' 

 
The old man leaned towards me. 'The difference between the unhappy poor and 
the unhappy rich is that the unhappy rich can change.' He gave an abrupt cackle. He 
shuffled across the cold floor and when he spoke again his voice echoed around the 
vaulting. 'When the Gestapo needed a h-h-h-h-h-headquarters here in Prague they chose 
the Petschek House - that's a bank - they used the vaults and strongrooms as their torture 
chambers. A symbolic dwelling for the torturers of fascism, eh?. The vaults of capitalist 
wealth.' He dodged away waving a finger. 
 
I realised why he was called 'Josef-the-gun' _ it was because of this stutter. 'But 
why was Broum unpopular in the camp?' I asked to try to get the conversation back on 
my lines. 
 
'He wasn't unpopular with the G-G-G-G-G-G-Germans. Oh dear no. They liked 
him almost as much as his money. Almost as much as his money,' he said again. 'They 
did favours for money, you see, the Germans.' 
 
'What sort of favours?' 

 
'Any sort,' said the gun. 'The medical officer for a start, he'd sell all manner of 
lovely things for money. For the right amount of money he could c-c-c-c-cure you.' 
 
I nodded. 

 
'Cure you,' said the old man. 'You understand what I mean?' 

 
'Yes,' I said, 'they could make innocent prisoners suffer or let guilty ones go free.' 

 
'Guilty ones,' said the man. 'What a strange vocabulary you have.' 

 
'Who killed Broum?' I asked. I wanted to cut through the man's rhetoric. 

 
'International disinterest,' said the man. 

 
'Who personally killed him?' I said. 

 
'Neville Chamberlain,' said the man. 

 
'Look,' I said. 'Who actually strangled him?' I added 'Broum', in an effort to avoid 
another long flight of philosophy and paradox. 
 
'Ah,' said the man, 'strangled?' He put on his hat like a judge about to pass the 
death sentence. 'The instrument of death?' 
 
'Yes.' 

 
'It was a guard,' said the man. 

 
'An officer?'I asked. 

 
Josef removed his hat and wiped the leather band with a handkerchief. 

 
'Was it the medical officer?' I prompted. 

 
'Didn't my brother tell you?' he said. 'He knew.' 

 
'You tell me,' I said. The man put his hat back on. 'A Landser named Vulkan. Just 
a boy. Not good nor bad.' 
 
He walked out of the door into the bright sunlight. Beyond him greenery sprouted 
between the white gravestones like they were gigantic mustard-and-cress sandwiches. I 
followed him. 
 
'Did you know this soldier Vulkan?' 

 
He turned quickly. 'Just as well as I know you. What do you think Treblinka was - 
a Conservative club?' He stepped away. The bright sunlight made his skin waxy and 
yellow. 
 
'Try to remember,' I said. 'This is important.' 

 
'Oh, that's different,' said the man. He rubbed his chin. 'If it's important, I'll have 
to remember.' He chewed each syllable carefully and presented the finished word on the 
tip of his tongue, anxious not to mutilate a vowel or drop an aitch. 'I was getting it mixed 
up with the trivia of half a million people being fed into a gas chamber.' He looked up at 
me, frankly jeering, and began to walk towards the street. 
 
'This prisoner Broum,' I said. 'What had he done?' 

 
'Done?' said the man. 'What had I done? To be in a concentration camp you need 
only be a Jew.' He opened the cemetery door with a howl of rusty hinges. 
 
'Had he been involved in a murder?' I asked. 

 
'Have we not all been involved?' said the man. 

 
'A communist,' I said. 'Was he a known communist?' 

 
The man turned in the doorway. 'Communist,' he repeated. 'You may have heard 
someone in a concentration camp admit to being a murderer and many agreed that they 
had been spies. A prisoner would sometimes even confess to having at one time - for a 
short while -been a Jew. But a communist, no. No one would ever let that word pass their 
lips.' He stepped through the door into the street and walked slowly towards the old 
synagogue. 
 
I walked alongside. 'You may be the last chance of bringing a guilty man to 
justice... ' I pleaded. '... a traitor.' 
 
The man seized on the word 'traitor'. He said, 'What's that mean? Is that another of 
your special words? What was a man who threw a piece of his bread ration into the 
children's compound when it was against his orders as a German soldier to do so?' 
 
I didn't answer. 

 
'What was a man who would only throw his bread for money?' 

 
'What about a Jew who worked for the Germans?' I countered. 

 
'No worse than a Frenchman who worked for the Americans,' said the old man 
cockily. 'L-l-l-l-look at the clock up there.' 
 
I looked past the Staronova Synagogue to where an ancient clock with Hebrew 
numbers glinted golden in the sun. 
 
'This was the Ghetto,' said Josef with a sudden sweep of his hand. 'Every day I 
looked at that clock when I was a young boy. I was eighteen before I discovered that it 
was different from every other clock in the world.' 
 
Around the corner rolled a huge, glassy tourist bus sparkling like a paste brooch. 
A resonant, amplified voice inside the coach was saying, '... wealth of sculptural 
decoration presages the High Gothic. This is the oldest surviving Jewish prayer-house in 
Europe.' 
 
'That clock goes backward,' said Josef, 'anti-clockwise.' 

 
Solemn tourists cocooned with camera straps disembarked. 'It keeps the right time 
but every twenty-four hours it moves one whole day in the wrong direction.' He tapped 
my arm. 'That's what will happen to us if we spend our days remembering the Vulkans, 
Broums and Mohrs instead of moving forward into a world that can never give birth to 
such people.' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
Josef-the-gun eyed me curiously, wondering if I would understand him. He said, 
'We must live out our personal decisions and beliefs, for this is what I was taught. When 
one day I face my God, He will not say to me, "Why were you not Moses?" God will say, 
"Why were you not Josef-the-gun?" ' 
 
Josef-the-gun moved away past the disgorged tourists like a mechanical toy with a 
broken ratchet. The American from the hotel called to his wife, 'Quick, Janie, get some 
movie. That's so typical: the old guy under the clock.' 
 
Switchback: to return to original position in any given sequence. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 36 
 
 
Friday, October 25th 
 
SOMEONE from the Meteorological Office should discover why it is that every time I 
fly into London Airport it is raining. Perhaps I should ask Mrs Meynard. The great silver 
wings shone with it and the motors made the puddles sag and blew them into weird 
branch shapes as the plane trundled towards the apron. There was the click of seat belts 
being loosened and that sudden nervous chatter of relief. Somewhere near the front, 
efficient men in camel-hair waistcoats were on their feet probing for plastic raincoats and 
bottles and cameras amongst the salvage of their holiday. 
 
The stewardess shook off her lethargic disinterest in the passengers and in a 
sudden surge of new-found energy began to assemble her own belongings. The motors 
gave a volley of pops before the blades came to a final sticky halt. Outside on the wet 
tarmac shiny loaders clustered around their siege ladders. The great door of the city 
swung open. In the corridors there was a last-minute scuffle as the engines of war moved 
closer -so must the greedy eyes have watched Bokhara. From their positions of power 
men in uniforms of blue and gold appeared, still strapping together their documents and 
treasures even as the sack began. 
 
'Nice trip?' said Jean. 

 
'All right,' I said. 'I read a history book for most of the way - and tried to forget 
the taste of the meal.' 
 
'That can be quite difficult.' Jean had wangled a Jaguar from the car pool. I eased 
myself into the leather-work as the driver nosed his way into the London Road traffic. 
 
'Been working hard?' 

 
'I've been getting my hair done almost every day.' 

 
'It looks nice.' 

 
'Does it?' Jean turned her head and prodded at the chignon. 'It's a new man who 
used to be an assistant...' 
 
'Don't tell me the secrets,' I said. 'It spoils the magic for me.' 

 
'There's a few things that you'll have to check. There are a couple of letters that 
I've written undated so that you can see if I've done the right thing. The only appointment 
you have is lunch with Grenade tomorrow but I haven't promised.' 

 
'What's he want?' 

 
'It's some conference that O'Brien at the Foreign Office has arranged. I said you 
probably wouldn't be back in time. I've told Chico that he must go.' 
 
'Good girl,' I said. 'Why does Grenade bother with those things? They only have 
them so that O'Brien can write those long reports and have his neighbours in East Anglia 
along as guest speakers at twenty-five guineas a time.' 
 
'Grenade goes to them because it's an expense-paid trip to London where, as you 
well know, he spends all his time on draughty railway stations watching trains.' 
 
'Well, that's harmless enough.' 

 
'It's not harmless when you make me entertain him. 

 
Last November I had ten days ill in bed with influenza through standing around 
on the sloping ends of railway stations. All I got out of it was where to find an ashpan 
drop-bottom, steam accumulators and why they are still used, and the ability to recognise 
a three-cylinder locomotive by sound alone.' 
 
'I think you are secretly rather proud of yourself.' 

 
'If he wasn't such a nice old character I'd flatly refuse to go again.' 

 
'Then you are offering to go again?' 

 
'You dare.' 

 
'It's all guilt, you know,' I said. 

 
'What, the trains?' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 'He was in the Resistance during the war. He destroyed any number 
of locomotives. Now that they are being exterminated by progress he feels he has a task 
to protect and preserve them.' 
 
'Are you giving him lunch?' 

 
'Yes. You can come too. He likes you.' 

 
'I'll book a table then - Chez Solange?' 

 
'No, make it King's Cross Station Restaurant - he'll like that better.' 

 
'Over my dead body,' said Jean. 

 
I scarcely recognised the office. It had been re-papered; it was lighter than I ever 
remembered it before. I was deprived of those hollow areas of paper which made a 
drumming sound when you tapped them, but Jean thought that was a good thing. 
 
The gramophone music from the dispatch department hadn't changed, though, and 
the sound of Munn and Felton's (Footwear) Band sailing through the 'Thunder and 
Lightning Polka' was clearly audible from the second floor. I flipped the switch on my 
intercom. The duty dispatch clerk answered, 'Sir.' 
 
'Angels Guard Thee,' I said and flipped the switch off. 

 
'And the new window,' said Jean. 'You haven't mentioned that.' 

 
'I noticed,' I said. 'And the Mother-in-law's Tongue is coming on a treat.' 

 
'I've been oiling the leaves,' said Jean. 'It's a lot of trouble but the man in the shop 
said it was well worth while.' 
 
'He was right,' I said. 'It looks great.' I turned over the stuff on my desk. 

 
The trombone solo of 'Angels Guard Thee' filtered up from dispatch. 'Everything 
is great,' I said. 

 
'I had a reply from Berlin Documents Centre [B. D. C.: an archive of Nazi Party 
Membership records saved from a paper mill at the end of the war.] -nothing known 
there.' I grunted. 'I have one or two things though,' said Jean, 'if you'd like to see.' 
 
'O.K.,' I said. 'In a minute or so.' 

 
Jean walked across to her desk and the wet sort of light that envelops London on 
rainy days made a halo around her face as she stood near the window. I watched the 
movements of her hands as she picked up the large heaps of uncompleted work. Her 
hands moved without haste or irritation: like a skilled nurse or a croupier. She wore one 
of those shirt-style dresses with buttons and pockets and too many seams. Her hair was 
drawn back tightly from her face and her skin was taut and wrinkle-free like the very 
finest aerodynamic design. She felt me looking at her and looked at me. I smiled but she 
did not smile back. She opened a small compartment of her desk. The dispassionate 
impersonal attitude made her very desirable. 'You are looking pretty damn sexy today, 
Jean,' I said. 
 
'Thanks,' she said. She continued to process a heap of file cards and I read a 
memo from the Defence Ministry. Jean had that diligence upon which all intelligence 
work and all police work and for that matter all research of any kind must be based. Jean 
could sift through a haystack, find a pin and then look at it close enough to see the Lord's 
Prayer written on the head of it. It's that extra piece of effort at the end which makes the 
difference. 
 
'Come on,' I said. 'You've signed the Official Secrets Act. You know that 
withholding information from me is a felony. Let's see what it is.' 
 
'Now then,' said Jean, 'don't be all pompous.' 

 
'There are days when I could cheerfully consign you to a job at the P. O.,' I said. 
'You'd find out what pomposity really means there. They all talk like officers in English 
war films.' 
 
Jean riffed through her desk. It was a large Knoll International desk that I had had 
to really fight the appropriations people about. There were so many drawers and sub-
compartments that only Jean knew her way around it. She produced a limp paper file. 
She'd written 'Broum' in pencil on the front. 
 
'There's no code name for him,' she said. 

 
I lifted the key on the desk communication box. Alice answered, 'Yep.' 

 
'Alice,' I said, 'can you let me have one of those code names we had reserved for 
the Cuban Embassy people last year?' 
 
'What for?' said Alice, adding a 'sir' as an afterthought. 

 
'It's for those papers in the name of Broum that Hallam is supplying for us.' 

 
'You want a depersonified one then?' 

 
'No,' I said. 'We think there may be a real live Broum hanging around somewhere. 
If we have to make a claim to P. O. or H. O. for any documents on him it would make our 
position stronger to have an open file ready.' 
 
'Death's-head hawk moth,' said Alice. 'I'll back-date the opening of the file a year 
ago today.' 
 
'Thanks, Alice,' I said. 

 
You couldn't fail by talking to Alice in terms of interdepartmental conspiracy. I 
told Jean the code name and the file date. 

 
'Death's-head hawk moth,' said Jean. 'That's a terrible long code name. Do I have 
to type that out all through the file?' 
 
'Yes you do,' I said. 'I have enough trouble with Alice as it is without asking her 
to change a code name after I've wangled one out of her.' 
 
Jean raised one eyebrow. 'You're frightened of Alice.' 

 
'I'm not frightened of Alice,' I said. 'I just want to work without unnecessary 
friction.' 
 
Jean opened the brown folder. Inside there were some flimsy typewritten 
documents. Printed at the top it said 'Surete Nationale'. Under that, the typing was single-
spaced and the open part of many of the round characters was clogged with dirt. I read it 
through slowly and pain fully. It was a transcript of a judge's preliminary hearing of a 
murder case. [In continental trials the first stage consists of the judge examining the 
accused about his work, his health, his general ambition and demeanour in order to build 
a picture of the accused before hearing about the crime. In England the exact contrary 
happens. Any evidence about previous crimes or anything which might influence the jury 
against the accused is expressly forbidden. While the English system is clung to on the 
grounds of 'fair play', the continental system can in its way be more humane.] It was 
datelined Colmar, February 1943. 
 
'Just an ordinary murder,' I said to Jean. 'This fellow Broum was a murderer?' 

 
I read the transcript through again. 'The way this reads, he was about to get the 
chop,' I said. Jean passed me a photostat of a German Army document. The photostat was 
brown and spotted. It was a receipt for a prisoner taken from the civil prison in Colmar by 
a German Army major whose signature was like a piece of rusty barbed wire. 'Photo of 
Broum?' I asked. 
 
'If you read it carefully you'll find you're holding a receipt for a prisoner and a 
dossier. Also notice,' said Jean, 'that the French documents have him as Monsieur Broum 
but the German one says Obergefreiter Broum. The Archives must have checked back to 
his desertion from Caen, and he probably had an equivalent army rank.' 
 
'I noticed,' I said. 'Check Caen area court-martial records. The normal procedure is 
to return a man to his unit...' 
 
'We know all that, darling, but his unit was no longer there and I can't find where 
they were. The Group 312 Geheime Feldpolizei had vanished, as far as I can find, and 
Ross at the War Office says that the Germans didn't send their people back to the original 
unit.' 
 
'He's an old know-all, Ross,' I said. 

 
'He's been very sweet and helpful.' 

 
'I hope you haven't been giving him access to our records,' I said. I shuffled all the 
stuff on the desk. 'Good, good,' I said. 'Send a thank you to Grenade through the usual 
channels, even though I will tell him tomorrow myself.' 
 
'Grenade has got nothing to do with it,' said Jean. 

 
'Didn't this come from Grenade?' I said. 

 
'No,' said Jean. 'I got it.' 

 
'What do you mean you got it?' I said. 'You climbed through the window of the 
Surete Nationale at dead of night, do you mean?' 
 
'Silly,' said Jean. 'All I did was put a Green through to Interpol.' 

 
'What?' 

 
'Now don't blow your top, darling. I mixed it up with a lot of ancient old tat and 
even then I had Special Branch origin it.' 
 
'Grenade will know,' I said. 'All Interpol requests go straight to D. S. T.' 

 
Jean said, 'If you sat over there for a couple of days -' she pointed to her desk: it 
was stacked with documents, dossiers, newspaper clippings, unsorted file cards, 
unanswered correspondence and I. B. M. cards - 'you'd know how unlikely it is that 
Grenade or anyone else at D. S. T. is going to attach any significance to an Interpol 
Green. Even if they do, it won't have origined us. It origined Special Branch. Even if they 
dust it for fingerprints and find where it came from, so what? Is that what we're supposed 
to be doing here in Charlotte Street, working against Grenade?' 
 
'Simmer down,' I said. 'It's not the role of this department to make political 
decisions. That's what we have Houses of Parliament for.' 
 
'Which, coming from you,' said Jean, 'is very funny.' 

 
'Why coming from me?' 

 
'Because when Parliamentarians wake up in the small hours of the morning 
bathed in sweat and screaming, you are what they were dreaming of.' 
 
'Look, Jean,' I said. 

 
'I'm joking,' said Jean. 'Don't give me the Dutch Uncle just because I made a joke.' 

 
I took no notice. 'You only have the same sort of fear that everyone here has. 
That's why you are employed here. The moment we notice someone who isn't frightened 
that this set-up and all the other set-ups like it are a threat to democratic parliamentary 
systems - we fire him. The only way a department that pries can run is to admit of no elite 
which is immune from prying. 
 
'On the other hand this is a Government department like all other Government 
departments; without money it could not exist. There is the danger that the people who 
allocate the money are going to feel that they should be immune from prying. That is 
why, every time someone is after my blood, Dawlish protects me. Dawlish and I have a 
perfect system. It is a well-known fact that I am an insolent intractable hooligan over 
whom Dawlish has only a modicum of control. Dawlish encourages this illusion. One day 
it will fail. Dawlish will throw me to the wolves. 
 
Until he does, Dawlish and I have a closeness in inverse proportion to our 
differences because that's his protection, my protection and, believe it or not, Parliament's 
protection.' 
 
Jean said, 'And next week, schools, your lesson will be "Statesmanship for the 
under fives". And now back to Victor Sylvester.' 
 
'Victor Sylvester,' I said. 'My God, did you fix with the B. B. C. for him to play 
"Someday I'll find you"?' 
 
Jean said, 'Good job I don't rely on your memory. You create an international 
incident by proxy. The tune was "There's a small Hotel" and it went out on the B. B. C. 
Overseas request programme yesterday morning.' 
 
'Good,' I said. 

 
'Speaking of music, I've bought you a little gift.' She opened the vast filing drawer 
of her teak desk and produced a brown paper envelope. Inside was a twelve-inch 
gramophone record of Schonberg's 'Variations for wind band'. 
 
I looked at it and wondered why Jean had bought it for me. I'd only heard it the 
previous week when I went to the concert with... Oh. 

 
Jean was looking down at me like a protegee of Count Dracula. 'I was at the 
Royal Festival Hall that night when you had business with the celebrated Miss Steel.' 
 
'So what,' I said. 'So were a couple of thousand other music lovers.' 

 
'The operative word is lovers,' said Jean. 

 
'Go down to dispatch,' I said, 'and borrow their gramophone.' 

 
'I hope you feel guilty every time you hear it,' Jean said. 

 
'I will if we break the gramophone,' I said. 

 
The dispatch department had all put five shillings a week towards buying it. It was a good 
machine. Not like my hi-fi, mind you, but really good for a small mass-production job. 
The bass instruments came through with a fine clarity and the volume was such that when 
I started to play the record a second time Dawlish began to thump on the floor in 
complaint. 
 
'Schonberg's Variations for wind band,' I said. 

 
Dawlish said, 'I don't care if it's the Treasury Choral Society. I won't have it in my 
office.' 
 
'It's not in your office,' I said, 'it's in my office.' 

 
'It might just as well be in my office,' Dawlish said. 'I can't hear myself speak.' 

 
'You're not missing a thing,' I said. 

 
Dawlish waved his pipe stem at me and at an armchair. 'It doesn't even make an 
irregular pattern,' said Alice to Dawlish. I sat down in one of the black leather armchairs. 
There was a great stack of newspapers on the table. I sorted through them carefully - 
finally selecting the Herald Tribune. Dawlish said, 'The Liberal Party' to Alice. 
 
Alice shrugged and put the finder card into the I.B.M .88, stacking a huge pile of 
cards into the sloping rack on the right. She switched the Collator on and there was a 
whirring noise like a piece of paper stuck into a cycle wheel. The cards piled up in the 
reject racks except for four cards which were flicked along the machine. 
 
'Four,' Alice called like a croupier. 

 
'Key-punch a finder card for the 'For y Party,' said Dawlish. 

 
'No,' said Alice. 'It will be far too many, it's not worth trying it.' 

 
Dawlish laid a clean piece of paper on his desk, studied it, then produced a device 
from his pocket that looked like something on which the Spanish Inquisition would have 
taken out a provisional patent. He reamed the bowl of his pipe with it, shedding crispy, 
well-done pieces of tobacco in a nasty little heap. 'Another way then.' He prodded the 
detritus with his finger. 'Sort out the aircraft companies who have given any sort of 
hospitality or entertainment...' 
 
'Not aircraft firms,' said Alice. 'This is missiles - we need to have the engineering 
firms.' 
 
'Where the Inland Revenue interim analysis shows over £10,000 in the last fiscal 
year. We'll process any new firms afterwards. It has to show up there somewhere, it's just 
a matter of keeping at it. Put them on the machine later, Alice, it makes such a terrible 
noise.' 
 
Alice walked across to Dawlish's desk and carefully folded up the tobacco ash 
into a neat envelope and put it into the waste basket. Then she straightened the pen set 
and went out. Dawlish said, ' "Variations for Wind Band", eh? Very nice. Very nice.' 

 
I said, 'You know Harvey Newbegin - State Department. Been in Prague for a few 
years now?' 
 
Dawlish said 'Newbegin' softly to himself over and over again putting the 
emphasis on every syllable I could have thought of and a couple of syllables that didn't 
exist. Dawlish produced a shiny plastic pouch and began to pound fresh golden tobacco 
into the bowl of his pipe. 'Trouble,' said Dawlish quietly like that was another name that 
someone had asked him if he remembered. 'Trouble with a girl in... ' He looked up and, 
raising his voice and the stem of his pipe in unison, he said 'Prague' quite loudly. 
 
'That's what I said,' I said. 'Prague. I've just told you that.' 

 
'Told me what?' said Dawlish vaguely. 

 
'Newbegin - State Department in Prague.' 

 
'It's not worth arguing, about,' said Dawlish. 'Why, we could have got it from the 
records in a minute or two. There's no need to take such a childish delight in 
remembering trivia.' 
 
'I think we should employ him,' I said. 

 
'No,' said Dawlish, 'I can't agree.' 

 
'Why?' 

 
Tour years with the U. S. Defence Department before going to State Department. 
They will be as paranoiac as anything if we give him a contract.' I realised that Dawlish 
knew about Harvey being fired and had been giving our dossier on Newbegin a careful 
going over in spite of all that vagueness about his name. 'I think it's worth chancing it,' I 
said. 'He's a first-rate man.' 
 
'What sort of money would he want?' said Dawlish cautiously. 

 
'He's an F.S.O .3. I'd say he's making fourteen thousand dollars a year. On top of 
that he'll be getting Post differential, quarters, and whisky allowance... ' 
 
'Good grief, man,' said Dawlish, 'I know all that. That sort of money is out of the 
question.' 
 
'But there is one thing that we can offer him that won't cost a bean,' I said, 'a 
British passport for his future wife - this Czech girl.' 
 
'You mean naturalise Newbegin so that his wife will become British by marriage.' 

 
'No, I don't mean that,' I said. 'Let Newbegin keep his U. S. passport and give the 
girl a British one. It gives us slightly more control.' 
 
'You've got it all worked out, haven't you?' said Dawlish. 

 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'Do you think Czech Intelligence have got a hold on the girl?' asked Dawlish. 

 
'We would have to assume that,' I said. Dawlish pursed his lips and nodded. 'The 
State Department,' I said sardonically. 'They make me... ' 
 
'They have their own way of working,' said Dawlish. 

 
'Finding out about things by not going near them?' I said. 

 
Dawlish smiled. 

 
'It's such a waste when they have such good people,' I said. 'Harvey Newbegin 
speaks Russian like a native.' 
 
'Not surprising. His mother and father were Russian,' said Dawlish. 

 
'You'd think the State Department would pay him a bonus for marrying a Czech 
girl. All they ever seem to do is order everyone to stand up and chant loyalty oaths.' 

 
'It's a young country,' said Dawlish. 'Don't go on about it - what are you doing 
with that New York Herald Tribune?' 
 
'It's a ladder,' I said. 

 
'Good gracious, man, they have to go downstairs to be filed, don't tear them up - 
are you completely irresponsible? Suppose we wanted to refer to a news item for that 
date - by George, it's very long, isn't it?' 
 
'It will go right from here to the window.' 

 
'No,' said Dawlish. 

 
'If you hold it there and pull the paper gently.' 

 
'Remarkable,' said Dawlish. 'You must show me how to do it. My children would 
find that awfully good fun.' 
 
'You need - keep going, there's lots more - you need one of these American 
newspapers really.' 
 
'Look at that, it's remarkable,' said Dawlish. 'Open the office door and we'll see 
how far it will go down the corridor. Get Sunday's New York Times from my desk. 
That's even thicker.' 
 
I opened the door only to find Alice standing in the corridor with an arm full of 
engineering companies' file cards. 
 
'Don't drop your end,' Dawlish shouted. Then he looked up and saw Alice too. 

 
A committed piece is one given a specific duty. It often becomes the focal point 
of an opponents attack. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 37 
 
 
Saturday, October 26th 
 
IT was a good thing that Jean had booked a table at Chez Solange because it was packed 
tight. The tables were garnished with tomato salads, slices of pate and bowls of fruit. 
Grenade made his way through the wild French menu handwriting and kept patting his 
face with his table napkin.'... tool box in the Stroudly position,' he was saying. 'There 
probably aren't more than half a dozen of them on the whole of British Railways, but we 
are boring Miss Jean.' 
 
'No,' said Jean, equally gallantly. 'It's interesting when you talk about it.' 

 
Grenade dabbed his lips again before finishing the sole. 'That girl claimed to be an 
American citizen,' he said. Jean pretended not to hear. 
 
'I told you she might,' I said. 

 
'Said you had stolen her passport and wanted to phone the American consul.' 

 
'Made a fuss, eh?' I said. I dipped a piece of bread into the sauce - it's something I 
feel free to do in bourgeois French restaurants. 
 
'She wanted me to have a road patrol stop you and search you.' 

 
'Waste of time,' I said. 

 
'That's exactly what I told her,' said Grenade cheerfully. 'I said, if it's not true that 
he has stolen your passport, then we will find nothing. If, on the other hand, it is true, he 
won't be walking around with it in his pocket.' 
 
'She was happy about that?' I said. I poured the last of the wine. 'A lot of people 
like a fragrant hock with fish,' I said to Grenade, 'but I prefer something really dry.' 
 
'This Pouilly-Fuisse is perfect with sole,' said Grenade. 'Happy? No, she was 
demented with rage. She broke a heel kicking Albert's shin.' 
 
'You should have let her have a go at your central heating,' I said. 'Where is she 
now?' 
 
'She told us that she wanted to go to New York, so we gave Pan-American 
airways a letter to say that if she was refused entry at Idlewild we would take her back. 
We never heard of her again.' 
 
'By the way,' said Grenade. He searched in every pocket of his serge suit. It had 
many pockets. He finally found a wallet crammed with tickets, cuttings, money and 
letters; from it he drew a photograph. 'Look at that,' he said, 'took it out of your friend 
Vulkan's pocket. Forgot to give it back to him.' 
 
It was a photograph of eight men. One man wore the uniform of an S. S. major. 
He wore metal-rimmed spectacles and stood with arms akimbo, thumbs tucked into a 
shiny leather belt. He was smiling. The other seven men wore the wide-striped pyjama-
like uniform of concentration-camp inmates. They were not smiling. Behind the group 
there were two cattle trucks and a lot of railway lines. 
 
'Mohr,' said Grenade, tapping the S. S. officer, 'owns a lot of villas near San 
Sebastian. Terribly nice fellow, they say.' 
 
'Really,' I said. 

 
'One of those others looks a lot like your friend Vulkan, don't you think?' Grenade 
asked. 
 
'These sort of old smudgy photos look like everyone,' I said. 'The man on the end 
looks a bit like you.' Grenade smiled and I smiled but we both knew that neither of us 
was being fooled. 
 
'Well I'm glad it all worked out O.K.,' I said. 'I've just remembered something I 
must do this afternoon. Why don't you two go off and look at trains and I'll meet you for 
tea?' 
 
'Miss Jean doesn't want to look at a lot of trains,' said Grenade with irrefutable 
truth. 
 
'Nonsense,' said Jean. 'I'd love to come but I must get a warm coat from the 
office.' I smiled at her and, because Grenade was looking at her, all she could do was 
smile back. 
 
Straight from lunch I went down into Leicester Square Underground station. There was a 
group of children sitting on the stairs with painted faces and rattling tin cans. 'Penny for 
the guy mister,' they repeated dully to each passer-by. I bought a threepenny piece from 
them and phoned the office. The Charlotte Street number gave the usual out-of-order 
sound before clearing automatically and ringing GHOst exchange. I gave the operator the 
week's code: 'I want the latest cricket scores.' The operator said, 'Are you a subscriber to 
the service?' and I said, 'I have country membership of two years' standing - Mr Dawlish, 
please.' 

 
The operator was careless with the key and I heard him say to Dawlish, 'He's on 
an open line, sir, please remember.' I made a note of the time in order to report the 
operator. Then Dawlish said, 'Hello, you've finished lunch early, it's only a quarter to 
three.' 
 
'They have phones on each table at the Caprice now,' I said, and there was a 
silence while Dawlish tried to decide whether I was really at the Caprice or sending him 
up. 'What is it?' he said finally. 
 
'Gas and electricity at Samantha Steel's old flat.' 

 
'Why?' 

 
'Just a hunch,' I said. 

 
'Well, since the Home Office are in on this there can't be any repercussions, so go 
ahead. I'll tell Hallam.' 
 
'Good,' I said. 'Thanks.' 

 
'We'll see,' said Dawlish. He was never enthusiastic. 

 
Sam's white Alpine car was parked outside. I turned in at the gate and crunched my way 
up the path through damp brown leaves. There was a small panel just inside the Gothic 
porch - it said 'Flats 1-5'. Against the bell-push of number four it said 'Steel' in 
typewritten characters. At the foot of the metal plate it said 'Caretaker - side entrance'. I 
pushed flat four's bell and waited, watching the curtains. There was no movement. I went 
down the side of the house to where a cat was asleep on a crate of dirty milk bottles. I 
rang the caretaker's bell. A man in a Fair-Isle pullover came to the door. In his bright red 
face was a small cheap cheroot. 
 
'I've gone out,' he said. He sucked in his cheeks theatrically a couple of times. I 
got my matches. Stepping forward into the protection of the door I lit one and held it up. 
The red-faced man reached out and held my wrist steady using a little more pressure than 
was needed as he pushed his big red face forward towards the match. He sucked the 
flame into the open end of the cheroot and without removing it from his mouth exhaled. 
 
'Can I do for you?' 

 
'Flat four,' I said. 'I want the key.' 

 
'Do yer?' he said. He grinned. He put one hand on the frame of the door and 
crossed one foot over the other resting it toe down on the floor. 'And who are you -
exactly?' He was still looking at his toe. 
 
'Electricity Emergency Service.' I produced a small red printed notice which said, 
'Under the Gas and Electricity Boards Act 1954, the undersigned officer is legally 
entitled to enter any premises to which gas and/or electricity is or has been supplied to 
operate, service or disconnect equipment.' From somewhere inside I could hear the gentle 
lowing of cattle. 
 
The Fair-Isle pullover read this through. 'You are holding it upside down,' I said. 

 
'Regular joker, ain't yer.' He folded the card with his long dirty fingernails and 
handed it back. 'Got no keys,' he said. 
 
'Well that's O.K.,' I said. I flicked the hollow door with my finger. 'It shouldn't be 
difficult to bore a hole through this jerry-built jungle. It'll just be another repair for you to 
add to the list. I'll get you to sign here to say you know the entry has been forced.' 
 
'I'll sign nothin',' he said. He uncrossed his feet and moved his shoulder up behind 
the door. The door moved slowly. 

 
'How would you like me to come in and disconnect your telly-palace?' I said 
moving in through his doorway, taking the initial weight of the door on my arm. 'I'll...' 
 
'Nar then,' said Fair-Isle pullover. 'Don't throw your weight about. I'll get the keys 
to number four.' He went off mumbling into the deep, dark Augean confines of his flat. 
The speculator's face-lift had been more perfunctory here in the basement. Cobwebbed 
into a dark corner was an ancient house phone, a dusty pantry shelf and a shallow 
mahogany box with striped indicator flags marked, '1st bedroom, 2nd bedroom, dining-
room, study and front door'. On the right was a room lit by the glow of a cocktail cabinet, 
the floor was bare boards and the only other furniture was a plastic-covered armchair 
with a box of Black Magic chocolates on the arm and a twenty-one-inch TV that was 
saying, 'Making it one of the beauty spots of Shropshire,' to the accompaniment of 
English documentary-film music and a picture of a flying buttress. 
 
Fair-Isle pullover came jingling his way up the passage. 'Don't snoop in there,' he 
said,' 
 
'sail paid for.' He prodded me in the back and I walked along the side path and up 
the carpeted stairs to flat four. He pushed the chiming doorbell and twisted the key twice 
in the lock. I walked straight to the kitchen; but not so straight to it that it looked like I'd 
been there before. I looked at the big modern stove and sighed a long deep sigh. 'We 
might have guessed it,' I said. 'We've had a lot of trouble with these.' I turned to Fair-Isle 
pullover. 'You'd better get a big spanner, or I can let you have one, I suppose, and you'd 
better have overalls on or you'll get properly messed up. They look spotless these things - 
' I leaned close to him ' - underneath they are crawling.' It had a good effect so I said it 
again - 'crawling'. That put him off his Black Magic chocolates for the afternoon. I told 
him that it was the caretaker's job to help, but he wouldn't stay. He had to go downstairs 
to do something that couldn't wait. 
 
I started again. I went through each room very carefully. I didn't take the 
furnishings to pieces but I lifted everything up and put everything down. The scientific 
equipment was missing. A woman had been in the flat fairly recently - there was still 
perfume on the sheets and towels. There was a tin in the kitchen that wasn't quite rusty 
enough. In the front room there were some flowers that just weren't old enough and the 
water tank just wasn't hot enough. I looked in the mail-box behind the door. There was a 
small yellow telegram envelope that was unopened; inside the telegram said 'Confirming 
Monday. Have enough money with you. John.' It was all so circumstantial even if 
Monday next was the day we were expecting to get Semitsa. This telegram could refer to 
any Monday and there were hundreds of Johns in Berlin. 
 
I went to the back window and looked down. It was a fine example of a London 
garden: luxuriant concrete lawn. A gay section of trellis hid the dustbins. It was being 
tied into position with a length of string by Fair-Isle pullover who stood on a heap of sand 
and spent more time watching the back window than putting his finger on knots. I moved 
back from the window and jarred against the phone; when I looked into the garden again 
he had gone. I sat down in the only comfortable armchair. Outside, an ice-cream van 
chimed a twentieth-century carillon. Just suppose that no one had used the flat since the 
last time I had seen Samantha Steel? What else? A red-faced man in a Fair-Isle pullover 
doesn't like me coming up into this flat. When I am here he doesn't watch the front of the 
house - he watches the back of it. In any case he drags himself away from an afternoon of 
telly. Suddenly he goes back into the house. 

 
Fool. Of course. I went across to the telephone and followed the wire back to the 
junction box. I found a small freshly bored hole in the skirting board and as I stood up I 
took a Morley stretch Bri-nylon (11/12 fitting) full of wet sand across the side of the 
head. I knew what it was because the torn stocking and the sand were underneath me 
when I recovered consciousness. 
 
It was a very well polished toecap that I saw first. It was prodding me not very 
gently in the chest. In an out-of-focus zone beyond I put together an image of a helmeted 
policeman and two men in belted raincoats. The shiny toecap said, 'He's coming round 
now - who did they say he was?' 
 
I couldn't make out what the other voice said but Toecap said, 'Oh, is he - I'll 
electricity him,' so I closed my eyes again. It was Keightley, the military liaison officer at 
Scotland Yard, who had them 'yessiring' and 'threebagsfulling' around. Jean had phoned 
Dawlish when I didn't turn up for tea. Dawlish had told the Yard to come and sort me out. 
 
Two of the Special Branch people broke in the door of the caretaker's flat while I 
rubbed my sore head. On the TV, the quizmaster was saying, 'And now, for a streamlined 
washing machine that will make every washday a pleasure. What is a secretaire?' 
 
There was enough blue light for me to find a hard centre in the box of Black 
Magic. The two back rooms were papered with wallpaper that had a motif of motor cars 
and crash-helmets and contained some dark-stained furniture with coloured plastic 
handles, dirty underwear, three packets of cheap cheroots, two bottles of Dimple Haig, 
one sticky glass, an opened packet of Kraft cheese slices, half a pound of margarine and a 
packet of soft white bread slices with Wonderloaf printed on the wax paper. The tiny 
kitchen was almost empty, except for an enamel bowl full of dirty underwear and two 
large family-size packets of Tide. Three quart bottles of brown ale were standing in the 
sink among the tea-leaves. On the draining-board was a stack of books, some of them 
about enzymes. 
 
On a slatted shelf in the airing cupboard there was a clean enamel bucket. The 
older Special Branch man with the shiny toecaps got it down gently. 'Smell that,' he said. 
'Strewth.' I sniffed at the warm frothy contents. There was a strong yeasty sweet smell. 
 
'A drop of good home brew,' said the younger man. 'Used to be able to pinch them 
for that - brewing beer without a licence.' 
 
Toecap said, 'All beer and dirty underwear, this bloke,' and the young one made a 
joke based upon the alimentary canal. 
 
I pushed past the two of them to get to the bathroom. The white tiles shone 
brightly in the pink neon light. Across the bath there was a door placed to make a table 
top; drawn up to it was an old kitchen chair. 
 
'Naughty,' said Toecap behind my shoulder, 'very naughty. ' I looked at the layout; 
it seemed complete. There was a dark brown U. S. Army surplus telephone handset, a 
small condenser and a wire leading to a pair of crocodile clips. Two G. P. O. phone wires 
had been brought in from the back garden and could be attached to the handset or to a 
small Grundig tape recorder for amplification of the speech or recording the message. 
Also on the makeshift table there was a small Wool-worth's reading light, a large 
scribbling-pad and four ballpoint pens stuck in an empty cream bottle. A do-it-yourself 
telephone-tapping kit. 

 
'Makes me curious about the locked room,' said the young S. B. man. He took off 
his roll-brim hat and put it on a chair. I said, 'I'll want a copy of the phone bill and the 
phone agreement and anything else you can think of-this flat and number four.' 
 
'We usually do the whole block in these sort of cases,' said the cop. 

 
'Fine,' I said. 

 
'We've got some Elastoplast in the squad car,' he said. 'You'd better get something 
on that cut.' 
 
'What, Dave?' said the young S. B. man. 

 
'I said I don't like the look of his head,' said Dave. 

 
'No, nor do I,' said the young S. B. man. Then they both looked at me quizzically 
for a couple of minutes. Finally the young man went and gazed at the steel padlock with 
the same forensic dispassion. There was a little glass pea set in the fresh black paintwork 
at eye level. When Dave had decided that he was trying to see through it the wrong way 
he said, 'Well this won't do,' to the young man, who produced a large screwdriver from 
his raincoat pocket. 
 
It took him only two minutes to rip the hasp out of the shoddy cardboard panels of 
the door. 'Landlords who rent places like this,' said the young S. B. man rapping the door, 
'that's who we should be locking up.' 
 
He raised his foot and gave the door a great superfluous smash of his boot that 
caved in one panel. The older S. B. man stepped inside and switched on the lights. He 
whistled very softly to himself. 
 
It was a semi-basement room. It got any daylight that could be spared by the 
architect and God between them through four small slots set high along one wall. There 
was some cheap lino of large black and white squares carefully cut to shape but not 
nailed down. Across the long side of the room was a low bench with two Angle-poise 
lamps and a gramophone. Draped over the bench was a huge red flag with a white circle 
and a black swastika in it. Upon the very centre of the swastika was a plaster cast of a 
rather idealised head of Hitler; around it were a few books, including a signed copy of 
Mein Kampf, some ceremonial daggers and a box of medals and badges. There were a 
few travel brochures and a notice that said: 'Hameln in Lower Saxony. Waffen S.S. Rally. 
Organised by the Welfare Association of former Waffen S.S. members. Members 
wishing to attend give in their names by next week. Friday 6.30 p.m. to 7.30 a.m. 
Monday. Comfortable hotel, all meals, a visit to a nightclub and attendance at the rally: 
by air both ways £30 inclusive.' 
 
Behind the gramophone there were some records put out by an American 
company which gave the connoisseur a chance to hear Hitler speeches and Nazi bands in 
hi-fi, even if they couldn't afford the thirty quid for the S. S. week-end. There were well-
framed official portraits of the Nazi leaders on the wall, including one of the American 
Fuhrer in his home-made uniform. There was army surplus seating stacked around the 
walls and a large very well-cleaned blackboard on an easel. Propped on the mantelpiece 
there was a piece of wrapping-paper with a message pencilled on it: 'Tell Mrs Wilkenson 
there will be a big turn-out Thursday. Please order extra pint milk.' 
 
'Very nice,' said the Special Branch man. 'Did you expect that something like this 
was going on?' 

 
From the next room I heard the telly shout gaily, 'No, I'm afraid that it's a writing-
desk with pigeon-holes for keeping papers, but thank you, Mrs Dugdale of 
Wolverhampton, for coming along and being such a good sport...' 
 
I said, 'I heard him say, "Take that, Yid," when he hit me.' The Special Branch 
man nodded. The telly gave a great fanfare of trumpets and a descending series of chords 
on an electric organ. 
 
A player who uses two moves to do something possible in one is said to have ' 

 
'lost tempo'. 

 
 
 
CHAPTER 38 
 
 
Sunday, October 27th 
 
'VERY pretty that plaster looks,' said Jean. 
 
'You have the flat well covered?' I asked. 

 
'Policemen are standing on top of policemen,' said Jean. 

 
'And the white Alpine?' 

 
'Give them a chance,' said Jean. 'The police have got plenty of things to attend to 
without interfering with the march of Crime.' 
 
'Didn't you tell them it was urgent?' 

 
'So is the Armistice Sunday rehearsal.' 

 
'But if they do stumble over anything, put it on the teleprinter,' I said. 'It could be 
important.' 
 
Jean smiled. 

 
'I'm serious,' I said. 

 
'I know you are,' said Jean and she smiled again. It was so difficult getting even 
the simplest things done. 
 
'Keightley says you don't want any D notices [D notice: instruction from 
Government to newspapers, etc.] sent out,' said Jean. 
 
'Keightley,' I said. 'He loves them, doesn't he? Sometimes they do more harm than 
good - they can attract attention when no one would have bothered.' 
 
'It's probably getting quite a splash - Nazis and all that - it's good circulation-
building stuff,' said Jean. 
 
'Sometimes you talk like a Press Officer,' I said. 'Just as long as I'm left out of it, 
they can have their swastikas across the front page. It could even help in the long run.' 
 
'You mean catching the man who socked you on the head.' 

 
'Socked is a good word,' I said. 

 
'Special Branch are throwing a Section 6 [Section 6: see Appendix 6.] at him.' 

 
'Good,' I said. 'That'll learn him to sub-let.' 

 
'Who is he?' asked Jean. 

 
'No idea,' I said, 'but he's certainly not fussy who he rents his room to.' 

 
'What do you know about him?' she coaxed. 

 
'An agent for the Ignited Arab Republic who carries a flick-knife.' 

 
'How do you know that?' 

 
'He had to use something to spread the marge on his processed cheese 
sandwiches,' I said. 
 
'I mean the U. A. R.,' said Jean. 

 
'I'm guessing,' I admitted, 'but Samantha Steel is undoubtedly on the payroll of 
Israeli Intelligence, whatever private shenanigan she may be up to with Vulkan. This 
character downstairs had done a neat job of tapping her phone right where it did the most 
good, so I'm guessing that he's a conscientious anti-Semite and maybe Egyptian 
Intelligence.' 
 
'It's a terrible over-simplification,' Jean said. 

 
'You're right,' I agreed, 'but it's all I've got.' 

 
'What about the neo-Nazis?' 

 
'I'm no expert,' I said, 'but I don't see those boys running away without their 
baubles.' 
 
'That's ingenious,' she said. 'You are probably right,' and gave me one of her rare 
admiring looks. 
 
In Burma and Japan a general is the piece we call a queen, but in China and Korea 
a general is the piece we call a king. Saturday, November 2nd PANKOW is a sort of 
Hampstead of East Berlin, comfortable and bourgeois; the dogs wear little overcoats and 
the kids play without shouting. Fist-sized shrapnel holes pockmarked the grey face of 
number 238 and as I mounted the wide stone staircase, the smell of Eisbein and fried 
onion walked alongside me. 
 
Apartment number 20 was on the top floor. The small brass plate said 'Borg' in 
Gothic script. Ex-Wehrmacht General Borg lived here. 
 
A young girl answered the door. She wore one of those short frillyedged aprons 
that maids wore in the 'thirties. The room she showed me into was over-decorated but 
under-furnished. A fierce-looking woman with her hair drawn tightly back into a bun 
glared out of a plain oval frame like a tiger leaping through a hoop. Under the large photo 
sat Colonel-General Erich Borg, Commander Panzer Group 'Borg'. 
 
General Borg was a tall thin man. Sitting low in the ancient armchair, all knees 
and elbows, he looked as delicate as a stick insect. His face was very white and very 
wrinkled like a big ball of string, loose to form eyes and mouth. Under his right hand was 
a pad of paper and an ancient fountain pen. With his left hand, he raised a tall glass of 
lemon tea to his face and sipped secretively at the almost transparent liquid. 
 
At Borg's feet there was a large tray of sand in which the contours of central 
Belgium had been carefully moulded. Tiny strips of coloured wood and bright drawing 
pins were meticulously arranged in neat rows. I walked across to the sand tray and 
studied it. 'Four-fifteen p. m.,' I said. 
 
'Good,' said Borg. The girl was watching us both. 

 
'Just before the British artillery start to fire the double-shotted charges.' 

 
'You hear that, Heidi,' said Borg. He prodded the sand around the rectangle of 
Hougoumont with a thin length of cane. 'Ney's cavalry are cantering up there towards the 
British guns, five thousand horsemen and not a grain of intelligence between them. Just 
shouting "Vive 1'Empereur!" and hoping for the best. When they reach the guns, they 
don't know what to do, do they?' 

 
The General stared up at me. I said, 'You can't spike guns without spikes or drag 
them away without horses and harness.' 
 
'They were stupid,' said Borg. 'Hammers and nails would have done it.' 

 
I shrugged. 'They could have smashed the sponge staves,' I said. 

 
Borg beamed. 'You hear that, Heidi?' He nodded. 'The sponge staves, yes, that 
would have been something.' 
 
'I learned about the battle from an artilleryman,' I explained. 

 
'No better way,' said Borg. 'Artillery was the key to the battle. Read War and 
Peace. Tolstoy knew it.' 
 
'Napoleon should have known it too. He was an artilleryman.' 

 
'Napoleon,' said Borg. He prodded deep into Rossome Farm until the cane bent 
and flipped a small red cube across the room in a spray of sand. 'Vollidiot,' snarled Borg 
as the Emperor disappeared under the sideboard. 
 
'I'm glad he was,' I said, 'or Waterloo Station would be in Paris.' 

 
'What would you care?' said Borg. 

 
'I live behind Waterloo Station,' I said. 

 
Borg rapped me across the ankle with his cane. I cowered back to avoid the next 
blow. Borg smiled icily. It was a Prussian gesture of friendship. The girl made a seat for 
me by moving a map of central Poland, a book of mediaeval armour and Der Deutsche 
Soldatenkalender for 1956. I sat down. 
 
'Droll men, you French,' said Borg. 

 
'Yes,' I said. The walls of the garret room sloped like a tent and the big windows 
fitted into it like an awning. Along the window stood a line of potted plants, which shone 
in the artificial heat. Condensation dribbled down the glass, making an impressionist 
painting of the view across the dusty roofs. 
 
'Heidi,' the general's voice was high and clear. 

 
His daughter brought me a small cup of strong coffee. She watched me as I tasted 
it and asked if I was too hot. 
 
'No,' I said. I felt a trickle of sweat move down my forehead and sweep across my 
cheek like an errant tear. 
 
She laughed. 'Papa feels the cold so,' she said. 

 
'I understand,' I said. I polished the condensation from my spectacles again. 

 
'What's that?' said the general in a loud voice. 

 
'You feel the cold,' I said. 

 
'I am? said the general. 

 
'What?'I said. 

 
'I am old,' he said patiently. The girl patted his shoulder and said, 'Of course he 
doesn't think you look old.' She spoke to me. 'Papa lip-reads; you must face him when 
you speak.' 
 
'Then he must be a fool,' said the general. 

 
I looked out through the dribbly glass; there was a banner on the building 
opposite. 'Peace must be armed', it said. 
 
General Borg said, 'The passing of time is like the passing of two trains; when 
you are young the other train is travelling at almost the same speed. Time hangs upon 
your hands. You grow older, the train gains speed slightly. Then it's rushing by faster, 
faster and faster until it's gone and you see the green countryside again.' 

 
'Yes,' I said. The general gazed at me intently. 'I'm trying,' he said very slowly, 
'I'm trying to remember you. Were you in the war with me?' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 'I was on the other side.' 

 
'That was wise,' he said and nodded in admiration. 

 
'It's about your collection of regimental diaries,' I said. 

 
The general's face brightened. 'You are a military historian. I knew it. We have a 
large collection of records - are you interested in cavalry uniform - that's my principal 
interest at present - I am writing an article.' 
 
'It's a simple enquiry,' I said. 'It's a Wehrmacht unit that was evacuating people 
from a concentration camp. I'd like some details of the personnel.' 
 
'Heidi will look it up for you,' said the general. 'That's a very straightforward 
matter. We have a roomful of unit records. Eh, Heidi?' 
 
'Yes, Papa,' she said. 'I can hardly get in it to clean,' she said to me. I gave her the 
details written on a slip of paper. 
 
'I'm sure you manage,' I said. She pattered off to get the files. 

 
The general sipped his tea and talked about nineteenth-century cavalry uniform. 

 
'You came on the advice of Colonel Stok?' the general said. 

 
'That's right. He said that you have one of the best collections of military records 
in the whole of Germany.' 
 
The general nodded. 'Fascinating man, Stok,' said the general. 'He has let me have 
some most interesting Red Army historical material, most interesting. Very kind. It's rare, 
you know.' I wondered whether he meant Red Army history or kindness. 
 
'Have you lived here very long?' I said finally, to break the silence. 

 
'Born in this very building,' said the general. 'And I'll die in it. Used to have the 
whole thing when my father was alive. Now we are just a small apartment in the roof, eh? 
All under Government control, the rest of the building - still people are homeless, can't 
have everything, mustn't complain.' 
 
'Have you ever thought of living in the West?' I asked. 

 
'Yes,' he said. 'My mother was very keen to move to Koln. That would be about 
1931, but we never went.' 
 
'I mean since the war. Why do you live here in East Berlin since the war?' 

 
'My old friends cannot visit me,' he said. 

 
I pursed my lips to reform the question, until the general's quiet simper told me he 
had answered it. 
 
'Do you do any work for Bonn?' I asked. 

 
'For those ruffians - certainly not.' He tapped the arm of his chair as though his fist 
was a gavel. 'For a decade after the war, I was too much of a Nazi for any decent German 
to take coffee with me.' He put the words 'decent German' into roughly-tongued inverted 
commas. 'My only conversations were with two colonels from the American Army 
Historical Department. We fought all the way from the Bug to the Volga together. Do 
you know... ' He leaned forward confidentially. '... every time we did it, I made less 
mistakes. I tell you, a couple more visits from those Historical Department colonels and I 
think I might have taken Stalingrad.' He laughed a humourless treble laugh. 'For a whole 
decade I was too much of a Nazi for the German politicians.' He sipped his tea. 'Now I'm 
not enough of a Nazi for them.' He laughed again, without humour, as though he had 

made that joke and laughed at it many times before. Heidi came back with a bundle of 
large brown envelopes. 
 
'Do you know Colonel Stok?' she asked me. 

 
'My girl's rather taken with him,' said the general and laughed as heartily as he 
could laugh without shattering into a million fragments. 
 
'She could do worse,' I said, wondering if I had been guilty of impropriety. 

 
'Exactly,' said the general. 

 
'Are you a colleague of Alexeyevitch?' the girl asked. 

 
'I'm a business rival,' I said. 

 
She laughed and set before me the big envelopes that contained more details of 
the life of Broum. 
 
A king cannot be captured nor need it be removed from the board. It is enough 
that the king is put into a position from which it cannot escape. Sunday, November 3rd I 
HAD begun to look upon Berlin as my home. The room at the Fruhling was warm and 
comfortable. I went to bed early, got up late and let the morning trickle through my 
fingers like silver sand. The sky was heavy and the air unnaturally warm. I bought a copy 
of Time and a Daily Express at the U-bahn station across the road and sat down in 
Kranzlers at a table from which I could see the whole width of the Kurfiirstendamm as 
far as the Gedachtniskirche. The waitress brought me a Kdnnchen Mokka, soft-boiled 
eggs, marmalade, bread and butter and I even remembered that Karlsbader Hornchen 
were croissants. 
 
There was plenty of traffic on the Ku-damm. Taxis full of sightseers were 
cruising, huge furniture vans with trailers were leaving for long trips and double-decker 
buses were making short ones. 
 
Oddly enough, Berlin is one of the most relaxed big cities of the world and people 
were smiling and making ponderous Teutonic jokes about soldiers and weather and 
bowels and soldiers; for Berlin is the only city still officially living under the martial 
command of foreign armies and if they can't make jokes about foreign soldiers no one 
can. Just ahead of me four English girls were adding up their holiday expenses, and 
deciding whether the budget would let them have lunch in a restaurant or if it was to be 
Bockwurst sausage from a kiosk on the Ku-damm and eat it in the park. Beyond them 
were two nurses, dressed in a grey conventual uniform which made them look like extras 
from All Quiet on the Western Front. And all around me people were munching and 
drinking. A white-faced man on my left was working out all the permutations on coffee, 
doughnuts and tiny glasses of Steinhager, and drinking in the scene around him like any 
moment he might wake up in Siberia. 
 
I had the table all to myself until the Science section of Time and my fourth pot of 
coffee. The man asking if he might sit there wore a very clean white shirt and a suit made 
from wool and mohair cut with that sort of high roll lapel that Continental tailors think is 
English. He cleared his throat and adjusted the set of his necktie. 
 
'If I sit at one of the outer tables I shall get wet when the rain begins,' he 
apologised. I nodded but he was anxious to talk. 
 
'The crops need it,' he said. 'If you live in a town, it's difficult to understand how 
welcome it is in the country.' He smiled and drank his coffee. 
 
'If you live in this town it's difficult to get into the country,' I said. 

 
He smiled. 'It's a little... ' He paused. 'Claustrophobic. Is that right?' 

 
'In every possible way,' I said. There was a distant roll of thunder, very faint, like 
a mouse walking across a drum. One of the English girls said, 'We won't be able to picnic 
if it rains.' The man with the white face was trying to get doughnut sugar off his tie and 
the German nurses were surreptitiously easing their shoes off. 
 
'They come from the Baltic Sea at this time of year,' said my companion. One of 
the English girls said, 'We'll just sit in the Mini and eat it.' 
 
'You get a cold front,' said my companion. 'Low pressure zone - moves quickly, 
brings the rain. See that cu-nimbus; when that's gone, it'll be fine again.' The thunder 
sounded again. He nodded his head knowingly; he was the only mortal in on the secret. 
He raised his long, carefully-manicured hand without looking to see where the waitress 
was. She initialled his bill with a hasty flick of the pencil, presented it to him on a saucer 
while confiscating the sugar with the other hand. 
 
'Thunder,' he said. 'Sinister sound, eh?' I nodded. He said smiling, 'My mother 
used to tell me that was God having his coal delivered.' The slow drum-roll of thunder 
sounded again. I sipped my coffee and watched him as he finished writing something on 
the back of the bill. He placed the bill face-down on my saucer. The pencilled message 
was light grey on the poor-quality paper. It said, 'I will attend to ALL. Go to zoo NOW. 
See KING.' The final word in each sentence was underlined three times. The message 
existed for only a few seconds because I lowered my cup quickly on to it. The dark coffee 
spilt in my saucer, defiling the coarse fibres into a soggy brown pulp. I twisted my cup 
and shredded it. 
 
'It sounds just like coal; you must admit it,' said the man, 'Just like it,' I said. The 
thunder sounded again, a little closer this time, and he raised his hand as though he had 
demonstrated the sound to jog my memory. As I got up to leave, he gave a stiff little bow 
of the forehead and backed into the table behind him. If he hadn't tried to save things it 
would have been all right, but his hands hit the tall pot of coffee. There was a howl of 
pain as the scalding coffee swept across the table. I could hear the weather man's voice 
apologising in the verbose formalities of German middle-class conversation and the 
doughnut man's staccato Berlin accent with its consonant-heavy exactness. A number 19 
stopped at the lights and, as I got aboard, I glanced back to see them still at it. The 
weather man was talking and bowing like a well-made puppet and the doughnut fancier 
was standing awkwardly holding his steaming trousers away from his tender thighs. The 
English girls were giggling and one of the nurses was groping under the table for her 
shoe. 
 
Ahead of me was Monte Klamott, [Klamott: ancient rubbish.] a hill of the TIER-
GARTEN made from old flak towers and concrete shelters that were too solid to 
eradicate; across the top of them the storm clouds were clamped like a stainless steel 
saucepan-lid. I got off the bus almost immediately and clapped down two marks at the 
zoo's main gate. The damp air held musky scents and there was a restless movement of 
animals. I could see the bison kicking at the ground and somewhere over on the right an 
elephant was trumpeting. There were a few moments of intense sunshine that 
photographed the shape of the trees on to the light-brown earth. Some visitors were 
moving towards the enclosures to avoid the rain. It was hard to believe that this was the 
heart of the city, except when modern concrete buildings leaned over the trees to reflect 
themselves in the bright blue ponds. Now that the rain was no longer in doubt, the wind 

had climbed down from the trees and chased the last crisp, brown leaves around in circles 
across the gravel paths. A bison rumbled its low threat from somewhere near at hand. 
 
I saw Vulkan, dressed in a heavy green trenchcoat. He leaned against the waist-
high railing in a tense posture. There was no one else in sight. 'All right?' Vulkan said and 
looked behind me in case any one was lurking in the bushes. 
 
'Relax,' I said. 'It's all right.' A large leaf, as crisp and brown as a piece of 
breakfast cereal, spun in the wind and settled in Vulkan's hair. He brushed it aside angrily 
as though it was a prank that I had played on him. 
 
'You got rid of your tail?' I felt the impact of a warm raindrop. 

 
'He got a lapful of Pfannkuchen and scalding coffee,' I said. 

 
Vulkan nodded. He ran a finger around his lips as though deciding whether to 
grow a beard. We walked towards the pool marked 'Flusspferdhaus'. The moisture drew a 
fresh astringent smell from the grass, which was still dry enough to cling on to the tiny 
tear-drops of rain. 
 
'There has been such a lot of trouble,' said Vulkan. We stopped in front of the still 
blue water. 'They have taken four of Gehlen's people in the last week.' 
 
'Who have?' I asked. A large raindrop hit the water and expanded until it 
disappeared. 
 
Vulkan shrugged. 'I don't know. STASI or Stok's people, someone in the East has 
taken them. They say it's all your fault.' 
 
'That's what they say, is it?' The surface of the water heaved and exploded into a 
vast shiny grey-mottled mound. 
 
'They say you talk too much with Stok,' said Vulkan. The hump split into two as a 
vast hippopotamus throat opened. 
 
'Those bright boys,' I said. 'They are so keen for applause they disembowel 
themselves as an encore, then they want to sue the audience for damages.' There was a 
noise like a U-bahn train and the hippo sank under the water. 
 
'Two of the people they have lost have been tailing you,' said Vulkan. 

 
'What am I supposed to do?' I said. 'I didn't ask them to tail me.' 

 
I noticed how spruce Johnnie's clothes were, from the crisp white collar to the 
highly-polished Oxfords that had picked up a layer of grey dust from the path. Even as I 
watched, a perfect circle of black shiny leather appeared on the toecap of one shoe. A 
bright geometrical shape that sagged gently and warped into an oval until the blob of rain 
drew a black line down to the welt of the dusty shoe and fell into the ground, a grey 
sphere of water. 
 
Vulkan leaned forward with his eyes wide open. I realised for the first time that he 
might be frightened of me. 'You didn't give them to Stok?' he said. 'You wouldn't do that, 
would you?' 
 
'Wouldn't I?' I said. 'I only wish I had thought of it.' 

 
Vulkan smiled nervously and twisted a cigarette in his dry lips to prevent it from 
sticking. He produced a gold lighter and put his head down inside his trenchcoat like a 
canary going to sleep. He lit the cigarette and tossed his head well back and sucked air in 
like an addict. 'I suppose you think that Gehlen's people are expendable,' he said. 
 
'You are damn right they are,' I said. That's what they get paid for: knowing this 
town well enough to take risks and get away with it.' He nodded agreement. I went on, 
'My boys have an entirely different job which is to sink into their environment like butter 

into hot toast and then not move whatever happens - especially for juvenile little pranks 
like this one. Gehlen's mob can't think of any greater ambition than kidnapping the 
premier of the U. S. S. R. Our aim is to have him working for us.' 
 
Vulkan laughed nervously but I think he got the idea. He said, 'You knew that 
someone was tailing you then?' There was the screech of an animal somewhere near by. I 
buttoned up my raincoat collar and a large raindrop hit Vulkan's cigarette with a loud 
hissing noise. 
 
'Listen, Johnnie,' I said. 'One of my great advantages in this business is that I look 
a little simple-minded; but I don't stop there; I act a little simple-minded; I'm crafty, 
nasty, suspicious and irritable. I look under beds and I rap lamp-posts for hollow 
compartments. The moment that you think that you know who your friends are is the 
moment to get another job.' The rain began a slow disconsolate tattoo and far in the 
distance the thunder was soft and muffled. 
 
'They were sold,' said Johnnie, 'those men.' The circles from the raindrops were 
describing more and more complex designs on the water. 
 
'Sold or bought,' I said, 'what's the difference?' The hippo yawned out of the pool 
again, snorting and blinking and rolling buoyantly so that little waves splashed near our 
toes. 
 
'They were men,' said Johnnie. 'That's the difference. They weren't packets of 
detergent. They were men; with wives, sisters, kids, debts, worries. And they suddenly 
aren't going to see them any more. That's the difference.' Small areas of earth under the 
trees were still dusty and grey, while elsewhere the ground became a rich dark brown as 
the rain beat it gently all over like a goldsmith's hammer on foil. The animal screeched 
again and from the same building there came a hard, almost human cry that could have 
been joy or pain or just something that wanted to have its voice heard. 
 
'It's no good letting personal feelings wreck you up, Johnnie,' I said gently. 'I 
know how you feel... ' 
 
'He was such a good man,' said Johnnie. The rain was falling hard enough to make 
tiny rivers in the gravel, and the rough bark of the trees was wet and shiny and so was 
Johnnie's face. 
 
'Keep a foot in each camp, Johnnie,' I said, 'and they'll build the barbed wire right 
through you,' and Johnnie nodded and the rain dripped from his face. 
 
Strong square: one placed well forward, secure from attack and firmly under 
control. Monday, November 4th GERMAN merchant banks are more conservative in 
their methods than their London counterparts but they still return a generous measure of 
profit. One small bank near the Ku-damm can hardly fail; it is backed by the Bank of 
England and is used by three British Intelligence groups as a clearing house for 
information. For obvious reasons each unit keeps to its own codes. My message only 
said, 'HOLD FIXED INTEREST ANNUITIES'; but to Dawlish it meant: Further to your 
instructions, the Gehlen Bureau has been thoroughly penetrated by Soviet Intelligence 
Groups in East Berlin. The agents now in Soviet hands will have had the list of 'tactical 
objectives' with which we provided them last month. There is good reason to hope that 
the Russians will not realise that this information has been deliberately planted upon 
them by us. 
 
I had also arranged a call from the bank to Hallam's office. Hallam was waiting at 
the Home Office for the phone to ring. 

 
'You've made me late for lunch,' said Hallam, 'Well, that's too bad,' I said. His 
voice was crystal clear. The arrangement was that I merely had to say the code words 
'Action imminent' to tell the Home Office that I was expecting the exchange to take place 
within four hours. His reply to indicate all standing by was 'Unanimous agreement'; but 
he said, 'Bogey, old chap, bogey.' 
 
'What do you mean "bogey"?' I said. 'Bogey' was the alternative code word that 
meant the whole operation was cancelled. 
 
'Semitsa's been made persona non grata,' said Hallam. 'I'm not permitted to 
discuss it.' 
 
'You bloody well are permitted to discuss it,' I said. 'The whole thing is arranged.' 

 
'What's happened to the. papers?' Hallam said. 

 
'I've given them to Vulkan,'. I said. This wasn't strictly true as I had them in my 
pocket. 
 
'Oh well, that can't be helped. Leave the documents in his possession. Let him 
handle everything as he wants. We officially withdraw all sanction and agreement. I'm 
putting that in writing immediately after lunch and pushing it round to your people early 
this afternoon. This operation is off as far as my people are concerned. We find that the 
other government' [he meant the Soviet Government, of course] 'are not aware of the 
transaction. It is unofficial and we want to have nothing to do with it. My personal 
advice, for what it's worth, is to withdraw without notice.' 
 
'And leave Vulkan in the lurch,' I said. 

 
'You are an employee. Vulkan is an indirect employee. Your employers are 
responsible to Vulkan, not you.' Hallam made it sound like an edict from the Institute of 
Directors. 
 
There was a lengthy silence. Then Hallam said, 'Hello, Berlin. Are we still 
connected?' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'Is that understood, Berlin?' 

 
'It's all understood, Hallam.' 

 
'It's no good taking that tone. It's official. It's a top-level decision, nothing to do 
with me.' 
 
'No, it wouldn't be.' 

 
'We are closing points of entry as far as those documents are concerned, so it's no 
good Vulkan or you trying to use them. It's the Home Secretary's decision.' 
 
'------off, Hallam,' I said. 

 
'Don't talk out of turn.' 

 
'It's my native language.' 

 
'Sorry you're taking it all personally. Don't forget. Bogey, bogey. I have my 
recorder going.' 
 
'Bogey------bogey to you, Hallam,' I said. 'Play that back to yourself this 
afternoon when you've finished lunch.' 
 
The Exchange: when a player sacrifices something for an opponent's piece of 
lesser value he is said to be 'the exchange down'. Monday, November 4th THE first thing 
you see is the 'No Entry' sign. It's on the corner of Friedrichstrasse and beyond that the 
whole thing is laid out. There is the little white hut sitting in the middle of the road with 
'U.S. ARMY CHECKPOINT' written in huge letters on the roof. Then above that there is 

a flagpole flying the Stars and Stripes and there are always a few olive-and-white Taunus 
cars and jeeps about. There are some West German policemen standing around in long 
grey overcoats and Afrika Korps caps and inside the hut a couple of young pink-faced 
G.I.s in starched khaki shirts write in a vast ledger and sometimes talk on the phone. 
There are lots of notices but the biggest one says, 'You are leaving the American Sector' 
and then says the same thing over again in French and Russian. Filing past that, prim old 
lady journalists go crowding up the short flight of steps that lead nowhere, like it's the 
royal box for the last public hanging. 
 
The wall itself is a shoddy breeze-block affair that looks as though one of the old 
ladies falling off the steps could tumble the whole thing from here to Potsdamerplatz. The 
West German policeman stands very near the wall on the West side and he lifts the long-
hinged barrier for the traffic. On the Eastern side there are three solid concrete barriers 
that block three-quarters of the road's width. Since the gaps they leave are staggered, a 
vehicle driven through has to zig-zag at full lock slowly past the barriers. That's what the 
big hearse had to do after they had removed the coffin. 
 
Six uniformed men were hastily pressed into service as coffin-bearers. There were 
Vopos, Grepos, policemen and soldiers stumbling along under the heavy weight and 
swinging their caps in their hands at arm's length to help them keep their balance. A 
policeman at the front missed his footing at one moment and almost fell, but an elderly N. 
C. O. began to sing out the time in the idiom of the old Army. They rested the coffin 
down on to the stretcher-like grid of the bier at the second barrier. The policeman who 
had nearly fallen wiped the inside of his shako and then held it up to adjust the cockade 
so that he didn't have to look at the others. 
 
It looked as though the D. D. R. had chosen a representative of each of its services 
as they stood there dusting off their blue, green and grey shoulders where the coffin had 
left an epaulette of dirt. Beneath me on the American side of the barrier were thirty men, 
all dressed in khaki lightweight raincoats. Each of them had a strange-shaped leather box 
at his feet. There were boxes for bassoons and boxes for bass clarinets, boxes for French 
horns, trombones, violins and cornets. The kettledrums were wrapped in soft black velvet 
bags. Two girls stood among the men dressed in the same raincoats but wearing long 
white woollen stockings. From where they were standing below me they couldn't see as 
well as I could. 'Some kinda procession, ain't it?' one said. 
 
'Bringing a funeral through by the look.' 

 
'Say, ain't that sump'n?' 

 
Two of the musicians unlocked the leather cases and looked inside before locking 
them again. One of the men tapped the belly of a double bass and said, 'Gee, I sure didn't 
think I'd be toting a bull-fiddle when I moved in among the commies.' 
 
The flautist got his instrument out of the case. 'It's as lethal in your hands as an M-
6o,' he laughed and played a little riff. In the silence caused by the attention to the coffin, 
the passage he played was the only sane thing for a hundred yards in every direction and, 
even before the overtones of that had faded, an American M.P. shouted, 'You want a 
goddam water-cannon to wash you across the sidewalk, fella? Put it away before they get 
the idea it's a telescope.' 
 
'I told you not to point it at anyone,' said the string player to ease the tension. The 
flautist said, 'But I had the safety on.' 
 
'Here she blows,' someone said. 

 
They had the coffin back inside the long black UN-STREAMLINED hearse that 
looked very Al Capone-like especially with Stok standing on the running boards. Stok 
was dressed in his corporal's uniform in order not to alert the newsmen who constantly 
gaze across the border from Checkpoint Charlie to the Friedrichstrasse Kontrollpunkt. 
 
There were two wreaths with the coffin; they were great lifebelts of fir-tree leaves 
with intertwined flowers and huge decorative ribbons of silk with 'Last greetings from old 
friends' and the date printed across them. The driver drove very slowly, nodding 
feverishly at Stok every now and again. The hearse stopped again and the driver 
produced a map, unfolding it across the steering wheel. In the no-man's-land of the world, 
two men in a hearse were looking at a map and discussing where to make for. 
 
Stok was talking energetically to the driver, who was probably a Red Army 
transport soldier, and the driver was nodding like mad. The glass panels at the sides were 
decorated with a complex engraved palm-leaf pattern, and the big coffin, chosen to give 
Semitsa room to stretch an elbow, could just be seen inside. 
 
The hearse moved slowly again and one Grenzpolizist was walking ahead of it, 
brandishing the documents like a royal flush. Two East German soldiers, leaning against 
the flower boxes and talking, made a joke about the hearse and then straightened their 
jackets and walked away in case they should be reprimanded. Overhead a U. S. Army 
helicopter clattered along the line of the wall, saw the hearse and circled, watching the 
activity around it. It crossed. One of the two G. I. s stepped out from the glass-sided box 
to salute a captain who had just arrived in a white Taunus with a spotlight and the words 
'Military Police' on its side. 
 
The G. I. waved the hearse forward and, as the western barrier was flipped open, 
the captain leaned into the shop downstairs and shouted 'Let's go, feller' to me. I turned 
away from the window, but not before taking one last look at Stok. He grinned and held 
his clenched fist in the air - a salute from worker to worker across the last frontier of the 
world. I grinned back and gave him the same salute in return. 'Let's go,' I heard the 
captain say again. I rattled down the ancient creaking staircase and jumped into the 
Taunus. By now the hearse was way down near the canal. The captain pumped the 
accelerator and jammed the siren on. 'Hoo-haw, hoo-haw,' the doleful bray had the traffic 
pulling aside and halting at the roadside. 
 
'This isn't the St Patrick's Day Parade,' I said irritably. 'Switch the bloody thing 
off, can't you? Didn't anybody tell you that this mission is secret?' 
 
'Yes,' he said. 

 
'Then why collect me in this carnival wagon?' 

 
He flipped the siren off and it died with a whimper. 'That's better,' I said. 

 
'It's your funeral, bud,' said the officer. He drove in silence, overtaking the hearse 
at the Tiergarten, at which stage of its journey it was attracting no attention at all. 
 
At the address in Wittenau Johnnie was awaiting me. 'Wittenau,' I thought; to a 
Berliner the word is invariably linked with the lunatic asylum here. The car stopped in a 
sordid street. 
 
It had perhaps been a shop at one time or maybe a tiny warehouse, but now it was 
a garage. There was a large wooden double door big enough to back in a lorry - or a 
hearse. At the rear there was a heavy bench with a metal-working vice and a few simple 
rusty tools and junk that the previous tenant had abandoned. As I opened one half of the 
door a thin shaft of daylight connected me with Johnnie Vulkan - like a carpet unrolling 

across the stone floor to where he was leaning against the bench. The single unshaded 
light bulb that looked so infirm in the daylight became newly significant in the darkness. 
I shot the large rectangular bolts and noticed how smoothly they moved into their oiled 
slots. There was grease underfoot too, and that smell of carbonised oil and spilt petrol 
that hangs around motor-car repair places. 
 
The light was directly above Vulkan's head and his eye-sockets were great 
piratical patches of darkness and under his nose was a moustache of shadow. He put a 
cigarette into his mouth and it gleamed under the light. 
 
Johnnie was watching me intently. He removed the unlit cigarette. 

 
'Get through to London?' he asked. 

 
'Just fine - clear as a bell.' 

 
'What did they say?' 

 
'They said 'Unanimous agreement,' the codeword. What did you expect them to 
say?' 
 
'Just checking,' said Johnnie. 

 
I squinted at him in an obvious sort of way. 'Do you know something that I don't 
know, Johnnie?' 
 
'No. Honest. Just checking. You got the documents in the name of Broum?' 

 
'Yes.' 

 
'Spelt correctly?' 

 
'Knock it off will you,' I said. 'I've got them.' 

 
Johnnie nodded and ran his fingers through his hair and carefully lit his cigarette 
with an expensive lighter. He began to recount the plan to himself to be sure he 
remembered it. 
 
'They'll go to the mortuary first. They will put him into a station wagon there. It 
should take at least another forty minutes.' We had both discussed the plan a dozen times. 
I nodded. We smoked in silence until Johnnie threw his cigarette butt on to the floor and 
stepped on it carefully. In the area around his feet the white rectangles of flattened 
cigarette ends were strewn like confetti. Overhead I heard the rattle of the low-flying 
helicopter which was watching the movement of the hearse between Checkpoint Charlie 
and the West Berlin mortuary. 
 
As my eyes grew more accustomed to the darkness I could see the junk that had 
accumulated in the building. There was a disembowelled motor-car engine with old torn 
gaskets hanging off it. The cylinder head had been hastily slid back on to its bolts without 
being seated and it rested drunkenly upon the engine. Beyond it was a heap of bald tyres 
and some dented oil drums. Vulkan had looked at his watch so often that he finally 
tucked his shirt cuff under the gold rim to make it easier to glimpse the time. He heaved 
deep sighs and every now and again he would go up to the engine and kick some part of 
it gently with the very tip of his hand-lasted Oxfords. 
 
'There's a funeral,' he said. 

 
I looked at him quizzically. 'That's what's delaying the transfer at the mortuary, a 
real funeral.' I looked at my watch. 'There's no delay,' I said, 'and if it doesn't arrive for 
another five minutes they will still be on time according to the schedule.' 
 
We both stood there in the dismal light of the bare bulb when suddenly Johnnie 
said, 'I was in prison once in the next street to this one.' 

 
I offered him a Gauloise and lit one myself and, when we had finished lighting 
them and having that first inhalation that makes you dive for a cigarette, I said, 'When 
was that?' 
 
'Spring of 1943,' said Vulkan. 

 
'What charge?' 

 
Johnnie grinned and stabbed the shadows with his cigarette. 'I was a communist, 
Roman Catholic Jew, who had deserted from the Army.' 
 
'Is that all?'I said. 

 
Vulkan gave a sour smile. 'I can tell you,' he said, 'it was grim. There wasn't much 
to eat for heroes in 1943 -for prisoners... 'He drew on his cigarette and the garage was full 
of the pungent aroma of French tobacco, and he drew on his cigarette again like this was 
all some complex dream he was dreaming while really he was in prison just a few year-
yards away. 
 
He rubbed two fingers of his left hand and then put them under his armpit as you 
do when you've hit them with a hammer - put them into some dark, warm place where 
they can stay for ever and never come out into the daylight. 
 
'Defined areas,' said Vulkan suddenly. 'Defined areas of hatred.' His voice was 
firm and yet seemed to originate from another time and another place, almost like a voice 
speaking through a medium, a voice that was just using the larynx and sound apparatus of 
Vulkan's body. 'It's easy then. When I was first arrested I was badly knocked about.' He 
made that motion of the hand that in some Latin parts of the world is a sign of pure joy: 
he flung his hand around on the end of his wrist like he wanted it to spin away into a 
corner. He held it up to me and I saw the skin grafts along the last two fingers. 'It wasn't 
so bad for me, those beatings. The French had arrested me; they were so anxious to 
demonstrate to their German masters how well they had learned from them. 
 
Those Frenchmen were the most evil men I have ever seen -they were sadists, I 
mean really, in the medical sense of the word. When they beat me they beat me for their 
own special sexual delight and just by being beaten I was participating in a sexual 
relationship with them - you understand me?' 
 
'I understand,' I said. 

 
'It was filthy,' he said. He clawed at his lip to find a shred of tobacco and finally 
spat heartily. I waited to see if he was going to continue; for a minute or so I thought he 
would say no more. Then he said, 'But it was uncomplicated for me. I could understand 
that a Frenchman felt hate for a German.' He stopped speaking again and I guessed that 
the conversation was proceeding in his head. 'The French prisoners were worse off 
because they...' He stopped talking again and his eyes were fixed on something from 
another time and place. 'But the first time I was ill-treated by a German - I don't mean 
pushed to one side or knocked off a chair, deliberately and systematically tortured, beaten 
- it was... I don't know, it threw me out of equilibrium. That's why the com munists were 
almost the last to crack, they were able to cling to their "in" group, they had sharply 
defined areas to hate.' 
 
I said, 'Most prejudice tends to operate against groups that it's easy to recognise. 
It's no accident that minorities only suffer where the prejudice has had time to develop its 
power of detection. Mexicans don't have trouble in New York City; it's down on the 
Mexican border they run into it. Pakistanis are honoured guests in Birmingham, 
Alabama. It's in Birmingham, England, that they run into prejudice.' 

 
'That's it,' said Johnnie. 'Well, after the war, communists had the best chances of 
rehabilitation. They'd always known that the forces of reaction (that's to say non-
communists) were swine, so nothing had surprised them. The Jews had known about anti-
Semitism for a few centuries. It was the ones who had suffered at the hands of their own 
people who were faced with an insoluble enigma. The Frenchman who had been tortured 
by other Frenchmen, the Italian partisan captured by the Italian fascists. We have this 
terrible thing to live with. 
 
'I have more in common with the Germans than with any other nation on the 
earth. I've lived among them, I understand them in ways I could never get to understand 
you, no matter if I was chained to you from now until the day I die. But I never go into a 
roomful of Germans without thinking to myself: is there a man here who tortured me? Is 
there a man here who killed my friends? Is there a man who just stood beyond the door 
while I screamed and believed that nothing outside of my torn body was real? Is there a 
woman here who was the daughter of such a one, a sister or a mother of such a man? And 
such is the power of mathematical reasoning that I am sure that often the answer has been 
"Yes" if only I had known.' He spat again in some sort of cathartic endeavour. 
 
Johnnie spoke suddenly. 'They might pull some sort of trick,' he said. 

 
'Could be,' I agreed. 

 
'Do you have a pistol or a knife?' 

 
'I don't think they are likely to try that sort of trick,' I said. 

 
'Do you have a pistol or a knife or a persuader?' 

 
'I have a persuader,' I said. 'Two hundred dollars in singles.' 

 
'The Americans,' said Johnnie. He walked over to the old engine. 'You shouldn't 
have told the Americans,' he said. 
 
'How would we have got it past Checkpoint Charlie?' I asked. 

 
'I don't know,' he said petulantly and kicked his collection of cigarette ends to the 
far corners of the building. 
 
He turned his back to me and began to toy with the junk on the bench, setting up 
some monstrous chess game. He tapped the rusty sparking plugs and squeezed valve 
springs in the palm of his hand. At the side of the bench was a thick polished oval of 
wood. There were twelve different sizes of drill stuck into it like matches in a peg board. 
Johnnie amused himself throwing the springs over the shiny drills. 'Schmidt's of 
Solingen,' it said on a scroll around the wooden base. 'Best drills in the world.' 
 
He arrived right on time, the same Red Army driver in a black station wagon. He 
rapped at the ancient wooden doors, but the joins in the woodwork were so warped that 
we had both already seen the car arrive and back up to the doors. Johnnie moved quickly. 
The doors swung back smoothly, the car chugged back in as far as the bench. Then the 
gigantic coffin slid out of the back of the car with just the three of us pulling, Johnnie and 
I one on each side and the Russian at the front of the car, bracing himself on the 
dashboard and pushing the end of the coffin with the soles of his boots. It wasn't very 
dignified but it was smooth and fast. As soon as the coffin was on to the bench the 
Russian stepped round to the driver's seat and came back bearing the two gigantic 
wreaths that I had seen on top of the hearse. There were great sprays of lilies and 
chrysanthemums and a bright red ribbon with 'Letzter Gruss' printed on it in Gothic 
script. 'Take those back,' said Johnnie to the young Russian. The Russian said he couldn't 
and there was a small argument. 

 
The Russian said he had tried to leave them at the mortuary but they didn't want 
them and he couldn't take them back through Checkpoint Charlie or it would seem highly 
suspicious. Johnnie argued in fluent Russian but it didn't do him any good: the boy 
wouldn't take the wreaths away with him. The more Johnnie swore, the more the Russian 
shrugged. Finally Johnnie turned away and the Russian jumped into the driver's seat and 
slammed the door. I opened the doors and the boy gunned the motor and gave the car full 
lock as he sped out into the street and away towards the border. 
 
Johnnie had climbed on the bench by the time I had turned round. He was using 
one of the big rusty screwdrivers to scratch the wood-filler from the sockets above the 
countersunk screws. He was so frantic in his haste that he had been working feverishly 
for five minutes or more before he noticed that I wasn't helping. 
 
'Get the items out of my case,' he said. 

 
There were two small suitcases. One was a midwife's set adapted to take an 
oxygen bottle. In the other case Johnnie had put a bottle of Glenlivet malt whisky, one of 
those sand hot-water bottles that keep hot for hours, a heavy sweater, sal volatile, 
smelling salts, a box containing a hypodermic needle and four small ampoules of 
megimide, four vials of aminophylline and a dark bottle that I guessed was nikethamide - 
a circulatory stimulant - a mirror to detect breathing, a short Piorry's wooden stethoscope, 
a thermometer, a pen torch suitable for examining pupils, and a marking pencil. 
 
'It's really complete,' I said. 'You take this pretty seriously, don't you?' 

 
'Yes,' said Vulkan. He hadn't removed his coat and he was sweating profusely. 
Sometimes in the exertion of the work his head would set the bare bulb swinging and all 
the shadows would dance crazily and his face glistened with sweat as I remembered it 
glistening with rain. 
 
'That's the last one,' he said. 

 
'Just like the last scene of Romeo and Juliet,' I said and Vulkan said 'Yes' over his 
shoulder and started to chip at the seam where the lid and bottom joined, but I doubt if he 
even heard what I said. 
 
'Help me,' he said. He began to strain at the heavy lid. It must have been inlaid 
with lead for it was so heavy to move that at first I felt sure that there were still some 
screws holding it - then it began to move. 
 
'Look out,' shouted Vulkan and the bottom end of the lid fell on to the bench, 
missing our toes by only inches. The crash was ear-splitting and the vibration rocked the 
bench. At first the shadow of the coffin lid obscured the view but, when it slid away, even 
Vulkan could cling to his hopes no more. 
 
'Six reasons why the Deutsche Demokratische Republik should be represented in 
the West.' There were hundreds of them, stacks and stacks of leaflets stuffed into the 
huge coffin - Stok's last joke. I climbed down to the floor. 
 
'It doesn't look like you'll need your hot-water bottle,' I said to Vulkan, and for 
just one split second reflexes pulled his face into a smile, but only for a second. 'They 
can't,' he said. 'They dare not, they promised - your Government must take action.' I 
suppose I laughed again, for Vulkan became past all rational argument. 
 
He held his splayed fingers before his face like he was studying an invisible hand 
of cards. 'You and Stok,' he said, over-salivating slightly. 'You planned this.' 
 
'He doesn't consult me,' I said. Vulkan was still standing on the bench three feet 
higher than I was. 

 
'But you are not surprised,' Vulkan shouted. 

 
'I'm not in even the slightest way surprised,' I said. 'That Red Army boy didn't 
even hang around to get a signature. Let alone for forty thousand pounds. I'd never 
believed any part of the whole deal, but that really convinced me. It's about time you 
came to grips with reality, Johnnie; there is no Santa Glaus. People just don't give away 
anything for nothing. What could Stok gain?' 
 
Then why did he go to all this trouble?' said Johnnie. He leaned down and moved 
some of the leaflets around in the coffin as though he thought he might find Semitsa in 
there if he dug deep enough. 
 
'He arrested four boys from the Gehlen set-up, didn't he?' 

 
'Five,' said Johnnie. 'Another failed to report in this morning.' 

 
'Exactly,' I said, 'and you got a little extra pay and some expenses and London 
will read your report and say what a good boy you have been.' 
 
'And you, you slimy bastard. What's your angle?' 

 
'I have my methods, Watson,' I said. 'I've been arranging the Berlin hit parade and 
you've slipped five notches to nowhere. You and that girl thought you had a nice deal, 
didn't you? Well, your big mistake was trying to exploit me as a part of it. Papers,' I said. 
I picked up a couple of the pamphlets from inside the coffin and let them flutter to the 
floor. 'There are the only papers you're getting, they aren't made out in the name of 
Broum but on the other hand there are probably no spelling errors.' 
 
'You------' said Vulkan and from his superior position on the bench-top tried to 
kick my head in. I backed off. 
 
'I'll tell you your trouble, Johnnie,' I said from a safe distance. 'You've become a 
professional phoney. You've become so good at pretending to be different that you have 
lost contact with your identity. You've learnt so much jargon that you don't know which 
side you are on. Every time you move through the frontier of space you slip through the 
frontier of time. Perhaps you like that. O.K. Be a Waldganger, [Waldganger: one who 
walks alone (in the woods).] but don't expect me to pay your expenses. Be a freelance, 
but don't expect a salary. You would be playing along with me now if you were smart. 
Stok's boys won't have anything more to do with you, you are poison to Gehlen... ' 
 
'Through you,' Vulkan shouted. 'You messed up Gehlen.' 

 
'You are poison to Gehlen,' I continued. 'And if you foul up with me there isn't a 
place left in the whole world where they would let you get a sniff of a job. You are dead, 
Johnnie. Dead and you don't know it. Dead and you can't afford the funeral expenses. Get 
clever!' 
 
There was a long silence broken only by Johnny's feet knocking against a valve. 

 
'I always return the things I am given,' said Johnnie menacingly, 'and that 
especially includes good advice.' He reached into his jacket and I saw his fingers flicker 
as he eased them around his ugly little Mauser H SC. 'I've planned this operation for 
fifteen years and I've worked out every conceivable contingency, including Semitsa's 
non-arrival. That's unfortunate but it won't impede the remainder of the programme, 
whether you choose to stand in the way or not, because this time they are going to be 
building the barbed wire through you.' 
 
' He clicked the gun casing back to show he meant business. Now we both knew 
the gun was ready loaded and cocked. 

 
'The girl and I did a deal,' Vulkan went on. 'Her interests and my interests 
complement each other: there is no conflict. Her side of the deal has gone on the rocks 
but that's too bad, I'm going to cut my losses. I need four days without you sounding off 
your big mouth. It's going to cost me eighty pounds per day to keep you on ice so you can 
see that I'm prepared to be out of pocket -because I could have you knocked off for one 
hundred pounds.' 
 
'Listen, Johnnie,' I said in an all-good-pals-together sort of voice, 'cut me in. I can 
get back that photo of you in prison clothes with Mohr.' 
 
'You lying bastard,' said Johnnie. 

 
I said, 'It's the papers you want?' 

 
Johnnie said softly, 'If you don't have them I'll kill you. You know that, don't 
you?' 
 
What could he do in four days? Knowing Vulkan, I could risk a guess. 'Can you 
get the money and be clear in four days?' I asked. 
 
'I told you I've been planning this for fifteen years. I laid the claim ages ago. I 
have three lawyers and a witness standing by - I...' he smiled '... talk too much,' he 
finished. I began to see the pattern but I didn't want that to be the last thing I ever saw. 
 
'Mohr is the witness,' I said. 'You met him in Hendaye and told him that Samantha 
was a Shinbet [Shinbet: Sheruter Betahan, Israeli Intelligence Service.] agent after him 
for war crimes. You told him that you could call her off if he did as you told him over the 
next day or so. Mohr saw Broum die. He's important to... ' 
 
'Shut your crummy mouth,' said Vulkan. 'I'm a Waldganger, just like you said.' He 
walked along the bench, the light glistening on his face. He walked slowly, picking his 
way among the set of drills, the mallets and rusty sparking plugs and little tin boxes of 
nuts and bolts, his shiny shoes moving, hesitating and placing themselves down like little 
flying saucers playing tag on a desolate landscape. 
 
Every now and again he flexed his fingers before easing them back around the 
handle of the pistol. I had seen Vulkan use that gun on the range; I knew he could put the 
whole eight-shot magazine into a six-inch group before I could swing open even one 
door-bolt. It seemed as though an hour went by as he moved along the bench but it 
probably wasn't more than forty-five seconds. That's the theory of relativity, I thought. 
 
'Get them,' said Vulkan. 

 
I had the big manilla envelope in my raincoat pocket. It had the royal coat of arms 
on the outside and 'Home Office' printed in prim roman letters across the corner. On the 
front was a white label that said that to help the war effort one should use envelopes as 
many times as possible. I moved towards the bench and handed the envelope to Vulkan 
who reached down with his left hand to take the corner. 
 
'Careful,' he said, in a genuinely solicitous voice. 'I want no complications at all. 
Let alone shooting you.' I nodded. 'I like you,' he added. 
 
'That puts a new complexion on the whole thing,' I said. 

 
The envelope had one of those little card circles that you wind string round. If you 
don't know what I mean, believe me you need two hands to open it, because that's the 
important point. Vulkan kept his finger on the trigger but held the corner of the envelope 
with his gun hand, using his left hand to unravel the string. It's the timing that was so 
important, because as soon as the string is unravelled you need two hands for only as 
long as it takes to get your hand inside and around the papers. Added to this factor was 

the risk that the longer I stayed there the more chance there was of Vulkan moving me 
back to a safe distance. 
 
Vulkan's knee was level with the top of my head. I judged my distance with care. 
There is a groove in the fibula just below the knee where the lateral popliteal nerve passes 
close against the bone. A sharp blow here paralyses the lower leg - 'dead man's leg' we 
called it in the school playground. 
 
'They are all falling out,' I shouted suddenly in panic. 'The papers.' Johnny 
clutched the bottom of the envelope as I pushed it - and his gun - upwards away from my 
cranium. I jabbed at his knee. I hit but not accurately enough. My head sang like a 
massed-voice choir as the nasty sharp front edge of the magazine hit the side of my head. 
I had already begun to fall back. Again I punched out, scarcely able to see Vulkan's leg 
for the bright crimson pain that sang its song in the empty echo chamber of my head. 
 
I felt him go. He toppled like a felled redwood, the spilled papers spinning and 
drifting all around him. The crash of his body collapsing full-length across the bench was 
followed by the clatter of dislodged junk. An insurance renewal slip fell like a sycamore 
seed into an open tin of grease. 'I've hurt my back,' he said urgently; but training won out 
and the Mauser stayed firmly in his fist. Its chamfered snout made a little circling motion 
like a clerk's pencil just about to write. I waited for the bang. 
 
'I've hurt my back,' he said again. I moved towards him but the foresight made 
that tiny movement again and I froze. His leg was crossed under him like a stone figure 
on a knight's tomb. I saw the real, ageing man behind the careless young mask. He 
twisted his shaken body and, more slowly than I had ever seen him move before, he eased 
his feet over the edge of the bench towards the greasy floor. His voice was a soft growl, 
'Es irrt der Mensch, so lang er strebt.' [Man errs till his strife is ended (Faust).] I watched 
him with that sort of hypnotic horror that venomous insects evoke, but between me and 
Johnnie Vulkan there was no glass. His feet took the weight of his body and his face took 
its pain. He groped along the bench towards me. I moved back. He stepped awkwardly as 
though his foot had gone to sleep, his muscle uncoordinated, his face twitching, but the 
Mauser always steady. His foot descended gently into the big tin of grease. Vulkan 
looked down at it. Now was the time to jump him. 'I've ruined my suit,' he said. The 
grease spattered around his leg and the Oxford made loud squelching noises inside the 
tin. He stood with one hand on the bench, one foot in the tin of grease and the Mauser H 
SC pointed at my middle. 'My suit,' he said and he laughed gently, keeping his mouth 
wide open, like imbeciles and drunks do, until the laugh became a gurgle, like soap suds 
going down a kitchen sink. 
 
The bare bulb was in my eyes, so it took me a few seconds to see the blood that 
was flowing out of his mouth. It was light pink and very frothy. He swayed, then crashed 
to the stone floor and the grease keg unstuck from his foot with a 'chug' and rolled across 
the garage, rattling as it struck the old debris, and bounced into the greasing pit. Johnnie 
was face-flat on the petrol-shiny floor. His whole body contracted and arched like 
someone was pouring salt on to him, and then the flat of his hand slapped the concrete, 
making three loud cracks like pistol shots. Suddenly he was relaxed and still. Stuck fairly 
high on to Vulkan's back was the thick oval of polished wood with the words 'Schmidt's 
of Solingen', and under that, 'The best drills in the world.' Vulkan now had their complete 
range driven deep into his dead body. 

 
It was all so in character. This little Faust, seeker of salvation by striving. This 
Sturm-und-Drang artist, with his two demanding masters, who tried to die with Goethe 
on his lips but was carried away by concern for his suit. I wondered whether Samantha 
was Gretchen or Helena. There was no doubt about my role. 
 
I stacked Stok's pamphlets in a pile near the door and, buttoning my trenchcoat 
tight around me, I lifted Johnnie's bloody carcass into the soft satin-upholstered coffin. 
Death had cut him down to size and I could hardly recognise the man whose ankle 
showed a four-inch scar. I took the grease pencil from the medical kit and, after wiping 
the blood from his face, I wrote '1 G. Na Am' on Vulkan's forehead. I looked at my watch 
and wrote '18.15' under it on the tanned skin. Anything that would increase the confusion 
when that box was opened was working in my favour. 
 
I had only four of the screws in when I heard the lorry outside. The place seemed 
to smell of blood, which perhaps was my imagination, but I tipped a little petrol on the 
floor just to be on the safe side, and hid my bloodstained coat. 
 
I swung the doors open. It was dark now and it had begun to snow. They drove in. 
I helped the driver unlock the rear doors of the truck. A figure stood inside the van 
holding an old Mark II Sten gun: a figure in a battered leather coat that bulged agreeably 
in just the right places. 
 
'Act your age, Sam,' I said. 'If there's only three of us it's going to be enough 
trouble lugging this thing into the truck. Lower that gun.' 
 
She didn't lower the gun. 'Where's Johnnie?' she said. 

 
'Lower that gun, Samantha. If you'd seen as many accidents as I've seen with 
those shoddy Sten guns you wouldn't behave that way. Don't they teach you anything in 
Haifa?' 
 
She smiled, pulled the cocking handle back, pushed it up into the lock slot and 
lowered the gun. 'Johnnie knows you're here?' 
 
'Of course he does,' I said. 'This is Johnnie's show, but you will never get away 
with your end of the deal.' 
 
'Maybe I won't,' she said, and leaned her face very close to mine, 'but my pop 
became a piece of soap in this God-damned country so I'm going to try.' She paused. 'We 
found out what happens if you don't - six million of you amble forward gently to die 
without too much mess or inconvenience - so from now on we Jews are going to try. 
Maybe I won't get away very far, but this boy... 'she stabbed a bright red fingernail 
towards the driver, '... is right behind, and behind him there are plenty more.' 
 
'O.K.,' I said. She 'was right. Sometimes it doesn't matter what the chances are. 
'Plenty more,' she said. I nodded. 
 
The military-style leather coat suited her. It suited the aggressive boyish stance 
that she had picked up along with the machine-gun. She leaned an elbow against the van 
and farmed her fingertips across her cheek as though the coat was the latest fashion and 
the machine-gun a photographer's prop. 
 
'You should have told me that you were in on it.' 

 
'Over that telephone of yours?' I said. 

 
'I saw the newspapers,' she said. 'We were careless.' 

 
'Is that what you call it?' I said. 

 
'I suppose the man downstairs burgled my flat too.' 

 
'There's no doubt,' I said. 

 
'Haifa thought your people had done it.' 

 
I shrugged and made the international sign for money with the index finger and 
thumb. 'How much of it's in German money?' I asked. 
 
'It all is,' she said, 'all Deutsche marks.' 

 
'That's all right,' I said. 'We have to pay the people at the mortuary for the turn-
round there.' She was still a little suspicious. 
 
'He's had one gramme of sodium amytal. ' I waved towards Vulkan's medical 
supplies and the coffin. 'He's sleeping quietly, we didn't use the oxygen, but Johnnie said 
to take the unit and antidote with you. I've marked the dose and time on his forehead so 
even if you forget to warn the people you pass him to, you'll be O.K.' 
 
She nodded and put down the gun and tried to push the coffin. I said, 'He'll be out 
for eight hours solid.' 
 
'It's heavy,' she said. 

 
'There's just one little thing,' I said, 'before we put him into your van. I would like 
the money here.' I held out my hand as Stok had done to me. She went to the cab and 
from a large leather handbag produced a bundle of new 100 DM. notes. She said, 'You 
realise there is nothing to stop me blasting you and taking Semitsa.' The driver came 
around the back of the lorry. He was carrying the gun, not aiming it, just carrying it. 
 
'Now you know why Johnnie isn't here,' I said. 

 
Her face showed great relief. 'Of course,' she said. 'I might have known he'd think 
of that. He's "Mr Angle": Johnnie Vulkan.' She gave me the money like she was sorry to 
see it go. 
 
'It's extortion, ghoul,' she said. 'He's not worth this much.' 

 
'That's what the Roman soldiers said to Judas,' I said. I put the money into my 
raincoat pocket and we all began to heave at the coffin. 
 
There was a time when I thought we weren't going to get it in, but slowly it 
inched into the truck. When it was far enough in for the rear doors to close (and we tried 
three times before it was) we stood there drinking in the smell of petrol by the deep 
lungful without enough energy to speak. I poured a big shot of Johnnie's Glenlivet 
whisky into the small plastic cups that he had been thoughtful enough to provide in his 
kit. My whole body suddenly began to shake. The neck of the whisky bottle chattered 
against the cup in a tiny shudder of sound. I saw Sam and the driver watching me. 
'Bottoms up,' I said and poured the smoky malt fluid into my bloodstream. 
 
Sam said, 'You told those French cops that I was working for the Krauts.' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 'I have an unpleasant sense of humour.' 

 
'You knew I was working for the Israeli Intelligence.' 

 
'Is that who you work for?' I said in mock innocence. 

 
'Um,' she said and sipped her whisky. The driver was watching us both. 

 
'It's all a game for you,' she said, 'but it's life and death for us. Those Egyptians 
have so many Kraut scientists working for them that their laboratory instruction manuals 
are printed in German as well as Arabic. With this guy we can really even things up.' 
 
'Enzymes,' I said. 

 
'Let's not kid each other any longer,' she said. 'Sure in Israel we can use Semitsa's 
knowledge of insecticides, but that's not half the story and you know it.' 
 
I didn't say anything. She buttoned her leather coat tighter around her chin. 'These 
insecticides Semitsa is working on are nerve gases! They've had lots of horticultural 

workers go crazy already. They attack the nervous system, they say they're the most 
deadly substances known to man. It's true, isn't it?' 
 
She needed to know. 'It's true enough,' I said. 

 
She spoke more quickly, relieved to know that her assignment was as important 
and factual as she wanted to believe. 'One day those Egyptians are going to come back,' 
she said. 'One day soon. When they come they are going to have weapons that these 
Kraut scientists have built for them. Our people in the nahals [Nahal: a military kibbutz.] 
have got to pack a punch.' There was a sharp click of plastic as she put down the empty 
whisky cup. 'That's why nothing that you or I could think or do stood a chance. This is 
something that could be the finale of the Jewish nation; no one is more important than 
that.' 
 
'If I'd known you were that keen I would have let you collect him from the Adlon.' 

 
She gave me a playful punch on the arm. 'You think we couldn't have done it? If 
there's one thing we know something about, it's cities divided by a wall. We've had a wall 
across Jerusalem ever since I was a kid. We've mastered every technique there is for 
getting over, round, through and under it.' 
 
I opened the rear doors of the truck and heaved the two dark shiny wreaths in. 
'From old friends,' one of them said. It had hooked itself over a coffin handle. 'We don't 
want those,' said Sam. 
 
'You take them,' I said. 'You don't know when you are likely to need a wreath 
from old friends. None of us does.' 
 
Sam smiled and I slammed the truck doors. I opened the garage doors with their 
carefully oiled bolts and I waved good-bye solemnly as the truck moved slowly forward. 
Sam was smiling out of her leather coat. Behind her head I could see the big polished box 
that contained the mortal remains of John Vulkan and just for a moment I felt like calling 
this over-confident child back. It's O.K. to have soft feelings knowing that years of 
training preclude one from obeying them. 
 
'Bis hundertundzwanzig,' [Jewish toast for a long life. (Moses lived 120 years.)] I 
said gently. The car lurched forward and Sam had to twist her head to keep me in sight. 
'Mazel Tov,' she called back. 'My darling ghoul.' Florins of snow hit the ebony 
windscreen and slid gently down the warm glass. The driver flipped his lights on to 
reveal long yellow cones of fast-moving snow. I closed out the sound of the engine and 
promised myself another Glenlivet whisky; it wasn't cold but I had the shivers again. 
 
HANNA STAHL alias SAMANTHA STEEL Monday, November 4th SNOW 
already, Samantha Steel thought. What kind of winter was it likely to be? Whatever kind 
of winter, it would be good to be back in her flat in Haifa, where from the bedroom 
window umbrella pines framed the intense blue water of the bay, and the whitewashed 
walls reflected back a glare too bright to look at, even in December. 
 
She watched the big snowflakes hitting the grimy streets as they passed through 
the Reinickendorf district of Berlin. The whisky had warmed her and she was quite 
capable of dropping off to sleep. She pressed her face about with her hands, stretching the 
cheeks and pummelling her eyes. What a relief that it was all over, there had been so 
many traps and pitfalls. Now she felt torn, shredded, used - sexually used almost. She 
combed her hair through her fingers. It was soft and young; fine silky hair. She let it fall 
against her neck like murmurs of love. She dragged it up again, her eyes closed; it was 

like taking a warm shower, combing her hair through her fingers. It would be nice to have 
it blonde again. She felt her whole body drift into relaxation. 
 
She would like to see Johnnie Vulkan again before she got on the plane; not for 
any romantic reason, he was just the sort of tough self-sufficient character that had no 
attraction for her at all. Vulkan was a big phoney. He wasn't even German, in spite of the 
way he always called Berlin his home town. He was a Sudeten German - you could hear 
it in his voice when he was angry. She didn't like him but she had to admire him. He was 
a professional; by any standards he was a professional. Just to see him work was a 
pleasure. 
 
The Englishman was the exact opposite. There were times when she could have 
'gone for' the Englishman, nearly did in fact. Given other circumstances, where there was 
no element of business involved, it all might have been different. She wished she had 
known him many years ago when he was at his red-brick university, this provincial boy 
wandering through the big city of life. She envied him his simplicity and briefly wished 
she had been the girl next door in Burnley, Lanes - wherever that was! He was cuddly, 
kind and malleable, he would make the sort of husband who wouldn't fight about her 
dress allowance all the time. 
 
Why the English used men like that in Intelligence work was something she 
would never understand. Amateur. That basically was why the English would never be 
good at doing anything: they were amateurs. 
 
Such amateurs that finally someone standing by couldn't watch their bungling any 
longer, and took over. That's what America had done in two World Wars. Perhaps it was 
all part of a vast British conspiracy. She giggled. She didn't think so. 
 
The driver offered his cigarettes. She looked round and tapped the coffin to make 
sure it was still there. She never trusted things she couldn't see and touch. Thank 
goodness Johnnie had supervised the morphia dosage and the details, the Englishman 
would forget or get it wrong. He had to be led, that Englishman. She had found exactly 
the same thing in her relationship with him. He has to have someone around like Johnnie 
Vulkan; or Samantha Steel, she added to herself. He would make a good father. Vulkan 
could perhaps be moulded into a good escort but the English guy would have been a good 
father to their children. She compared her memories of the two of them as though they 
were fighting some sort of tournament for her favours. She snuggled deeper in the seat 
and pulled her coat collar up to her eyebrows to think about that - to keep it more secret. 
 
Vulkan was the worst sort of womaniser and had some idea that women were an 
inferior race; he had used that word - Mannerbund - too; the bond that unites men, 
comradeship - her mother had told her that that was a dangerous sign. Men can get away 
with that sort of attitude in this country where there had been nearly two million surplus 
women in 1945. He would have got the shock of his life in Israel, where women were 
really gaining a place for themselves. 
 
She lit the cigarette. Her hands shook. It was natural, it was the after-effect of all 
the work and worry, but there was still the airport to deal with. If she was still in this sort 
of condition when they got there she would let the driver handle it; he was unimaginative 
enough to be calm, thank goodness. 'Where are we?' she asked. 
 
'There's the Siegessaule,' said the driver and pointed to the tall monument to 
ancient victories that stabbed into the Tiergarten like a pin through a green butterfly. He 
detoured to avoid the police cars that always sat around at the base of it. 'Not far now.' 

 
'Thank goodness,' she shivered. 'It's damn cold in here,' she said. 

 
The driver said nothing but they both knew it wasn't cold in there. 

 
She went back to thinking about the Englishman; it was a nice warm pretence to 
indulge in and quite academic, now that she would never see him again. He smelled 
good; she thought smell was important. You could tell a lot about a man by his smell and 
the taste of his mouth. His smell wasn't particularly masculine. Not like Vulkan - all 
tobacco and untanned-leather smells, which she knew came from a bottle, ever since she 
had looked for aspirins that night and found his hair-net. She laughed. The Englishman 
smelled of something softer: more like warm yeasty bread, and sometimes he tasted of 
cocoa. 
 
She remembered that night. It was the night she decided she would never 
understand men. Vulkan had made love to her in his usual fashion, which was like a 
specialist performing major surgery. She had promised to buy him some rubber gloves 
and he had made some wisecrack about her acting like she was anaesthetized. It was 
about three o'clock in the morning when she had found not only the hair-net but the parts 
for the half-finished string quartet. Vulkan. King Vulkan. The way he delighted in his 
big, secret-agent, undercover life. She ought to have told him that the secretive attitude he 
had about his intellectual life was a guilt syndrome centred upon his parents. Vulkan 
preferred to think it was 'the mental casualties of war'. Phoney. 
 
Why was the car stopping? She looked out at the densely packed traffic jam. It 
was a miserable town full of men in ankle-length overcoats and big hats. As for the 
clothes the women wore, they were unbelievable, she had hardly seen a well dressed 
woman all the time she had been here. 
 
She wasn't worried about the traffic jam, there was ample time, she had worked 
out the schedule to allow for such things. The van crept forward a little then stopped 
again. It was as bad as New York. She wondered whether to visit her mother at 
Christmas. It was a lot of expense and she had only recently been there. Mothers, 
however, had some special metaphysical regard for Christmas. Perhaps she should ask 
her mother to come to Haifa. The traffic had begun to move again, there was a cream 
double-decker bus slewed across the road. An accident. The road was probably slippery 
with the snow. At first the big flakes had melted as they hit the ground but now they were 
beginning to build up a white pattern. People too were wearing lace shawls of 
snowflakes. The driver switched the windscreen wipers on. The motor whined in a 
monotonous rhythm. 
 
There was a fire engine and a lot of people in the centre of the road. It could take 
ages at this rate. She leaned back to relax. The taste of the whisky recurred in her throat. 
She recounted the programme in her mind from the moment they had backed the truck 
through the doors of the Wittenau garage. Haifa had told her to let the money go only if 
she had to. It would make them suspicious, they had said. She wished she had bargained 
with the Englishman now: what had he said about 'That's what the Roman soldiers said to 
'Judas'? It was a typical sour English remark. She should have just taken the coffin at 
gunpoint. It had been in her mind to do so at one time. It was Johnnie Vulkan who had 
forced her hand, by not being there. He was probably watching from a window across the 
road. You had to admire Vulkan, he was a real professional. 
 
It was quite dark now, dark with the claustrophobic weight of the cloud from 
which dirty flakes of snow fell relentlessly. That's better; they were edging forward again 

now. Great lights illuminated the firemen operating the jacks under the bus. One fireman 
was kneeling down in a great pool of oil, so was a policeman. Now she could see what 
had happened. The fireman was talking to an old man whose legs were under the wheels 
of the bus. They were trying to take the banner he was holding away from him but the old 
man was gripping it tightly. The policeman waved them past. The old man still wouldn't 
let go. The snow covered his face. The banner said, 'No man can serve two masters. 
Matthew vi .24.' 
 
'This is Schoneberg,' said the driver. Tempelhof must be just ahead. 

 
In China, Hungary, India, Korea and Poland pawns are called ' 

 
'foot soldiers', but in Tibet they are called 'children'. Tuesday, November 5th THE 
green-shaded lamp in Dawlish's office is rigged up with a complex series of cords and 
counterweights. From its present position its light cut the figures round his desk in half 
and illumined them only from the waist down. Dawlish's disembodied hands reached into 
the circle of yellow light. The fingers shuffled and riffed through the thin new unwrinkled 
paper money like serpents' tongues. 
 
'You are probably right,' he said to me. 'It's counterfeit.' 

 
'I'm only guessing,' I said. 'But she gave it to me like she was playing Monopoly.' 

 
Dawlish flipped through it and read that little paragraph that they have on German 
money that says how they don't want anybody to feel free to print their own. Dawlish 
handed the money to Alice. 
 
'They're being very cagey about Newbegin filling the Berlin vacancy,' said 
Dawlish. 'They say you are Americanizing the department in dress, syntax and operation.' 
 
I said: 'That's their way of compensating for the orders they get from Washington.' 

 
Dawlish nodded. He said, 'The Yard have had a cable from the Munich police.' He 
watched my face in the darkness. I said nothing. On the other side of the desk Alice was 
plucking an elastic band that held the money that Sam had given me. The elastic made a 
loud crack in the still room. 
 
'A girl was transhipping a coffin at Munich - travelling with it between Berlin and 
Haifa. There was a dead body in the coffin.' 
 
Dawlish looked at me again, wanting me to speak. I said, 'Coffins often contain 
corpses, don't they?' 
 
Dawlish walked across to the tiny coal fire. He prodded it with a bent bayonet, 
there was a sudden flicker of flame and a tiny army of red sparks marched across the side 
of the grate. 
 
'What do you think we should say?' he said to the fireplace. 

 
'We?' I said. 'I thought the Munich police were asking the Yard. If you want to get 
yourself involved with girls going to Haifa with coffins, it's up to you, but I don't know 
what you're talking about.' 
 
Dawlish gave the largest piece of coal an in-out and on-guard and it split into five 
small blazing pieces. 'Just as long as I know,' he said, putting down the poker and 
walking back to the desk. 'It's no use my saying one thing if your written report says 
something completely different.' He nodded like he was trying to convince himself. He 
didn't have to convince me. 
 
'Yes,' I said. Outside there was a steady noise of starlings fidgeting about on the 
guttering. Through the window, dawn was revealing crippled roofs, and painting bloody 
reflections in the dirty glass of the window panes. The senile light above Dawlish's desk 

was losing its battle against the daylight with bad grace. Dawlish walked across to a 
leather chair and sank into it with a sigh. He took off his glasses and produced a crisp 
handkerchief which he carefully patted over his face. 'Could you find us a little cup of 
real coffee?' he asked in a gentle voice -but Alice had already left to make some. 
 
Dawlish read the newspaper clipping I gave him. 

 
FASCIST VICTIMS' ASSETS WILL BE RELEASED BY SWISS BANKS 
Berne, Oct .21st (R) The Swiss parliament on Thursday approved a government bill 
designed to release unclaimed assets of long-dead victims of fascism deposited in the 
country's banks. 
 
The new law supported by 130 deputies with no opposition lifts a corner of the 
curtain of secrecy which enshrouds many a foreign fortune deposited in Switzerland's 
confidential numbered accounts. 
 
The Bank Secrecy Act will now be set aside for a temporary period of ten years so 
that the government can take over the unclaimed funds. 
 
Under the new law, banks, insurance companies or anybody else are obliged to 
declare untouched assets belonging to people untraced since the war and who are racially, 
politically or religiously persecuted foreigners or stateless persons. 
 
The government's motives in pushing the bill through are to remove any suspicion 
that Switzerland would be prepared to profit from the case of European Jewry in Hitler's 
extermination camps. 
 
Disposal of the assets is to be decided by federal decree, with the stipulation that 
the origin of the dead owner will be considered. 
 
Jewish charities, or perhaps the state of Israel, are expected to benefit. 

 
The heirs to those declared missing, believed dead, will have five years to claim 
the deposits, but Swiss authorities believe that most of them are probably dead too, and 
there will be few applications. 
 
Nobody knows how much is involved, although the Swiss Banking Association 
has stated that it may amount to less than one million Swiss francs. 
 
Dawlish read the newspaper cutting for the fourth time. 

 
'Money,' he said. 'Vulkan was just after money.' 

 
'It's highly thought of,' I said. 

 
'Money isn't everything,' said Dawlish seriously. 

 
'No,' I said, 'but it buys everything.' 

 
Dawlish said, 'I don't really understand.' 

 
'There's nothing to understand,' I said. 'It's perfectly simple. In a concentration 
camp there is a very wealthy man named Broum. Broum's family left him about a quarter 
of a million pounds in securities in a Swiss bank. Anyone who can prove he is Broum can 
collect a quarter of a million pounds. It's not hard to understand; Vulkan wanted those 
papers to prove that he was Broum. All the other things were incidental. Vulkan made 
Gehlen's people ask us for the papers to make it appear more genuine.' 
 
'What did the girl want?' said Dawlish. 

 
'Semitsa,' I said, 'for the Israeli scientific programme She was an Israeli 
intelligence agent.' 
 
'Um,' said Dawlish. 'Vulkan wanted to give Semitsa to the Israeli Government. In 
exchange for this they would endorse his claim to the Broum fortune. The Swiss banks 
are very sensitive to the Israeli Government. It was a brilliant touch, that.' 

 
'Nearly,' I said to Dawlish, 'very nearly.' 

 
The system upon which we ran the department was that I took responsibility for 
all financial problems, although what might be called 'accounts' were seen by Alice and I 
merely initialled them. It was my special knowledge of finance which had brought me 
into W. O. O. C.(P) and compelled them to put up with me. Dawlish ran through a 
foolscap sheet of notes that he had prepared. It was comfortable sitting back in Dawlish's 
battered armchair in front of the fire, which every now and then exploded a little firework 
of sparks. 
 
Dawlish's voice summed up the circumstances of each problem neatly and 
cogently. There was little for me to say except yes or no, unless Dawlish required an 
explanation or amplification of my decision. He seldom did. 
 
Suddenly he said, 'Are you asleep, old boy?' 

 
'Just closed my eyes,' I explained. 'I concentrate better.' 

 
Dawlish said, 'You look about all in, now one comes to look at you.' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 'I feel like hell.' 

 
'It's the business with Vulkan, isn't it, old lad?' 

 
I didn't answer and Dawlish said, 'Of course it is -you've been fighting his battles 
here and down the road for the last eighteen months. It's a nasty business.' 
 
Dawlish stared into the fire for some time. 'Are you worried,' he finally asked, 
'about the written report?' 
 
'Well,' I said, 'it's tricky.' 

 
'Um,' said Dawlish, 'it's tricky all right.' He closed the file on his knee. 'Well, 
leave this for now - go home and get some sleep.' 
 
'I think I will,' I said. I suddenly felt absolutely done in. 

 
Dawlish said, 'I think I might be able to get you that interest-free loan if you still 
want it. Was it eight hundred pounds?' 
 
I said, 'Can we make it a thousand?' 

 
'I daresay we might,' said Dawlish, 'and if you leave that gun here I'll get one of 
the messengers to return it to the War Office.' I gave him the Browning FN pistol and 
three i3-round magazines. Dawlish put them into a large manilla envelope and wrote 'gun' 
on the flap. 
 
The End-game: this often centres around the queening of a pawn. Here a sudden 
threat can arrive on home ground.. Tuesday, November 5th I GOT to my flat at 10 a.m. 
The milkman was just delivering next door and I bought two pints of Jersey and a half-
pound of butter from him. 
 
'You've got the same trouble I've got,' the milkman said. 

 
'What's that?'I said. 

 
He slapped his belly with a noise that made his horse flinch. 'You like the cream 
and butter.' Then he gave a loud hoot. The horse walked slowly towards the next house. 
'Don't wear your old clothes tonight,' he said. 
 
'Why?'I asked. 

 
'They'll have you on top of the fire.' Then he laughed again. 

 
I had trouble opening the door, so much mail had jammed there. Copies of Time 
and Newsweek, bills from the electric company, adverts, fly to Paris for £9 175., the 
R.S.P.C.A. needs old clothes, and a sale of fire-damaged carpets gave me a chance to buy 
them for only ten times what they were worth. Inside the flat was a musty smell of stale 

air and two pints of penicillin under the sink. I made coffee and took that strange pleasure 
in handling well-known implements in a well-known place. I lit the gas poker with a 
comforting plop, placed a log on the fire and drew a chair up to it. Outside, the dawn 
sunlight had given way to low dark cloud that was sitting there thinking of some way to 
unload snow over the city. 
 
The whistling kettle interrupted me. I opened a tin of Blue Mountain coffee and 
poured a lot of it into the French drip-pot. The heavy aroma scented the air and from the 
living-room there was a crackle of sound as the log began to catch. I switched on the 
electric blanket and stood for a moment staring out of the bedroom window. Men were 
smashing dustbins on to huge council lorries and the publican was having his windows 
cleaned by Mr Boatwright. Down the road, the milkman was slapping his belly and 
laughing with the postman. I pulled the curtains close and as suddenly it was all gone. I 
went back to the kitchen and poured my coffee. 
 
The sun was trying to penetrate the cloud layer and the man five leafless gardens 
along was setting fire to old garden rubbish and tidying his hideous little yard for winter's 
onslaught. The smoke from the bonfire rose straight up on the windless air. Several of the 
gardens had huge heaps of inflammable material and the summit of one of them was 
crowned with a crippled human shape wearing a top hat. November the fifth, I thought. I 
suppose that's what the milkman was laughing about. Even as I watched a little boy came 
out of the house next door and threw an armful of firewood on the heap. 
 
I returned to my bonfire, prodded it with the toe of my boot and sipped at the 
strong black coffee. There was the third volume of Fuller's Decisive Battles of the 
Western World on the table. I opened it and removed the marker. For thirty minutes or so 
I read. A light sleet had begun to fall outside and the streets were deserted. There were a 
number of bottles on the coffee table. I poured myself a large measure of malt whisky 
and stared into the fire. 
 
As I caught the rich aroma of the malt it all suddenly came back to me. I was 
transferred to the dirty little dark garage with its spilt petrol and its dismantled engines. 
The smell of the whisky clawed at my nostrils and ripped open my memory. Johnny was 
lying in a mixture of spilt petrol and pink frothy blood, and as I moved him I was covered 
in a Faustian nightmare. I sank into a vortex of imaginings in which Walpurgis Night and 
Vulkan and the smell of petrol and whisky were indissolubly linked. Four hours later I 
woke up sweating in front of a cold fireplace. I had just enough strength left to get 
undressed and go to bed. 
 
Unless one is a master player the Queen's Gambit - when a pawn is offered for 
sacrifice - is best declined. Tuesday, November 5th TAPERS,' said Hallam. 'P - A - P - E 
- R - S.' 
 
'Wait a moment,' I said. 'I've only just this moment woken up. I've been working 
all night, hang on.' I put down the phone and on the way to the bathroom downed half a 
cup of cold coffee. I splashed lots of cold water on to my face and looked at the time. It 
was 5.30 p.m. Already it was dusk. The back-gardens all along the block were a 
chessboard of lighted windows. The light inside the houses was very yellow in the blue 
evening of a London winter. I went back to the phone. 'That's better,' I said. 
 
'There's been a frenzy here, I'll have you know,' said Hallam. 'It's about the Broum 
documents. Where are they?' Without waiting for a reply, he went on, 'We give you full 
co-operation. Then you don't... ' 

 
'Arf a mo, Hallam,' I said. 'You told me to clear out of Berlin and leave the 
documents with Vulkan.' 
 
'That's all very well, old boy. Where is he and where are they?' 

 
'How the hell do I know?' 

 
'You sure you haven't got them?' 

 
'No,' I lied. I didn't want the documents but I was fascinated to hear why just 
about everyone else did. 
 
'Would you care to come across here for a drink?' said Hallam, changing his 
manner abruptly. 'Fireworks night tonight, you know. Come and have a drink. There are a 
couple of things I want to ask you.' 
 
'O.K.,'I said.'What time?' 

 
'About an hour,' said Hallam. 'Do you think you could bring a bottle? You know 
how these firework parties are. In the dark people sneak off with the booze.' 
 
'O.K.' 

 
'Jolly good,' said Hallam. 'Sorry if I was a little shirty just now. The P. U. S. has 
been giving me a frightful telling-off about those papers.' 
 
'Don't mention it.' 

 
'That's jolly decent,' said Hallam. 

 
'Yes,' I said before I rang off. 

 
The power of a queen often encourages its use single-handed. But an unsupported 
queen is in a dangerous position against skilfully used pawns. Tuesday, November 5th 
THE fog had descended on the town. Not fog to stop the buses running or make the 
policemen use fog masks, but drifting areas of fog that would suddenly throw the 
headlight beam back through the windscreen. It had pedestrians wrapping their scarves a 
little higher than usual and coughing and spitting the sooty layer that formed on the 
mucous membrane like scale in a kitchen kettle. 
 
At Parliament Square they had a couple of acetylene lamps roaring and flaring 
their distinctive green light. Two policemen in white raincoats stood in the centre of the 
road amid the swirling mist like spectral puppets, raising their white arms as the visibility 
lengthened and scampering aside when it closed in. Here and there, around the entrances 
to the Tube stations, kids were begging money for the guys, most of which were little 
more than shapeless stuffed sacks with a mask and a hat stuck on them. Near South 
Kensington Tube there was a wonderful one, though. It was as big as a scarecrow and 
was dressed in an old dinner-suit complete with white shirt and bow-tie, while on its head 
was a dented bowler. There were four children around it and they were doing great from 
what I saw of passers-by throwing them money. I found a place to park just across the 
road from Hallam's flat. There seemed to be far more parked cars than usual because 
Gloucester Road was the kind of district where drinking cocktails and setting off rockets 
would be the right thing to do for young executives who like to play with fire. 
 
'Capital,' said Hallam. His eyes were a little shiny. I guessed he had been at the 
decanter himself before I arrived. He ushered me into the echoing hallway. From upstairs 
I could hear an old Frank Sinatra record. 'It's the animals I sympathise with,' said Hallam, 
walking down the corridor that was so dark I could hardly see him. As he opened the 
door to his room there was a halo of light around his silhouette. 'They get frightened,' he 
said. 

 
Hallam's room looked different from the way it was, the last visit I paid there. 
There was a Braun stereo-radiogram across one wall and a superb carpet on the floor. 
Hallam stood by the door, smiling. 
 
'Do you like it?' he asked. 'Sets the room off, I think.' 

 
'It must have given your bank account a bloodletting, though.' 

 
'Go on,' Hallam said. 'You're always thinking of money.' 

 
I took off my coat. Hallam wanted to explain. 'My aunt died,' he said. 

 
'No kidding,' I said. 'With something contagious?' 

 
'Good heavens no,' said Hallam quickly, then he gave a hurried laugh. 'She died 
with too much money.' 
 
'That's the most contagious thing of all,' I said, 'and what's more it can prove fatal.' 

 
'You are a terrible tease,' said Hallam. 'I never know when you're serious.' 

 
I threw my coat across the sofa without solving the enigma for him. I unwrapped 
the tissue paper from a bottle of rum and set it on the chest of drawers between the half-
eaten pot of Tiptree marmalade and the Worcester sauce. 
 
The pile of travel booklets had grown. The top one had a half-tone shot of a liner 
at dusk. Golden lights were twinkling through the portholes with a promise of cultured 
gaiety. In the foreground a woman with a small poodle in the bosom of her mink stole 
was emerging from the discreet legend, 'Luxury Cruises for the people who know'. 
 
'Rum,' said Hallam, 'that's very nice. I'm just taking a bottle of Algerian wine.' He 
moved the wrapped bottle of Algerian close to the Lemon Hart Rum; then we stood 
looking at them for a moment. 'What do you say to a little drink now?' said Hallam. 
 
'I'd say hello,' I said. 

 
Hallam beamed. 'What about a little rum?' 

 
'What sort?' I said. 

 
'That sort,' said Hallam. 'The bottle you've brought with you.' 

 
'O.K.,' I said. 

 
Hallam bustled about squeezing some lemons and boiling water on the tiny gas 
ring in the fireplace. 
 
'How's Grannie Dawlish?' he asked as he crouched over the kettle. 

 
'Getting older,' I said. 

 
'Ah, aren't we all?' said Hallam. 'Good chap Dawlish, in his way.' 

 
I said nothing. Hallam added, 'Tends to play the heavy father a little. You know - 
Whitehall Top Level stuff, but a decent cove in his way.' 
 
'Didn't know you knew each other,' I said. 

 
'Yes, Dawlish was at Home Office for a little while. He had that office next to the 
lift on the same floor I'm on. He said the noise of the lift got him down; otherwise I was 
going to move into there when he went.' 
 
Hallam stood up with two steaming glasses of drink. 'Here we are,' said Hallam. 
'Taste that.' 
 
I tasted it. It was a sweet combination of lemon juice, cloves, sugar and hot water, 
with a trace of butter on the top. 'Not exactly alcoholic,' I said. 
 
'Of course not, silly. I haven't put the rum in yet.' He uncorked the rum bottle and 
poured a slug into both glasses. Outside there was a sudden spatter of small explosions as 
a jumping cracker exploded. 
 
'I personally have always been against it,' said Hallam. 

 
'Alcohol?'I said. 

 
'Fireworks night,' said Hallam. 

 
I went across to the sofa, sat down and began to search through Hallam's 
gramophone-record collection. He had a lot of modern music. I picked out Berg's Violin 
Concerto. 'Can we hear this?' I said. 
 
'Play this one. It's wonderful.' He shuffled through his collection and found Sam's 
favourite: Schonberg's Variations for wind band. 
 
'It retains a strong melody even when the tonality is abandoned,' Hallam 
explained. 'A remarkable work. Remarkable.' 
 
He played this haunting discordant work from which it seemed I could never 
escape. It could be just a coincidence, of course, but I didn't think it was. While the music 
played I could hear the odd bang and shout outside and sometimes the whizz and spatter 
of a rocket ascending. When the music stopped Hallam fixed us another drink. As he 
said, in the dark the people at the party wouldn't notice whether it was full or not. 
Whenever there was a very loud bang Hallam went across to comfort one of the cats. 
 
'Confucius,' he called. He had a special high-pitched voice that he only used for 
talking to the cats. 'Fang.' Fang was something like a large bath-loofah with a leg at each 
corner. It moved lazily from under the sofa, about four paces to the centre of the carpet, 
deflated itself gently and went to sleep. 
 
'They don't seem very frightened.' 

 
'They are all right now,' said Hallam. 'It's later when the big ones go off. I shall 
give them a sleeping draught before we go out.' 
 
'If you give that one a sleeping draught it will fall into its saucer of milk.' 

 
Hallam chuckled discreetly. 'Where's my Confucius?' 

 
Confucius was the active one of the household. It came from its curled-up pose on 
the bed in that crosseyed, bandy-legged way that Siamese cats do and clambered with 
unfaltering ease on to Hallam's shoulder. It gave a short regal purr and then Hallam 
stroked its head. 'Wonderful creatures,' he said, 'so dignified.' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'We shall need your help,' Hallam said. 

 
'I'm no good with cats,' I said. 

 
'No,' said Hallam abruptly. He picked Confucius gently off his shoulder and put 
him on to the carpet. 'Your help with the Broum papers, I mean.' 
 
'Is that so?' I said. I took out my Gauloises. 

 
'Could I?' said Hallam; I gave him one. He placed it precisely in relation to a gold 
cigarette lighter and lit it. 'One way or another, you are the only one who can help. The 
department is extraordinary about documents like that. I know I said give them to 
Vulkan, but I didn't know the department would create such a fuss.' There was an 
explosion and then another from the street outside. Hallam stooped down to pat the cats. 
'There there, my lovely. It's all right.' 
 
'It will cost money,' I said. 

 
'How much?' said Hallam. He didn't say, 'Very well' or 'Out of the question' or 'I'll 
refer it to higher authority.' I couldn't see the Home Office paying to retrieve things that 
they owned. It wasn't like them somehow. I said, 'How much? That's difficult. What do 
you think the traffic will bear?' 
 
'It's the time factor,' said Hallam. 'Are they in London?' 

 
'I'm not sure,' I said. 

 
'For goodness' sake be reasonable,' said Hallam. 'I'm supposed to phone the P. U. 
S. tonight at his private number and tell him that the documents are safely in our 
possession.' 
 
There was a meek tapping at the door. 'Wait a moment,' Hallam said to me. He 
opened the door about six inches. 'Yes?' 
 
A voice from outside the door said, 'She won't let me do it in the passage, Mr 
Hallam.' 
 
'She's an old busybody,' said Hallam. 'Do it outside.' 

 
'On the pavement?' said the voice. 

 
'Yes, under a street lamp,' said Hallam. 

 
'They are throwing a lot of fireworks about tonight, the young boys.' 

 
'Well,' said Hallam in a bracing tone, 'it won't take you more than ten minutes, 
will it?' 
 
'No, that's right,' said the voice and Hallam closed the door and turned back to me. 

 
'Foggy tonight,' said Hallam to me. 

 
'Yes, in patches,' I said. 

 
Hallam pursed his mouth like he was sucking a lemon. 'Taste it. I can taste the fog 
in the air.' He went across to the little writing-desk and lifted the lid to reveal the 
washbasin. He rinsed his hands under the hot-water tap and there was a little boom and a 
flash as the gas heater began to operate. He dried his hands meticulously, opened a 
cupboard above the sink and took out a throat spray. 
 
'I suffer on the foggy nights,' Hallam said. He said this while spraying the back of 
his throat. He stopped spraying, turned to me and said the same thing again so that I 
could understand him. 
 
Outside the man had almost finished repairing Hal-lam's puncture. We drove in 
my car with Hallam shouting directions. The fog was worse around here. It was a great 
green swirling bank, punctuated by dusty yellow orbs of street lamps. It tasted sour and 
caked the nostrils. The fog was a wall that echoed back the sound of footsteps before 
swallowing the sound. A heavy lorry ground past in bottom gear, following the pavement 
edge anxiously. A man walked slowly, guiding a car with a flashlight, and behind that a 
little convoy came like a line of coal barges towed by an adventurous tug. I let in the 
clutch and followed them. 'It's always bad around here,' Hallam said. 
 
Pawns can only move forward. They can never retreat. Tuesday, November 5th IT 
was there in the sky: red. Red flickering brown, red flashing pink, but always red like 
some sinister dusk or neolithic dawn. Chimneys were drawn up tightly in soldierly rows 
across the skyline and as we turned the corner a long low street of artisans' houses was 
bright with the firelight, like some Kensington speculator had given them the pink-
distemper-and-brass-lion's-head-knocker treatment. 
 
The crash of fireworks went on all the time and the tearaway sound of rockets 
wooshed and pattered way overhead. The lines of windows were twisting with reflected 
flame and suddenly the bonfire appeared from round the corner. It was a huge flaming 
altar of fruit boxes, heaped together and twisted with flames into a fiery cubist nightmare. 
The apex of the flame was about thirty feet high and from the very tip a whirling vortex 
of sparks moved violently upwards on currents of heat, and then slid sideways towards 
the cold ground like a swarm of wounded fireflies. 

 
The bonfire was in the centre of a large open site that had probably been flat since 
the bomb-damage squads of the war had checked the number of corpses against the list of 
residents, sprayed the site with chemicals and framed it with the fencing that now was 
bent and trampled. The site was covered with irregular clumps of waist-high weeds and 
nettles. I wondered if there was anything here that Dawlish would like for his garden. 
 
From the far side of the site there was a sudden patchwork of flame. Tangled 
skeins of yellow, unravelled spools of green and neat scarlet patches tumbled across the 
ground like an upset sewing box. 
 
'Toes,' said a laconic voice behind me. I turned to see two men pushing a huge 
Victorian pram full of old cardboard cartons and pieces of wood. Behind them there was 
a hoarding full of wrestling advertisements. 'Doctor Death,' said one of them, 'versus the 
South London Vampire -Camberwell Baths.' 
 
There were lots of people scattered across the site in large groups and small 
groups, not mixing but holding their own little parties. We walked across the uneven 
ground, avoiding the large pieces of junk that had been dumped there over the past twelve 
months. Only non-inflammable items had survived the survey of the bonfire tenders. As 
we skirted a deep hole a group of men were sharply silhouetted on to the white-hot centre 
of the bonfire. I watched the two men who had passed us throw chunks of wood from the 
pram high on to the pyre. On the other side of the fire the spectators were drawn as if 
with yellow chalk on a blackboard, but each figure had only one side depicted, their 
backs melting into the darkness and the haze of the remaining wisps of fog. 
 
Behind the fire, four men were standing round one of the few trees that remained 
on the site. I saw the sulphurous yellow glare of a firework. Then the group and the tree 
disappeared into the darkness again. There was a tiny flicker of yellow flame as one of 
the men thumbed his cigarette lighter. One said, 'It's gone out' and some else said, 'Go 
and blow on it, Charlie,' and they all laughed. All around us there was the flare and bang 
of fireworks and a pitter-patter overhead where rockets were spitting at the stars. There 
was a soft buzz as something landed at my feet. 'Oops a daisy,' said a fat woman walking 
towards me and we both leapt aside as there was a great smash of sound. 
 
Hallam had dropped behind to have a cigarette without offering them to me. I 
could see the outline of figures against the light reflected in the house-fronts, but it was 
hard to know which was Hallam until there was the loud cloth-tearing sound of a rocket, 
then the intense white light of the parachute flare which it had contained. Suddenly the 
whole site was as light as midday. I looked back in the direction we had come. I saw 
Hallam. He was dressed in his black melton overcoat and bowler hat with a bright yellow 
silk scarf. The thing that I noticed about him was that he was carrying a.45 pistol and it 
was pointing directly at me. The flare surprised him as much as it did me. I saw him push 
the huge pistol into the front of his coat. The flare was beginning to die now. I looked 
around and saw the small crater I had almost fallen into. I dropped into it as the flare 
went out. It was very dark, the fire was behind me and Hallam in front; I peeped over the 
edge of the hole to see if I could see him. 
 
He was standing in the same place. He had wrapped his scarf around the gun. 
Two old women were picking their way carefully past the crater. 'Look out, Mabel,' said 
one of them and the other one caught sight of me and said loudly, 'Cor, look at him, dear. 
He's had one over the eight, all right.' The other one said, 'One over the eighteen, you 
mean.' 

 
It was all Hallam needed to locate me. I decided to get up right away and get close 
to the two old ladies. There was a crash and rip of a.45 bullet passing above my cranium. 
'Oops,' said the old ladies. 'There's a loud one.' Hallam wanted me to stay right where I 
was until he came over to do his task and then leave me there. The two old ladies said, 
'Aren't they terrible?' 
 
I felt in my pocket for the fireworks I had brought and found a 'Tiny Demon'. I lit 
it and carefully threw it at Hallam. The explosion had him leaping aside and a man who 
saw it said, 'Stop throwing those bangers, you hooligans. I'll have the law on you.' 
 
I lit another and threw that at Hallam too. He was ready this time but the blast had 
him keeping his distance. A man passing by said, 'Are you all right down there?>' and his 
friend said, 'It's just an excuse to get plastered for some of them,' and they hurried away. 
 
Behind Hallam, the fireworks were bright green and yellow, popping and sending 
little showers of golden rain into the sky. It gave me a chance to range him in. I watched 
the fine red tip of the firework land near Hallam's feet and for a second or so he didn't see 
it and when he did he moved fast. There was a big blast but Hallam was merely a little 
shaken. I looked around for some way out of this fiasco. The whole site was crowded 
with people coming and going, blissfully unaware of Hallam trying to kill me. 
 
A man was looking into the crater, saying, 'Have you slipped?' 

 
'I'm not drunk,' I said. 'I've twisted my ankle.' The man reached down a large hard 
hand to help me. I came to my feet like a man with a twisted ankle and there was a stab of 
flame as Hallam fired again. 
 
Someone from the darkness yelled, 'Bloke there is holding bangers in his hand - 
you don't want to do that, mate. ' Hallam shuffled to one side a little self-consciously. 'I'll 
be O.K. now,' I said to my benefactor. Near by there was a whirling buzz as a Catherine 
wheel tore a golden hole in the night As the man moved away there was another pistol 
shot and near by someone laughed. Hallam had fired high for fear of hitting the man, and 
I started to think that he had decided to back me up against the bonfire, with the idea of 
tipping me in. All sorts of ideas occurred to me such as falling to the ground when I heard 
the next bullet in the hope that Hallam would come within striking distance. That plan 
assumed Hallam would be careless; there was no reason to think that Hallam would be 
careless. To my right there was the choking sound of a roman candle sending livid balls 
of fire high above my head. Two red spots moved towards me. One said, 'Where did you 
put it?' The other one said, 'Under this bush, nearly half a bottle; Haig and Haig.' They 
moved past. The other two men of a party of four lit another roman candle. 
 
I had lost sight of Hallam, which made me a little nervous. I knew that as soon as 
the second roman candle went up Hallam would pinpoint me and he didn't have so many 
rounds left in the pistol. The next shot might well prove fatal. 
 
I moved in among the men and their roman candles like David among the 
Philistines. I put my foot on the roman candle and ground it into the earth just as the 
ignition began. 'Here here,' shouted the biggest one of the men. 'What the------hell you 
think you are on?' 
 
'I'm doing a trick,' I said. 'Hold that.' I took the bottle of rum out of my pocket and 
gave it to him. 'Suppose I don't want to,' he said. 'Then me and my mates will smash your 
head in,' I said in a surly voice. He backed away hurriedly. I searched through their huge 
box of fireworks and found a parachute flare. I put the stick of it into the bottle and lit it. 
There was a great roar of sparks and it took off to burst in a great white glow that 

momentarily dimmed the bonfire. I stayed close to the tree. There was a great 'Ooohh' 
and 'Aaahh', as the rocket burst, and I picked out Hallam in his bowler hat standing near 
the old Victorian perambulator. I had wedged three more rockets into the crutch of the 
tree. Hallam looked around feverishly. I depressed the elevation of the first rocket and 
lined it up with Hallam. I lit it. 
 
'Steady on,' said one of the men. 

 
'Come away, Charlie,' said his friend. 'He's going to do someone an injury and I'm 
not going to be around.' As I was lighting the second rocket, the first one began to fire 
sparks, then it gained power and roared forward like a bazooka shell. It passed about six 
feet over Hal-lam's head and about four feet to the right side. I lit a firecracker and let it 
burn its fuse well down before hurling it towards Hallam's feet. By this time he was 
looking around and he saw the fire of the second rocket begin. There was a flash as he 
fired the pistol and a chunk of tree ripped a hole in my sleeve. The second rocket roared 
towards Hallam. It's easy to see a rocket. It leaves a trail like a tracer bullet. He moved 
easily to one side and the rocket thudded harmlessly into the ground just beyond where 
he had been standing. He fired again and there was a crunch of breaking wood. I peeped 
over the crutch of the tree and saw a great snowstorm of sparks, like it was raining golden 
sovereigns. Beyond Hallam there were the asterisks of sparklers. 
 
Nearer to me a man said, 'Well, I'll tackle him. I paid for those rockets and I'm 
going to let them off.' His voice was slurred with drink and I thought at first that it was 
the men who had been looking for the Haig and Haig coming back to remonstrate with 
me, but they walked past the tree still talking. Hallam began to load the pistol. I could just 
see his movements in the gloom. To his right the bonfire was burning brightly; the wind 
had caught it, and the side which had hitherto been hardly alight suddenly caught fire 
with a roar. 
 
I groped around feverishly for more fireworks. There was only one more rocket 
and some roman candles and groups of tiny bangers with rubber bands round them. I 
grabbed one bundle, lit them with my hand shaking so much I could hardly hold the 
match and tossed them in the direction of Hallam. I put the last rocket in the branch of the 
tree and lit it just as the bundle of bangers went off with a huge crash. It put Hallam off 
guard. My last rocket tore a yellow gash in the fabric of night. At first I thought it would 
hit him, but at the last minute he saw it coming and moved aside. It went into the soft 
earth a few feet behind him and expired softly. Two shots ripped notches into the tree. I 
shrank down behind it with the idea of running for the nearest cover. I looked at the 
brightly lit ground around me. There was no cover. Nothing between me and Hallam 
now. 
 
I looked around the shadow side of the tree fairly low down, and as I did I saw 
what happened. The second or third rocket lying on the ground suddenly obediently 
discharged its flare. I saw Hallam's whole figure silhouetted in the great white light 
behind him. I could read the wrestling ad. about Dr Death. Hallam half turned, probably 
thinking that he was being attacked from the rear and as he did I saw his scarf was alight. 
The scarf hung from his hand like a great flaming walking stick and he beat it against 
himself to put the flames out. Suddenly there was an enormous sheet of flame into which 
Hallam disappeared. It flickered for a moment and I saw Hallam's body twisted in the 
very centre of the flame. Then suddenly there was a roar like a jet motor, and where there 
had been flame there was nothing but a great white fireball, so bright that the bonfire 

looked dull and yellow. Some vintage, that Algerian wine. It was a Molotov cocktail to 
dispose of my mortal remains. 
 
'Cor, what a beauty.' 

 
'Hello, somebody's thrown a match into a box of fireworks; easy to do.' 

 
'A few bobs' worth of whizzers gone up there, Mabel.' 

 
'I bet my dog's going mad.' 

 
'Mind how you go, there's a hole there. One drunk feller has fallen into it already.' 

 
'I wonder who clears it all up.' 

 
'We've got some cold sausages in the fridge or we can stop off for some fried fish 
and chips.' 
 
'Look at that green one.' 

 
'Oooooohh, what a terrible smell of burning food. Look at that smoke.' 

 
'Leave off, George.' 

 
'Hello, there's a crowd gathering over there. I'll bet there's been an accident.' 

 
If a player is not in check but can only make a move that will place him in check; 
this is stalemate and is scored as a dram. Wednesday, November 6th 'WELL, you had 
better not put any of that in the report,' said Dawlish. 'The Cabinet will go dotty if you've 
been mixed up with two nasty businesses in one week.' 
 
'How many am I allowed per week?' I said. 

 
Dawlish just sucked an empty pipe. 

 
'How many?' I asked again. 

 
'As one man who hates violence to another,' said Dawlish patiently, 'you are 
developing an unfortunate habit of being near by when people commit suicide.' 
 
'You are damn right,' I told him. 'I've spent my whole adult life being near by, 
watching half the human race committing suicide, and from where I'm sitting the other 
half seem hell-bent on following suit.' 
 
'Don't go on,' said Dawlish. 'You've made your point.' There was a long silence 
with just the ticking of the clock. It was 2.30 in the middle of the night. We always 
seemed to be in Dawlish's office in the middle of the night. 
 
Dawlish fiddled around with some papers in the tiny light on his desk. Outside I 
could hear lorries laden with deliveries of milk roaring and clinking at breakneck speed 
into the city. I sat in front of the tiny coal fire that no one in the building except Dawlish 
could ever get to burn, sipped his best brandy and waited while Dawlish got ready to tell 
me something. By now I could recognise the signs. 'It's my fault,' said Dawlish. 'My fault 
that this happened,' I said nothing. Dawlish came across to the fire and sat down in the 
biggest armchair. 
 
'You checked... ' Dawlish spoke to the mantelpiece rather than to me.'... that 
Hallam was to leave the Civil Service next week?' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'You know why?' he asked. 

 
I sipped my brandy and took my time about replying. I knew that Dawlish 
wouldn't hurry me. 'He was a bad security risk,' I said. 
 
'My report said he was not a good security risk,' said Dawlish emphasising the 
difference. 'My report,' he repeated. 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'You knew.' 

 
'You kept telling me not to ill-treat him,' I said. 

 
Dawlish nodded. That's right, I did,' he agreed. We both stared into the fire for a 
long time, me sipping brandy, Dawlish with both palms pressed flat together and the two 
index fingers rubbing the tip of his nose. 
 
'I don't like it,' said Dawlish. 'You know my views.' 

 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
'I sent in a long supplementary attached to his file, and three memos about him in 
particular and homosexuals in general. Do you know what happened?' 
 
'What?'I said. 

 
'A certain hooligan in the Cabinet' - I had never heard Dawlish describe his 
superiors in quite such terms - 'had Ross at the War Office check me to see whether I 
have homosexual tendencies.' He leaned forward and prodded the fire gently with the 
poker. 'Whether I have them.' 
 
'That's the way your mind works if you are a politician,' I said. I suppose I smiled. 
Dawlish said sadly, 'It's not funny.' He poured me another brandy and decided to have 
one himself. 'That's what happens once you start moving along these sort of lines. Look at 
the Americans. They have invented some quality called un-Americanism just as though 
Americanism were a concept of an individual instead of a government's concept. There 
are strong resemblances between Americanism, communism and Aryanism: all are 
government ideas and therefore will naturally describe characteristics of the easily-
governed; other differences are minor.' 
 
'Yes,' I said. 

 
Dawlish wasn't talking to me, he was just thinking aloud. I wanted to know what 
would happen about the Hallam disaster but I would let Dawlish get to it in his own way. 
 
Dawlish said, 'That's what one doesn't like about this homosexual business. We 
may as well say that all women are a security risk because they can have illicit relations 
with men. Or vice versa.' 
 
'For those who like their vice versa,' I said. 

 
Dawlish nodded. 'The only solution is to take the social pressures off the 
homosexuals. These damned security hunts just put more pressure on. If someone gets on 
to one of these johnnies before we do he's got an extra threat for him - losing his job; if 
they weren't going to lose their job, they might ask to have "homosexual" entered on their 
dossiers voluntarily. If they then had someone pressuring them, they could report to their 
security people and we'd have some sort of chance of dealing with it. This damned 
system, all that happens is that we make enemies.' I nodded. 
 
'Don't even report to me,' said Dawlish, and I realised that part of his mind had 
been thinking of the Hallam situation all the time. 'Just act as if you knew nothing 
whatsoever.' 
 
'That comes naturally to me,' I said. 

 
'That's right,' said Dawlish. He sucked his pipe and said, 'Poor old Hallam, what a 
way to go,' two or three times and then finally, 'Are you happy, that's the main thing?' 
 
'Sure,' I said. 'An all-laughing, all-dancing, all-singing, Technicolour wide-screen 
massacre. Why wouldn't I be happy?' 
 
'Desperate diseases require desperate remedies,' said Dawlish. 

 
'Says who?' I said. 

 
'Guy Fawkes, I believe,' said Dawlish. He was just great at quoting people. 

 
I said, 'Why don't you and me clear off to Zurich and claim the quarter of a 
million? We've got the proof.' I tapped the envelope full of Broum. 
 
'For the department?' said Dawlish, walking back to his desk. 

 
'Us,' I said. 

 
'It would mean living with all those Swiss,' said Dawlish. 'They'd never let me 
grow weeds there.' He opened a drawer, dropped the documents into it and locked it, 
before coming back to the fireside. 
 
'Shall we try and get that bastard Mohr?' I said. 

 
'You are a callow youth,' said Dawlish. 'If we tell Bonn he is a war criminal, 
either they won't claim him at all or else they will give him some nice fat government 
job. You know what always happens.' 
 
'You're right,' I said, and we both sat quietly staring into the fire. Every now and 
then Dawlish said how amazing it was that Vulkan never really existed, and poured me 
another drink. 'I'll tell Stok about Mohr,' I said. 
 
'Do that,' said Dawlish, 'and we'll watch what happens.' 

 
'If anything,' I said. 

 
'So Vulkan never really existed?' 

 
'Vulkan existed all right,' I said. 'He was a concentration-camp guard until a 
wealthy prisoner (who had been an assassin for the Communist Parties) arranged to have 
him killed. This man was Broum, and an S. S. medical officer named Mohr... ' 
 
'The one in Spain now. Our Mohr.' 

 
I nodded. '... made a deal. The S.S. officer staged a death scene and made sure that 
Broum was believed dead by all the prisoners. Broum meanwhile dressed as a German 
soldier and disappeared. In 1945 even being a German soldier was better than being a 
murderer. What's more Broum (or Vulkan) got along very well financially even without 
the £250,000, but it was nice to think it was there waiting. Perhaps he intended to leave it 
to someone. Perhaps on his death-bed, beyond the reach of the guillotine, he was going to 
say who he really was. No. It was this new law about unclaimed property that made him 
suddenly start to move. What he needed was a way of proving he was Broum and then of 
not being Broum just as quickly.' 
 
'It's astonishing,' said Dawlish, 'to think of a Jewish prisoner who had suffered so 
much going all through his life saying that he had been a Nazi guard in a concentration 
camp.' 
 
'He didn't know whether he was up or down,' I said. 'He came to the conclusion 
that if you throw enough money around you don't have enemies. Vulkan, Broum, 
whatever you want to call him, his final allegiance was to cash.' 
 
'Was it all worth it?' said Dawlish. 

 
I said, 'We are talking about a quarter of a million pounds; it's a hell of a lot of 
money.' 
 
'You misunderstand me,' said Dawlish. 'I meant, did he need to live in fear? After 
all, this was an old war-time political assassination...' 
 
'Carried out by order of the Communist Party,' I finished. 'Would you like to enter 
present-day France with a tag like that?' 
 
Dawlish gave a sour smile. 'Communist Party,' he repeated. 'Do you think that 
Stok knew everything all the time? Knew who Vulkan really was, and who he had been 

and whom he had killed? They could really have him in a cleft stick if they had all that on 
their war-time files, squeezing him until he cracked?' 
 
'I thought about that,' I said. 

 
'You are sure about all this?' said Dawlish anxiously. 'It's not just guesswork, the 
dead man was Broum?' 
 
'Positive,' I said. 'It was the scars that settled it. Grenade confirmed it yesterday. I 
sent Albert six bottles of whisky on expenses.' 
 
'Six bottles of whisky in exchange for losing one good operative doesn't seem a 
good way to do busi ness.' 
 
'No,' I said. Alice brought the coffee in Dawlish's one-and-sixpenny cups from 
Portobello Road. Alice never went home. 
 
'I guessed in a way,' I said, 'when the old man said that a doctor in a concentration 
camp can even cure you. Cure, you see - to be released - or to die. It could be arranged by 
a doctor willing to fiddle a certificate of death. The extraordinary aspect of Broum's 
situation was the way he must impersonate his victim - Vulkan the guard - because in 
doing so Vulkan was still alive and his first victim assassinated by someone else.' 
 
'And Hallam?' 

 
'As soon as he was offered money he co-operated with Vulkan to the utmost. He 
was the only person authorised to issue documents of that sort. Without his connivance it 
wouldn't have been so easy for them.' 
 
'Hallam didn't have much to lose, if he was getting the sack as a security risk.' 

 
'That's it,' I said. 'It all depended upon me getting panicky when they made 
Semitsa persona non grata right at the last minute. Their theory was that I'd clear out and 
leave Vulkan holding the baby.' 
 
'They trusted Stok to deliver Semitsa?' 

 
'Hilarious, isn't it?' I said. 'They were so pleased with themselves that they 
couldn't bear to consider that Stok might be smarter than them. That he might be just 
kidding around to see what he could find out.' 
 
'But it was obvious, you said.' 

 
'Well,' I said, 'Stok and I are in the same business -we understand each other only 
too well.' 
 
'There were people,' said Dawlish dryly, 'who thought you might end up as his 
assistant.' 
 
'You weren't one of them, I trust?' 

 
'Gracious no,' said Dawlish. 'I said that he would end up as yours.' 

 
Originally the piece we now call a queen was a counsellor or government adviser. 
Thursday, November 7th IT was just like Hallam had said, there were so many accidents 
on November 5th that the 'awful death of man on fireworks night' didn't get into the 
national press at all and the local paper only gave it a couple of paragraphs and that was 
mostly devoted to a spokesman from the R. S. P. C. A. 
 
November 7th was the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. Jean gave me 
four aspirins, which was her friendly overture, and Alice a coffee made with milk, which 
was her cure-all. I sent Colonel Stok an Eton tie from Bond Street, which was my 
revolutionary gesture. 
 
The Mother-in-law's Tongue was coming along nicely. Jean said that on the 
window-sill over the radiator was the best place for it and it certainly seemed to thrive 

there. Dawlish had decided that he was going to spend a few days busy in the country, 
which I suppose was to make himself scarce. He had taken Chico with him so the office 
was quiet enough for me to finish It pays to increase your word power. My rating was 
'fair'. 
 
They wouldn't let us offer Harvey Newbegin a job partly because he was foreign, 
and partly because I wore woollen shirts and said 'like' instead of 'as though'. This left us 
weaker in both Berlin and Prague. 
 
'Going to the Home Office on Sunday?' Jean asked. 'You have an invitation. It's 
the Remembrance Service. I said I'd phone them back this morning. There are only 
twelve places in Hallam's room.' 
 
'I promised to go,' I said. 

 
'Is it true that Hallam is in hospital?' said Jean. 

 
'Ask them,' I said. 

 
'I heard 'Ask them,' I said. 

 
'I did,' said Jean. 'They were very short and rude.' 

 
That's O.K. then,' I said. 'H. O. are like London theatres: if they answer politely, 
you can be sure the show is a little shaky.' 
 
'Yes,' said Jean. She gave me a memo from Dawlish that said that some of the 
Broum documents had been damaged by grease and would I please submit a full 
explanation in writing. There was another document that authorised the cashier's 
department to pay me £1, subject to my signing that it could be deducted from my pay 
over a two-year period. I said to Jean, 'How would you like a spin in the country this 
week-end in a new car?' 
 
'Perhaps,' said Jean. 'I've got every kind of eyebrow pencil.' 

 
'In that case,' said Jean, 'how can I refuse?' 

 
'Friday then,' I said. 'Back Sunday morning.' 

 
'Without fail,' said Jean. 'I'm looking after Hallam's cats.' 

 
Repetition rule: it is a rule of chess that when the same sequence recurs three 
times the game can be terminated. Sunday, November loth IT is one of those misty 
London mornings when the British Travel and Holiday Association stock up with colour 
photos. Whitehall is a vast stadium of grey granite and thin white geometrical shapes 
have appeared on the black roadway overnight so that representatives of the whole nation 
can stand in their allotted places. Soldiers in black bearskins and grey overcoats are lined 
up to form three sides of a square and a cruel wind blows across the scene that so closely 
resembles a military execution. The pipes and drums are playing the Skye Boat Song. A 
general fidgets with a sword that the wind has wrapped into his greatcoat and the cocked 
hats flutter like frightened hens. 
 
An aged civil servant beside me says 'Here comes Her Majesty', as the Queen 
steps out of the front door below us. Dominating the whole scene is the gleaming stone 
pillar of the Cenotaph like the freshly-built leg of a new overpass. Beyond the memorial 
the Chapel Royal choirboys in their bright scarlet Tudor costumes are blowing on their 
blue hands. 
 
Mrs Meynard is laying rows of coffee cups across the desk behind us. I hear her 
say, 'Mr Hallam is not well, sir. He's having a few days off.' There is polite condolence. 
'Nothing serious,' Mrs Meynard adds in a motherly voice. 'Just been overdoing it.' She 
didn't say what he'd been overdoing. 

 
'Waaaaaahhhhhh.' The throaty cry of a drill sergeant bounces down the lines of 
bearskins and bayonets. Senile statesmen stand pierced by the chilly damp November air 
that has called so many predecessors away. 
 
'Yip.' Fleshy palms smack artfully loosened metal as a few hundred rifles click 
into rows. 
 
There is a sudden cannonade of artillery rumbling across the low cloud as Big 
Ben tolls eleven. Blancoed webbing and polished metal shine in the dull wintry light and 
there is a sudden flash of brandished trumpets. The notes of the Last Post crawl dolefully 
up the still thoroughfare as a thousand stand tensely silent. 
 
Across the silent, wet street, a newspaper tumbles gently like an urban 
tumbleweed. It floats just buoyant on the wind, kisses a traffic sign, lightly dabs a slide 
trombone and plasters itself across army boots. The newspaper is rainsoaked to a dull 
yellow colour but the large headline is blunt and legible. 'Berlin - a new crisis?' 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 1 
 
POISONOUS INSECTICIDES 
 
IN the late 'thirties a German scientist, Gerald Schrader, discovered a group of organic 
phosphorus insecticides from which Parathion [Parathion is a popular suicide drug. ] and 
Melathion were developed. The German Government immediately put a security blank 
over all this work, seeing the potential value of nerve gas as a weapon. They filmed the 
effect of them upon concentration-camp prisoners. The films and the research came into 
Allied hands during the war and the research was continued by U. K., U. S. S. R and U. 
S. A. and still continues to be important as a military weapon. 
 
There are many stories demonstrating the enormous potency of these poisons, like 
the crop-sprayer who reached his hand into a tank of it to retrieve a nozzle and was dead 
within twenty-four hours. 
 
Dr Samuel Gershon and Dr F. H. Shaw (Departments of Pharmacology and 
Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Australia) reported in the Lancet on sixteen cases of 
schizophrenic symptoms, depression, blackouts, impaired memories and inability to 
concentrate among horticultural workers where this group of insecticides was used. 
 
Organo-phosphorus compounds although they break down quickly have a 
dangerous tendency to 'potentiate' one another. That is to say, two tiny harmless amounts 
get together and make a lethal combination. 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 2 
 
 

GEHLEN ORGANIZATION 
 
GEHLEN came from an old Westphalian family but the family motto - Laat vaaren niet - 
was Flemish. The motto means, 'Never give up'. Gehlen entered the Reichswehr under 
General von Seeckt in 1921 and was seconded to military intelligence even before Hitler 
took power. 
 
The Abwehr department he made his own was Group 111 F, directed against the 
U.S.S.R. By 1941 Major Gehlen was in charge of Abwehr Ost. His districts included the 
Ukraine and Byelorussia. He received many decorations including the Knight's Cross. 
When he compiled a report suggesting that the Germans formed a resistance based upon 
the Polish Resistance, it was suppressed by Himmler for being 'defeatist'. 
 
In 1945 he was in a better position to summarise the world's position than Hitler 
was. Gehlen went to the Abwehr Archives at Zossen [Now a Soviet Army Intelligence 
Unit.] and burned every document there - after microfilming it and locking the 
microfilms into steel canisters. 
 
Gehlen allowed himself to be captured by the Americans and, after a little trouble, 
gained an interview with Brigadier-General Patterson, the U. S. Army Intelligence chief. 
 
The U.S. Army gave Gehlen the 'Rudolf Hess Wohngemeinde' [Pullach, Bavaria, 
not very far from Dachau.] - which was a large modern housing estate built for Waffen 
S.S. officers in 1938 - they put stars and stripes on the roof, U.S. Army sentries on the 
gates and lots and lots of dollars in the kitty. He was allowed to call upon old comrades 
of the Sicherheitsdienst and the Abwehr and some of his agents abroad scarcely had a 
break in their payments and communications. 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 3 
 
 
THE ABWEHR 
 
Nomenclature. Group 1. 
 
Intelligence. Group 2. 

 
Sabotage (a very small group consisting mostly of a structure without operatives). 

 
Group 3. Counter-intelligence. 

 
This group is sub-divided according to function and a suffix letter is added to 
indicate its activities as follows: H = Army M = Navy L = Air Force F = The detection 
and penetration of enemy intelligence. 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 4 
 
 
SOVIET SECURITY SYSTEMS 
 

ONE still hears Russian security men speak of Chekist operators. Originally these were 
an anti-sabotage, anti-revolutionary force which became a battle gendarmerie during the 
civil war and was empowered to hold courts-martial and execute Whites, or Reds who 
were getting a little bleached. It remained as a part of the army although nowadays has 
become merely a slang word. The actual organisation underwent many changes of 
structure, responsibility and name. It became G.P.U., O.G.P.U., N.K.V.D., N.K.G.B. and 
in 1946 split into M.V.D. and M.G.B. The latter was renamed K.G.B. in 1954; it is 
responsible for the most vital part of security and intelligence at home and overseas. (The 
M.V.D. now handles police, prisons, immigration, highway police and fire services.) 
Stok's branch of K.G.B. is the counter-intelligence unit G.U.K.R. 
 
In 1937 Marshal Tukhachevsky tried to throw off Chekist control and was 
executed for plotting with Trotsky to betray Russia to Hitler. Thousands of Red Army 
officers were executed at the same period and the Red Army was in bad repute. At the 
twentieth Party Congress in 1956 there was a movement towards proving the innocence 
of the executed men. 
 
Colonel Stok had had extensive political-military experience, starting from when 
he stormed the Winter Palace in Leningrad in 1917. He worked with Antonov Ovseyenko 
when the latter was military adviser in Barcelona. Some say that he was responsible for 
Ovseyenko's removal. As a K.G.B. officer, Stok's loyalty is to the Communist Party, but 
as an officer he must sometimes sympathise with the aims of the professional soldiers 
with whom he works. Stok is not a member of G.R.U. (military intelligence) which is 
entirely separate. 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 5 
 
 
FRENCH SECURITY SYSTEM 
 
A VERY complex arrangement of interlapping units which -like all intelligence units - 
tend to develop special allegiances. 
 
The Secret Service as such is the top dog. I will not elaborate on that. Next in 
importance is the D.S.T. (Direction de la Surveillance du Territoire) of which Grenade is 
a member. This unit combines the function of what is, in Britain, the Special Branch with 
M.I.5. 
 
Thirdly, there is the General Intelligence which holds the files of politicians and 
trade union leaders. It is comprised of two parts; one part overlaps with the Surete 
Nationale and the other with the Paris Police Prefecture. 
 
The Surete Nationale also leads a life of its own and has all sorts of specialised 
departments - from gambling to the huge phone-tapping department. The Ministry of the 
Interior controls General Intelligence as well as having its own private intelligence unit 
rather like W. O. O. C.(P), except that while Dawlish is responsible to the Cabinet via the 
Prime Minister, the French Minister gets access to his reports before the President. 
 
The military have their own intelligence networks which co-operate with the 
above departments now and again. 

 
The lowest echelon of agent consists of the so-called barbouzes or semi-official 
informers, who often speed up a slow season by fomenting anti-government plots in order 
to expose them. 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 6 
 
OFFICIAL SECRETS ACT 1911 (as amended by the O.S. Acts of 1920 and 1939) 
 
SECTION 6 provides that the police (or etc.) may question someone suspected of 
having information in regard to a breach of Section 1 of the Act. Failure to answer such 
questions is punishable as a misdemeanour. It is under this section that results can be 
obtained from unco-operative persons. The law does not provide that Section 6 can be 
invoked to solve a breach of the less serious Section 2 of the Act. (The maximum penalty 
for misdemeanour is two years' imprisonment.) But until the information is gained by 
means of Section 6, it is not always clear whether Section 1 or Section 2 is the relevant 
one (if you see what I mean!). 
 
Another interesting aspect of the application of the O. S. Acts is the use to which 
the prosecution puts the charge of 'conspiring to contravene the O. S. Acts', for a 
conspiracy charge automatically renders the Attorney-General's permission unnecessary 
and gives the Crown a catch-all way to plaster the sum of the charges across all the 
persons charged (some of whom might not have otherwise been liable for prosecution). 
This convenience is illustrated by the frequency with which the conspiracy charge arises 
in prosecutions under the Official Secrets Act. 
 
 
 
The End 

