Acclaim for Susanna Kaysen’s

 
 
Girl, Interrupted
 

“A bitter, funny, insightful memoir … A minimalist relative of One
Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Kaysen’s spare, elegant book raises
angry questions about just who’s crazy, and who’s in charge of
ɹguring it out.”

—Los Angeles Times Book Review

“Written [in] bare-bones prose, funny, readable and true. The great
success of Girl, Interrupted is that it avoids the romantic inɻation
that most other suʃerers of psychosis fall into when they describe
their experience. Kaysen simply lets us know, with spare poetry,
what it is like to have a life interrupted by madness.”

—Philadelphia Inquirer

“In piercing vignettes shadowed with humor [Kaysen] brings to life
the routine of the ward and its patients.… Kaysen’s meditations on
young women and madness form a trenchant counterpoint to the
copies of her medical records that are woven into the text.”

—The New Yorker

“An eloquent and unexpectedly funny memoir.”

—Vanity Fair

“At turns wry, sardonic, witty  …  an unusual glimpse of a young
woman’s experience with insanity. Kaysen presents a meaningful
analysis of the dual and contradictory nature of psychiatric
hospitalization as both refuge and prison.”

—San Francisco Chronicle

“Nothing 
short 
of 
astonishing 
… 
unusually 
frank 
and

thoughtful … Girl, Interrupted [gives] a piercing sense of how very
short is the journey from humor to outright horror … remarkable.”

—Mirabella

“Memorable and stirring … fascinating. A powerful examination not
only of Kaysen’s own imperfections but of those of the system that
diagnosed her.”

—Vogue

“Girl, Interrupted is a writer’s book, crafted by an author of
extraordinary acuteness and skill. Kaysen takes us across the
boundaries of ‘normalcy.’ Girl, Interrupted is about the borders
between the world inside the hospital and the world outside,
between sanity and insanity, between freedom and captivity,
between self and other, between dignity and shame, between power
and powerlessness.”

—Boston Phoenix Literary Section

“Remarkable … In prose lean and mean, Kaysen’s memoir brings us
inside [McLean] and paints a picture of madness that is both
disturbing and compelling.”

—Detroit News

“Using herself as a troubled—and troubling—example, Kaysen
demonstrates with excoriating humor the severe problems with
diagnosis, the phenomenon of psychiatric hospitalization and the
callousness of even the most sophisticated of families and hospitals.
Girl, Interrupted is more than a ’60s period piece. It is a cautionary
tale for our time, for any era struggling to balance on the razor’s
edge between sanity and insanity.”

—St. Louis Post Dispatch

“Susanna Kaysen’s candid memoir of her stay in a psychiatric
hospital breaks the mold. It is both funny and frightening. Kaysen’s
account is provocative, concise writing with an occasional edge of
black humor. It makes us examine our own minds and wonder just
who has the right to decide if someone has gone mad.”

—St. Petersburg Times

“Girl, Interrupted is Ms. Kaysen’s sly, witty memoir [in] which she
writes vividly pf the McLean community in the late ’60s:
beleaguered nurses, ineʃective doctors, obsessed patients. Kaysen
ɹnds her reality in writing, inside.”

—Atlanta Journal-Constitution

Susanna Kaysen

 
 
Girl, Interrupted

Susanna Kaysen is also the author of the
novels Asa, As I Knew Him and Far Aɹeld. She
lives in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Books by Susanna Kaysen

Asa, As I Knew Him

Far Aɹeld

Girl, Interrupted

First Vintage Books Edition, June 1994

Copyright © 1993 by Susanna Kaysen

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.

Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New

York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.

Originally published in hardcover by Turtle Bay Books, a division of Random House, Inc.,

New York, in 1993.

Portions of this book, in slightly diʃerent form, appeared in Agni, The Boston Review, and

Ploughshares.

Grateful acknowledgment is made to American Psychiatric Press for permission to reprint

the entry for Borderline Personality Disorder from the American Psychiatric Association’s

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised, Washington,

D.C., American Psychiatric Association, 1987. Reprinted by permission.

The author is grateful to the Artists Foundation of Massachusetts and the Corporation of

Yaddo for their generosity.

Though this book is nonɹction, some of the names and distinguishing traits of patients,

doctors, and staʃ have been changed.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

 
Kaysen, Susanna, 1948–

 
Girl, interrupted / Susanna Kaysen.—1st Vintage Books ed.

 
p.   cm.

 
Originally published: New York: Turtle Bay Books, 1993.

 
eISBN: 978-0-8041-5111-5

 
1. Kaysen, Susanna, 1948—Mental health. 2. Psychiatric hospital patients—Massachusetts

—Biography. I. Title

 
RC464.K36A3   1994

 
616.89′ 0092—dc20

 
[B]            93-43339

Author photograph © Marion Ettlinger

v3.1_r2

For Ingrid and Sanford

Contents

Cover
About the Author
Other Books by This Author
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication

Toward a Topography of the Parallel Universe
The Taxi
Etiology
Fire
Freedom
The Secret of Life
Politics
If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home Now
My Suicide
Elementary Topography
Applied Topography
The Prelude to Ice Cream
Ice Cream
Checks
Sharps
Another Lisa
Checkmate
Do You Believe Him or Me?
Velocity vs. Viscosity
Security Screen

Keepers
Nineteen Sixty-Eight
Bare Bones
Dental Health
Calais Is Engraved on My Heart
The Shadow of the Real
Stigmatography
New Frontiers in Dental Health
Topography of the Future
Mind vs. Brain
Borderline Personality Disorder
My Diagnosis
Farther on, Down the Road, You Will Accompany Me
Girl, Interrupted

Acknowledgments

Toward a Topography of the Parallel
Universe

People ask, How did you get in there? What they really want to
know is if they are likely to end up in there as well. I can’t answer
the real question. All I can tell them is, It’s easy.

And it is easy to slip into a parallel universe. There are so many of

them: worlds of the insane, the criminal, the crippled, the dying,
perhaps of the dead as well. These worlds exist alongside this world
and resemble it, but are not in it.

My roommate Georgina came in swiftly and totally, during her

junior year at Vassar. She was in a theater watching a movie when a
tidal wave of blackness broke over her head. The entire world was
obliterated—for a few minutes. She knew she had gone crazy. She
looked around the theater to see if it had happened to everyone, but
all the other people were engrossed in the movie. She rushed out,
because the darkness in the theater was too much when combined
with the darkness in her head.

And after that? I asked her.
A lot of darkness, she said.
But most people pass over incrementally, making a series of

perforations in the membrane between here and there until an
opening exists. And who can resist an opening?

In the parallel universe the laws of physics are suspended. What

goes up does not necessarily come down, a body at rest does not
tend to stay at rest; and not every action can be counted on to
provoke an equal and opposite reaction. Time, too, is diʃerent. It
may run in circles, ɻow backward, skip about from now to then.
The very arrangement of molecules is ɻuid: Tables can be clocks;
faces, ɻowers.

These are facts you ɹnd out later, though.
Another odd feature of the parallel universe is that although it is

invisible from this side, once you are in it you can easily see the
world you came from. Sometimes the world you came from looks
huge and menacing, quivering like a vast pile of jelly; at other times
it is miniaturized and alluring, a-spin and shining in its orbit. Either
way, it can’t be discounted.

Every window on Alcatraz has a view of San Francisco.

The Taxi

“You have a pimple,” said the doctor.

I’d hoped nobody would notice.
“You’ve been picking it,” he went on.
When I’d woken that morning—early, so as to get to this

appointment—the pimple had reached the stage of hard expectancy
in which it begs to be picked. It was yearning for release. Freeing it
from its little white dome, pressing until the blood ran, I felt a sense
of accomplishment: I’d done all that could be done for this pimple.

“You’ve been picking at yourself,” the doctor said.
I nodded. He was going to keep talking about it until I agreed

with him, so I nodded.

“Have a boyfriend?” he asked.
I nodded to this too.
“Trouble with the boyfriend?” It wasn’t a question, actually, he

was already nodding for me. “Picking at yourself,” he repeated. He
popped out from behind his desk and lunged toward me. He was a
taut fat man, tight-bellied and dark.

“You need a rest,” he announced.
I did need a rest, particularly since I’d gotten up so early that

morning in order to see this doctor, who lived out in the suburbs. I’d
changed trains twice. And I would have to retrace my steps to get to
my job. Just thinking of it made me tired.

“Don’t you think?” He was still standing in front of me. “Don’t

you think you need a rest?”

“Yes,” I said.
He strode oʃ to the adjacent room, where I could hear him

talking on the phone.

I have thought often of the next ten minutes—my last ten

minutes. I had the impulse, once, to get up and leave through the
door I’d entered, to walk the several blocks to the trolley stop and
wait for the train that would take me back to my troublesome
boyfriend, my job at the kitchen store. But I was too tired.

He strutted back into the room, busy, pleased with himself.
“I’ve got a bed for you,” he said. “It’ll be a rest. Just for a couple

of weeks, okay?” He sounded conciliatory, or pleading, and I was
afraid.

wouldn’t want to go.

He bore down on me with his belly. “No. You go now.”
I thought this was unreasonable. “I have a lunch date,” I said.
“Forget it,” he said. “You aren’t going to lunch. You’re going to

the hospital.” He looked triumphant.

It was very quiet out in the suburbs before eight in the morning.

And neither of us had anything more to say. I heard the taxi pulling
up in the doctor’s driveway.

He took me by the elbow—pinched me between his large stout

ɹngers—and steered me outside. Keeping hold of my arm, he
opened the back door of the taxi and pushed me in. His big head
was in the backseat with me for a moment. Then he slammed the
door shut.

The driver rolled his window down halfway.
“Where to?”
Coatless in the chilly morning, planted on his sturdy legs in his

driveway, the doctor lifted one arm to point at me.

“Take her to McLean,” he said, “and don’t let her out till you get

there.”

I let my head fall back against the seat and shut my eyes. I was

glad to be riding in a taxi instead of having to wait for the train.

Etiology

This person is (pick one):

1. on a perilous journey from which we can learn much when

he or she returns;

2. possessed by (pick one):
a) the gods,
b) God (that is, a prophet),
c) some bad spirits, demons, or devils,
d) the Devil;
3. a witch;
4. bewitched (variant of 2);
5. bad, and must be isolated and punished;
6. ill, and must be isolated and treated by (pick one):
a) purging and leeches,
b) removing the uterus if the person has one,
c) electric shock to the brain,
d) cold sheets wrapped tight around the body,
e) Thorazine or Stelazine;
7. ill, and must spend the next seven years talking about it;
8. a victim of society’s low tolerance for deviant behavior;
9. sane in an insane world;
10. on a perilous journey from which he or she may never

return.

Fire

One girl among us had set herself on ɹre. She used gasoline. She
was too young to drive at the time. I wondered how she’d gotten
hold of it. Had she walked to her neighborhood garage and told
them her father’s car had run out of gas? I couldn’t look at her
without thinking about it.

I think the gasoline had settled in her collarbones, forming pools

there beside her shoulders, because her neck and cheeks were
scarred the most. The scars were thick ridges, alternating bright
pink and white, in stripes up from her neck. They were so tough and
wide that she couldn’t turn her head, but had to swivel her entire
upper torso if she wanted to see a person standing next to her.

Scar tissue has no character. It’s not like skin. It doesn’t show age

or illness or pallor or tan. It has no pores, no hair, no wrinkles. It’s
like a slipcover. It shields and disguises what’s beneath. That’s why
we grow it; we have something to hide.

Her name was Polly. This name must have seemed ridiculous to

her in the days—or months—when she was planning to set herself
on ɹre, but it suited her well in her slipcovered, survivor life. She
was never unhappy. She was kind and comforting to those who
were unhappy. She never complained. She always had time to listen
to other people’s complaints. She was faultless, in her impermeable
tight pink-and-white casing. Whatever had driven her, whispered
“Die!” in her once-perfect, now-scarred ear, she had immolated it.

Why did she do it? Nobody knew. Nobody dared to ask. Because

—what courage! Who had the courage to burn herself? Twenty
aspirin, a little slit alongside the veins of the arm, maybe even a bad
half hour standing on a roof: We’ve all had those. And somewhat
more dangerous things, like putting a gun in your mouth. But you

put it there, you taste it, it’s cold and greasy, your ɹnger is on the
trigger, and you ɹnd that a whole world lies between this moment
and the moment you’ve been planning, when you’ll pull the trigger.
That world defeats you. You put the gun back in the drawer. You’ll
have to ɹnd another way.

What was that moment like for her? The moment she lit the

match. Had she already tried roofs and guns and aspirin? Or was it
just an inspiration?

I had an inspiration once. I woke up one morning and I knew that

today I had to swallow ɹfty aspirin. It was my task: my job for the
day. I lined them up on my desk and took them one by one,
counting. But it’s not the same as what she did. I could have
stopped, at ten, or at thirty. And I could have done what I did do,
which was go onto the street and faint. Fifty aspirin is a lot of
aspirin, but going onto the street and fainting is like putting the gun
back in the drawer.

She lit the match.
Where? In the garage at home, where she wouldn’t set anything

else on ɹre? Out in a ɹeld? In the high school gym? In an empty
swimming pool?

Somebody found her, but not for a while.
Who would kiss a person like that, a person with no skin?
She was eighteen before this thought occurred to her She’d spent

a year with us. Other people stormed and screamed and cringed and
cried; Polly watched and smiled. She sat by people who were
frightened, and her presence calmed them. Her smile wasn’t mean,
it was understanding. Life was hellish, she knew that. But, her smile
hinted, she’d burned all that out of her. Her smile was a little bit
superior: We wouldn’t have the courage to burn it out of ourselves—
but she understood that too. Everyone was diʃerent. People just did
what they could.

One morning somebody was crying, but mornings were often

noisy: ɹghts about getting up on time and complaints about
nightmares. Polly was so quiet, so unobtrusive a presence, that we
didn’t notice she wasn’t at breakfast. After breakfast, we could still
hear crying.

“Who’s crying?”
Nobody knew.
And at lunch, there was still crying.
“It’s Polly,” said Lisa, who knew everything.
“Why?”
But even Lisa didn’t know why.
At dusk the crying changed to screaming. Dusk is a dangerous

time. At ɹrst she screamed, “Aaaaaah!” and “Eeeeeh!” Then she
started to scream words.

“My face! My face! My face!”
We could hear other voices shushing her, murmuring comfort, but

she continued to scream her two words long into the night.

Lisa said, “Well, I’ve been expecting this for a while.”
And then I think we all realized what fools we’d been.
We might get out sometime, but she was locked up forever in that

body.

Freedom

Lisa had run away again. We were sad, because she kept our spirits
up. She was funny. Lisa! I can’t think of her without smiling, even
now.

The worst was that she was always caught and dragged back,

dirty, with wild eyes that had seen freedom. She would curse her
captors, and even the tough old-timers had to laugh at the names
she made up.

“Cheese-pussy!” And another favorite, “You schizophrenic bat!”
Usually, they found her within a day. She couldn’t get far on foot,

with no money. But this time she seemed to have lucked out. On the
third day I heard someone in the nursing station saying “APB” into
the phone: all points bulletin.

Lisa wouldn’t be hard to identify. She rarely ate and she never

slept, so she was thin and yellow, the way people get when they
don’t eat, and she had huge bags under her eyes. She had long dark
dull hair that she fastened with a silver clip. She had the longest
ɹngers I’ve ever seen.

This time, when they brought her back, they were almost as angry

as she was. Two big men had her arms, and a third guy had her by
the hair, pulling so that Lisa’s eyes bugged out. Everybody was
quiet, including Lisa. They took her down to the end of the hall, to
seclusion, while we watched.

We watched a lot of things.
We watched Cynthia come back crying from electroshock once a

week. We watched Polly shiver after being wrapped in ice-cold
sheets. One of the worst things we watched, though, was Lisa
coming out of seclusion two days later.

To begin with, they’d cut her nails down to the quick. She’d had

beautiful nails, which she worked on, polishing, shaping, buɽng.
They said her nails were “sharps.”

And they’d taken away her belt. Lisa always wore a cheap beaded

belt—the kind made by Indians on reservations. It was green, with
red triangles on it, and it had belonged to her brother Jonas, the
only one in her family still in touch with her. Her mother and father
wouldn’t visit her because she was a sociopath, or so said Lisa. They
took away the belt so she couldn’t hang herself.

They didn’t understand that Lisa would never hang herself.
They let her out of seclusion, they gave her back her belt, and her

nails started to grow in again, but Lisa didn’t come back. She just sat
and watched TV with the worst of us.

Lisa had never watched TV. She’d had nothing but scorn for those

who did. “It’s shit!” she’d yell, sticking her head into the TV room.
“You’re already like robots. It’s making you worse.” Sometimes she
turned oʃ the TV and stood in front of it, daring somebody to turn it
on. But the TV audience was mostly catatonics and depressives, who
were disinclined to move. After ɹve minutes, which was about as
long as she could stand still, Lisa would be oʃ on another project,
and when the person on checks came around, she would turn the TV
on again.

Since Lisa hadn’t slept for the two years she’d been with us, the

nurses had given up telling her to go to bed Instead, she had a chair
of her own in the hallway, just like the night staʃ, where she’d sit
and work on her nails. She made wonderful cocoa, and at three
o’clock in the morning she made cocoa for the night staʃ and
anybody else who was up. She was calmer at night.

Once I asked her, “Lisa, how come you don’t rush around and yell

at night?”

“I need rest too,” she said. “Just because I don’t sleep doesn’t

mean I don’t rest.”

Lisa always knew what she needed. She’d say, “I need a vacation

from this place,” and then she’d run away. When she got back, we’d
ask her how it was out there.

“It’s a mean world,” she’d say. She was usually glad enough to be

back. “There’s nobody to take care of you out there.”

Now she said nothing. She spent all her time in the TV room. She

watched prayers and test patterns and hours of late-night talk shows
and early-morning news. Her chair in the hall was unoccupied, and
nobody got cocoa.

“Are you giving Lisa something?” I asked the person on checks.
“You know we can’t discuss medication with patients.”
I asked the head nurse. I’d known her awhile, since before she

was the head nurse.

But she acted as though she’d always been the head nurse. “We

can’t discuss medication—you know that.”

“Why bother asking,” said Georgina. “She’s completely blotto. Of

course they’re giving her something.”

Cynthia didn’t think so. “She still walks okay,” she said.
“I don’t,” said Polly. She didn’t. She walked with her arms stuck

out in front of her, her red-and-white hands drooping from her
wrists and her feet shuʀing along the ɻoor. The cold packs hadn’t
worked; she still screamed all night until they put her on something.

“It took a while,” I said. “You walked okay when they started it.”
“Now I don’t,” said Polly. She looked at her hands.
I asked Lisa if they were giving her something, but she wouldn’t

look at me.

And this way we all passed through a month or two, Lisa and the

catatonics in the TV room, Polly walking like a motorized corpse,
Cynthia crying after electroshock (“I’m not sad,” she explained to
me, “but I can’t help crying”), and me and Georgina in our double
suite. We were considered the healthiest.

When spring came Lisa began spending a little more time outside

the TV room. She spent it in the bathroom, to be exact, but at least
it was a change.

I asked the person on checks, “What’s she doing in the

bathroom?”

This was a new person. “Am I supposed to open bathroom doors

too?”

I did what we often did to new people. “Somebody could hang

herself in there in a minute! Where do you think you are, anyhow?
A boarding school?” Then I put my face close to hers. They didn’t
like that, touching us.

I noticed Lisa went to a diʃerent bathroom every time. There

were four, and she made the circuit daily. She didn’t look good. Her
belt was hanging oʃ her and she looked yellower than usual.

“Maybe she’s got dysentery,” I said to Georgina. But Georgina

thought she was just blotto.

door slam. Then Lisa appeared in the kitchen.

“Later for that TV,” she said. She poured herself a big cup of

coʃee, just as she used to do in the mornings, and sat down at the
table. She smiled at us, and we smiled back. “Wait,” she said.

We heard feet running and voices saying things like “What in the

world  …” and “How in the world  …” Then the head nurse came
into the kitchen.

“You did this,” she said to Lisa.
We went to see what it was.
She had wrapped all the furniture, some of it holding catatonics,

and the TV and the sprinkler system on the ceiling in toilet paper.
Yards and yards of it ɻoated and dangled, bunched and draped on
everything, everywhere. It was magniɹcent.

“She wasn’t blotto,” I said to Georgina. “She was plotting.”
We had a good summer, and Lisa told us lots of stories about what

she’d done those three days she was free.

The Secret of Life

One day I had a visitor. I was in the TV room watching Lisa watch
TV, when a nurse came in to tell me.

“You’ve got a visitor,” she said. “A man.”
It wasn’t my troublesome boyfriend. First of all, he wasn’t my

boyfriend anymore. How could a person who was locked up have a
boyfriend? Anyhow, he couldn’t bear coming here. His mother had
been in a loony bin too, it turned out, and he couldn’t bear being
reminded of it.

It wasn’t my father; he was busy.
It wasn’t my high school English teacher; he’d been ɹred and

moved to North Carolina.

I went to see who it was.
He was standing at a window in the living room, looking out:

giraʃe-tall, with slumpy academic shoulders, wrists sticking out of
his jacket, and pale hair that shot out from his head in a corona. He
turned around when he heard me come in.

It was Jim Watson. I was happy to see him, because, in the ɹfties,

he had discovered the secret of life, and now, perhaps, he would tell
it to me.

“Jim!” I said.
He drifted toward me. He drifted and wobbled and faded out

while he was supposed to be talking to people, and I’d always liked
him for that.

“You look ɹne,” he told me.
“What did you expect?” I asked.
He shook his head.
“What do they do to you in here?” He was whispering.
“Nothing,” I said. “They don’t do anything.”

“It’s terrible here,” he said.
The living room was a particularly terrible part of our ward. It

was huge and jammed with huge vinyl-covered armchairs that
farted when anyone sat down.

“It’s not really that bad,” I said, but I was used to it and he wasn’t.
He drifted toward the window again and looked out. After a while

he beckoned me over with one of his long arms.

“Look.” He pointed at something.
“At what?”
“That.” He was pointing at a car. It was a red sports car, maybe

an MG. “That’s mine,” he said. He’d won the Nobel Prize, so
probably he’d bought this car with the money.

“Nice,” I said. “Very nice.”
Now he was whispering again. “We could leave,” he whispered.
“Hunh?”
“You and me, we could leave.”
“In the car, you mean?” I felt confused. Was this the secret of life?

Running away was the secret of life?

“They’d come after me,” I said.
“It’s fast,” he said. “I could get you out of here.”
Suddenly I felt protective of him. “Thanks,” I said. “Thanks for

oʃering. It’s sweet of you.”

“Don’t you want to go?” He leaned toward me. “We could go to

England.”

“England?” What did England have to do with anything? “I can’t

go to England,” I said.

“You could be a governess,” he said.
For ten seconds I imagined this other life, which began when I

stepped into Jim Watson’s red car and we sped out of the hospital
and on to the airport. The governess part was hazy. The whole
thing, in fact, was hazy. The vinyl chairs, the security screens, the
buzzing of the nursing-station door: Those things were clear.

“I’m here now, Jim,” I said. “I think I’ve got to stay here.”
“Okay.” He didn’t seem miʃed. He looked around the room one

last time and shook his head.

I stayed at the window. After a few minutes I saw him get into his

red car and drive oʃ, leaving little puʃs of sporty exhaust behind
him. Then I went back to the TV room.

“Hi, Lisa,” I said. I was glad to see she was still there.
“Rnnn,” said Lisa.
Then we settled in for some more TV.

Politics

In our parallel world, things happened that had not yet happened in
the world we’d come from. When they ɹnally happened outside, we
found them familiar because versions of them had been performed
in front of us. It was as if we were a provincial audience, New
Haven to the real world’s New York, where history could try out its
next spectacle.

For instance, the story of Georgina’s boyfriend, Wade, and the

sugar.

They’d met in the cafeteria. Wade was dark and good-looking in a

ɻat, all-American way. What made him irresistible was his rage. He
was enraged about almost everything and glowed with anger.
Georgina explained that his father was the problem.

“His father’s a spy, and Wade’s mad that he can never be as tough

as his father.”

I was more interested in Wade’s father than in Wade’s problem.
“A spy for us?” I asked.
“Of course,” said Georgina, but she wouldn’t say more.
Wade and Georgina would sit on the ɻoor of our room and

whisper. I was supposed to leave them alone, and usually I did. One
day, though, I decided to stick around and ɹnd out about Wade’s
father.

Wade loved talking about him. “He lives in Miami, so he can get

over to Cuba. He invaded Cuba. He’s killed dozens of people, with
his bare hands. He knows who killed the president.”

“Did he kill the president?” I asked.
“I don’t think so,” said Wade.
Wade’s last name was Barker.

I have to admit I didn’t believe a word of what Wade said. After

all, he was a crazy seventeen-year-old who got so violent that it took
two big aides to hold him down. Sometimes he’d be locked on his
ward for a week and Georgina couldn’t get in to see him. Then he’d
simmer down and resume his visits on the ɻoor of our room.

Wade’s father had two friends who particularly impressed Wade:

Liddy and Hunt. “Those guys will do anything!” Wade said. He said
this often, and he seemed worried about it.

Georgina didn’t like my pestering Wade about his father; she

ignored me as I sat on the ɻoor with them. But I couldn’t resist.

“Like what?” I asked him. “What kinds of things will they do?”
“I can’t reveal,” said Wade.
Shortly after this he lapsed into a violent phase that went on for

several weeks.

Georgina was at a loose end without Wade’s visits. Because I felt

partly responsible for his absence, I oʃered various distractions.
“Let’s redecorate the room,” I said. “Let’s play Scrabble.” Or “Let’s
cook things.”

Cooking things was what appealed to Georgina. “Let’s make

caramels,” she said.

I was surprised that two people in a kitchen could make caramels.

I thought of them as a mass-production item, like automobiles, for
which complicated machinery was needed.

But, according to Georgina, all we needed was a frying pan and

sugar.

“When it’s caramelized,” she said, “we pour it into little balls on

waxed paper.”

The nurses thought it was cute that we were cooking. “Practicing

for when you and Wade get married?” one asked.

“I don’t think Wade is the marrying kind,” said Georgina.
Even someone who’s never made caramels knows how hot sugar

has to be before it caramelizes. That’s how hot it was when the pan
slipped and I poured half the sugar onto Georgina’s hand, which was
holding the waxed paper straight.

I screamed and screamed, but Georgina didn’t make a sound. The

nurses ran in and produced ice and unguents and wrappings, and I

kept screaming, and Georgina did nothing. She stood still with her
candied hand stretched out in front of her.

I can’t remember if it was E. Howard Hunt or G. Gordon Liddy

who said, during the Watergate hearings, that he’d nightly held his
hand in a candle ɻame till his palm burned to assure himself he
could stand up to torture.

Whoever it was, we knew about it already: the Bay of Pigs, the

seared skin, the bare-handed killers who’d do anything. We’d seen
the previews, Wade, Georgina, and I, along with an audience of
nurses whose reviews ran something like this: “Patient lacked aʃect
after accident”, “Patient continues fantasy that father is CIA
operative with dangerous friends.”

If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home Now

Daisy was a seasonal event. She came before Thanksgiving and
stayed through Christmas every year. Some years she came for her
birthday in May as well.

She always got a single. “Would anybody like to share?” the head

nurse asked at our weekly Hall Meeting one November morning. It
was a tense moment. Georgina and I, who already shared, were free
to enjoy the confusion.

“Me! Me!” Somebody who was a Martian’s girlfriend and also had

a little penis of her own, which she was eager to show oʃ, raised a
hand; nobody wanted to share with her.

“I would if somebody would want to but of course nobody would

want to so I wouldn’t want to force somebody to want to.” This was
Cynthia, who’d started talking like that after six months of shock.

Polly to the rescue: “I’ll share with you, Cynthia.”
But that didn’t solve the problem, because Polly was in a double

herself. Her roommate was a new anorexic named Janet who was
scheduled for force feedings the moment she dropped below
seventy-ɹve.

Lisa leaned toward me. “I watched her on the scale yesterday:

seventy-eight,” she said loudly. “She’ll be on the tube by the
weekend.”

“Seventy-eight is the perfect weight,” said Janet. She’d said the

same about eighty-three and seventy-nine, though, so nobody
wanted to share with her, either.

In the end a couple of catatonics were teamed up and Daisy’s

room was ready for her arrival on November ɹfteenth.

Daisy had two passions: laxatives and chicken. Every morning she

presented herself at the nursing station and drummed her ɹngers,

pale and stained with nicotine, on the counter, impatient for
laxatives.

“I want my Colace,” she would hiss. “I want my Ex-Lax.”
If someone was standing near her, she would jab her elbow into

that person’s side or step on her foot. Daisy hated anyone to be near
her.

Twice a week her squat potato-face father brought a whole

chicken roasted by her mother and wrapped in aluminum foil. Daisy
would hold the chicken in her lap and fondle it through the foil,
darting her eyes around the room, eager for her father to leave so
she could get going on the chicken. But Daisy’s father wanted to
stay as long as possible, because he was in love with Daisy.

Lisa explained it. “He can’t believe he produced her. He wants to

fuck her to make sure she’s real.”

“But she smells,” Polly objected. She smelled, of course, like

chicken and shit.

“She didn’t always smell,” said Lisa.
I thought Lisa was right, because I’d noticed that Daisy was sexy.

Even though she smelled and glowered and hissed and poked, she
had a spark the rest of us lacked. She wore shorts and tank tops to
display her pale wiry limbs, and when she ambled down the hall in
the morning to get her laxatives, she swung her ass in insouciant
half-circles.

The Martian’s girlfriend was in love with her too. She followed

her down the hall crooning, “Want to see my penis?” To which
Daisy would hiss, “I shit on your penis.”

Nobody had ever been in Daisy’s room. Lisa was determined to

get in. She had a plan.

“Man, am I constipated,” she said for three days. “Wow.” On the

fourth day she got some Ex-Lax out of the head nurse. “Didn’t
work,” she reported the next morning. “Got anything stronger?”

“How about castor oil?” said the head nurse. She was overworked.
“This place is a fascist snake pit,” said Lisa. “Give me a double

dose of Ex-Lax.”

Now she had six Ex-Lax and she was ready to bargain. She stood

in front of Daisy’s door.

“Hey, Daisy,” she called. “Hey, Daisy.” She kicked the door.
“Fuck oʃ,” said Daisy.
“Hey, Daisy.”
Daisy hissed.
Lisa leaned close to the door. “I got something you want,” she

said.

“Bullshit,” said Daisy. Then she opened the door.
Georgina and I had been watching from down the hall. When

Daisy opened the door we craned our necks, but it was too dark in
Daisy’s room to see anything. When the door shut behind Lisa, a
strange sweet smell wafted brieɻy into the hall.

Lisa didn’t come out for a long time. We gave up waiting and

went over to the cafeteria for lunch.

Lisa gave her report during the evening news. She stood in front

of the TV and spoke loud enough to drown out Walter Cronkite.

“Daisy’s room is full of chicken,” she said. “She eats chicken in

there. She has a special method she showed me. She peels all the
meat oʃ because she likes to keep the carcasses whole. Even the
wings—she peels the meat oʃ them. Then she puts the carcass on
the ɻoor next to the last carcass. She has about nine now. She says
when she’s got fourteen it’s time to leave.”

“Did she give you any chicken?” I asked.
“I didn’t want any of her disgusting chicken.”
“Why does she do it?” Georgina asked.
“Hey, man,” said Lisa, “I don’t know everything.”
“What about the laxatives?” Polly wanted to know.
“Needs ’em. Needs ’em because of all the chicken.”
“There’s more to this than meets the eye,” said Georgina.
“Listen! I got access,” said Lisa. The discussion degenerated

quickly after that.

Within the week there was more news about Daisy. Her father

had bought her an apartment for Christmas. “A love nest,” Lisa
called it.

Daisy was pleased with herself and spent more time out of her

room, hoping that someone would ask her about the apartment.
Georgina obliged.

“How big is the apartment, Daisy?”
“One bedroom, L-shaped living room, eat-in chicken.”
“You mean eat-in kitchen?”
“That’s what I said, asshole.”
“Where’s the apartment, Daisy?”
“Near the Mass. General.”
“On the way to the airport, like?”
“Near the Mass. General.” Daisy didn’t want to admit it was on

the way to the airport.

“What do you like best about it?”
Daisy shut her eyes and paused, relishing her favorite part. “The

sign.”

“What does the sign say?”
“  ‘If you lived here, you’d be home now.’  ” She clenched her

hands with excitement. “See, every day people will drive past and
read that sign and think, ‘Yeah, if I lived here I’d be home now,’ and
I will be home. Motherfuckers.”

Daisy left early that year, to spend Christmas in her apartment.
“She’ll be back,” said Lisa. But Lisa for once was wrong.
One afternoon in May we were called to a special Hall Meeting.
“Girls,” said the head nurse, “I have some sad news.” We all

leaned forward. “Daisy committed suicide yesterday.”

“Was she in her apartment?” asked Georgina.
“Did she shoot herself?” asked Polly.
“Who’s Daisy? Do I know Daisy?” asked the Martian’s girlfriend.
“Did she leave a note?” I asked.
“The details aren’t important,” said the head nurse.
“It was her birthday, wasn’t it?” asked Lisa. The head nurse

nodded.

We all observed a moment of silence for Daisy.

My Suicide

Suicide is a form of murder—premeditated murder. It isn’t
something you do the ɹrst time you think of doing it. It takes
getting used to. And you need the means, the opportunity, the
motive. A successful suicide demands good organization and a cool
head, both of which are usually incompatible with the suicidal state
of mind.

It’s important to cultivate detachment. One way to do this is to

practice imagining yourself dead, or in the process of dying. If
there’s a window, you must imagine your body falling out the
window. If there’s a knife, you must imagine the knife piercing your
skin. If there’s a train coming, you must imagine your torso
ɻattened under its wheels. These exercises are necessary to
achieving the proper distance.

The motive is paramount. Without a strong motive, you’re sunk.
My motives were weak: an American-history paper I didn’t want

to write and the question I’d asked months earlier, Why not kill
myself? Dead, I wouldn’t have to write the paper. Nor would I have
to keep debating the question.

The debate was wearing me out. Once you’ve posed that question,

it won’t go away. I think many people kill themselves simply to stop
the debate about whether they will or they won’t.

Anything I thought or did was immediately drawn into the

debate. Made a stupid remark—why not kill myself? Missed the bus
—better put an end to it all. Even the good got in there. I liked that
movie—maybe I shouldn’t kill myself.

Actually, it was only part of myself I wanted to kill: the part that

wanted to kill herself, that dragged me into the suicide debate and

made every window, kitchen implement, and subway station a
rehearsal for tragedy.

I didn’t ɹgure this out, though, until after I’d swallowed the ɹfty

aspirin.

I had a boyfriend named Johnny who wrote me love poems—

good ones. I called him up, said I was going to kill myself, left the
phone oʃ the hook, took my ɹfty aspirin, and realized it was a
mistake. Then I went out to get some milk, which my mother had
asked me to do before I took the aspirin.

mother what I’d done. She turned up in the A&P on Mass. Ave. just
as I was about to pass out over the meat counter.

As I walked the ɹve blocks to the A&P I was gripped by

humiliation and regret. I’d made a mistake and I was going to die
because of it. Perhaps I even deserved to die because of it. I began
to cry about my death. For a moment, I felt compassion for myself
and all the unhappiness I contained. Then things started to blur and
whiz. By the time I reached the store, the world had been reduced
to a narrow, throbbing tunnel. I’d lost my peripheral vision, my ears
were ringing, my pulse was pounding. The bloody chops and steaks
straining against their plastic wrappings were the last things I saw
clearly.

Having my stomach pumped brought me around. They took a

long tube and put it slowly up my nose and down the back of my
throat. That was like being choked to death. Then they began to
pump. That was like having blood drawn on a massive scale—the
suction, the sense of tissue collapsing and touching itself in a way it
shouldn’t, the nausea as all that was inside was pulled out. It was a
good deterrent. Next time, I decided, I certainly wouldn’t take
aspirin.

But when they were done, I wondered if there would be a next

time. I felt good. I wasn’t dead, yet something was dead. Perhaps I’d
managed my peculiar objective of partial suicide. I was lighter,
airier than I’d been in years.

My airiness lasted for months. I did some of my homework. I

stopped seeing Johnny and took up with my English teacher, who

wrote even better poems, though not to me. I went to New York
with him; he took me to the Frick to see the Vermeers.

The only odd thing was that suddenly I was a vegetarian.
I associated meat with suicide, because of passing out at the meat

counter. But I knew there was more to it.

The meat was bruised, bleeding, and imprisoned in a tight

wrapping. And, though I had a six-month respite from thinking
about it, so was I.

Elementary Topography

Perhaps it’s still unclear how I ended up in there. It must have been
something more than a pimple. I didn’t mention that I’d never seen
that doctor before, that he decided to put me away after only ɹfteen
minutes. Twenty, maybe. What about me was so deranged that in
less than half an hour a doctor would pack me oʃ to the nuthouse?
He tricked me, though: a couple of weeks. It was closer to two years.
I was eighteen.

I signed myself in. I had to, because I was of age. It was that or a

court order, though they could never have gotten a court order
against me. I didn’t know that, so I signed myself in.

I wasn’t a danger to society. Was I a danger to myself? The ɹfty

aspirin—but I’ve explained them. They were metaphorical. I wanted
to get rid of a certain aspect of my character. I was performing a
kind of self-abortion with those aspirin. It worked for a while. Then
it stopped; but I had no heart to try again.

Take it from his point of view. It was 1967. Even in lives like his,

professional lives lived out in the suburbs behind shrubbery, there
was a strange undertow, a tug from the other world—the drifting,
drugged-out, no-last-name youth universe—that knocked people oʃ
balance. One could call it “threatening,” to use his language. What
are these kids doing? And then one of them walks into his oɽce
wearing a skirt the size of a napkin, with a mottled chin and
speaking in monosyllables. Doped up, he ɹgures. He looks again at
the name jotted on the notepad in front of him. Didn’t he meet her
parents at a party two years ago? Harvard faculty—or was it MIT?
Her boots are worn down but her coat’s a good one. It’s a mean
world out there, as Lisa would say. He can’t in good conscience send
her back into it, to become ɻotsam on the subsocietal tide that

washes up now and then in his oɽce, depositing others like her. A
form of preventive medicine.

Am I being too kind to him? A few years ago I read he’d been

accused of sexual harassment by a former patient. But that’s been
happening a lot these days, it’s become fashionable to accuse
doctors. Maybe it was just too early in the morning for him as well
as for me, and he couldn’t think of what else to do. Maybe, most
likely, he was just covering his ass.

My point of view is harder to explain. I went. First I went to his

oɽce, then I got into the taxi, then I walked up the stone steps to
the Administration Building of McLean Hospital, and, if I remember
correctly, sat in a chair for ɹfteen minutes waiting to sign my
freedom away.

Several preconditions are necessary if you are going to do such a

thing.

I was having a problem with patterns. Oriental rugs, tile ɻoors,

printed curtains, things like that. Supermarkets were especially bad,
because of the long, hypnotic checkerboard aisles. When I looked at
these things, I saw other things within them. That sounds as though
I was hallucinating, and I wasn’t. I knew I was looking at a ɻoor or
a 
curtain. 
But 
all 
patterns 
seemed 
to 
contain 
potential

representations, which in a dizzying array would ɻicker brieɻy to
life. That could be  …  a forest, a ɻock of birds, my second-grade
class picture. Well, it wasn’t—it was a rug, or whatever it was, but
my glimpses of the other things it might be were exhausting. Reality
was getting too dense.

Something also was happening to my perceptions of people. When

I looked at someone’s face, I often did not maintain an unbroken
connection to the concept of a face. Once you start parsing a face,
it’s a peculiar item: squishy, pointy, with lots of air vents and wet
spots. This was the reverse of my problem with patterns. Instead of
seeing too much meaning, I didn’t see any meaning.

But I wasn’t simply going nuts, tumbling down a shaft into

Wonderland. It was my misfortune—or salvation—to be at all times
perfectly conscious of my misperceptions of reality. I never

“believed” anything I saw or thought I saw. Not only that, I
correctly understood each new weird activity.

Now, I would say to myself, you are feeling alienated from people

and unlike other people, therefore you are projecting your
discomfort onto them. When you look at a face, you see a blob of
rubber because you are worried that your face is a blob of rubber.

This clarity made me able to behave normally, which posed some

interesting questions. Was everybody seeing this stuʃ and acting as
though they weren’t? Was insanity just a matter of dropping the
act? If some people didn’t see these things, what was the matter
with them? Were they blind or something? These questions had me
unsettled.

Something had been peeled back, a covering or shell that works to

protect us. I couldn’t decide whether the covering was something on
me or something attached to every thing in the world. It didn’t
matter, really; wherever it had been, it wasn’t there anymore.

And this was the main precondition, that anything might be

something else. Once I’d accepted that, it followed that I might be
mad, or that someone might think me mad. How could I say for
certain that I wasn’t, if I couldn’t say for certain that a curtain
wasn’t a mountain range?

I have to admit, though, that I knew I wasn’t mad.
It was a diʃerent precondition that tipped the balance: the state of

contrariety. My ambition was to negate. The world, whether dense
or hollow, provoked only my negations. When I was supposed to be
awake, I was asleep; when I was supposed to speak, I was silent;
when a pleasure oʃered itself to me, I avoided it. My hunger, my
thirst, my loneliness and boredom and fear were all weapons aimed
at my enemy, the world. They didn’t matter a whit to the world, of
course, and they tormented me, but I got a gruesome satisfaction
from my suʃerings. They proved my existence. All my integrity
seemed to lie in saying No.

So the opportunity to be incarcerated was just too good to resist.

It was a very big No—the biggest No this side of suicide.

Perverse reasoning. But back of that perversity, I knew I wasn’t

mad and that they wouldn’t keep me there, locked up in a loony

bin.

Applied Topography

Two locked doors with a ɹve-foot space between them where you
had to stand while the nurse relocked the ɹrst door and unlocked
the second.

Just inside, three phone booths. Then a couple of single rooms

and the living room and eat-in kitchen. This arrangement ensured a
good ɹrst impression for visitors.

Once you turned the corner past the living room, though, things

changed.

A long, long hallway: too long. Seven or eight double rooms on

one side, the nursing station centered on the other, ɻanked by the
conference room and hydrotherapy tub room. Lunatics to the left,
staʃ to the right. The toilets and shower rooms were also to the
right, as though the staʃ claimed oversight of our most private acts.

A blackboard with our twenty-odd names in green chalk and

spaces after each where we, in white chalk, entered our destination,
departure time, and time of return whenever we left the ward. The
blackboard hung directly across from the nursing station. When
someone was restricted to the ward, the head nurse wrote RESTRICTED
in green chalk beside the name. We got advance warning of an
admission when a new name appeared on the list—sometimes as
much as a day before the person of that name appeared on the hall.
The discharged and the dead stayed on the list for a while in silent
memoriam.

At the end of the terrible hall, the terrible TV room. We liked it.

At least, we preferred it to the living room. It was messy, noisy,
smoky, and, most important, it was on the left, lunatic side of
things. As far as we were concerned, the living room belonged to

the staʃ. We often agitated to move our weekly Hall Meeting from
the living room to the TV room; it never happened.

After the TV room, another turn in the hall. Two more singles,

one double, a toilet, and seclusion.

The seclusion room was the size of the average suburban

bathroom. Its only window was the chicken-wire-enforced one in
the door that allowed people to look in and see what you were up
to. You couldn’t get up to much in there. The only thing in it was a
bare mattress on the green linoleum ɻoor. The walls were chipped,
as though somebody had been at them with ɹngernails or teeth. The
seclusion room was supposed to be soundproof. It wasn’t.

You could pop into the seclusion room, shut the door, and yell for

a while. When you were done you could open the door and leave.
Yelling in the TV room or the hall was “acting out” and was not a
good idea. But yelling in the seclusion room was ɹne.

You could also “request” to be locked into the seclusion room. Not

many people made that request. You had to “request” to get out too.
A nurse would look through the chicken wire and decide if you were
ready to come out. Somewhat like looking at a cake through the
glass of the oven door.

The seclusion-room etiquette was, If you weren’t locked in,

anybody could join you. A nurse could interrupt your yelling to try
to ɹnd out why you were yelling, or some other crazy person could
come in and start yelling too. Hence the “request” business.
Freedom was the price of privacy.

The real purpose of the seclusion room, though, was to quarantine

people who’d gone bananas. As a group we maintained a certain
level of noisiness and misery. Anyone who sustained a higher level
for more than a few hours was put in seclusion. Otherwise, the staʃ
reasoned, we would all turn up the volume on our nuttiness, and the
staʃ would lose control. There were no objective criteria for
deciding to put someone into seclusion. It was relative, like the
grading curve in high school.

Seclusion worked. After a day or a night in there with nothing to

do, most people calmed down. If they didn’t, they went to maximum
security.

Our double-locked doors, our steel-mesh window screens, our

kitchen stocked with plastic knives and locked unless a nurse was
with us, our bathroom doors that didn’t lock: All this was medium
security. Maximum security was another world.

The Prelude to Ice Cream

The hospital was on a hill outside of town, the way hospitals are in
movies about the insane. Our hospital was famous and had housed
many great poets and singers. Did the hospital specialize in poets
and singers, or was it that poets and singers specialized in madness?

Ray Charles was the most famous ex-patient. We all hoped he’d

return and serenade us from the window of the drug-rehabilitation
ward. He never did.

We had the Taylor family, though. James graduated to a diʃerent

hospital before I arrived, but Kate and Livingston were there. In Ray
Charles’s absence, their North Carolina–twanged blues made us sad
enough. When you’re sad you need to hear your sorrow structured
into sound.

Robert Lowell also didn’t come while I was there. Sylvia Plath had

come and gone.

What is it about meter and cadence and rhythm that makes their

makers mad?

The grounds were large and beautifully planted. They were

pristine as well, since we were almost never allowed to walk
around. But now and then, for a special treat, we were taken
through them on the way to get ice cream.

The group had an atomic structure: a nucleus of nuts sunounded

by darting, nervous nurse-electrons charged with our protection. Or
with protecting the residents of Belmont from us.

The residents were well heeled. Most worked as engineers or

technocrats along the Technology Highway, Route 128. The
important other type of Belmont resident was the John Bircher. The
John Birch Society lay as far to the east of Belmont as the hospital
lay to the west. We saw the two institutions as variations on each

other; doubtless the Birchers did not see it this way. But between us
we had Belmont surrounded. The engineers knew this, and they
took care not to stare when we came into the ice cream parlor.

Saying that we traveled with a group of nurses does not fully

explain the situation. A complex system of “privileges” determined
how many nurses accompanied each patient, and whether a patient
could leave the grounds in the ɹrst place.

The privileges started at no privileges: restricted to the ward. This

was often Lisa’s condition. Sometimes she was bumped up to the
next rung, two-to-ones. That meant she could leave the ward if she
had two nurses with her, though only to go to the cafeteria or
occupational therapy. Even with our high staʃ-to-patient ratio, two-
to-ones often meant restricted to the ward. Two nurses could rarely
be spared to take Lisa by the elbows and hustle her over to dinner.
Then there were one-to-ones: a nurse and patient bound together
like Siamese twins. Some patients were on one-to-ones even on the
ward, which was like having a page or valet. Or like having a bad
conscience. It depended on the nurse. A lousy nurse on one-to-ones
could be a problem; it was usually a long-term assignment, so the
nurse could get to understand her patient.

The gradations were Byzantine. One-to-twos (one nurse, two

patients) led to group (three or four patients and one nurse). If you
behaved in group, you got something called destination privileges:
This meant telephoning the head nurse the moment you arrived at
wherever you were going to let her know you were there. You had
to call before coming back, too, so she could calculate time and
distance in case you ran away instead. Then there was mutual
escort, which was two relatively not-crazy patients going places
together. And the top, grounds, which meant you could go all over
the hospital alone.

Once these stations of the cross were achieved within the hospital,

the whole circuit began again in the outside world. Someone who
had mutual escort or grounds would probably still be on group
outside.

So when we went to Bailey’s in Waverley Square with our retinue

of nurses, the arrangement of atoms in our molecule was more

complex than it appeared to the engineers’ wives sipping coʃee at
the counter and graciously pretending not to look at us.

Lisa wouldn’t have been with us. Lisa never made it past one-to-

ones after her third escape. Polly was on one-to-ones, but that was
to make her feel safe, not hemmed in, and she always came along.
Georgina and I were on group, but since nobody else was on group,
we were eʃectively on one-to-twos. Cynthia and the Martian’s
girlfriend were on one-to-twos; this made it seem that Georgina and
I were as crazy as Cynthia and the Martian’s girlfriend. We weren’t,
and there was a bit of resentment on our part. Daisy was at the top
of the chart: full towns and grounds. Nobody could understand why.

Six patients, three nurses.
It was a ten- or ɹfteen-minute walk down the hill, past the

rosebushes and stately trees of our beautiful hospital. The farther we
got from our ward, the jumpier the nurses became. By the time we
hit the street they were silent and closed in on us, and they had
assumed the Nonchalant Look, an expression that said, I am not a
nurse escorting six lunatics to the ice cream parlor.

But they were, and we were their six lunatics, so we behaved like

lunatics.

None of us did anything unusual. We just kept up doing whatever

we did back on the ward. Muttering, snarling, crying. Daisy poked
people. Georgina complained about not being as crazy as those
other two.

“Stop acting out,” a nurse would say.
They were not above pinching us or giving a Daisy-like poke to

try shutting us up: nurse nips. We didn’t blame them for trying, and
they didn’t blame us for being ourselves. It was all we had—the
truth—and the nurses knew it.

Ice Cream

It was a spring day, the sort that gives people hope: all soft winds
and delicate smells of warm earth. Suicide weather. Daisy had killed
herself the week before. They probably thought we needed
distraction. Without Daisy, the staʃ-to-patient ratio was higher than
usual: ɹve patients, three nurses.

Down the hill, past the magnolia already losing its ɻeshy

blossoms, the pink turning brown and rotten along the edge; past
the paper-dry daʃodils; past the sticky laurel that could crown you
or poison you. The nurses were less nervous on the street that day,
spring fever making them careless—or perhaps the staʃ-to-patient
ratio was a more comfortable one for them.

The ɻoor of the ice cream parlor bothered me. It was black-and-

white checkerboard tile, bigger than supermarket checkerboard. If I
looked only at a white square, I would be all right, but it was hard
to ignore the black squares that surrounded the white ones. The
contrast got under my skin. I always felt itchy in the ice cream
parlor. The ɻoor meant Yes, No, This, That, Up, Down, Day, Night—
all the indecisions and opposites that were bad enough in life
without having them spelled out for you on the ɻoor.

A new boy was dishing out cones. We approached him in a

phalanx.

“We want eight ice cream cones,” said one of the nurses.
“Okay,” he said. He had a friendly, pimply face.
It took a long time to decide what ɻavors we wanted. It always

did.

“Peppermint stick,” said the Martian’s girlfriend.
“It’s just called ‘peppermint,’ ” said Georgina.
“Peppermint dick.”

“Honestly.” Georgina was revving up for a complaint.
“Peppermint clit.”
The Martian’s girlfriend got a nurse nip for that.
There were no other takers for peppermint; chocolate was a big

favorite. For spring they had a new ɻavor, peach melba. I ordered
that.

“You gonna want nuts on these?” the new boy asked.
We looked at one another: Should we say it? The nurses held their

breath. Outside, the birds were singing.

“I don’t think we need them,” said Georgina.

Checks

Five-minute checks. Fifteen-minute checks. Half-hour checks. Some
nurses said, “Checks,” when they opened the door. Click turn the
knob, swish, open the door, “Checks,” swish, pull the door shut, click,
turn the knob. Five-minute checks. Not enough time to drink a cup
of coʃee, read three pages of a book, take a shower.

When digital watches were invented years later they reminded me

of ɹve-minute checks. They murdered time in the same way—slowly
—chopping oʃ pieces of it and lobbing them into the dustbin with a
little click to let you know time was gone. Click, swish, “Checks,”
swish, click: another ɹve minutes of life down the drain. And spent
in this place.

I got onto half-hour checks eventually, but Georgina remained on

ɹfteen-minute checks, so as long as we were in the same room, it
made no diʃerence. Click, swish, “Checks,” swish, click.

It was one reason we preferred sitting in front of the nursing

station. The person on checks could pop her head out and take her
survey without bothering us.

Sometimes they had the audacity to ask where someone was.
Click, swish, “Checks”—the rhythm broke for a moment. “Have

you seen Polly?”

“I’m not doing your job for you,” Georgina growled.
Swish, click.
Before you knew it, she’d be back. Click, swish, “Checks,” swish,

click.

It never stopped, even at night; it was our lullaby. It was our

metronome, our pulse. It was our lives measured out in doses
slightly larger than those famous coʃee spoons. Soup spoons,
maybe? Dented tin spoons brimming with what should have been

sweet but was sour, gone oʃ, gone by without our savoring it: our
lives.

Sharps

Nail scissors. Nail ɹle. Safety razor. Penknife. (The one your father
gave you when you were eleven.) Pin. (That pin you got when you
graduated from high school, the one with two small pink pearls.)
Georgina’s gold stud earrings. (You can’t be serious! It’s the backs,
see—the nurse showed her the stubby darts of the backs—they’re
sharp, see.) That belt. (My belt? What’s going on here? The buckle
was the culprit. You could maybe put your eye out with this part of
the buckle, the pointy part.) Knives. Well, you could make a case for
knives. But forks and spoons too? Knives, forks, and spoons.

We ate with plastic. It was a perpetual picnic, our hospital.
Cutting old tough beef with a plastic knife, then scooping it onto a

plastic fork (the tines wouldn’t stick into the meat, so you had to use
the fork like a spoon): Food tastes diʃerent eaten with plastic
utensils.

One month the plastic-utensil delivery was late and we ate with

cardboard knives and forks and spoons. Have you ever eaten with a
cardboard fork? Imagine the taste of it, melting clotted cardboard in
and out of your mouth, rubbing on your tongue.

How about shaving your legs?
Over to the nursing station. “I want to shave my legs.”
“Just a minute.”
“I’m going to take a bath now and I want to shave my legs.”
“Let me check your orders.”
“I’ve got orders to shave my legs. Supervised.”
“Let me check.” Rustle, rattle. “Okay. Just a minute.”
“I’m going now.”
In the tub, swimming-pool-sized, Olympic-swimming-pool-sized,

deep and long and claw-footed: Click, swish, “Checks”—

“Hey! Where’s my razor?”
“I’m just the person on checks.”
“I’m supposed to shave my legs now.”
Swish, click.
More hot water: These hydrotherapy tubs are really comfortable.
Click, swish, my shaving supervisor.
“Did you bring my razor?”
She hands it over. She sits on the chair next to the bathtub. I’m

eighteen years old. She’s twenty-two. She’s watching me shave my
legs.

We had a lot of hairy legs on our ward. Early feminists.

Another Lisa

One day a second Lisa arrived. We called her by her full name, Lisa
Cody, to distinguish her from the real Lisa, who remained simply
Lisa, like a queen.

The Lisas became friends. One of their favorite activities was

having phone conversations.

The three phone booths near the double-locked double doors were

our only privacy. We could go in one and shut the door. Even the
craziest person could sit in a phone booth and have a private
conversation—though only with herself. The nurses had lists of
permitted numbers for each of us. When we picked up the phone, a
nurse would answer.

“Hello,” we’d say. “This is Georgina”—or Cynthia, or Polly—“I

want to call 555-4270.”

“That’s not on your list,” the nurse would say.
Then the line would go dead.
But there was still the quiet dusty phone booth and the old-

fashioned black receiver with its sharp dorsal ridge.

The Lisas had phone conversations. Each one got in a booth,

folded the door shut, and yelled into her receiver. When the nurse
answered, Lisa yelled, “Oʃ the line!” Then the Lisas got on with
their conversation. Sometimes they yelled insults; sometimes they
yelled about their plans for the day.

“Wanna go over to the cafeteria for dinner?” Lisa Cody would

yell.

But Lisa was restricted to the ward, so she’d have to yell back

something like: “Why do you want to eat that slop with all those
psychotics?”

To which Lisa Cody would yell, “What do you think you are?”

“Sociopath!” Lisa would yell proudly.
Lisa Cody didn’t have a diagnosis yet.
Cynthia was depressive; Polly and Georgina were schizophrenic; I

had a character disorder. Sometimes they called it a personality
disorder. When I got my diagnosis it didn’t sound serious, but after a
while it sounded more ominous than other people’s. I imagined my
character as a plate or shirt that had been manufactured incorrectly
and was therefore useless.

When she’d been with us a month or so, Lisa Cody got a

diagnosis. She was a sociopath too. She was happy, because she
wanted to be like Lisa in all things. Lisa was not so happy, because
she had been the only sociopath among us.

“We are very rare,” she told me once, “and mostly we are men.”
After Lisa Cody got her diagnosis, the Lisas started making more

trouble.

“Acting out,” the nurses said.
We knew what it was. The real Lisa was proving that Lisa Cody

wasn’t a sociopath.

Lisa tongued her sleeping meds for a week, took them all at once,

and stayed zonked for a day and a night. Lisa Cody managed to save
only four of hers, and when she took them, she puked. Lisa put a
cigarette out on her arm at six-thirty in the morning while the
nurses were changing shifts. That afternoon Lisa Cody burned a tiny
welt on her wrist and spent the next twenty minutes running cold
water on it.

Then they had a life-history battle. Lisa wormed out of Lisa Cody

that she’d grown up in Greenwich, Connecticut.

“Greenwich, Connecticut!” She sneered. No sociopath could

emerge from there. “Were you a debutante too?”

Speed, black beauties, coke, heroin—Lisa had done it all. Lisa

Cody said she’d been a junkie too. She rolled her sleeve back to
show her tracks: faint scratches along the vein as if once, years
before, she’d tangled with a rosebush.

“A suburban junkie,” said Lisa. “You were playing, that’s what.”
“Hey, man, junk’s junk,” Lisa Cody protested.

Lisa Cody’s nose. Her arm was studded with pale brown lumps,
gnarled and authentic.

“These,” said Lisa, “are tracks, man. Later for your tracks.”
Lisa Cody was beaten, but she didn’t have the sense to give up.

She still sat beside Lisa at breakfast and Hall Meeting. She still
waited in the phone booth for the call that didn’t come.

“I gotta get rid of her,” said Lisa.
“You’re mean,” Polly said.
“Fucking bitch,” said Lisa.
“Who?” asked Cynthia, Polly’s protector.
But Lisa didn’t bother to clarify.
One evening when the nurses walked the halls at dusk to turn on

the lights that made our ward as bright and jarring as a penny
arcade, they found every light bulb gone. Not broken, vanished.

We knew who’d done it. The question was, Where had she put

them? It was hard to search in the darkness. Even the light bulbs in
our rooms were gone.

“Lisa has the true artistic temperament,” said Georgina.
“Just hunt,” said the head nurse. “Everybody hunt.”
Lisa sat out the hunt in the TV room.
It was Lisa Cody who found them, as she was meant to. She was

probably planning to sit out the hunt as well, in the place that held
memories of better days. She must have felt some resistance when
she tried to fold the door back—there were dozens of light bulbs
inside—but she persevered, just as she’d persevered with Lisa. The
crunch and clatter brought us all scampering down to the phone
booths.

“Broken,” said Lisa Cody.
Everyone asked Lisa how she’d done it, but all she would say was,

“I’ve got a long, skinny arm.”

Lisa Cody disappeared two days later. Somewhere between our

ward and the cafeteria she slipped away. Nobody ever found her,
though the search went on for more than a week.

“She couldn’t take this place,” said Lisa.

didn’t hear one.

Some months later, Lisa ran oʃ again while she was being taken to a
gynecology consult at the Mass. General: two days she managed this
time. When she got back, she looked especially pleased with herself.

“I saw Lisa Cody,” she said.
“Oooh,” said Georgina. Polly shook her head.
“She’s a real junkie now,” said Lisa, smiling.

Checkmate

We were sitting on the ɻoor in front of the nursing station having a
smoke. We liked sitting there. We could keep an eye on the nurses
that way.

“On ɹve-minute checks it’s impossible,” said Georgina.
“I did it,” said Lisa Cody.
“Nah,” said the real Lisa. “You didn’t.” She had just started her

campaign against Lisa Cody.

“On ɹfteen, I did it,” Lisa Cody amended.
“Maybe on ɹfteen,” said Lisa.
“Oh, ɹfteen’s easy,” said Georgina.
“Wade’s young,” said Lisa. “Fifteen would work.”
I hadn’t tried yet. Although my boyfriend had calmed down about

my being in the hospital and come to visit me, the person on checks
caught me giving him a blow job, and we’d been put on supervised
visits. He wasn’t visiting anymore.

“They caught me,” I said. Everybody knew they’d caught me, but

I kept mentioning it because it bothered me.

“Big deal,” said Lisa. “Fuck them.” She laughed. “Fuck them and

fuck them.”

“I don’t think he could do it in ɹfteen minutes,” I said.
“No distractions. Right down to business,” said Georgina.
“Who’re you fucking anyhow?” Lisa asked Lisa Cody. Lisa Cody

didn’t answer. “You’re not fucking anybody,” said Lisa.

“Fuck you,” said Daisy, who was passing by.
“Hey, Daisy,” said Lisa, “you ever fuck on ɹve-minute checks?”
“I don’t want to fuck these assholes in here,” said Daisy.
“Excuses,” Lisa whispered.
“You’re not fucking anybody either,” said Lisa Cody.

Lisa grinned. “Georgina’s gonna lend me Wade for an afternoon.”
“All it takes is ten minutes,” said Georgina.
“They never caught you?” I asked her.
“They don’t care. They like Wade.”
“You have to fuck patients,” Lisa explained. “Get rid of that stupid

boyfriend and get a patient boyfriend.”

“Yeah, that boyfriend sucks,” said Georgina.
“I think he’s cute,” Lisa Cody said.
“He’s trouble,” said Lisa.
I started to sniʀe.
Georgina patted me. “He doesn’t even visit,” she pointed out.
“It’s true,” said Lisa. “He’s cute, but he doesn’t visit. And where

does he get oʃ with that accent?”

“He’s English. He grew up in Tunisia.” These were very important

qualiɹcations for being my boyfriend, I felt.

“Send him back there,” Lisa advised.
“I’ll take him,” said Lisa Cody.
“He can’t fuck in ɹfteen minutes,” I warned her. “You’d have to

give him a blow job.”

“Whatever,” said Lisa Cody.
“I like a blow job now and then,” said Lisa.
Georgina shook her head. “Too salty.”
“I don’t mind that,” I said.
“Did you ever get one that had a really bitter taste, puckery, like

lemons, only worse?” Lisa asked.

“Some kind of dick infection,” said Georgina.
“Yuuuch,” said Lisa Cody.
“Nah, it’s not an infection,” said Lisa. “It’s just how some of them

taste.”

“Oh, who needs them,” I said.
“We’ll ɹnd you a new one in the cafeteria,” said Georgina.
“Bring a few extra back,” said Lisa. She was still restricted to the

ward.

“I’m sure Wade knows somebody nice,” Georgina went on.
“Let’s forget it,” I said. The truth was, I didn’t want a crazy

boyfriend.

Lisa looked at me. “I know what you’re thinking,” she said. “You

don’t want some crazy boyfriend, right?”

I was embarrassed and didn’t say anything.
“You’ll get over it,” she told me. “What choice have you got?”
Everybody laughed. Even I had to laugh.
The person on checks put her head out of the nursing station and

bobbed it four times, once for each of us.

“Half-hour checks,” said Georgina. “That would be good.”
“A million dollars would be good, too,” said Lisa Cody.
“This place,” said Lisa.
We all sighed.

Do You Believe Him or Me?

That doctor says he interviewed me for three hours. I say it was
twenty minutes. Twenty minutes between my walking in the door
and his deciding to send me to McLean. I might have spent another
hour in his oɽce while he called the hospital, called my parents,
called the taxi. An hour and a half is the most I’ll grant him.

We can’t both be right. Does it matter which of us is right?
It matters to me. But it turns out I’m wrong.
I have a piece of hard evidence, the Time Admitted line from the

Nurse’s Report of Patient on Admission. From that I can reconstruct
everything. It reads: 1:30 P.M.

I said I left home early. But my idea of early might have been as

late as nine in the morning. I’d switched night and day—that was
one of the things the doctor harped on.

I said I was in his oɽce before eight, but I seem to have been

wrong about that, too.

I’ll compromise by saying that I left home at eight and spent an

hour traveling to a nine o’clock appointment. Twenty minutes later
is nine-twenty.

Now let’s jump ahead to the taxi ride. The trip from Newton to

Belmont takes about half an hour. And I remember waiting ɹfteen
minutes in the Administration Building to sign myself in. Add
another ɹfteen minutes of bureaucracy before I reached the nurse
who wrote that report. This totals up to an hour, which means I
arrived at the hospital at half past twelve.

And there we are, between nine-twenty and twelve-thirty—a

three-hour interview!

I still think I’m right. I’m right about what counts.
But now you believe him.

Don’t be so quick. I have more evidence.
The Admission Note, written by the doctor who supervised my

case, and who evidently took an extensive history before I reached
that nurse. At the top right corner, at the line Hour of Adm., it
reads: 11:30 A.M.

Let’s reconstruct it again.
Subtracting the half hour waiting to be admitted and wading

through bureaucracy takes us to eleven o’clock. Subtracting the half-
hour taxi ride takes us to ten-thirty. Subtracting the hour I waited
while the doctor made phone calls takes us to nine-thirty. Assuming
my departure from home at eight o’clock for a nine o’clock
appointment results in a half-hour interview.

There we are, between nine and nine-thirty. I won’t quibble over

ten minutes.

Now you believe me.

Velocity vs. Viscosity

Insanity comes in two basic varieties: slow and fast.

I’m not talking about onset or duration. I mean the quality of the

insanity, the day-to-day business of being nuts.

There are a lot of names: depression, catatonia, mania, anxiety,

agitation. They don’t tell you much.

The predominant quality of the slow form is viscosity.
Experience is thick. Perceptions are thickened and dulled Time is

slow, dripping slowly through the clogged ɹlter of thickened
perception. The body temperature is low. The pulse is sluggish. The
immune system is half-asleep. The organism is torpid and brackish.
Even the reɻexes are diminished, as if the lower leg couldn’t be
bothered to jerk itself out of its stupor when the knee is tapped.

Viscosity occurs on a cellular level. And so does velocity.
In contrast to viscosity’s cellular coma, velocity endows every

platelet and muscle ɹber with a mind of its own, a means of
knowing and commenting on its own behavior. There is too much
perception, and beyond the plethora of perceptions, a plethora of
thoughts about the perceptions and about the fact of having
perceptions. Digestion could kill you! What I mean is the unceasing
awareness of the processes of digestion could exhaust you to death.
And digestion is just an involuntary sideline to thinking, which is
where the real trouble begins.

Take a thought—anything; it doesn’t matter. I’m tired of sitting

here in front of the nursing station: a perfectly reasonable thought.
Here’s what velocity does to it.

First, break down the sentence. I’m tired—well, are you really

tired, exactly? Is that like sleepy? You have to check all your body
parts for sleepiness, and while you’re doing that, there’s a

bombardment of images of sleepiness, along these lines: head falling
onto pillow, head hitting pillow, Wynken, Blynken, and Nod, Little
Nemo rubbing sleep from his eyes, a sea monster. Uh-oh, a sea
monster. If you’re lucky, you can avoid the sea monster and stick
with sleepiness. Back to the pillow, memories of having mumps at
age ɹve, sensation of swollen cheeks on pillows and pain on
salivation—stop. Go back to sleepiness.

But the salivation notion is too alluring, and now there’s an

excursion into the mouth. You’ve been here before and it’s bad. It’s
the tongue: Once you think of the tongue it becomes an intrusion.
Why is the tongue so large? Why is it scratchy on the sides? Is that a
vitamin deɹciency? Could you remove the tongue? Wouldn’t your
mouth be less bothersome without it? There’d be more room in
there. The tongue, now, every cell of the tongue, is enormous. It’s a
vast foreign object in your mouth.

Trying to diminish the size of your tongue, you focus your

attention on its components: tip, smooth; back, bumpy; sides,
scratchy, as noted earlier (vitamin deɹciency); roots—trouble. There
are roots to the tongue. You’ve seen them, and if you put your ɹnger
in your mouth you can feel them, but you can’t feel them with the
tongue. It’s a paradox.

Paradox. The tortoise and the hare. Achilles and the what? The

tortoise? The tendon? The tongue?

Back to tongue. While you weren’t thinking of it, it got a little

smaller. But thinking of it makes it big again. Why is it scratchy on
the sides? Is that a vitamin deɹciency? You’ve thought these
thoughts already, but now these thoughts have been stuck onto your
tongue. They adhere to the existence of your tongue.

All of that took less than a minute, and there’s still the rest of the

sentence to ɹgure out. And all you wanted, really, was to decide
whether or not to stand up.

Viscosity and velocity are opposites, yet they can look the same.

Viscosity causes the stillness of disinclination; velocity causes the
stillness of fascination. An observer can’t tell if a person is silent and
still because inner life has stalled or because inner life is
transɹxingly busy.

Something common to both is repetitive thought. Experiences

seem prerecorded, stylized. Particular patterns of thought get
attached to particular movements or activities, and before you know
it, it’s impossible to approach that movement or activity without
dislodging an avalanche of prethought thoughts.

A lethargic avalanche of synthetic thought can take days to fall.

Part of the mute paralysis of viscosity comes from knowing every
detail of what’s ahead and having to wait for its arrival. Here comes
the I’m-no-good thought. That takes care of today. All day the
insistent dripping of I’m no good. The next thought, the next day, is
I’m the Angel of Death. This thought has a glittering expanse of
panic behind it, which is unreachable. Viscosity ɻattens the
eʃervescence of panic.

These thoughts have no meaning. They are idiot mantras that

exist in a prearranged cycle: I’m no good, I’m the Angel of Death,
I’m stupid, I can’t do anything. Thinking the ɹrst thought triggers
the whole circuit. It’s like the ɻu: ɹrst a sore throat, then,
inevitably, a stuʃy nose and a cough.

Once, these thoughts must have had a meaning. They must have

meant what they said. But repetition has blunted them. They have
become background music, a Muzak medley of self-hatred themes.

Which is worse, overload or underload? Luckily, I never had to
choose. One or the other would assert itself, rush or dribble through
me, and pass on.

Pass on to where? Back into my cells to lurk like a virus waiting

for the next opportunity? Out into the ether of the world to wait for
the 
circumstances 
that 
would 
provoke 
its 
reappearance?

Endogenous or exogenous, nature or nurture—it’s the great mystery
of mental illness.

Security Screen

“I need some fresh air,” said Lisa. We were sitting on the ɻoor in
front of the nursing station, as usual.

Daisy passed by.
“Gimme a cigarette,” she said.
“Get your own, bitch,” said Lisa. Then she gave her one.
“Lousy cigarette,” said Daisy. Lisa smoked Kools.
“I need some fresh air,” Lisa repeated. She stubbed her cigarette

out on the brown-and-beige-speckled rug and stood up. “Hey!” She
put her head into the nursing station, in through the open half of
the Dutch door. “I need some fucking fresh air.”

“Just a minute, Lisa,” said a voice from inside.
“Now!” Lisa banged on the sill that divided the top and bottom

halves of the door. “This is illegal. You can’t keep a person inside a
building for months. I’m going to call my lawyer.”

Lisa often threatened to call her lawyer. She had a court-

appointed lawyer, about twenty-six, handsome, with almond eyes.
He hadn’t been able to stop her being committed. His name was
Irwin. Lisa claimed to have fucked him a few times in the lawyer-
client conference room at the courthouse.

Whenever Lisa threatened to call her lawyer, the head nurse got

involved.

Now she came out and leaned on the sill. “What’s up, Lisa,” she

said, sounding tired.

“I want some fucking fresh air.”
“You don’t have to yell,” said the head nurse.
“How the fuck else am I going to get any attention in this place?”

Lisa always called the hospital “this place.”

“I’m right in front of you now,” the head nurse said. “I’m paying

attention.”

“Then you know what I want.”
“I’ll get an aide to open your window,” said the head nurse.
“Window,” said Lisa. She turned brieɻy to look at us. “I’m not

interested in some fucking window.” She hit the sill again. The head
nurse moved back a bit.

“It’s window or nothing, Lisa,” she said.
“Window or nothing,” said Lisa in a singsong. She took a few

steps down the hall, so that all of us, including the head nurse,
could see her.

“I’d just like to see how you’d manage this place, never going

outside, never even breathing fresh air, never being able to open
your own fucking window, with a bunch of sissy cunts telling you
what to do. Valerie, time for lunch, Valerie, you don’t have to yell,
Valerie, time for your sleeping meds, Valerie, stop acting out. You
know? I mean, how the fuck would you manage, hunh?”

The head nurse’s name was Valerie.
“I mean, you wouldn’t last ten minutes in this place.”
“Fucking bitch,” said Daisy.
“Who asked you?” Lisa pointed at Daisy.
“Gimme a cigarette,” said Daisy.
“Get your own,” said Lisa. She turned to the head nurse. “I’m

going to call my lawyer.”

“Okay,” said the head nurse. She was pretty smart.
“You think I’ve got no rights? Is that what you think?”
“Should I put the call through?”
Lisa waved her arm dismissively. “Nah,” she said. “Nah, open the

window.”

“Judy,” said the head nurse. This was a young blond aide we

enjoyed tormenting.

“Valerie!” yelled Lisa. She called the head nurse Valerie only

when she was upset. “Valerie, I want you to open my window.”

“I’m busy, Lisa.”
“I’ll call my lawyer.”
“Judy can do it.”

“I don’t want that fucking sissy cunt in my room.”
“Oh, you’re such a bore,” said the head nurse. She pressed the

security buzzer that unlocked the bottom of the door and came out
into the hall with us.

Lisa smiled.
To open a window, a staʃ person had to unlock the security

screen, which was a thick impregnable mesh on a steel frame, then
lift the heavy unbreakable-glass-paned window, then shut and
relock the security screen. This took about three minutes, and it was
hard work. It was the sort of thing aides did. When the window was
open, air might make its way through the mesh of the security
screen, if it was a breezy day.

The head nurse returned from Lisa’s room, a little pink from

exertion. “Okay,” she said. She rapped on the nursing-station door
to be buzzed back in.

Lisa lit another cigarette.
“Your window’s open,” said the head nurse.
“I’m aware of that,” said Lisa.
“You aren’t even going in there, are you?” The head nurse sighed.
“Hey, man,” said Lisa, “it passes the time,” She touched the hot

end of her cigarette to her arm for a second. “I mean, that took up
twenty minutes, maybe half an hour.”

The buzzer sounded, the head nurse opened the door, went inside,

and leaned on the sill again.

“Yes, it does pass the time,” she said.
“Gimme a cigarette,” said Daisy.
“Get your own, bitch,” said Lisa. Then she gave her one.

Keepers

Valerie was about thirty. She was tall and had tapered legs and
arms. She looked a lot like Lisa, though she was fair. They both had
lean long haunches and ɻexible joints. Lisa was good at curling
herself into chairs and corners, and so was Valerie. When someone
was upset and had tucked herself between a radiator and a wall or
behind a bathtub or into another small secure spot, Valerie could
curl herself into a compact package and sit near that person.

Valerie’s fair hair was beautiful, but she kept it hidden in a braid

that she twisted up on the back of her head. This braid-in-a-bun
never came undone or slipped out of place. Rarely, Valerie could be
coaxed into undoing the bun and showing us the braid, which
reached to her waist. Only Lisa could convince her to do this. She
never released her hair from the braid, though we begged her to.

Valerie was strict and inɻexible and she was the only staʃ person

we trusted. We trusted her because she wasn’t afraid of us. She
wasn’t afraid of doctors either. She didn’t have much to say about
anything, and we liked her for that, too.

We had to hear a lot of talk in that place. Each of us saw three

doctors a day: the ward doctor, the resident, and our own therapist.
Mostly we had to hear ourselves talk to these doctors, but they did a
fair amount of talking themselves.

They had a special language: regression, acting out, hostility,

withdrawal, indulging in behavior. This last phrase could be attached
to any activity and make it sound suspicious: indulging in eating
behavior, talking behavior, writing behavior. In the outside world
people ate and talked and wrote, but nothing we did was simple.

Valerie was a relief from that. The only phrase she used was acting

out, and she used it correctly, to mean “getting in my hair and

driving me crazy.” She said things like “Cut that out” and “You’re a
bore.” She said what she meant, just as we did.

The doctors were men; the nurses and aides were women. There

were two exceptions: Jerry the Aide and Dr. Wick. Jerry was
willowy and worried. He had one good trick. Now and then,
someone with a lot of privileges was allowed to leave the hospital in
a taxi. That person would say, “Jerry, call me a cab.” Jerry would
say, “You’re a cab.” We loved this.

Dr. Wick was another story.
Dr. Wick was the head of our ward, South Belknap Two. The

wards had boarding-school names like East House and South
Belknap, and Dr. Wick would have been a good boarding-school
matron. She came from Rhodesia and she looked like the ghost of a
horse. When she talked, she sounded somewhat like a horse as well.
She had a low, burbly voice, and her colonial English accent gave
her sentences a neighing cadence.

Dr. Wick seemed utterly innocent about American culture, which

made her an odd choice to head an adolescent girls’ ward. And she
was easily shocked about sexual matters. The word fuck made her
pale horse face ɻush; it ɻushed a lot when she was around us.

A representative conversation with Dr. Wick:
“Good morning. It has been decided that you were compulsively

promiscuous. Would you like to tell me about that?”

“No.” This is the best of several bad responses, I’ve decided.
“For instance, the attachment to your high school English

teacher.” Dr. Wick always uses words like attachment.

“Uh?”
“Would you like to tell me about that?”
“Um. Well. He drove me to New York.” That was when I realized

he was interested. He brought along a wonderful vegetarian lunch
for me. “But that wasn’t when it was.”

“What? When what was?”
“When we fucked.”
(Flush.) “Go on.”
“We went to the Frick. I’d never been there. There was this

Vermeer, see, this amazing painting of a girl having a music lesson

—I just couldn’t believe how amazing it was—”

“So when did you—ah—when was it?”
Doesn’t she want to hear about the Vermeer? That’s what I

remember. “What?”

“The—ah—attachment. How did it start?”
“Oh, later, back home.” Suddenly I know what she wants. “I was

at his house. We had poetry meetings at his house. And everybody
had left, so we were just sitting there on the sofa alone. And he said,
‘Do you want to fuck?’ ”

(Flush.) “He used that word?”
“Yup.” He didn’t. He kissed me. And he’d kissed me in New York

too. But why should I disappoint her?

This was called therapy.
Luckily, Dr. Wick had a lot of girls to take care of, so therapy with

her was brief, maybe ɹve minutes a day. But in her wake came the
resident.

There was a two- or three-minute breather between Dr. Wick’s

departure and the resident’s arrival. During this time we could think
of new things to say or formulate complaints. Residents were in
charge of privileges, medication, phone calls—the day-to-day
matters that were not important enough for Dr. Wick to bother with.

Residents changed every six months. We’d just begin to ɹgure out

how to manage one resident when he’d be snatched out from under
us and replaced with a new, incomprehensible resident. They started
out tough and ended up exhausted and ready to leave. A few started
out with compassion; they ended up bitter, because we took
advantage of them.

A representative conversation with a resident:
“Good morning. How are your bowel movements?”
“I want to get oʃ group. I want destination privileges.”
“Do you have any headaches?”
“I’ve been on group for six months!”
“The head nurse said you were acting out after lunch yesterday.”
“She’s making that up.”
“Hmmmm. Hostility.” He scribbles in a notebook.
“Can I have orders for Tylenol instead of aspirin?”

“There’s no diʃerence.”
“Aspirin gives me a stomach ache.”
“Are you having headaches?”
“This is in case I do.”
“Hmmmm. Hypochondria.” He scribbles again.
But these two doctors were hors d’oeuvres. The entrée was the

therapist.

Most of us saw our therapists every day. Cynthia didn’t; she had

therapy twice a week and shock therapy once a week. And Lisa
didn’t go to therapy. She had a therapist, but he used her hour to
take a nap. If she was extremely bored, she’d demand to be taken to
his oɽce, where she’d ɹnd him snoozing in his chair. “Gotcha!”
she’d say. Then she’d come back to the ward. The rest of us traipsed
oʃ day after day to exhume the past.

Therapists had nothing to do with our everyday lives.
“Don’t talk about the hospital,” my therapist said if I complained

about Daisy or a stupid nurse. “We’re not here to talk about the
hospital.”

They couldn’t grant or rescind privileges, help us get rid of smelly

roommates, stop aides from pestering us. The only power they had
was the power to dope us up. Thorazine, Stelazine, Mellaril,
Librium, Valium: the therapists’ friends. The resident could put us
on that stuʃ too, in an “acute” situation. Once we were on it, it was
hard to get oʃ. A bit like heroin, except it was the staʃ who got
addicted to our taking it.

“You’re doing so well,” the resident would say.
That was because those things knocked the heart out of us.
Half a dozen nurses, including Valerie, and an aide or two were

on duty during the day. The night staʃ consisted of three comfy big-
bosomed Irish women who called us “dearie.” Occasionally there
was a comfy big-bosomed black woman who called us “honey.” The
night staʃ would hug us if we needed a hug. The day staʃ adhered
to the No Physical Contact rule.

Between day and night was a dark universe called evening, which

began at three-ɹfteen, when the day staʃ retired to the living room
to gossip about us with the evening staʃ. At three-thirty everyone

emerged. Power had been transferred. From then until eleven, when
the comfy women took over, we were in Mrs. McWeeney’s hands.

Perhaps it was Mrs. McWeeney who made dusk such a dangerous

time. No matter the season, dusk began at three-ɹfteen with her
arrival.

Mrs. McWeeney was dry, tight, small, and pig-eyed. If Dr. Wick

was a disguised boarding-school matron, Mrs. McWeeney was an
undisguised prison matron. She had hard gray hair pressed into
waves that grasped her scalp like a migraine. The day nurses,
following Valerie’s lead, wore unbuttoned nurse coats over street
clothes. No such informality for Mrs. McWeeney. She wore a creaky
white uniform and spongy ripple-soled nurse shoes that she painted
white every week; we could watch the paint cracking and peeling
oʃ between Monday and Friday.

Mrs. McWeeney and Valerie did not get along. This was

fascinating, like overhearing your parents having a ɹght. Mrs.
McWeeney cast on Valerie’s clothes and hair the same disapproving
eye she gave us and clicked her teeth with impatience as Valerie
gathered her coat and pocketbook and left the nursing station at
three-thirty. Valerie ignored her. Valerie was able to ignore people
in an obvious way.

As long as Valerie was on the ward, we felt safe hating Mrs.

McWeeney. But as soon as her long tapered back had receded down
the hall and out the double-locked double doors, we were overcome
by gloom shot through with anxiety: Now Mrs. McWeeney was in
power.

Her power wasn’t absolute, but it was close. She shared it with a

mysterious Doctor on Call. She never called him. “I can handle this,”
she said.

She had more conɹdence in her ability to handle things than we

did. Many evenings were spent arguing about whether the Doctor
on Call should make an appearance.

“We’ll just have to agree to disagree,” Mrs. McWeeney said about

ten times per evening. She had an endless store of clichés.

When Mrs. McWeeney said, “We’ll just have to agree to disagree”

or “Little pitchers have big ears” or “Smile and the world smiles

with you, cry and you cry alone,” a faint but delighted grin came
onto her face.

Clearly, she was nuts. We were locked up for eight hours a day

with a crazy woman who hated us.

Mrs. McWeeney was unpredictable. She’d gnarl her face up for no

reason while giving out bedtime meds and slam back into the
nursing station without a word. We’d have to wait for her to calm
down before getting our nightly Mickey Finns; sometimes we waited
as long as half an hour.

though we never said anything about waiting for our meds. We
knew Mrs. McWeeney was a crazy person who had to earn a living.
We weren’t trying to get her decertiɹed; we just wanted her oʃ our
ward.

Valerie was unsympathetic to our complaints.
“Mrs. McWeeney is a professional,” she said. “She’s been in this

business a lot longer than I have.”

“So what?” said Georgina.
“She’s fucking nuts,” Lisa yelled.
“You don’t have to yell, Lisa—I’m right here,” said Valerie.
We were all protecting Mrs. McWeeney, one way or another.
Mrs. McWeeney wasn’t the only person in need of protection.
Now and then there was an inɻux of student nurses. They were

migratory, passing through our hospital on their way to operating
rooms and cardiac-care units. They followed real nurses around in a
ɻock, asking questions and getting underfoot. “Oh, that Tiʃany! She
sticks to me like a barnacle,” the nurses would complain. Then we
got the chance to say, “Sucks, doesn’t it? Being followed around all
the time.” The nurses would have to grant us this point.

The student nurses were about nineteen or twenty: our age. They

had clean, eager faces and clean, ironed uniforms. Their innocence
and incompetence aroused our pity, unlike the incompetence of
aides, which aroused our scorn. This was partly because student
nurses stayed only a few weeks, whereas aides were incompetent for
years at a stretch. Mainly, though, it was because when we looked
at the student nurses, we saw alternate versions of ourselves. They

were living out lives we might have been living, if we hadn’t been
occupied with being mental patients. They shared apartments and
had boyfriends and talked about clothes. We wanted to protect them
so that they could go on living these lives. They were our proxies.

They loved talking to us. We asked them what movies they’d seen

and how they’d done on their exams and when they were getting
married (most of them had sadly small engagement rings). They’d
tell us anything—that the boyfriend was insisting they “do it” before
the wedding, that the mother was a drinker, that the grades were
bad and the scholarship wasn’t going to be renewed.

We gave them good advice. “Use a condom”; “Call Alcoholics

Anonymous”; “Work hard for the rest of the semester and bring your
grades up.” Later they’d report back to us: “You were right. Thanks
a lot.”

We did our best to control our snarls and mutterings and tears

when they were around. Consequently, they learned nothing about
psychiatric nursing. When they ɹnished their rotation, all they took
with them were improved versions of us, halfway between our
miserable selves and the normality we saw embodied in them.

For some of us, this was the closest we would ever come to a cure.
As soon as they left, things went quickly back to worse than usual,

and the real nurses had their hands full.

Thus, our keepers. As for ɹnders—well, we had to be our own

ɹnders.

Nineteen Sixty-Eight

The world didn’t stop because we weren’t in it anymore; far from it.
Night after night tiny bodies fell to the ground on our TV screen:
black people, young people, Vietnamese people, poor people—some
dead, some only bashed up for the moment. There were always
more of them to replace the fallen and join them the next night.

Then came the period when people we knew—not knew

personally, but knew of—started falling to the ground: Martin
Luther King, Robert Kennedy. Was that more alarming? Lisa said it
was natural. “They gotta kill them,” she explained. “Otherwise it’ll
never settle down.”

But it didn’t seem to be settling down. People were doing the

kinds of things we had fantasies of doing: taking over universities
and abolishing classes; making houses out of cardboard boxes and
putting them in people’s way; sticking their tongues out at
policemen.

We’d cheer them on, those little people on our TV screen, who

shrank as their numbers increased until they were just a mass of
dots taking over universities and sticking their tiny tongues out. We
thought eventually they’d get around to “liberating” us too. “Right
on!” we’d yell at them.

Fantasies don’t include repercussions. We were safe in our

expensive, well-appointed hospital, locked up with our rages and
rebellions. Easy for us to say “Right on!” The worst we got was an
afternoon in seclusion. Usually all we got was a smile, a shake of the
head, a note on our charts: “Identiɹcation with protest movement.”
They got cracked skulls, black eyes, kicks to the kidneys—and then,
they got locked up with their rages and rebellions.

So it went on, month after month of battles and riots and

marches. These were easy times for the staʃ. We didn’t “act out”; it
was all acted out for us.

We were not only calm, we were expectant. The world was about

to ɻip, the meek were about to inherit the earth or, more precisely,
wrest it from the strong, and we, the meekest and weakest, would
be heirs to the vast estate of all that had been denied us.

But this didn’t happen—not for us and not for any of those other

claimants to the estate.

It was when we saw Bobby Seale bound and gagged in a Chicago

courtroom that we realized the world wasn’t going to change. He
was in chains like a slave.

Cynthia was particularly upset. “They do that to me!” she cried. It

was true that they did tie you down and put something in your
mouth when you had shock, to stop you from biting your tongue
during the convulsion.

Lisa was angry too, but for another reason. “Don’t you see the

diʃerence?” she snarled at Cynthia. “They have to gag him, because
they’re afraid people will believe what he says.”

We looked at him, a tiny dark man in chains on our TV screen

with the one thing we would always lack: credibility.

Bare Bones

For many of us, the hospital was as much a refuge as it was a prison.
Though we were cut oʃ from the world and all the trouble we
enjoyed stirring up out there, we were also cut oʃ from the
demands and expectations that had driven us crazy. What could be
expected of us now that we were stowed away in a loony bin?

The hospital shielded us from all sorts of things. We’d tell the staʃ

to refuse phone calls or visits from anyone we didn’t want to talk to,
including our parents.

“I’m too upset!” we’d wail, and we wouldn’t have to talk to

whoever it was.

As long as we were willing to be upset, we didn’t have to get jobs

or go to school. We could weasel out of anything except eating and
taking our medication.

In a strange way we were free. We’d reached the end of the line.

We had nothing more to lose. Our privacy, our liberty, our dignity:
All of this was gone and we were stripped down to the bare bones of
our selves.

Naked, we needed protection, and the hospital protected us. Of

course, the hospital had stripped us naked in the ɹrst place—but
that just underscored its obligation to shelter us.

And the hospital fulɹlled its obligation. Somebody in our families

had to pay a good deal of money for that: sixty dollars (1967
dollars) a day just for the room; therapy, drugs, and consultations
were extra. Ninety days was the usual length of mental-hospital
insurance coverage, but ninety days was barely enough to get
started on a visit to McLean. My workup alone took ninety days.
The price of several of those college educations I didn’t want was
spent on my hospitalization.

naked into a world we didn’t know how to live in anymore. Writing
a check, dialing a telephone, opening a window, locking a door—
these were just a few of the things we all forgot how to do.

Our families. The prevailing wisdom was that they were the

reason we were in there, yet they were utterly absent from our
hospital lives. We wondered: Were we as absent from their lives
outside?

Lunatics are similar to designated hitters. Often an entire family is

crazy, but since an entire family can’t go into the hospital, one
person is designated as crazy and goes inside. Then, depending on
how the rest of the family is feeling, that person is kept inside or
snatched out, to prove something about the family’s mental health.

Most families were proving the same proposition: We aren’t crazy;

she is the crazy one. Those families kept paying.

But some families had to prove that nobody was crazy, and they

were the ones who threatened to stop paying.

Torrey had that sort of a family.
We all liked Torrey, because she had a noble bearing. The only

thing wrong with her was amphetamines. She’d spent two years
shooting speed in Mexico, where her family lived. Amphetamines
had made her face pale and her voice tired and drawling—or,
rather, it was the lack of amphetamines that made her this way.

Torrey was the only person Lisa respected, probably because they

had the needle in common.

Every few months Torrey’s parents ɻew from Mexico to Boston to

harangue her. She was crazy, she had driven them crazy, she was
malingering, they couldn’t aʃord it, and so forth. After they left
Torrey would give a report in her tired drawl.

“Then Mom said, ‘You made me into an alcoholic,’ and then Dad

said, ‘I’m going to see you never get out of this place,’ and then they
sort of switched and Mom said, ‘You’re nothing but a junkie,’ and
Dad said, ‘I’m not going to pay for you to take it easy in here while
we suʃer.’ ”

“Why do you see them?” Georgina asked.
“Oh,” said Torrey.

“It’s how they show their love,” said Lisa. Her parents never made

contact with her.

The nurses agreed with Lisa. They told Torrey she was mature for

agreeing to see her parents when she knew they were going to
confuse her. Confuse was the nurses’ word for abuse.

Torrey was not confused. “I don’t mind this place,” she said. “It’s

a break from Mexico.” In Torrey’s mouth, Mexico sounded like a
curse.

“Mexico,” she’d say, and shake her head.
In Mexico there was a big house with porches back and front,

there were servants, there was sun every day, and there were
amphetamines for sale in the drugstore.

Lisa thought it sounded pretty good.
“It’s death,” said Torrey. “Being in Mexico means being dead and

shooting speed to feel like you’re not quite dead. That’s all.”

Sometimes Valerie or another nurse tried explaining to Torrey

that she could be in Mexico without going to the drugstore and
buying amphetamines.

“You haven’t been there,” Torrey said.
In August Torrey’s parents called to announce that they were

coming up to get her.

“Taking me home to die,” she said.
“We won’t let you go,” said Georgina.
“That’s right,” I said. “Right, Lisa?”
Lisa wasn’t making any promises. “What can we do about it?”
“Nothing,” said Torrey.
That afternoon I asked Valerie, “You wouldn’t let Torrey’s parents

take her back to Mexico, would you?”

“We’re here to protect you,” she said.
“What does that mean?” I asked Lisa that evening.
“Doesn’t mean shit,” said Lisa.
For about a week there was no word from Torrey’s parents. Then

they called to say they’d meet her at the Boston airport. They didn’t
want to bother with coming out to the hospital to pick her up.

“You could hop out on the way to the airport,” said Lisa.

“Somewhere downtown. Get right onto the subway.” She was an old

hand at escape planning.

“I don’t have any money,” said Torrey.
We pooled our money. Georgina had twenty-two dollars; Polly

had eighteen; Lisa had twelve; I had ɹfteen ninety-ɹve.

“You could live for weeks on this,” Lisa told her.
“One, maybe,” said Torrey. But she looked less depressed. She

took the money and put it in her bra. It made quite a lump.
“Thanks,” she said.

“You’ve got to have a plan,” Lisa said. “Are you going to stay here

or leave town? I think you ought to leave town right away.”

“And go where?”
“Don’t you have any friends in New York?” Georgina asked.
Torrey shook her head. “I know you people, and I know some

junkies in Mexico. That’s it.”

“Lisa Cody,” said Lisa. “She’s a junkie. She’d put you up.”
“She’s not reliable,” said Georgina.
“She’d use all that money for junk anyhow,” I said.
“I might too,” Torrey pointed out.
“That’s diʃerent,” said Lisa. “We gave it to you.”
“Don’t,” said Polly. “You might as well go back to Mexico if you

do that.”

“Yeah,” said Torrey. Now she looked depressed again.
“What’s up?” said Lisa.
“I don’t have the nerve,” said Torrey. “I can’t do it.”
“Yes, you can,” said Lisa. “You just open the door at a red light

and tear oʃ. You just get the fuck away. You can do it.”

“You could do it,” said Torrey. “I can’t.”
“You’ve got to do it,” said Georgina.
“I know you can do it,” Polly said. She put her pink-and-white

hand on Torrey’s thin shoulder.

I wondered if Torrey could do it.
In the morning, two nurses were waiting to take Torrey to the

airport.

“That’s not going to work,” Lisa whispered to me. “She’ll never

get away from two.”

She decided to create a diversion. The point was to occupy

enough staʃ members so that only one nurse would be available to
take Torrey to the airport.

“This fucking place!” Lisa yelled. She went down the hall

slamming the doors to the rooms. “Eat shit!”

It worked. Valerie shut the top of the Dutch door to the nursing

station and had a powwow with the rest of the staʃ while Lisa
yelled and slammed. When they emerged, they fanned out in
trouble-shooting formation.

“Calm down, Lisa,” said Valerie. “Where’s Torrey? It’s time to go.

Let’s go.”

Lisa paused on her circuit. “Are you taking her?”
We all knew nobody could escape from Valerie.
Valerie shook her head. “No. Now calm down, Lisa.”
Lisa slammed another door.
“It’s not going to help,” Valerie said. “It’s not going to stop

anything.”

“Valerie, you promised—” I began.
“Where’s Torrey?” Valerie interrupted me. “Let’s just get this over

with.”

“I’m here,” said Torrey. She was holding a suitcase, and her arm

was trembling, so the suitcase was bumping against her leg.

“Okay,” said Valerie. She reached into the nursing station and

pulled out a full medication cup. “Take this,” she said.

“What the fuck is that?” yelled Lisa from halfway down the hall.
“It’ll just relax Torrey,” Valerie said. “Something to relax her.”
“I’m relaxed,” said Torrey. “Drink up,” said Valerie.
“Don’t take it!” Lisa yelled. “Don’t do it, Torrey!”
Torrey tipped her head back and drank.
“Thank God,” Valerie muttered. “Okay. All right. This is it.” She

was shaking too. “Okay. Good-bye, Torrey dear, good-bye now.”

Torrey was actually leaving. She was going to get on the airplane

and go back to Mexico.

Lisa quit banging and came up to stand with the rest of us. We

stood around the nursing station looking at Torrey.

face up to Valerie’s face. “Was that Thorazine? Is that what that
was?”

Valerie didn’t answer. She didn’t need to. Torrey’s eyes were

already glistening. She took a step away from us and lost her
balance slightly. Valerie caught her elbow.

“It’s all right,” she told Torrey.
“I know,” said Torrey. She cleared her throat. “Sure.”
The nurse who was taking her to the airport picked up the

suitcase and led Torrey down the hall to the double-locked double
doors.

Then there wasn’t anything to do. An aide went into Torrey’s

room and started stripping the sheets oʃ the bed. Valerie went back
inside the nursing station. Lisa slammed a door. The rest of us stood
where we were for a while. Then we watched TV until the nurse
came back from the airport. We fell silent, listening for agitation in
the nursing station—the sort of agitation an escape provokes. But
nothing happened.

The day got worse after that. It didn’t matter where we were,

every place was the wrong place. The TV room was too hot; the
living room was too weird; the ɻoor in front of the nursing station
was no good either. Georgina and I tried sitting in our room, and
that was terrible as well. Every room was echoey and big and
empty. And there was just nothing to do.

Lunch came: tuna melt. Who wanted it? We hated tuna melt.
After lunch Polly said, “Let’s just plan to spend one hour in the

living room and then one hour in front of the nursing station and so
on. At least it will be a schedule.”

Lisa wasn’t interested. But Georgina and I agreed to give it a

whirl.

We started in the living room. Each of us plopped into a yellow

vinyl chair. Two o’clock on a Saturday in August on a medium-
security ward in Belmont. Old cigarette smoke, old magazines, green
spotted rug, ɹve yellow vinyl chairs, a broken-backed orange sofa:
You couldn’t mistake that room for anything but a loony-bin living
room.

I sat in my yellow vinyl chair not thinking about Torrey. Instead, I

looked at my hand. It occurred to me that my palm looked like a
monkey’s palm. The crinkle of the three lines running across it and
the way my ɹngers curled in seemed simian to me. If I spread my
ɹngers out, my hand looked more human, so I did that. But it was
tiring holding my ɹngers apart. I let them relax, and then the
monkey idea came back.

I turned my hand over quickly. The back of it wasn’t much better.

My veins bulged—maybe because it was such a hot day—and the
skin around my knuckles was wrinkly and loose. If I moved my
hand I could see the three long bones that stretched out from the
wrist to the ɹrst joints of my ɹngers. Or perhaps those weren’t
bones but tendons? I poked one; it was resilient, so probably it was
a tendon. Underneath, though, were bones. At least I hoped so.

I poked deeper, to feel the bones. They were hard to ɹnd.

Knucklebones were easy, but I wanted to ɹnd the hand bones, the
long ones going from my wrist to my ɹngers.

I started getting worried. Where were my bones? I put my hand in

my mouth and bit it, to see if I crunched down on something hard.
Everything slid away from me. There were nerves; there were blood
vessels; there were tendons: All these things were slippery and
elusive.

“Damn,” I said.
Georgina and Polly weren’t paying attention.
I began scratching at the back of my hand. My plan was to get

hold of a ɻap of skin and peel it away, just to have a look. I wanted
to see that my hand was a normal human hand, with bones. My
hand got red and white—sort of like Polly’s hands—but I couldn’t
get my skin to open up and let me in.

I put my hand in my mouth and chomped. Success! A bubble of

blood came out near my last knuckle, where my incisor had pierced
the skin.

“What the fuck are you doing?” Georgina asked.
“I’m trying to get to the bottom of this,” I said.
“Bottom of what?” Georgina looked angry.

“My hand,” I said, waving it around. A dribble of blood went

down my wrist.

“Well, stop it,” she said.
“It’s my hand,” I said. I was angry too. And I was getting really

nervous. Oh God, I thought, there aren’t any bones in there, there’s
nothing in there.

“Do I have any bones?” I asked them. “Do I have any bones? Do

you think I have any bones?” I couldn’t stop asking.

“Everybody has bones,” said Polly.
“But do I have any bones?”
“You’ve got them,” said Georgina. Then she ran out of the room.

She came back in half a minute with Valerie.

“Look at her,” Georgina said, pointing at me.
Valerie looked at me and went away.
“I just want to see them,” I said. “I just have to be sure.”
“They’re in there—I promise you,” said Georgina.
“I’m not safe,” I said suddenly.
Valerie was back, with a full medication cup.
“Valerie, I’m not safe,” I said.
“You take this.” She gave me the cup.
I could tell it was Thorazine from the color. I’d never had it

before. I tipped my head back and drank.

It was sticky and sour and it oozed into my stomach. The taste of

it stayed in my throat. I swallowed a few times.

“Oh, Valerie,” I said, “you promised—” Then the Thorazine hit

me. It was like a wall of water, strong but soft.

“Wow,” I said. I couldn’t hear my own voice very well. I decided

to stand up, but when I did, I found myself on the ɻoor.

Valerie and Georgina picked me up under the arms and steered

me down the hall to our room. My legs and feet felt like mattresses,
they were so huge and dense. Valerie and Georgina felt like
mattresses too, big soft mattresses pressing on either side of me. It
was comforting.

“It’ll be okay, won’t it?” I asked. My voice was far away from me

and I hadn’t said what I meant. What I meant was that now I was
safe, now I was really crazy, and nobody could take me out of there.

Dental Health

I was sitting in the cafeteria eating meat loaf when something
peculiar happened inside my jaw. My cheek started swelling up. By
the time I got back to the ward I had a Ping-Pong ball on the side of
my face.

“Wisdom tooth,” said Valerie.
We went over to see the dentist.
His oɽce was in the Administration Building, where long ago I’d

sat quietly waiting to be locked up. The dentist was tall, sullen, and
dirty, with speckles of blood on his lab coat and a pubic mustache.
When he put his ɹngers in my mouth they tasted of ear wax.

“Abscess,” he said. “I’ll take it right out.”
“No,” I said.
“No what?” He was shuʀing through his tool tray.
“I won’t.” I looked at Valerie. “I won’t let you.”
Valerie looked out the window. “Could control it with some

antibiotics for the moment,” she said.

“Could,” he said. He looked at me. I bared the rest of my teeth at

him. “Okay,” he said.

On our way back Valerie said, “That was sensible of you.”
It had been a long time since I’d heard myself called anything as

complimentary as sensible. “That guy looked like a pimple,” I said.

“Have to get the infection under control ɹrst,” Valerie muttered to

herself as she unlocked the double doors to our ward.

The ɹrst day of penicillin the Ping-Pong ball turned into a marble.

By the second day the marble had turned into a pea, but there was a
rash on my face. Also I was too hot.

“No postponing it now,” said Valerie. “And don’t take penicillin

again, ever.”

“I won’t go,” I said.
“I’m taking you to my dentist in Boston tomorrow,” she said.
Everybody was excited. “Boston!” Polly wiggled her striped

hands. “What are you going to wear?” “You could go to a matinee,”
said Georgina, “and eat popcorn.” “You could score something for
me,” said Lisa. “Down near Jordan Marsh there’s this guy with a
blue baseball cap—” “You could jump out at a red light and split,”
said Cynthia. “His name is Astro,” Lisa continued. She was more
realistic than Cynthia; she knew I wouldn’t split. “He sells black
beauties cheap.”

“I look like a chipmunk,” I said. “I can’t do anything.”
In the cab I was too nervous to look at Boston.
“Lean back and count to ten,” said the dentist. Before I got to four

I was sitting up with a hole in my mouth.

“Where did it go?” I asked him
He held up my tooth, huge, bloody, spiked, and wrinkled.
But I’d been asking about the time. I was ahead of myself. He’d

dropped me into the future, and I didn’t know what had happened
to the time in between. “How long did that take?” I asked.

“Oh, nothing,” he said. “In and out.”
That didn’t help. “Like ɹve seconds? Like two minutes?”
He moved away from the chair. “Valerie,” he called.
“I need to know,” I said.
“No hot liquids for twenty-four hours,” he said.
“How long?”
“Twenty-four hours.”
Valerie came in, all business. “Up you get, let’s go.”
“I need to know how long that took,” I said, “and he won’t tell

me.”

She gave me one of her withering looks. “Not long, I can tell you

that.”

“It’s my time!” I yelled. “It’s my time and I need to know how

much it was.”

The dentist rolled his eyes. “I’ll let you handle this,” he said, and

left the room.

“Come on,” said Valerie. “Don’t make trouble for me.”

“Okay.” I got out of the dentist’s chair. “I’m not making trouble

for you, anyhow.”

In the cab Valerie said, “I’ve got something for you.”
It was my tooth, cleaned up a bit but huge and foreign.
“I snitched it for you,” she said.
“Thanks, Valerie, that was nice of you.” But the tooth wasn’t what

I really wanted. “I want to know how much time that was,” I said.
“See, Valerie, I’ve lost some time, and I need to know how much. I
need to know.”

Then I started crying. I didn’t want to, but I couldn’t help it.

Calais Is Engraved on My Heart

A new name had appeared on the blackboard: Alice Calais.

“Let’s guess about her,” said Georgina.
“Some new nut,” said Lisa.
“When is she coming?” I asked Valerie.
Valerie pointed down the hall toward the doors. And there she

was, Alice Calais.

She was young, like us, and she didn’t look too crazy. We got up

oʃ the ɻoor to say hello properly.

“I’m Alice Calais,” she said, but she said callous.
“Cal-lay?” said Georgina.
Alice Calais-Callous squinted. “Hunh?”
“You say it callous,” I told Georgina. I thought she was rude to

imply that Alice didn’t know how to say her own name.

“Cal-lay?” Georgina said again.
Valerie came over at that point to show Alice her room.
“It’s like Vermont,” I said to Georgina. “We don’t say Vayr-mon

like the French do.”

“Phonetics,” said Lisa.
Alice Calais-Callous was timid, but she liked us. She often sat near

us and listened. Lisa thought she was a bore. Georgina tried to draw
her out.

“You know, that’s a French name,” she told Alice. “Calais.”
“Callous,” said Alice. “It is?”
“Yes. It’s a place in France. A famous place.”
“Why?”
“It used to belong to England,” said Georgina. “A lot of France

did. Then they lost it in the Hundred Years’ War. Calais was the last
place they lost.”

“A hundred years!” Alice widened her eyes.
It was easy to impress Alice. She knew almost nothing about

anything. Lisa thought she was a retard.

One morning we were sitting in the kitchen eating toast with

honey.

“What’s that?” asked Alice.
“Toast with honey.”
“I’ve never had honey,” Alice said.
This was stunning. Who could imagine a life so circumscribed that

it excluded honey?

“Never?” I asked.
Georgina passed her a piece. We watched while she ate.
“It tastes like bees,” she announced.
“What do you mean?” Lisa asked.
“Sort of furry and tingly—like bees.”
I took another bite of my toast. The honey just tasted like honey,

something I couldn’t remember tasting for the ɹrst time.

Later that day, when Alice was oʃ having a Rorschach, I asked,

“How can a person who’s never eaten honey have a family that can
aʃord to send her here?”

“Probably really incredibly crazy and interesting, so they let her

in for less,” said Georgina.

“I doubt it,” said Lisa.
And for several weeks Alice Calais-Callous gave no evidence of

being either really crazy or interesting. Even Georgina got tired of
her.

“She doesn’t know anything,” said Georgina. “It’s as if she spent

her life in a closet.”

“She probably did,” said Lisa. “Locked up in a closet eating

Cheerios.”

“You mean kept there by her parents?” I asked.
“Why not,” said Lisa. “After all, they named her Alice Callous.”
It was as good an explanation as any for why, after about a

month, Alice exploded like a volcano.

“Lot of energy in that girl,” Georgina observed. Down at the end

of the hall, muʀed booming and yelling and crashing came out of

the seclusion room.

The next day as we sat on the ɻoor under the blackboard Alice

was marched past us between two nurses on her way to maximum
security. Her face was puʃy from crying and bashing around. She
didn’t look at us. She was occupied by her own complicated
thoughts—you could tell from the way she was squinting and
moving her mouth.

Her name came oʃ the blackboard rather quickly.
“Guess she’s settled in over there,” said Lisa.
“We ought to go see her,” said Georgina.
The nurses thought it was nice that we wanted to visit Alice. It

was even all right for Lisa to go. They must have ɹgured she
couldn’t get into trouble on maximum security.

It didn’t look special from the outside. It didn’t even have extra

doors. But inside it was diʃerent. The windows had screens like our
windows, but there were bars in front of the screens. Little bars, thin
and several inches apart; still, they were bars. The bathrooms had
no doors, and the toilets had no seats.

“Why no seats?” I asked Lisa.
“Could rip oʃ a seat and whack somebody? I don’t know.”
The nursing station wasn’t open, like ours, but encased in

chicken-wire glass. Nurses were either in or out. No leaning over the
Dutch door to chat on maximum security.

And the rooms were not really rooms. They were cells. They were

seclusion rooms, in fact. There wasn’t anything in them except bare
mattresses with people on them. Unlike our seclusion room, they
had windows, but the windows were tiny, high, chicken-wire-
enforced, security-screened, barred windows. Most of the doors to
the rooms were open, so as we walked down the hall to see Alice,
we could see other people lying on their mattresses. Some were
naked. Some were not on their mattresses but standing in a corner
or curled up against a wall.

That was it. That was all there was. Little bare rooms with one

person per room curled up somewhere.

Alice’s room didn’t smell good. Her walls were smeared with

something. So was she. She was sitting on her mattress with her

arms wrapped around her knees, and with smears on her arms.

“Hi, Alice,” said Georgina.
“That’s shit,” Lisa whispered to me. “She’s been rubbing her shit

around.”

We stood around outside the doorway. We didn’t want to go into

the room because of the smell. Alice looked like somebody else, as if
she’d gotten a new face. She looked kind of good.

“How’s it going?” asked Georgina.
“It’s okay,” said Alice. Her voice was hoarse. “I’m hoarse,” she

said. “I’ve been yelling.”

“Right,” said Georgina.
Nobody said anything for a minute.
“I’m getting better,” said Alice.
“Good,” said Georgina.
Lisa tapped her foot on the linoleum. I was feeling faint from

trying to breathe without breathing in the smell.

“So,” said Georgina. “Well. See you soon, okay?”
“Thanks for coming,” said Alice. She unclasped her knees for a

few seconds to wave at us.

We went over to the nursing station, where our escort had gone to

visit with the staʃ. We couldn’t see our nurse. Georgina rapped on
the glass. The person on duty looked up and shook her head at us.

“I just want to get out of here,” I said.
Georgina rapped on the glass again. “We want to go back to SB

Two,” she said loudly.

The person on duty nodded, but our nurse did not appear.
“Maybe they tricked us,” said Lisa. “Gonna leave us here.”
“That’s not funny,” I said.
Georgina gave another rat-a-tat to the glass.
“I’ll ɹx it,” said Lisa. She pulled her lighter from her pocket and

lit up a cigarette.

Immediately two nurses sprang out of the nursing station.
“Give me that lighter,” said one, while the other grabbed the

cigarette.

Lisa smiled. “We need our escort over to SB Two.”
The nurses went back into the nursing station.

“No lighters on maximum security. Supervised smoking. I knew

that would rouse them.” Lisa pulled out another cigarette, then put
it back in the pack.

Our nurse came out. “That was a short visit,” she said. “How was

Alice?”

“She said she was getting better,” said Georgina.
“She had shit …” I said, but I couldn’t describe it.
Our nurse nodded. “It’s not that unusual.”
The ugly living room, the bedrooms stuʃed with bureaus and

chairs and blankets and pillows, an aide leaning out of the nursing
station talking to Polly, the white chalk in its dish below the
blackboard waiting for us to sign ourselves in: home again.

“Oh,” I said, sighing several times. I couldn’t get enough air in, or

get the air in me out.

“What do you think happened to her, anyhow?” said Georgina.
“Something,” said Lisa.
“Shit on the wall,” I said. “Oh, God. Could that happen to us?”
“She said she was getting better,” Georgina said.
“Everything’s relative, I guess,” said Lisa.
“It couldn’t, could it?” I asked.
“Don’t let it,” said Georgina. “Don’t forget it.”

The Shadow of the Real

My analyst is dead now. Before he was my analyst, he was my
therapist, and I was fond of him. The view from his oɽce on the
ɹrst ɻoor of the maximum-security-ward building was restful: trees,
wind, sky. I was often silent. There was so little silence on our ward.
I looked at the trees and said nothing, and he looked at me and said
nothing. It was companionable.

Now and then he said something. Once I fell asleep brieɻy in the

chair facing him, after a night full of ɹghting and yelling on our
ward.

“You want to sleep with me,” he crowed.
I opened my eyes and looked at him. Sallow, bald early, and with

pale pouches under his eyes, he wasn’t anybody I wanted to sleep
with.

Most of the time, though, he was okay. It calmed me to sit in his

oɽce without having to explain myself.

But he couldn’t leave well enough alone. He started asking me,

“What are you thinking?” I never knew what to say. My head was
empty and I liked it that way. Then he began to tell me what I
might be thinking. “You seem sad today,” he’d say, or “Today, you
seem puzzled about something.”

Of course I was sad and puzzled. I was eighteen, it was spring,

and I was behind bars.

Eventually he said so many wrong things about me that I had to

set him right, which was what he’d wanted in the ɹrst place. It
irritated me that he’d gotten his way. After all, I already knew what
I felt; he was the one who didn’t know.

His name was Melvin. I felt sorry for him because of this.

Often on the way from our ward to the maximum-security ward, I

saw him driving up to his oɽce. Usually he drove a station wagon
with fake wood panels, but occasionally he drove a sleek black
Buick with oval windows and a vinyl roof. Then one day he shot
past me in a pointy green sports car, which he slammed into his
parking place with a squeal.

I started to laugh, standing outside his oɽce, because I’d

understood something about him, and it was funny. I couldn’t wait
to tell him.

When I got into his oɽce I said, “You have three cars, right?”
He nodded.
“The station wagon, the sedan, and the sports car.”
He nodded again.
“It’s the psyche!” I said. I was excited. “See, the station wagon is

the ego, sturdy and reliable, and the sedan is the superego, because
it’s how you want to present yourself, powerful and impressive, and
the sports car is the id—it’s the id because it’s irrepressible and fast
and dangerous and maybe a little forbidden.” I smiled at him. “It’s
new, isn’t it? The sports car?”

This time he didn’t nod.
“Don’t you think it’s great?” I asked him. “Don’t you think it’s

great that your cars are your psyche?”

He didn’t say anything.
It was shortly after this that he began badgering me to go into

analysis.

“We aren’t getting anywhere,” he’d say. “I think analysis is in

order.”

“Why will it be diʃerent?” I wanted to know.
“We aren’t getting anywhere,” he’d say again.
After a couple of weeks he changed tactics.
“You are the only person in this hospital who could tolerate an

analysis,” he said.

“Oh yeah? Why’s that?” I didn’t believe him, but it was intriguing.
“You need a fairly well integrated personality to be in analysis.”
I went back to the ward ɻushed with the idea of my fairly well

integrated personality. I didn’t tell anyone; that would have been

bragging.

If I’d said to Lisa, “I have a fairly well integrated personality and

therefore I’m going into analysis with Melvin,” she would have
made retching sounds and said, “Assholes! They’ll say anything!”
and I wouldn’t have done it.

But I kept it to myself. He’d ɻattered me—he understood me well

enough to know I craved ɻattery—and in gratitude, I acquiesced.

My view, now, was of a wall, an oʃ-white, featureless wall. No

trees, no Melvin patiently looking at me while I looked away. I
could feel his presence, though, and it was cold and hard. The only
things he said were “Yes?” and “Could you say more about that?” If
I said, “I hate looking at this fucking wall,” he’d say, “Could you say
more about that?” If I said, “I hate this analysis stuʃ,” he’d say,
“Yes?”

Once I asked him, “Why are you so diʃerent? You used to be my

friend.”

“Could you say more about that?”
I started analysis in November, when I was still on group. Five

times a week I joined a herd of patients headed for doctors and led
by a nurse. But most doctors’ oɽces were in the Administration
Building, which was in the opposite direction from the maximum-
security ward. So being on group was like being stuck on an
inconvenient bus route. I complained. And I got destination
privileges.

Now my hour began with a phone call to the nursing station to

say I’d arrived in Melvin’s oɽce. It ended with my calling to say I
was leaving.

Melvin didn’t like the phone business. He squinted while I talked

on the phone. He kept the phone close to him on his desk. Every day
I had to ask him to push it toward me so I could use it.

Perhaps he complained, because soon I got grounds privileges—

only to therapy, but it was something. For other activities, I was still
on group.

So it was that in December, when I joined Georgina and some

other people going to the cafeteria for dinner, I discovered the
tunnels.

We say that Columbus discovered America and Newton

discovered gravity, as though America and gravity weren’t there
until Columbus and Newton got wind of them. This was the way I
felt about the tunnels. They weren’t news to anybody else, but they
made such an impression on me that I felt I’d conjured them into
being.

It was a typical December day in the Boston area: tin-colored

clouds spitting bits of rain mixed with ɻat watery snowɻakes and
just enough wind to make you wince.

“Tunnels,” said the nurse.
Out the double-locked double doors and down the stairs as usual

—our ward was on the second ɻoor for added security. There were
many doors in the hallway, one of which went outside. The nurse
opened another one, and we went down a second ɻight of stairs.
Then we were in the tunnels.

First their wonderful smell: They smelled of laundry, clean and

hot and slightly electriɹed, like warmed wiring. Then their
temperature: eighty at a minimum, and this when it was thirty-three
outside, probably twenty-ɹve with windchill (though in the
innocent sixties, windchill, like digital time, hadn’t yet been
discovered). Their quavery yellow light, their long yellow-tiled walls
and barrel-vaulted ceilings, their forks and twists and roads not
taken, whose yellow openings beckoned like shiny open mouths.
Here and there, on white tiles embedded in the yellow, were
signposts: CAFETERIA, ADMINISTRATION, EAST HOUSE.

“This is great,” I said.
“Haven’t you been down here before?” asked Georgina.
I asked the nurse, “Do these run under the whole hospital?”
“Yes,” she said. “You can get anywhere. It’s easy to get lost,

though.”

“How about the signs?”
“There aren’t really enough of them.” She giggled; she was an

okay nurse named Ruth. “This one says EAST HOUSE”—she pointed up
—“but then you come to a fork and there isn’t another sign.”

“What do you do?”

“You just have to know the way,” she said.
“Can I come down here alone?” I asked. I wasn’t surprised when

Ruth said I couldn’t.

The tunnels became my obsession.
“Anybody free to take me into the tunnels?” I’d ask every day.

About once a week, somebody would take me.

And then there they were, always hot and clean and yellow and

full of promise, always throbbing with heating and water pipes that
sang and whistled as they did their work. And everything
interconnected, everything going on its own private pathway to
wherever it went.

“It’s like being in a map—not reading a map but being inside a

map,” I said to Ruth one day when she’d taken me down there.
“Like the plan of something rather than the thing itself.” She didn’t
say anything and I knew I ought to stop talking about it, but I
couldn’t. “It’s like the essence of the hospital down here—you know
what I mean?”

“Time’s up,” said Ruth. “I’m on checks in ten minutes.”
In February I asked Melvin, “You know those tunnels?”
“Could you tell me more about the tunnels?”
He didn’t know about them. If he’d known about them, he would

have said, “Yes?”

“There are tunnels under this entire hospital. Everything is

connected by tunnels. You could get in them and go anywhere. It’s
warm and cozy and quiet.”

“A womb,” said Melvin.
“It’s not a womb,” I said.
“Yes.”
When Melvin said Yes without a questioning intonation, he meant

No.

“It’s the opposite of a womb,” I said. “A womb doesn’t go

anywhere.” I thought hard about how to explain the tunnels to
Melvin. “The hospital is the womb, see. You can’t go anywhere, and
it’s noisy, and you’re stuck. The tunnels are like a hospital without
the bother.”

He said nothing and I said nothing. Then I had another idea.

“Remember the shadows on the wall of the cave?”
“Yes.”
He didn’t remember them. “Plato said everything in the world is

just the shadow of some real thing we can’t see. And the real thing
isn’t like the shadow, it’s a kind of essence-thing, like a—” I couldn’t
think what, for a minute. “Like a super-table.”

“Could you say more about that?”
The super-table hadn’t been a good example. “It’s like a neurosis,”

I said. I was making this up. “Like when you’re angry, and that’s the
real thing, and what shows is you’re afraid of dogs biting you.
Because really what you want is to bite everybody. You know?”

Now that I’d said this, I thought it was pretty convincing.
“Why are you angry?” Melvin asked.
He died young, of a stroke. I was his ɹrst analytic patient; I found

that out after I quit analysis. A year after I got out of the hospital, I
quit. I’d had it, ɹnally, with all that messing about in the shadows.

Stigmatography

The hospital had an address, 115 Mill Street. This was to provide
some cover if one of us were well enough to apply for a job while
still incarcerated. It gave about as much protection as 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue would have.

“Let’s see, nineteen years old, living at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue

—Hey! That’s the White House!”

This was the sort of look we got from prospective employers,

except not pleased.

In Massachusetts, 115 Mill Street is a famous address. Applying

for a job, leasing an apartment, getting a driver’s license: all
problematic. The driver’s-license application even asked, Have you
ever been hospitalized for mental illness? Oh, no, I just loved
Belmont so much I decided to move to 115 Mill Street.

“You’re living at One ɹfteen Mill Street?” asked a small,

basement-colored person who ran a sewing-notions shop in Harvard
Square, where I was trying to get a job.

“Uh-hunh.”
“And how long have you been living there?”
“Oh, a while.” I gestured at the past with one hand.
“And I guess you haven’t been working for a while?” He leaned

back, enjoying himself.

“No,” I said. “I’ve been thinking things over.”
I didn’t get the job.
As I left the shop my glance met his, and he gave me a look of

such terrible intimacy that I cringed. I know what you are, said his
look.

What were we, that they could know us so quickly and so well?

the hospital. At a minimum we were older and more self-aware.
Many of us had spent our hospital years yelling and causing trouble
and were ready to move on to something else. All of us had learned
by default to treasure freedom and would do anything we could to
get it and keep it.

The question was, What could we do?
Could we get up every morning and take showers and put on

clothes and go to work? Could we think straight? Could we not say
crazy things when they occurred to us?

Some of us could; some of us couldn’t. In the world’s terms,

though, all of us were tainted.

There’s always a touch of fascination in revulsion: Could that

happen to me? The less likely the terrible thing is to happen, the
less frightening it is to look at or imagine. A person who doesn’t talk
to herself or stare oʃ into nothingness is therefore more alarming
than a person who does. Someone who acts “normal” raises the
uncomfortable question, What’s the diʃerence between that person
and me? which leads to the question, What’s keeping me out of the
loony bin? This explains why a general taint is useful.

Some people are more frightened than others.
“You spent nearly two years in a loony bin! Why in the world

were you in there? I can’t believe it!” Translation: If you’re crazy,
then I’m crazy, and I’m not, so the whole thing must have been a
mistake.

“You spent nearly two years in a loony bin? What was wrong with

you?” Translation: I need to know the particulars of craziness so I
can assure myself that I’m not crazy.

“You spent nearly two years in a loony bin? Hmmm. When was

that, exactly?” Translation: Are you still contagious?

I stopped telling people. There was no advantage in telling

people. The longer I didn’t say anything about it, the farther away it
got, until the me who had been in the hospital was a tiny blur and
the me who didn’t talk about it was big and strong and busy.

I began to feel revulsion too. Insane people: I had a good nose for

them and I didn’t want to have anything to do with them. I still

don’t. I can’t come up with reassuring answers to the terrible
questions they raise.

Don’t ask me those questions! Don’t ask me what life means or

how we know reality or why we have to suʃer so much. Don’t talk
about how nothing feels real, how everything is coated with gelatin
and shining like oil in the sun. I don’t want to hear about the tiger
in the corner or the Angel of Death or the phone calls from John the
Baptist. He might give me a call too. But I’m not going to pick up
the phone.

If I who was previously revolting am now this far from my crazy

self, how much further are you who were never revolting, and how
much deeper your revulsion?

New Frontiers in Dental Health

My one-and-a-half-year sentence was running out and it was time to
plan my future. I was nearing twenty.

I’d had two jobs in my life: three months selling gourmet

cookware, much of which I dropped and broke; and one week
typing in the Harvard billing oɽce, terrifying students by sending
them term bills for $10,900 that were meant to read $1,900.

I made these mistakes because I was terriɹed by the supervisor.

The supervisor was an elegant and attractive black man who
roamed all day among the aisles of typists, watching us work. He
smoked while doing this. When I lit a cigarette, he pounced on me.

“You can’t smoke,” he said.
“But you’re smoking.”
“Typists are not permitted to smoke.”
I looked around the room. All typists were women; all supervisors

were men. All supervisors were smoking; all typists were not.

When break time came, at ten-ɹfteen, the bathroom was stuʃed

with smoking typists.

“Can’t we smoke in the hall?” I asked. There was an ashtray

outside the bathroom.

But we couldn’t. We had to smoke in the bathroom.
The other problem was clothes.
“No miniskirts,” said the supervisor.
This put me in a pickle, as I had only miniskirts, and I had as yet

no paycheck. “Why?” I asked.

“No miniskirts,” he repeated.
Smoking was Monday, miniskirts was Tuesday. Wednesday I wore

a black miniskirt with black tights and hoped for the best.

“No miniskirts,” he said.

I scooted to the bathroom for a quick cigarette.
“No smoking except on break,” he muttered as he passed my desk

on his next round.

This was when I began making my high-priced mistakes.
Thursday he beckoned me over to his desk, where he sat,

smoking.

“Making some mistakes,” he said. “We can’t have that.”
“If I could smoke,” I said, “I wouldn’t make so many.”
He just shook his head.
Friday I didn’t go in. I didn’t call either. I lay in bed smoking and

thinking about the oɽce. The more I thought about it the more
absurd it became. I couldn’t take all those rules seriously. I started
to laugh, thinking of the typists jammed into the bathroom,
smoking.

But it was my job. Not only that—I was the one person who had

trouble with the rules. Everybody else accepted them.

Was this a mark of my madness?
All weekend I thought about it. Was I crazy or right? In 1967, this

was a hard question to answer. Even twenty-ɹve years later, it’s a
hard question to answer.

Sexism! It was pure sexism—isn’t that the answer?
It’s true, it was sexism. But I’m still having trouble with rules

about smoking. Now we’ve got smokism. It’s one of the reasons I
became a writer: to be able to smoke in peace.

“A writer,” I said, when my social worker asked me what I

planned to do when I got out of the hospital. “I’m going to be a
writer.”

“That’s a nice hobby, but how are you going to earn a living?”
My social worker and I did not like each other. I didn’t like her

because she didn’t understand that this was me, and I was going to
be a writer; I was not going to type term bills or sell au gratin bowls
or do any other stupid things. She didn’t like me because I was
arrogant and uncooperative and probably still crazy for insisting on
being a writer.

“A dental technician,” she said. “That’s the ticket. The training is

only one year. I’m sure you’d be able to manage the

responsibilities.”

“You don’t understand,” I said.
“No, you don’t understand,” she said.
“I hate the dentist.”
“It’s nice clean work. You have to be realistic.”
“Valerie,” I said, when I got back to the ward, “she wants me to

be a dental technician. It’s impossible.”

“Oh?” Valerie didn’t seem to understand either. “It’s not bad. Nice

clean work.”

Luckily, I got a marriage proposal and they let me out. In 1968,

everybody could understand a marriage proposal.

Topography of the Future

Christmas in Cambridge. The Harvard students from New York and
Oregon had switched places with the Columbia and Reed students
from Cambridge: vacation musical chairs.

The brother of my friend who was going to die a violent death—

but we didn’t know that yet; his death was nearly two years in the
future—took me to the movies, where I met my husband-to-be. Our
marriage as well was two years in the future.

We met in front of the Brattle Theatre. Les Enfants du Paradis was

playing. And in the bright, dry December air, Cambridge seemed a
sort of paradise that evening, busy with lights and Christmas
shoppers and a ɹne dry snow. The snow fell on my future husband’s
ɹne blond hair. They’d gone to high school together, my doomed
friend’s brother and he. Now he was home from Reed for Christmas
vacation.

I sat between them in the balcony, where we could smoke. Long

before Baptiste lost Garance in the crowd, my future husband had
taken my hand in his. He was still holding it when we came out of
the theater, and my friend’s brother tactfully left us there, in the
twirling snowy Cambridge night.

He wouldn’t let me go. We were infected by the movie, and

Cambridge was beautiful that night, full of possibilities and life. We
spent the night together, in an apartment he borrowed from a
friend.

He went back to Reed; I went back to selling garlic presses and

madeleine pans. Then the future started closing in on me and I
forgot about him.

He didn’t forget about me. When he graduated that spring and

returned to Cambridge, he tracked me down in the hospital. He was

going to Paris for the summer, he said, but he would write to me.
He wouldn’t forget to write, he said.

I paid no attention. He lived in a world with a future and I did

not.

When he came back from Paris, things were bad: Torrey’s leaving,

the question of my bones, the worry over how much time I’d lost in
the dentist’s chair. I didn’t want to see him. I told the staʃ I was too
upset.

“It’s impossible! I’m too upset.”
We talked on the phone instead. He was moving to Ann Arbor.

That was ɹne with me.

He didn’t like Ann Arbor. Eight months later, he was back,

wanting to visit again.

Things were not as bad. I had a lot of privileges. We went to

movies, we cooked dinner together in his apartment, we watched
the body count for the day on the seven o’clock news. At eleven-
thirty I’d call a taxi and go back to the hospital.

Late that summer my friend’s body was found at the bottom of an

elevator shaft. It was a hot summer, and his body was partly
decomposed. That was where his future ended, in a basement on a
hot day.

One September night I got back to the hospital early, before

eleven. Lisa was sitting with Georgina in our room.

“I got a marriage proposal tonight,” I said.
“What did you say?” Georgina asked.
“I got a marriage proposal,” I said. The second time I said it, I was

more surprised by it.

“To him,” said Georgina. “What did you say to him?”
“I said Yes,” I said.
“You wanna marry him?” Lisa asked.
“Sure,” I said. I wasn’t completely sure, though.
“And then what?” said Georgina.
“What do you mean?”
“What’s going to happen then, after you’re married?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “I haven’t thought about it.”
“You better think about it,” said Lisa.

I tried. I closed my eyes and thought of us in the kitchen,

chopping and stirring. I thought of my friend’s funeral. I thought of
going to movies.

“Nothing,” I said. “It’s quiet. It’s like—I don’t know. It’s like

falling oʃ a cliʃ.” I laughed. “I guess my life will just stop when I
get married.”

It didn’t. It wasn’t quiet either. And in the end, I lost him. I did it

on purpose, the way Garance lost Baptiste in the crowd. I needed to
be alone, I felt. I wanted to be going on alone to my future.

Mind vs. Brain

Whatever we call it—mind, character, soul—we like to think we
possess something that is greater than the sum of our neurons and
that “animates” us.

A lot of mind, though, is turning out to be brain. A memory is a

particular pattern of cellular changes on particular spots in our
heads. A mood is a compound of neurotransmitters. Too much
acetylcholine, not enough serotonin, and you’ve got a depression.

So, what’s left of mind?
It’s a long way from not having enough serotonin to thinking the

world is “stale, ɻat and unproɹtable”; even further to writing a play
about a man driven by that thought. That leaves a lot of mind room.
Something is interpreting the clatter of neurological activity.

But is this interpreter necessarily metaphysical and unembodied?

Isn’t it probably a number—an enormous number—of brain
functions working in parallel? If the entire network of simultaneous
tiny actions that constitute a thought were identiɹed and mapped,
then “mind” might be visible.

The interpreter is convinced it’s unmappable and invisible. “I’m

your mind,” it claims. “You can’t parse me into dendrites and
synapses.”

It’s full of claims and reasons. “You’re a little depressed because of

all the stress at work,” it says. (It never says, “You’re a little
depressed because your serotonin level has dropped”)

Sometimes its interpretations are not credible, as when you cut

your ɹnger and it starts yelling, “You’re gonna die!” Sometimes its
claims are unlikely, as when it says, “Twenty-ɹve chocolate chip
cookies would be the perfect dinner.”

Often, then, it doesn’t know what it’s talking about. And when

you decide it’s wrong, who or what is making that decision? A
second, superior interpreter?

Why stop at two? That’s the problem with this model. It’s endless.

Each interpreter needs a boss to report to.

But something about this model describes the essence of our

experience of consciousness. There is thought, and then there is
thinking about thoughts, and they don’t feel the same. They must
reɻect quite diʃerent aspects of brain function.

The point is, the brain talks to itself, and by talking to itself

changes its perceptions. To make a new version of the not-entirely-
false model, imagine the ɹrst interpreter as a foreign correspondent,
reporting from the world. The world in this case means everything
out- or inside our bodies, including serotonin levels in the brain.
The second interpreter is a news analyst, who writes op-ed pieces.
They read each other’s work. One needs data, the other needs an
overview; they inɻuence each other. They get dialogues going.

INTERPRETER ONE: Pain in the left foot, back of heel.

INTERPRETER TWO: I believe that’s because the shoe is too tight.

INTERPRETER ONE: Checked that. Took oʃ the shoe. Foot still hurts.

INTERPRETER TWO: Did you look at it?

INTERPRETER ONE: Looking. It’s red.

INTERPRETER TWO: No blood?

INTERPRETER ONE: Nope.

INTERPRETER TWO: Forget about it.

INTERPRETER ONE: Okay.

A minute later, though, there’s another report.

INTERPRETER ONE: Pain in the left foot, back of heel.

INTERPRETER TWO: I know that already.

INTERPRETER ONE: Still hurts. Now it’s puʃed up.

INTERPRETER TWO: It’s just a blister. Forget about it.

INTERPRETER ONE: Okay.

Two minutes later.

INTERPRETER TWO: Don’t pick it!

INTERPRETER ONE: It’ll feel better if I pop it.

INTERPRETER TWO: That’s what you think. Leave it alone.

INTERPRETER ONE: Okay. Still hurts, though.

Mental illness seems to be a communication problem between

interpreters one and two.

An exemplary piece of confusion:

INTERPRETER ONE: There’s a tiger in the corner.

INTERPRETER TWO: No, that’s not a tiger—that’s a bureau.

INTERPRETER ONE: It’s a tiger, it’s a tiger!

INTERPRETER TWO: Don’t be ridiculous. Let’s go look at it.

Then all the dendrites and neurons and serotonin levels and

interpreters collect themselves and trot over to the corner.

If you are not crazy, the second interpreter’s assertion, that this is

a bureau, will be acceptable to the ɹrst inter-prêter. If you are crazy,
the ɹrst interpreter’s viewpoint, the tiger theory, will prevail.

The trouble here is that the ɹrst interpreter actually sees a tiger.

The messages sent between neurons are incorrect somehow. The
chemicals triggered are the wrong chemicals, or the impulses are
going to the wrong connections. Apparently, this happens often, but
the second interpreter jumps in to straighten things out.

Think of being in a train, next to another train, in a station. When

the other train starts moving, you are convinced that your train is
moving. The rattle of the other train feels like the rattle of your

train, and you see your train leaving that other train behind. It can
take a while—maybe even half a minute—before the second
interpreter sorts through the ɹrst interpreter’s claim of movement
and corrects it. That’s because it’s hard to counteract the validity of
sensory impressions. We are designed to believe in them.

The train situation is not the same as an optical illusion. An

optical illusion does contain two realities. It’s not that the vase is
wrong and the faces are right; both are right, and the brain moves
between two existing patterns that it recognizes as diʃerent.
Although you can make yourself dizzy going from vase to faces and
back again, you can’t undermine your sense of reality in quite such
a visceral way as you can with the train.

Sometimes, when you’ve realized that your train is not really

moving, you can spend another half a minute suspended between
two realms of consciousness: the one that knows you aren’t moving
and the one that feels you are. You can ɻit back and forth between
these perceptions and experience a sort of mental vertigo. And if
you do this, you are treading on the ground of craziness—a place
where false impressions have all the hallmarks of reality.

Freud said psychotics were unanalyzable because they couldn’t

distinguish between fantasy and reality (tiger vs. bureau), and
analysis works on precisely that distinction. The patient must lay
out the often fantastic assertions of the ɹrst interpreter and
scrutinize them with the second. The hope is that the second
interpreter has, or will learn to have, the wit and insight to disprove
some of the ridiculous claims the ɹrst interpreter has made over the
years.

You can see why doubting one’s own craziness is considered a

good sign: It’s a sort of ɻailing response by the second interpreter.
What’s happening? the second interpreter is saying. He tells me it’s
a tiger but I’m not convinced; maybe there’s something wrong with
me. Enough doubt is in there to give “reality” a toehold.

No doubt, no analysis. Somebody who comes in chatting about

tigers is going to be oʃered Thorazine, not the couch.

At that moment, when the doctor suggests Thorazine, what’s

happening to that doctor’s mental map of mental illness? Earlier in

the day, the doctor had a map divided into superego, ego, and id,
with all kinds of squiggly, perhaps broken, lines running among
those three areas. The doctor was treating something he or she calls
a psyche or mind. All of a sudden the doctor is preparing to treat a
brain. This brain doesn’t have a psychelike arrangement, or if it
does, that’s not where its problem is. This brain has problems that
are chemical and electrical.

“It’s the reality-testing function,” says the doctor. “This brain is

bollixed up about reality and I can’t analyze it. Those other brains—
minds—weren’t.”

Something’s wrong here. You can’t call a piece of fruit an apple

when you want to eat it and a dandelion when you don’t want to eat
it. It’s the same sort of fruit no matter what your intentions toward
it. And how strong is the case for a categorical distinction between
brains that know reality and brains that don’t? Is a non-reality-
recognizing brain truly as diʃerent from a reality-recognizing brain
as a foot, say, is from a brain? This seems unlikely. Recognizing the
agreed-upon version of reality is only one of billions of brain jobs.

If the biochemists were able to demonstrate the physical workings

of neuroses (phobias, or diɽculties getting pleasure from life), if
they could pinpoint the chemicals and impulses and interbrain
conversations and information exchanges that constitute these
feelings, would the psychoanalysts pack up their ids and egos and
retire from the ɹeld?

They have partially retired from the ɹeld. Depression, manic-

depression, schizophrenia: All that stuʃ they always had trouble
treating they now treat chemically. Take two Lithium and don’t call
me in the morning because there’s nothing to say; it’s innate.

Some cooperative eʃorts—the sort the brain makes—would be

useful here.

For nearly a century the psychoanalysts have been writing op-ed

pieces about the workings of a country they’ve never traveled to, a
place that, like China, has been oʃ-limits. Suddenly, the country has
opened its borders and is crawling with foreign correspondents;
neurobiologists are ɹling ten stories a week, ɹlled with new data.

These two groups of writers, however, don’t seem to read each
other’s work.

That’s because the analysts are writing about a country they call

Mind and the neuroscientists are reporting from a country they call
Brain.

Borderline Personality Disorder*

An essential feature of this disorder is a pervasive pattern of
instability of self-image, interpersonal relationships, and mood,
beginning in early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts.

A marked and persistent identity disturbance is almost invariably

present. This is often pervasive, and is manifested by uncertainty
about several life issues, such as self-image, sexual orientation, long-
term goals or career choice, types of friends or lovers to have, and
which values to adopt. The person often experiences this instability
of self-image as chronic feelings of emptiness and boredom.

Interpersonal relationships are usually unstable and intense, and

may be characterized by alternation of the extremes of
overidealization and devaluation. These people have diɽculty
tolerating being alone, and will make frantic eʃorts to avoid real or
imagined abandonment.

Aʃective instability is common. This may be evidenced by marked

mood shifts from baseline mood to depression, irritability, or
anxiety, usually lasting a few hours or, only rarely, more than a few
days. In addition, these people often have inappropriately intense
anger with frequent displays of temper or recurrent physical ɹghts.
They tend to be impulsive, particularly in activities that are
potentially self-damaging, such as shopping sprees, psychoactive
substance abuse, reckless driving, casual sex, shoplifting, and binge
eating.

Recurrent suicidal threats, gestures, or behavior and other self-

mutilating behavior (e.g., wrist-scratching) are common in the more
severe forms of the disorder. This behavior may serve to manipulate
others, may be a result of intense anger, or may counteract feelings

of “numbness” and depersonalization that arise during periods of
extreme stress.…

Associated Features. Frequently this disorder is accompanied by

many features of other Personality Disorders, such as Schizotypal,
Histrionic, Narcissistic, and Antisocial Personality Disorders. In
many cases more than one diagnosis is warranted. Quite often social
contrariness and a generally pessimistic outlook are observed.
Alternation between dependency and self-assertion is common.
During periods of extreme stress, transient psychotic symptoms may
occur, but they are generally of insuɽcient severity or duration to
warrant an additional diagnosis.

Impairment. Often there is considerable interference with social

or occupational functioning.

Complications. 
Possible 
complications 
include 
Dysthymia

[depressive neurosis], Major Depression, Psychoactive Substance
Abuse, and psychotic disorders such as Brief Reactive Psychosis.
Premature death may result from suicide.

Sex Ratio. The disorder is more commonly diagnosed in women.
Prevalence. Borderline Personality Disorder is apparently

common.

Predisposing and Familial Pattern. No information.
Diʃerential Diagnosis. In Identity Disorder there is a similar

clinical picture, but Borderline Personality Disorder preempts the
diagnosis of Identity Disorder if the criteria for Borderline
Personality Disorder are met, the disturbance is suɽciently
pervasive and persistent, and it is unlikely that it will be limited to a
developmental stage.…

* From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3d edition, revised (1987),

pp. 346–47

My Diagnosis

So these were the charges against me. I didn’t read them until
twenty-ɹve years later. “A character disorder” is what they’d told
me then.

I had to ɹnd a lawyer to help me get my records from the

hospital; I had to read line 32a of form Al of the Case Record, and
entry G on the Discharge on Visit Summary, and entry B of Part IV
of the Case Report; then I had to locate a copy of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and look up Borderline
Personality to see what they really thought about me.

It’s a fairly accurate picture of me at eighteen, minus a few quirks

like reckless driving and eating binges. It’s accurate but it isn’t
profound. Of course, it doesn’t aim to be profound. It’s not even a
case study. It’s a set of guidelines, a generalization.

I’m tempted to try refuting it, but then I would be open to the

further charges of “defensiveness” and “resistance.”

All I can do is give the particulars: an annotated diagnosis.
“[U]ncertainty about several life issues, such as self-image, sexual

orientation, long-term goals or career choice, types of friends or
lovers to have …” I relish that last phrase. Its awkwardness (the “to
have” seems superɻuous) gives it substance and heft. I still have
that uncertainty. Is this the type of friend or lover I want to have? I
ask myself every time I meet someone new. Charming but shallow;
good-hearted but a bit conventional; too handsome for his own
good; fascinating but probably unreliable; and so forth. I guess I’ve
had my share of unreliables. More than my share? How many would
constitute more than my share?

Fewer than for somebody else—somebody who’d never been

called a borderline personality?

That’s the nub of my problem here.
If my diagnosis had been bipolar illness, for instance, the reaction

to me and to this story would be slightly diʃerent. That’s a chemical
problem, you’d say to yourself, manic-depression, Lithium, all that. I
would be blameless, somehow. And what about schizophrenia—that
would send a chill up your spine. After all, that’s real insanity.
People don’t “recover” from schizophrenia. You’d have to wonder
how much of what I’m telling you is true and how much imagined.

I’m simplifying, I know. But these words taint everything. The fact

that I was locked up taints everything.

What does borderline personality mean, anyhow?
It appears to be a way station between neurosis and psychosis: a

fractured but not disassembled psyche. Though to quote my post-
Melvin psychiatrist: “It’s what they call people whose lifestyles
bother them.”

He can say it because he’s a doctor. If I said it, nobody would

believe me.

An analyst I’ve known for years said, “Freud and his circle

thought most people were hysterics, then in the ɹfties it was
psychoneurotics, and lately, everyone’s a borderline personality.”

When I went to the corner bookstore to look up my diagnosis in

the Manual, it occurred to me that I might not ɹnd it in there
anymore. They do get rid of things—homosexuality, for instance.
Until recently, quite a few of my friends would have found
themselves documented in that book along with me. Well, they got
out of the book and I didn’t. Maybe in another twenty-ɹve years I
won’t be in there either.

“[I]nstability of self-image, interpersonal relationships, and

mood … uncertainty about … long-term goals or career choice …”
Isn’t this a good description of adolescence? Moody, ɹckle, faddish,
insecure: in short, impossible.

“[S]elf-mutilating behavior (e.g., wrist-scratching) …” I’ve

skipped forward a bit. This is the one that caught me by surprise as I
sat on the ɻoor of the bookstore reading my diagnosis. Wrist-
scratching! I thought I’d invented it. Wrist-banging, to be precise.

This is where people stop being able to follow me. This is the sort

of stuʃ you get locked up for. Nobody knew I was doing it, though. I
never told anyone, until now.

I had a butterɻy chair. In the sixties, everyone in Cambridge had

a butterɻy chair. The metal edge of its upturned seat was perfectly
placed for wrist-banging. I had tried breaking ashtrays and walking
on the shards, but I didn’t have the nerve to tread ɹrmly. Wrist-
banging—slow, steady, mindless—was a better solution. It was
cumulative injury, so each bang was tolerable.

may … counteract feelings of ‘numbness’ and depersonalization that
arise during periods of extreme stress.”

I spent hours in my butterɻy chair banging my wrist. I did it in

the evenings, like homework. I’d do some homework, then I’d spend
half an hour wrist-banging, then ɹnish my homework, then back in
the chair for some more banging before brushing my teeth and
going to bed. I banged the inside, where the veins converge. It
swelled and turned a bit blue, but considering how hard and how
much I banged it, the visible damage was slight. That was yet one
more recommendation of it to me.

I’d had an earlier period of face-scratching. If my ɹngernails

hadn’t been quite short, I couldn’t have gotten away with it. As it
was, I deɹnitely looked puʃy and peculiar the next day. I used to
scratch my cheeks and then rub soap on them. Maybe the soap
prevented me from looking worse. But I looked bad enough that
people asked, “Is something wrong with your face?” So I switched to
wrist-banging.

I was like an anchorite with a hair shirt. Part of the point was that

nobody knew about my suʃering. If people knew and admired—or
abominated—me, something important would be lost.

I was trying to explain my situation to myself. My situation was

that I was in pain and nobody knew it; even I had trouble knowing
it. So I told myself, over and over, You are in pain. It was the only
way I could get through to myself (“counteract feelings of
‘numbness’  ”). I was demonstrating, externally and irrefutably, an
inward condition.

“Quite often social contrariness and a generally pessimistic

outlook are observed.” What do you suppose they mean by “social
contrariness”? Putting my elbows on the table? Refusing to get a job
as a dental technician? Disappointing my parents’ hope that I would
go to a ɹrst-rate university?

They don’t deɹne “social contrariness,” and I can’t deɹne it, so I

think it ought to be excluded from the list. I’ll admit to the generally
pessimistic outlook. Freud had one too.

I can honestly say that my misery has been transformed into

common unhappiness, so by Freud’s deɹnition I have achieved
mental health. And my discharge sheet, at line 41, Outcome with
Regard to Mental Disorder, reads “Recovered.”

Recovered. Had my personality crossed over that border,

whatever and wherever it was, to resume life within the conɹnes of
the normal? Had I stopped arguing with my personality and learned
to straddle the line between sane and insane? Perhaps I’d actually
had an identity disorder. “In Identity Disorder there is a similar
clinical picture, but Borderline Personality  …  preempts the
diagnosis … if the disturbance is suɽciently pervasive and … it is
unlikely that it will be limited to a developmental stage.” Maybe I
was a victim of improper preemption?

I’m not ɹnished with this diagnosis.
“The person often experiences this instability of self-image as

chronic feelings of emptiness or boredom.” My chronic feelings of
emptiness and boredom came from the fact that I was living a life
based on my incapacities, which were numerous. A partial list
follows. I could not and did not want to: ski, play tennis, or go to
gym class; attend to any subject in school other than English and
biology; write papers on any assigned topics (I wrote poems instead
of papers for English; I got F’s); plan to go or apply to college; give
any reasonable explanation for these refusals.

My self-image was not unstable. I saw myself, quite correctly, as

unɹt for the educational and social systems.

But my parents and teachers did not share my self-image. Their

image of me was unstable, since it was out of kilter with reality and
based on their needs and wishes. They did not put much value on

my capacities, which were admittedly few, but genuine. I read
everything, I wrote constantly, and I had boyfriends by the
barrelful.

“Why don’t you do the assigned reading?” they’d ask. “Why don’t

you write your papers instead of whatever you’re writing—what is
that, a short story?” “Why don’t you expend as much energy on your
schoolwork as you do on your boyfriends?”

By my senior year I didn’t even bother with excuses, let alone

explanations.

“Where is your term paper?” asked my history teacher.
“I didn’t write it. I have nothing to say on that topic.”
“You could have picked another topic.”
“I have nothing to say on any historical topic.”
One of my teachers told me I was a nihilist. He meant it as an

insult but I took it as a compliment.

Boyfriends and literature: How can you make a life out of those

two things? As it turns out, I did; more literature than boyfriends
lately, but I guess you can’t have everything (“a generally
pessimistic outlook [is] observed”).

Back then I didn’t know that I—or anyone—could make a life out

of boyfriends and literature. As far as I could see, life demanded
skills I didn’t have. The result was chronic emptiness and boredom.
There were more pernicious results as well: self-loathing, alternating
with “inappropriately intense anger with frequent displays of
temper …”

What would have been an appropriate level of intensity for my

anger at feeling shut out of life? My classmates were spinning their
fantasies for the future: lawyer, ethnobotanist, Buddhist monk (it
was a very progressive high school). Even the dumb, uninteresting
ones who were there to provide “balance” looked forward to their
marriages and their children. I knew I wasn’t going to have any of
this because I knew I didn’t want it. But did that mean I would have
nothing?

I was the ɹrst person in the history of the school not to go to

college. Of course, at least a third of my classmates never ɹnished
college. By 1968, people were dropping out daily.

Quite often now, people say to me, when I tell them I didn’t go to

college, “Oh, how marvelous!” They wouldn’t have thought it was
so marvelous back then. They didn’t; my classmates were just the
sorts of people who now tell me how marvelous I am. In 1966, I was
a pariah.

What was I going to do? a few of my classmates asked.
“I’m going to join the WACs,” I told one guy.
“Oh, yeah? That will be an interesting career.”
“Just kidding,” I said.
“Oh, uh, you mean you’re not, really?”
I was stunned. Who did they think I was?
I’m sure they didn’t think about me much. I was that one who

wore black and—really, I’ve heard it from several people—slept
with the English teacher. They were all seventeen and miserable,
just like me. They didn’t have time to wonder why I was a little
more miserable than most.

Emptiness and boredom: what an understatement. What I felt was

complete desolation. Desolation, despair, and depression.

Isn’t there some other way to look at this? After all, angst of these

dimensions is a luxury item. You need to be well fed, clothed, and
housed to have time for this much self-pity. And the college
business: My parents wanted me to go, I didn’t want to go, and I
didn’t go. I got what I wanted. Those who don’t go to college have
to get jobs. I agreed with all this. I told myself all this over and over.
I even got a job—my job breaking au gratin dishes.

But the fact that I couldn’t hold my job was worrisome. I was

probably crazy. I’d been skirting the idea of craziness for a year or
two; now I was closing in on it.

Pull yourself together! I told myself. Stop indulging yourself.

There’s nothing wrong with you. You’re just wayward.

One of the great pleasures of mental health (whatever that is) is

how much less time I have to spend thinking about myself.

I have a few more annotations to my diagnosis.
“The disorder is more commonly diagnosed in women.”
Note the construction of that sentence. They did not write, “The

disorder is more common in women.” It would still be suspect, but

they didn’t even bother trying to cover their tracks.

Many disorders, judging by the hospital population, were more

commonly diagnosed in women. Take, for example, “compulsive
promiscuity.”

How many girls do you think a seventeen-year-old boy would

have to screw to earn the label “compulsively promiscuous”? Three?
No, not enough. Six? Doubtful. Ten? That sounds more likely.
Probably in the ɹfteen-to-twenty range, would be my guess—if they
ever put that label on boys, which I don’t recall their doing.

And for seventeen-year-old girls, how many boys?
In the list of six “potentially self-damaging” activities favored by

the borderline personality, three are commonly associated with
women (shopping sprees, shoplifting, and eating binges) and one
with men (reckless driving). One is not “gender-speciɹc,” as they
say these days (psychoactive substance abuse). And the deɹnition of
the other (casual sex) is in the eye of the beholder.

Then there is the question of “premature death” from suicide.

Luckily, I avoided it, but I thought about suicide a lot. I’d think
about it and make myself sad over my premature death, and then I’d
feel better. The idea of suicide worked on me like a purgative or a
cathartic. For some people it’s diʃerent—Daisy, for instance. But
was her death really “premature”? Ought she to have sat in her eat-
in kitchen with her chicken and her anger for another ɹfty years?
I’m assuming she wasn’t going to change, and I may be wrong. She
certainly made that assumption, and she may also have been wrong.
And if she’d sat there for only thirty years, and killed herself at
forty-nine instead of at nineteen, would her death still be
“premature”?

I got better and Daisy didn’t and I can’t explain why. Maybe I was

just ɻirting with madness the way I ɻirted with my teachers and my
classmates. I wasn’t convinced I was crazy, though I feared I was.
Some people say that having any conscious opinion on the matter is
a mark of sanity, but I’m not sure that’s true. I still think about it.
I’ll always have to think about it.

I often ask myself if I’m crazy. I ask other people too.

“Is this a crazy thing to say?” I’ll ask before saying something that

probably isn’t crazy.

I start a lot of sentences with “Maybe I’m totally nuts,” or “Maybe

I’ve gone ’round the bend.”

If I do something out of the ordinary—take two baths in one day,

for example—I say to myself: Are you crazy?

It’s a common phrase, I know. But it means something particular

to me: the tunnels, the security screens, the plastic forks, the
shimmering, ever-shifting borderline that like all boundaries
beckons and asks to be crossed. I do not want to cross it again.

Farther on, Down the Road, You Will
Accompany Me

Most of us got out eventually. Georgina and I kept in touch.

For a while she lived in a women’s commune in north Cambridge.

She came over to my apartment one day and terrorized my upstairs
neighbor, who was making bread.

“You’re doing that wrong!” Georgina said. She and I were having

a cup of tea upstairs while my neighbor kneaded the dough.

“Let me show you,” said Georgina. She pushed my neighbor out of

the way and started ɻinging the dough around on the counter.

My neighbor was a mild-mannered woman who never did

anything graceless or rude. Consequently, most people were polite
to her.

“You really have to beat it up,” said Georgina, doing so.
“Oh,” said my neighbor. She was about ten years older than

Georgina and I, and she’d been making bread for all those years.

After she’d given the bread a good beating, Georgina said she had

to leave.

“I have never been treated that way,” said my neighbor. She

seemed more astonished than angry.

Then Georgina got involved in a consciousness-raising group. She

pestered me to come. “You’ll love it,” she said.

The women made me feel inadequate. They knew how to

disassemble car engines and climb mountains. I was the only
married one. I could see that Georgina had a certain cachet because
of her craziness; somehow, this cachet did not apply to me. But I
went often enough to become suspicious of marriage, and of my
husband in particular. I picked stupid ɹghts with him. It was hard to
ɹnd something to ɹght about. He did the cooking and the shopping,

and he did a fair amount of cleaning too. I spent most of my time
reading and painting watercolors.

Luckily, Georgina got herself a husband as well and dropped out

of the group before I could pick a really destructive ɹght.

Then we had to go visit their farm in western Massachusetts.
Georgina’s husband was pale and slight and unmemorable. But

she had also gotten a goat. Georgina, the husband, and the goat
lived in a barn on a few acres of scrub land at the foot of a small
mountain. The day we visited was cold, though it was May, and
they were busy ɹtting glazing into their windows. They had six-
over-six window frames, so this was quite a chore.

We watched while they puttied and ɹtted. The goat stood in her

room near the door and watched as well. Finally, Georgina said it
was time for lunch. She made a pressure cooker full of sweet
potatoes. That was lunch. There was some maple syrup for topping.
The goat had bananas.

After lunch, Georgina said, “Want to see the goat dance?”
The goat’s name was Darling. She was the color of ginger and had

long hairy ears.

Georgina held a sweet potato up in the air. “Dance, Darling,” she

said.

The goat stood on her hind legs and chased after the sweet potato,

which Georgina kept moving away from her. Her long ears swayed
as she hopped, and she pawed the air with her front legs. Her
hooves were black and sharp; they looked as though they could do a
lot of damage. Indeed, when she lost her footing, which she did a
few times, and a hoof grazed the edge of the kitchen counter, it cut
a groove in the wood.

“Give it to her,” I said. Something about the goat dancing made

me want to cry.

They moved west, to Colorado, where the land was better.

Georgina called once or twice from a pay phone. They had no
telephone of their own. I don’t know what happened to the goat.

A few years after Georgina went west, I ran into Lisa in Harvard
Square. She had a little toast-colored boy with her, about three

years old.

I hugged her. “Lisa,” I said, “I’m so happy to see you.”
“This is my kid,” she said. “Isn’t it crazy that I have a kid?” She

laughed. “Aaron, say hello.” He didn’t; he put his face behind her
leg.

She looked exactly the same: skinny, yellow, cheerful.
“What have you been doing?” I asked.
“The kid,” she said. “That’s all you can do.”
“What about the father?”
“Later for him. I got rid of him.” She put her hand on the boy’s

head. “We don’t need him, do we?”

“Where are you living?” I wanted to know everything about her.
“You won’t believe this.” Lisa pulled out a Kool and lit up. “I’m

living in Brookline. I’m a suburban matron in Brookline. I’ve got the
kid, I take the kid to nursery school, I’ve got an apartment, I’ve got
furniture. Fridays we go to temple.”

“Temple!” This amazed me. “Why?”
“I want—” Lisa faltered. I’d never before seen her at a loss for

words. “I want us to be a real family, with furniture, and all that. I
want him to have a real life. And temple helps. I don’t know why,
but it helps.”

I stared at Lisa, trying to imagine her in temple with her dark-

skinned son. I noticed she was wearing some jewelry—a ring with
two sapphires, a gold chain around her neck.

“What’s with the jewelry?” I asked.
“Presents from Grandma, right?” She addressed this to the kid.

“Everything changes when you have children,” she told me.

I didn’t know what to say to that. I’d decided not to have any.

And it didn’t look like my marriage was going to last, either.

We were standing in the middle of Harvard Square in front of the

subway entrance. Suddenly, Lisa leaned close to me and said,
“Wanna see something fantastic?” Her voice had the old quiver of
mischief in it. I nodded.

She pulled up her shirt, a T-shirt advertising a bagel shop in

Brookline, and grabbed hold of the ɻesh of her abdomen. Then she
pulled. Her skin was like an accordion; it kept expanding, more and

more, until she was holding the ɻap of skin a foot away from her
body. She let go and it subsided, somewhat wrinkled at ɹrst but
then settling back on her bones, looking perfectly normal.

“Wow!” I said.
“Kids,” said Lisa. “That’s what happens.” She laughed. “Say good-

bye, Aaron.”

“Bye,” he said, surprising me.
They were going back to Brookline on the subway. At the top of

the stairs Lisa turned around toward me again.

“You ever think of those days in there, in that place?” she asked.
“Yes,” I answered. “I do think of them.”
“Me too.” She shook her head. “Oh, well,” she said rather jauntily.

Then the two of them went down the stairs, underground.

Girl, Interrupted

The Vermeer in the Frick is one of three, but I didn’t notice the
other two the ɹrst time I went there. I was seventeen and in New
York with my English teacher, who hadn’t yet kissed me. I was
thinking of that future kiss, which I knew was coming, as I left the
Fragonards behind and walked into the hall leading to the courtyard
—that dim corridor where the Vermeers gleam against the wall.

Besides the kiss, I was thinking of whether I could graduate from

high school if for the second year in a row I failed biology. I was
surprised to be failing it, because I loved it, I’d loved it the ɹrst time
I failed it too. My favorite part was gene-recession charts. I liked
working out the sequence of blue eyes in families that had no
characteristics except blue eyes and brown eyes. My family had a lot
of characteristics—achievements, ambitions, talents, expectations—
that all seemed to be recessive in me.

I walked past the lady in yellow robes and the maid bringing her

a letter, past the soldier with a magniɹcent hat and the girl smiling
at him, thinking of warm lips, brown eyes, blue eyes. Her brown
eyes stopped me.

It’s the painting from whose frame a girl looks out, ignoring her

beefy music teacher, whose proprietary hand rests on her chair. The
light is muted, winter light, but her face is bright.

I looked into her brown eyes and I recoiled. She was warning me

of something—she had looked up from her work to warn me. Her
mouth was slightly open, as if she had just drawn a breath in order
to say to me, “Don’t!”

I moved backward, trying to get beyond the range of her urgency.

But her urgency ɹlled the corridor. “Wait,” she was saying, “wait!
Don’t go!”

I didn’t listen to her. I went out to dinner with my English

teacher, and he kissed me, and I went back to Cambridge and failed
biology, though I did graduate, and, eventually, I went crazy.

Sixteen years later I was in New York with my new, rich

boyfriend. We took many trips, which he paid for, although
spending money made him queasy. On our trips, he often attacked
my character—that character once diagnosed as disordered.
Sometimes I was too emotional, other times too cold and
judgmental. Whichever he said, I’d comfort him by telling him it
was okay to spend money. Then he would stop attacking me, which
meant we could stay together and begin the spending-and-attack
cycle on some future trip.

It was a beautiful October day in New York. He had attacked and

I had comforted and now we were ready to go out.

“Let’s go to the Frick,” he said.
“I’ve never been there,” I said. Then I thought maybe I had been. I

didn’t say anything; I’d learned not to discuss my doubts.

When we got there I recognized it. “Oh,” I said. “There’s a

painting I love here.”

“Only one?” he said. “Look at these Fragonards.”
I didn’t like them. I left the Fragonards behind and walked into

the hall leading to the courtyard.

She had changed a lot in sixteen years. She was no longer urgent.

In fact, she was sad. She was young and distracted, and her teacher
was bearing down on her, trying to get her to pay attention. But she
was looking out, looking for someone who would see her.

This time I read the title of the painting: Girl Interrupted at Her

Music.

Interrupted at her music: as my life had been, interrupted in the

music of being seventeen, as her life had been, snatched and ɹxed
on canvas: one moment made to stand still and to stand for all the
other moments, whatever they would be or might have been. What
life can recover from that?

I had something to tell her now. “I see you,” I said.
My boyfriend found me crying in the hallway.
“What’s the matter with you?” he asked.

“Don’t you see, she’s trying to get out,” I said, pointing at her.
He looked at the painting, he looked at me, and he said, “All you

ever think about is yourself. You don’t understand anything about
art.” He went oʃ to look at a Rembrandt.

I’ve gone back to the Frick since then to look at her and at the

two other Vermeers. Vermeers, after all, are hard to come by, and
the one in Boston has been stolen.

The other two are self-contained paintings. The people in them

are looking at each other—the lady and her maid, the soldier and
his sweetheart. Seeing them is peeking at them through a hole in a
wall. And the wall is made of light—that entirely credible yet unreal
Vermeer light.

Light like this does not exist, but we wish it did. We wish the sun

could make us young and beautiful, we wish our clothes could
glisten and ripple against our skins, most of all, we wish that
everyone we knew could be brightened simply by our looking at
them, as are the maid with the letter and the soldier with the hat.

The girl at her music sits in another sort of light, the ɹtful,

overcast light of life, by which we see ourselves and others only
imperfectly, and seldom.

Acknowledgments

My thanks to Jill Ker Conway, Maxine Kumin, and Susan Ware for
their early encouragement; to Gerald Berlin for his legal help; and to
Julie Grau for her enthusiasm and her good care of both book and
author.

I am most grateful to Robin Becker, Robin Desser, Michael

Downing, Lyda Kuth, and Jonathan Matson for their insights,
humor, and true-blue friendship.

ALSO BY SUSANNA KAYSEN

Dinah Sachs and Asa Thayer have had a love aʃair, conducted in
afternoons stolen from the oɽce of the magazine where they work.
But now that the aʃair is over, Dinah, in an act of lingering passion,
invents a narrative of Asa’s youth, imagining the events that shaped
the “happy, handsome man” who, in her words, “was born to stomp
on my heart.” Witty and sexy, funny and immediate, Asa, As I Knew
Him is a seductive dialogue between love and memory, obsession
and illusion.

Fiction/Literature

The Camera My Mother Gave Me takes us through Susanna Kaysen’s
often comic, sometimes surreal encounters with all kinds of doctors
—internists, gynecologists, “alternative health” experts—as well as
with her boyfriend and her friends, when suddenly, inexplicably,
“something went wrong” with her vagina. Spare, frank, and
altogether original, The Camera My Mother Gave Me challenges us to
think in new ways about the centrality and power of sexuality. It is
an extraordinary investigation into the role sex plays in perception
and our notions of ourselves—and into what happens when the
erotic impulse meets the world of medicine.

Memoir

Jonathan Brand, a graduate student in anthropology, has decided to
do his ɹeldwork in the remote Faroe Islands in the North Atlantic.
But despite his Harvard training, he can barely understand, let alone
study, the culture he encounters. From his struggles with the cuisine
to his aʃair with the Danish woman the locals want him to marry,
Jonathan is both repelled by and drawn into the Faroese way of life.

Wry and insightful, Far Aɹeld reveals Susanna Kaysen’s gifts of
imagination, satire, and compassion.

Fiction/Literature

Available wherever books are sold.

www.vintagebooks.com

