PENGUIN CLASSICS 
 DELUXE EDITION

HEART OF DARKNESS

JOSEPH CONRAD (Józef Teodor Konrad Korzeniowski) was born in December
1857 in Berdyczów (now Berdychiv, Ukraine) of Polish parents. His father, a
poet and translator, and his mother were exiled for nationalist activities and
died when he was a child. He grew up and was educated informally in
Lemberg (now L’viv) and Krakow, which he left in 1874 for Marseilles and a
career at sea. After voyages to the French Antilles, he joined the British
Merchant Service in 1878, sailing first in British coastal waters and then to
the Far East and Australia. In 1886, he became a British subject and received
his captaincy certificate. In 1890, he was briefly in the Congo with a Belgian
company. After his career at sea ended in 1894, he lived mainly in Kent. He
married in 1896 and had two sons.

Conrad began writing, in English, his third language, in 1886. His first

novels, Almayer’s Folly (1895) and An Outcast of the Islands (1896), were
immediately hailed as the work of a significant new talent. He produced his
major fiction from about 1897 to 1911, a period that saw the publication of
The Nigger of the ‘Narcissus’ (1897); Heart of Darkness (1899); Lord Jim
(1900); and the political novels Nostromo (1904), The Secret Agent (1907),
and Under Western Eyes (1911). His writing, considered “difficult,” received
considerable critical acclaim, but it was not until 1914 after the appearance of
Chance that Conrad won a wide public. The dazzling narrative experiments
and thematic complexities of Conrad’s earlier fiction are largely absent from
his later writings, which are pitched to a more popular audience.

Fame saw the offer of honorary degrees and a knighthood—both declined

—capped by a triumphal publicity tour in America in 1923. In addition to
novels, Conrad produced short stories, plays, several essays, and two
autobiographical volumes, The Mirror of the Sea (1906) and A Personal
Record (1908–9). He died in August 1924 at the age of sixty-six.

ADAM HOCHSCHILD is the author of seven books, including King Leopold’s
Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror and Heroism in Colonial Africa, and Bury the
Chains: Prophets and Rebels in the Fight to Free an Empire’s Slaves. He
teaches narrative writing at the Graduate School of Journalism, University of
California at Berkeley.

TIMOTHY S. HAYES is an Instructor of English at Auburn University in Alabama.
His research interests include narrative theory and the novel, particularly the
works of Robert Louis Stevenson and Joseph Conrad.

JOSEPH CONRAD

Heart of Darkness

Introduction by

ADAM HOCHSCHILD

Notes and Apparatus by

TIMOTHY S. HAYES

PENGUIN BOOKS

PENGUIN BOOKS

Published by the Penguin Group

Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street,

New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.

Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.)

Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2,

Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd)

Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road,

Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd)

Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre,

Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India

Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632,

New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd)

Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,

Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa

Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England

First published in Great Britain in Youth: A Narrative; and Two Other Stories

by William Blackwood & Sons 1902

First published in the United States of America by McClure, Phillips 1903

This edition with an introduction by Adam Hochschild published in Penguin Books 2012

Introduction copyright © Adam Hochschild, 2012

All rights reserved

Originally published in serial form in Blackwood’s Magazine, 1899.

The filmography, “Telling Africa’s Story Today,” further reading, character sketches, and notes by
Timothy S. Hayes appeared in the Penguin Enriched eBook Classic edition of Heart of Darkness.

Copyright © Timothy S. Hayes, 2008.

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Conrad, Joseph, 1857–1924.

Heart of darkness / Joseph Conrad ; introduction by Adam Hochschild ; notes and apparatus

by Timothy S. Hayes.

p. cm.—(Penguin Classics Deluxe Edition)

Includes bibliographical references.

Includes filmography.

ISBN: 978-1-101-61368-9

1. Europeans—Africa—Fiction.  2. Trading posts—Fiction.  3. Degeneration—Fiction.

4. Imperialism—Fiction.  5. Africa—Fiction.  6. Psychological fiction.  I. Hochschild, Adam.

II. Hayes, Timothy Scott.   III. Title.

PR6005.O4H4 2012

823’.912—dc23    2012023575

Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by

way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher’s prior

consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and without a similar

condition including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.

The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without

the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized

electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials.

Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.

Cover art by Mike Mignola

Cover design by Paul Buckley

Version_2

Contents

Introduction by ADAM HOCHSCHILD

HEART OF DARKNESS

Filmography
Telling Africa’s Story Today: Recent Films About Africa
Contemporary Reviews of Heart of Darkness
Further Reading
Character Sketches
Notes

Introduction

At the beginning of August 1890, the steamboat Roi des Belges—King of the
Belgians—a small, boxy, wood-burning stern-wheeler with a funnel and
pilothouse on its upper deck, began a four-week journey up the Congo River.
At the captain’s side was a thirty-two-year-old ship’s officer, stocky and black
bearded, whose eyes, in some photographs, look as if they were perpetually
narrowed against the tropical sun. Konrad Korzeniowski, of Polish descent,
had arrived in the Congo some weeks earlier, his nautical experience
previously limited to the sea. This was his first trip on the river, and his
logbook from the voyage is entirely filled with detailed, businesslike notes
about such matters as shoals, sandbars, and refueling points not included on
the primitive navigational chart available: “Lulonga Passage.…NbyE to NNE.
On the Port Side: Snags. Soundings in fathoms: 2,2,2,1,1,2,2,2,2.…”

It would be almost a decade before he finally committed to paper a great

many other features of the Congo not shown on the map, and by that time, of
course, the world would know him as Joseph Conrad:

Going up that river was like travelling back to the earliest beginnings
of the world, when vegetation rioted on the earth and the big trees
were kings. An empty stream, a great silence, an impenetrable forest.
The air was warm, thick, heavy, sluggish. There was no joy in the
brilliance of sunshine. The long stretches of the waterway ran on,
deserted, into the gloom of overshadowed distances. On silvery
sandbanks hippos and alligators sunned themselves side by side. The
broadening waters flowed through a mob of wooded islands; you lost
your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted all day
long against shoals, trying to find the channel, till you thought
yourself bewitched and cut off for ever from everything you had
known …

The European colonization of the African continent, often called the

Scramble for Africa, was the greatest land grab in history, and one of the
swiftest. In 1870, some 80 percent of Africa south of the Sahara was still
under the control of indigenous kings, chiefs, or other rulers. Within thirty-

five years, virtually the entire continent, only a few countries excepted, was
composed of European colonies or protectorates. Great Britain, France,
Germany, Portugal, Spain, and Italy all had seized pieces of what King
Leopold II of Belgium—who kept an enormous slice for himself—called
“this magnificent African cake.” The Scramble for Africa redrew the map,
enriched Europe, and left tens of millions of Africans dead in its wake. But
this history is glaringly absent from the work of first-rank European novelists
of the day. It would be as if no major nineteenth-century American writer
dealt with slavery, or no major twentieth-century German wrote about the
Holocaust. Joseph Conrad is a rare and brave exception.

The multilayered richness of Heart of Darkness has made it probably the
most widely read short novel in English, and certainly the most written about.
If the pages of all the monograph chapters, scholarly articles, entire books,
conference papers, and dissertations about Heart of Darkness were laid end to
end, they would stretch, it seems, the full length of the Congo River and back
again.

Several curious tensions run throughout the book. One is between the way

the story is painfully rooted in the six grueling months that Conrad spent in
the Congo, nearly dying from dysentery and malaria, and the manner in which
the novel is written, where no place—indeed, almost no person—is even
named. Not only the Congo but even the very continent of Africa is never
mentioned as the scene of the action. And although the shape of the “great
river” up which Conrad’s alter ego Marlow begins steaming suggests the
Congo River—“resembling an immense snake uncoiled, with its head in the
sea, its body at rest curving afar over a vast country, and its tail lost in the
depths of the land”—it, too, is never named. The key settings (the Central
Station, the Inner Station) and most of the people Marlow meets (the
manager, the Accountant, the brickmaker, the helmsman) also have no proper
names.

This technique, imitated by other writers since Conrad, is certainly one

source of the book’s haunting power. We feel that we are reading a parable, a
fable, something freighted with mythic overtones. After all, what do the snake
and “traveling back to the earliest beginnings of the world” conjure up if not
the Garden of Eden? For this is a book about the end of innocence and the
discovery of evil. Written on the very eve of the twentieth century, the novel
portrays a façade of benevolence and glory underlain by hideous brutality that
seems to look forward, in a way few other writers of Conrad’s time did, to the
era of Auschwitz and the Soviet gulag.

It is often said that there were two great totalitarian systems of the last

century, Nazism and Communism. But we too often ignore a third: European
colonialism, particularly as practiced in Africa, where it could be just as

brutal and as deadly as the other systems. Hitler’s top deputy, Hermann
Göring, sentenced to death at Nuremberg for his role in the murder of
Europe’s Jews, was the son of the colonial governor of German South-West
Africa (today’s Namibia), where the authorities carried out a deliberate
genocide against the Herero people who had rebelled against German rule.
And, as late as the 1950s, the British imprisoned tens of thousands of
Kenyans in harsh concentration camps, in the course of ruthlessly suppressing
an anticolonial revolt. The list is far longer.

For many decades, most critics and readers in the West preferred to look at

Heart of Darkness only for what it says about the eternal human condition,
rather than to consider it also as a portrait of a particular time and place. In
several of its transformations into film, it has been moved completely out of
Africa. The director Manuel Gutiérrez Aragón transplanted it to Spain after
the Spanish Civil War in the film El corazón del bosque (The Heart of the
Forest). And Francis Ford Coppola moved the story to Vietnam in his
Apocalypse Now. In part these geographical leaps are testimony to the novel’s
power and universality. But there is also something odd about pulling it loose
from its historical moorings. Would we not think it strangely evasive if a
director filmed Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s One Day in the Life of Ivan
Denisovich but didn’t set it in the Soviet Union, or brought to the screen Elie
Wiesel’s Night but moved the story out of Auschwitz?

What, then, was going on in the Congo at the time Conrad went there that

Europeans and Americans for so many years afterward preferred not to
confront?

The colony in which an unsuspecting Conrad arrived in 1890 was in the

early stages of what would be the bloodiest single chapter of the Scramble for
Africa. Orchestrating it was Leopold II, the man whose formal title was the
name of Conrad’s steamboat: King of the Belgians. Brilliant and charming,
ruthless and avaricious, a public relations genius who cloaked his greed in the
rhetoric of Christian philanthropy, Leopold was openly frustrated with being
king of such a small country. “Petit pays, petit gens,” he once said: “small
country, small-minded people.” Moreover, he reigned at a time when
European monarchs were rapidly losing power to the electorate. And, so, he
wanted a colony where he could rule supreme. The Belgian cabinet was not
interested, thinking colonies an extravagance for a small country with no navy
or merchant marine, but that suited Leopold perfectly: he set off to acquire his
own.

To begin with, the king hired the famous explorer Henry Morton Stanley to

navigate and reconnoiter the Congo River and its tributaries for him. Next, he
lobbied first the United States and then all the major nations of Europe into
recognizing the Congo—a vast territory more than seventy times the size of
Belgium—as belonging to him personally. He proclaimed himself its “King-

Sovereign” in 1885. It was the world’s only privately owned colony.

In the early years of the Congo Free State, as Leopold inaccurately

christened his new domain, the main commodity he coveted was ivory.
Elephant tusks were highly prized because they could be easily carved into a
wide variety of shapes: piano keys, statuettes, jewelry, false teeth, and more.
The king ordered a network of ivory-gathering posts set up along the colony’s
riverbanks, and men who wanted to make their fortunes flocked to the Congo.
As Conrad writes in Heart of Darkness, “The word ‘ivory’ rang in the air, was
whispered, was sighed. You would think they were praying to it.” The
adventurers who headed for Leopold’s new colony were often eager not just
for riches but for combat. Much of the ivory was seized at gunpoint, and as
Congolese resisted the foreigners who were taking over their land, there were
countless rebellions to put down. For a young European or American seeking
excitement, going to the Congo held the thrills of joining both a gold rush and
the French Foreign Legion.

Like much of the European colonization of Africa, the entire ivory-

gathering system was based on forced labor. It was forced laborers who
carried the white men’s supplies into the interior on their backs, forced
laborers who chopped the wood that fueled the steamboats, and Congolese
conscripts who were dragooned into the ranks of the king’s private army.
Conrad recognized Leopold’s forced-labor system for what it was. Soon after
Marlow, Conrad’s narrator, arrives in the territory, he sees six workers on a
railroad-construction crew; they “all were connected together with a chain
whose bights swung between them, rhythmically clinking.” Others, exhausted
by their labor, have crawled into a grove of trees to die.

In the years after Conrad’s visit, the toll of this forced-labor system would

swell to unimaginable proportions. Although ivory remained valuable, by the
late 1890s, wild rubber would supplant it as the colony’s most lucrative
treasure. The army went into village after village, holding the women hostage
in order to force the men to go into the rain forest, for days and eventually
weeks at a time, to gather a monthly quota of rubber. Many male rubber
gatherers were worked to death; many women hostages starved. Tens of
thousands more Congolese died in doomed uprisings against Leopold’s well-
armed military. Hundreds of thousands fled the forced-labor system by going
deep into the rain forest, where there was little food and no shelter, and they
died. And with so many Congolese turned into forced laborers, hostages, or
refugees, the birth rate plummeted, and there were few able-bodied adults left
to hunt, fish, or plant and harvest crops. In the resulting famine, disease took a
horrendous toll among people who otherwise would have survived. From all
these causes, the best estimates today are that the territory’s population was
slashed from somewhere around 20 million in 1880 to approximately half of
that in 1920. Conrad was an eyewitness to the beginnings of one of the great

human catastrophes of modern Africa.

The writer’s Congo odyssey began weeks before he was able to board the Roi
des Belges. He first set foot in the territory on June 12, 1890, when, following
the long voyage from Belgium, he disembarked at the colony’s capital, Boma,
just inland from where the “great river” pours its enormous torrent of water—
in volume second only to that of the Amazon—into the Atlantic. After a short
steamer ride upstream, he set off, accompanied by one other white man and a
caravan of thirty-one porters, on the arduous 230-mile trek around the
succession of thundering rapids that the Congo River tumbles down on the
last part of its journey from the central African plateau to the ocean. It was on
this caravan route that Conrad first recorded signs of the immense violence
that underlay the colony’s operations. In his diary on July 3 he noted, “Met an
off[ic]er of the State inspecting; a few minutes afterwards saw at a camp[in]g
place the dead body of a Backongo. Shot? Horrid smell.” The following day:
“Saw another dead body lying by the path.” And on July 29: “On the road
today passed a skeleton tied up to a post.”

After more than a month of walking, in shaky health, he arrived at the

small trading post of Kinshasa; inland from here, it was clear sailing for
steamboats for a thousand miles upstream. Only a day later Conrad was
aboard the fifteen-ton Roi des Belges. It had been ordered to depart early by
the trading company he was working for, to come to the aid of another
steamer that had gotten stuck on a submerged root some distance upriver. The
Roi des Belges passed only a half dozen other steamers during its month of
traveling upstream. Typically these river steamboats would travel by daylight
and then tie up onshore for the night, either at one of the militarized ivory-
gathering posts where firewood for the boilers could be loaded, or sometimes
just at a spot on the riverbank where the boat’s crew of Congolese
woodcutters could chop trees during the night for a day or two’s supply of
fuel.

Finally, the steamer reached Stanley Falls (today Kisangani), a settlement

of ivory warehouses, army barracks, and offices for the colonial officials who
controlled the eastern part of the colony. A week later, Conrad and the Roi des
Belges headed back downstream—with the current the voyage would only
take some two weeks—carrying cargo and a twenty-seven-year-old
Frenchman, Georges Antoine Klein, a company agent who was gravely ill.
Klein died onboard a few days before the steamer’s journey ended, a detail
echoed in Heart of Darkness.

Some bitter disappointments punctured Conrad’s Congo dreams now that

he was back in Kinshasa. He had hit it off badly with a key company official
and found that he was not slated to take part, as he had been hoping, in an

exploring expedition up one of the Congo River’s major tributaries, the Kasai.
The venality and greed of the ivory hunters dismayed him. And his malaria
and dysentery, which he already had been fighting for some weeks, grew
worse, landing him in a primitive hospital at a Baptist mission station where
he may have had to endure some proselytizing. “He is a gentlemanly fellow,”
wrote American missionary Samuel Lapsley in his diary. “An English [New]
Testament on his table furnishes a handle I hope to use on him.” Europeans
still had few effective medicines for most tropical diseases, and roughly a
third of the white men who came to the Congo in this era died there. Such
statistics were kept concealed by King Leopold II, but Conrad saw Klein die
and surely heard of many other such deaths. Finally, in October 1890, he
decided to abandon his Africa venture and head back to Europe. On the long
trip around the lower river rapids his illness was at its worst, and he had to be
carried by porters. He arrived back in Europe early the next year, his health
permanently weakened and his view of humanity forever darkened.

How much of what Conrad portrayed in Heart of Darkness was based on his
actual experience?

For most of the century after the book was written, the implicit answer

from critics was: not much, except for the superficial details of the steamboat
journey up- and downriver. They analyzed the novel in terms of Freud, Jung,
and Nietzsche, of Victorian innocence and original sin, of patriarchy and
gnosticism, of postmodernism and poststructuralism. Monographs and Ph.D.
theses poured forth with titles like “The Eye and the Gaze in ‘Heart of
Darkness’: A Symptomological Reading.” By contrast, in a 1917 preface
Conrad himself wrote, “‘Heart of Darkness’ is experience…pushed a little
(and only very little) beyond the actual facts of the case.”

There is considerable truth in what he says, and we miss much if we look at

the novel only as a work of imaginative literature. It is also a remarkable
description of “the actual facts of the case,” the Scramble for Africa at its
most naked. The river that Marlow travels up may never be named—and,
indeed, it doesn’t always physically resemble the Congo River, nor does the
Inner Station much resemble the Stanley Falls Station Conrad saw. (Two
recent scholars, Harry White and the late Irving L. Finston, contend that the
river Conrad imagined as he wrote was the Kasai, which he had hoped to
explore but never did.) But consider the figure at the novel’s center, Mr.
Kurtz, the brilliant, ambitious, supremely rapacious hoarder of ivory. Kurtz is
sketched with only a few bold strokes, but he has become our time’s most
famous literary villain: the lone white man with his dreams of culture and
grandeur, his great store of ivory, and his barbarous fiefdom carved out of the
jungle.

No doubt Conrad drew part of Kurtz from deep within himself; that is what

gives the reader a tinge of uneasy empathy with Kurtz’s boundless ambition
and his vision of himself as the apostle of “the cause of progress” among
awestruck savages. But Conrad may also have taken aspects of Kurtz from
various men whom he encountered in the Congo, or whom he heard about
there or afterward.

Look, for instance, at the searing scene in which Marlow gazes from the

steamboat at what he first thinks are ornamental knobs atop the fence posts
near Mr. Kurtz’s house. But through his binoculars he then sees that each is a
human head, “black, dried, sunken, with closed eyelids.” Biographers long
talked of Kurtz’s collection of severed heads as a brilliant example of
Conrad’s phantasmagoric imagination; one, Norman Sherry, even described it
as possibly a “macabre transference” by Conrad of a well-known episode
when an aggressive white ivory-seeker in the Congo was beheaded by African
rivals.

But no macabre transference was necessary: a number of white men in the

colony at this time collected African heads and openly bragged about it. One,
Guillaume Van Kerckhoven, a dashing, mustachioed officer of King
Leopold’s private army, told a fellow steamboat passenger in 1887 that he
paid his black soldiers the equivalent of two and halfpence in British money
for every rebel head they brought him after a battle. “He said it was to
stimulate their prowess in the face of the enemy.” The man to whom Van
Kerckhoven made the boast, Roger Casement, later renowned for his
exposure of the brutalities of King Leopold’s regime, was Conrad’s
housemate for some ten days in the Congo, and the two men became fast
friends who later saw each other in England. Van Kerckhoven and his soldiers
also traveled on the Roi des Belges a few months before Conrad did, so the
writer could likely have heard about him from other people as well.

Another notorious head collector was an officer named Léon Fiévez, who

worked in the Congo for eleven years starting in 1888. Accounts from both
Africans and Europeans describe his brutal ways. To a white government
agent who visited his post in 1894, Fiévez explained that when local Africans
failed to supply his troops with manioc, “I made war against them. One
example was enough: a hundred heads cut off, and there have been plenty of
supplies at the station ever since. My goal is ultimately humanitarian. I killed
a hundred people, but that allowed five hundred others to live.”

We do not know whether Fiévez had yet started these “humanitarian”

practices in 1890, but Conrad may have met him that year, for Fiévez had just
taken command of the strategic, heavily fortified post of Basoko, a likely
refueling and overnight stop for the Roi des Belges on its way up and down
the river. Nor was it only Belgians who collected heads. One British explorer-
adventurer in the Congo, part of an expedition that received a huge amount of
press coverage, in 1887 packed an African’s head in a box of salt and sent it

to his Piccadilly taxidermist to be stuffed and mounted.

The most striking head-collector of all, with an eerie resemblance to Mr.

Kurtz on several other counts as well, was a brusque-looking Congo state
official named Léon Rom, whose combat exploits earned him various medals
and write-ups in Belgian colonial-heroic literature of the day. When
commander of the Stanley Falls station a few years after Conrad was there,
Rom kept a gallows permanently erected in front of his headquarters. A
British journalist who passed through in 1895 described, in the widely read
Century Magazine, a punitive expedition Rom had mounted against African
rebels: “Many women and children were taken, and twenty-one heads were
brought to the falls, and have been used by Captain Rom as a decoration
round a flower-bed in front of his house!”

In addition, both the real-life Rom and the fictional Kurtz carried out their

looting amid pretensions to high culture. In the novel, Mr. Kurtz is an
intellectual, “an emissary of…science and progress.” Rom also had scientific
ambitions: he brought many butterfly specimens back to Europe and was
elected a member of the Royal Belgian Entomological Society. Furthermore,
Mr. Kurtz is an artist—the painter of “a small sketch in oils” of a woman
carrying a torch, which hangs on the wall of the Central Station. Léon Rom,
when he was not collecting butterflies or human heads, painted portraits and
landscapes, several of which can be found today in the vaults of the Royal
Museum for Central Africa, outside Brussels.

Mr. Kurtz is also a writer. Among other things, he writes a seventeen-page

report—“vibrating with eloquence.…a beautiful piece of writing” to the
International Society for the Suppression of Savage Customs. Although
Conrad most likely was unaware, in 1899, the same year that Heart of
Darkness appeared as a magazine serial, Léon Rom fulfilled his own literary
ambitions. He, too, published a report on savage customs, a jaunty, arrogant,
and sweepingly superficial little book called Le Nègre du Congo. There are
short chapters on “Le Nègre en Général,” the black woman, food, pets, native
medicine, and many pages about a particular enthusiasm of Rom’s—hunting.
Of “the black race,” Rom says, “its feelings are coarse, its passions rough, its
instincts brutish, and, in addition, it is proud and vain.…The black man has no
idea of time, and, questioned on that subject by a European, he generally
responds with something stupid.”

One final notable parallel: Mr. Kurtz succeeds in “getting himself adored”

by the Africans of the Inner Station. Chiefs crawl on the ground before him,
the blacks obey him with slavish devotion, and a beautiful woman among
them is his concubine. In 1895, a disapproving Belgian lieutenant confided to
his diary a similar description of a fellow officer:

He makes his agents starve while he gives provisions in abundance to

the black women of his harem.…Finally, he got into his dress uniform
at his house, brought together his women, picked up some piece of
paper and pretended to read to them that the king had named him the
big chief and that the other whites of the station were only small fry.…
He gave 50 lashes to a poor little negress because she wouldn’t be his
mistress, then he gave her to a soldier.

Significantly, the diarist introduces his account by saying, “This man wants

to play the role of a second Rom.”

On August 2, 1890, Conrad and Rom may have met. About five miles

before reaching the riverside village of Kinshasa, where the Roi des Belges
was waiting, he and his caravan of porters passed through the neighboring
post of Léopoldville. All told, only about twenty white men were living in
these two places, each of which—long before they were both absorbed into
the giant metropolis today called Kinshasa—was just a scattering of thatch-
roofed buildings. Léon Rom was then station chief at Leopoldville. His diary,
which in a neat, almost calligraphic hand records any raid or campaign that
could win him another medal, shows no expedition away from the post that
day. If he was on hand, he certainly would have greeted any caravan with
white newcomers, for these arrived only a few times a month. Conrad spoke
near-perfect French, so they would have had a language in common.

Did Conrad meet Rom—or Fiévez or Van Kerckhoven? Did Rom tell him

about his scientific, artistic, and literary ambitions, or did Conrad hear of
these from others? Did Conrad see one of Rom’s paintings on the wall, as
Marlow does one of Kurtz’s? We will never know. Nor will we ever know if
any such recollections were triggered by Conrad reading the Century
Magazine’s description of Rom’s severed-head collection, which, as it
happens, was also referred to in the Saturday Review, a magazine he admired
and read faithfully, within a week or two of the day he started writing Heart
of Darkness. But whether specific memories provided building blocks for the
character of Mr. Kurtz, or whether Conrad simply worked on intuition, the
novel captures something crucial about its place and time with piercing,
uncanny accuracy.

Heart of Darkness is not always an easy book to read. There are times when
the voice of Marlow seems too insistent, too extravagant—and too vague.
Marlow’s portrayal of Kurtz’s appalling brutality seems at odds with his
repeated professions of loyalty to the man. Parades of ponderous adjectives—
inexorable, unspeakable, unfathomable—rumble past relentlessly. “Sentence
after sentence,” wrote the novelist E. M. Forster, “discharges its smoke screen
into our abashed eyes.” The poet John Masefield found the novel to have “too
much cobweb.”

What accounts for this? Clearly, when he wrote the book, Conrad was

painfully wrestling with something deep within himself. Before his six
months in Africa, he once told his friend the critic Edward Garnett he had had
“not a thought in his head.” But what he found in the Congo—dead bodies
strewn about; the skeleton tied up to a post; workers in chains; an entire
economy founded on the whip, the gun, and forced labor—was, he wrote in
an essay published only a few months before he died, “the vilest scramble for
loot that ever disfigured the history of human conscience.” Some of his angst
may have stemmed from embarrassment and guilt about his own youthful
naïveté. He had hoped for a glamorous job skippering a steamboat on an
exploring voyage—a hope which, we know from letters, persisted even into
the middle of his stay in the Congo. But, as he says of Kurtz, his time there
may have “whispered to him things about himself which he did not know.”

There was also a political struggle going on in Conrad’s soul, although he

never articulated it, and never would have used that word to describe it. On
one hand, he was writing the most scathing portrait of colonialism in all of
Western literature. No one who reads Heart of Darkness can ever again
imagine the colonization of central Africa as something benevolent. “To tear
treasure out of the bowels of the land was their desire,” Marlow says of the
exploring expedition he encounters, “with no more moral purpose at the back
of it than there is in burglars breaking into a safe.” Nor does Conrad imply
that there was anything uniquely Belgian about this burglary. Fortune-seekers
in the Congo came from throughout the Western world: “All Europe
contributed to the making of Kurtz.” Conrad’s ability to see the toll of
conquest owes something to his own upbringing, for he had been born Polish
at a time when Poland itself had been earlier snuffed out of existence as an
independent nation, its land divided up by powerful neighbors—Prussia,
Austria, and Russia. The writer spent part of his childhood in northern Russia,
where his father, a Polish nationalist hero, was exiled for leading an
insurrection against Russian rule.

Yet at the same time Conrad was a deeply conservative man, profoundly

loyal to his adoptive country, Britain, which, of course, was the greatest
colonial power of them all. Early on in the novel, when Marlow sees a map of
Africa dominated by the British Empire’s red and feels the color is “good to
see at any time, because one knows that some real work is done in there,” he
is probably speaking for his creator. Indeed, Conrad once declared in a letter
that “liberty…can only be found under the English flag all over the world.”

Similarly, despite his searing portrayal of white greed, Conrad was very

much a man of his own imperial time when it came to race. The Africans in
this novel barely ever even speak. Instead they grunt; they chant; they
produce a “drone of weird incantations” and a “wild and passionate uproar”;
they spout “strings of amazing words that resembled no sounds of human

language…like the responses of some satanic litany.” Heart of Darkness has
come in for some attacks in recent years because of this, most notably from
the distinguished Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe. But the fact that Conrad
shared the attitudes of those around him about race no more disqualifies him
from greatness than do Tolstoy’s beliefs about the position of women or
Shakespeare’s about monarchy.

One final contradiction: in the middle of the decade between his six months

in the Congo and the time he finally got the lust for quick riches he saw there
onto paper in this novel, Conrad made an unsuccessful try at gaining quick
riches himself. Although the details remain shadowy, he apparently invested
and lost almost all his savings in a South African gold mine—a loss all the
more embarrassing because it came just as he got married and hoped to start a
family. The South African gold rush of the late 1880s and ’90s was, like the
simultaneous ivory and rubber boom in the Congo, one of the great bonanzas
of the Scramble for Africa. Tens of thousands of miners flocked there from all
over the world—as did merchants, pimps, and prostitutes, hoping to make
money from them. Mine owners amassed huge fortunes. Meanwhile, the
hardest and lowest-paid manual labor was done by Africans. Pushed off their
land and desperate for money to survive, they died by the thousands in
underground mining accidents, were forced to leave their families behind in
distant rural areas, and were deliberately provided with few recreation
facilities except drinking places—which recycled much of their meager
earnings back to mine owners, several of whom owned the major distillery.
How much of all this was Conrad aware of? How did he feel about his failed
attempt to cash in on the gold rush? We will never know, but this may be yet
another of those struggles within himself which in the end only add to the
depth of the book he wrote.

ADAM HOCHSCHILD

I

The Nellie, a cruising yawl, swung to her anchor without a flutter of the sails,
and was at rest. The flood had made, the wind was nearly calm, and being
bound down the river, the only thing for it was to come to and wait for the
turn of the tide.

The sea-reach of the Thames stretched before us like the beginning of an

interminable waterway. In the offing the sea and the sky were welded together
without a joint, and in the luminous space the tanned sails of the barges
drifting up with the tide seemed to stand still in red clusters of canvas sharply
peaked, with gleams of varnished sprits. A haze rested on the low shores that
ran out to sea in vanishing flatness. The air was dark above Gravesend, and
further back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom, brooding
motionless over the biggest, and the greatest, town on earth.1

The Director of Companies was our captain and our host. We four

affectionately watched his back as he stood in the bows looking to seaward.
On the whole river there was nothing that looked half so nautical. He
resembled a pilot, which to a seaman is trustworthiness personified. It was
difficult to realise his work was not out there in the luminous estuary, but
behind him, within the brooding gloom.

Between us there was, as I have already said somewhere, the bond of the

sea. Besides holding our hearts together through long periods of separation, it
had the effect of making us tolerant of each other’s yarns—and even
convictions. The Lawyer2—the best of old fellows—had, because of his many
years and many virtues, the only cushion on deck, and was lying on the only
rug. The Accountant had brought out already a box of dominoes, and was
toying architecturally with the bones. Marlow sat cross-legged right aft,
leaning against the mizzenmast. He had sunken cheeks, a yellow complexion,
a straight back, an ascetic aspect, and, with his arms dropped, the palms of
hands outwards, resembled an idol. The Director, satisfied the anchor had
good hold, made his way aft and sat down amongst us. We exchanged a few
words lazily. Afterwards there was silence on board the yacht. For some
reason or other we did not begin that game of dominoes. We felt meditative,
and fit for nothing but placid staring. The day was ending in a serenity of still
and exquisite brilliance. The water shone pacifically; the sky, without a speck,
was a benign immensity of unstained light; the very mist on the Essex

marshes was like a gauzy and radiant fabric, hung from the wooded rises
inland, and draping the low shores in diaphanous folds.3 Only the gloom to
the west, brooding over the upper reaches, became more sombre every
minute, as if angered by the approach of the sun.

And at last, in its curved and imperceptible fall, the sun sank low, and from

glowing white changed to a dull red without rays and without heat, as if about
to go out suddenly, stricken to death by the touch of that gloom brooding over
a crowd of men.

Forthwith a change came over the waters, and the serenity became less

brilliant but more profound. The old river in its broad reach rested unruffled at
the decline of day, after ages of good service done to the race that peopled its
banks, spread out in the tranquil dignity of a waterway leading to the
uttermost ends of the earth. We looked at the venerable stream not in the vivid
flush of a short day that comes and departs for ever, but in the august light of
abiding memories. And indeed nothing is easier for a man who has, as the
phrase goes, “followed the sea” with reverence and affection, than to evoke
the great spirit of the past upon the lower reaches of the Thames. The tidal
current runs to and fro in its unceasing service, crowded with memories of
men and ships it had borne to the rest of home or to the battles of the sea. It
had known and served all the men of whom the nation is proud, from Sir
Francis Drake to Sir John Franklin, knights all, titled and untitled—the great
knights-errant of the sea. It had borne all the ships whose names are like
jewels flashing in the night of time, from the Golden Hind returning with her
round flanks full of treasure, to be visited by the Queen’s Highness and thus
pass out of the gigantic tale, to the Erebus and Terror, bound on other
conquests—and that never returned. It had known the ships and the men.
They sailed from Deptford, from Greenwich, from Erith—the adventurers and
the settlers; kings’ ships and the ships of men on ’Change; captains, admirals,
the dark “interlopers” of the Eastern trade, and the commissioned “generals”
of East India fleets. Hunters for gold or pursuers of fame, they all had gone
out on that stream, bearing the sword, and often the torch, messengers of the
might within the land, bearers of a spark from the sacred fire. What greatness
had not floated on the ebb of that river into the mystery of an unknown earth!
… The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths, the germs of empires.4

The sun set; the dusk fell on the stream, and lights began to appear along

the shore. The Chapman lighthouse, a three-legged thing erect on a mudflat,
shone strongly. Lights of ships moved in the fairway—a great stir of lights
going up and going down. And further west on the upper reaches the place of
the monstrous town was still marked ominously on the sky, a brooding gloom
in sunshine, a lurid glare under the stars.

“And this also,” said Marlow5 suddenly, “has been one of the dark places

of the earth.”

He was the only man of us who still “followed the sea.” The worst that

could be said of him was that he did not represent his class. He was a seaman,
but he was a wanderer too, while most seamen lead, if one may so express it,
a sedentary life. Their minds are of the stay-at-home order, and their home is
always with them—the ship; and so is their country—the sea. One ship is
very much like another, and the sea is always the same. In the immutability of
their surroundings the foreign shores, the foreign faces, the changing
immensity of life, glide past, veiled not by a sense of mystery but by a slightly
disdainful ignorance; for there is nothing mysterious to a seaman unless it be
the sea itself, which is the mistress of his existence and as inscrutable as
Destiny. For the rest, after his hours of work, a casual stroll or a casual spree
on shore suffices to unfold for him the secret of a whole continent, and
generally he finds the secret not worth knowing. The yarns of seamen have an
effective simplicity, the whole meaning of which lies within the shell of a
cracked nut. But, as has been said, Marlow was not typical (if his propensity
to spin yarns be excepted), and to him the meaning of an episode was not
inside like a kernel but outside, enveloping the tale which brought it out only
as a glow brings out a haze, in the likeness of one of these misty halos that,
sometimes, are made visible by the spectral illumination of moonshine.

His remark did not seem at all surprising. It was just like Marlow. It was

accepted in silence. No one took the trouble to grunt even; and presently he
said, very slow—

“I was thinking of very old times, when the Romans first came here,

nineteen hundred years ago—the other day…. Light came out of this river
since—you say Knights? Yes; but it is like a running blaze on a plain, like a
flash of lightning in the clouds. We live in the flicker—may it last as long as
the old earth keeps rolling! But darkness was here yesterday. Imagine the
feelings of say a commander of a fine—what d’ye call ’em?—trireme in the
Mediterranean, ordered suddenly to the north; run overland across the Gauls
in a hurry; put in charge of one of these craft the legionaries—a wonderful lot
of handy men they must have been too—used to build, apparently by the
hundred, in a month or two, if we may believe what we read. Imagine him
here—the very end of the world, a sea the colour of lead, a sky the colour of
smoke, a kind of ship about as rigid as a concertina—and going up this river
with stores, or orders, or what you like. Sandbanks, marshes, forests, savages
—precious little to eat fit for a civilised man, nothing but Thames water to
drink. No Falernian wine here, no going ashore. Here and there a military
camp lost in a wilderness like a needle in a bundle of hay—cold, fog,
tempests, disease, exile, and death—death skulking in the air, in the water, in
the bush. They must have been dying like flies here. Oh yes—he did it. Did it
very well, too, no doubt, and without thinking much about it either, except
afterwards to brag of what he had gone through in his time, perhaps. They

were men enough to face the darkness. And perhaps he was cheered by
keeping his eye on a chance of promotion to the fleet at Ravenna, by and bye,
if he had good friends in Rome and survived the awful climate. Or think of a
decent young citizen in a toga—perhaps too much dice, you know—coming
out here in the train of some prefect, or tax-gatherer, or trader even, to mend
his fortunes. Land in a swamp, march through the woods, and in some inland
post feel the savagery, the utter savagery, had closed round him—all that
mysterious life of the wilderness that stirs in the forests, in the jungles, in the
hearts of wild men. There’s no initiation either into such mysteries. He has to
live in the midst of the incomprehensible, which is also detestable. And it has
a fascination, too, that goes to work upon him. The fascination of the
abomination—you know. Imagine the growing regrets, the longing to escape,
the powerless disgust, the surrender, the hate.”6

He paused.
“Mind,” he began again, lifting one arm from the elbow, the palm of the

hand outwards, so that, with his legs folded before him, he had the pose of a
Buddha preaching in European clothes and without a lotus-flower—“Mind,
none of us would feel exactly like this. What saves us is efficiency—the
devotion to efficiency. But these chaps were not much account, really. They
were no colonists; their administration was merely a squeeze, and nothing
more, I suspect. They were conquerors, and for that you want only brute force
—nothing to boast of, when you have it, since your strength is just an
accident arising from the weakness of others. They grabbed what they could
get and for the sake of what was to be got. It was just robbery with violence,
aggravated murder on a great scale, and men going at it blind—as is very
proper for those who tackle a darkness. The conquest of the earth, which
mostly means the taking it away from those who have a different complexion
or slightly flatter noses than ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look
into it too much.7 What redeems it is the idea only. An idea at the back of it;
not a sentimental pretence but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the idea—
something you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a sacrifice to.…”8

He broke off. Flames glided in on the river, small green flames, red flames,

white flames, pursuing, overtaking, joining, crossing each other—then
separating slowly or hastily. The traffic of the great city went on in the
deepening night upon the sleepless river. We looked on, waiting patiently—
there was nothing else to do till the end of the flood; but it was only after a
long silence, when he said, in a hesitating voice, “I suppose you fellows
remember I did once turn fresh-water sailor for a bit,” that we knew we were
fated, before the ebb began to run, to hear about one of Marlow’s inconclusive
experiences.

“I don’t want to bother you much with what happened to me personally,”

he began, showing in this remark the weakness of many tellers of tales who

seem so often unaware of what their audience would best like to hear; “yet to
understand the effect of it on me you ought to know how I got out there, what
I saw, how I went up that river to the place where I first met the poor chap. It
was the furthest point of navigation and the culminating point of my
experience. It seemed somehow to throw a kind of light on everything about
me—and into my thoughts. It was sombre enough too—and pitiful—not
extraordinary in any way—not very clear either. No, not very clear. And yet it
seemed to throw a kind of light.

“I had then, as you remember, just returned to London after a lot of Indian

Ocean, Pacific, China Seas—a regular dose of the East—six years or so, and I
was loafing about, hindering you fellows in your work and invading your
homes, just as though I had got a heavenly mission to civilise you. It was very
fine for a time, but after a bit I did get tired of resting. Then I began to look
for a ship—I should think the hardest work on earth. But the ships wouldn’t
even look at me. And I got tired of that game too.

“Now when I was a little chap I had a passion for maps. I would look for

hours at South America, or Africa, or Australia and lose myself in all the
glories of exploration. At that time there were many blank spaces on the earth,
and when I saw one that looked particularly inviting on a map (but they all
look that) I would put my finger on it and say, When I grow up I will go there.
The North Pole was one of these places, I remember. Well, I haven’t been
there yet, and shall not try now. The glamour’s off. Other places were
scattered about the Equator, and in every sort of latitude all over the two
hemispheres. I have been in some of them, and…well, we won’t talk about
that.9 But there was one yet—the biggest, the most blank, so to speak—that I
had a hankering after.

“True, by this time it was not a blank space any more. It had got filled since

my boyhood with rivers and lakes and names. It had ceased to be a blank
space of delightful mystery—a white patch for a boy to dream gloriously
over. It had become a place of darkness. But there was in it one river
especially, a mighty big river, that you could see on the map, resembling an
immense snake uncoiled, with its head in the sea, its body at rest curving afar
over a vast country, and its tail lost in the depths of the land. And as I looked
at the map of it in a shop-window, it fascinated me like a snake would a bird
—a silly little bird. Then I remembered there was a big concern, a Company
for trade on that river. Dash it all! I thought to myself, they can’t trade without
using some kind of craft on that lot of fresh water—steamboats! Why
shouldn’t I try to get charge of one. I went on along Fleet Street,10 but could
not shake off the idea. The snake had charmed me.

“You understand it was a Continental concern, that Trading society; but I

have a lot of relations living on the Continent, because it’s cheap and not so
nasty as it looks, they say.

“I am sorry to own I began to worry them. This was already a fresh

departure for me. I was not used to get things that way, you know. I always
went my own road and on my own legs where I had a mind to go. I wouldn’t
have believed it of myself; but, then—you see—I felt somehow I must get
there by hook or by crook. So I worried them. The men said ‘My dear fellow,’
and did nothing. Then—would you believe it?—I tried the women. I, Charlie
Marlow, set the women to work—to get a job. Heavens! Well, you see, the
notion drove me. I had an aunt, a dear enthusiastic soul. She wrote: ‘It will be
delightful. I am ready to do anything, anything for you. It is a glorious idea. I
know the wife of a very high personage in the Administration, and also a man
who has lots of influence with,’ etc., etc. She was determined to make no end
of fuss to get me appointed skipper of a river steamboat, if such was my
fancy.

“I got my appointment—of course; and I got it very quick. It appears the

Company had received news that one of their captains had been killed in a
scuffle with the natives. This was my chance, and it made me the more
anxious to go. It was only months and months afterwards, when I made the
attempt to recover what was left of the body, that I heard the original quarrel
arose from a misunderstanding about some hens. Yes, two black hens.
Fresleven—that was the fellow’s name, a Dane—thought himself wronged
somehow in the bargain, so he went ashore and started to hammer the chief of
the village with a stick. Oh, it didn’t surprise me in the least to hear this, and
at the same time to be told that Fresleven was the gentlest, quietest creature
that ever walked on two legs. No doubt he was; but he had been a couple of
years already out there engaged in the noble cause, you know, and he
probably felt the need at last of asserting his self-respect in some way.
Therefore he whacked the old nigger mercilessly, while a big crowd of his
people watched him, thunderstruck, till some man—I was told the chief’s son
—in desperation at hearing the old chap yell, made a tentative jab with a spear
at the white man—and of course it went quite easy between the shoulder-
blades. Then the whole population cleared into the forest, expecting all kinds
of calamities to happen, while, on the other hand, the steamer Fresleven
commanded left also in a bad panic, in charge of the engineer, I believe.
Afterwards nobody seemed to trouble much about Fresleven’s remains, till I
got out and stepped into his shoes. I couldn’t let it rest though; but when an
opportunity offered at last to meet my predecessor, the grass growing through
his ribs was tall enough to hide his bones. They were all there. The
supernatural being had not been touched after he fell. And the village was
deserted, the huts gaped black, rotting, all askew within the fallen enclosures.
A calamity had come to it, sure enough. The people had vanished. Mad terror
had scattered them, men, women, and children, through the bush, and they
had never returned. What became of the hens I don’t know either. I should

think the cause of progress got them, anyhow. However, through this glorious
affair I got my appointment, before I had fairly begun to hope for it.

“I flew around like mad to get ready, and before forty-eight hours I was

crossing the Channel to show myself to my employers, and sign the contract.
In a very few hours I arrived in a city that always makes me think of a whited
sepulchre. Prejudice no doubt. I had no difficulty in finding the Company’s
offices. It was the biggest thing in the town, and everybody I met was full of
it. They were going to run an over-sea empire, and make no end of coin by
trade.

“A narrow and deserted street in deep shadow, high houses, innumerable

windows with Venetian blinds, a dead silence, grass sprouting between the
stones, imposing carriage archways right and left, immense double doors
standing ponderously ajar. I slipped through one of these cracks, went up a
swept and ungarnished staircase, as arid as a desert, and opened the first door
I came to. Two women, one fat and the other slim, sat on straw-bottomed
chairs, knitting black wool. The slim one got up and walked straight at me—
still knitting with downcast eyes—and only just as I began to think of getting
out of her way, as you would for a somnambulist, stood still, and looked up.
Her dress was as plain as an umbrella-cover, and she turned round without a
word and preceded me into a waiting-room. I gave my name, and looked
about. Deal table in the middle, plain chairs all round the walls, on one end a
large shining map, marked with all the colours of a rainbow. There was a vast
amount of red—good to see at any time, because one knows that some real
work is done in there, a deuce of a lot of blue, a little green, smears of orange,
and, on the East Coast, a purple patch, to show where the jolly pioneers of
progress drink the jolly lager-beer. However, I wasn’t going into any of these.
I was going into the yellow. Dead in the centre. And the river was there—
fascinating—deadly—like a snake. Ough! A door opened, a white-haired
secretarial head, but wearing a compassionate expression, appeared, and a
skinny forefinger beckoned me into the sanctuary. Its light was dim, and a
heavy writing-desk squatted in the middle. From behind that structure came
out an impression of pale plumpness in a frock-coat. The great man himself.
He was five feet six, I should judge, and had his grip on the handle-end of
ever so many millions. He shook hands, I fancy, murmured vaguely, was
satisfied with my French. Bon voyage.

“In about forty-five seconds I found myself again in the waiting-room with

the compassionate secretary, who, full of desolation and sympathy, made me
sign some document. I believe I undertook amongst other things not to
disclose any trade secrets. Well, I am not going to.

“I began to feel slightly uneasy. You know I am not used to such

ceremonies, and there was something ominous in the atmosphere. It was just
as though I had been let into some conspiracy—I don’t know—something not

quite right; and I was glad to get out. In the outer room the two women
knitted black wool feverishly. People were arriving, and the younger one was
walking back and forth introducing them. The old one sat on her chair. Her
flat cloth slippers were propped up on a foot-warmer, and a cat reposed on her
lap. She wore a starched white affair on her head, had a wart on one cheek,
and silver-rimmed spectacles hung on the tip of her nose. She glanced at me
above the glasses. The swift and indifferent placidity of that look troubled me.
Two youths with foolish and cheery countenances were being piloted over,
and she threw at them the same quick glance of unconcerned wisdom. She
seemed to know all about them and about me too. An eerie feeling came over
me. She seemed uncanny and fateful. Often far away there I thought of these
two, guarding the door of Darkness, knitting black wool as for a warm pall,
one introducing, introducing continuously to the unknown, the other
scrutinising the cheery and foolish faces with unconcerned old eyes. Ave! Old
knitter of black wool. Morituri te salutant. Not many of these she looked at
ever saw her again—not half, by a long way.

“There was yet a visit to the doctor. ‘A simple formality,’ assured me the

secretary, with an air of taking an immense part in all my sorrows.
Accordingly a young chap wearing his hat over the left eyebrow, some clerk I
suppose—there must have been clerks in the business, though the house was
as still as a house in a city of the dead—came from somewhere up-stairs and
led me forth. He was shabby and careless, with ink-stains on the sleeves of his
jacket, and his cravat was large and billowy, under a chin shaped like the toe
of an old boot. It was a little too early for the doctor, so I proposed a drink,
and thereupon he developed a vein of joviality. As we sat over our vermouths
he glorified the Company’s business and by and bye I expressed casually my
surprise at him not going out there. He became very cool and collected all at
once. ‘I am not such a fool as I look, quoth Plato to his disciples,’ he said
sententiously, emptied his glass with great resolution, and we rose.

“The old doctor felt my pulse, evidently thinking of something else the

while. ‘Good, good for there,’ he mumbled, and then with a certain eagerness
asked me whether I would let him measure my head. Rather surprised, I said
Yes, when he produced a thing like callipers and got the dimensions back and
front and every way, taking notes carefully. He was an unshaven little man in
a threadbare coat like a gaberdine, with his feet in slippers, and I thought him
a harmless fool. ‘I always ask leave, in the interests of science,11 to measure
the crania of those going out there,’ he said. ‘And when they come back too?’
I asked. ‘Oh, I never see them,’ he remarked; ‘and, moreover, the changes
take place inside, you know.’ He smiled, as if at some quiet joke. ‘So you are
going out there. Famous. Interesting too.’ He gave me a searching glance, and
made another note. ‘Ever any madness in your family?’ he asked, in a matter-
of-fact tone. I felt very annoyed. ‘Is that question in the interests of science

too?’ ‘It would be,’ he said, without taking notice of my irritation, ‘interesting
for science to watch the mental changes of individuals, on the spot,12 but …’
‘Are you an alienist?’13 I interrupted. ‘Every doctor should be—a little,’
answered that original, imperturbably. ‘I have a little theory which you
Messieurs who go out there must help me to prove. This is my share in the
advantages my country shall reap from the possession of such a magnificent
dependency. The mere wealth I leave to others. Pardon my questions, but you
are the first Englishman coming under my observation…’ I hastened to assure
him I was not in the least typical. ‘If I were,’ said I, ‘I wouldn’t be talking like
this with you.’ ‘What you say is rather profound, and probably erroneous,’ he
said, with a laugh. ‘Avoid irritation more than exposure to the sun. Adieu.
How do you English say, eh? Goodbye. Ah! Goodbye. Adieu. In the tropics
one must before everything keep calm.’… He lifted a warning forefinger.…
‘Du calme, du calme. Adieu.’

“One thing more remained to do—say good-bye to my excellent aunt. I

found her triumphant. I had a cup of tea—the last decent cup of tea for many,
many days—and in a room that most soothingly looked just as you would
expect a lady’s drawing-room to look, we had a long quiet chat by the
fireside. In the course of these confidences it became quite plain to me I had
been represented to the wife of the high dignitary, and goodness knows to
how many more people besides, as an exceptional and gifted creature—a
piece of good fortune for the Company—a man you don’t get hold of every
day. Good heavens! and I was going to take charge of a two pence-halfpenny
river-steamboat with a penny whistle attached! It appeared, however, I was
also one of the Workers, with a capital—you know. Something like an
emissary of light, something like a lower sort of apostle. There had been a lot
of such rot let loose in print and talk just about that time, and the excellent
woman, living right in the rush of all that humbug, got carried off her feet.
She talked about ‘weaning those ignorant millions from their horrid ways,’
till, upon my word, she made me quite uncomfortable. I ventured to hint that
the Company was run for profit.

“‘You forget, dear Charles, that the labourer is worthy of his hire,’ she said,

brightly. It’s queer how out of touch with truth women are! They live in a
world of their own, and there had never been anything like it, and never can
be. It is too beautiful altogether, and if they were to set it up it would go to
pieces before the first sunset. Some confounded fact we men have been living
contentedly with ever since the day of creation would start up and knock the
whole thing over.

“After this I got embraced, told to wear flannel, be sure to write often, and

so on—and I left. In the street—I don’t know why—a queer feeling came to
me that I was an impostor. Odd thing that I, who used to clear out for any part
of the world at twenty-four hours’ notice, with less thought than most men

give to the crossing of a street, had a moment—I won’t say of hesitation, but
of startled pause, before this commonplace affair. The best way I can explain
it to you is by saying that, for a second or two, I felt as though, instead of
going to the centre of a continent, I were about to set off for the centre of the
earth.14

“I left in a French steamer, and she called in every blamed port they have

out there, for, as far as I could see, the sole purpose of landing soldiers and
custom-house officers. I watched the coast. Watching a coast as it slips by the
ship is like thinking about an enigma. There it is before you—smiling,
frowning, inviting, grand, mean, insipid, or savage, and always mute with an
air of whispering, Come and find out. This one was almost featureless, as if
still in the making, with an aspect of monotonous grimness. The edge of a
colossal jungle, so dark-green as to be almost black, fringed with white surf,
ran straight, like a ruled line, far, far along a blue sea whose glitter was
blurred by a creeping mist. The sun was fierce, the land seemed to glisten and
drip with steam. Here and there greyish-whitish specks showed up, clustered
inside the white surf, with a flag flying above them perhaps. Settlements—
settlements, some centuries old, and still no bigger than pin-heads on the
untouched expanse of their background. We pounded along, stopped, landed
soldiers; went on, landed custom-house clerks to levy toll in what looked like
a God-forsaken wilderness, with a tin shed and a flag-pole lost in it; landed
more soldiers—to take care of the custom-house clerks, presumably. Some, I
heard, got drowned in the surf; but whether they did or not, nobody seemed
particularly to care. They were just flung out there, and on we went. Every
day the coast looked the same, as though we had not moved; but we passed
various places—trading places—with names like Gran’ Bassam, Little Popo,
names that seemed to belong to some sordid farce acted in front of a sinister
backcloth. The idleness of a passenger, my isolation amongst all these men
with whom I had no point of contact, the oily and languid sea, the uniform
sombreness of the coast, seemed to keep me away from the truth of things,
within the toils of a mournful and senseless delusion. The voice of the surf
heard now and then was a positive pleasure, like the speech of a brother. It
was something natural, that had its reason, that had a meaning. Now and then
a boat from the shore gave one a momentary contact with reality. It was
paddled by black fellows. You could see from afar the white of their eyeballs
glistening. They shouted, sang; their bodies streamed with perspiration; they
had faces like grotesque masks—these chaps; but they had bone, muscle, a
wild vitality, an intense energy of movement, that was as natural and true as
the surf along their coast. They wanted no excuse for being there. They were
a great comfort to look at. For a time I would feel I belonged still to a world
of straightforward facts; but the feeling would not last long. Something would
turn up to scare it away. Once, I remember, we came upon a man-of-war

anchored off the coast. There wasn’t even a shed there, and she was shelling
the bush. It appears the French had one of their wars going on thereabouts.
Her ensign drooped limp like a rag; the muzzles of the long eight-inch guns
stuck out all over the low hull; the greasy, shiny swell swung her up lazily and
let her down, swaying her thin masts. In the empty immensity of earth, sky,
and water, there she was, incomprehensible, firing into a continent. Pop,
would go one of the eight-inch guns; a small flame would dart and vanish, a
little white smoke would disappear, a tiny projectile would give a feeble
screech—and nothing happened. Nothing could happen. There was a touch of
insanity in the proceeding, a sense of lugubrious drollery in the sight; and it
was not dissipated by somebody on board assuring me earnestly there was a
camp of natives—he called them enemies!—hidden out of sight somewhere.

“We gave her her letters (I heard the men in that lonely ship were dying of

fever at the rate of three a day) and went on. We called at some more places
with farcical names, where the merry dance of death and trade goes on in a
still and earthy atmosphere as of an overheated catacomb; all along the
formless coast bordered by dangerous surf, as if Nature herself had tried to
ward off intruders; in and out of rivers, streams of death in life, whose banks
were rotting into mud, whose waters, thickening into slime, invaded the
contorted mangroves, that seemed to writhe at us in the extremity of an
impotent despair. Nowhere did we stop long enough to get a particularised
impression, but the general sense of vague and oppressive wonder grew upon
me. It was like a weary pilgrimage amongst hints for nightmares.

“It was upwards of thirty days before I saw the mouth of the big river. We

anchored off the seat of the government. But my work would not begin till
some two hundred miles further on. So as soon as I could I made a start for a
place thirty miles higher up.

“I had my passage on a little sea-going steamer. Her captain was a Swede,

and knowing me for a seaman, invited me on the bridge. He was a young
man, lean, fair, and morose, with lanky hair and a shuffling gait. As we left
the miserable little wharf, he tossed his head contemptuously at the shore.
‘Been living there?’ he asked. I said, ‘Yes.’ ‘Fine lot these government chaps
—are they not?’ he went on, speaking English with great precision and
considerable bitterness. ‘It is funny what some people will do for a few francs
a month. I wonder what becomes of that kind when it goes up country?’ I told
him I expected to see that soon. ‘So-o-o!’ he exclaimed. He shuffled athwart,
keeping one eye ahead vigilantly. ‘Don’t be too sure,’ he continued. ‘The
other day I took up a man who hanged himself on the road. He was a Swede,
too.’ ‘Hanged himself! Why, in God’s name?’ I cried. He kept on looking out
watchfully. ‘Who knows? The sun too much for him, or the country perhaps.’

“At last we opened a reach. A rocky cliff appeared, mounds of turned-up

earth by the shore, houses on a hill, others, with iron roofs, amongst a waste

of excavations, or hanging to the declivity. A continuous noise of rapids
above hovered over this scene of inhabited devastation. A lot of people,
mostly black and naked, moved about like ants. A jetty projected into the
river. A blinding sunlight drowned all this at times in a sudden recrudescence
of glare. ‘There’s your Company’s station,’ said the Swede, pointing to three
wooden barrack-like structures hanging on the rocky slope. ‘I will send your
things up. Four boxes did you say? So. Farewell.’

“I came upon a boiler wallowing in the grass, then found a path leading up

the hill. It turned aside for the boulders, and also for an undersized railway-
truck lying there on its back with its wheels in the air. One was off. The thing
looked as dead as the carcass of some animal. I came upon more pieces of
decaying machinery, a stack of rusty rails. To the left a clump of trees made a
thick shade, where dark things seemed to stir feebly. I blinked, the path was
steep. A horn tooted to the right, and I saw the black people run. A heavy and
dull detonation shook the ground, a puff of smoke came out of the cliff, and
that was all. No change appeared on the face of the rock. They were building
a railway. The cliff was not in the way of anything; but this objectless blasting
was all the work going on.

“A slight clinking behind me made me turn my head. Six black men

advanced in a file, toiling up the path. They walked erect and slow, balancing
small baskets full of earth on their heads, and the clink kept time with their
footsteps. Black rags were wound round their loins, and the short ends behind
wagged to and fro like tails.15 I could see every rib, the joints of their limbs
were like knots in a rope; each had an iron collar on his neck, and all were
connected together with a chain whose bights swung between them,
rhythmically clinking. Another report from the cliff made me think suddenly
of that ship of war I had seen firing into a continent. It was the same kind of
ominous voice; but these men could by no stretch of imagination be called
enemies. They were called criminals, and the outraged law, like the bursting
shells, had come to them, an insoluble mystery from over the sea. All the
meagre breasts panted together, the violently dilated nostrils quivered, the
eyes stared stonily up-hill. They passed me within six inches, without a
glance, with that complete, deathlike indifference of unhappy savages.16
Behind this raw matter one of the reclaimed, the product of the new forces at
work, strolled despondently, carrying a rifle by its middle. He had a uniform
jacket with one button off, and seeing a white man on the path, hoisted his
weapon on to his shoulder with alacrity. This was simple prudence, white men
being so much alike at a distance that he could not tell who I might be. He
was speedily reassured, and with a large, white, rascally grin, and a glance at
his charge, seemed to take me into partnership in his exalted trust. After all, I
also was a part of the great cause of these high and just proceedings.

“Instead of going up, I turned and descended to the left. My idea was to let

that chain-gang get out of sight before I climbed the hill. You know I am not
particularly tender; I’ve had to strike and to fend off. I’ve had to resist and to
attack sometimes—that’s only one way of resisting—without counting the
exact cost, according to the demands of such sort of life as I had blundered
into. I’ve seen the devil of violence, and the devil of greed, and the devil of
hot desire; but, by all the stars! these were strong, lusty, red-eyed devils, that
swayed and drove men—men, I tell you. But as I stood on this hillside, I
foresaw that in the blinding sunshine of that land I would become acquainted
with a flabby, pretending, weak-eyed devil of a rapacious and pitiless folly.
How insidious he could be, too, I was only to find out several months later
and a thousand miles further. For a moment I stood appalled, as though by a
warning. Finally I descended the hill, obliquely, towards the trees I had seen.

“I avoided a vast, artificial hole somebody had been digging on the slope,

the purpose of which I found it impossible to divine. It wasn’t a quarry or a
sandpit, anyhow. It was just a hole. It might have been connected with the
philanthropic desire of giving the criminals something to do. I don’t know.
Then I nearly fell into a very narrow ravine, almost no more than a scar in the
hillside. I discovered that a lot of imported drainage-pipes for the settlement
had been tumbled in there. There wasn’t one that was not broken. It was a
wanton smash-up. At last I got under the trees. My purpose was to stroll into
the shade for a moment; but no sooner within than it seemed to me I had
stepped into the gloomy circle of some Inferno. The rapids were near, and an
uninterrupted, uniform, headlong, rushing noise filled the mournful stillness
of the grove, where not a breath stirred, not a leaf moved, with a mysterious
sound—as though the tearing pace of the launched earth had suddenly
become audible.

“Black shapes crouched, lay, sat between the trees, leaning against the

trunks, clinging to the earth, half coming out, half effaced within the dim
light, in all the attitudes of pain, abandonment, and despair. Another mine on
the cliff went off, followed by a slight shudder of the soil under my feet. The
work was going on. The work! And this was the place where some of the
helpers had withdrawn to die.

“They were dying slowly—it was very clear. They were not enemies, they

were not criminals, they were nothing earthly now—nothing but black
shadows of disease and starvation, lying confusedly in the greenish gloom.
Brought from all the recesses of the coast in all the legality of time contracts,
lost in uncongenial surroundings, fed on unfamiliar food, they sickened,
became inefficient, and were then allowed to crawl away and rest. These
moribund shapes were free as air—and nearly as thin. I began to distinguish
the gleam of eyes under the trees. Then, glancing down, I saw a face near my
hand. The black bones reclined at full length with one shoulder against the
tree, and slowly the eyelids rose and the sunken eyes looked up at me,

enormous and vacant, a kind of blind, white flicker in the depths of the orbs,
which died out slowly. The man seemed young—almost a boy—but you
know with them it’s hard to tell. I found nothing else to do but to offer him
one of my good Swede’s ship’s biscuits I had in my pocket. The fingers
closed slowly on it and held—there was no other movement and no other
glance. He had tied a bit of white worsted round his neck—Why? Where did
he get it? Was it a badge—an ornament—a charm—a propitiatory act? Was
there any idea at all connected with it? It looked startling round his black
neck, this bit of white thread from beyond the seas.

“Near the same tree two more, bundles of acute angles, sat with their legs

drawn up. One, with his chin propped on his knees, stared at nothing, in an
intolerable and appalling manner: his brother phantom rested its forehead, as
if overcome with a great weariness; and all about others were scattered in
every pose of contorted collapse, as in some picture of a massacre or a
pestilence. While I stood horror-struck, one of these creatures rose to his
hands and knees, and went off on all-fours towards the river to drink. He
lapped out of his hand, then sat up in the sunlight, crossing his shins in front
of him, and after a time let his woolly head fall on his breastbone.

“I didn’t want any more loitering in the shade, and I made haste towards

the station. When near the buildings I met a white man, in such an unexpected
elegance of get-up that in the first moment I took him for a sort of vision. I
saw a high starched collar, white cuffs, a light alpaca jacket, snowy trousers, a
clear silk necktie, and varnished boots. No hat. Hair parted, brushed, oiled,
under a green-lined parasol held in a big white hand. He was amazing, and
had a penholder behind his ear.

“I shook hands with this miracle, and I learned he was the Company’s chief

accountant, and that all the book-keeping was done at this station. He had
come out for a moment, he said, ‘to get a breath of fresh air.’ The expression
sounded wonderfully odd, with its suggestion of sedentary desk-life. I
wouldn’t have mentioned the fellow to you at all, only it was from his lips
that I first heard the name of the man who is so indissolubly connected with
the memories of that time. Moreover, I respected the fellow. Yes; I respected
his collars, his vast cuffs, his brushed head. His appearance was certainly that
of a hairdresser’s dummy; but in the great demoralisation of the land he kept
up his appearance. That’s backbone! His starched collars and got-up shirt-
fronts were achievements of character. He had been out nearly three years;
and, later on, I could not help asking him how he managed to sport such linen.
He had just the faintest blush, and said modestly, ‘I’ve been teaching one of
the native women about the station. It was difficult. She had a distaste for the
work.’ Thus this man had, verily, accomplished something. And he was
devoted to his books, which were in apple-pie order.

“Everything else in the station was in a muddle—heads, things, buildings.

Caravans, strings of dusty niggers with splay feet arrived and departed; a
stream of manufactured goods, rubbishy cottons, beads, and brass wire set off
into the depths of darkness, and in return came a precious trickle of ivory.

“I had to wait in this station for ten days—an eternity. I lived in a tent in the

yard, but to be out of the chaos I would sometimes get into the accountant’s
office. It was built of horizontal planks, and so badly put together that, as he
bent over his high desk, he was barred from neck to heels with narrow strips
of sunlight. There was no need to open the big shutter to see. It was hot there
too; big flies buzzed fiendishly, and did not sting, but stabbed. I sat generally
on the floor, while, of faultless appearance (and even slightly scented),
perching on a high stool, he wrote, he wrote. Sometimes he stood up for
exercise. When a truckle-bed with a sick man (some invalided ‘agent’ from up
country) was hurriedly put in there, he exhibited a gentle annoyance. ‘The
groans of this sick person,’ he said, ‘distract my attention. And without that it
is extremely difficult to guard against clerical errors in this climate.’

“One day he remarked, without lifting his head, ‘In the interior you will no

doubt meet Mr Kurtz.’ On my asking who Mr Kurtz was, he said he was a
first-class agent; and seeing my disappointment at this information, he added
slowly, laying down his pen, ‘He is a very remarkable person.’ Further
questions elicited from him that Mr Kurtz was at present in charge of a
trading-post, a very important one, in the true ivory-country, at ‘the very
bottom of there. Sends in as much ivory as all the others put together…’ He
began to write again. The sick man was too ill to groan. The flies buzzed in a
great peace.

“Suddenly there was a growing murmur of voices and a great tramping of

feet. A caravan had come in. A violent babble of uncouth sounds burst out on
the other side of the planks. All the carriers were speaking together, and in the
midst of the uproar the lamentable voice of the chief agent was heard ‘giving
it up’ tearfully for the twentieth time that day.… He rose slowly. ‘What a
frightful row,’ he said. He crossed the room gently to look at the sick man,
and returning, said to me, ‘He does not hear.’ ‘What! Dead?’ I asked, startled.
‘No, not yet,’ he answered, with great composure. Then, alluding with a toss
of the head to the tumult in the station-yard, ‘When one has got to make
correct entries, one comes to hate these savages—hate them to the death!’ He
remained thoughtful for a moment. ‘When you see Mr Kurtz,’ he went on,
‘tell him from me that everything here’—he glanced at the desk—‘is very
satisfactory. I don’t like to write to him—with those messengers of ours you
never know who may get hold of your letter—at that Central Station.’ He
stared at me for a moment with his mild, bulging eyes. ‘Oh, he will go far,
very far,’ he began again. ‘He will be a somebody in the Administration
before long. They, above—the Council in Europe, you know—mean him to
be.’

“He turned to his work. The noise outside had ceased, and presently in

going out I stopped at the door. In the steady buzz of flies the homeward-
bound agent was lying flushed and insensible; the other, bent over his books,
was making correct entries of perfectly correct transactions; and fifty feet
below the doorstep I could see the still tree-tops of the grove of death.

“Next day I left that station at last, with a caravan of sixty men, for a two-

hundred-mile tramp.

“No use telling you much about that. Paths, paths, everywhere; a stamped-

in network of paths spreading over an empty land, through long grass,
through burnt grass, through thickets, down and up chilly ravines, up and
down stony hills ablaze with heat; and a solitude, a solitude, nobody, not a
hut. The population had cleared out a long time ago. Well, if a lot of
mysterious niggers armed with all kinds of fearful weapons suddenly took to
travelling on the road between Deal and Gravesend, catching the yokels right
and left to carry heavy loads for them, I fancy every farm and cottage
thereabouts would get empty very soon. Only here the dwellings were gone
too. Still I passed through several abandoned villages. There’s something
pathetically childish in the ruins of grass walls. Day after day, with the stamp
and shuffle of sixty pair of bare feet behind me, each pair under a sixty-pound
load. Camp, cook, sleep, strike camp, march. Now and then a carrier dead in
harness, at rest in the long grass near the path, with an empty water-gourd and
his long staff lying by his side. A great silence around and above. Perhaps on
some quiet night the tremor of far-off drums, sinking, swelling, a tremor vast,
faint; a sound weird, appealing, suggestive, and wild—and perhaps with as
profound a meaning as the sound of bells in a Christian country. Once a white
man in an unbuttoned uniform, camping on the path with an armed escort of
lank Zanzibaris, very hospitable and festive—not to say drunk. Was looking
after the upkeep of the road, he declared. Can’t say I saw any road or any
upkeep, unless the body of a middle-aged negro, with a bullet-hole in the
forehead, upon which I absolutely stumbled three miles further on, may be
considered as a permanent improvement. I had a white companion too, not a
bad chap, but rather too fleshy and with the exasperating habit of fainting on
the hot hillsides, miles away from the least bit of shade and water. Annoying,
you know, to hold your own coat like a parasol over a man’s head while he is
coming-to. I couldn’t help asking him once what he meant by coming there at
all. ‘To make money, of course.17 What do you think?’ he said, scornfully.
Then he got fever, and had to be carried in a hammock slung under a pole. As
he weighed sixteen stone I had no end of rows with the carriers. They jibbed,
ran away, sneaked off with their loads in the night—quite a mutiny. So, one
evening, I made a speech in English with gestures, not one of which was lost
to the sixty pairs of eyes before me, and the next morning I started the
hammock off in front all right. An hour afterwards I came upon the whole

concern wrecked in a bush—man, hammock, groans, blankets, horrors. The
heavy pole had skinned his poor nose. He was very anxious for me to kill
somebody, but there wasn’t the shadow of a carrier near. I remembered the
old doctor—‘It would be interesting for science to watch the mental changes
of individuals, on the spot.’ I felt I was becoming scientifically interesting.
However, all that is to no purpose. On the fifteenth day I came in sight of the
big river again, and hobbled into the Central Station. It was on a back water
surrounded by scrub and forest, with a pretty border of smelly mud on one
side, and on the three others enclosed by a crazy fence of rushes. A neglected
gap was all the gate it had, and the first glance at the place was enough to let
you see the flabby devil was running that show. White men with long staves
in their hands appeared languidly from amongst the buildings, strolling up to
take a look at me, and then retired out of sight somewhere. One of them, a
stout, excitable chap with black moustaches, informed me with great
volubility and many digressions, as soon as I told him who I was, that my
steamer was at the bottom of the river. I was thunderstruck. What, how, why?
Oh, it was ‘all right.’ The ‘manager himself’ was there. All quite correct.
‘Everybody had behaved splendidly! splendidly!’—‘you must,’ he said in
agitation, ‘go and see the general manager at once. He is waiting!’

“I did not see the real significance of that wreck at once. I fancy I see it

now, but I am not sure—not at all. Certainly the affair was too stupid—when I
think of it—to be altogether natural. Still… But at the moment it presented
itself simply as a confounded nuisance. The steamer was sunk. They had
started two days before in a sudden hurry up the river with the manager on
board, in charge of some volunteer skipper, and before they had been out
three hours they tore the bottom out of her on stones, and she sank near the
south bank. I asked myself what I was to do there, now my boat was lost. As a
matter of fact, I had plenty to do in fishing my command out of the river. I
had to set about it the very next day. That, and the repairs when I brought the
pieces to the station, took some months.

“My first interview with the manager was curious. He did not ask me to sit

down after my twenty-mile walk that morning. He was commonplace in
complexion, in feature, in manner, and in voice.18 He was of middle size and
of ordinary build. His eyes, of the usual blue, were perhaps remarkably cold,
and he certainly could make his glance fall on one as trenchant and heavy as
an axe. But even at these times the rest of his person seemed to disclaim the
intention. Otherwise there was only an indefinable, faint expression of his
lips, something stealthy—a smile—not a smile—I remember it, but I can’t
explain. It was unconscious, this smile was, though just after he had said
something it got intensified for an instant.19 It came at the end of his speeches
like a seal applied on the words to make the meaning of the commonest
phrase appear absolutely inscrutable. He was a common trader, from his

youth up employed in these parts—nothing more. He was obeyed, yet he
inspired neither love nor fear, nor even respect. He inspired uneasiness. That
was it! Uneasiness. Not a definite mistrust—just uneasiness—nothing more.
You have no idea how effective such a… a… faculty can be. He had no
genius for organising, for initiative, or for order even. That was evident in
such things as the deplorable state of the station. He had no learning, and no
intelligence. His position had come to him—why? Perhaps because he was
never ill… He had served three terms of three years out there… Because
triumphant health in the general rout of constitutions is a kind of power in
itself. When he went home on leave he rioted on a large scale—pompously.
Jack ashore—with a difference—in externals only. This one could gather
from his casual talk. He originated nothing, he could keep the routine going—
that’s all. But he was great. He was great by this little thing that it was
impossible to tell what could control such a man. He never gave that secret
away. Perhaps there was nothing within him. Such a suspicion made one
pause—for out there there were no external checks. Once when various
tropical diseases had laid low almost every ‘agent’ in the station, he was heard
to say, ‘Men who come out here should have no entrails.’ He sealed the
utterance with that smile of his, as though it had been a door opening into a
darkness he had in his keeping. You fancied you had seen things—but the seal
was on. When annoyed at meal-times by the constant quarrels of the white
men about precedence, he ordered an immense round table to be made, for
which a special house had to be built. This was the station’s mess-room.
Where he sat was the first place—the rest were nowhere. One felt this to be
his unalterable conviction.20 He was neither civil nor uncivil. He was quiet.
He allowed his ‘boy’—an overfed young negro from the coast—to treat the
white men, under his very eyes, with provoking insolence.

“He began to speak as soon as he saw me. I had been very long on the road.

He could not wait. Had to start without me. The up-river stations had to be
relieved. There had been so many delays already that he did not know who
was dead and who was alive, and how they got on—and so on, and so on. He
paid no attention to my explanations, and, playing with a stick of sealing-wax,
repeated several times that the situation was ‘very grave, very grave.’ There
were rumours that a very important station was in jeopardy, and its chief, Mr
Kurtz, was ill. Hoped it was not true. Mr Kurtz was… I felt weary and
irritable. Hang Kurtz, I thought. I interrupted him by saying I had heard of Mr
Kurtz on the coast. ‘Ah! So they talk of him down there,’ he murmured to
himself. Then he began again, assuring me Mr Kurtz was the best agent he
had, an exceptional man, of the greatest importance to the Company;
therefore I could understand his anxiety. He was, he said, ‘very, very uneasy.’
Certainly he fidgeted on his chair a good deal, exclaimed, ‘Ah, Mr Kurtz!’,
broke the stick of sealing-wax and seemed dumbfounded by the accident.

Next thing he wanted to know ‘how long it would take to—’ I interrupted him
again. Being hungry, you know, and kept on my feet too, I was getting savage.
‘How could I tell?’ I said. ‘I hadn’t even seen the wreck yet—some months,
no doubt.’ All this talk seemed to me so futile. ‘Some months,’ he said. ‘Well,
let us say three months before we can make a start. Yes. That ought to do the
affair.’ I flung out of his hut (he lived all alone in a clay hut with a sort of
verandah) muttering to myself my opinion of him. He was a chattering idiot.
Afterwards I took it back when it was borne upon me startlingly with what
extreme nicety he had estimated the time requisite for the ‘affair.’

“I went to work the next day, turning, so to speak, my back on that station.

In that way only it seemed to me I could keep my hold on the redeeming facts
of life. Still, one must look about sometimes; and then I saw this station, these
men strolling aimlessly about in the sunshine of the yard. I asked myself
sometimes what it all meant. They wandered here and there with their absurd
long staves in their hands, like a lot of faithless pilgrims bewitched inside a
rotten fence. The word ‘ivory’ rang in the air, was whispered, was sighed. You
would think they were praying to it. A taint of imbecile rapacity blew through
it all, like a whiff from some corpse. By Jove! I’ve never seen anything so
unreal in my life. And outside, the silent wilderness surrounding this cleared
speck on the earth struck me as something great and invincible, like evil or
truth, waiting patiently for the passing away of this fantastic invasion.

“Oh, these months! Well, never mind. Various things happened. One

evening a grass shed full of calico, cotton prints, beads, and I don’t know
what else, burst into a blaze so suddenly that you would have thought the
earth had opened to let an avenging fire consume all that trash. I was smoking
my pipe quietly by my dismantled steamer, and saw them all cutting capers in
the light, with their arms lifted high, when the stout man with moustaches
came tearing down to the river, a tin pail in his hand, assured me that
everybody was ‘behaving splendidly, splendidly,’ dipped about a quart of
water and tore back again. I noticed there was a hole in the bottom of his pail.

“I strolled up. There was no hurry. You see the thing had gone off like a

box of matches. It had been hopeless from the very first. The flame had
leaped high, driven everybody back, lighted up everything—and collapsed.
The shed was already a heap of embers glowing fiercely. A nigger was being
beaten near by. They said he had caused the fire in some way; be that as it
may, he was screeching most horribly. I saw him, later on, for several days,
sitting in a bit of shade looking very sick and trying to recover himself:
afterwards he arose and went out—and the wilderness without a sound took
him into its bosom again. As I approached the glow from the dark I found
myself at the back of two men, talking. I heard the name of Kurtz
pronounced, then the words, ‘take advantage of this unfortunate accident.’
One of the men was the manager. I wished him a good evening. ‘Did you ever

see anything like it—eh? it is incredible,’ he said, and walked off. The other
man remained. He was a first-class agent, young, gentlemanly, a bit reserved,
with a forked little beard and a hooked nose. He was stand-offish with the
other agents, and they on their side said he was the manager’s spy upon them.
As to me, I had hardly ever spoken to him before. We got into talk, and by
and bye we strolled away from the hissing ruins. Then he asked me to his
room, which was in the main building of the station. He struck a match, and I
perceived that this young aristocrat had not only a silver-mounted dressing-
case but also a whole candle all to himself. Just at that time the manager was
the only man supposed to have any right to candles. Native mats covered the
clay walls; a collection of spears, assegais, shields, knives was hung up in
trophies. The business entrusted to this fellow was the making of bricks—so I
had been informed; but there wasn’t a fragment of a brick anywhere in the
station, and he had been there more than a year—waiting. It seems he could
not make bricks without something, I don’t know what—straw maybe.
Anyway, it could not be found there, and as it was not likely to be sent from
Europe, it did not appear clear to me what he was waiting for. An act of
special creation perhaps. However, they were all waiting—all the sixteen or
twenty pilgrims of them—for something; and upon my word it did not seem
an uncongenial occupation, from the way they took it, though the only thing
that ever came to them was disease—as far as I could see. They beguiled the
time by backbiting and intriguing against each other in a foolish kind of way.
There was an air of plotting about that station, but nothing came of it, of
course. It was as unreal as everything else—as the philanthropic pretence of
the whole concern, as their talk, as their government, as their show of work.
The only real feeling was a desire to get appointed to a trading-post where
ivory was to be had, so that they could earn percentages. They intrigued and
slandered and hated each other only on that account—but as to effectually
lifting a little finger—oh, no. By heavens! there is something after all in the
world allowing one man to steal a horse while another must not look at a
halter. Steal a horse straight out. Very well. He has done it. Perhaps he can
ride. But there is a way of looking at a halter that would provoke the most
charitable of saints into a kick.

“I had no idea why he wanted to be so sociable, but as we chatted in there it

suddenly occurred to me the fellow was trying to get at something—in fact,
pumping me. He alluded constantly to Europe, to the people I was supposed
to know there—putting leading questions as to my acquaintances in the
sepulchral city, and so on. His little eyes glittered like mica discs—with
curiosity—though he tried to keep up a bit of superciliousness. At first I was
astonished, but very soon I became also awfully curious to see what he would
find out from me. I couldn’t possibly imagine what I had in me to make it
worth his while. It was very pretty to see how he baffled himself, for in truth

my body was full of chills, and my head had nothing in it but that wretched
steamboat business. It was evident he took me for a perfectly shameless
prevaricator. At last he got angry, and, to conceal a movement of furious
annoyance, he yawned. I rose. Then I noticed a small sketch in oils, on a
panel, representing a woman, draped and blindfolded, carrying a lighted
torch. The background was sombre—almost black. The movement of the
woman was stately, and the effect of the torchlight on the face was sinister.

“It arrested me, and he stood by, civilly holding an empty half-pint

champagne bottle (medical comforts) with the candle stuck in it. To my
question he said Mr Kurtz had painted this—in this very station more than a
year ago—while waiting for means to go to his trading-post. ‘Tell me, pray,’
said I, ‘who is this Mr Kurtz?’

“‘The chief of the Inner Station,’ he answered in a short tone, looking away.

‘Much obliged,’ I said, laughing. ‘And you are the brickmaker of the Central
Station. Every one knows that.’ He was silent for a while. ‘He is a prodigy,’
he said at last. ‘He is an emissary of pity, and science, and progress, and devil
knows what else. We want,’ he began to declaim suddenly, ‘for the guidance
of the cause entrusted to us by Europe, so to speak, higher intelligence, wide
sympathies, a singleness of purpose.’ ‘Who says that?’ I asked. ‘Lots of them,’
he replied. ‘Some even write that; and so he comes here, a special being, as
you ought to know.’ ‘Why ought I to know?’ I interrupted, really surprised.
He paid no attention. ‘Yes. To-day he is chief of the best station, next year he
will be assistant-manager, two years more and… but I daresay you know what
he will be in two years’ time. You are of the new gang—the gang of virtue.
The same people who sent him specially also recommended you. Oh, don’t
say no. I’ve my own eyes to trust.’ Light dawned upon me. My dear aunt’s
influential acquaintances were producing an unexpected effect upon that
young man. I nearly burst into a laugh. ‘Do you read the Company’s
confidential correspondence?’ I asked. He hadn’t a word to say. It was great
fun. ‘When Mr Kurtz,’ I continued severely, ‘is General Manager, you won’t
have the opportunity.’

“He blew the candle out suddenly, and we went outside. The moon had

risen. Black figures strolled about listlessly, pouring water on the glow,
whence proceeded a sound of hissing; steam ascended in the moonlight, the
beaten nigger groaned somewhere. ‘What a row the brute makes!’ said the
indefatigable man with the moustaches, appearing near us. ‘Serve him right.
Transgression—punishment—bang! Pitiless, pitiless. That’s the only way.
This will prevent all conflagrations for the future. I was just telling the
manager…’ He noticed my companion, and became crestfallen all at once.
‘Not in bed yet,’ he said, with a kind of servile heartiness; ‘it’s so natural. Ha!
Danger—agitation.’ He vanished. I went on to the river-side, and the other
followed me. I heard a scathing murmur at my ear, ‘Heap of muffs—go to.’

The pilgrims could be seen in knots gesticulating, discussing. Several had still
their staves in their hands. I verily believe they took these sticks to bed with
them. Beyond the fence the forest stood up spectrally21 in the moonlight, and
through the dim stir, through the faint sounds of that lamentable courtyard, the
silence of the land went home to one’s very heart—its mystery, its greatness,
the amazing reality of its concealed life. The hurt nigger moaned feebly
somewhere near by, and then fetched a deep sigh that made me mend my pace
away from there. I felt a hand introducing itself under my arm. ‘My dear sir,’
said the fellow, ‘I don’t want to be misunderstood, and especially by you, who
will see Mr Kurtz long before I can have that pleasure. I wouldn’t like him to
get a false idea of my disposition.…’

“I let him run on, this papier-mâché Mephistopheles, and it seemed to me

that if I tried I could poke my forefinger through him, and find nothing inside
but a little loose dirt, maybe. He, don’t you see, had been planning to be
assistant-manager by and bye under the present man, and I could see that the
coming of that Kurtz had upset them both not a little. He talked precipitately,
and I did not try to stop him. I had my shoulders against the wreck of my
steamer, hauled up on the slope like a carcass of some big river animal. The
smell of mud, of primeval mud, by Jove! was in my nostrils, the high stillness
of primeval forests was before my eyes; there were shiny patches on the black
creek. The moon had spread over everything a thin layer of silver—over the
rank grass, over the mud, upon the wall of matted vegetation standing higher
than the wall of a temple, over the great river I could see through a sombre
gap glittering, glittering, as it flowed broadly by without a murmur. All this
was great, expectant, mute, while the man jabbered about himself. I wondered
whether the stillness on the face of the immensity looking at us two were
meant as an appeal or as a menace. What were we who had strayed in here?
Could we handle that dumb thing, or would it handle us? I felt how big, how
confoundedly big, was that thing that couldn’t talk, and perhaps was deaf as
well. What was in there? I could see a little ivory coming out from there, and
I had heard Mr Kurtz was in there. I had heard enough about it too—God
knows! Yet somehow it didn’t bring any image with it—no more than if I had
been told an angel or a fiend was in there. I believed it in the same way one of
you might believe there are inhabitants in the planet Mars. I knew once a
Scotch sailmaker who was certain, dead sure, there were people in Mars. If
you asked him for some idea how they looked and behaved, he would get shy
and mutter something about ‘walking on all-fours.’ If you as much as smiled,
he would—though a man of sixty—offer to fight you. I would not have gone
so far as to fight for Kurtz, but I went for him near enough to a lie. You know
I hate, detest, and can’t bear a lie, not because I am straighter than the rest of
us, but simply because it appals me. There is a taint of death, a flavour of
mortality in lies—which is exactly what I hate and detest in the world—what

I want to forget. It makes me miserable and sick, like biting something rotten
would do. Temperament, I suppose. Well, I went near enough to it by letting
the young fool there believe anything he liked to imagine as to my influence
in Europe. I became in an instant as much of a pretence as the rest of the
bewitched pilgrims. This simply because I had a notion it somehow would be
of help to that Kurtz whom at the time I did not see—you understand. He was
just a word for me. I did not see the man in the name any more than you do.22
Do you see him? Do you see the story? Do you see anything? It seems to me I
am trying to tell you a dream—making a vain attempt, because no relation of
a dream can convey the dream-sensation, that commingling of absurdity,
surprise, and bewilderment in a tremor of struggling revolt, that notion of
being captured by the incredible which is of the very essence of dreams.…”

He was silent for a while.
“…No, it is impossible; it is impossible to convey the life-sensation of any

given epoch of one’s existence—that which makes its truth, its meaning—its
subtle and penetrating essence. It is impossible. We live, as we dream—alone.
…”

He paused again as if reflecting, then added—
“Of course in this you fellows see more than I could then. You see me,

whom you know.…”

It had become so pitch dark that we listeners could hardly see one another.

For a long time already he, sitting apart, had been no more to us than a voice.
There was not a word from anybody. The others might have been asleep, but I
was awake. I listened, I listened on the watch for the sentence, for the word,
that would give me the clue to the faint uneasiness inspired by this narrative
that seemed to shape itself without human lips in the heavy night-air of the
river.

“…Yes—I let him run on,” Marlow began again, “and think what he

pleased about the powers that were behind me. I did! And there was nothing
behind me! There was nothing but that wretched, old, mangled steamboat I
was leaning against, while he talked fluently about ‘the necessity for every
man to get on.’ ‘And when one comes out here, you conceive, it is not to gaze
at the moon.’ Mr Kurtz was a ‘universal genius,’ but even a genius would find
it easier to work with ‘adequate tools—intelligent men.’ He did not make
bricks—why, there was a physical impossibility in the way—as I was well
aware; and if he did secretarial work for the manager, it was because ‘no
sensible man rejects wantonly the confidence of his superiors.’ Did I see it? I
saw it. What more did I want? What I really wanted was rivets, by heaven!
Rivets. To get on with the work—to stop the hole.23 Rivets I wanted. There
were cases of them down at the coast—cases—piled up—burst—split! You
kicked a loose rivet at every second step in that station yard on the hillside.
Rivets had rolled into the grove of death. You could fill your pockets with

rivets for the trouble of stooping down—and there wasn’t one rivet to be
found where it was wanted. We had plates that would do, but nothing to fasten
them with. And every week the messenger, a lone negro, letter-bag on
shoulder and staff in hand, left our station for the coast. And several times a
week a coast caravan came in with trade goods—ghastly glazed calico that
made you shudder only to look at it, glass beads value about a penny a quart,
confounded spotted cotton handkerchiefs. And no rivets. Three carriers could
have brought all that was wanted to set that steamboat afloat.

“He was becoming confidential now, but I fancy my unresponsive attitude

must have exasperated him at last, for he judged it necessary to inform me he
feared neither God nor devil, let alone any mere man. I said I could see that
very well, but what I wanted was a certain quantity of rivets—and rivets were
what really Mr Kurtz wanted, if he had only known it. Now letters went to the
coast every week.… ‘My dear sir,’ he cried, ‘I write from dictation.’ I
demanded rivets. There was a way—for an intelligent man. He changed his
manner; became very cold, and suddenly began to talk about a hippopotamus;
wondered whether sleeping on board the steamer (I stuck to my salvage night
and day) I wasn’t disturbed. There was an old hippo that had the bad habit of
getting out on the bank and roaming at night over the station grounds. The
pilgrims used to turn out in a body and empty every rifle they could lay hands
on at him. Some even had sat up o’ nights for him. All this energy was
wasted, though. ‘That animal has a charmed life,’ he said; ‘but you can say
this only of brutes in this country. No man—you apprehend me?—no man
here bears a charmed life.’ He stood there for a moment in the moonlight with
his delicate hooked nose set a little askew, and his mica eyes glittering
without a wink, then, with a curt Good night, he strode off. I could see he was
disturbed and considerably puzzled, which made me feel more hopeful than I
had been for days. It was a great comfort to turn from that chap to my
influential friend, the battered, twisted, ruined, tin-pot steamboat. I clambered
on board. She rang under my feet like an empty Huntley & Palmers biscuit-tin
kicked along a gutter; she was nothing so solid in make, and rather less pretty
in shape, but I had expended enough hard work on her to make me love her.
No influential friend would have served me better. She had given me a chance
to come out a bit—to find out what I could do. No, I don’t like work. I had
rather laze about and think of all the fine things that can be done. I don’t like
work—no man does—but I like what is in the work—the chance to find
yourself. Your own reality—for yourself, not for others—what no other man
can ever know. They can only see the mere show, and never can tell what it
really means.

“I was not surprised to see somebody sitting aft, on the deck, with his legs

dangling over the mud. You see I rather chummed with the few mechanics
there were in that station, whom the other pilgrims naturally despised—on

account of their imperfect manners, I suppose. This was the foreman—a
boiler-maker by trade—a good worker. He was a lank, bony, yellow-faced
man, with big intense eyes. His aspect was worried, and his head was as bald
as the palm of my hand; but his hair in falling seemed to have stuck to his
chin, and had prospered in the new locality, for his beard hung down to his
waist. He was a widower with six young children (he had left them in charge
of a sister of his to come out there), and the passion of his life was pigeon-
flying. He was an enthusiast and a connoisseur. He would rave about pigeons.
After work hours he used sometimes to come over from his hut for a talk
about his children and his pigeons; at work, when he had to crawl in the mud
under the bottom of the steamboat, he would tie up that beard of his in a kind
of white serviette he brought for the purpose. It had loops to go over his ears.
In the evening he could be seen squatted on the bank rinsing that wrapper in
the creek with great care, then spreading it solemnly on a bush to dry.

“I slapped him on the back and shouted, ‘We shall have rivets!’ He

scrambled to his feet exclaiming, ‘No! Rivets!’ as though he couldn’t believe
his ears. Then in a low voice, ‘You… eh?’ I don’t know why we behaved like
lunatics. I put my finger to the side of my nose and nodded mysteriously.
‘Good for you!’ he cried, snapped his fingers above his head, lifting one foot.
I tried a jig. We capered on the iron deck. A frightful clatter came out of that
empty hulk, and the virgin forest on the other bank of the creek sent it back in
a thundering roll upon the sleeping station. It must have made some of the
pilgrims sit up in their hovels. A dark figure obscured the lighted doorway of
the manager’s hut, vanished, then, a second or so after, the doorway itself
vanished too. We stopped, and the silence driven away by the stamping of our
feet flowed back again from the recesses of the land. The great wall of
vegetation, an exuberant and entangled mass of trunks, branches, leaves,
boughs, festoons, motionless in the moonlight, was like a rioting invasion of
soundless life, a rolling wave of plants, piled up, crested, ready to topple over
the creek, to sweep every little man of us out of his little existence.24 And it
moved not. A deadened burst of mighty splashes and snorts reached us from
afar, as though an ichthyosaurus had been taking a bath of glitter in the great
river. ‘After all,’ said the boiler-maker in a reasonable tone, ‘why shouldn’t
we get the rivets?’ Why not, indeed! I did not know of any reason why we
shouldn’t. ‘They’ll come in three weeks,’ I said, confidently.

“But they didn’t. Instead of rivets there came an invasion, an infliction, a

visitation.25 It came in sections during the next three weeks, each section
headed by a donkey carrying a white man in new clothes and tan shoes,
bowing from that elevation right and left to the impressed pilgrims. A
quarrelsome band of footsore sulky niggers trod on the heels of the donkey; a
lot of tents, camp-stools, tin boxes, white cases, brown bales would be shot
down in the courtyard, and the air of mystery would deepen a little over the

muddle of the station. Five such instalments came, with their absurd air of
disorderly flight with the loot of innumerable outfit shops and provision
stores, that, one would think, they were lugging, after a raid, into the
wilderness for equitable division. It was an inextricable mess of things decent
in themselves but that human folly made look like the spoils of thieving.

“This devoted band called itself the Eldorado Exploring Expedition, and I

believe they were sworn to secrecy. Their talk, however, was the talk of
sordid buccaneers: it was reckless without hardihood, greedy without
audacity, and cruel without courage; there was not an atom of foresight or of
serious intention in the whole batch of them, and they did not seem aware
these things are wanted for the work of the world. To tear treasure out of the
bowels of the land was their desire, with no more moral purpose at the back
of it than there is in burglars breaking into a safe. Who paid the expenses of
the noble enterprise I don’t know; but the uncle of our manager was leader of
that lot.

“In exterior he resembled a butcher in a poor neighbourhood, and his eyes

had a look of sleepy cunning. He carried his fat paunch with ostentation on
his short legs, and during the time his gang infested the station spoke to no
one but his nephew. You could see these two roaming about all day long with
their heads close together in an everlasting confab.

“I had given up worrying myself about the rivets. One’s capacity for that

kind of folly is more limited than you would suppose. I said Hang!—and let
things slide. I had plenty of time for meditation, and now and then I would
give some thought to Kurtz. I wasn’t very interested in him. No. Still, I was
curious to see whether this man, who had come out equipped with moral ideas
of some sort, would climb to the top after all, and how he would set about his
work when there.”

II

“One evening as I was lying flat on the deck of my steamboat, I heard voices
approaching—and there were the nephew and the uncle strolling along the
bank. I laid my head on my arm again, and had nearly lost myself in a doze,
when somebody said in my ear, as it were: ‘I am as harmless as a little child,
but I don’t like to be dictated to. Am I the manager—or am I not? I was
ordered to send him there. It’s incredible.’… I became aware that the two
were standing on the shore alongside the forepart of the steamboat, just below
my head. I did not move; it did not occur to me to move: I was sleepy. ‘It is
unpleasant,’ grunted the uncle. ‘He has asked the Administration to be sent
there,’ said the other, ‘with the idea of showing what he could do; and I was
instructed accordingly. Look at the influence that man must have. Is it not
frightful?’ They both agreed it was frightful, then made several bizarre
remarks: ‘Make rain and fine weather—one man—the Council—by the
nose’—bits of absurd sentences that got the better of my drowsiness, so that I
had pretty near the whole of my wits about me when the uncle said, ‘The
climate may do away with this difficulty for you. Is he alone there?’ ‘Yes,’
answered the manager; ‘he sent his assistant down the river with a note to me
in these terms: “Clear this poor devil out of the country, and don’t bother
sending more of that sort. I had rather be alone than have the kind of men you
can dispose of with me.” It was more than a year ago. Can you imagine such
impudence!’ ‘Anything since then?’ asked the other, hoarsely. ‘Ivory,’ jerked
out the nephew; ‘lots of it—prime sort—lots—most annoying, from him.’
‘And with that?’ questioned the heavy rumble. ‘Invoice,’ was the reply fired
out, so to speak. Then silence. They had been talking about Kurtz.

“I was broad awake by this time, but, lying perfectly at ease, remained still,

having no inducement to change my position. ‘How did that ivory come all
this way?’ growled the elder man, who seemed very vexed. The other
explained that it had come with a fleet of canoes in charge of an English half-
caste clerk Kurtz had with him; that Kurtz had apparently intended to return
himself, the station being by that time bare of goods and stores, but after
coming three hundred miles, had suddenly decided to go back, which he
started to do alone in a small dug-out with four paddlers, leaving the half-
caste to continue down the river with the ivory. The two fellows there seemed
astounded at anybody attempting such a thing. They were at a loss for an

adequate motive. As to me, I seemed to see Kurtz for the first time. It was a
distinct glimpse: the dug-out, four paddling savages, and the lone white man
turning his back suddenly on the headquarters, on relief, on thoughts of home
—perhaps; setting his face towards the depths of the wilderness, towards his
empty and desolate station. I did not know the motive. Perhaps he was just
simply a fine fellow who stuck to his work for its own sake. His name, you
understand, had not been pronounced once. He was ‘that man.’ The half-caste,
who, as far as I could see, had conducted a difficult trip with great prudence
and pluck, was invariably alluded to as ‘that scoundrel.’ The ‘scoundrel’ had
reported that the ‘man’ had been very ill—had recovered imperfectly.… The
two below me moved away then a few paces, and strolled back and forth at
some little distance. I heard: ‘Military post—doctor—two hundred miles—
quite alone now—unavoidable delays—nine months—no news—strange
rumours.’ They approached again, just as the manager was saying, ‘No one,
as far as I know, unless a species of wandering trader—a pestilential fellow,
snapping ivory from the natives.’ Who was it they were talking about now? I
gathered in snatches that this was some man supposed to be in Kurtz’s
district, and of whom the manager did not approve. ‘We will not be free from
unfair competition till one of these fellows is hanged for an example,’ he said.
‘Certainly,’ grunted the other; ‘get him hanged! Why not? Anything—
anything can be done in this country. That’s what I say; nobody here, you
understand, here, can endanger your position. And why? You stand the
climate—you outlast them all. The danger is in Europe; but there before I left
I took care to—’ They moved off and whispered, then their voices rose again.
‘The extraordinary series of delays is not my fault. I did my possible.’ The fat
man sighed, ‘Very sad.’ ‘And the pestiferous absurdity of his talk,’ continued
the other; ‘he bothered me enough when he was here. “Each station should be
like a beacon on the road towards better things, a centre for trade of course,
but also for humanising, improving, instructing.” Conceive you—that ass!
And he wants to be manager! No, it’s—’ Here he got choked by excessive
indignation, and I lifted my head the least bit. I was surprised to see how near
they were—right under me. I could have spat upon their hats. They were
looking on the ground, absorbed in thought. The manager was switching his
leg with a slender twig: his sagacious relative lifted his head. ‘You have been
well since you came out this time?’ he asked. The other gave a start. ‘Who? I?
Oh! Like a charm—like a charm. But the rest—oh, my goodness! All sick.
They die so quick, too, that I haven’t the time to send them out of the country
—it’s incredible!’ ‘H’m. Just so,’ grunted the uncle. ‘Ah! my boy, trust to this
—I say, trust to this.’ I saw him extend his short flipper of an arm for a
gesture that took in the forest, the creek, the mud, the river1—seemed to
beckon with a dishonouring flourish before the sunlit face of the land a
treacherous appeal to the lurking death, to the hidden evil, to the profound

darkness of its heart. It was so startling that I leaped to my feet and looked
back at the edge of the forest, as though I had expected an answer of some
sort to that black display of confidence. You know the foolish notions that
come to one sometimes. The high stillness confronted these two figures with
its ominous patience, waiting for the passing away of a fantastic invasion.

“They swore aloud together—out of sheer fright, I believe—then

pretending not to know anything of my existence, turned back to the station.
The sun was low; and leaning forward side by side, they seemed to be tugging
painfully uphill their two ridiculous shadows of unequal length, that trailed
behind them slowly over the tall grass without bending a single blade.

“In a few days the Eldorado Expedition went into the patient wilderness,

that closed upon it as the sea closes over a diver. Long afterwards the news
came that all the donkeys were dead. I know nothing as to the fate of the less
valuable animals. They, no doubt, like the rest of us, found what they
deserved. I did not inquire. I was then rather excited at the prospect of
meeting Kurtz very soon. When I say very soon I mean it comparatively. It
was just two months from the day we left the creek when we came to the bank
below Kurtz’s station.

“Going up that river was like travelling back to the earliest beginnings of

the world, when vegetation rioted on the earth and the big trees were kings.
An empty stream, a great silence, an impenetrable forest. The air was warm,
thick, heavy, sluggish. There was no joy in the brilliance of sunshine. The
long stretches of the waterway ran on, deserted, into the gloom of
overshadowed distances. On silvery sandbanks hippos and alligators sunned
themselves side by side. The broadening waters flowed through a mob of
wooded islands; you lost your way on that river as you would in a desert, and
butted all day long against shoals, trying to find the channel, till you thought
yourself bewitched and cut off for ever from everything you had known once
—somewhere—far away—in another existence perhaps. There were moments
when one’s past came back to one, as it will sometimes when you have not a
moment to spare to yourself; but it came in the shape of an unrestful and
noisy dream, remembered with wonder amongst the overwhelming realities of
this strange world of plants, and water, and silence. And this stillness of life
did not in the least resemble a peace. It was the stillness of an implacable
force brooding over an inscrutable intention. It looked at you with a vengeful
aspect. I got used to it afterwards; I did not see it any more; I had no time. I
had to keep guessing at the channel; I had to discern, mostly by inspiration,
the signs of hidden banks; I watched for sunken stones; I was learning to clap
my teeth smartly before my heart flew out, when I shaved by a fluke some
infernal sly old snag that would have ripped the life out of the tin-pot
steamboat and drowned all the pilgrims; I had to keep a look-out for the signs
of dead wood we could cut up in the night for next day’s steaming. When you

have to attend to things of that sort, to the mere incidents of the surface, the
reality—the reality, I tell you—fades. The inner truth is hidden—luckily,
luckily. But I felt it all the same; I felt often its mysterious stillness watching
me at my monkey tricks, just as it watches you fellows performing on your
respective tight-ropes for—what is it? half-a-crown a tumble—”

“Try to be civil, Marlow,” growled a voice, and I knew there was at least

one listener awake besides myself.

“I beg your pardon. I forgot the heartache which makes up the rest of the

price. And indeed what does the price matter, if the trick be well done? You
do your tricks very well. And I didn’t do badly either, since I managed not to
sink that steamboat on my first trip. It’s a wonder to me yet. Imagine a
blindfolded man set to drive a van over a bad road. I sweated and shivered
over that business considerably, I can tell you. After all, for a seaman, to
scrape the bottom of the thing that’s supposed to float all the time under his
care is the unpardonable sin. No one may know of it, but you never forget the
thump—eh? A blow on the very heart. You remember it, you dream of it, you
wake up at night and think of it—years after—and go hot and cold all over. I
don’t pretend to say that steamboat floated all the time. More than once she
had to wade for a bit, with twenty cannibals splashing around and pushing.
We had enlisted some of these chaps on the way for a crew. Fine fellows—
cannibals—in their place. They were men one could work with, and I am
grateful to them.2 And, after all, they did not eat each other before my face:
they had brought along a provision of hippo-meat which went rotten, and
made the mystery of the wilderness stink in my nostrils. Phoo! I can sniff it
now. I had the manager on board and three or four pilgrims with their staves
—all complete. Sometimes we came upon a station close by the bank,
clinging to the skirts of the Unknown, and the white men rushing out of a
tumble-down hovel, with great gestures of joy and surprise and welcome,
seemed very strange—had the appearance of being held there captive by a
spell. The word ‘ivory’ would ring in the air for a while—and on we went
again into the silence, along empty reaches, round the still bends, between the
high walls of our winding way, reverberating in hollow claps the ponderous
beat of the stern-wheel. Trees, trees, millions of trees, massive, immense,
running up high; and at their foot, hugging the bank against the stream, crept
the little begrimed steamboat, like a sluggish beetle crawling on the floor of a
lofty portico. It made you feel very small, very lost, and yet it was not
altogether depressing that feeling. After all, if you were small, the grimy
beetle crawled on—which was just what you wanted it to do. Where the
pilgrims imagined it crawled to I don’t know. To some place where they
expected to get something, I bet! For me it crawled towards Kurtz—
exclusively; but when the steam-pipes started leaking we crawled very slow.
The reaches opened before us and closed behind, as if the forest had stepped

leisurely across the water to bar the way for our return. We penetrated deeper
and deeper into the heart of darkness. It was very quiet there. At night
sometimes the roll of drums behind the curtain of trees would run up the river
and remain sustained faintly, as if hovering in the air high over our heads, till
the first break of day. Whether this meant war, peace, or prayer we could not
tell. The dawns were heralded by the descent of a chill stillness; the
woodcutters slept, their fires burned low; the snapping of a twig would make
you start. We were wanderers on a prehistoric earth, on an earth that wore the
aspect of an unknown planet. We could have fancied ourselves the first of
men taking possession of an accursed inheritance, to be subdued at the cost of
profound anguish and of excessive toil. But suddenly, as we struggled round a
bend, there would be a glimpse of rush walls, of peaked grass-roofs, a burst of
yells, a whirl of black limbs, a mass of hands clapping, of feet stamping, of
bodies swaying, of eyes rolling, under the droop of heavy and motionless
foliage. The steamer toiled along slowly on the edge of a black and
incomprehensible frenzy. The prehistoric man was cursing us, praying to us,
welcoming us—who could tell? We were cut off from the comprehension of
our surroundings; we glided past like phantoms, wondering and secretly
appalled, as sane men would be before an enthusiastic outbreak in a
madhouse. We could not understand, because we were too far and could not
remember, because we were travelling in the night of first ages, of those ages
that are gone, leaving hardly a sign—and no memories.3

“The earth seemed unearthly. We are accustomed to look upon the shackled

form of a conquered monster, but there—there you could look at a thing
monstrous and free. It was unearthly, and the men were—No, they were not
inhuman. Well, you know, that was the worst of it—this suspicion of their not
being inhuman. It would come slowly to one. They howled, and leaped, and
spun, and made horrid faces; but what thrilled you was just the thought of
their humanity—like yours—the thought of your remote kinship with this
wild and passionate uproar. Ugly. Yes, it was ugly enough; but if you were
man enough you would admit to yourself that there was in you just the
faintest trace of a response to the terrible frankness of that noise, a dim
suspicion of there being a meaning in it which you—you so remote from the
night of first ages—could comprehend. And why not? The mind of man is
capable of anything—because everything is in it, all the past as well as all the
future. What was there after all? Joy, fear, sorrow, devotion, valour, rage—
who can tell?—but truth—truth stripped of its cloak of time. Let the fool gape
and shudder—the man knows, and can look on without a wink. But he must at
least be as much of a man as these on the shore. He must meet that truth with
his own true stuff—with his own inborn strength. Principles? Principles won’t
do. Acquisitions, clothes, pretty rags—rags that would fly off at the first good
shake. No; you want a deliberate belief. An appeal to me in this fiendish row

—is there? Very well; I hear; I admit, but I have a voice too, and for good or
evil mine is the speech that cannot be silenced. Of course, a fool, what with
sheer fright and fine sentiments, is always safe. Who’s that grunting? You
wonder I didn’t go ashore for a howl and a dance? Well, no—I didn’t. Fine
sentiments, you say? Fine sentiments, be hanged! I had no time. I had to mess
about with white-lead and strips of woollen blanket helping to put bandages
on those leaky steam-pipes—I tell you. I had to watch the steering, and
circumvent those snags, and get the tin-pot along by hook or by crook. There
was surface-truth enough in these things to save a wiser man. And between
whiles I had to look after the savage who was fireman. He was an improved
specimen; he could fire up a vertical boiler. He was there below me, and,
upon my word, to look at him was as edifying as seeing a dog in a parody of
breeches and a feather hat, walking on his hind-legs. A few months of training
had done for that really fine chap. He squinted at the steam-gauge and at the
water-gauge with an evident effort of intrepidity—and he had filed teeth too,
the poor devil, and the wool of his pate shaved into queer patterns, and three
ornamental scars on each of his cheeks. He ought to have been clapping his
hands and stamping his feet on the bank, instead of which he was hard at
work, a thrall to strange witchcraft, full of improving knowledge. He was
useful because he had been instructed; and what he knew was this—that
should the water in that transparent thing disappear, the evil spirit inside the
boiler would get angry through the greatness of his thirst, and take a terrible
vengeance. So he sweated and fired up and watched the glass fearfully (with
an impromptu charm, made of rags, tied to his arm, and a piece of polished
bone, as big as a watch, stuck flatways through his lower lip), while the
wooded banks slipped past us slowly, the shore noise was left behind, the
interminable miles of silence—and we crept on, towards Kurtz. But the snags
were thick, the water was treacherous and shallow, the boiler seemed indeed
to have a sulky devil in it, and thus neither that fireman nor I had any time to
peer into our creepy thoughts.

“Some fifty miles below the Inner Station we came upon a hut of reeds, an

inclined and melancholy pole, with the unrecognisable tatters of what had
been a flag of some sort flying from it, and a neatly stacked wood-pile. This
was unexpected. We came to the bank, and on the stack of firewood found a
flat piece of board with some faded pencil-writing on it. When deciphered it
said: ‘Wood for you. Hurry up. Approach cautiously.’ There was a signature,
but it was illegible—not Kurtz—a much longer word. Hurry up. Where? Up
the river? ‘Approach cautiously.’ We had not done so. But the warning could
not have been meant for the place where it could be only found after
approach. Something was wrong above. But what—and how much? That was
the question. We commented adversely upon the imbecility of that telegraphic
style. The bush around said nothing, and would not let us look very far, either.

A torn curtain of red twill hung in the doorway of the hut, and flapped sadly
in our faces. The dwelling was dismantled; but we could see a white man had
lived there not very long ago. There remained a rude table—a plank on two
posts; a heap of rubbish reposed in a dark corner, and by the door I picked up
a book. It had lost its covers, and the pages had been thumbed into a state of
extremely dirty softness; but the back had been lovingly stitched afresh with
white cotton thread, which looked clean yet. It was an extraordinary find. Its
title was, ‘An Inquiry into some Points of Seamanship,’ by a man Towzer,
Towson—some such name—Master in his Majesty’s Navy. The matter looked
dreary reading enough, with illustrative diagrams and repulsive tables of
figures, and the copy was sixty years old. I handled this amazing antiquity
with the greatest possible tenderness, lest it should dissolve in my hands.
Within, Towson or Towzer was inquiring earnestly into the breaking strain of
ships’ chains and tackle, and other such matters. Not a very enthralling book;
but at the first glance you could see there a singleness of intention, an honest
concern for the right way of going to work, which made these humble pages,
thought out so many years ago, luminous with another than a professional
light.4 The simple old sailor, with his talk of chains and purchases, made me
forget the jungle and the pilgrims in a delicious sensation of having come
upon something unmistakably real. Such a book being there was wonderful
enough; but still more astounding were the notes pencilled in the margin, and
plainly referring to the text. I couldn’t believe my eyes! They were in cipher!
Yes, it looked like cipher. Fancy a man lugging with him a book of that
description into this nowhere and studying it—and making notes—in cipher
at that! It was an extravagant mystery.

“I had been dimly aware for some time of a worrying noise, and when I

lifted my eyes I saw the wood-pile was gone, and the manager, aided by all
the pilgrims, was shouting at me from the river-side. I slipped the book into
my pocket. I assure you to leave off reading was like tearing myself away
from the shelter of an old and solid friendship.

“I started the lame engine ahead. ‘It must be this miserable trader—this

intruder,’ exclaimed the manager, looking back malevolently at the place we
had left. ‘He must be English,’ I said. ‘It will not save him from getting into
trouble if he is not careful,’ muttered the manager darkly. I observed with
assumed innocence that no man was safe from trouble in this world.

“The current was more rapid now, the steamer seemed at her last gasp, the

stern-wheel flopped languidly, and I caught myself listening on tiptoe for the
next beat of the float, for in sober truth I expected the wretched thing to give
up every moment. It was like watching the last flickers of a life. But still we
crawled. Sometimes I would pick out a tree a little way ahead to measure our
progress towards Kurtz by, but I lost it invariably before we got abreast. To
keep the eyes so long on one thing was too much for human patience. The

manager displayed a beautiful resignation. I fretted and fumed and took to
arguing with myself whether or no I would talk openly with Kurtz; but before
I could come to any conclusion it occurred to me that my speech or my
silence, indeed any action of mine, would be a mere futility. What did it
matter what any one knew or ignored? What did it matter who was manager?
One gets sometimes such a flash of insight. The essentials of this affair lay
deep under the surface, beyond my reach, and beyond my power of meddling.

“Towards the evening of the second day we judged ourselves about eight

miles from Kurtz’s station. I wanted to push on; but the manager looked
grave, and told me the navigation up there was so dangerous that it would be
advisable, the sun being very low already, to wait where we were till next
morning. Moreover, he pointed out that if the warning to approach cautiously
were to be followed, we must approach in daylight—not at dusk, or in the
dark. This was sensible enough. Eight miles meant nearly three hours’
steaming for us, and I could also see suspicious ripples at the upper end of the
reach. Nevertheless, I was annoyed beyond expression at the delay, and most
unreasonably too, since one night more could not matter much after so many
months. As we had plenty of wood, and caution was the word, I brought up in
the middle of the stream. The reach was narrow, straight, with high sides like
a railway cutting. The dusk came gliding into it long before the sun had set.
The current ran smooth and swift, but a dumb immobility sat on the banks.
The living trees, lashed together by the creepers and every living bush of the
undergrowth, might have been changed into stone, even to the slenderest
twig, to the lightest leaf. It was not sleep—it seemed unnatural, like a state of
trance. Not the faintest sound of any kind could be heard. You looked on
amazed, and began to suspect yourself of being deaf—then the night came
suddenly, and struck you blind as well. About three in the morning some large
fish leaped, and the loud splash made me jump as though a gun had been
fired. When the sun rose there was a white fog, very warm and clammy, and
more blinding than the night. It did not shift or drive; it was just there,
standing all round you like something solid. At eight or nine, perhaps, it lifted
as a shutter lifts. We had a glimpse of the towering multitude of trees, of the
immense matted jungle, with the blazing little ball of the sun hanging over it
—all perfectly still—and then the white shutter came down again, smoothly,
as if sliding in greased grooves. I ordered the chain, which we had begun to
heave in, to be paid out again. Before it stopped running with a muffled rattle,
a cry, a very loud cry, as of infinite desolation, soared slowly in the opaque
air. It ceased. A complaining clamour, modulated in savage discords, filled
our ears. The sheer unexpectedness of it made my hair stir under my cap. I
don’t know how it struck the others: to me it seemed as though the mist itself
had screamed, so suddenly, and apparently from all sides at once, did this
tumultuous and mournful uproar arise. It culminated in a hurried outbreak of

almost intolerably excessive shrieking, which stopped short, leaving us
stiffened in a variety of silly attitudes, and obstinately listening to the nearly
as appalling and excessive silence. ‘Good God! What is the meaning—?’
stammered at my elbow one of the pilgrims—a little fat man, with sandy hair
and red whiskers, who wore side-spring boots, and pink pyjamas tucked into
his socks. Two others remained open-mouthed a whole minute, then dashed
into the little cabin, to rush out incontinently and stand darting scared glances,
with Winchesters at ‘ready’ in their hands. What we could see was just the
steamer we were on, her outlines blurred as though she had been on the point
of dissolving, and a misty strip of water, perhaps two feet broad, around her—
and that was all. The rest of the world was nowhere, as far as our eyes and
ears were concerned. Just nowhere. Gone, disappeared; swept off without
leaving a whisper or a shadow behind.

“I went forward, and ordered the chain to be hauled in short, so as to be

ready to trip the anchor and move the steamboat at once if necessary. ‘Will
they attack?’ whispered an awed voice. ‘We will be all butchered in this fog,’
murmured another. The faces twitched with the strain, the hands trembled
slightly, the eyes forgot to wink. It was very curious to see the contrast of
expressions of the white men and of the black fellows of our crew, who were
as much strangers to that part of the river as we, though their homes were
only eight hundred miles away. The whites, of course greatly discomposed,
had besides a curious look of being painfully shocked by such an outrageous
row. The others had an alert, naturally interested expression; but their faces
were essentially quiet, even those of the one or two who grinned as they
hauled at the chain. Several exchanged short, grunting phrases, which seemed
to settle the matter to their satisfaction. Their headman, a young, broad-
chested black, severely draped in dark-blue fringed cloths, with fierce nostrils
and his hair all done up artfully in oily ringlets, stood near me. ‘Aha!’ I said
nodding, just for good fellowship’s sake. ‘Catch ’im,’ he snapped, with a
bloodshot widening of his eyes and a flash of sharp teeth—‘catch ’im. Give
’im to us.’ ‘To you, eh?’ I asked; ‘what would you do with them?’ ‘Eat ’im!’
he said, curtly, and, leaning his elbow on the rail, looked out into the fog in a
dignified and profoundly pensive attitude. I would no doubt have been
properly horrified, had it not occurred to me that he and his chaps must be
very hungry: that they must have been growing increasingly hungry for at
least this month past. They had been engaged for six months (I don’t think a
single one of them had any clear idea of time, as we at the end of countless
ages have. They still belonged to the beginnings of time—had no inherited
experience to teach them as it were), and of course, as long as there was a
piece of paper written over in accordance with some farcical law or other
made down the river, it didn’t enter anybody’s head to trouble how they
would live. Certainly they had brought with them some rotten hippo-meat,

which couldn’t have lasted very long, anyway, even if the pilgrims hadn’t, in
the midst of a shocking hullabaloo, thrown a considerable quantity of it
overboard. It looked like a high-handed proceeding; but it was really a case of
legitimate self-defence. You can’t breathe dead hippo waking, sleeping, and
eating, and at the same time keep your precarious grip on existence. Besides
that, they had given them every week three pieces of brass wire, each about
nine inches long; and the theory was they were to buy their provisions with
that currency in river-side villages. You can see how that worked. There were
either no villages, or the people were hostile, or the director, who like the rest
of us fed out of tins, with an occasional old he-goat thrown in, didn’t want to
stop the steamer for some more or less recondite reason. So, unless they
swallowed the wire itself, or made loops of it to snare the fish with, I don’t
see what good their extravagant salary could be to them.5 I must say it was
paid with a regularity worthy of a large and honourable trading company. For
the rest, the only thing to eat—though it didn’t look eatable in the least—I
saw in their possession was a few lumps of some stuff like half-cooked cold
dough, of a dirty lavender colour, they kept wrapped in leaves, and now and
then swallowed a piece of, but so small that it seemed done more for the looks
of the thing than for any serious purpose of sustenance. Why in the name of
all the gnawing devils of hunger they didn’t go for us—they were thirty to
five—and have a good tuck in for once, amazes me now when I think of it.
They were big powerful men, with not much capacity to weigh the
consequences, with courage, with strength, even yet, though their skins were
no longer glossy and their muscles no longer hard. And I saw that something
restraining, one of those human secrets that baffle probability, had come into
play there. I looked at them with a swift quickening of interest—not because
it occurred to me I might be eaten by them before very long, though I own to
you that just then I perceived—in a new light, as it were—how unwholesome
the pilgrims looked, and I hoped, yes, I positively hoped, that my aspect was
not so—what shall I say?—so—unappetising: a touch of fantastic vanity
which fitted well with the dream-sensation that pervaded all my days at that
time. Perhaps I had a little fever too. One can’t live with one’s finger
everlastingly on one’s pulse. I had often a ‘little fever,’ or a little touch of
other things—the playful paw-strokes of the wilderness, the preliminary
trifling before the more serious onslaught which came in due course. Yes; I
looked at them as you would on any human being, with a curiosity of their
impulses, motives, capacities, weaknesses, when brought to the test of an
inexorable physical necessity.6 Restraint! What possible restraint? Was it
superstition, disgust, patience, fear—or some kind of primitive honour? No
fear can stand up to hunger, no patience can wear it out, disgust simply does
not exist where hunger is; and as to superstition, beliefs, and what you may
call principles, they are less than chaff in a breeze. Don’t you know the

devilry of lingering starvation, its exasperating torment, its black thoughts, its
sombre and brooding ferocity? Well, I do. It takes a man all his inborn
strength to fight hunger properly. It’s really easier to face bereavement,
dishonour, and the perdition of one’s soul—than this kind of prolonged
hunger. Sad, but true. And these chaps too had no earthly reason for any kind
of scruple. Restraint! I would just as soon have expected restraint from a
hyena prowling amongst the corpses of a battlefield. But there was the fact
facing me—the fact dazzling, to be seen, like the foam on the depths of the
sea, like a ripple on an unfathomable enigma, a mystery greater—when I
thought of it—than the curious, inexplicable note of desperate grief in this
savage clamour that had swept by us on the river-bank, behind the blind
whiteness of a fog.

“Two pilgrims were quarrelling in hurried whispers as to which bank.

‘Left.’ ‘No, no; how can you? Right, right, of course.’ ‘It is serious, very
serious,’ said the manager’s voice behind me; ‘I would be desolated if
anything should happen to Mr Kurtz before we came up.’ I looked at him, and
had not the slightest doubt he was sincere. He was just the kind of man who
would wish to preserve appearances. That was his restraint. But when he
muttered something about going on at once, I did not even take the trouble to
answer him. I knew, and he knew, that it was impossible. Were we to let go
our hold of the bottom, we would be absolutely in the air—in space. We
wouldn’t be able to tell where we were going to—whether up or down stream,
or across—till we fetched against one bank or the other—and then we
wouldn’t know at first which it was. Of course I made no move. I had no
mind for a smash-up. You couldn’t imagine a more deadly place for a
shipwreck. Whether drowned at once or not, we were sure to perish speedily
in one way or another. ‘I authorise you to take all the risks,’ he said, after a
short silence. ‘I refuse to take any,’ I said shortly; which was just the answer
he expected, though its tone might have surprised him. ‘Well, I must defer to
your judgment. You are captain,’ he said, with marked civility. I turned my
shoulder to him in sign of my appreciation, and looked into the fog. How long
would it last? It was the most hopeless look-out. The approach to this Kurtz
grubbing for ivory in the wretched bush was beset by as many dangers as
though he had been an enchanted princess sleeping in a fabulous castle.7 ‘Will
they attack, do you think?’ asked the manager, in a confidential tone.

“I did not think they would attack, for several obvious reasons. The thick

fog was one. If they left the bank in their canoes they would get lost in it, as
we would be if we attempted to move. Still, I had also judged the jungle of
both banks quite impenetrable—and yet eyes were in it, eyes that had seen us.
The river-side bushes were certainly very thick; but the undergrowth behind
was evidently penetrable. However, during the short lift I had seen no canoes
anywhere in the reach—certainly not abreast of the steamer. But what made

the idea of attack inconceivable to me was the nature of the noise—of the
cries we had heard. They had not the fierce character boding of immediate
hostile intention. Unexpected, wild, and violent as they had been, they had
given me an irresistible impression of sorrow. The glimpse of the steamboat
had for some reason filled those savages with unrestrained grief. The danger,
if any, I expounded, was from our proximity to a great human passion let
loose. Even extreme grief may ultimately vent itself in violence—but more
generally takes the form of apathy.…

“You should have seen the pilgrims stare! They had no heart to grin, or

even to revile me; but I believe they thought me gone mad—with fright,
maybe. I delivered a regular lecture. My dear boys, it was no good bothering.
Keep a look-out? Well, you may guess I watched the fog for the signs of
lifting as a cat watches a mouse; but for anything else our eyes were of no
more use to us than if we had been buried miles deep in a heap of cotton-
wool. It felt like it too—choking, warm, stifling. Besides, all I said, though it
sounded extravagant, was absolutely true to fact. What we afterwards alluded
to as an attack was really an attempt at repulse. The action was very far from
being aggressive—it was not even defensive, in the usual sense: it was
undertaken under the stress of desperation, and in its essence was purely
protective.

“It developed itself, I should say, two hours after the fog lifted, and its

commencement was at a spot, roughly speaking, about a mile and a half
below Kurtz’s station. We had just floundered and flopped round a bend,
when I saw an islet, a mere grassy hummock of bright green, in the middle of
the stream. It was the only thing of the kind; but as we opened the reach more,
I perceived it was the head of a long sandbank, or rather of a chain of shallow
patches stretching down the middle of the river. They were discoloured, just
awash, and the whole lot was seen just under the water, exactly as a man’s
backbone is seen running down the middle of his back under the skin. Now,
as far as I did see, I could go to the right or to the left of this. I didn’t know
either channel, of course. The banks looked pretty well alike, the depth
appeared the same; but as I had been informed the station was on the west
side, I naturally headed for the western passage.

“No sooner had we fairly entered it than I became aware it was much

narrower than I had supposed. To the left of us there was the long
uninterrupted shoal, and to the right a high, steep bank heavily overgrown
with bushes. Above the bush the trees stood in serried ranks. The twigs
overhung the current thickly, and from distance to distance a large limb of
some tree projected rigidly over the stream. It was then well on in the
afternoon, the face of the forest was gloomy, and a broad strip of shadow had
already fallen on the water. In this shadow we steamed up—very slowly, as
you may imagine. I sheered her well inshore—the water being deepest near

the bank, as the sounding-pole informed me.

“One of my hungry and forbearing friends was sounding in the bows just

below me. This steamboat was exactly like a decked scow. On the deck there
were two little teak-wood houses, with doors and windows. The boiler was in
the fore-end, and the machinery right astern. Over the whole there was a light
roof, supported on stanchions. The funnel projected through that roof, and just
in front of the funnel a small cabin built of light planks served for a pilot-
house. It contained a couch, two camp-stools, a loaded Martini-Henry leaning
in one corner, a tiny table, and the steering-wheel. It had a wide door in front
and a broad shutter at each side. All these were always thrown open, of
course. I spent my days perched up there on the extreme fore-end of that roof,
before the door. At night I slept, or tried to, on the couch. An athletic black
belonging to some coast tribe, and educated by my poor predecessor, was the
helmsman. He sported a pair of brass earrings, wore a blue cloth wrapper
from the waist to the ankles, and thought all the world of himself. He was the
most unstable kind of fool I had ever seen. He steered with no end of a
swagger while you were by; but if he lost sight of you, he became instantly
the prey of an abject funk, and would let that cripple of a steamboat get the
upper hand of him in a minute.

“I was looking down at the sounding-pole, and feeling much annoyed to

see at each try a little more of it stick out of that river, when I saw my
poleman give up the business suddenly, and stretch himself flat on the deck,
without even taking the trouble to haul his pole in. He kept hold on it though,
and it trailed in the water. At the same time the fireman, whom I could also
see below me, sat down abruptly before his furnace and ducked his head. I
was amazed. Then I had to look at the river mighty quick, because there was a
snag in the fairway. Sticks, little sticks, were flying about—thick: they were
whizzing before my nose, dropping below me, striking behind me against my
pilot-house. All this time the river, the shore, the woods, were very quiet—
perfectly quiet. I could only hear the heavy splashy thump of the stern-wheel
and the patter of these things. We cleared the snag clumsily. Arrows, by
Jove!8 We were being shot at! I stepped in quickly to close the shutter on the
land-side. That fool-helmsman, his hands on the spokes, was lifting his knees
high, stamping his feet, champing his mouth, like a reined-in horse. Confound
him! And we were staggering within ten feet of the bank. I had to lean right
out to swing the heavy shutter, and I saw a face amongst the leaves on the
level with my own, looking at me very fierce and steady; and then suddenly,
as though a veil had been removed from my eyes, I made out, deep in the
tangled gloom, naked breasts, arms, legs, glaring eyes—the bush was
swarming with human limbs in movement, glistening, of bronze colour. The
twigs shook, swayed, and rustled, the arrows flew out of them, and then the
shutter came to. ‘Steer her straight,’ I said to the helmsman. He held his head

rigid, face forward; but his eyes rolled, he kept on lifting and setting down his
feet gently, his mouth foamed a little. ‘Keep quiet!’ I said in a fury. I might
just as well have ordered a tree not to sway in the wind. I darted out. Below
me there was a great scuffle of feet on the iron deck; confused exclamations; a
voice screamed, ‘Can you turn back?’ I caught sight of a V-shaped ripple on
the water ahead. What? Another snag! A fusillade burst out under my feet.
The pilgrims had opened fire with their Winchesters, and were simply
squirting lead into that bush. A deuce of a lot of smoke came up and drove
slowly forward. I swore at it. Now I couldn’t see the ripple or the snag either.9
I stood in the doorway, peering, and the arrows came in swarms. They might
have been poisoned, but they looked as though they wouldn’t kill a cat. The
bush began to howl. Our wood-cutters raised a warlike whoop; the report of a
rifle just at my back deafened me. I glanced over my shoulder, and the pilot-
house was yet full of noise and smoke when I made a dash at the wheel. The
fool-nigger had dropped everything, to throw the shutter open and let off that
Martini-Henry. He stood before the wide opening, glaring, and I yelled at him
to come back, while I straightened the sudden twist out of that steamboat.
There was no room to turn even if I had wanted to, the snag was somewhere
very near ahead in that confounded smoke, there was no time to lose, so I just
crowded her into the bank—right into the bank, where I knew the water was
deep.

“We tore slowly along the overhanging bushes in a whirl of broken twigs

and flying leaves. The fusillade below stopped short, as I had foreseen it
would when the squirts got empty. I threw my head back to a glinting whizz
that traversed the pilot-house, in at one shutter-hole and out at the other.
Looking past that mad helmsman, who was shaking the empty rifle and
yelling at the shore, I saw vague forms of men running bent double, leaping,
gliding, distinct, incomplete, evanescent. Something big appeared in the air
before the shutter, the rifle went overboard, and the man stepped back swiftly,
looked at me over his shoulder in an extraordinary, profound, familiar
manner, and fell upon my feet. The side of his head hit the wheel twice, and
the end of what appeared a long cane clattered round and knocked over a little
camp-stool. It looked as though after wrenching that thing from somebody
ashore he had lost his balance in the effort. The thin smoke had blown away,
we were clear of the snag, and looking ahead I could see that in another
hundred yards or so I would be free to sheer off, away from the bank; but my
feet felt so very warm and wet that I had to look down. The man had rolled on
his back and stared straight up at me; both his hands clutched that cane. It was
the shaft of a spear that, either thrown or lounged through the opening, had
caught him in the side just below the ribs; the blade had gone in out of sight,
after making a frightful gash; my shoes were full; a pool of blood lay very
still, gleaming dark-red under the wheel; his eyes shone with an amazing

lustre. The fusillade burst out again. He looked at me anxiously, gripping the
spear like something precious, with an air of being afraid I would try to take it
away from him. I had to make an effort to free my eyes from his gaze and
attend to the steering. With one hand I felt above my head for the line of the
steam-whistle, and jerked out screech after screech hurriedly. The tumult of
angry and warlike yells was checked instantly, and then from the depths of the
woods went out such a tremulous and prolonged wail of mournful fear and
utter despair as may be imagined to follow the flight of the last hope from the
earth. There was a great commotion in the bush; the shower of arrows
stopped, a few dropping shots rang out sharply—then silence, in which the
languid beat of the stern-wheel came plainly to my ears. I put the helm hard a-
starboard at the moment when the pilgrim in pink pyjamas, very hot and
agitated, appeared in the doorway. ‘The manager sends me—’ he began in an
official tone, and stopped short. ‘Good God!’ he said, glaring at the wounded
man.

“We two whites stood over him, and his lustrous and inquiring glance

enveloped us both. I declare it looked as though he would presently put to us
some question in an understandable language; but he died without uttering a
sound, without moving a limb, without twitching a muscle. Only in the very
last moment, as though in response to some sign we could not see, to some
whisper we could not hear, he frowned heavily, and that frown gave to his
black death-mask an inconceivably sombre, brooding, and menacing
expression. The lustre of inquiring glance faded swiftly into vacant glassiness.
‘Can you steer?’ I asked the agent eagerly. He looked very dubious; but I
made a grab at his arm, and he understood at once I meant him to steer
whether or no. To tell you the truth, I was morbidly anxious to change my
shoes and socks. ‘He is dead,’ murmured the fellow, immensely impressed.
‘No doubt about it,’ said I, tugging like mad at the shoe-laces. ‘And, by the
way, I suppose Mr Kurtz is dead as well by this time.’

“For the moment that was the dominant thought. There was a sense of

extreme disappointment, as though I had found out I had been striving after
something altogether without a substance. I couldn’t have been more
disgusted if I had travelled all this way for the sole purpose of talking with Mr
Kurtz. Talking with… I flung one shoe overboard, and became aware that that
was exactly what I had been looking forward to—a talk with Kurtz. I made
the strange discovery that I had never imagined him as doing, you know, but
as discoursing. I didn’t say to myself, ‘Now I will never see him,’ or ‘Now I
will never shake him by the hand,’ but, ‘Now I will never hear him.’ The man
presented himself as a voice. Not of course that I did not connect him with
some sort of action. Hadn’t I been told in all the tones of jealousy and
admiration that he had collected, bartered, swindled, or stolen more ivory than
all the other agents together. That was not the point. The point was in his

being a gifted creature, and that of all his gifts the one that stood out pre-
eminently, that carried with it a sense of real presence, was his ability to talk,
his words—the gift of expression, the bewildering, the illuminating, the most
exalted and the most contemptible, the pulsating stream of light, or the
deceitful flow from the heart of an impenetrable darkness.

“The other shoe went flying unto the devil-god of that river. I thought, By

Jove! it’s all over. We are too late; he has vanished—the gift has vanished, by
means of some spear, arrow, or club. I will never hear that chap speak after all
—and my sorrow had a startling extravagance of emotion, even such as I had
noticed in the howling sorrow of these savages in the bush. I couldn’t have
felt more of lonely desolation somehow, had I been robbed of a belief or had
missed my destiny in life.… Why do you sigh in this beastly way, somebody?
Absurd? Well, absurd. Good Lord! mustn’t a man ever—Here, give me some
tobacco.”…

There was a pause of profound stillness, then a match flared, and Marlow’s

lean face appeared—worn, hollow, with downward folds and dropped eyelids,
with an aspect of concentrated attention; and as he took vigorous draws at his
pipe, it seemed to retreat and advance out of the night in the regular flicker of
the tiny flame. The match went out.

“Absurd!” he cried. “This is the worst of trying to tell… Here you all are,

each moored with two good addresses, like a hulk with two anchors, a butcher
round one corner, a policeman round another, excellent appetites, and
temperature normal—you hear—normal from year’s end to year’s end. And
you say, Absurd! Absurd be—exploded! Absurd! My dear boys, what can you
expect from a man who out of sheer nervousness had just flung overboard a
pair of new shoes. Now I think of it, it is amazing I did not shed tears. I am,
upon the whole, proud of my fortitude. I was cut to the quick at the idea of
having lost the inestimable privilege of listening to the gifted Kurtz. Of course
I was wrong. The privilege was waiting for me. Oh yes, I heard more than
enough. And I was right, too. A voice. He was very little more than a voice.
And I heard—him—it—this voice—other voices—all of them were so little
more than voices—and the memory of that time itself lingers around me,
impalpable, like a dying vibration of one immense jabber, silly, atrocious,
sordid, savage, or simply mean, without any kind of sense. Voices, voices—
even the girl herself—now—”

He was silent for a long time.
“I laid the ghost of his gifts at last with a lie,” he began suddenly. “Girl!

What? Did I mention a girl? Oh, she is out of it—completely. They—the
women I mean—are out of it—should be out of it. We must help them to stay
in that beautiful world of their own, lest ours gets worse. Oh, she had to be
out of it. You should have heard the disinterred body of Mr Kurtz saying, ‘My
Intended.’ You would have perceived directly then how completely she was

out of it. And the lofty frontal bone of Mr Kurtz! They say the hair goes on
growing sometimes, but this—ah—specimen, was impressively bald. The
wilderness had patted him on the head, and, behold, it was like a ball—an
ivory ball; it had caressed him, and—lo!—he had withered; it had taken him,
loved him, embraced him, got into his veins, consumed his flesh, and sealed
his soul to its own by the inconceivable ceremonies of some devilish
initiation. He was its spoiled and pampered favourite. Ivory? I should think
so. Heaps of it, stacks of it. The old mud shanty was bursting with it. You
would think there was not a single tusk left either above or below ground in
the whole country. ‘Mostly fossil,’ the manager had remarked disparagingly.
It was no more fossil than I am; but they call it fossil when it is dug up. It
appears these niggers do bury the tusks sometimes—but evidently they
couldn’t bury this parcel deep enough to save the gifted Mr Kurtz from his
fate. We filled the steamboat with it, and had to pile a lot on the deck. Thus he
could see and enjoy as long as he could see, because the appreciation of this
favour had remained with him to the last. You should have heard him say,
‘My ivory.’ Oh yes, I heard him. ‘My Intended, my ivory, my station, my
river, my—’ Everything belonged to him. It made me hold my breath in
expectation of hearing the wilderness burst into a prodigious peal of laughter
that would shake the fixed stars in their places. Everything belonged to him—
but that was a trifle. The thing was to know what he belonged to, how many
powers of darkness claimed him for their own. That was the reflection that
made you creepy all over. It was impossible—it was not good for one either—
trying to imagine. He had taken a high seat amongst the devils of the land—I
mean literally. You can’t understand. How could you?—with solid pavement
under your feet, surrounded by kind neighbours ready to cheer you or to fall
on you, stepping delicately between the butcher and the policeman, in the
holy terror of scandal and gallows and lunatic asylums—how can you
imagine what particular region of the first ages a man’s untrammelled feet
may take him into by the way of solitude—utter solitude without a policeman
—by the way of silence—utter silence, where no warning voice of a kind
neighbour can be heard whispering of public opinion? These little things
make all the great difference. When they are gone you must fall back upon
your own innate strength, upon your own capacity for faithfulness. Of course
you may be too much of a fool to go wrong—too dull even to know you are
being assaulted by the powers of darkness. I take it, no fool ever made a
bargain for his soul with the devil: the fool is too much of a fool, or the devil
too much of a devil—I don’t know which. Or you may be such a thunderingly
exalted creature as to be altogether deaf and blind to anything but heavenly
sights and sounds. Then the earth for you is only a standing place—and
whether to be like this is your loss or your gain I won’t pretend to say. But
most of us are neither one nor the other. The earth for us is a place to live in,

where we must put up with sights, with sounds, with smells too, by Jove!—
breathe dead hippo, so to speak, and not be contaminated.10 And there, don’t
you see? your strength comes in, the faith in your ability for the digging of
unostentatious holes to bury the stuff in—your power of devotion, not to
yourself, but to an obscure, back-breaking business. And that’s difficult
enough. Mind, I am not trying to excuse or even explain—I am trying to
account to myself for—for—Mr Kurtz—for the shade of Mr Kurtz. This
initiated wraith from the back of Nowhere honoured me with its amazing
confidence before it vanished altogether. This was because it could speak
English to me. The original Kurtz had been educated partly in England, and—
as he was good enough to say himself—his sympathies were in the right
place. His mother was half-English, his father was half-French. All Europe
contributed to the making of Kurtz; and by and bye I learned that, most
appropriately, the International Society for the Suppression of Savage
Customs had entrusted him with the making of a report, for its future
guidance. And he had written it too. I’ve seen it. I’ve read it. It was eloquent,
vibrating with eloquence, but too high-strung, I think. Seventeen pages of
close writing he had found time for! But this must have been before his—let
us say—nerves, went wrong, and caused him to preside at certain midnight
dances ending with unspeakable rites, which—as far as I reluctantly gathered
from what I heard at various times—were offered up to him—do you
understand?—to Mr Kurtz himself. But it was a beautiful piece of writing.
The opening paragraph, however, in the light of later information, strikes me
now as ominous. He began with the argument that we whites, from the point
of development we had arrived at, ‘must necessarily appear to them [savages]
in the nature of supernatural beings—we approach them with the might as of
a deity,’ and so on, and so on. ‘By the simple exercise of our will we can exert
a power for good practically unbounded,’ etc., etc.11 From that point he
soared and took me with him. The peroration was magnificent, though
difficult to remember, you know. It gave me the notion of an exotic
Immensity ruled by an august Benevolence. It made me tingle with
enthusiasm. This was the unbounded power of eloquence—of words—of
burning noble words. There were no practical hints to interrupt the magic
current of phrases, unless a kind of note at the foot of the last page, scrawled
evidently much later, in an unsteady hand, may be regarded as the exposition
of a method. It was very simple, and at the end of that moving appeal to every
altruistic sentiment it blazed at you, luminous and terrifying, like a flash of
lightning in a serene sky: ‘Exterminate all the brutes!’ The curious part was
that he had apparently forgotten all about that valuable postscriptum, because,
later on, when he in a sense came to himself, he repeatedly entreated me to
take good care of ‘my pamphlet’ (he called it), as it was sure to have in the
future a good influence upon his career. I had full information about all these

things, and, besides, as it turned out, I was to have the care of his memory.
I’ve done enough for it to give me the indisputable right to lay it, if I choose,
for an everlasting rest in the dust-bin of progress, amongst all the sweepings
and, figuratively speaking, all the dead cats of civilisation. But then, you see,
I can’t choose. He won’t be forgotten. Whatever he was, he was not common.
He had the power to charm or frighten rudimentary souls into an aggravated
witch-dance in his honour; he could also fill the small souls of the pilgrims
with bitter misgivings;12 he had one devoted friend at least, and he had
conquered one soul in the world that was neither rudimentary nor tainted with
self-seeking. No; I can’t forget him, though I am not prepared to affirm the
fellow was exactly worth the life we lost in getting to him. I missed my late
helmsman awfully—I missed him even while his body was still lying in the
pilot-house. Perhaps you will think it passing strange this regret for a savage
who was no more account than a grain of sand in a black Sahara. Well, don’t
you see, he had done something, he had steered; for months I had him at my
back—a help—an instrument. It was a kind of partnership. He steered for me
—I had to look after him, I worried about his deficiencies, and thus a subtle
bond had been created, of which I only became aware when it was suddenly
broken. And the intimate profundity of that look he gave me when he
received his hurt remains to this day in my memory—like a claim of distant
kinship affirmed in a supreme moment.

“Poor fool! If he had only left that shutter alone. He had no restraint, no

restraint—just like Kurtz—a tree swayed by the wind. As soon as I had put on
a dry pair of slippers, I dragged him out, after first jerking the spear out of his
side, which operation I confess I performed with my eyes shut tight. His heels
leaped together over the little door-step; his shoulders were pressed to my
breast; I hugged him from behind desperately. Oh! he was heavy, heavy;
heavier than any man on earth, I should imagine. Then without more ado I
tipped him overboard. The current snatched him as though he had been a wisp
of grass, and I saw the body roll over twice before I lost sight of it for ever.
All the pilgrims and the manager were then congregated on the awning-deck
about the pilot-house, chattering at each other like a flock of excited magpies,
and there was a scandalised murmur at my heartless promptitude. What they
wanted to keep that body hanging about for I can’t guess. Embalm it, maybe.
But I had also heard another, and very ominous, murmur on the deck below.
My friends the wood-cutters were likewise scandalised, and with a better
show of reason—though I admit that the reason itself was quite inadmissible.
Oh, quite! I had made up my mind that if my late helmsman was to be eaten,
the fishes alone should have him. He had been a very second-rate helmsman
while alive, but now he was dead he might have become a first-class
temptation, and possibly cause some startling trouble. Besides, I was anxious
to take the wheel, the man in pink pyjamas showing himself a hopeless duffer

at the business.

“This I did directly the simple funeral was over. We were going half-speed,

keeping right in the middle of the stream, and I listened to the talk about me.
They had given up Kurtz, they had given up the station; Kurtz was dead, and
the station had been burnt—and so on—and so on. The red-haired pilgrim
was beside himself with the thought that at least this poor Kurtz had been
properly revenged. ‘Say! We must have made a glorious slaughter of them in
the bush. Eh? What do you think? Say?’ He positively danced, the
bloodthirsty little gingery beggar. And he had nearly fainted when he saw the
wounded man! I could not help saying, ‘You made a glorious lot of smoke,
anyhow.’ I had seen, from the way the tops of the bushes rustled and flew, that
almost all the shots had gone too high. You can’t hit anything unless you take
aim and fire from the shoulder; but these chaps fired from the hip with their
eyes shut. The retreat, I maintained—and I was right—was caused by the
screeching of the steam-whistle. Upon this they forgot Kurtz, and began to
howl at me with indignant protests.

“The manager stood by the wheel murmuring confidentially about the

necessity of getting well away down the river before dark at all events, when I
saw in the distance a clearing on the river-side and the outlines of some sort
of building. ‘What’s this?’ I asked. He clapped his hands in wonder. ‘The
station!’ he cried. I edged in at once, still going half-speed.

“Through my glasses I saw the slope of a hill interspersed with rare trees

and perfectly free from undergrowth. A long decaying building on the summit
was half buried in the high grass; the large holes in the peaked roof gaped
black from afar; the jungle and the woods made a background. There was no
enclosure or fence of any kind; but there had been one apparently, for near the
house half-a-dozen slim posts remained in a row, roughly trimmed, and with
their upper ends ornamented with round carved balls. The rails, or whatever
there had been between, had disappeared. Of course the forest surrounded all
that. The river-bank was clear, and on the water-side I saw a white man under
a hat like a cart-wheel beckoning persistently with his whole arm. Examining
the edge of the forest above and below, I was almost certain I could see
movements—human forms gliding here and there. I steamed past prudently,
then stopped the engines and let her drift down. The man on the shore began
to shout, urging us to land. ‘We have been attacked,’ screamed the manager. ‘I
know—I know. It’s all right,’ yelled back the other, as cheerful as you please.
‘Come along. It’s all right. I am glad.’

“His aspect reminded me of something I had seen—something funny I had

seen somewhere. As I manoeuvred to get alongside, I was asking myself,
‘What does this fellow look like?’ Suddenly I got it. He looked like a
harlequin. His clothes had been made of some stuff that was brown holland
probably, but it was covered with patches all over, with bright patches, blue,

red, and yellow—patches on the back, patches on front, patches on elbows, on
knees; coloured binding round his jacket, scarlet edging at the bottom of his
trousers; and the sunshine made him look extremely gay and wonderfully neat
withal, because you could see how beautifully all this patching had been
done. A beardless, boyish face, very fair, no features to speak of, nose
peeling, little blue eyes, smiles and frowns chasing each other over that open
countenance like sunshine and shadow on a wind-swept plain. ‘Look out,
captain!’ he cried; ‘there’s a snag lodged in here last night.’ What! Another
snag? I confess I swore shamefully. I had nearly holed my cripple, to finish
off that charming trip. The harlequin on the bank turned his little pug nose up
to me. ‘You English?’ he asked, all smiles. ‘Are you?’ I shouted from the
wheel. The smiles vanished, and he shook his head as if sorry for my
disappointment. Then he brightened up. ‘Never mind!’ he cried
encouragingly. ‘Are we in time?’ I asked. ‘He is up there,’ he replied, with a
toss of the head up the hill, and becoming gloomy all of a sudden. His face
was like the autumn sky, overcast one moment and bright the next.

“When the manager, escorted by the pilgrims, all of them armed to the

teeth, had gone to the house, this chap came on board. ‘I say, I don’t like this.
These natives are in the bush,’ I said. He assured me earnestly it was all right.
‘They are simple people,’ he added; ‘well, I am glad you came. It took me all
my time to keep them off.’ ‘But you said it was all right,’ I cried. ‘Oh, they
meant no harm,’ he said; and as I stared he corrected himself, ‘Not exactly.’
Then vivaciously, ‘My faith, your pilot-house wants a clean up!’ In the next
breath he advised me to keep enough steam on the boiler to blow the whistle
in case of any trouble. ‘One good screech will do more for you than all your
rifles. They are simple people,’ he repeated. He rattled away at such a rate he
quite overwhelmed me. He seemed to be trying to make up for lots of silence,
and actually hinted, laughing, that such was the case. ‘Don’t you talk with Mr
Kurtz?’ I said. ‘You don’t talk with that man—you listen to him,’ he
exclaimed with severe exaltation. ‘But now—’ He waved his arm, and in the
twinkling of an eye was in the uttermost depths of despondency. In a moment
he came up again with a jump, possessed himself of both my hands, shook
them continuously, while he gabbled: ‘Brother sailor… honour… pleasure…
delight… introduce myself… Russian… son of an archpriest… Government
of Tambov… What? Tobacco! English tobacco; the excellent English
tobacco! Now, that’s brotherly. Smoke? Where’s a sailor that does not
smoke?’

“The pipe soothed him, and gradually I made out he had run away from

school, had gone to sea in a Russian ship; ran away again; served some time
in English ships; was now reconciled with the arch-priest. He made a point of
that. ‘But when one is young one must see things, gather experience, ideas;
enlarge the mind.’ ‘Here!’ I interrupted. ‘You can never tell! Here I have met

Mr Kurtz,’ he said, youthfully solemn and reproachful. I held my tongue after
that. It appears he had persuaded a Dutch trading-house on the coast to fit him
out with stores and goods, and had started for the interior with a light heart,
and no more idea of what would happen to him than a baby. He had been
wandering about that river for nearly two years alone, cut off from everybody
and everything. ‘I am not so young as I look. I am twenty-five,’ he said. ‘At
first old Van Shuyten would tell me to go to the devil,’ he narrated with keen
enjoyment; ‘but I stuck to him, and talked and talked, till at last he got afraid I
would talk the hind-leg off his favourite dog, so he gave me some cheap
things and a few guns, and told me he hoped he would never see my face
again. Good old Dutchman, Van Shuyten. I’ve sent him one small lot of ivory
a year ago, so that he can’t call me a little thief when I get back. I hope he got
it. And for the rest I don’t care. I had some wood stacked for you. That was
my old house. Did you see?’

“I gave him Towson’s book. He made as though he would kiss me, but

restrained himself. ‘The only book I had left, and I thought I had lost it,’ he
said, looking at it ecstatically. ‘So many accidents happen to a man going
about alone, you know. Canoes get upset sometimes—and sometimes you’ve
got to clear out so quick when the people get angry.’ He thumbed the pages.
‘You made notes in Russian?’ I asked. He nodded. ‘I thought they were
written in cipher,’ I said. He laughed, then became serious. ‘I had lots of
trouble to keep these people off,’ he said. ‘Did they want to kill you?’ I asked.
‘Oh no!’ he cried, and checked himself. ‘Why did they attack us?’ I pursued.
He hesitated, then said shamefacedly, ‘They don’t want him to go.’ ‘Don’t
they?’ I said, curiously. He nodded a nod full of mystery and wisdom. ‘I tell
you,’ he cried, ‘this man has enlarged my mind.’ He opened his arms wide,
staring at me with his little blue eyes that were perfectly round.”

III

“I looked at him, lost in astonishment. There he was before me, in motley, as
though he had absconded from a troupe of mimes, enthusiastic, fabulous. His
very existence was improbable, inexplicable, and altogether bewildering. He
was an insoluble problem. It was inconceivable how he had existed, how he
had succeeded in getting so far, how he had managed to remain—why he did
not instantly disappear. ‘I went a little further,’ he said, ‘then still a little
further—till I had gone so far that I don’t know how I’ll ever get back. Never
mind. Plenty time. I can manage. You take Kurtz away quick—quick—I tell
you.’ The glamour of youth enveloped his particoloured rags, his destitution,
his loneliness, the essential desolation of his futile wanderings. For months—
for years—his life hadn’t been worth a day’s purchase; and there he was
gallantly, thoughtlessly alive, to all appearance indestructible solely by the
virtue of his few years and of his unreflecting audacity. I was seduced into
something like admiration—like envy. Glamour urged him on, glamour kept
him unscathed. He surely wanted nothing from the wilderness but space to
breathe in and to push on through. His need was to exist, and to move
onwards at the greatest possible risk, and with a maximum of privation. If the
absolutely pure, uncalculating, impractical spirit of adventure had ever ruled a
human being, it ruled this be-patched youth. I almost envied him the
possession of this modest and clear flame. It seemed to have consumed all
thought of self so completely, that, even while he was talking to you, you
forgot that it was he—the man before your eyes—who had gone through
these things. I did not envy him his devotion to Kurtz, though. He had not
meditated over it. It came to him, and he accepted it with a sort of eager
fatalism. I must say that to me it appeared about the most dangerous thing in
every way he had come upon so far.

“They had come together unavoidably, like two ships becalmed near each

other, and lay rubbing sides at last. I suppose Kurtz wanted an audience,
because on a certain occasion, when encamped in the forest, they had talked
all night, or more probably Kurtz had talked. ‘We talked of everything,’ he
said, quite transported at the recollection. ‘I forgot there was such a thing as
sleep. The night did not seem to last an hour. Everything! Everything!…Of
love too.’ ‘Ah, he talked to you of love!’ I said, much amused. ‘It isn’t what
you think,’ he cried, almost passionately. ‘It was in general. He made me see

things—things.’

“He threw his arms up. We were on deck at the time, and the headman of

my wood-cutters, lounging near by, turned upon him his heavy and glittering
eyes. I looked around, and I don’t know why, but I assure you that never,
never before, did this land, this river, this jungle, the very arch of this blazing
sky, appear to me so hopeless and so dark, so impenetrable to human thought,
so pitiless to human weakness. ‘And, ever since, you have been with him, of
course?’ I said.

“On the contrary. It appears their intercourse had been very much broken

by various causes. He had, as he informed me proudly, managed to nurse
Kurtz through two illnesses (he alluded to it as you would to some risky feat),
but as a rule Kurtz wandered alone, far in the depths of the forest. ‘Very often
coming to this station, I had to wait days and days before he would turn up,’
he said. ‘Ah, it was worth waiting for!—sometimes.’ ‘What was he doing?
exploring or what?’ I asked. ‘Oh yes, of course’; he had discovered lots of
villages, a lake too—he did not know exactly in what direction; it was
dangerous to inquire too much—but mostly his expeditions had been for
ivory. ‘But he had no goods to trade with by that time,’ I objected. ‘There’s a
good lot of cartridges left even yet,’ he answered, looking away. ‘To speak
plainly, he raided the country,’ I said. He nodded. ‘Not alone, surely!’ He
muttered something about the villages round that lake. ‘Kurtz got the tribe to
follow him, did he?’ I suggested. He fidgeted a little. ‘They adored him,’ he
said. The tone of these words was so extraordinary that I looked at him
searchingly. It was curious to see his mingled eagerness and reluctance to
speak of Kurtz. The man filled his life, occupied his thoughts, swayed his
emotions. ‘What can you expect?’ he burst out; ‘he came to them with thunder
and lightning, you know—and they had never seen anything like it—and very
terrible. He could be very terrible.1 You can’t judge Mr Kurtz as you would an
ordinary man. No, no, no! Now—just to give you an idea—I don’t mind
telling you, he wanted to shoot me too one day—but I don’t judge him.’
‘Shoot you!’ I cried. ‘What for?’ ‘Well, I had a small lot of ivory the chief of
that village near my house gave me. You see I used to shoot game for them.
Well, he wanted it, and wouldn’t hear reason. He declared he would shoot me
unless I gave him the ivory and then cleared out of the country, because he
could do so, and had a fancy for it, and there was nothing on earth to prevent
him killing whom he jolly well pleased. And it was true too. I gave him the
ivory. What did I care! But I didn’t clear out. No, no. I couldn’t leave him. I
had to be careful, of course, till we got friendly again for a time. He had his
second illness then. Afterwards I had to keep out of the way; but I didn’t
mind. He was living for the most part in those villages on the lake. When he
came down to the river, sometimes he would talk to me, and sometimes it was
better for me to be careful. This man suffered too much. He hated all this, and

somehow he couldn’t get away. When I had a chance I begged him to try and
leave while there was time; I offered to go back with him. And he would say
yes, and then he would remain; go off on another ivory hunt; disappear for
weeks; forget himself amongst these people—forget himself—you know.’
‘Why! he’s mad,’ I said. He protested indignantly. Mr Kurtz couldn’t be mad.
If I had heard him talk, only two days ago, I wouldn’t dare hint at such a
thing.… I had taken up my binoculars while we talked, and was looking at the
shore, sweeping the limit of the forest at each side and at the back of the
house. The consciousness of there being people in that bush, so silent, so
quiet—as silent and quiet as the ruined house on the hill—made me uneasy.
There was no sign on the face of nature of this amazing tale that was not so
much told as suggested to me in desolate exclamations, completed by shrugs,
in interrupted phrases, in hints ending in deep sighs. The woods were
unmoved, like a mask—heavy, like the closed door of a prison—they looked
with their air of hidden knowledge, of patient expectation, of unapproachable
silence. The Russian was explaining to me that it was only lately that Mr
Kurtz had come down to the river, bringing along with him all the fighting
men of that lake tribe. He had been absent for several months—getting
himself adored, I suppose—and had come down unexpectedly, with the
intention to all appearance of making a raid either across the river or down
stream. Evidently the appetite for more ivory had got the better of the—what
shall I say?—less material aspirations. However he had got much worse
suddenly. ‘I heard he was lying here helpless, and so I came up—took my
chance,’ said the Russian. ‘Oh, he is bad, very bad.’ I directed my glass to the
house. There were no signs of life, but there was the ruined roof, the long
mud wall peeping above the grass, with three little square window-holes, no
two of the same size; all this brought within reach of my hand, as it were. And
then I made a brusque movement, and one of the remaining posts of that
vanished fence leaped up in the field of my glass. You remember I told you I
had been struck at the distance by certain attempts at ornamentation, rather
remarkable in the ruinous aspect of the place. Now I had suddenly a nearer
view, and its first result was to make me throw my head back as if before a
blow. Then I went carefully from post to post with my glass, and I saw my
mistake. These round knobs were not ornamental but symbolic; they were
expressive and puzzling, striking and disturbing—food for thought and also
for the vultures if there had been any looking down from the sky; but at all
events for such ants as were industrious enough to ascend the pole. They
would have been even more impressive, those heads on the stakes, if their
faces had not been turned to the house. Only one, the first I had made out, was
facing my way. I was not so shocked as you may think. The start back I had
given was really nothing but a movement of surprise. I had expected to see a
knob of wood there, you know. I returned deliberately to the first I had seen—

and there it was, black, dried, sunken, with closed eyelids—a head that
seemed to sleep at the top of that pole, and, with the shrunken dry lips
showing a narrow white line of the teeth, was smiling too, smiling
continuously at some endless and jocose dream of that eternal slumber.

“I am not disclosing any trade secrets. In fact the manager said afterwards

that Mr Kurtz’s methods had ruined the district. I have no opinion on that
point, but I want you clearly to understand that there was nothing exactly
profitable in these heads being there. They only showed that Mr Kurtz lacked
restraint in the gratification of his various lusts, that there was something
wanting in him—some small matter which, when the pressing need arose,
could not be found under his magnificent eloquence. Whether he knew of this
deficiency himself I can’t say. I think the knowledge came to him at last—
only at the very last. But the wilderness had found him out early, and had
taken on him a terrible vengeance for the fantastic invasion. I think it had
whispered to him things about himself which he did not know, things of
which he had no conception till he took counsel with this great solitude—and
the whisper had proved irresistibly fascinating. It echoed loudly within him
because he was hollow at the core.… I put down the glass, and the head that
had appeared near enough to be spoken to seemed at once to have leaped
away from me into inaccessible distance.

“The admirer of Mr Kurtz was a bit crestfallen. In a hurried, indistinct

voice he began to assure me he had not dared to take these—say, symbols—
down. He was not afraid of the natives; they would not stir till Mr Kurtz gave
the word. His ascendancy was extraordinary. The camps of these people
surrounded the place, and the chiefs came every day to see him. They would
crawl.… ‘I don’t want to know anything of the ceremonies used when
approaching Mr Kurtz,’ I shouted. Curious, this feeling that came over me
that such details would be more intolerable than those heads drying on the
stakes under Mr Kurtz’s windows. After all, that was only a savage sight,
while I seemed at one bound to have been transported into some lightless
region of subtle horrors, where pure, uncomplicated savagery was a positive
relief, being something that had a right to exist—obviously—in the sunshine.
The young man looked at me with surprise. I suppose it did not occur to him
Mr Kurtz was no idol of mine. He forgot I hadn’t heard any of these splendid
monologues on, what was it? on love, justice, conduct of life—or what not. If
it had come to crawling before Mr Kurtz, he crawled as much as the veriest
savage of them all. I had no idea of the conditions, he said: these heads were
the heads of rebels. I shocked him excessively by laughing. Rebels! What
would be the next definition I was to hear? There had been enemies,
criminals, workers—and these were rebels. Those rebellious heads looked
very subdued to me on their sticks. ‘You don’t know how such a life tries a
man like Kurtz,’ cried Kurtz’s last disciple. ‘Well, and you?’ I said. ‘I! I! I am

a simple man. I have no great thoughts. I want nothing from anybody. How
can you compare me to… ?’ His feelings were too much for speech, and
suddenly he broke down. ‘I don’t understand,’ he groaned. ‘I’ve been doing
my best to keep him alive, and that’s enough. I had no hand in all this. I have
no abilities. There hasn’t been a drop of medicine or a mouthful of invalid
food for months here. He was shamefully abandoned. A man like this, with
such ideas. Shamefully! Shamefully! I—I—haven’t slept for the last ten
nights.…’

“His voice lost itself in the calm of the evening. The long shadows of the

forest had slipped down hill while we talked, had gone far beyond the ruined
hovel, beyond the symbolic row of stakes. All this was in the gloom, while we
down there were yet in the sunshine, and the stretch of the river abreast of the
clearing glittered in a still and dazzling splendour, with a murky and
overshadowed bend above and below. Not a living soul was seen on the shore.
The bushes did not rustle.

“Suddenly round the corner of the house a group of men appeared, as

though they had come up from the ground. They waded waist-deep in the
grass, in a compact body, bearing an improvised stretcher in their midst.
Instantly, in the emptiness of the landscape, a cry arose whose shrillness
pierced the still air like a sharp arrow flying straight to the very heart of the
land; and, as if by enchantment, streams of human beings—of naked human
beings—with spears in their hands, with bows, with shields, with wild glances
and savage movements, were poured into the clearing by the dark-faced and
pensive forest. The bushes shook, the grass swayed for a time, and then
everything stood still in attentive immobility.

“‘Now, if he does not say the right thing to them we are all done for,’ said

the Russian at my elbow. The knot of men with the stretcher had stopped too,
half-way to the steamer, as if petrified. I saw the man on the stretcher sit up,
lank and with an uplifted arm, above the shoulders of the bearers. ‘Let us
hope that the man who can talk so well of love in general will find some
particular reason to spare us this time,’ I said. I resented bitterly the absurd
danger of our situation, as if to be at the mercy of that atrocious phantom had
been a dishonouring necessity. I could not hear a sound, but through my
glasses I saw the thin arm extended commandingly, the lower jaw moving, the
eyes of that apparition shining darkly far in its bony head that nodded with
grotesque jerks.2 Kurtz—Kurtz—that means ‘short’ in German—don’t it?
Well, the name was as true as everything else in his life—and death. He
looked at least seven feet long. His covering had fallen off, and his body
emerged from it pitiful and appalling as from a winding-sheet. I could see the
cage of his ribs all astir, the bones of his arm waving. It was as though an
animated image of death carved out of old ivory had been shaking its hand
with menaces at a motionless crowd of men made of dark and glittering

bronze. I saw him open his mouth wide—it gave him a weirdly voracious
aspect, as though he had wanted to swallow all the air, all the earth, all the
men before him. A deep voice reached me faintly. He must have been
shouting. He fell back suddenly. The stretcher shook as the bearers staggered
forward again, and almost at the same time I noticed that the crowd of
savages was vanishing without any perceptible movement of retreat, as if the
forest that had ejected these beings so suddenly had drawn them in again as
the breath is drawn in a long aspiration.

“Some of the pilgrims behind the stretcher carried his arms—two shot-

guns, a heavy rifle, and a light revolver-carbine—the thunderbolts of that
pitiful Jupiter. The manager bent over him murmuring as he walked beside his
head. They laid him down in one of the little cabins—just a room for a bed-
place and a camp-stool or two, you know. We had brought his belated
correspondence, and a lot of torn envelopes and open letters littered his bed.
His hand roamed feebly amongst these papers. I was struck by the fire of his
eyes and the composed languor of his expression. It was not so much the
exhaustion of disease. He did not seem in pain. This Shadow looked satiated
and calm, as though for the moment it had had its fill of all the emotions.

“He rustled one of the letters, and looking straight in my face said, ‘I am

glad.’ Somebody had been writing to him about me. These special
recommendations were turning up again. The volume of tone he emitted
without effort, almost without the trouble of moving his lips, amazed me. A
voice! a voice! It was grave, profound, vibrating, while the man did not seem
capable of a whisper. However, he had enough strength in him—factitious no
doubt—to very nearly make an end of us, as you shall hear directly.

“The manager appeared silently in the doorway; I stepped out at once and

he drew the curtain after me. The Russian, eyed curiously by the pilgrims,
was staring at the shore. I followed the direction of his glance.

“Dark human shapes could be made out in the distance, flitting indistinctly

against the gloomy border of the forest, and near the river two bronze figures,
leaning on tall spears, stood in the sunlight, under fantastic head-dresses of
spotted skins, warlike and still in statuesque repose. And from right to left
along the lighted shore moved a wild and gorgeous apparition of a woman.

“She walked with measured steps, draped in striped and fringed cloths,

treading the earth proudly, with a slight jingle and flash of barbarous
ornaments. She carried her head high; her hair was done in the shape of a
helmet; she had brass leggins to the knee, brass wire gauntlets to the elbow, a
crimson spot on her tawny cheek, innumerable necklaces of glass beads on
her neck; bizarre things, charms, gifts of witch-men, that hung about her,
glittered and trembled at every step. She must have had the value of several
elephant tusks upon her. She was savage and superb, wild-eyed and
magnificent; there was something ominous and stately in her deliberate

progress. And in the hush that had fallen suddenly upon the whole sorrowful
land, the immense wilderness, the colossal body of the fecund and mysterious
life seemed to look at her, pensive, as though it had been looking at the image
of its own tenebrous and passionate soul.

“She came abreast of the steamer, stood still, and faced us. Her long

shadow fell to the water’s edge. Her face had a tragic and fierce aspect of wild
sorrow and of dumb pain mingled with the fear of some struggling, half-
shaped resolve. She stood looking at us without a stir, and like the wilderness
itself, with an air of brooding over an inscrutable purpose. A whole minute
passed, and then she made a step forward. There was a low jingle, a glint of
yellow metal, a sway of fringed draperies, and she stopped as if her heart had
failed her. The young fellow by my side growled. The pilgrims murmured at
my back. She looked at us all as if her life had depended upon the unswerving
steadiness of her glance. Suddenly she opened her bared arms and threw them
up rigid above her head, as though in an uncontrollable desire to touch the
sky, and at the same time the swift shadows darted out on the earth, swept
around on the river, gathering the steamer into a shadowy embrace. A
formidable silence hung over the scene.

“She turned away slowly, walked on, following the bank, and passed into

the bushes to the left. Once only her eyes gleamed back at us in the dusk of
the thickets before she disappeared.

“‘If she had offered to come aboard I really think I would have tried to

shoot her,’ said the man of patches, nervously. ‘I had been risking my life
every day for the last fortnight to keep her out of the house. She got in though
one day and kicked up a row about those miserable rags I picked up in the
storeroom to mend my clothes with. I wasn’t decent. At least it must have
been that, for she talked like a fury to Kurtz for an hour, pointing at me now
and then. I don’t understand the dialect of this tribe. Luckily for me, I fancy
Kurtz felt too ill that day to care, or there would have been mischief. I don’t
understand.… No—it’s too much for me. Ah, well, it’s all over now.’

“At this moment I heard Kurtz’s deep voice behind the curtain, ‘Save me!

—save the ivory, you mean. Don’t tell me. Save me! Why, I’ve had to save
you. You are interrupting my plans now. Sick! Sick! Not so sick as you would
like to believe. Never mind. I’ll carry my ideas out yet—I will return. I’ll
show you what can be done. You with your little peddling notions—you are
interfering with me. I will return. I…’

“The manager came out. He did me the honour to take me under the arm

and lead me aside. ‘He is very low, very low,’ he said. He considered it
necessary to sigh, but neglected to be consistently sorrowful. ‘We have done
all we could for him—haven’t we? But there is no disguising the fact, Mr
Kurtz has done more harm than good to the Company. He did not see the time
was not ripe for vigorous action. Cautiously, cautiously—that’s my principle.

We must be cautious yet. The district is closed to us for a time. Deplorable!
Upon the whole, the trade will suffer. I don’t deny there is a remarkable
quantity of ivory—mostly fossil. We must save it, at all events—but look how
precarious the position is—and why? Because the method is unsound.’ ‘Do
you,’ said I, looking at the shore, ‘call it “unsound method”?’ ‘Without doubt,’
he exclaimed, hotly. ‘Don’t you?’… ‘No method at all,’ I murmured after a
while. ‘Exactly,’ he exulted. ‘I anticipated this. Shows a complete want of
judgment. It is my duty to point it out in the proper quarters.’3 ‘Oh,’ said I,
‘that fellow—what’s his name?—the brickmaker, will make a readable report
for you.’ He appeared confounded for a moment. It seemed to me I had never
breathed an atmosphere so vile, and I turned mentally to Kurtz for relief—
positively for relief. ‘Nevertheless I think Mr Kurtz is a remarkable man,’ I
said with emphasis. He started, dropped on me a cold heavy glance, said very
quietly, ‘He was,’ and turned his back on me. My hour of favour was over. I
found myself lumped along with Kurtz as a partisan of methods for which the
time was not ripe. I was unsound! Ah! but it was something to have at least a
choice of nightmares.4

“I had turned to the wilderness really, not to Mr Kurtz, who, I was ready to

admit, was as good as buried. And for a moment it seemed to me as if I also
were buried in a vast grave full of unspeakable secrets. I felt an intolerable
weight oppressing my breast, the smell of the damp earth, the unseen
presence of victorious corruption, the darkness of an impenetrable night.…
The Russian tapped me on the shoulder. I heard him mumbling and
stammering something about ‘brother seaman—couldn’t conceal—knowledge
of matters that would affect Mr Kurtz’s reputation.’ I waited. For him
evidently Mr Kurtz was not in his grave. I suspect that for him Mr Kurtz was
one of the immortals. ‘Well!’ said I at last, ‘speak out. As it happens, I am Mr
Kurtz’s friend—in a way.’

“He stated with a good deal of formality that had we not been ‘of the same

profession,’ he would have kept the matter to himself without regard to
consequences. ‘He suspected there was an active ill-will towards him on the
part of these white men that—’ ‘You are right,’ I said, remembering a certain
conversation I had overheard. ‘The manager thinks you ought to be hanged.’
He showed a concern at this intelligence which amused me at first. ‘I had
better get out of the way quietly,’ he said, earnestly. ‘I can do no more for
Kurtz now, and they would soon find some excuse. What’s to stop them?
There’s a military post three hundred miles from here.’ ‘Well, upon my word,’
said I, ‘perhaps you had better go if you have any friends amongst the savages
near by.’ ‘Plenty,’ he said. ‘They are simple people—and I want nothing, you
know.’ He stood biting his lip, then: ‘I don’t want any harm to happen to these
whites here, but of course I was thinking of Mr Kurtz’s reputation—but you
are a brother seaman and—’ ‘All right,’ said I, after a time. ‘Mr Kurtz’s

reputation is safe with me.’ I did not know how truly I spoke.

“He informed me, lowering his voice, that it was Kurtz who had ordered

the attack to be made on the steamer. ‘He hated sometimes the idea of being
taken away—and then again… But I don’t understand these matters. I am a
simple man. He thought it would scare you away—that you would give it up,
thinking him dead. I could not stop him. Oh, I had an awful time of it this last
month.’ ‘Very well,’ I said. ‘He is all right now.’ ‘Ye-e-es,’ he muttered, not
very convinced apparently. ‘Thanks,’ said I; ‘I shall keep my eyes open.’ ‘But
quiet—eh?’ he urged, anxiously. ‘It would be awful for his reputation if
anybody here—’ I promised a complete discretion with great gravity. ‘I have a
canoe and three black fellows waiting not very far. I am off. Could you give
me a few Martini-Henry cartridges?’ I could, and did, with proper secrecy. He
helped himself, with a wink at me, to a handful of my tobacco. ‘Between
sailors—you know—good English tobacco.’ At the door of the pilot-house he
turned round—‘I say, haven’t you a pair of shoes you could spare?’ He raised
one leg. ‘Look.’ The soles were tied with knotted strings sandal-wise under
his bare feet. I rooted out an old pair, at which he looked with admiration
before tucking it under his left arm. One of his pockets (bright red) was
bulging with cartridges, from the other (dark blue) peeped ‘Towson’s Inquiry,’
etc., etc. He seemed to think himself excellently well equipped for a renewed
encounter with the wilderness. ‘Ah! I’ll never, never meet such a man again.
You ought to have heard him recite poetry—his own too it was, he told me.
Poetry!’ He rolled his eyes at the recollection of these delights. ‘Oh, he
enlarged my mind!’ ‘Goodbye,’ said I. He shook hands and vanished in the
night. Sometimes I ask myself whether I had ever really seen him—whether it
was possible to meet such a phenomenon!…

“When I woke up shortly after midnight his warning came to my mind with

its hint of danger that seemed, in the starred darkness, real enough to make
me get up for the purpose of having a look round. On the hill a big fire
burned, illuminating fitfully a crooked corner of the station-house. One of the
agents with a picket of a few of our blacks, armed for the purpose, was
keeping guard over the ivory; but deep within the forest, red gleams that
wavered, that seemed to sink and rise from the ground amongst confused
columnar shapes of intense blackness, showed the exact position of the camp
where Mr Kurtz’s adorers were keeping their uneasy vigil. The monotonous
beating of a big drum filled the air with muffled shocks and a lingering
vibration. A steady droning sound of many men chanting each to himself
some weird incantation came out from the black, flat wall of the woods as the
humming of bees comes out of a hive, and had a strange narcotic effect upon
my half-awake senses. I believe I dozed off leaning over the rail, till an abrupt
burst of yells, an overwhelming outbreak of a pent-up and mysterious frenzy,
woke me up in a bewildered wonder. It was cut short all at once, and the low

droning went on with an effect of audible and soothing silence. I glanced
casually into the little cabin. A light was burning within, but Mr Kurtz was
not there.

“I think I would have raised an outcry if I had believed my eyes. But I

didn’t believe them at first—the thing seemed so impossible. The fact is I was
completely unnerved by a sheer blank fright, pure abstract terror, unconnected
with any distinct shape of physical danger. What made this emotion so
overpowering was—how shall I define it?—the moral shock I received, as if
something altogether monstrous, intolerable to thought and odious to the soul,
had been thrust upon me unexpectedly. This lasted of course the merest
fraction of a second, and then the usual sense of commonplace, deadly
danger, the possibility of a sudden onslaught and massacre, or something of
the kind, which I saw impending, was positively welcome and composing. It
pacified me, in fact, so much, that I did not raise an alarm.

“There was an agent buttoned up inside an ulster and sleeping on a chair on

deck within three feet of me. The yells had not awakened him; he snored very
slightly; I left him to his slumbers and leaped ashore. I did not betray Mr
Kurtz—it was ordered I should never betray him—it was written I should be
loyal to the nightmare of my choice. I was anxious to deal with this Shadow
by myself alone—and to this day I don’t know why I was so jealous of
sharing with any one the peculiar blackness of that experience.

“As soon as I got on the bank I saw a trail—a broad trail through the grass.

I remember the exultation with which I said to myself, ‘He can’t walk—he is
crawling on all-fours—I’ve got him.’ The grass was wet with dew. I strode
rapidly with clenched fists. I fancy I had some vague notion of falling upon
him and giving him a drubbing. I don’t know. I had some imbecile thoughts.
The knitting old woman with the cat obtruded herself upon my memory as a
most improper person to be sitting at the other end of such an affair. I saw a
row of pilgrims squirting lead in the air out of Winchesters held to the hip. I
thought I would never get back to the steamer, and imagined myself living
alone and unarmed in the woods to an advanced age.5 Such silly things—you
know. And I remember I confounded the beat of the drum with the beating of
my heart, and was pleased at its calm regularity.

“I kept to the track though—then stopped to listen. The night was very

clear: a dark blue space, sparkling with dew and starlight, in which black
things stood very still. I thought I could see a kind of motion ahead of me. I
was strangely cocksure of everything that night. I actually left the track and
ran in a wide semicircle (I verily believe chuckling to myself) so as to get in
front of that stir, of that motion I had seen—if indeed I had seen anything. I
was circumventing Kurtz as though it had been a boyish game.

“I came upon him, and, if he had not heard me coming, I would have fallen

over him too; but he got up in time. He rose, unsteady, long, pale, indistinct,

like a vapour exhaled by the earth, and swayed slightly, misty and silent
before me; while at my back the fires loomed between the trees, and the
murmur of many voices issued from the forest. I had cut him off cleverly; but
when actually confronting him I seemed to come to my senses, I saw the
danger in its right proportion. It was by no means over yet. Suppose he began
to shout? Though he could hardly stand, there was still plenty of vigour in his
voice. ‘Go away—hide yourself,’ he said, in that profound tone. It was very
awful. I glanced back. We were within thirty yards from the nearest fire. A
black figure stood up, strode on long black legs, waving long black arms,
across the glow. It had horns—antelope horns, I think—on its head. Some
sorcerer, some witch-man, no doubt: it looked fiend-like enough. ‘Do you
know what you are doing?’ I whispered. ‘Perfectly,’ he answered, raising his
voice for that single word: it sounded to me far off and yet loud, like a hail
through a speaking-trumpet. If he makes a row we are lost, I thought to
myself. This clearly was not a case for fisticuffs, even apart from the very
natural aversion I had to beat that Shadow—this wandering and tormented
thing. ‘You will be lost,’ I said—‘utterly lost.’ One gets sometimes such a
flash of inspiration, you know. I did say the right thing, though indeed he
could not have been more irretrievably lost than he was at this very moment,
when the foundations of our intimacy were being laid—to endure—to endure
—even to the end—even beyond.

“‘I had immense plans,’ he muttered irresolutely. ‘Yes,’ said I; ‘but if you

try to shout I’ll smash your head with—’ There was not a stick or a stone near.
‘I will throttle you for good,’ I corrected myself. ‘I was on the threshold of
great things,’ he pleaded, in a voice of longing, with a wistfulness of tone that
made my blood run cold. ‘And now for this stupid scoundrel—’ ‘Your success
in Europe is assured in any case,’ I affirmed, steadily. I did not want to have
the throttling of him, you understand—and indeed it would have been very
little use for any practical purpose. I tried to break the spell—the heavy, mute
spell of the wilderness—that seemed to draw him to its pitiless breast by the
awakening of forgotten and brutal instincts, by the memory of gratified and
monstrous passions. This alone, I was convinced, had driven him out to the
edge of the forest, to the bush, towards the gleam of fires, the throb of drums,
the drone of weird incantations; this alone had beguiled his unlawful soul
beyond the bounds of permitted aspirations. And, don’t you see, the terror of
the position was not in being knocked on the head—though I had a very lively
sense of that danger too—but in this, that I had to deal with a being to whom I
could not appeal in the name of anything high or low. I had, even like the
niggers, to invoke him—himself—his own exalted and incredible
degradation. There was nothing either above or below him, and I knew it. He
had kicked himself loose of the earth. Confound the man! he had kicked the
very earth to pieces. He was alone, and I before him did not know whether I

stood on the ground or floated in the air. I’ve been telling you what we said—
repeating the phrases we pronounced—but what’s the good? They were
common everyday words—the familiar, vague sounds exchanged on every
waking day of life. But what of that? They had behind them, to my mind, the
terrific suggestiveness of words heard in dreams, of phrases spoken in
nightmares. Soul! If anybody had ever struggled with a soul, I am the man.
And I wasn’t arguing with a lunatic either. Believe me or not, his intelligence
was perfectly clear—concentrated, it is true, upon himself with horrible
intensity, yet clear; and therein was my only chance—barring, of course, the
killing him there and then, which wasn’t so good, on account of unavoidable
noise. But his soul was mad. Being alone in the wilderness, it had looked
within itself, and, by heavens! I tell you, it had gone mad. I had—for my sins,
I suppose—to go through the ordeal of looking into it myself. No eloquence
could have been so withering to one’s belief in mankind as his final burst of
sincerity. He struggled with himself, too. I saw it—I heard it. I saw the
inconceivable mystery of a soul that knew no restraint, no faith, and no fear,
yet struggling blindly with itself. I kept my head pretty well; but when I had
him at last stretched on the couch, I wiped my forehead, while my legs shook
under me as though I had carried half a ton on my back down that hill. And
yet I had only supported him, his bony arm clasped round my neck—and he
was not much heavier than a child.

“When next day we left at noon, the crowd, of whose presence behind the

curtain of trees I had been acutely conscious all the time, flowed out of the
woods again, filled the clearing, covered the slope with a mass of naked,
breathing, quivering bronze bodies. I steamed up a bit, then swung down-
stream, and two thousand eyes followed the evolutions of the splashing,
thumping, fiery river-demon beating the water with its terrible tail and
breathing black smoke into the air.6 In front of the first rank, along the river,
three men, plastered with bright red earth from head to foot, strutted to and
fro restlessly. When we came abreast again, they faced the river, stamped their
feet, nodded their horned heads, swayed their scarlet bodies; they shook
towards the fierce river-demon a bunch of black feathers, a mangy skin with a
pendant tail—something that looked like a dried gourd; they shouted
periodically together strings of amazing words that resembled no sounds of
human language; and the deep murmurs of the crowd, interrupted suddenly,
were like the responses of some satanic litany.

“We had carried Kurtz into the pilot-house: there was more air there. Lying

on the couch, he stared through the open shutter. There was an eddy in the
mass of human bodies, and the woman with helmeted head and tawny cheeks
rushed out to the very brink of the stream. She put out her hands, shouted
something, and all that wild mob took up the shout in a roaring chorus of
articulated, rapid, breathless utterance.

“‘Do you understand this?’ I asked.
“He kept on looking out past me with fiery, longing eyes, with a mingled

expression of wistfulness and hate. He made no answer, but I saw a smile, a
smile of indefinable meaning, appear on his colourless lips that a moment
after twitched convulsively. “Do I not?” he said slowly, gasping, as if the
words had been torn out of him by a supernatural power.

“I pulled the string of the whistle, and I did this because I saw the pilgrims

on deck getting out their rifles with an air of anticipating a jolly lark. At the
sudden screech there was a movement of abject terror through that wedged
mass of bodies. “Don’t! don’t you frighten them away,” cried someone on
deck disconsolately. I pulled the string time after time. They broke and ran,
they leaped, they crouched, they swerved, they dodged the flying terror of the
sound. The three red chaps had fallen flat, face down on the shore, as though
they had been shot dead. Only the barbarous and superb woman did not so
much as flinch, and stretched tragically her bare arms after us over the sombre
and glittering river.

“And then that imbecile crowd down on the deck started their little fun, and

I could see nothing more for smoke.

“The brown current ran swiftly out of the heart of darkness, bearing us down
towards the sea with twice the speed of our upward progress; and Kurtz’s life
was running swiftly too, ebbing, ebbing out of his heart into the sea of
inexorable time. The manager was very placid, he had no vital anxieties now,
he took us both in with a comprehensive and satisfied glance: the ‘affair’ had
come off as well as could be wished. I saw the time approaching when I
would be left alone of the party of ‘unsound method.’ The pilgrims looked
upon me with disfavour. I was, so to speak, numbered with the dead. It is
strange how I accepted this unforeseen partnership, this choice of nightmares
forced upon me in the tenebrous land invaded by these mean and greedy
phantoms.

“Kurtz discoursed. A voice! a voice! It rang deep to the very last. It

survived his strength to hide in the magnificent folds of eloquence the barren
darkness of his heart. Oh, he struggled! he struggled! The wastes of his weary
brain were haunted by shadowy images now—images of wealth and fame
revolving obsequiously round his unextinguishable gift of noble and lofty
expression. My Intended, my ivory, my station, my career, my ideas—these
were the subjects for the occasional utterances of elevated sentiments. The
shade of the original Kurtz frequented the bedside of the hollow sham, whose
fate it was to be buried presently in the mould of primeval earth. But both the
diabolic love and the unearthly hate of the mysteries it had penetrated fought
for the possession of that soul satiated with primitive emotions, avid of lying
fame, of sham distinction, of all the appearances of success and power.

“Sometimes he was contemptibly childish. He desired to have kings meet

him at railway-stations on his return from some ghastly Nowhere, where he
intended to accomplish great things. ‘You show them you have in hand
something that is really profitable, and then there will be no limits to the
recognition of your ability,’ he would say. ‘Of course you must take care of
the motives—right motives—always.’ The long reaches that were like one
and the same reach, monotonous bends that were exactly alike, slipped past
the steamer with their multitude of secular trees looking patiently after this
grimy fragment of another world, the forerunner of change, of conquest, of
trade, of massacres, of blessings. I looked ahead—piloting. ‘Close the
shutter,’ said Kurtz suddenly one day; ‘I can’t bear to look at this.’ I did so.
There was a silence. ‘Oh, but I will wring your heart yet!’ he cried at the
invisible wilderness.

“We broke down—as I had expected—and had to lie up for repairs at the

head of an island. This delay was the first thing that shook Kurtz’s
confidence. One morning he gave me a packet of papers and a photograph—
the lot tied together with a shoe-string. ‘Keep this for me,’ he said. ‘This
noxious fool’ (meaning the manager) ‘is capable of prying into my boxes
when I am not looking.’ In the afternoon I saw him. He was lying on his back
with closed eyes, and I withdrew quietly, but I heard him mutter, ‘Live rightly,
die, die…’ I listened. There was nothing more. Was he rehearsing some
speech in his sleep, or was it a fragment of a phrase from some newspaper
article? He had been writing for the papers and meant to do so again, ‘for the
furthering of my ideas. It’s a duty.’

“His was an impenetrable darkness. I looked at him as you peer down at a

man who is lying at the bottom of a precipice where the sun never shines. But
I had not much time to give him, because I was helping the engine-driver to
take to pieces the leaky cylinders, to straighten a bent connecting-rod, and in
other such matters. I lived in an infernal mess of rust, filings, nuts, bolts,
spanners, hammers, ratchet-drills—things I abominate, because I don’t get on
with them. I tended the little forge we fortunately had aboard; I toiled wearily
in a wretched scrap-heap—unless I had the shakes too bad to stand.

“One evening coming in with a candle I was startled to hear him say a little

tremulously, ‘I am lying here in the dark waiting for death.’ The light was
within a foot of his eyes. I forced myself to murmur, ‘Oh, nonsense!’ and
stood over him as if transfixed.

“Anything approaching the change that came over his features I have never

seen before, and hope never to see again. Oh, I wasn’t touched. I was
fascinated. It was as though a veil had been rent. I saw on that ivory face the
expression of sombre pride, of ruthless power, of craven terror—of an intense
and hopeless despair.7 Did he live his life again in every detail of desire,
temptation, and surrender during that supreme moment of complete

knowledge? He cried in a whisper at some image, at some vision—he cried
out twice, a cry that was no more than a breath—

“‘The horror! The horror!’
“I blew the candle out and left the cabin. The pilgrims were dining in the

mess-room, and I took my place opposite the manager, who lifted his eyes to
give me a questioning glance, which I successfully ignored. He leaned back,
serene, with that peculiar smile of his sealing the unexpressed depths of his
meanness. A continuous shower of small flies streamed upon the lamp, upon
the cloth, upon our hands and faces. Suddenly the manager’s boy put his
insolent black head in the doorway, and said in a tone of scathing contempt—

“‘Mistah Kurtz—he dead.’8
“All the pilgrims rushed out to see. I remained, and went on with my

dinner. I believe I was considered brutally callous. However, I did not eat
much. There was a lamp in there—light, don’t you know—and outside it was
so beastly, beastly dark. I went no more near the remarkable man who had
pronounced a judgment upon the adventures of his soul on this earth. The
voice was gone. What else had been there? But I am of course aware that next
day the pilgrims buried something in a muddy hole.

“And then they very nearly buried me.
“However, as you see, I did not go to join Kurtz there and then. I did not. I

remained to dream the nightmare out to the end, and to show my loyalty to
Kurtz once more. Destiny. My destiny! Droll thing life is—that mysterious
arrangement of merciless logic for a futile purpose. The most you can hope
from it is some knowledge of yourself—that comes too late—a crop of
unextinguishable regrets. I have wrestled with death. It is the most unexciting
contest you can imagine. It takes place in an impalpable greyness, with
nothing underfoot, with nothing around, without spectators, without clamour,
without glory, without the great desire of victory, without the great fear of
defeat, in a sickly atmosphere of tepid scepticism, without much belief in
your own right, and still less in that of your adversary. If such is the form of
ultimate wisdom, then life is a greater riddle than some of us think it to be. I
was within a hair’s-breadth of the last opportunity for pronouncement, and I
found with humiliation that probably I would have nothing to say. This is the
reason why I affirm that Kurtz was a remarkable man. He had something to
say. He said it. Since I had peeped over the edge myself, I understand better
the meaning of his stare, that could not see the flame of the candle, but was
wide enough to embrace the whole universe, piercing enough to penetrate all
the hearts that beat in the darkness. He had summed up—he had judged. ‘The
horror!’ He was a remarkable man. After all, this was the expression of some
sort of belief; it had candour, it had conviction, it had a vibrating note of
revolt in its whisper, it had the appalling face of a glimpsed truth—the strange
commingling of desire and hate. And it is not my own extremity I remember

best—a vision of greyness without form filled with physical pain, and a
careless contempt for the evanescence of all things—even of this pain itself.
No! It is his extremity that I seem to have lived through. True, he had made
that last stride, he had stepped over the edge, while I had been permitted to
draw back my hesitating foot. And perhaps in this is the whole difference;
perhaps all wisdom, and all truth, and all sincerity, are just compressed into
that inappreciable moment of time in which we step over the threshold of the
Invisible. Perhaps! I like to think that my summing-up would not have been a
word of careless contempt. Better his cry—much better. It was an affirmation,
a moral victory paid for by innumerable defeats, by abominable terrors, by
abominable satisfactions. But it was a victory! That is why I have remained
loyal to Kurtz to the last, and even beyond, when a long time after I heard
once more, not his own voice, but the echo of his magnificent eloquence
thrown to me from a soul as translucently pure as a cliff of crystal.

“No, they did not bury me, though there is a period of time which I

remember mistily, with a shuddering wonder, like a passage through some
inconceivable world that had no hope in it and no desire. I found myself back
in the sepulchral city resenting the sight of people hurrying through the streets
to filch a little money from each other, to devour their infamous cookery, to
gulp their unwholesome beer, to dream their insignificant and silly dreams.
They trespassed upon my thoughts. They were intruders whose knowledge of
life was to me an irritating pretence, because I felt so sure they could not
possibly know the things I knew. Their bearing, which was simply the bearing
of commonplace individuals going about their business in the assurance of
perfect safety,9 was offensive to me like the outrageous flauntings of folly in
the face of a danger it is unable to comprehend. I had no particular desire to
enlighten them, but I had some difficulty in restraining myself from laughing
in their faces, so full of stupid importance. I daresay I was not very well at
that time. I tottered about the streets—there were various affairs to settle—
grinning bitterly at perfectly respectable persons.10 I admit my behaviour was
inexcusable, but then my temperature was seldom normal in these days. My
dear aunt’s endeavours to ‘nurse up my strength’ seemed altogether beside the
mark. It was not my strength that wanted nursing, it was my imagination that
wanted soothing. I kept the bundle of papers given me by Kurtz, not knowing
exactly what to do with it. His mother had died lately, watched over, as I was
told, by his Intended. A clean-shaved man, with an official manner and
wearing gold-rimmed spectacles, called on me one day and made inquiries, at
first circuitous, afterwards suavely pressing, about what he was pleased to
denominate certain ‘documents.’ I was not surprised, because I had had two
rows with the manager on the subject out there. I had refused to give up the
smallest scrap out of that package, and I took the same attitude with the
spectacled man. He became darkly menacing at last, and with much heat

argued that the Company had the right to every bit of information about its
‘territories.’ And, said he, ‘Mr Kurtz’s knowledge of unexplored regions must
have been necessarily extensive and peculiar—owing to his great abilities and
to the deplorable circumstances in which he had been placed: therefore—’ I
assured him Mr Kurtz’s knowledge, however extensive, did not bear upon the
problems of commerce or administration. He invoked then the name of
science. ‘It would be an incalculable loss if,’ etc., etc. I offered him the report
on the ‘Suppression of Savage Customs,’ with the postscriptum torn off. He
took it up eagerly, but ended by sniffing at it with an air of contempt. ‘This is
not what we had a right to expect,’ he remarked. ‘Expect nothing else,’ I said.
‘There are only private letters.’ He withdrew upon some threat of legal
proceedings, and I saw him no more; but another fellow, calling himself
Kurtz’s cousin, appeared two days later, and was anxious to hear all the
details about his dear relative’s last moments. Incidentally he gave me to
understand that Kurtz had been essentially a great musician. ‘There was the
making of an immense success,’ said the man, who was an organist, I believe,
with lank grey hair flowing over a greasy coat-collar. I had no reason to doubt
his statement; and to this day I am unable to say what was Kurtz’s profession,
whether he ever had any—which was the greatest of his talents. I had taken
him for a painter who wrote for the papers, or else for a journalist who could
paint—but even the cousin (who took snuff during the interview) could not
tell me what he had been—exactly. He was a universal genius—on that point
I agreed with the old chap, who thereupon blew his nose noisily into a large
cotton handkerchief and withdrew in senile agitation, bearing off some family
letters and memoranda without importance. Ultimately a journalist anxious to
know something of the fate of his ‘dear colleague’ turned up. This visitor
informed me Kurtz’s proper sphere ought to have been politics ‘on the
popular side.’ He had furry straight eyebrows, bristly hair cropped short, an
eye-glass on a broad black ribbon, and, becoming expansive, confessed his
opinion that Kurtz really couldn’t write a bit—‘but heavens! how that man
could talk! He electrified large meetings. He had the faith—don’t you see?—
he had the faith. He could get himself to believe anything—anything.11 He
would have been a splendid leader of an extreme party.’ ‘What party?’ I
asked. ‘Any party,’ answered the other. ‘He was an—an—extremist.’ Did I
not think so? I assented. Did I know, he asked, with a sudden flash of
curiosity, ‘what it was that had induced him to go out there?’ ‘Yes,’ said I, and
forthwith handed him the famous Report for publication, if he thought fit. He
glanced through it hurriedly, mumbling all the time, judged ‘it would do,’ and
took himself off with this plunder.

“Thus I was left at last with a slim packet of letters and the girl’s portrait.

She struck me as beautiful—I mean she had a beautiful expression. I know
that the sunlight can be made to lie too, yet one felt that no manipulation of

light and pose could have conveyed the delicate shade of truthfulness upon
those features. She seemed ready to listen without mental reservation, without
suspicion, without a thought for herself. I concluded I would go and give her
back her portrait and those letters myself. Curiosity? Yes; and also some other
feeling perhaps. All that had been Kurtz’s had passed out of my hands: his
soul, his body, his station, his plans, his ivory, his career. There remained only
his memory and his Intended—and I wanted to give that up too to the past, in
a way—to surrender personally all that remained of him with me to that
oblivion which is the last word of our common fate. I don’t defend myself. I
had no clear perception of what it was I really wanted. Perhaps it was an
impulse of unconscious loyalty, or the fulfilment of one of these ironic
necessities that lurk in the facts of human existence. I don’t know. I can’t tell.
But I went.

“I thought his memory was like the other memories of the dead that

accumulate in every man’s life—a vague impress on the brain of shadows that
had fallen on it in their swift and final passage; but before the high and
ponderous door, between the tall houses of a street as still and decorous as a
well-kept alley in a cemetery, I had a vision of him on the stretcher, opening
his mouth voraciously, as if to devour all the earth with all its mankind. He
lived then before me; he lived as much as he had ever lived—a shadow
insatiable of splendid appearances, of frightful realities; a shadow darker than
the shadow of the night, and draped nobly in the folds of a gorgeous
eloquence. The vision seemed to enter the house with me—the stretcher, the
phantom-bearers, the wild crowd of obedient worshippers, the gloom of the
forests, the glitter of the reach between the murky bends, the beat of the drum,
regular and muffled like the beating of a heart—the heart of a conquering
darkness. It was a moment of triumph for the wilderness, an invading and
vengeful rush which, it seemed to me, I would have to keep back alone for the
salvation of another soul. And the memory of what I had heard him say afar
there, with the horned shapes stirring at my back, in the glow of fires, within
the patient woods, those broken phrases came back to me, were heard again in
their ominous and terrifying simplicity. I remembered his abject pleading, his
abject threats, the colossal scale of his vile desires, the meanness, the torment,
the tempestuous anguish of his soul. And later on I seemed to see his
collected languid manner, when he said one day, ‘This lot of ivory now is
really mine. The Company did not pay for it. I collected it myself at a very
great personal risk. I am afraid they will try to claim it as theirs though. H’m.
It is a difficult case. What do you think I ought to do—resist? Eh? I want no
more than justice.’… He wanted no more than justice—no more than justice.
I rang the bell before a mahogany door on the first floor, and while I waited
he seemed to stare at me out of the glassy panel—stare with that wide and
immense stare embracing, condemning, loathing all the universe. I seemed to

hear the whispered cry, ‘The horror! The horror!’

“The dusk was falling. I had to wait in a lofty drawing-room with three

long windows from floor to ceiling that were like three luminous and
bedraped columns. The bent gilt legs and backs of the furniture shone in
indistinct curves. The tall marble fireplace had a cold and monumental
whiteness. A grand piano stood massively in a corner, with dark gleams on
the flat surfaces like a sombre and polished sarcophagus. A high door opened
—closed. I rose.

“She came forward, all in black, with a pale head, floating towards me in

the dusk. She was in mourning. It was more than a year since his death, more
than a year since the news came; she seemed as though she would remember
and mourn for ever. She took both my hands in hers and murmured, ‘I had
heard you were coming.’ I noticed she was not very young—I mean not
girlish. She had a mature capacity for fidelity, for belief, for suffering.12 The
room seemed to have grown darker, as if all the sad light of the cloudy
evening had taken refuge on her forehead. This fair hair, this pale visage, this
pure brow, seemed surrounded by an ashy halo from which the dark eyes
looked out at me. Their glance was guileless, profound, confident, and
trustful. She carried her sorrowful head as though she were proud of that
sorrow, as though she would say, I—I alone know how to mourn for him as he
deserves. But while we were still shaking hands, such a look of awful
desolation came upon her face that I perceived she was one of those creatures
that are not the playthings of Time. For her he had died only yesterday. And,
by Jove! the impression was so powerful that for me too he seemed to have
died only yesterday—nay, this very minute. I saw her and him in the same
instant of time—his death and her sorrow—I saw her sorrow in the very
moment of his death. Do you understand? I saw them together—I heard them
together. She had said, with a deep catch of the breath, ‘I have survived’;
while my strained ears seemed to hear distinctly, mingled with her tone of
despairing regret, the summing-up whisper of his eternal condemnation. I
asked myself what I was doing there, with a sensation of panic in my heart as
though I had blundered into a place of cruel and absurd mysteries not fit for a
human being to behold. She motioned me to a chair. We sat down. I laid the
packet gently on the little table, and she put her hand over it.… ‘You knew
him well,’ she murmured, after a moment of mourning silence.

“‘Intimacy grows quick out there,’ I said. ‘I knew him as well as it is

possible for one man to know another.’

“‘And you admired him,’ she said. ‘It was impossible to know him and not

to admire him. Was it?’

“‘He was a remarkable man,’ I said, unsteadily. Then before the appealing

fixity of her gaze, that seemed to watch for more words on my lips, I went on,
‘It was impossible not to—’

“‘Love him,’ she finished eagerly, silencing me into an appalled dumbness.

‘How true! how true! But when you think that no one knew him so well as I! I
had all his noble confidence. I knew him best.’

“‘You knew him best,’ I repeated. And perhaps she did. But with every

word spoken the room was growing darker, and only her forehead, smooth
and white, remained illumined by the unextinguishable light of belief and
love.

“‘You were his friend,’ she went on. ‘His friend,’ she repeated, a little

louder. ‘You must have been, if he had given you this, and sent you to me. I
feel I can speak to you—and oh! I must speak. I want you—you who have
heard his last words—to know I have been worthy of him.… It is not pride.…
Yes! I am proud to know I understood him better than any one on earth—he
told me so himself. And since his mother died I have had no one—no one—to
—to—’

“I listened. The darkness deepened. I was not even sure whether he had

given me the right bundle. I rather suspect he wanted me to take care of
another batch of his papers which, after his death, I saw the manager
examining under the lamp. And the girl talked, easing her pain in the certitude
of my sympathy; she talked as thirsty men drink. I had heard that her
engagement with Kurtz had been disapproved by her people. He wasn’t rich
enough or something. And indeed I don’t know whether he had not been a
pauper all his life. He had given me some reason to infer that it was his
impatience of comparative poverty that drove him out there.

“‘…Who was not his friend who had heard him speak once?’ she was

saying. ‘He drew men towards him by what was best in them.’ She looked at
me with intensity. ‘It is the gift of the great,’ she went on, and the sound of her
low voice seemed to have the accompaniment of all the other sounds, full of
mystery, desolation, and sorrow, I had ever heard—the ripple of the river, the
soughing of the trees swayed by the wind, the murmurs of wild crowds, the
faint ring of incomprehensible words cried from afar, the whisper of a voice
speaking from beyond the threshold of an eternal darkness. ‘But you have
heard him! You know!’ she cried.

“‘Yes, I know,’ I said with something like despair in my heart, but bowing

my head before the faith that was in her, before that great and saving illusion
that shone with an unearthly glow in the darkness, in the triumphant darkness
from which I could not have defended her—from which I could not even
defend myself.

“‘What a loss to me—to us!’—she corrected herself with beautiful

generosity; then added in a murmur, ‘To the world.’ By the last gleams of
twilight I could see the glitter of her eyes, full of tears—of tears that would
not fall.

“‘I have been very happy—very fortunate—very proud,’ she went on. ‘Too

fortunate. Too happy for a little while. And now I am unhappy for—for life.’

“She stood up; her fair hair seemed to catch all the remaining light in a

glimmer of gold.13 I rose too.

“‘And of all this,’ she went on, mournfully, ‘of all his promise, and of all

his greatness, of his generous mind, of his noble heart, nothing remains—
nothing but a memory. You and I—’

“‘We shall always remember him,’ I said, hastily.
“‘No!’ she cried. ‘It is impossible that all this should be lost—that such a

life should be sacrificed to leave nothing—but sorrow. You know what vast
plans he had. I knew of them too—I could not perhaps understand—but
others knew of them. Something must remain. His words, at least, have not
died.’

“‘His words will remain,’ I said.
“‘And his example,’ she whispered to herself. ‘Men looked up to him—his

goodness shone in every act. His example—’

“‘True,’ I said; ‘his example too. Yes, his example. I forgot that.’
“‘But I do not. I cannot—I cannot believe—not yet. I cannot believe that I

shall never see him again, that nobody will see him again, never, never,
never!’

“She put out her arms as if after a retreating figure, stretching them black

and with clasped pale hands across the fading and narrow sheen of the
window. Never see him! I saw him clearly enough then. I shall see this
eloquent phantom as long as I live, and I shall see her too, a tragic and
familiar Shade, resembling in this gesture another one, tragic also, and
bedecked with powerless charms, stretching bare brown arms over the glitter
of the infernal stream, the stream of darkness. She said suddenly very low,
‘He died as he lived.’

“‘His end,’ said I, with dull anger stirring in me, ‘was in every way worthy

of his life.’

“‘And I was not with him,’ she murmured. My anger subsided before a

feeling of infinite pity.

“‘Everything that could be done—’ I mumbled.
“‘Ah, but I believed in him more than any one on earth—more than his

own mother, more than—himself. He needed me! Me! I would have treasured
every sigh, every word, every sign, every glance.’

“I felt like a chill grip on my chest. ‘Don’t,’ I said, in a muffled voice.
“‘Forgive me. I—I—have mourned so long in silence—in silence.… You

were with him—to the last? I think of his loneliness. Nobody near to
understand him as I would have understood. Perhaps no one to hear…’

“‘To the very end,’ I said, shakily. ‘I heard his very last words.…’ I stopped

in a fright.

“‘Repeat them,’ she said in a heart-broken tone. ‘I want—I want—

something—something—to—to live with.’

“I was on the point of crying at her, ‘Don’t you hear them?’ The dusk was

repeating them in a persistent whisper all around us, in a whisper that seemed
to swell menacingly like the first whisper of a rising wind. ‘The horror! the
horror!’

“‘His last word—to live with,’ she murmured. ‘Don’t you understand I

loved him—I loved him—I loved him!’

“I pulled myself together and spoke slowly.
“‘The last word he pronounced was—your name.’
“I heard a light sigh, and then my heart stood still, stopped dead short by an

exulting and terrible cry, by the cry of inconceivable triumph and of
unspeakable pain. ‘I knew it—I was sure!’… She knew. She was sure. I heard
her weeping; she had hidden her face in her hands. It seemed to me that the
house would collapse before I could escape, that the heavens would fall upon
my head. But nothing happened. The heavens do not fall for such a trifle.
Would they have fallen, I wonder, if I had rendered Kurtz that justice which
was his due? Hadn’t he said he wanted only justice? But I couldn’t. I could
not tell her. It would have been too dark—too dark altogether.…”

Marlow ceased, and sat apart, indistinct and silent, in the pose of a

meditating Buddha. Nobody moved for a time. “We have lost the first of the
ebb,” said the Director, suddenly. I raised my head. The offing was barred by
a black bank of clouds, and the tranquil waterway leading to the uttermost
ends of the earth flowed sombre under an overcast sky—seemed to lead into
the heart of an immense darkness.

Filmography

ADAPTATIONS OF HEART OF DARKNESS

Apocalypse Now Redux. Dir. Francis Ford Coppola. Perf. Marlon Brando

and Martin Sheen. 1979.

Heart of Darkness. Dir. Nicolas Roeg. Perf. Tim Roth and John Malkovich.

1994.

Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker’s Apocalypse. Dir. Fax Bahr, George

Hickenlooper, Eleanor Coppola. 1991.

ADAPTATIONS OF OTHER CONRAD WORKS

Lord Jim. Dir. Richard Brooks. Perf. Peter O’Toole and James Mason.

1965.

Nostromo. Dir. Alastair Reid. Perf. Colin Firth and Albert Finney. 1997.

The Secret Agent. Dir. Christopher Hampton. Perf. Bob Hoskins and Robin

Williams. 1996.

Swept from the Sea. Dir. Beeban Kidron. Perf. Ian McKellen and Rachel

Weisz. 1997.

Victory. Dir. Mark Peploe. Perf. Willem Dafoe and Sam Neill. 1996.

FILMS ABOUT AFRICA

The African Queen. Dir. John Huston. Perf. Humphrey Bogart and

Katharine Hepburn. 1951.

Amistad. Dir. Steven Spielberg. Perf. Morgan Freeman, Anthony Hopkins,

and Djimon Hounsou. 1997.

Babel. Dir. Alejandro González Iñárritu. Perf. Brad Pitt and Cate Blanchett.

2006.

La Battaglia di Algeri (The Battle of Algiers). Dir. Gillo Pontecorvo. Perf.

Jean Martin. 1966.

Black Hawk Down. Dir. Ridley Scott. Perf. Josh Hartnett and Ewan

McGregor. 2001.

Blood Diamond. Dir. Edward Zwick. Perf. Leonardo DiCaprio, Djimon

Hounsou, and Jennifer Connelly. 2006.

Congo. Dir. Frank Marshall. Perf. Laura Linney and Dylan Walsh. 1995.

The Constant Gardener. Dir. Fernando Meirelles. Perf. Ralph Fiennes and

Rachel Weisz. 2005.

Cry Freedom. Dir. Richard Attenborough. Perf. Kevin Kline and Denzel

Washington. 1987.

Darfur Now (documentary). Dir. Ted Braun. Perf. Don Cheadle. 2007.

The Ghost and the Darkness. Dir. Stephen Hopkins. Perf. Michael Douglas

and Val Kilmer. 1996.

Hotel Rwanda. Dir. Terry George. Perf. Don Cheadle. 2004.

King Leopold’s Ghost (documentary). Dir. Pippa Scott and Oreet Rees.

2006.

King Solomon’s Mines. Dir. Andrew Marton and Compton Bennett. Perf.

Deborah Kerr. 1950.

King Solomon’s Mines. Dir. Robert Stevenson. Perf. Paul Robeson. 1937.

King Solomon’s Mines. Dir. J. Lee Thompson. Perf. Richard Chamberlain.

1985.

The Last King of Scotland. Dir. Kevin Macdonald. Perf. Forest Whitaker

and James McAvoy. 2006.

Lumumba. Dir. Raoul Peck. Perf. Eriq Ebouaney. 2000.

Mogambo. Dir. John Ford. Perf. Clark Gable, Ava Gardner, and Grace

Kelly. 1953.

Out of Africa. Dir. Sydney Pollack. Perf. Meryl Streep and Robert Redford.

1985.

The Snows of Kilimanjaro. Dir. Henry King. Perf. Gregory Peck, Susan

Hayward, and Ava Gardner. 1952.

Tears of the Sun. Dir. Antoine Fuqua. Perf. Bruce Willis and Monica

Bellucci. Sony Pictures, 2003.

Tsotsi. Dir. Gavin Hood. Perf. Presley Chweneyagae. 2005.

FILMS ABOUT IMPERIALISM

Burn! Dir. Gillo Pontecorvo. Perf. Marlon Brando. 1969.

Gandhi. Dir. Richard Attenborough. Perf. Ben Kingsley. 1982.

Lawrence of Arabia. Dir. David Lean. Perf. Peter O’Toole. 1962.

The Man Who Would Be King. Dir. John Huston. Perf. Sean Connery and

Michael Caine. 1975.

A Passage to India. Dir. David Lean. Perf. Judy Davis and Alec Guinness.

1984.

Telling Africa’s Story Today: 

Recent Films About Africa

While opinions differ about just how forward-looking the publication of
Heart of Darkness was in its time—some critics and readers appreciate the
work as a bold statement against imperialism, while others think Conrad did
not go far enough—the work has had a significant impact on portrayals of
Africa in fiction and nonfiction alike for more than a century. In this brief
essay, I will explore the connections between Conrad’s portrayal of Africa in
Heart of Darkness and a number of films released in recent years: Hotel
Rwanda (2004), The Constant Gardener (2005), Tsotsi (2005), The Last King
of Scotland (2006), and Blood Diamond (2006).

In three films featuring major Hollywood stars released within the last

decade, the story of Africa has continued to be told through the viewpoint
primarily of white characters from the West. Each offers a skeptical look at
whether change can really occur, often exploring the possibility through
distinct portrayals of gender. In The Constant Gardener, a tale primarily of
corporate greed in Africa, Ralph Fiennes’s diplomat Justin Quayle at first
rejects and then ultimately embraces the forceful efforts of his activist wife,
Tessa (Rachel Weisz), to uncover the exploitation of Africans by a fictional
European pharmaceutical company. In The Last King of Scotland, James
McAvoy’s Scottish doctor Nicholas Garrigan is starstruck and largely
oblivious to the violent tactics of his employer Idi Amin while his friend
Sarah Merrit, a doctor’s wife herself, works diligently and quietly to provide
proper care to a small village. And in Blood Diamond, Leonardo DiCaprio’s
soldier-turned-diamond-smuggler Danny Archer struggles to overcome his
self-interest, urged to more noble aspirations by the Western journalist Maddy
Bowen (Jennifer Connelly) and Mende fisherman Solomon Vandy (Djimon
Hounsou). These are also each partially fictionalized accounts of Africa,
much like Heart of Darkness, that explore and offer similarly ambiguous
lessons about whether intervention in Africa—be it to exploit or to save—is a
positive thing.

In contrast, two other films tell stories that are more about Africa than

about the West. Hotel Rwanda (2004) recounts the tale of Paul Rusesabagina,
a hotel owner who successfully managed to protect more than a thousand
Rwandans from the genocide of 1994. It exposes as absurd the minute

differences upon which this genocide was based, pondering the ironies of
Africa, but it certainly also aims to expose a Western audience to the fact that
the West could have but did not intervene (the question of United Nations
intervention in particular is a central feature of the story). But a film released
only a year later, Tsotsi, based on a South African novel about an orphan-
turned-thug who accidentally kidnaps a baby, offers a tale that could be told in
virtually any language or country where classes are divided by wealth and
opportunity.

More than a century after Conrad introduced a deeply troubled Africa to

the Western world, modern films continue to explore similar questions in
often complex ways. But unlike Heart of Darkness, women are now featured
prominently and Africans speak for themselves. The answers may still be
beyond us, but the countless voices of Africans and those who seek to help
Africans can now be heard.

Contemporary Reviews of 

Heart of Darkness

EDWARD GARNETT

Unsigned review from “Mr. Conrad’s New Book,”

Academy and Literature (6 December 1902): 606–07.

The publication in volume form of Mr. Conrad’s three stories, “Youth,”
“Heart of Darkness,” “The End of the Tether,” is one of the events of the
literary year. These stories are an achievement in art which will materially
advance his growing reputation. Of the stories, “Youth” may be styled a
modern English epic of the Sea; “The End of the Tether” is a study of an old
sea captain who, at the end of forty years’ trade exploration of the Southern
seas, finding himself dispossessed by the perfected routine of the British
empire overseas he has helped to build, falls on evil times, and faces ruin
calmly, fighting to the last. These two will be more popular than the third,
“Heart of Darkness,” a study of “the white man in Africa” which is most
amazing, a consummate piece of artistic diablerie. On reading “Heart of
Darkness” on its appearance in Blackwood’s Magazine our first impression
was that Mr. Conrad had, here and there, lost his way. Now that the story can
be read, not in parts, but from the first page to the last at a sitting, we retract
this opinion and hold “Heart of Darkness” to be the high-water mark of the
author’s talent. It may be well to analyse this story a little so that the
intelligent reader, reading it very deliberately, may see better for himself why
Mr. Conrad’s book enriches English literature.

“Heart of Darkness,” to present its theme bluntly, is an impression, taken

from life, of the conquest by the European whites of a certain portion of
Africa, an impression in particular of the civilising methods of a certain great
European Trading Company face to face with the “nigger.” We say this much
because the English reader likes to know where he is going before he takes art
seriously, and we add that he will find the human life, black and white, in
“Heart of Darkness” an uncommonly and uncannily serious affair. If the
ordinary reader, however, insists on taking the subject of a tale very seriously,
the artist takes his method of presentation more seriously still, and rightly so.
For the art of “Heart of Darkness”—as in every psychological masterpiece—

lies in the relation of the things of the spirit to the things of the flesh, of the
invisible life to the visible, of the sub-conscious life within us, our obscure
motives and instincts, to our conscious actions, feelings and outlook. Just as
landscape art implies the artist catching the exact relation of a tree to the earth
from which it springs, and of the earth to the sky, so the art of “Heart of
Darkness” implies the catching of infinite shades of the white man’s uneasy,
disconcerted, and fantastic relations with the exploited barbarism of Africa; it
implies the acutest analysis of the deterioration of the white man’s morale,
when he is let loose from European restraint, and planted down in the tropics
as an “emissary of light” armed to the teeth, to make trade profits out of the
“subject races.” The weirdness, the brilliance, the psychological truth of this
masterly analysis of two Continents in conflict, of the abysmal gulf between
the white man’s system and the black man’s comprehension of its results, is
conveyed in a rapidly rushing narrative which calls for close attention on the
reader’s part. But the attention once surrendered, the pages of the narrative are
as enthralling as the pages of Dostoevsky’s Crime and Punishment. The
stillness of the sombre African forests, the glare of sunshine, the feeling of
dawn, of noon, of night on the tropical rivers, the isolation of the unnerved,
degenerating whites staring all day and every day at the Heart of Darkness
which is alike meaningless and threatening to their own creed and
conceptions of life, the helpless bewilderment of the unhappy savages in the
grasp of their flabby and rapacious conquerors—all this is a page torn from
the life of the Dark Continent—a page which has been hitherto carefully
blurred and kept away from European eyes. There is no “intention” in the
story, no parti pris, no prejudice one way or the other; it is simply a piece of
art, fascinating and remorseless, and the artist is but intent on presenting his
sensations in that sequence and arrangement whereby the meaning or the
meaninglessness of the white man in uncivilised Africa can be felt in its really
significant aspects. If the story is too strong meat for the ordinary reader, let
him turn to “Youth,” wherein the song of every man’s youth is indeed sung.
[…] Mr. Conrad is easily among the first writers of to-day. His special
individual gift, as an artist, is of so placing a whole scene before the reader
that the air, the landscape, the moving people, the houses on the quays, the
ships in the harbour, the sounds, the scents, the voices in the air, all fuse in the
perfect and dream-like illusion of an unforgettable reality.

Unsigned review from the Manchester Guardian 

(10 December 1902): 3.

Mr. Joseph Conrad’s latest volume, Youth, contains three stories, of which the
one that gives the title is the shortest. This and the second one may be
regarded as a kind of sequence. The third and longest, “The End of the

Tether,” is admirable, but in comparison with the others the tension is relaxed.
It is in a manner more deliberate, less closely packed; this is Conrad, but not
Conrad in his fine frenzy; it gives an engaging picture of a noble old man,
pathetic, imaginative, deserving a whole array of eulogistic adjectives, but it
is not of the amazing quality of Mr. Conrad at his best. The other two, though
not of such scope and design, are of the quality of Lord Jim—that is to say,
they touch the high-water mark of English fiction and continue a great
expression of adventure and romance. Both stories follow Mr. Conrad’s
particular convention; they are the outpourings of Marlow’s experiences. It
would be useless to pretend that they can be very widely read. Even to those
who are most impressed an excitement so sustained and prolonged, in which
we are braced to encounter so much that menaces and appals, must be
something of a strain. “Youth,” in this conception of Mr. Conrad’s, is not the
time of freedom and delight, but “the test, the trial of life.” No labour is too
great, no danger is too close for this great adventure of the spirit.

“Heart of Darkness” is, again, the adventure of youth, an adventure more
significant than the mere knockabout of the world. It is youth in the toils, a
struggle with phantoms worse than the elements, “a weary pilgrimage
amongst hints for nightmares,” a destructive experience.

It must not be supposed that Mr. Conrad makes attack upon colonisation,
expansion, even upon Imperialism. In no one is the essence of the
adventurous spirit more instinctive. But cheap ideals, platitudes of civilisation
are shrivelled up in the heat of such experiences. The end of this story brings
us back to the familiar, reassuring region of common emotions, to the grief
and constancy of the woman who had loved Kurtz and idealises his memory.
It shows us how far we have travelled.

Those who can read these two stories in sympathy with Mr. Conrad’s

temperament will find in them a great expression of the world’s mystery and
romance. They show the impact upon an undaunted spirit of what is terrible
and obscure; they are adventure in terms of experience; they represent the
sapping of life that cannot be lived on easy terms. Mr. Conrad’s style is his
own—concentrated, tenacious, thoughtful, crammed with imaginative detail,
breathless, yet missing nothing. Its grim earnestness bends to excursions of
irony, to a casual humour, dry, subdued to its surroundings. Phrases strike the
mind like lines of verse; we weary under a tension that is never slackened. He
is one of the greatest of sea-writers and the most subjective of them. His
storms are not the picturesque descriptions of the great phenomena, we see
them in the “weary, serious faces,” in the dreadful concentration of the actors.
Mr. Conrad is intensely human and, we may add with some pride of

fellowship, intensely modern. By those who seek for the finest expositions of
the modern spirit “Youth” and “Heart of Darkness” cannot be neglected.

Unsigned review from the Times Literary Supplement 48 

(12 December 1902): 372.

Telling tales, just spinning yarns, has gone out of fashion since the novel has
become an epitome of everything a man has to say about anything. The three
stories in Youth by Joseph Conrad are in this reference a return to an earlier
taste. The yarns are of the sea, told with an astonishing zest; and given with
vivid accumulation of detail and iterative persistency of emphasis of the
quality of character and scenery. The method is exactly the opposite of Mr.
Kipling’s. It is a little precious; one notes a tasting of the quality of phrases
and an occasional indulgence in poetic rhetoric. But the effect is not unlike
Mr. Kipling’s. In the first story, “Youth,” the colour, the atmosphere of the
East is brought out as in a picture. The concluding scene of the “Heart of
Darkness” is crisp and brief enough for Flaubert, but the effect—a woman’s
ecstatic belief in a villain’s heroism—is reached by an indulgence in the
picturesque horror of the villain, his work and his surroundings, which is
pitiless in its insistence, and quite extravagant according to the canons of art.
But the power, the success in conveying the impression vividly, without loss
of energy is undoubted and is refreshing. “The End of the Tether,” the last of
the three, is the longest and best. Captain Whalley is racy of the sea, and an
embodiment of its finest traditions; and the pathos of his long-drawn wrestle
with the anger of circumstance is poignant to the end. Mr. Conrad should have
put him in the forefront of the book. There are many readers who would not
get beyond the barren and not very pretty philosophy of “Youth”; more who
might feel they had had enough horror at the end of “The Heart of Darkness.”
But they would miss a great deal if they did not reach “The End of the
Tether.” It has this further advantage over the other two tales, that it is much
less clever, much less precious.

Unsigned review from Athenaeum (20 December 1902): 824.

The art of Mr. Conrad is exquisite and very subtle. He uses the tools of his
craft with the fine, thoughtful delicacy of a mediaeval clockmaker. […]
Putting aside all considerations of mere taste, one may say at once that Mr.
Conrad’s methods command and deserve the highest respect, if only by
reason of their scholarly thoroughness. One feels that nothing is too minute,
no process too laborious for this author. He considers not material rewards,
but the dignity of his work, of all work. […]

A critical writer has said that all fiction may roughly be divided into two

classes: that dealing with movement and adventure, and the other dealing with
characterization, the analysis of the human mind. In the present, as in every
one of his previous books, Mr. Conrad has stepped outside these boundaries,
and made his own class of work as he has made his own methods. All his
stories have movement and incident, most of them have adventure, and the
motive in all has apparently been the careful analysis, the philosophic
presentation, of phases of human character. His studious and minute drawing
of the action of men’s minds, passions, and principles forms fascinating
reading. But he has another gift of which he himself may be less conscious,
by means of which his other more incisive and purely intellectual message is
translated for the proper understanding of simpler minds and plainer men.
That gift is the power of conveying atmosphere, and in the exercise of this
talent Mr. Conrad has few equals among our living writers of fiction. He
presents the atmosphere in which his characters move and act with singular
fidelity, by means of watchful and careful building in which the craftsman’s
methods are never obtrusive, and after turning the last page of one of his
books we rise saturated by the very air they breathed. This is a great power,
but, more or less, it is possessed by other talented writers of fiction. The rarity
of it in Mr. Conrad lies in this, that he can surround both his characters and
his readers with the distinctive atmosphere of a particular story within the
limits of a few pages. This is an exceptional gift, and the more to be prized in
Mr. Conrad for the reason that he shows some signs of growing over-subtle in
his analysis of moods, temperaments, and mental idiosyncrasies. It is an
extreme into which all artists whose methods are delicate, minute and
searching are apt to be led. We have at least one other analyst of temperament
and mood in fiction whose minute subtlety, scrupulous restraint, and allusive
economy of words resemble Mr. Conrad’s. And, becoming an obsession,
these characteristics tend to weary the most appreciative reader. With Mr.
Conrad, however, these rather dangerous intellectual refinements are
illumined always by a vivid wealth of atmosphere, and translated simply by
action, incident, strong light and shade, and distinctive colouring. […]

The reviewer deliberately abstains both from quotation and from any

attempt at analysis of a story like “The Heart of Darkness.” Any such attempt
in a limited space would be a painful injustice where work of this character is
concerned. Further, the reader is warned that this book cannot be read
understandingly—as evening newspapers and railway novels are perused—
with one mental eye closed and the other roving. Mr. Conrad himself spares
no pains, and from his readers he demands thoughtful attention. He demands
so much, and, where the intelligent are concerned, we think he will command
it.

Further Reading

CRITICAL STUDIES

Adams, David. Colonial Odysseys: Empire and Epic in the Modernist

Novel. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2003.

Caminero-Santangelo, Byron. African Fiction and Joseph Conrad: Reading

Postcolonial Intertextuality. Albany: State University of New York
Press, 2005.

Carabine, Keith, and Max Saunders, eds. Inter-Relations: Conrad, James,

Ford and Others. Boulder: Social Science Monographs; Lublin: Maria
Curie-Skłodowska University; New York: Distributed by Columbia
University Press, 2003.

Cooper, Brenda. Weary Sons of Conrad: White Fiction Against the Grain of

Africa’s Dark Heart. New York: Peter Lang, 2002.

Donovan, Stephen. Joseph Conrad and Popular Culture. Basingstoke

[England]; New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.

Henricksen, Bruce. Nomadic Voices: Conrad and the Subject of Narrative.

Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois Press, 1992.

Kaplan, Carola M., Peter Mallios, and Andrea White, eds. Conrad in the

Twenty-First Century: Contemporary Approaches and Perspectives.
New York: Routledge, 2005.

Lange, Attie de, Gail Fincham, and Wiesław Krajka, eds. Conrad in Africa:

New Essays on “Heart of Darkness.”(New York: Columbia University
Press, 2002.

Sherry, Norman. Conrad: A Critical Heritage. London: Routledge and

Kegan Paul, 1973.

White, Andrea. Joseph Conrad and the Adventure Tradition. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press, 1993.

White, Harry, and Irving L. Finston. “The Two River Narratives in Heart of

Darkness” and “Who Put Kurtz on the Congo?” Conradiana: A Journal
of Joseph Conrad Studies, vol. 42, no. 1–2, Spring/Summer, 2010.

NINETEENTH-CENTURY ACCOUNTS OF AFRICA

Hobson, J. A. Imperialism: A Study. London: Unwin Hyman, 1988.

Kingsley, Mary. Travels in West Africa. London: The Folio Society, 1976.

Morel, E. D. Great Britain and the Congo: The Pillage of the Congo Basin.

New York: H. Fertig, 1969.

Park, Mungo. Travels in the Interior Districts of Africa. Durham, N.C.:

Duke University Press, 2000.

Stanley, Henry Morton. How I Found Livingstone. Vercelli: White Star,

2006.

CONRAD’S CONTEMPORARIES

Ford, Ford Madox. The Good Soldier: A Tale of Passion. London; New

York: Penguin Classics, 2007.

Haggard, H. Rider. King Solomon’s Mines. London; New York: Penguin

Classics, 2007.

———. She. London; New York: Penguin Classics, 2001.

Kipling, Rudyard. Kim. New York: Penguin, 1987.

Kucich, John, ed. Fictions of Empire (includes Kipling’s “The Man Who

Would Be King” and Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Beach of Falesá).
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.

CONRAD’S INFLUENCE

Achebe, Chinua. Arrow of God. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1969.

———. No Longer at Ease. Oxford: Heinemann, 1987.

———. Things Fall Apart. New York: Anchor Books, 1994.

Aidoo, Ama Ata. Our Sister Killjoy. London: Longman, 1977.

Boyd, William. A Good Man in Africa. London: H. Hamilton, 1981.

———. An Ice-Cream War. New York: Vintage Books, 1982.

Boyle, T. C. Water Music. Boston: Little, Brown, 1981.

Coetzee, J. M. Waiting for the Barbarians. New York: Penguin, 1999.

Fitzgerald, F. Scott. The Great Gatsby. New York: Scribner, 2000.

Foden, Giles. The Last King of Scotland. New York: Vintage Books, 1999.

Forster, E. M. A Passage to India. New York: Penguin, 2005.

Garland, Alex. The Beach. New York: Riverhead Books, 1997.

Golding, William. Lord of the Flies. New York: Penguin, 1999.

Gordimer, Nadine. July’s People. New York: Penguin Books, 1982.

Kerouac, Jack. On the Road. New York: Penguin Books, 2005.

Naipaul, V. S. A Bend in the River. New York: Vintage International, 1989.

Ngugi wa Thiong’o. A Grain of Wheat. London: Heinemann Educational,

1986.

———. Moving the Centre: The Struggle for Cultural Freedoms. London:

J. Currey; Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann, 1993.

Orwell, George. Burmese Days. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World,

1962.

Silverberg, Robert. Downward to the Earth. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday,

1970.

Warren, Robert Penn. All the King’s Men. New York: Harcourt, 2001.

RELATED HISTORICAL BOOKS

Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil.

New York: Penguin Books, 2006.

Browning, Christopher R. Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101

and the Final Solution in Poland. New York: HarperPerennial, 1998.

Butcher, Tim. Blood River: A Journey to Africa’s Broken Heart. London:

Chatto & Windus, 2007. (Retraces Conrad’s journey up the Congo.)

Easterly, William. The White Man’s Burden: Why the West’s Efforts to Aid

the Rest Have Done So Much Ill and So Little Good. New York: Penguin
Press, 2006.

Edgerton, Robert. The Troubled Heart of Africa: A History of the Congo.

New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2002.

French, Howard W. A Continent for the Taking: The Tragedy and Hope of

Africa. New York: Knopf, 2004.

Hochschild, Adam. King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and

Heroism in Colonial Africa. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1998.

Klee, Ernst, Willi Dressen, and Volker Reiss, eds. The Good Old Days: The

Holocaust as Seen by Its Perpetrators and Bystanders. New York: Free

Press, 1991.

Mealer, Bryan. All Things Must Fight to Live: Stories of War and

Deliverance in Congo. New York: Bloomsbury; Distributed in the trade
by Macmillan, 2008.

Otis, Laura, ed. Literature and Science in the Nineteenth Century: An

Anthology. New York: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Pakenham, Thomas. The Scramble for Africa: White Man’s Conquest of the

Dark Continent from 1876–1912. New York: Random House, 1991.

Reader, John. Africa: A Biography of the Continent. New York: Vintage

Books, 1999.

Stearns, Jason K. Dancing in the Glory of Monsters: The Collapse of the

Congo and the Great War of Africa. New York: Public Affairs, 2011.

Wrong, Michela. In the Footsteps of Mr. Kurtz: Living on the Brink of

Disaster in Mobutu’s Congo. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2001.

Character Sketches

Heart of Darkness features a substantial number of unnamed characters, many
of whom also share similar characteristics, adding to the potential confusion.
In fact, only two characters of significance are named—the story’s most
important figures, Kurtz and Charlie Marlow (also named are Fresleven, the
deceased captain whom Marlow replaces aboard the Congo steamer he pilots;
Towson/Towser, the author of the sailor’s manual that Marlow discovers
shortly before arriving at the Inner Station; and Van Shuyten, a Dutch trader
on the Congo coast who equips the harlequin for his journey into the Congo).
What follows are primarily brief descriptions of the various unnamed
individuals whom Marlow meets on his voyage up the river.

Marlow’s audience: Marlow tells his tale to a group of his friends
aboard a boat floating below London on the Thames. The group
includes the unnamed first narrator, the Director of Companies, the
Lawyer, and the Accountant. The latter three, in addition to being
closely related to individuals whom Conrad often spent time with,
were all involved daily with the British economy, including its
connections with imperial activity in places like Africa and India.
And, in this way, they very much reflect the people who would have
been reading Heart of Darkness in Blackwood’s Magazine: English
businessmen of the middle and upper classes. Once Marlow begins his
tale, however, they are barely referenced, aside from a few brief
moments in which Marlow responds to their objections or doubts
about his tale.

The Accountant: This is the first of a series of workers for the

Company whom Marlow encounters and describes in extensive and
often withering detail. The accountant works at the Outer Station
(corresponding to Matadi in real life). There he maintains an
astonishingly formal level of dress, with starched shirts, a jacket, and a
necktie among his attire (which he owes to the “native women” whom
he has taught to launder his clothes). His method of coping with the
uncertainties of the Congo is to focus his attention almost solely on
the proper accounting of the Company’s funds, which leads to his
brutal complaint about a dying man’s groans interrupting his all-

important calculations. Marlow is both impressed and disgusted by
“this miracle,” as he describes him.

The Manager: This is the man in charge of the Central Station

(corresponding to Kinshasa). During an initial interview as well as his
time at the Central Station and later during the journey up the Congo
to recover Kurtz, Marlow learns a fair amount of information about
the manager, little of which he likes. The manager, who is
“commonplace” in virtually every respect and who does not inspire
respect but instead “uneasiness,” apparently blames Kurtz for taking
his place in the pecking order of the Company. Immensely proud of
his ability to survive while many other Europeans are killed by
“various tropical diseases,” he famously announces, “Men who come
out here should have no entrails.” Indeed, the manager and his uncle
both believe that the manager can ultimately gain the promotion he
wishes if he simply stays alive. But they may also be helping Kurtz to
die by wrecking the steamboat that Marlow is to command (the
evidence in the text is not conclusive but certainly hints at this
possibility) and denying him supplies. Once Kurtz has been recovered
and shortly before his death, the manager cannot resist expressing how
he knew that Kurtz would come to this kind of end. On the whole,
Marlow finds the manager’s hypocritical and self-interested behavior
to be nauseating and extremely troubling, yet also representative of the
kinds of “workers” that the Company ultimately creates.

The Brickmaker: Perhaps the shrewdest of the Company

employees whom Marlow meets, the brickmaker is a substantial
source of information about Kurtz and the ongoing intrigues among
the Company men. He doesn’t actually make bricks, but he does give
Marlow a more complete understanding of who Kurtz is, at least in
terms of the Company. At the same time, the brickmaker also reveals a
pettiness and a paranoia that certainly echo the manager’s beliefs.
Marlow is hardly impressed, calling him a “papier-mâché
Mephistopheles”—essentially, a troublemaker whose words are no
more meaningful than any others he has heard from other imperialists.
Told that he and Kurtz are members of the “new gang of virtue,”
Marlow decides to have a bit of fun with the brickmaker, allowing him
to believe that Marlow is closely allied with Kurtz and that he will
make the brickmaker’s life hard should Kurtz’s ascendancy through
the Company continue. The brickmaker, who apparently hoped to be
Assistant Manager under the General Manager of the Central Station,
is perhaps the novel’s best example of what T. S. Eliot would later call
“the hollow men.”

The Fireman: One of only two Africans aboard the steamboat

whom Marlow specifically describes, the fireman maintains the boiler
on the craft. Marlow’s description of him is an uneven mix of
appreciation and condescension, as he speaks of the fireman as “an
improved specimen” who was often “hard at work, a thrall to strange
witchcraft, full of improving knowledge.” At the same time, though,
Marlow brutally explains (perhaps trying to cater to racist views
among his audience) “to look at him was as edifying as seeing a dog
in a parody of breeches and a feather hat, walking on his hind-legs.”
Ultimately, while Marlow cannot quite move beyond the racist views
of his time, he does seem to appreciate the fireman’s devotion to the
work that must be done aboard the steamboat.

The Helmsman: Unlike the fireman, whom Marlow only briefly

describes, Marlow ultimately points to a more substantial and real
bond between himself and the helmsman of the Congo steamer he
captains. At first, though, Marlow paints the helmsman as an
inconsistent and attention-hungry fool. Once the attack commences,
the helmsman reacts by stamping his feet in an animalistic way.
Frustrated by the noise and commotion that the helmsman makes,
Marlow expresses a growing frustration with him. But everything
changes as Marlow slowly realizes (much like his discovery of the
arrows) that the helmsman has been mortally wounded by a spear (he
sees the look on his face, he feels the warm liquid around his feet, and
then he finally sees the fatal wound). Forced to watch this young
African die and to witness the haunting look on his face, Marlow
reassesses his relationship with the helmsman, ultimately telling his
audience, “I am not prepared to affirm the fellow [Kurtz] was exactly
worth the life we lost in getting to him.” Despite his bigoted response
to the helmsman’s outward behavior, Marlow’s posthumous
appreciation of him seems more akin to a captain personally mourning
the loss of one of his crew, no matter what his race.

The Harlequin/Russian: This man—who is called a number of

things: the harlequin, the Russian, Kurtz’s disciple—has been Kurtz’s
closest companion during his months of violent pillaging of the local
villages near the station. He greets Marlow as the steamer arrives at
the Inner Station (near Stanley Falls)1 shortly after the attack. Marlow
also discovers that the writing that he took to be ciphers in the
seamanship manual that he found near Kurtz’s station was, in fact,
Russian penned by the harlequin himself. The harlequin wears a large
coat that has been patched many times with different colors of cloth,
thus appearing similar to the multicolored map of Africa that Marlow
glimpsed much earlier in the story. Above all, the harlequin is an
unrepentant and fully devoted disciple of Kurtz, ready to defend any

of his actions. In this way, he deeply unnerves Marlow, who only
partially realizes that, by retelling the story of Kurtz and refusing to
condemn him, he may be more like the Russian than he realizes—
maybe even Kurtz’s last disciple himself.

1 For updated scholarship see Harry White and Irving L. Finston, “The Two River Narratives in
‘Heart of Darkness’” and “Who Put Kurtz on the Congo?” Conradiana: A Journal of Joseph Conrad
Studies 42:1–2, Spring/Summer, 2010.

Notes

PART I

1. the biggest, and the greatest, town on earth: In 1890, London was the

largest city in the world (and would continue to be until about 1925),
with approximately five million inhabitants. It was also the world’s
busiest port throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with
numerous docks lining the river Thames for miles.

2. The Lawyer: With only a few notable exceptions (particularly Marlow

and Kurtz), Conrad avoids assigning proper names to his characters in
Heart of Darkness. In the case of Marlow’s immediate audience aboard
the ship, this was likely to increase any identification Conrad’s readers
would have had with the men of business and industry aboard. For the
Company men in Africa, Conrad may have wanted to avoid identifying
them too closely with real individuals he encountered during his time in
the Congo, or he may have simply sought to emphasize how little
Marlow knows and understands of these individuals. The Nobel Prize–
winning author J. M. Coetzee uses a similar approach in his novel
Waiting for the Barbarians (1980), naming neither his protagonist nor
the empire for which he works.

3. The water shone pacifically; the sky, without a speck, was a benign

immensity of unstained light; the very mist on the Essex marshes was like
a gauzy and radiant fabric, hung from the wooded rises inland, and
draping the low shores in diaphanous folds: Descriptions of nature like
these occur throughout many of Conrad’s works and show a significant
connection to impressionist works of art by famous painters, including
Claude Monet. This impressionistic technique in fiction is also a
hallmark of several well-known modernist writers, including Virginia
Woolf.

4. What greatness had not floated on the ebb of that river into the mystery

of an unknown earth!…The dreams of men, the seed of commonwealths,
the germs of empires: In contrast to Marlow’s skeptical approach, the
first narrator displays an unchecked enthusiasm for British imperial
endeavors. In this way, he reflects the attitudes of most professional

Englishmen of the time, many of whom read Blackwood’s Magazine, the
journal in which Heart of Darkness was first published. It is also quite
ironic that the first of three installments of Heart of Darkness was the
first and most prominent piece in the magazine’s special issue of its
thousandth edition, which was specifically devoted to celebrating British
imperialism.

5. Marlow: Most critics credit Conrad’s invention of Charlie Marlow as a

pivotal device that allowed the author finally to “find his voice.” After
several awkward attempts at omniscient or shifting perspectives in his
first few novels, Conrad, with Marlow as his narrator, speaks with a
single and clear voice. Marlow’s first appearance actually occurs in Lord
Jim, a novel that Conrad began writing before Heart of Darkness
(though it wasn’t published serially until after Heart of Darkness).
Conrad also used Marlow as his narrator in two other works, Youth
(1902) and Chance (1913).

6. “the hate”: In this crucial early paragraph in his narrative, Marlow offers

up two “Roman” figures who point directly to two central characters of
the African tale he is about to tell: The military officer who endures the
harsh climate in the hopes of gaining promotion and a glorious return to
Rome seems to match quite well with the manager who travels with
Marlow to reclaim Kurtz. And the “decent young citizen” who has
squandered his money and hopes to redeem himself suggests the man at
the heart of Marlow’s tale, Kurtz himself.

7. “The conquest of the earth, which mostly means the taking it away from

those who have a different complexion or slightly flatter noses than
ourselves, is not a pretty thing when you look into it too much”: This
passage points directly to a term later coined by Sigmund Freud, the
“narcissism of minor differences.” In essence, Freud argued that humans
release their greatest violence against those more similar to them than
different, because that very similarity represents a greater threat to
identity (see “The Taboo of Virginity” [1917] and Civilization and Its
Discontents [1930]). Hauntingly, this notion remains all too real in
Africa, as was especially apparent during the Rwandan genocide of 1994
(the minute difference between the Hutus and the Tutsis, the two warring
ethnic groups, is made especially clear in a memorable scene from the
2004 film Hotel Rwanda).

8. “What redeems it is the idea only. An idea at the back of it; not a

sentimental pretence but an idea; and an unselfish belief in the idea—
something you can set up, and bow down before, and offer a sacrifice
to…”: Though it had been engaged in imperial activity for a number of

decades (particularly in India), Britain and its European rivals did not
aggressively pursue expansions of their imperial claims until roughly the
last fifteen years of the nineteenth century, in the wake of the famous
Berlin Conference. Because of the increased competition, “imperialism”
took on a more nationalistic and jingoistic importance, and often became
“Imperialism” instead. Also note Marlow’s ellipses here; they appear
fairly frequently throughout his narrative and remind us that often what
he doesn’t say is at least as significant as what he does.

9. “I have been in some of them, and…well, we won’t talk about that”:

Conrad’s time as a seaman brought him a fairly substantial “dose of the
East.” Ships that he served aboard made regular stops in the Australian
ports of Adelaide, Sydney, and Melbourne, while his travels also brought
him to places such as Singapore, Bangkok, Calcutta (now Kolkata), and
the comparatively small and exotic port of Berau on the east coast of
Borneo. This small port is particularly important, however, because it
was here that he met Charles William Olmeijer, the inspiration for his
first novel, Almayer’s Folly.

10. “I went on along Fleet Street”: Fleet Street was long the home of

Britain’s most important and influential newspapers. Today the
newspapers have largely moved elsewhere, and the numerous law offices
along Fleet Street make it important to London’s legal community.

11. “‘in the interests of science’”: Phrenology, a now disproven science that

claimed to be able to predict mental characteristics based on the shape of
the skull, was a popular idea that helped support a number of racist
beliefs in the Victorian era (and fostered some of the thinking behind
eugenics as well). Interestingly, and more positively, it also served as an
early precursor of modern cognitive sciences that pursue explanations for
certain behaviors by examining brain activity.

12. “‘interesting for science to watch the mental changes of individuals, on

the spot’”: Though still in its relative infancy, the field of anthropology,
led by the work of Franz Boas and Bronisław Malinowski around the
turn of the twentieth century, increasingly came to favor the idea of
extended experiences and observations in the field as the best means to
understand the full context of the cultures or groups being studied.

13. “‘Are you an alienist?’”: In his popular novel The Alienist (1994), Caleb

Carr resurrects this nineteenth-century term and concept by telling a
story that anticipates television’s CSI series but that is set in 1896 New
York City.

14. “I felt as though, instead of going to the centre of a continent, I were

about to set off for the centre of the earth”: Conrad here makes an
obvious connection to one of Jules Verne’s most famous works, Journey
to the Center of the Earth. Verne wrote about environments even more
alien than the Congo of Heart of Darkness, but he also contributed
greatly to the success of adventure fiction as a genre. The endurance of
Verne’s tale continues, as is made apparent by the film version of the
story released in the summer of 2008 and starring Brendan Fraser.

15. “Black rags were wound round their loins, and the short ends behind

wagged to and fro like tails”: There are a number of moments like this in
Heart of Darkness that seem to point directly (even deliberately) to the
writings of Charles Darwin, whose On the Origin of Species (1859) and
especially The Descent of Man (1871) popularized ideas about evolution
and the survival of the fittest that were already “in the air” during the
1840s and ’50s. The “tails” that Marlow mentions here offer a brief but
nonetheless racist hint that these Africans are less evolved beings.

16. “They passed me within six inches, without a glance, with that complete,

deathlike indifference of unhappy savages”: Jean-Jacques Rousseau, one
of the eighteenth century’s most significant philosophers, often posited
the idea that those who were most removed from “civilization” were best
able to live in a purely happy state. He also believed that there was a
purity to such lives and also spoke of “noble” savages that lived beyond
the corrupt and ignoble “civilized” world.

17. “‘To make money, of course’”: J. A. Hobson argued in his 1902 work

Imperialism that Britain’s imperial actions were largely driven by a
relatively small group of businessmen who were also in large part the
beneficiaries of the British Empire. At the same time, one of the reasons
for the fall of that empire was the tremendous costs involved in policing
and protecting any held lands, particularly India but also numerous other
colonial holdings around the world. Thus, the economic stakes of
imperialism cut both ways.

18. “He was commonplace in complexion, in feature, in manner, and in

voice”: While reporting on the trial of the Nazi war criminal Adolf
Eichmann, Hannah Arendt coined the phrase “the banality of evil,”
which posits that many of the greatest evils in the world originate in
humans who are otherwise “normal” (that is, not sociopaths or madmen).
This phrase also seems to apply to many imperialists in the Belgian
Congo. Another interesting study of something like this phenomenon is
Christopher Browning’s Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101
and the Final Solution in Poland, which chronicles the lives of similarly
“commonplace” men from Poland who were pressed into duty by the

Nazis and essentially did as they were told, becoming proficient
executioners in the process.

19. “Otherwise there was only an indefinable, faint expression of his lips,

something stealthy—a smile—not a smile—I remember it, but I can’t
explain. It was unconscious, this smile was, though just after he had said
something it got intensified for an instant”: In The Great Gatsby (1925),
a novel that its author, F. Scott Fitzgerald, acknowledged was heavily
influenced by Heart of Darkness, the narrator, Nick Carraway, describes
Gatsby in intriguingly similar terms. In chapter 3, Nick relates:

He smiled understandingly—much more than understandingly. It

was one of those rare smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance in it,
that you may come across four or five times in life. It faced—or
seemed to face—the whole external world for an instant, and then
concentrated on you with an irresistible prejudice in your favor. It
understood you just so far as you wanted to be understood, believed in
you as you would like to believe in yourself, and assured you that it
had precisely the impression of you that, at your best, you hoped to
convey. Precisely at that point it vanished—and I was looking at an
elegant young rough-neck, a year or two over thirty, whose elaborate
formality of speech just missed being absurd. Some time before he
introduced himself I’d got a strong impression that he was picking his
words with care.

20. “When annoyed at meal-times by the constant quarrels of the white men

about precedence, he ordered an immense round table to be made, for
which a special house had to be built. This was the station’s mess-room.
Where he sat was the first place—the rest were nowhere. One felt this to
be his unalterable conviction”: The manager’s unique interpretation of
the famous round table that, in Arthurian legend, symbolized that all
knights were of equal worth leads instead to each “knight” believing that
his is the most important place at the table. It shows the manager to be
cunning enough to be a leader at least of these men but driven by
egotistical and selfish aims that are far from what the mythical Camelot
would have endorsed. (For a more traditional rendering/explanation of
the round table, see, among other films, First Knight [1995].)

21. “the forest stood up spectrally”: Early in the nineteenth century, during

what we now call the Romantic era (roughly 1790–1830), poets such as
Wordsworth and Coleridge wrote often of a benevolent nature that could
offer comfort, pleasure, and inspiration to humans. By the turn of the
twentieth century, though, when Heart of Darkness appeared, literary

movements like naturalism, along with evolving scientific developments,
had combined to alter views of nature substantially, either displaying it
as completely indifferent to humans or even in open opposition to
humans’ desires. In our own time, the view has evolved even further,
with the environmental and green movements now suggesting that nature
is ours to take care of and, in a sense, dependent upon us for its survival.

22. “This simply because I had a notion it somehow would be of help to that

Kurtz whom at the time I did not see—you understand. He was just a
word for me. I did not see the man in the name any more than you do”:
This idea of believing without seeing has many important connections
with literature and the movies. It is a central tenet of the Christian faith
as expressed in the New Testament of the Bible. But we also find it in a
number of films, perhaps most memorably (and startlingly) in the
mysterious figure of Keyser Söze, portrayed by Kevin Spacey, in Bryan
Singer’s 1995 film The Usual Suspects. In the immediate context of the
story, however, this “notion” has more to do with Marlow choosing the
devil he can’t see over the devils he can.

23. “What more did I want? What I really wanted was rivets, by heaven!

Rivets. To get on with the work—to stop the hole”: Endlessly frustrated
by the inefficiency he sees around him in the Congo, Marlow transfers
his whole desire for order and efficiency onto the rivets that are so basic
and plentiful in Europe and even at the previous station that he visited—
and yet nearly impossible to find at this particular spot.

24. “a rioting invasion of soundless life, a rolling wave of plants, piled up,

crested, ready to topple over the creek, to sweep every little man of us
out of his little existence”: Conrad’s language here echoes the fear of
death at the hands of an all-powerful nature that is shared by the four
men shipwrecked in Stephen Crane’s short story “The Open Boat”
(1897). Conrad and Crane became good friends late in Crane’s all too
brief life (he died in 1900 of tuberculosis at the age of only twenty-
eight).

25. “Instead of rivets there came an invasion, an infliction, a visitation”: As

countless historians have referenced, contact between “civilized”
explorers and native peoples in lands throughout the world has often had
fatal consequences for those peoples. This is because their immune
systems have not had to fight off some of the germs carried by those
from the outside world and are unable to adapt. This has not always been
true, though, as many young imperialists who accepted positions in
Africa and other colonial lands died at the hands of diseases for which
their own, fairly delicate immune systems were not prepared.

PART II

1. “‘Ah! my boy, trust to this—I say, trust to this.’ I saw him extend his short

flipper of an arm for a gesture that took in the forest, the creek, the mud,
the river”: Unlike Marlow, who at least seems to reference Darwin
correctly (see note 15 of Part I), the manager and his uncle rely on a
slightly corrupted evolution of Darwinian concepts commonly known as
social Darwinism, a belief that was particularly popular during late
Victorian and early modernist times (roughly 1870 to World War I in the
1910s). Social Darwinism took the idea of “survival of the fittest” and
tried to apply it among classes and even races of individuals both within
and outside of “civilized” society. In the manager’s case, his surprising
longevity in the disease-ridden Congo creates in him what we might call
a “Darwinian arrogance” that he will prove himself “fittest” simply by
outliving all his rivals, including Kurtz. At the same time, Marlow
mocks the idea that either the manager or his uncle (with his “short
flipper of an arm”) has any control over their survival, much less the
mysterious and seemingly unknowable African jungle.

2. “Fine fellows—cannibals—in their place. They were men one could work

with, and I am grateful to them”: The presence of “cannibals” in fiction
had a long tradition well before Conrad wrote Heart of Darkness. The
protagonists of Daniel Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe (1719) and Herman
Melville’s Typee (1846), to name only two especially prominent
examples, both live at least part of their exiled lives in fear of
discovering cannibals.

3. “we were travelling in the night of first ages, of those ages that are gone,

leaving hardly a sign—and no memories”: Developments in science and
history moved so swiftly across the nineteenth century that the idea of
the “primeval” for Victorians was a radically different one than ever
before. Instead of a history of the world as brief as four thousand years
based on some biblical accounts, the same history was considered to
have covered countless millennia by the time Marlow described his
travel in the “night of first ages.” This lengthening of what we know as
“history” continues, as the age of the universe increases virtually every
time a more powerful deep space telescope is created.

4. “you could see there a singleness of intention, an honest concern for the

right way of going to work, which made these humble pages, thought out
so many years ago, luminous with another than a professional light”:
Marlow’s fondness for the right kind of “work” ties his narrative to the
mid-nineteenth-century works of Thomas Carlyle. This, along with some
of his arguably racist and at least racially insensitive views, reminds us

that Heart of Darkness, while often celebrated as a modernist text that
points forward to the twentieth century, also is very much a product of
the Victorian era that was ending just as it first appeared in 1899.

5. “So, unless they swallowed the wire itself, or made loops of it to snare

the fish with, I don’t see what good their extravagant salary could be to
them”: Marlow’s keen sense of cynicism and disgust for hypocrisy lead
to a harsh indictment of how the crew is paid in “currency” that is
literally worthless. A number of economic theorists before Conrad’s
time, including Adam Smith and Karl Marx, had considered the
importance of what is known as the “use value” of a product. Given the
right place and time, such wire might have such a value or even be
prized as a commodity. But, in the isolation and danger of the Congo,
such pay is less than worthless in Marlow’s eyes.

6. “Yes; I looked at them as you would on any human being, with a

curiosity of their impulses, motives, capacities, weaknesses, when
brought to the test of an inexorable physical necessity”: Marlow’s
curiosity about others echoes Ishmael’s fascination with his friend
Queequeg and others from countries around the world in Herman
Melville’s Moby-Dick.

7. “beset by as many dangers as though he had been an enchanted princess

sleeping in a fabulous castle”: In a surprising moment within such a
dark tale, Marlow actually compares Kurtz to “an enchanted princess
sleeping in a fabulous castle.” His point here mainly is to emphasize the
number of dangers that he has to face in order to rescue the highly
valued person of Kurtz. But it also serves as a gentle reminder that he
has not yet even seen Kurtz, who remains as artificial at this point as the
princesses in fairy tales that we often tell to children.

8. “Arrows, by Jove!”: Marlow’s slow-motion telling of the beginning of

the attack, which Ian Watt famously described as “delayed decoding,”
replicates the confusion and ignorance that mark Marlow’s initial
response to the “sticks” he sees flying through the air. Though we might
recognize these instantly for the arrows they are in one circumstance
(say, if we saw video of such a battle), Conrad helps us to understand
just how difficult it might be in the bewildering state of mind of Marlow
to distinguish them during this astonishing and feverish attack.

9. “A deuce of a lot of smoke came up and drove slowly forward. I swore at

it. Now I couldn’t see the ripple or the snag either”: Though Marlow
does not use the actual term, his words here point to a phenomenon
known as the “fog of war.” The term is usually credited to the Prussian
military analyst Carl von Clausewitz, who wrote: “The great uncertainty

of all data in War is a peculiar difficulty, because all action must, to a
certain extent, be planned in a mere twilight, which in addition not
infrequently—like the effect of a fog or moonshine—gives to things
exaggerated dimensions and an unnatural appearance” (On War, book 2,
chapter 2, paragraph 24).

10. “The earth for us is a place to live in, where we must put up with sights,

with sounds, with smells too, by Jove!—breathe dead hippo, so to speak,
and not be contaminated”: Though it is delivered in language and
imagery specific to his time in Africa, Marlow’s declaration here points
to the ongoing universality of Marlow’s story and helps to explain why
Heart of Darkness’s importance endures. Life is lived among diversity,
including aspects that each individual dislikes, but life must be lived
nevertheless, and each of us finds a way to adapt to our ever-changing
world.

11. “‘By the simple exercise of our will we can exert a power for good

practically unbounded,’ etc., etc.”: This kind of language, promising that
the West can and should “improve” places like Africa, was particularly
prominent in some of the writings of Henry Morton Stanley (of Stanley
and Livingstone fame) and King Leopold II of Belgium, who personally
owned the Congo Free State (unlike most colonies, which were officially
the possessions of nations, not persons). Though this belief often served
only to hide less noble intentions (particularly the economic exploitation
of colonies and their inhabitants), a longer view of history paints more of
a mixed picture. Recent efforts by international organizations and a
number of countries to fight diseases like AIDS and malaria have made
at least some progress in a number of African nations within the last
decade. At the same time, significant challenges and problems remain,
some of which seem to require solutions either by individual African
countries or by larger groups of African nations joining together in
common effort (possibly including the current crisis in Darfur).

12. “He won’t be forgotten. Whatever he was, he was not common. He had

the power to charm or frighten rudimentary souls into an aggravated
witch-dance in his honour; he could also fill the small souls of the
pilgrims with bitter misgivings”: This charismatic power to whip large
crowds into a frenzy, to say and believe whatever is needed in order to
take control of a village or country, has unfortunately lived on in a
number of real-life figures in modern African history, including Idi Amin
Dada of Uganda in the 1970s (memorably portrayed by Forest Whitaker
in the 2006 film The Last King of Scotland).

PART III

1. “‘What can you expect?’ he burst out; ‘he came to them with thunder and

lightning, you know—and they had never seen anything like it—and very
terrible’”: The harlequin tries to avoid speaking too directly here, but it
is fairly clear that the phrase “thunder and lightning” refers to the guns
that Kurtz has likely used in rampaging local villages. Using technology
to achieve one’s aims also lies at the heart of two novels that were
written about a decade before Heart of Darkness. In Rudyard Kipling’s
The Man Who Would Be King (1888), two vagabonds briefly achieve
power as kings over a fictional land near India by threatening the locals
with guns (though they do, in true imperial fashion, eventually begin
training their subjects how to use those same firearms as they form an
army to protect them). In Mark Twain’s A Connecticut Yankee in King
Arthur’s Court (1889), an American from the nineteenth century is
transported into medieval times but gains respect by using modern ideas
and technology (including knowledge of a solar eclipse) as “magic.”

2. “I could not hear a sound, but through my glasses I saw the thin arm

extended commandingly, the lower jaw moving, the eyes of that
apparition shining darkly far in its bony head that nodded with
grotesque jerks”: This statement is typical of the way that Marlow,
telling after Kurtz’s death of his encounter with the living Kurtz, still
describes the enigmatic figure as a virtual skeleton or corpse. Perhaps in
Marlow’s mind, Kurtz was already dead, or at least destined to die,
before Marlow reached him (which may have been the manager’s plan
all along (see note 1 of Part II).

3. “‘I anticipated this. Shows a complete want of judgment. It is my duty to

point it out in the proper quarters’”: Even deep in the Congo, office
politics still exist. Living up (or actually down) to the petty reputation
that Marlow has established for him, the manager insists on claiming just
how right he was to doubt Kurtz and his “methods” in the first place.
And such behavior leads Marlow to have even greater disgust for the
manager, as his “I told you so” about Kurtz is almost more than he can
stand.

4. “My hour of favour was over. I found myself lumped along with Kurtz as

a partisan of methods for which the time was not ripe. I was unsound!
Ah! but it was something to have at least a choice of nightmares”: This
is a complex and surprising moment in Marlow’s narrative. Appalled by
the naked hypocrisy of the Company men, especially the manager,
Marlow embraces Kurtz and the violent methods that he has clearly
employed to gain his bounty of ivory. But it is hard to imagine Marlow
actually supporting the violence itself. Instead, he may simply accept

Kurtz’s behavior as brutal but honest instead of the hypocrisy and
pretense of individuals like the manager and the brickmaker.

5. “imagined myself living alone and unarmed in the woods to an advanced

age”: Marlow here imagines himself living the life of Robinson Crusoe
in the midst of the African jungle rather than on a deserted isle. One of
the most important works in the history of the novel, Defoe’s Robinson
Crusoe continues to inspire imitations to this day. In recent decades, Tim
Severin’s book Seeking Robinson Crusoe (2002) has renewed the search
for Defoe’s real-life model for Crusoe; J. M. Coetzee’s Foe (1986) has
fascinatingly retold the story from a woman’s point of view; and Michel
Tournier’s Friday (1967) has offered Crusoe’s story from the point of
view of the titular character, who willingly serves as Crusoe’s servant in
Defoe’s original tale. In addition, films including Cast Away (2000) have
updated the famous story of Crusoe, while television recently offered
Lost as well. The universe of artistic works generated by Defoe’s
enduring novel is well worth exploring, and growing larger all the time.

6. “two thousand eyes followed the evolutions of the splashing, thumping,

fiery river-demon beating the water with its terrible tail and breathing
black smoke into the air”: In a remarkable and unique moment in the
narrative, Marlow describes the steamer as it would have appeared to the
Africans rather than from his own perspective. Robert Louis Stevenson
uses a similar technique with much greater regularity in his novella The
Beach of Falesá (1893).

7. “I saw on that ivory face the expression of sombre pride, of ruthless

power, of craven terror—of an intense and hopeless despair”: The idea
of a person being transformed by an obsession with a particular object,
as Kurtz’s face comes to appear like “ivory” to Marlow, is also a key
concept in another novel from the same period, Oscar Wilde’s The
Picture of Dorian Gray (1890). Wilde’s novel, however, features a
fascinating twist: as Dorian pursues his hedonistic ways, his physical
appearance does not change—but a particular portrait of him grows ever
uglier and more sinister as he continues to sin.

8. “‘Mistah Kurtz—he dead’”: This succinct and brutal line (delivered “in a

tone of scathing contempt”) serves as one of two epigraphs to T. S.
Eliot’s poem “The Hollow Men” (1925). Eliot’s title for this poem also
serves as an appropriate term for many of the imperialists Marlow
encounters—Marlow himself says of the brickmaker, “it seemed to me
that if I tried I could poke my forefinger through him, and find nothing
inside but a little loose dirt, maybe.” Eliot’s poem is also well known for
its closing lines:

This is the way the world ends
This is the way the world ends
This is the way the world ends
Not with a bang but a whimper.

Also, note how these lines match up quite well with Marlow’s
ambivalent description of his struggle with death, which he calls “the
most unexciting contest you can imagine.”

9. “the bearing of commonplace individuals going about their business in

the assurance of perfect safety”: This idea of members of society
walking about in “the assurance of perfect safety” lies at the heart of
Conrad’s urban spy novel set in Victorian London, The Secret Agent
(1907). Though quite different from some of Conrad’s early efforts and
focused instead on an English metropolis, The Secret Agent offers such a
compelling vision of the mind-set behind terroristic behavior that it has
received a great deal of attention in the wake of 9/11 and other attacks
throughout the world.

10. “I had some difficulty in restraining myself from laughing in their faces,

so full of stupid importance. I daresay I was not very well at that time. I
tottered about the streets—there were various affairs to settle—grinning
bitterly at perfectly respectable persons”: How Marlow feels upon his
return to society again echoes Ishmael in his reasons for fleeing from
society in the first place, as we see in the opening paragraph of Herman
Melville’s Moby-Dick: “Whenever I find myself growing grim about the
mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I
find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing
up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos
get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to
prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically
knocking people’s hats off—then, I account it high time to get to sea as
soon as I can.”

11. “‘He electrified large meetings. He had the faith—don’t you see?—he had

the faith. He could get himself to believe anything—anything’”: This
type of rhetorical power can also be seen in a number of equally
unforgettable figures in fiction and film, including 1930s Louisiana
governor Huey Long and the character he inspired, Willie Stark, in
Robert Penn Warren’s All the King’s Men (1946) (and in the Academy
Award–winning 1949 film of the same name); Charles Foster Kane as
portrayed by Orson Welles in the film Citizen Kane (1941); and Forest
Whitaker’s Idi Amin in The Last King of Scotland (2006).

12. “She had a mature capacity for fidelity, for belief, for suffering”: While

critics tend to view Marlow’s behavior in this scene as condescending
toward the Intended and often women in general, it is interesting to note
that the traits that Marlow attributes to her—fidelity, belief, suffering—
were among those characteristics that Conrad often considered the most
important, as he made clear in a number of letters during his career. In
addition, Conrad noted in a 1902 letter to the magazine editor William
Blackwood that he considered this scene important because it makes
Heart of Darkness more than just the story of a white man in Africa.

13. “her fair hair seemed to catch all the remaining light in a glimmer of

gold”: This reference to the Intended’s “fair hair,” coupled with
Marlow’s admission on the previous page that he cannot defend her from
the “triumphant darkness,” carries an odd hint of the fairy tale, similar to
Marlow’s earlier comparison of Kurtz to an “enchanted princess”
similarly awaiting rescue (see note 7 of Part II).

Looking for more?

Visit Penguin.com for more about this author and a complete

list of their books.

Discover your next great read!

