by Mickey Spillane, 1918-2006 
 
Co-author Max Allan Collins 
 
 
Published:  1947 
 
 
 
 
 

J J J J J   I I I I I 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Dedication 
 
Chapter  1 …  thru  …  Chapter  13 

 
*     *     *     *     * 
 
This novel is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are either the product of 
the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or 
dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental. 
 
 
 

J J J J J   I I I I I 
 
 
 
 
 
Dedicated to my wife 
 
 
“I’m going to get the louse that killed you!” 
—MIKE HAMMER, judge, jury, and executioner of I, THE JURY 
 
 
 
Chapter  1 
 
 
 
I shook the rain from my hat and walked into the room. Nobody said a word. 
They stepped back politely and I could feel their eyes on me. Pat Chambers was 
standing by the door to the bedroom trying to steady Myrna. The girl’s body was 
racking with dry sobs. I walked over and put my arms around her. 
 
“Take it easy, kid,” I told her. “Come on over here and lie down.” I led her to a 
studio couch that was against the far wall and sat her down. She was in pretty 
bad shape. One of the uniformed cops put a pillow down for her and she stretched 
out. 
 
Pat motioned me over to him and pointed to the bedroom. “In there, Mike,” he 
said. 
 
In there. The words hit me hard. In there was my best friend lying on the floor 
dead. The body. Now I could call it that. Yesterday it was Jack Williams, the guy 
that shared the same mud bed with me through two years of warfare in the 
stinking slime of the jungle. Jack, the guy who said he’d give his right arm for a 
friend and did when he stopped a bastard of a Jap from slitting me in two. He 
caught the bayonet in the biceps and they amputated his arm. 
 
Pat didn’t say a word. He let me uncover the body and feel the cold face. For the 
first time in my life I felt like crying. “Where did he get it, Pat?” 
 
“In the stomach. Better not look at it. The killer carved the nose off a forty-five 
and gave it to him low.” 

 
I threw back the sheet anyway and a curse caught in my throat. Jack was in 
shorts, his one hand still clutching his belly in agony. The bullet went in clean, 
but where it came out left a hole big enough to cram a fist into. 
 
Very gently I pulled the sheet back and stood up. It wasn’t a complicated setup. 
A trail of blood led from the table beside the bed to where Jack’s artificial arm lay. 
Under him the throw rug was ruffled and twisted. He had tried to drag himself 
along with his one arm, but never reached what he was after. 
 
His police positive, still in the holster, was looped over the back of the chair. 
That was what he wanted. With a slug in his gut he never gave up. 
 
I pointed to the rocker, overbalanced under the weight of the .38. “Did you move 
the chair, Pat?” 
 
“No, why?” 
 
“It doesn’t belong there. Don’t you see?” 
 
Pat looked puzzled. “What are you getting at?” 
 
“That chair was over there by the bed. I’ve been here often enough to remember 
that much. After the killer shot Jack, he pulled himself toward the chair. But the 
killer didn’t leave after the shooting. He stood here and watched him grovel on the 
floor in agony. Jack was after that gun, but he never reached it. He could have if 
the killer didn’t move it. The trigger-happy bastard must have stood by the door 
laughing while Jack tried to make his last play. He kept pulling the chair back, 
inch by inch, until Jack gave up. Tormenting a guy who’s been through all sorts of 
hell. Laughing. This was no ordinary murder, Pat. It’s as cold-blooded and as 
deliberate as I ever saw one. I’m going to get the one that did this.” 
 
“You dealing yourself in, Mike?” 
 
“I’m in. What did you expect?” 
 
“You’re going to have to go easy.” 
 
“Uh-uh. Fast, Pat. From now on it’s a race. I want the killer for myself. We’ll 
work together as usual, but in the homestretch, I’m going to pull the trigger.” 
 
“No, Mike, it can’t be that way. You know it.” 
 
“Okay, Pat,” I told him. “You have a job to do, but so have I. Jack was about the 
best friend I ever had. We lived together and fought together. And by Christ, I’m 
not letting the killer go through the tedious process of the law. You know what 
happens, damn it. They get the best lawyer there is and screw up the whole thing 
and wind up a hero! The dead can’t speak for themselves. They can’t tell what 
happened. How could Jack tell a jury what it was like to have his insides ripped 
out by a dumdum? Nobody in the box would know how it felt to be dying or have 
your own killer laugh in your face. One arm. Hell, what does that mean? So he has 
the Purple Heart. But did they ever try dragging themselves across a floor to a gun 
with that one arm, their insides filling up with blood, so goddamn mad to be shot 
they’d do anything to reach the killer. No, damn it. A jury is cold and impartial like 
they’re supposed to be, while some snotty lawyer makes them pour tears as he 
tells how his client was insane at the moment or had to shoot in self-defense. 
Swell. The law is fine. But this time I’m the law and I’m not going to be cold and 
impartial. I’m going to remember all those things.” 
 
I reached out and grabbed the lapels of his coat. “And something more, Pat. I 
want you to hear every word I say. I want you to tell it to everyone you know. And 
when you tell it, tell it strong, because I mean every word of it. There are ten 

thousand mugs that hate me and you know it. They hate me because if they mess 
with me I shoot their damn heads off. I’ve done it and I’ll do it again.” 
 
There was so much hate welled up inside me I was ready to blow up, but I 
turned and looked down at what was once Jack. Right then I felt like saying a 
prayer, but I was too mad. 
 
“Jack, you’re dead now. You can’t hear me any more. Maybe you can. I hope so. 
I want you to hear what I’m about to say. You’ve known me a long time, Jack. My 
word is good just as long as I live. I’m going to get the louse that killed you. He 
won’t sit in the chair. He won’t hang. He will die exactly as you died, with a .45 
slug in the gut, just a little below the belly button. No matter who it is, Jack, I’ll 
get the one. Remember, no matter who it is, I promise.” 
 
When I looked up, Pat was staring at me strangely. He shook his head. I knew 
what he was thinking. “Mike, lay off. For God’s sake don’t go off half-cocked about 
this. I know you too well. You’ll start shooting up anyone connected with this and 
get in a jam you’ll never get out of.” 
 
“I’m over it now, Pat. Don’t get excited. From now on I’m after one thing, the 
killer. You’re a cop, Pat. You’re tied down by rules and regulations. There’s 
someone over you. I’m alone. I can slap someone in the puss and they can’t do a 
damn thing. No one can kick me out of my job. Maybe there’s nobody to put up a 
huge fuss if I get gunned down, but then I still have a private cop’s license with 
the privilege to pack a rod, and they’re afraid of me. I hate hard, Pat. When I latch 
on to the one behind this they’re going to wish they hadn’t started it. Some day, 
before long, I’m going to have my rod in my mitt and the killer in front of me. I’m 
going to watch the killer’s face. I’m going to plunk one right in his gut, and when 
he’s dying on the floor I may kick his teeth out. 
 
“You couldn’t do that. You have to follow the book because you’re a Captain of 
Homicide. Maybe the killer will wind up in the chair. You’d be satisfied, but I 
wouldn’t. It’s too easy. That killer is going down like Jack did.” 
 
There was nothing more to say. I could see by the set of Pat’s jaw that he wasn’t 
going to try to talk me out of it. All he could do was to try to beat me to him and 
take it from there. We walked out of the room together. The coroner’s men had 
arrived and were ready to carry the body away. 
 
I didn’t want Myrna to see that. I sat down on the couch beside her and let her 
sob on my shoulder. That way I managed to shield her from the sight of her fiancé 
being carted off in a wicker basket. She was a good kid. Four years ago, when Jack 
was on the force, he had grabbed her as she was about to do a Dutch over the 
Brooklyn Bridge. She was a wreck then. Dope had eaten her nerve ends raw. But 
he had taken her to his house and paid for a full treatment until she was normal. 
For the both of them it had been a love that blossomed into a beautiful thing. If it 
weren’t for the war they would have been married long ago. 
 
When Jack came back with one arm it had made no difference. He no longer 
was a cop, but his heart was with the force. She had loved him before and she still 
loved him. Jack wanted her to give up her job, but Myrna persuaded him to let her 
hold it until he really got settled. It was tough for a man with one arm to find 
employment, but he had many friends. 

 
Before long he was part of the investigating staff of an insurance company. It 
had to be police work. For Jack there was nothing else. Then they were happy. 
Then they were going to be married. Now this. 
 
Pat tapped me on the shoulder. “There’s a car waiting downstairs to take her 
home.” 
 
I rose and took her by the hand. “Come on, kid. There’s no more you can do. 
Let’s go.” 
 
She didn’t say a word, but stood up silently and let a cop steer her out the door. 
I turned to Pat. “Where do we start?” I asked him. 
 
“Well, I’ll give you as much as I know. See what you can add to it. You and Jack 
were great buddies. It might be that you can add something that will make some 
sense.” 
 
Inwardly I wondered. Jack was such a straight guy that he never made an 
enemy. Even while on the force. Since he’d gotten back, his work with the 
insurance company was pretty routine. But maybe an angle there, though. 
 
“Jack threw a party last night,” Pat went on. “Not much of an affair.” 
 
“I know,” I cut in, “he called me and asked me over, but I was pretty well 
knocked out. I hit the sack early. Just a group of old friends he knew before the 
army.” 
 
“Yeah. We got their names from Myrna. The boys are checking on them now.” 
 
“Who found the body?” I asked. 
 
“Myrna did. She and Jack were driving out to the country today to pick a 
building site for their cottage. She got here at eight A.M. or a little after. When 
Jack didn’t answer, she got worried. His arm had been giving him trouble lately 
and she thought it might have been that. She called the super. He knew her and 
let her in. When she screamed the super came running back and called us. Right 
after I got the story about the party from her, she broke down completely. Then I 
called you.” 
 
“What time did the shooting occur?” 
 
“The coroner places it about five hours before I got here. That would make it 
about three fifteen. When I get an autopsy report we may be able to narrow it 
down even further.” 
 
“Anyone hear a shot?” 
 
“Nope. It probably was a silenced gun.” 
 
“Even with a muffler, a .45 makes a good-sized noise.” 
 
“I know, but there was a party going on down the hall. Not loud enough to cause 
complaints, but enough to cover up any racket that might have been made here.” 
 
“What about those that were here?” Pat reached in his pocket and pulled out a 
pad. He ripped a leaf loose and handed it to me. 
 
“Here’s a list Myrna gave me. She was the first to arrive. Got here at eight thirty 
last night. She acted as hostess, meeting the others at the door. The last one came 
about eleven. They spent the evening doing some light drinking and dancing, then 
left as a group about one.” 
 
I looked at the names Pat gave me. A few of them I knew well enough, while a 
couple of the others were people of whom Jack had spoken, but I had never met 
 
“Where did they go after the party, Pat?” 

 
“They took two cars. The one Myrna went in belonged to Hal Kines. They drove 
straight up to Westchester, dropping Myrna off on the way. I haven’t heard from 
any of the others yet.” 
 
Both of us were silent for a moment, then Pat asked, “What about a motive, 
Mike?” 
 
I shook my head. “I don’t see any yet. But I will. He wasn’t killed for nothing. I’ll 
bet this much, whatever it was, was big. There’s a lot here that’s screwy. You got 
anything?” 
 
“Nothing more than I gave you, Mike. I was hoping you could supply some 
answers.” 
 
I grinned at him, but I wasn’t trying to be funny. “Not yet. Not yet. They’ll come 
though. And I’ll relay them on to you, but by that time I’ll be working on the next 
step.” 
 
“The cops aren’t exactly dumb, you know. We can get our own answers.” 
 
“Not like I can. That’s why you buzzed me so fast. You can figure things out as 
quickly as I can, but you haven’t got the ways and means of doing the dirty work. 
That’s where I come in. You’ll be right behind me every inch of the way, but when 
the pinch comes I’ll get shoved aside and you slap the cuffs on. That is, if you can 
shove me aside. I don’t think you can.” 
 
“Okay, Mike, call it your own way. I want you in all right. But I want the killer, 
too. Don’t forget that. I’ll be trying to beat you to him. We have every scientific 
facility at our disposal and a lot of men to do the leg work. We’re not short in 
brains, either,” he reminded me. 
 
“Don’t worry, I don’t underrate the cops. But cops can’t break a guy’s arm to 
make him talk, and they can’t shove his teeth in with the muzzle of a .45 to 
remind him that you aren’t fooling. I do my own leg work, and there are a lot of 
guys who will tell me what I want to know because they know what I’ll do to them 
if they don’t. My staff is strictly ex officio, but very practical.” 
 
That ended the conversation. We walked out into the hall where Pat put a 
patrolman on the door to make sure things stayed as they were. We took the self-
operated elevator down four flights to the lobby and I waited while Pat gave a brief 
report to some reporters. 
 
My car stood at the curb behind the squad car. I shook hands with Pat and 
climbed into my jalopy and headed for the Hackard Building, where I held down a 
two-room suite to use for operation. 
 
 
Chapter  2 
 
 
 
The office was locked when I got there. I kicked on the door a few times and 
Velda clicked the lock back. When she saw who it was she said, “Oh, it’s you.” 
 
“What do you mean—‘Oh, it’s you’! Surely you remember me, Mike Hammer, 
your boss.” 
 
“Poo! You haven’t been here in so long I can’t tell you from another bill 
collector.” I closed the door and followed her into my sanctum sanctorum. She had 
million-dollar legs, that girl, and she didn’t mind showing them off. For a secretary 

she was an awful distraction. She kept her coal-black hair long in a page-boy cut 
and wore tight-fitting dresses that made me think of the curves in the 
Pennsylvania Highway every time I looked at her. Don’t get the idea that she was 
easy, though. I’ve seen her give a few punks the brush off the hard way. When it 
came to quick action she could whip off a shoe and crack a skull before you could 
bat an eye. 
 
Not only that, but she had a private op’s ticket and on occasions when she went 
out with me on a case, packed a flat .32 automatic—and she wasn’t afraid to use 
it. In the three years she worked for me I never made a pass at her. Not that I 
didn’t want to, but it would be striking too close to home. 
 
Velda picked up her pad and sat down. I plunked myself in the old swivel chair, 
then swung around facing the window. Velda threw a thick packet on my desk. 
 
“Here’s all the information I could get on those that were at the party last night.” 
I looked at her sharply. 
 
“How did you know about Jack? Pat only called my home.” Velda wrinkled that 
pretty face of hers up into a cute grin. 
 
“You forget that I have an in with a few reporters. Tom Dugan from the 
Chronicle remembered that you and Jack had been good friends. He called here to 
see what he could get and wound up by giving me all the info he had—and I didn’t 
have to sex him, either.” She put that in as an afterthought. “Most of the gang at 
the party were listed in your files. Nothing sensational. I got a little data from Tom 
who had more personal dealings with a few of them. Mostly character studies and 
some society reports. Evidently they were people whom Jack had met in the past 
and liked. You’ve even spoken about several yourself.” 
 
I tore open the package and glanced at a sheaf of photos. “Who are these?” 
Velda looked over my shoulder and pointed them out. 
 
“Top one is Hal Kines, a med student from a university upstate. He’s about 
twenty-three, tall, and looks like a crew man. At least that’s the way he cuts his 
hair.” She flipped the page over. “These two are the Bellemy twins. Age, twenty-
nine, unmarried. In the market for husbands. Live off the fatta the land with 
dough their father left them. A half interest in some textile mills someplace down 
South.” 
 
“Yeah,” I cut in, “I know them. Good lookers, but not very bright. I met them at 
Jack’s place once and again at a dinner party.” 
 
She pointed to the next one. A newspaper shot of a middle-aged guy with a 
broken nose. George Kalecki. I knew him pretty well. In the roaring twenties he 
was a bootlegger. He came out of the crash with a million dollars, paid up his 
income tax, and went society. He fooled a lot of people but he didn’t fool me. He 
still had his finger in a lot of games just to keep in practice. Nothing you could pin 
on him though. He kept a staff of lawyers on their toes to keep him clean and they 
were doing a good job. “What about him?” I asked her. 
 
“You know more than I do. Hal Kines is staying with him. They live about a mile 
above Myrna in Westchester.” I nodded. I remembered Jack talking about him. He 
had met George through Hal. The kid had been a friend of George ever since the 
older man had met him through some mutual acquaintance. George was the guy 
that was putting him through college, but why, I wasn’t sure. 

 
The next shot was one of Myrna with a complete history of her that Jack had 
given me. Included was a medical record from the hospital when he had made her 
go cold turkey, which is dope-addict talk for an all-out cure. They cut them off 
from the stuff completely. It either kills them or cures them. In Myrna’s case, she 
made it. But she made Jack promise that he would never try to get any 
information from her about where she got the stuff. The way he fell for the girl, he 
was ready to do anything she asked, and so far as he was concerned, the matter 
was completely dropped. 
 
I flipped through the medical record. Name, Myrna Devlin. Attempted suicide 
while under the influence of heroin. Brought to emergency ward of General 
Hospital by Detective Jack Williams. Admitted 3-15-40. Treatment complete 9-21-
40. No information available on patient’s source of narcotics. Released into 
custody of Detective Jack Williams 9-30-40. Following this was a page of medical 
details which I skipped. 
 
“Here’s one you’ll like, chum,” Velda grinned at me. She pulled out a full-length 
photo of a gorgeous blonde. My heart jumped when I saw it. The picture was taken 
at a beach, and she stood there tall and languid-looking in a white bathing suit. 
Long solid legs. A little heavier than the movie experts consider good form, but the 
kind that make you drool to look at. Under the suit I could see the muscles of her 
stomach. Incredibly wide shoulders for a woman, framing breasts that jutted out, 
seeking freedom from the restraining fabric of the suit. Her hair looked white in 
the picture, but I could tell that it was a natural blonde. Lovely, lovely yellow hair. 
But her face was what got me. I thought Velda was a good looker, but this one was 
even lovelier. I felt like whistling. 
 
“Who is she?” 
 
“Maybe I shouldn’t tell you. That leer on your face could get you into trouble, 
but it’s all there. Name’s Charlotte Manning. She’s a female psychiatrist with 
offices on Park Avenue, and very successful. I understand she caters to a pretty 
ritzy clientele.” 
 
I glanced at the number and made up my mind that right here was something 
that made this business a pleasurable one. I didn’t say that to Velda. Maybe I’m 
being conceited, but I’ve always had the impression that she had designs on me. 
Of course she never mentioned it, but whenever I showed up late in the office with 
lipstick on my shirt collar, I couldn’t get two words out of her for a week. 
 
I stacked the sheaf back on my desk and swung around in the chair. Velda was 
leaning forward ready to take notes. “Want to add anything, Mike?” 
 
“Don’t think so. At least not now. There’s too much to think about first. Nothing 
seems to make sense.” 
 
“Well, what about motive? Could Jack have had any enemies that caught up 
with him?” 
 
“Nope. None I know of. He was square. He always gave a guy a break if he 
deserved it. Then, too, he never was wrapped up in anything big.” 
 
“Did he own anything of any importance?” 
 
“Not a thing. The place was completely untouched. He had a few hundred 
dollars in his wallet that was lying on the dresser. The killing was done by a 
sadist. He tried to reach his gun, but the killer pulled the chair it hung on back 

slowly, making him crawl after it with a slug in his gut, trying to keep his insides 
from falling out with his hand.” 
 
“Mike, please.” 
 
I said no more. I just sat there and glowered at the wall. Someday I’d trigger the 
bastard that shot Jack. In my time I’ve done it plenty of times. No sentiment. That 
went out with the first. After the war I’ve been almost anxious to get to some of the 
rats that make up the section of humanity that prey on people. People. How 
incredibly stupid they could be sometimes. A trial by law for a killer. A loophole in 
the phrasing that lets a killer crawl out. But in the end the people have their 
justice. They get it through guys like me once in a while. They crack down on 
society and I crack down on them. I shoot them like the mad dogs they are and 
society drags me to court to explain the whys and wherefores of the extermination. 
They investigate my past, check my fingerprints and throw a million questions my 
way. The papers make me look like a kill-crazy shamus, but they don’t bear down 
too hard because Pat Chambers keeps them off my neck. Besides, I do my best to 
help the boys out and they know it. And I’m usually good for a story when I wind 
up a case. 
 
Velda came back into the office with the afternoon edition of the sheets. The kill 
was spread all over the front page, followed by a four-column layout of what 
details were available. Velda was reading over my shoulder and I heard her gasp. 
 
“Did you come in for a blasting! Look.” She was pointing to the last paragraph. 
There was my tie-up with the case, but what she was referring to was the word-
for-word statement that I had made to Jack. My promise. My word to a dead friend 
that I would kill this murderer as he had killed him. I rolled the paper into a ball 
and threw it viciously at the wall. 
 
“The louse! I’ll break his filthy neck for printing that. I meant what I said when I 
made that promise. It’s sacred to me, and they make a joke out of it. Pat did that. 
And I thought he was a friend. Give me the phone.” 
 
Velda grabbed my arm. “Take it easy. Suppose he did. After all, Pat’s still a cop. 
Maybe he saw a chance of throwing the killer your way. If the punk knows you’re 
after him for keeps he’s liable not to take it standing still and make a play for you. 
Then you’ll have him.” 
 
“Thanks, kid,” I told her, “but your mind’s too clean. I think you got the first 
part right, but your guess on the last part smells. Pat doesn’t want me to have any 
part of him because he knows the case is ended right there. If he can get the killer 
to me you can bet your grandmother’s uplift bra that he’ll have a tail on me all the 
way with someone ready to step in when the shooting starts.” 
 
“I don’t know about that, Mike. Pat knows you’re too smart not to recognize 
when you’re being tailed. I wouldn’t think he’d do that.” 
 
“Oh, no? He isn’t dumb by any means. I’ll bet you a sandwich against a 
marriage license he’s got a flatfoot downstairs covering every exit in the place 
ready to pick me up when I leave. Sure, I’ll shake them, but it won’t stop there. A 
couple of experts will take up where they leave off.” 
 
Velda’s eyes were glowing like a couple of hot brands. “Are you serious about 
that? About the bet, I mean?” 
 
I nodded. “Dead serious. Want to go downstairs with me and take a look?” She 
grinned and grabbed her coat. I pulled on my battered felt and we left the office, 

but not before I had taken a second glance at the office address of Charlotte 
Manning. 
 
Pete, the elevator operator, gave me a toothy grin when we stepped into the car. 
“Evening, Mr. Hammer,” he said. 
 
I gave him an easy jab in the short ribs and said, “What’s new with you?” 
 
“Nothing much, ’cepting I don’t get to sit down much on the job anymore.” I had 
to grin. Velda had lost the bet already. That little piece of simple repartee between 
Pete and myself was a code system we had rigged up years ago. His answer meant 
that I was going to have company when I left the building. It cost me a fin a week 
but it was worth it. Pete could spot a flatfoot faster than I can. He should. He had 
been a pick-pocket until a long stretch up the river gave him a turn of mind. 
 
For a change I decided to use the front entrance. I looked around for my tail but 
there was none to be seen. For a split second my heart leaped into my throat. I 
was afraid Pete had gotten his signals crossed. Velda was a spotter, too, and the 
smile she was wearing as we crossed the empty lobby was a thing to see. She 
clamped onto my arm ready to march me to the nearest justice of the peace. 
 
But when I went through the revolving doors her grin passed as fast as mine 
appeared. Our tail was walking in front of us. Velda said a word that nice girls 
don’t usually use, and you see scratched in the cement by some evil-minded 
guttersnipe. 
 
This one was smart. We never saw where he came from. He walked a lot faster 
than we did, swinging a newspaper from his hand against his leg. Probably, he 
spotted us through the windows behind the palm, then seeing what exit we were 
going to use, walked around the comer and came past us as we left. If we had gone 
the other way, undoubtedly there was another ready to pick us up. 
 
But this one had forgotten to take his gun off his hip and stow it under his 
shoulder, and guns make a bump look the size of a pumpkin when you’re used to 
looking for them. 
 
When I reached the garage he was nowhere to be seen. There were a lot of doors 
he could have ducked behind. I didn’t waste time looking for him. I backed the car 
out and Velda crawled in beside me. “Where to now?” she asked. 
 
“The automat, where you’re going to buy me a sandwich.” 
 
 
Chapter  3 
 
 
 
I dumped Velda at her hairdresser’s after we ate, then headed north to 
Westchester. I hadn’t planned to call on George Kalecki until the following day, but 
a call to Charlotte’s office dealed that one out. She had left for home, and the 
wench in the reception room had been instructed not to give her address. I told 
her I’d call later and left a message that I wanted to see her as soon as possible. I 
couldn’t get that woman off my mind. Those legs. 
 
Twenty minutes later I was pulling the bell outside a house that must have cost 
a cool quarter million. A very formal butler clicked the lock and admitted me. “Mr. 
Kalecki,” I said. 
 
“Who shall I say is calling, sir?” 

 
“Mike Hammer. I’m a private detective.” I flashed my tin on him but he wasn’t 
impressed. 
 
“I’m rather afraid Mr. Kalecki is indisposed at the moment, sir,” he told me. I 
recognized a pat standoff when I saw one, but I wasn’t bothered. 
 
“Well, you tell him to un-dispose himself right away and get his tail down here 
or I’ll go get him. And I’m not kidding, either.” 
 
The butler looked me over carefully and must have decided that I meant what I 
said. He nodded and took my hat. “Right this way, Mr. Hammer.” He led me to an 
oversize library and I plunked myself in an armchair and waited for George 
Kalecki. 
 
He wasn’t long coming. The door banged open and a grey-haired guy a little 
stouter than his picture revealed came in. He didn’t waste words. “Why did you 
come in after my man informed you that I was not to be disturbed?” 
 
I lit a butt and blew the smoke at him. “Don’t give me that stuff, chum. You 
know why I’m here.” 
 
“No doubt. I read the papers. But I’m afraid that I can’t help you. I was home in 
bed when the murder occurred and I can prove it.” 
 
“Hal Kines came in with you?” 
 
“Yes.” 
 
“Did your servant let you in?” 
 
“No, I used my own key.” 
 
“Did anyone else beside Hal see you come in?” 
 
“I don’t think so, but his word is good enough.” 
 
I sneered into his face. “Not when the both of you are possible murder suspects, 
it isn’t.” 
 
Kalecki turned pale when I said that. His mouth worked a little and he looked 
ready to kill me. “How dare you say that,” he snarled at me. “The police have not 
made an attempt to connect me with that killing. Jack Williams died hours after I 
left.” 
 
I took a step forward and gathered a handful of his shirt front in my fist. “Listen 
to me, you ugly little crook,” I spat in his face, “I’m talking language you can 
understand. I’m not worried about the cops. If you’re under suspicion it’s to me. 
I’m the one that counts, because when I find the one that did it, he dies. Even if I 
can’t prove it, he dies anyway. In fact, I don’t even have to be convinced too 
strongly. Maybe just a few things will point your way, and when they do I’m going 
after you. Before I’m done I may shoot up a lot of snotty punks like you, but you 
can bet that one of them will have been the one I was after, and as for the rest, 
tough luck. They got their noses a little too dirty.” 
 
Nobody had talked to him like that the past twenty years. He floundered for 
words but they didn’t come. If he had opened his mouth right then, I would have 
slammed his teeth down his throat. 
 
Disgusted with the sight of him, I shoved him back toward an end table in time 
to push myself aside far enough to keep from getting brained. A crockery vase 
smashed on my shoulder and shattered into a hundred fragments. 
 
I ducked and whirled at the same time. A fist came flying over my head and I 
blocked it with my left. I didn’t wait. I let fly a wicked punch that landed low then 

came up with the top of my skull and I rammed the point of a jaw with a 
shattering impact. Hal Kines hit the floor and lay there motionless. 
 
“Wise guy. A fresh kid that tries to bust me from behind. You’re certainly not 
training him right, George. Time was when you stood behind a chopper yourself, 
now you let a college kid do your blasting, and in a houseful of mirrors he tries to 
sneak up behind me.” He didn’t say anything. He found a chair and slid into it, his 
eyes narrow slits of hate. If he had a rod right then he would have let me have it. 
He would have died, too. I’ve had an awful lot of practice sneaking that .45 out 
from under my arm. 
 
The Kines kid was beginning to stir. I prodded him in the ribs with my toe until 
he sat up. He was still pretty green around the gills, but not green enough to sneer 
at me. “You lousy bastard,” he said. “Have to fight dirty, don’t you.” 
 
I reached down and grabbed him under the arm and yanked him to his feet. His 
eyes bugged. Maybe he thought he was dealing with somebody soft. “Listen, 
pimple face. Just for the fun of it I ought to slap your fuzzy chin all around this 
room, but I got things to do. Don’t go playing man when you’re only a boy. You’re 
pretty big, but I’m three sizes bigger and a hell of a lot tougher and I’ll beat the 
living daylights out of you if you try anything funny again. Now sit down over 
there.” 
 
Kines hit the sofa and stayed there. George must have gotten his second wind 
because he piped up. “Just a moment, Mr. Hammer. This has gone far enough. I 
am not without influence at city hall…” 
 
“I know,” I cut in. “You’ll have me arrested for assault and battery and have my 
license revoked. Only when you do that, keep a picture in your mind of what your 
face will look like when I reach you. Someone already worked over your nose, but 
it’s nothing compared to what you’ll look like when I get done with it. Now keep 
your big mouth shut and give me some answers. First, what time did you leave the 
party?” 
 
“About one or a little after,” George said sullenly. That checked with Myrna’s 
version. 
 
“Where did you go after you left?” 
 
“We went downstairs to Hal’s car and drove straight home.” 
 
“Who’s we?” 
 
“Hal, Myrna and myself. We dropped her off at her apartment and came here 
after putting the car in the garage. Ask Hal, hell verify it.” 
 
Hal looked at me. It was easy to see that he was worried. Evidently this was the 
first time he had been mixed up in anything so deep. Murders don’t appeal to 
anyone. 
 
I continued with my questioning. “Then what?” 
 
“Oh, for Pete’s sake, we had a highball and went to bed. What else do you think 
we did?” Hal said. 
 
“I don’t know. Maybe you sleep together.” Hal stood up in front of me, his face a 
red mask of fury. I put my mitt in his face and shoved him back on the sofa. “Or 
maybe,” I went on, “you don’t sleep together. Which means that either one of you 
had plenty of time to take the car back out and make the run to town to knock off 
Jack and get back here without anyone noticing it. If you do sleep together you 
both could have done it. See what I mean? 

 
“If either of you think you’re clean you’d better think again. I’m not the only one 
that has a mind that can figure out angles. Right now Pat Chambers has it all 
figured out on paper. He’ll be around soon, so you’d better be expecting him. And 
if either of you are tapped for the hot seat, you’d do a lot better by letting Pat pick 
you up. At least that way you’ll live through a trial.” 
 
“Someone calling me?” a voice said from the doorway. I spun around. Pat 
Chambers was framed in the hardwood paneling wearing his ever-present grin. 
 
I waved him over. “Yeah. You’re the main topic of conversation around here at 
this moment.” George Kalecki got up from the overstuffed cushions and walked to 
Pat. His old bluster was back. 
 
“Officer, I demand the arrest of this man at once,” he fairly shouted. “He broke 
into my home and insulted me and my guest. Look at the bruise on his jaw. Tell 
him what happened, Hal.” 
 
Hal saw me watching him. He saw Pat standing ten feet away from me with his 
hands in his pockets and apparently no desire to stop what might happen. It 
suddenly hit him that Jack had been a cop and Pat was a cop and Jack had been 
killed. And you don’t kill a cop and get away with it. “Nothing happened,” he said. 
 
“You stinking little liar!” Kalecki turned on him. “Tell the truth! Tell how he 
threatened us. What are you afraid of, this dirty two-bit shamus?” 
 
“No, George,” I said quietly, “he’s afraid of this.” I swung on him with all of my 
hundred and ninety pounds. My fist went in up to the wrist in his stomach. He 
flopped to the floor vomiting his lungs out, his face gradually turning purple. Hal 
just looked. For a second I could have sworn I saw a satisfied leer cross his 
swollen face. 
 
I took Pat by the arm. “Coming?” I asked him. 
 
“Yeah, nothing more to do here.” 
 
Outside Pat’s car was drawn up under the covered portico. We climbed in and 
he started it up and drove around the house to the graveled drive-way to the 
highway and turned south toward the city. Neither of us had spoken until I asked 
him, “Get an earful back there?” 
 
He gave me a glance and nodded. “Yeah, I was outside the door while you were 
going through your spiel. Guess you laid it out the same way I did.” 
 
“By the way,” I added, “don’t get the idea I’m slipping. I was onto the tail you put 
on me. What did he do, call from the front gate or the filling station where I left my 
heap?” 
 
“From the station,” he answered. “He couldn’t catch on to why the hike and 
called for instructions. By the way. Why did you walk a mile and a half to his 
house?” 
 
“That ought to be easy, Pat. Kalecki probably left instructions not to admit me 
after he read that piece in the papers. I came in over the wall. Here’s the station. 
Pull up.” 
 
Pat slid the car off the road to the cindered drive. My car was still alongside the 
stucco house. I pointed to the grey-suited man sitting inside asleep. “Your tail. 
Better wake him up.” 
 
Pat got out and shook the guy. He came to with a silly grin. Pat motioned in my 
direction. “He was on to you, chum. Maybe you had better change your 
technique.” 

 
The guy looked puzzled. “On to me? Hell, he never gave me a tumble.” 
 
“Nuts,” I said. “Your rod sticks out of your back pocket like a sore thumb. I’ve 
been in this game awhile myself, you know.” 
 
I climbed into my buggy and turned it over. Pat stuck his head in the window 
and asked, “You still going ahead on your own, Mike?” 
 
The best I could do was nod. “Natch. What else?” 
 
“Then you’d better follow me in to town. I have something that might interest 
you.” 
 
He got in the squad car and slid out of the cinders to the highway. My tail 
pulled out behind Pat and I followed him. Pat was playing it square so far. He was 
using me for bait, but I didn’t mind. It was like using a trout for bait to catch flies 
as far as I was concerned. But he was sticking too close to me to make the game 
any fun. Whether he was keeping me from being blasted or just making sure I 
didn’t knock off any prominent Joes whom I suspected I couldn’t say. 
 
The article in the paper didn’t have enough time to work. The killer wouldn’t be 
flushed as quickly as that. Whoever pulled the trigger was a smart apple. Too 
damned smart. He must have considered me if he was in his right mind at all. He 
had to consider the cops even if it was an ordinary job. But this was a cop killing 
which made it worse. I was sure of one thing though, I’d be on the kill list for sure, 
especially after I made the rounds of everyone connected with it. 
 
So far, I couldn’t find anything on Kalecki or Kines. No motive yet. That would 
come later. They both had the chance to knock off Jack. George Kalecki wasn’t 
what people thought him to be. His finger was still in the rackets. Possibilities 
there. Where Hal came in was something else again. He was tied up in some way. 
Maybe not. Maybe so. I’d find out. 
 
My thoughts wandered around the general aspects of the case without reaching 
any conclusions. Pat went through the city sans benefit of a siren, unlike a lot of 
coppers, and we finally pulled up to the curb in front of his precinct station. 
 
Upstairs he pulled open the bottom drawer of his desk and drew out a pint of 
bourbon from a lunch box. He handed me a man-sized slug of the stuff and set up 
one for himself. I poured mine down in one gulp. 
 
“Want another?” 
 
“Nope. Want some information. What were you going to tell me?” He went over 
to a filing cabinet and drew out a folder. I noticed the label. It read, “Myrna 
Devlin.” 
 
Pat sat down and shook out the contents. The dossier was complete. It had 
everything on her that I had and more. “What’s the angle, Pat?” I knew he was 
getting at something. “Are you connecting Myrna with this? If you are you’re 
barking up the wrong tree.” 
 
“Perhaps. You see, Mike, when Jack first found Myrna trying to go over the 
railing of the bridge, he treated her like any other narcotic case. He took her to the 
emergency ward of the hospital.” Pat rose and shoved his hands in his pockets. 
His mouth talked, but I could see that his mind was deep in thought. “It was 
through constant contact with her that he fell in love. It was real enough for him. 
He saw all the bad side of her before he saw the good. If he could love her then he 
could love her anytime.” 

 
“I don’t follow, Pat. I know Myrna as well as Jack did. If you smear her all over 
the papers as a number-one candidate for the hot squat you and me are going to 
have it out.” 
 
“Don’t fly off the handle, Mike. There’s more to it than that. After she was 
released, she made Jack promise not to follow it up any further. He agreed.” 
 
“I know,” I cut in, “I was there that night.” 
 
“Well, Jack held up his end to her all right, but that didn’t take in the whole 
department. Narcotics comes under a separate bureau. The case was turned over 
to them. Myrna didn’t know anything about it, but while she was out, she talked. 
We had a steno taking down every word she said and she said plenty. Narcotics 
was able to snare a ring that was operating around the city, but when they made 
the raid there was some shooting, and during it the one guy that would have been 
able to spill the beans caught one in the head and the cycle stopped there.” 
 
“That’s news to me, Pat.” 
 
“Yeah, you were in the army then. It took awhile to track the outfit down, nearly 
a year. It didn’t stop even then. The outfit was working interstate and the feds 
were in on it. They laid off Myrna when they went into her history. She was a 
small-town girl here in the city to break into show business. Unfortunately, she 
got mixed up with the wrong outfit and got put on the stuff by one of her 
roommates. Their contact was a guy who was paying for protection as a bookie, 
but who used the cover to peddle dope. His guardian angel was a politician who 
now occupies a cozy cell in Ossining on the Hudson. 
 
“The head of the outfit was a shrewd operator. No one knew or saw him. 
Transactions were made by mail. Dope was sent in to post-office boxes, very 
skillfully disguised. In each box was a number to send the cash to. That turned 
out to be a box somewhere, too.” 
 
That I couldn’t figure. Pat turned and sat down again before he went on, but I 
beat him to it with a question. 
 
“Something screwy, Pat. The whole thing’s backwards. The stuff is usually paid 
for in advance, with the peddlers hoping they come through with enough decks to 
make money on it.” 
 
Pat lit a but and nodded vigorously. “Exactly. That’s one reason why we had 
trouble. Undoubtedly there’s stuff sitting in post-office boxes right now loaded to 
the brims with the junk. It isn’t an amateur’s touch, either. The stuff came in too 
regularly. The source was plentiful. We managed to dig up a few old containers 
that hadn’t been destroyed by the receiver and there were no two postmarks 
alike.” 
 
“That wouldn’t be hard to work if it was a big outfit.” 
 
“Apparently they had no trouble. But we had operatives in the towns the stuff 
was sent from and they went over the places with a fine-tooth comb. Nothing was 
turned up. They checked the transient angle since it was the only way it could 
have been done. Busses and trains went through these towns, and it’s possible 
that the packages could have been dropped off by a person posing as a traveler. 
Each place was used once. So there was no way of telling where the next one was 
coming from.” 
 
“I get the picture, Pat. Since the last outfit was pulled, have they found any 
other sources?” 

 
“Some. But nothing they could connect with the last. Most of it was petty stuff 
with some hospital attendant sneaking it out of stock and peddling it on the 
outside.” 
 
“So far you haven’t told me where Myrna comes into this. I appreciate the 
information, but we’re not getting anyplace. What you’ve given me is strictly police 
stuff.” 
 
Pat gave me a long, searching glance. His eyes were screwed up tight like he was 
thinking. I knew that look well. “Tell me,” he said, “hasn’t it occurred to you that 
Jack, being a cop, could have welshed on his promise to Myrna? He hated crooks 
and sneaks, but most of all he hated the dirty rats that used people like Myrna to 
line their own pockets.” 
 
“So what?” I asked. 
 
“So this. He was in on things in the beginning. He might have been holding back 
something on us. Or he might have gotten something from Myrna we didn’t know 
about. Either he spoke up at the wrong moment or he didn’t. But somebody was 
afraid of what he knew and bumped him.” I yawned. I hated to disillusion Pat but 
he was wrong. “Fellow, you are really mixed up. Let me show you where. First, 
classify all murders. There are only a few. War, Passion, Self-Protection, Insanity, 
Profit and Mercy Killings. There are some others, but these are enough. To me it 
looks like Jack was killed either for profit or self-protection. I don’t doubt but what 
he had something on someone. It must have been something he had known all 
along, and suddenly realized its importance, or it was something he recently found 
out. You know how active he was in police work even though he was disabled and 
attached to the job with the insurance company. 
 
“Whatever it was, he apparently wanted to make a choice. That’s why you heard 
nothing about it. The killer had to have something he had, and killed to get it. But 
you searched the place, didn’t you?” Pat agreed with a movement of the eyes. “And 
there was nothing removed, was there?” He shook his head. “Then,” I went on, 
“unless it was something Jack had outside, which I doubt, it wasn’t a killing for 
profit. The killer knew that Jack had some poop which would mean exposure or 
worse. To protect himself, the killer knocked Jack off. Self-protection.” 
 
I picked up my battered hat from the desk and stretched. “Got to blow, pal. 
Since I’m not on an expense account or a salary, this is one job I can’t afford to 
lose time on. Thanks for the try, anyway. If I turn anything up I’ll let you know.” 
 
“How long after?” Pat said with a smile. 
 
“Just long enough to keep the jump on you,” I shot back at him. I fished for a 
smoke and pulled a wreck of a butt from my pocket, waved so long to Pat and 
walked out. My tail was waiting for me, trying to look inconspicuous in a crowd of 
cigar-smoking detectives in the anteroom. As I stepped outside I flattened myself 
into a niche in the brick wall. The guy came out, stopped and looked frantically 
both ways up and down the street. I stepped out and tapped him on the shoulder. 
 
“Got a light?” I asked, flipping the ancient butt between my lips. He turned beet-
red and lit me. “Instead of playing cops and robbers,” I told him, “why not just 
walk along with me?” 
 
He didn’t quite know what to say, but got out an “Okay.” It sounded more like a 
growl. The two of us ambled over to my car. He got in and I slid under the wheel. 
There was no use trying to talk to the guy. I couldn’t get a word out of him. When I 

hit the main stem, I went down a side street past a little hotel. After I pulled up in 
front of it, I got out with my tail right behind me, went through the revolving door, 
kept right on going until I was outside where I went in. That left my tail still in the 
door. I bent down and stuck a rubber wedge I had taken from my car window 
under the door and walked back to the car. Inside the door, the cop was pounding 
on the glass and calling me dirty names. If he wanted me, he had to go out the 
back door and around the street. I saw the clerk grinning. That wasn’t the first 
time I had used his hotel for that gag. All the way downtown my window shook like 
it would fall out, which reminded me that I had better get some more wedges in 
case I was tailed again. 
 
 
Chapter  4 
 
 
 
The anteroom was ultramodern, but well appointed. Chairs that looked angular 
were really very comfortable. Whoever decorated the interior had a patient’s 
mental comfort well in mind. The walls were an indescribable shade of olive, 
cleverly matched with a dull-finished set of drapes. The windows admitted no 
light, instead, the soft glow came from hidden bulbs installed directly into the wall. 
On the floor an ankle-thick carpet muffled any sound of footsteps. From 
somewhere came the muted tones of a string quartet. I could have fallen asleep 
right there if the secretary who had given me the telephone brushoff didn’t motion 
me over to the desk. From her tone it was evident that she knew that I was no 
patient. With a full day’s growth of beard and the wrinkled ruin of a suit I had on, 
I was lower than the janitor in her estimation. 
 
She inclined her head toward the door behind her and said, “Miss Manning will 
see you now. Please go in.” With special emphasis on the please. When I went past 
her she drew back slightly. 
 
“Don’t worry, honey,” I told her out of the corner of my mouth, “I won’t bite. This 
is just a disguise.” I yanked open the door and went in. 
 
She was better than her picture. She was delicious. There was a lot about her 
that couldn’t be put into words. Charlotte Manning was sitting at her desk, hands 
folded in front of her as if she were listening for something. Beautiful was a poor 
description. She was what you would expect to find in a painting if each of the 
world’s greatest artists added their own special technique to produce a 
masterpiece. 
 
Her hair was almost white as I thought. It fell in such soft curls you wanted to 
bury your face in it. Each of her features were modeled exquisitely. A smooth 
forehead melted into alive, hazel eyes, framed in the symmetrical curves of 
naturally brown eyebrows, studded with long, moist lashes. 
 
The dress she wore was not at all revealing, being a long-sleeved black business 
garb, but what it attempted to conceal was pure loveliness. Her breasts fought the 
dress as valiantly as they had the bathing suit. I could only imagine how the rest 
of her looked since the desk blocked my vision. 

 
All this I saw in the three seconds it took to walk across the room. I doubt if she 
saw any change in my expression, but she could have sued me if she knew what 
went on in my mind. 
 
“Good morning, Mr. Hammer. Please sit down.” Her voice was like liquid. I 
wondered what she could do if she put a little passion in it. Plenty, I bet. It wasn’t 
hard to see why she was a successful psychiatrist. Here was a woman anyone 
could tell their troubles to. 
 
I sat down in the chair beside her and she swung around to meet my eyes with 
a steady, direct gaze. “I presume you are here on police business?” 
 
“Not exactly. I’m a private detective.” 
 
“Oh.” When she said that her voice held none of the usual contempt or curiosity 
I find when I tell that to someone. Instead, it was as if I had given her a pertinent 
piece of information. 
 
“Is it about the death of Mr. Williams?” she asked. 
 
“Uh-huh. He was a close buddy of mine. I’m conducting a sort of personal 
investigation of my own.” 
 
She looked at me quizzically at first, then, “Oh, yes. I read your statement in the 
papers. As a matter of fact, I attempted to analyze your reasoning. I’ve always been 
interested in things of that sort.” 
 
“And what conclusion did you reach?” 
 
Charlotte surprised me. “I’m afraid I justify you, although several of my former 
professors would condemn me if I made that statement public.” I saw what she 
meant. There’s a school of thought that believes anyone who kills is the victim of a 
moment’s insanity, no matter what the reason for the killing. 
 
“How can I help you?” she went on. 
 
“By answering a few questions. First, what time did you get to the party that 
night?” 
 
“Roughly, about eleven. I was held up by a visit to a patient.” 
 
“What time did you leave?” 
 
“Around one. We left together.” 
 
“Then where did you go?” 
 
“I had my car downstairs. Esther and Mary Bellemy drove with me. We went to 
the Chicken Bar and had a sandwich. We left there at one forty-five. I remember 
the time because we were the only ones there and they were getting ready to close 
at two. I dropped the twins off at their hotel, then went straight to my apartment. I 
reached there about a quarter after two. I remember the time there, too, since I 
had to reset my alarm clock.” 
 
“Anybody see you come into the apartment?” 
 
Charlotte gave me the cutest little laugh. “Yes, Mr. District Attorney. My maid. 
She even tucked me into bed as usual. She would have heard me go out, too, for 
the only door to my apartment has a chime on it that rings whenever the door 
opens, and Kathy is a very light sleeper.” 
 
I couldn’t help but grin at that. “Has Pat Chambers been here to see you 
already?” 
 
“This morning, but much earlier.” She laughed again. Shivers went through me 
when she did that. She radiated sex in every manner and gesture. “What is more,” 

she continued, “he came, he saw, and he suspected. By now he must be checking 
my story.” 
 
“Pat’s not letting any grass grow under his feet,” I mused. “Did he mention me 
at all?” 
 
“Not a word. A very thorough man. He represents efficiency. I like him.” 
 
“One thing more. When did you make the acquaintance of Jack Williams?” 
 
“I’m afraid I’m not at liberty to reveal that.” 
 
I shook my head. “If it was in reference to Myrna, you needn’t be. I was on the 
ground floor there.” 
 
She seemed surprised at that. But I knew Jack had kept the entire affair of 
Myrna’s past as close to his vest as possible. “Well,” she said, “that was it. He 
called me in under advice from a doctor to attend Myrna. She had suffered a 
severe shock. I doubt if you can comprehend what it means to one addicted to 
narcotics to go ‘cold turkey’ as they call it. It means an immediate and complete 
removal from the source of the drug. The mental strain is terrific. They have 
violent convulsions, their bodies endure the most racking pain there is. Nerve ends 
eaten raw are exposed to unbelievable torture, and you can give them no relief. 
Quite often they destroy themselves in fits of madness. 
 
“The cure is far from an easy one. Having made the decision, they are separated 
from outside contact in padded cells. During the earlier stages of it, they change 
their minds and beg to be given the drug. Later the pain and tension mount to 
such dizzy heights that they are completely unrational. All the while, their body 
fights the effects of the drug, and it emerges finally either cured or unfit to 
continue life. In Myrna’s case, she lived through it. Jack was worried what this 
would do to her mentally and called me. I treated her while she was undergoing 
the cure, and afterwards. Since she was released I have never visited her in a 
professional capacity.” 
 
“Well, I guess that’s all then. I do have some other things I would like to discuss 
with you about the case. But I want to do a little checking first.” 
 
She gave me another of those smiles. Any more of them and she’d find out what 
it was like to be kissed from under a set of whiskers. “If it’s about the time element 
of my story—or should I say alibi?-then I suggest you hurry over to my apartment 
before my maid goes on her weekly shopping spree.” 
 
The woman knew all the answers. I tried to keep my face straight, but it was too 
much work. I broke out my lopsided grin and picked up my hat. “That’s partly it. 
Guess I don’t trust anybody.” 
 
Charlotte rose and gave me the look at her legs I’d been waiting for. “I 
understand,” she remarked. “To a man friendship is a much greater thing than to 
a woman.” 
 
“Especially when that friend gave an arm to save my life,” I said. 
 
A puzzled frown creased her forehead. “So you’re the one.” It was almost a gasp. 
“I didn’t know, but I’m glad I do now. I have heard so much about you from Jack, 
but they were stories in the third person. He never mentioned a thing about his 
arm, although Myrna later told me why he lost it.” 
 
“Jack didn’t want to embarrass me. But that’s only part of the reason why I’m 
going to get his murderer. He was my friend even before that.” 
 
“I hope you get him,” she said sincerely. “I truly hope you do.” 

 
“I will,” I said. 
 
We stood there a moment just looking at each other, then I caught myself. “I 
have to leave now. I’ll see you soon.” 
 
Her breath seemed to catch in her throat a moment before she said softly, “Very 
soon, I trust.” I was hoping that light in her eyes meant what I thought it did when 
she said it. 
 
I parked a few feet away from the blue canopy of the apartment house. The 
doorman, for once conservatively dressed, opened the door of my car without 
wrinkling his mouth in disgust. I gave him a nod and went into the outer foyer. 
 
The name over the bell was stamped in aluminum. “Manning Charlotte,” it read, 
without a series of degrees following it like the doctor’s below. That guy must have 
had a letter complex. I rang the bell and walked in when the buzzer sounded. 
 
She lived on the fourth floor, in a suite facing the street. A coal-black maid in a 
white uniform answered the door. “Mistah Hammah?” she asked me. 
 
“Yeah, how didja know?” 
 
“De police gennimuns in de front room was ‘specting you. Come in, please.” 
Sure enough, there was Pat sprawled in a chair by the window. 
 
“Hi, Mike,” he called. I threw my hat on an end table and sat down on a hassock 
beside him. 
 
“What did you find, Pat?” 
 
“Her story checks. A neighbor saw her come in at the proper time; her maid 
confirmed it.” For once I was relieved. “I knew you’d be along, so I iust parked the 
carcass until you showed up. By the way, I wish you’d be a little easier on the men 
I detail to keep track of you.” 
 
“Easier, hell. Keep ’em off my neck. Either that or get an expert.” 
 
“Just for your own protection, Mike.” 
 
“Nuts. You know me better than that. I can take care of myself.” Pat let his head 
fall back and closed his eyes. I looked around the room. Like her office, Charlotte 
Manning’s apartment was furnished in excellent taste. It had a casual air that 
made it look lived in, yet everything was in order. It wasn’t large; then too it had 
no reason to be. Living alone with one maid, a few rooms was all that was 
necessary. Several good paintings adorned the walls, hanging above shelves that 
were well stocked with books of all kinds. I noticed one bookcase that held nothing 
but volumes on psychology. At one end of the room a framed diploma was the only 
ornament. A wide hallway opened off the living room and led to a bedroom and the 
kitchen, with a bathroom opposite. Beside the foyer was the maid’s room. Here the 
color scheme was not conducive to mental peace, but designed to add color and 
gaiety to its already beautiful occupant. Directly opposite the hassock I was 
parked on was a sofa, a full six feet long. It gave me ideas, which I quickly ignored. 
It was no time to play wolf. Yet. 
 
I nudged Pat with my foot. “Don’t let’s be going to sleep, chum. You’re on 
taxpayers’ time.” 
 
He came out of his reverie with a start. “Only giving you time to size things up, 
junior. Let’s roll.” 
 
Kathy, the maid, came scurrying in when she heard us making sounds of 
leaving. She opened the door for us and I heard the sound of the chimes Charlotte 
had spoken of. “Does the gong go off when the bell rings too?” I asked her. 

 
“Yassuh, or when de do’ opens, too.” 
 
“Why?” 
 
“Well, suh, when I‘se not to home, Miss Charlotte has to answer de do’. 
Sometimes when she’s busy in de blackroom de bell rings and she just opens de 
lock. Den when de visitors come up she knows when dey comes in. She can’t leave 
in de middle of her work in de blackroom to answer both de bell and de do’.” 
 
I looked at Pat and he looked at me. “What’s the blackroom?” I practically 
demanded. 
 
Kathy jumped like she was shot. “Why, where she makes pitchers from de 
fillums,” she answered. Pat and I left feeling a little foolish. So Charlotte made a 
hobby of photography. I reminded myself to brush up on details so we’d have 
something to speak about the next time we met. Besides that, I mean. 
 
 
Chapter  5 
 
 
 
Downstairs, Pat and I went across the street to a tiny delicatessen and sat in a 
booth with two bottles of beer. He asked me if I had gotten anywhere yet and I had 
to give him a negative answer. 
 
“What about motive?” I put to him. “I’m up the creek on that angle, mainly 
because I haven’t looked into it. When I get all the case histories down I’ll begin on 
the motive. But did you dig up anything yet?” 
 
“Not yet,” Pat answered. “Ballistics checked on the slug and it came from an 
unidentified .45. According to the experts, the barrel was nearly new. We followed 
that up by inquiring into the sale of all guns, but got nowhere. Only two had been 
sold, both to store owners who were recently robbed. We took some samples of the 
slugs, but they didn’t match.” 
 
“For that matter it might have been a gun sold some time ago, but unfired until 
recently,” I said. 
 
“We thought of that, too. Records still don’t account for it. None of those at the 
party have ever owned a gun to our knowledge.” 
 
“Officially,” I added. 
 
“Yes, that’s a possibility. It isn’t hard to come in possession of a gun.” 
 
“What about the silencer? The killer was no novice about firearms. A silencer 
plus a dumdum. He wanted to make sure Jack died—not too fast. Just definitely 
died.” 
 
“No trace of that, either. Where it may have come from is a rifle. There are a few 
makes of rifle silencers that can be adjusted to a .45.” 
 
We sipped the beer slowly, each of us thinking hard. It was a full two minutes 
before Pat remembered something and said, “Oh, yeah, almost forgot. Kalecki and 
the Kines kid moved into an apartment in town this morning.” 
 
That was news. “What for?” 
 
“Someone took a shot at him through his window late last night. Missed by a 
hair. It was a .45 slug, too. We checked it with the one that killed Jack. It was the 
same gun.” 
 
I almost choked on my beer. “You almost forgot,” I said with a smirk. 

 
“Oh, and one other thing.” 
 
“What?” 
 
“He thinks you did it.” 
 
I banged my glass down on the table so hard Pat jumped. “Why, that dirty 
snivelling louse! That does it. This time I’ll smash his face all over the place!” 
 
“There you go, racing your motor again, Mike. Sit down and pipe down. As he 
said, he wasn’t without a little influence at city hall, and they made us look into 
you. But don’t forget, you’ve knocked off a few undesirable citizens before and the 
slugs from your gun were photographed. We keep all the prints and tried in the 
worst way to match ’em, but they don’t match. Besides, we knew where you were 
last night. They raided the joint ten minutes after you left.” 
 
I got kind of red in the face and sat down. “You got one hell of a way of breaking 
things to me, Pat. Now let’s quit the joking and tell me where Kalecki and company 
moved to.” 
 
Pat grinned. “They live right around the corner in the same apartment hotel the 
Bellemy twins occupy, but on the second floor. The Midworth Arms.” 
 
“Have you been there yet?” 
 
“Not to see the twins. I saw George and Hal, though. Had quite a time telling 
him that it would do no good to place a charge against you for assault and battery 
after the other night. Didn’t take much talking, either. Evidently he’s heard a lot 
about the way you operate, but just likes to keep his own courage up with a lot of 
talk. ” 
 
Both of us poured down the remainder of the beer and got up to leave. I 
outfumbled Pat and got stuck for the check. Next time he’d buy. Cop or no cop. We 
parted outside the door, and as soon as he took off I started around the comer for 
the Midworth Arms. I wanted to get the low-down when anyone accused me of 
murder-attempted or successful. The real reason why Pat was sure it wasn’t me 
was because the killer missed. I wouldn’t have. 
 
I knew Kalecki probably had tipped the doorman and the super off not to admit 
me, so I didn’t bother messing with them. Instead I walked in like a regular 
resident and took the elevator to the second floor. The operator was a skinny runt 
in his late twenties who wore a built-in leer. I was the only one in the car, and 
when we stopped I pulled a bill from my pocket and showed him the color of it. 
 
“Kalecki. George Kalecki. He’s new in this dump. What apartment and the green 
is yours,” I said. 
 
He gave me a careful going over, that one. Finally put his tongue in his cheek 
and said, “You must be that Hammer mug. He gimme a ten not to spot him for 
you.” 
 
I opened my coat and pulled my .45 from its holster. The kid’s eyes popped 
when he saw it. “I am that Hammer mug, junior,” I told him, “and if you don’t spot 
him for me I’m giving you this.” I motioned toward his teeth with the gun barrel. 
 
“Front 206,” he said hastily. My bill was a five. I rolled it up in a ball and poked 
it in his wide-opened mouth, then shoved the rod back. 
 
“The next time remember me. And in the meantime, act like a clam or I’ll open 
you up like one.” 
 
“Y-yes, sir.” He practically leaped back in the car and slammed the door shut. 

 
206 was down the hall, the apartment facing on the street. I knocked, but there 
was no answer. Hardly breathing, I put my ear against the wood paneling of the 
door and kept it there. That way the wood acts as a sounding board, and any noise 
made inside is magnified a hundred times. That is, except this time. Nobody was 
home. Just to be sure, I slid a note under the door, then walked away and took the 
stairs down to the first landing. There I took off my shoes and tiptoed back up. The 
note was still sticking out exactly as I had placed it. 
 
Instead of fooling around I brought out a set of skeleton keys. The third one did 
it. I snapped the deadlock on the door behind me—just in case. 
 
The apartment was furnished. None of Kalecki’s personal stuff was in the front 
room except a picture of himself on the mantel when he was younger. I walked 
into the bedroom. It was a spacious place, with two chests of drawers and a table. 
But there was only one bed. So they did sleep together. I had to laugh even if I did 
mention it to get a rise out of them before. 
 
A suitcase was under the bed. I opened that first. On top of six white shirts a 
.45 was lying with two spare clips beside it. Man, oh man, that caliber gun is 
strictly for professionals, and they were turning up all over the place. I sniffed the 
barrel, but it was clean. As far as I could tell, it hadn’t been fired for a month. I 
wiped my prints off and put the gun back. 
 
There wasn’t much in the chest of drawers, either. Hal Kines had a photo album 
that showed him engaging in nearly every college sport there is. A lot of the shots 
were of women, and some of them weren’t half bad, that is if you like them tall and 
on the thin side. Me, I like ’em husky. Toward the end of the book were several 
showing Kalecki and Hal together. In one they were fishing. Another was taken 
alongside a car in camping clothes. It was the third one that interested me. 
 
Both Hal and Kalecki were standing outside a store. In this one Hal wasn’t 
dressed like a college kid at all. In fact, he looked quite the business-man. But 
that wasn’t the point—yet. In the window behind him was one of those news 
releases they plant in stores facing the street that are made up of a big photo with 
a caption below it. There were two. One was indiscernible, but the other was the 
burning of the Morro Castle. And the Morro Castle went up in flames eight years 
ago. Yet here was Hal Kines looking older than he looked now. 
 
I didn’t get any more time to look around. I heard the elevator doors slam and I 
walked into the front room. When I got there someone was fiddling at the lock. 
There was a steady stream of curses before I clicked up the deadlock and opened 
the door. “Come in, George,” I said. 
 
He looked more scared than amazed. Apparently he really believed that it was 
me who took the shot at him. Hal was behind him ready to run as soon as I made 
one move. George recov ered first. 
 
“Where do you get off breaking into my apartment. This time…” 
 
“Oh, shut up and come in. It’s just as monotonous for me. If you’d stay home 
awhile, you’d be better off.” The two of them stamped into the bedroom. When he 
came out he was red as a beet. I didn’t give him a chance to accuse me of 
anything. 
 
“Why all the artillery?” I asked him. 
 
“For guys like you,” he snarled, “for guys that try potting me through a window. 
Besides, I have a permit to carry it.” 

 
“Okay, you got a permit. Just be sure you know who you use that rod on.” 
 
“Don’t worry, I’ll give you a warning first. Now, if you don’t mind, will you tell me 
what you are doing here?” 
 
“Sure, sonny. I want the low-down on the bang, bang. Since I was the one 
accused of it, I’d like to know just what I was supposed to have done.” 
 
George slid a cigar from its wrapper and inserted it in a holder. He took his time 
lighting it up before he spoke. 
 
“You seem to have police connections,” he said finally. “Why don’t you ask 
them?” 
 
“Because I don’t like second-hand information. And if you’re smart you’ll talk. 
That gun was the killer’s gun, and I want the killer. You know that. But that isn’t 
all. The killer made one try and missed, so you can bet your boots there’ll be 
another.” 
 
Kalecki took the cigar out of his mouth. Little lines of fear were racing around 
his eyes. The guy was scared. He tried to hide it, but he didn’t do very well. A 
nervous tic tugged at the corner of his mouth. 
 
“I still see nothing I can tell you that would help. I was sitting in the big chair by 
the window. The first thing I knew the glass shattered beside me and the bullet hit 
the back of the chair. I dropped to the floor and crawled to the wall to be out of 
sight of whoever fired the shot.” 
 
“Why?” I said slowly. 
 
“Why? To save myself, of course. You don’t think I was just going to sit there 
and get shot at, do you?” Kalecki gave me a look of contempt but I ignored it. 
 
“You don’t get the point, George,” I told him. “Why were you shot at to begin 
with?” 
 
Little beads of sweat were popping out on his forehead. He wiped his brow 
nervously. “How should I know? I’ve made enemies in my time.” 
 
“This was a very particular enemy, George. This one killed Jack, too, and he’s 
coming back after you. He may not miss the next time. Why are you on his list?” 
 
He was really jumpy now. “I—I don’t know. Honest I don’t.” He was almost 
apologetic the way he spoke now. “I tried to think it out but I don’t get anywhere. 
That’s why I moved to the city. Where I was, anyone could get to me. At least here 
there are other people around.” 
 
I leaned forward. “You didn’t think enough. You and Jack had something in 
common. What was it? What did you know that Jack did? What did you have on 
somebody that Jack might have tumbled to? When you answer that question you’ll 
have your killer. Now do I bang your head on the floor to help you remember or do 
you do it yourself?” 
 
He stood up straight and paced across the room. The thought of being on a kill 
list had him half bugs. He just wasn’t as young as he used to be. This sort of thing 
got him down. 
 
“I can’t say. If there’s anything, it’s a mistake. I didn’t know Jack long. Hal knew 
him. He met him through Miss Manning. If you can figure out a tie-up in there I’ll 
be glad to tell you what I know. Do you think I want to get knocked off?” 
 
That was an angle I had forgotten about. Hal Kines was still sitting in the 
armchair beside the mantlepiece dragging heavily on a cigarette. For an athlete he 
wasn’t holding to training rules at all. I still couldn’t get the picture of Hal out of 

my mind. The one taken eight years ago. He was only a young punk, but that shot 
made him look like an old man. I don’t know. Maybe it was an abandoned store 
that had the picture in it for years. 
 
“Okay, Hal, let’s hear what you know.” The kid turned his head toward me, 
giving me an excellent view of his Greek-god profile. 
 
“George mentioned everything.” 
 
“How do you know Miss Manning?” I asked him. “When did you meet her? After 
all, a babe like that plays ball in a bigger league than you can pay admission to 
see.” 
 
“Oh, she came to school last year and gave a lecture on practical psychology. 
That’s what I’m majoring in. She had several students visit her clinic in New York 
to see her methods. I was one of them. She became interested in me and assisted 
me no end. That’s all.” 
 
It wasn’t hard to see why she’d become interested in him. It made me mad to 
think of it, but he could have been right. Maybe it was purely professional interest. 
After all, a woman like that could have just about any male she wanted, including 
me. 
 
I went on. “And what about Jack? When did you meet him?” 
 
“Shortly afterwards. Miss Manning took me to his apartment for supper with 
him and Myrna. I got involved in a drunken brawl right after a football game. It 
was the last one of the season and all training rules were off. I guess we all went a 
bit too far, but we wrecked a joint. Jack knew the proprietor and instead of 
turning us in, made us pay for the place. The following week I was studying the 
case history of a homicidal maniac in the city wards when I met him again. He was 
glad to see me and we had dinner together. We became rather good friends in a 
short time. I was glad to know him, because he helped me immensely. The type of 
work I was doing involved visits to places where I ordinarily would not have access 
to, but with his help I managed to get to them all.” 
 
For the life of me I couldn’t make anything out of it. Jack never spoke too much 
about anyone. Our association had started by having an interest in police work 
and our friendship had developed over firing ranges, ballistics tables and 
fingerprint indexes. Even in the army we had thought about it. Life on the side 
was only incidental. He had mentioned his friends. That’s about all. Myrna I knew 
very well. Kalecki from his underworld contacts. The Bellemy twins from the 
newspapers mostly, and the short time I had seen them before. 
 
There was nothing more to be gained by hanging around here. I slapped my hat 
back on and walked toward the door. Neither of them thought to say so long, so I 
stepped out and slammed the door as hard as I could. Outside I wondered when 
George had gotten hold of the .45. Pat had said none of those at the party had ever 
owned a gun. Yet George had one and a permit to carry it. Or at least he said so. 
Well, if anything cropped up where a .45 was involved, I’d know where to look first. 
 
The Bellemy twins lived on the fifth floor. Their apartment was in the same 
position as Kalecki’s. The only difference was that they answered the bell. The door 
had a chain lock on the inside and a plain, but vaguely pretty face was meeting 
mine through the six-inch opening. 
 
“Yes?” 

 
I couldn’t tell which of the twins I was speaking to, so I said, “Miss Bellemy?” 
She nodded. “I’m Mr. Hammer, private investigator. I’m working on the Williams 
case. Could you...” 
 
“Why, of course.” The door closed and the chain removed from the lock. When 
the door opened again, I was facing a woman that had athlete written all over her. 
Her skin was brown from the sun except for the wrinkle spots beside her eyes, and 
her arms and shoulders were as smooth-muscled as a statue’s. This one certainly 
didn’t have justice done her by her photos. For a moment it struck me why they 
were having any trouble finding husbands. As far as I could see, there wasn’t 
anything wrong with this particular twin that the money she had couldn’t cover. 
Plenty of guys would take her without any cash settlement at all. 
 
“Won’t you come in?” 
 
“Thank you.” I stepped inside and surveyed the place. Not much different from 
Kalecki’s, but it had a light perfume smell instead of a cigar odor. She led me to a 
pair of divans separated by a coffee table and waved toward one. I sat down and 
she took the other. 
 
“Now what is it you wish to see me about?” 
 
“Perhaps you’d better tell me which Miss Bellemy I’m speaking to so I won’t get 
my twins crossed.” 
 
“Oh, I’m Mary,” she laughed. “Esther has gone shopping, which means she’s 
gone for the day.” 
 
“Well, I guess you can tell me all I need to know. Has Mr. Chambers been to see 
you yet?” 
 
“Yes. And he told me to expect you, too.” 
 
“I won’t have much to ask. You knew Jack before the war, didn’t you?” She 
acknowledged with a nod. “Did you notice anything particular the night of the 
party?” I continued. 
 
“No, nothing. Light drinking and a little dancing. I saw Jack talking rather 
earnestly to Myrna a few times, and once he and Mr. Kines went out in the kitchen 
for about fifteen minutes, but they came back laughing as though they had been 
telling jokes.” 
 
“Did any of the others team up at all?” 
 
“Umm, no, not to speak of. Myrna and Charlotte had a conference for a while, 
but the boys broke it up when the dancing started. I think they were talking about 
Myrna’s wedding plans.” 
 
“What about afterwards?” 
 
“We had a bite to eat, then came home. Both of us had forgotten our keys as 
usual and had to wake the super up to let us in. Both of us went right to bed. I 
knew nothing about the murder until a reporter awakened us with a phone call to 
get a statement. We expected a visit from the police at once and stayed at home to 
receive them, but no one came until today.” 
 
She stopped short and cocked her head a little. “Oh,” she said, “you must 
excuse me. I left the water running in the tub.” She ran to the narrow hallway and 
disappeared into the bathroom. Maybe I was getting old. I didn’t hear any water 
running. 
 
A couple of magazines were lying in a rack beside the divan. I picked one up and 
thumbed through it, but it was one of those pattern and fashion jobs without any 

pictures and I dropped it. Two new copies of Confessions were on the bottom of the 
pile. These were better than the rest, but still the same old story. One was a 
humdinger about a gal that meets a detective in a big city. He does her dirt and 
she tries to throw herself in front of a subway train. Some nice young jerk grabs 
her in time and makes a respectable woman of her. 
 
I had just gotten to where he was leading her to the justice of the peace when 
Mary Bellemy came back. Only this time she made my head swim. Instead of the 
grey suit she had on before, she wore a sheer pink negligee that was designed with 
simplicity as the motif. Her hair was down out of the roll and her face looked clean 
and strong. 
 
Whether or not she planned it I don’t know, but she passed momentarily in 
front of the light streaming in from the window and I could see through everything 
she had on. And it wasn’t much. Just the negligee. She smiled and sat down 
beside me. I moved over to make some room. 
 
“I’m sorry I had to leave you, but the water wouldn’t stay hot very long.” 
 
“That’s all right, most women take all day at that.” 
 
She laughed again. “Not me. I was too anxious to hear more about this case 
you’re working on.” She crossed her legs and leaned forward to pick a cigarette 
from the box on the table. I had to turn my head. At this stage of the game I 
couldn’t afford to get wrapped up with a love life. Besides, I wanted to see 
Charlotte later. 
 
“Smoke?” she offered. 
 
“No thanks.” She leaned back against the divan and blew a ring at the ceiling. 
 
“What else can I tell you? I can speak both for my sister and myself since we 
were together until the next evening.” The sight of her in that carelessly draped 
sheer fabric kept my mind from what she was saying. “Of course, you can check 
with my sister later,” she added, “exactly as Mr. Chambers did.” 
 
“No, that won’t be necessary. Those details are minor. What I’m after now are 
the seemingly unimportant ones. Personality conflicts. Things you might have 
noticed about Jack the past few days. Any remark that might have been passed or 
something you overheard.” 
 
“I’m afraid I can’t help you there. I’m not very good at eavesdropping and I don’t 
collect gossip. My sister and I have remained fairly isolated in our home, that is, 
until we came to town. Our circle of friendship reaches out to our neighbors who 
like isolation as much as we do. Rarely do we entertain guests from the city.” 
 
Mary drew her legs up under her on the divan and turned on her side to face 
me. During the process the negligee fell open, but she took her time to draw it 
shut. Deliberately, she let my eyes feast on her lovely bosom. What I could see of 
her stomach was smooth parallel rows of light muscles, almost like a man’s. I 
licked my lips and said, “How long do you expect to remain in town?” 
 
She smiled. “Just long enough so Esther can get her shopping spree over with. 
Her main joy in living is wearing pretty clothes, regardless of whether or not she’s 
seen in them.” 
 
“And yours?” 
 
“My main joy in living is living.” Two weeks ago I couldn’t picture her saying 
that, but I could now. Here was a woman to whom time and place didn’t mean a 
damn thing. 

 
“Tell me,” I started, “how can you tell the difference between you and your 
sister?” 
 
“One of us has a small strawberry birthmark on the right hip.” 
 
“Which one?” 
 
“Why don’t you find out?” Brother, this girl was asking for trouble. 
 
“Not today. I have work to do.” I stood up and stretched. 
 
“Don’t be a sissy,” she said. 
 
Her eyes were blazing into mine. They were violet eyes, a wild blazing violet. Her 
mouth looked soft and wet, and provocative. She was making no attempt to keep 
the negligee on. One shoulder had slipped down and her brown skin formed an 
interesting contrast with the pink. I wondered how she got her tan. There were no 
strap marks anywhere. She uncrossed her legs deliberately and squirmed like an 
overgrown cat, letting the light play with the ripply muscles in her naked thighs. 
 
I was only human. I bent over her, taking her mouth on mine. She was straining 
in the divan to reach me, her arms tight around my neck. Her body was a hot 
flame; the tip of her tongue searched for mine. She quivered under my hands 
wherever I touched her. Now I knew why she hadn’t married. One man could never 
satisfy her. My hand fastened on the hem of the negligee and with one motion 
flipped it open, leaving her body lean and bare. She let my eyes search every inch 
of her brown figure. 
 
I grabbed my hat and jammed it on my head. “It must be your sister who has 
the birthmark,” I told her as I rose. “See you later.” 
 
I half expected to hear a barrage of nasty words when I went through the door 
and was disappointed. Instead, I heard a faint, faraway chuckle. I would love to 
have known how Pat reacted to that act. It had dawned on me all of a sudden that 
she was left in my path as a sort of booby trap while Pat went on his own way. 
Huh, I’d wrap that guy up for this little trick. There was a neat tomato down on 
Third Avenue who loved to play tricks herself, especially against the police. Later, 
perhaps… 
 
 
Chapter  6 
 
 
 
Velda was still at the office when I got there. When I saw the light on I stopped 
in front of a mirrored door and gave myself a thorough inspection for lipstick 
marks. I managed to wipe my mouth clean, but getting it off my white collar was 
something else again. I could never figure out why the stuff came off women so 
easy and off the men so hard. Before I fooled around Mary Bellemy again I’d be 
sure she used Kleenex first. 
 
I went in whistling. Velda took one look at me and her mouth tightened up. 
“Now what’s the matter?” I could see something was wrong. 
 
“You didn’t get it off your ear,” she said. 
 
Uh-oh. This gal could be murder when she wanted to. I didn’t bother to say 
anything more, but walked into my office. Velda had laid out a clean shirt for me, 
and an unwrinkled tie. Sometimes I thought she was a mind reader. I kept a few 
things handy for emergencies, and she generally knew when that would be. 

 
At a washbowl in the comer I cleaned up a bit, then got into my shirt. Ties 
always were a problem. Usually Velda was on hand to help me out, but when I 
heard the door slam I knew I’d have to go it alone. 
 
Downstairs I stopped in at the bar and had a few quick ones. The clock on the 
wall said it was early, so I picked out an empty booth and parked to spend a few 
hours. The waiter came over and I told him to bring me a rye and soda every 
fifteen minutes. This was an old custom and the waiter was used to it. 
 
I dragged a list from my pocket and jotted down a few notes concerning Mary 
Bellemy. So far, the list was mainly character studies, but things like that can give 
a good insight into a crime. Actually, I hadn’t accomplished much. I had made the 
rounds of the immediate suspects and had given them a good reason to sweat. 
 
The police were doing things in their own methodical way, no doubt. They 
certainly weren’t the saps a lot of newshawks try to make them. A solution to 
murder takes time. But this murder meant a race. Pat wasn’t going to get the 
jump on me if I could help it. He’d been to the same places I had, but I bet he 
didn’t know any more. 
 
What we were both searching for was motive. There had to be one—and a good 
one. Murder doesn’t just happen. Murder is planned. Sometimes in haste, but 
planned nevertheless. 
 
As for the time element, George Kalecki had time to kill Jack. So did Hal Kines. I 
hated to think of it, but Charlotte Manning did too. Then there was Myrna. She too 
could have circled back to do it, leaving time to get home unnoticed. That left the 
Bellemy twins. Perhaps it was accidental, but they established their arrival time by 
letting the super open the door for them. Nice thinking if it was deliberate. I didn’t 
bother to ask whether they left again or not. I knew the answer would be negative. 
Twins were peculiar; they were supposed to be uncannily inseparable. I’ve noticed 
it before in other sets, so these two wouldn’t be any different. If it came to it they 
would lie, cheat or steal for each other. 
 
I couldn’t quite picture Mary Bellemy as being a nymphomaniac though. From 
all I’ve read of the two, they were sweet and demure, not young, not old. They kept 
strictly to themselves, or at least that’s what the papers said. What a woman will 
do when she’s alone with a man in her room is another thing. I was looking 
forward to seeing Esther Bellemy. That strawberry birthmark ought to prove sort 
of interesting. 
 
Then there was the potshot at Kalecki. That stumped me. The best thing to do 
was to take a run up town and check up on his contacts. I signaled the waiter over 
and asked for a check. The guy frowned at me. I guess he wasn’t used to me 
leaving after so few. 
 
I got in my car and drove to the Hi-Ho Club. It used to be a bootleg spot during 
prohibition, but changed into a dingy joint over the years. It was a very unhealthy 
spot for strangers after dark, but I knew the Negro that ran the joint. Four years 
ago he had backed me up in a little gunplay with a drunken hood and I paid him 
back a month later by knocking off a punk that tried to set him for a rub-out when 
he refused to pay off for protection. My name goes pretty strong up that way and 
since then they let him strictly alone to run his business anyway he pleased. In 
this racket it’s nice to have connections in places like that. 

 
Big Sam was behind the bar. He saw me come in and waved to me with a wet 
rag over a toothy grin. I shook hands with the guy and ordered a brew. The high 
yellow and the tall coal black next to me were giving me nasty looks until they 
heard Big Sam say “Howday, Mistah Hammah. Glad to see yuh. Long time since 
yuh done been in dis part of town.” 
 
When they heard my name mentioned they both moved their drinks six feet 
down the bar. Sam knew I was here for more than a beer. He moved to the end of 
the bar and I followed him. 
 
“What’s up, Mistah Hammah? Somethin’ I can do fuh yuh?” 
 
“Yeah. You got the numbers running in here?” 
 
Sam gave a quick look around before he answered. “Yeah. De Boys take ’em 
down same’s they do the othah places. Why?” 
 
“Is George Kalecki still the big boy?” 
 
He licked his thick lips. Sam was nervous. He didn’t want to be a squealer, yet 
he wanted to help me. “It’s murder, Sam,” I told him. “It’s better you tell me than 
have the bulls drag you to the station. You know how they are.” 
 
I could see he was giving it thought. The black skin of his forehead furrowed up. 
“Okay, Mistah Hammah. Guess it’s all right. Kalecki is still head man, but he don’t 
come around hisself. De runners do all the work.” 
 
“Is Bobo Hopper doing the running yet? He was with Kalecki some time. Hangs 
out here all the time, doesn’t he?” 
 
“Yassuh. He’s head now, but he don’ do no mo’ running. He done had a good job 
the last few months. Keeps bees, too.” 
 
This was new. Bobo Hopper was only half human, an example of what 
environment can do to a man. His mental age was about twelve, with a build that 
went with it. Underfed all his life, he developed into a skinny caricature of a 
person. I knew him well. A nice Joe that had a heart of gold. No matter how badly 
you treated him, you were still his friend. Everything was his friend. Birds, 
animals, insects. Why, once I saw him cry because some kids had stepped on an 
anthill and crushed a dozen of its occupants. Now he had a “good” job and was 
keeping bees. 
 
“Where is he, Sam? Back room?” 
 
“Yassuh. You know where. Last I seed him he was looking at a pitcher book of 
bees.” 
 
I polished the beer off in one swallow, hoping the guys that had used it before 
me didn’t have anything contagious. When I passed the high yellow and his friend, 
I saw their eyes follow me right through the doors of the back room. 
 
Bobo Hopper was sitting at a table in the far corner of the room. The place used 
to be fixed up with a dice table and a couple of wheels, but now the stuff was 
stacked in a corner. High up on the wall a single barred window was trying hard to 
keep out what light seeped down the air shaft, leaving all the work to the solitary 
bulb dangling on the wire strand from the ceiling. Rubbish was piled high along 
one side, held back by a few frail pieces of beer poster cardboards. 
 
On the walls a few dirty pictures still hung from thumbtacks, the scenes half 
wiped out by finger smudges and dust. Someone had tried to copy the stuff in 
pencil on the wallpaper, but it was a poor try. The door to the bar was the only 
exit. I fished for the bolt lock, but there was nothing to slide it into so I let it be. 

 
Bobo didn’t hear me come in, he was so absorbed in his book. For a few seconds 
I looked at the pictures over his shoulders, watching his mouth work as he tried to 
spell out the words. I slammed him on the back. 
 
“Hey, there, don’t you say hello to an old friend?” 
 
He half leaped from his chair, then saw that it was me and broke into a big 
smile. “Gee, Mike Hammerl Golly, I’m glad to see you.” He stuck out a skinny paw 
at me and I took it. “Whatcha doin’ down here, Mike? Come down just to see me, 
huh? Here, lemme get you a chair.” He rolled an empty quarter keg that had seen 
better days over to the table and I parked on it. 
 
“Hear you’re keeping bees now, Bobo. That right?” 
 
“Gee, yeah, an’ I’m learning all about it from this book here. It’s lotsa fun. They 
even know me, Mike. When I put my hand near the hive they don’t bite me at all. 
They walk on me. You should see them.” 
 
“I’ll bet it’s a lot of fun,” I told him. “But bees are expensive to keep, aren’t 
they?” 
 
“Naw. I made the hive from an egg box. And painted it, too. They like their hive. 
They don’t fly away like other guys’ do. I got ‘em on my roof where the landlady 
lets me keep ’em. She don’t like bees, but I brought her a tiny bit of honey and she 
liked that. I’m good to my bees.” 
 
He was such a nice kid. He bubbled over with enthusiasm. Unlike so many 
others who were bitter. No family, no home, but now he had a landlady who let 
him keep bees. Bobo was a funny kid. I couldn’t quiz him or he’d clam up, but 
when you got him talking about something he liked he’d spiel on all day for you. 
 
“I hear you’ve got a new job, Bobo. How are you making out?” 
 
“Oh, swell, Mike. I like it. They call me the errand manager.” They probably 
meant “erring,” but I didn’t tell him that. 
 
“What kind of work it is?” I asked. “Very hard?” 
 
“Uh-uh. I run errands and deliver things and sweep and everything. Sometimes 
Mr. Didson lets me ride his bicycle when I deliver things for his store. I have lots of 
fun. Meet nice people, too.” 
 
“Do you make much money?” 
 
“Sure. I get most a quarter or a half buck every time I do something. Them Park 
Avenue swells like me. Last week I made nearly fifteen bucks.” Fifteen bucks. That 
was a lot of dough to him. He lived simply enough; now he was proud of himself. 
So was I. 
 
“Sounds pretty good, Bobo. How did you ever manage to run down such a good 
job?” 
 
“Well, you remember old Humpy?” I nodded. Humpy was a hunchback in his 
late forties who shined shoes in Park Avenue offices. I used him for an eye several 
times. He’d do anything to make a buck. 
 
“Old Humpy got T.B.,” Bobo continued. “He went up in the mountains to shine 
shoes there and I took his place. Only I wasn’t so good at it like him. Then folks 
asked me to do little things for them and I did. Now I go down there every day 
early in the morning and they give me things to do like running errands. I got a 
day off today on account of I gotta see a guy about buying a queen bee. He’s got 
two. Do you think five bucks is too much to pay for a queen bee, Mike?” 

 
“Oh, I don’t think so.” I didn’t know a queen bee from a king cobra, but queens 
usually run high in any species. “What did Mr. Kalecki say when you quit running 
numbers for him?” 
 
Bobo didn’t clam up like I expected. “Gee, he was swell. Gimme ten bucks 
’cause I was with him so long and told me I could have my old job back whenever I 
wanted it.” No wonder. Bobo was as honest as the day was long. Generally a 
runner made plenty for himself, taking a chance that the dough he clipped wasn’t 
on the number that pulled in the shekels. But Bobo was too simple to be 
dishonest. 
 
“That was pretty nice of Mr. Kalecki,” I grinned, “but you do better when you’re 
in business for yourself.” 
 
“Yeah. Some day I’m just gonna raise bees. You can make a lot of money from 
bees. Even own a bee farm, maybe.” 
 
Bobo smiled happily at the thought of it. But his smile passed into a puzzled 
frown. His eyes were fastened on something behind me. I had my back to the door, 
but when I saw Bobo’s face, I knew that we weren’t alone in the back room any 
longer. 
 
The knife went under my chin very slowly. It was held loosely enough, but the 
slim fingers that held it were ready to tighten up the second I moved. Along the 
blade were the marks of a whetstone, so I knew it had been sharpened recently. 
The forefinger was laid on the top of the four-inch blade in proper cutting position. 
Here was a lug that knew what it was all about. 
 
Bobo’s eyes were wide open with terror. His mouth worked, but no sound came 
from it. The poor kid began to sweat, little beads that ran in rivulets down his 
sallow cheeks. A brown-sleeved arm came over my other shoulder and slid nicely 
under my coat lapel, the hand reaching for my rod. 
 
I clamped down and kicked back. The table went sailing as my feet caught it. I 
got the knife hand and pulled down hard, and the high yellow landed in a heap on 
top of me. Just in time I saw the foot coming and pulled my head aside. The coal 
black missed by inches. I didn’t. I let go the knife hand and grabbed the leg. The 
next moment I was fighting for my life under two sweating Negroes. 
 
But not for long. The knife came out again and this time I got the hand in a 
wristlock and twisted. The tendons stretched, and the bones snapped sickeningly. 
The high yellow let out a scream and dropped the knife. I was on my feet in a 
flash. The big black buck was up and came charging into me, his head down. 
 
There was no sense to busting my hand on his skull, so I lashed out with my 
foot and the toe of my shoe caught the guy right in the face. He toppled over 
sideways, still running, and collapsed against the wall. His lower teeth were 
protruding through his lip. Two of his incisors were lying beside his nose, 
plastered there with blood. 
 
The high yellow was holding his broken wrist in one hand, trying to get to his 
feet. I helped him. My hand hooked in his collar and dragged him up. I took the 
side of my free hand and smashed it across his nose. The bone shattered and 
blood poured out. That guy probably was a lady killer in Harlem, but them days 
were gone forever. He let out a little moan and slumped to the floor. I let him drop. 
 
Just for the hell of it, I went through his pockets. Not much there. A cheap 
wallet held a few photos of girls, one of them white, eleven dollars and a flock of 

number stubs. The coal black covered his ruined face when I went near him, 
rolling his eyes like a cow. I found a safety-razor blade in his pocket with a 
matchstick through it. Nice trick. They palm the blade, letting it protrude a bit 
through the fingers, and slap you cross the face. The matchstick keeps it from 
sliding through their fingers. That blade can cut a face to pieces. 
 
The Negro tried to pull away, so I smashed him again. The pad of my fist 
landing on that busted jaw was too much for him. He went out too. Bobo was still 
in his chair, only now he was grinning again. “Gee, Mike, you’re pretty tough. Wish 
I was like that.” 
 
I pulled a five spot from my pocket and slipped it in his shirt pocket. “Here’s 
something to buy a king for that queen bee, kid,” I said to him. “See you later.” I 
grabbed the two jigs by their collars and yanked them out of the door. Big Sam 
saw me coming with them. So did a dozen others in the place. Those at the door 
looked like they expected something more. 
 
“What’s the idea, Sam? Why let these monkeys make a try for me? You know 
better than that.” 
 
Big Sam just grinned broader than ever. “It’s been a long time since we had 
some excitements in here, Mistah Hammah.” He turned to the guys at the bar and 
held out a thick palm. “Pay me,” he laughed at them. I dropped the high yellow 
and his friend in a heap on the floor as the guys paid Sam off. The next time they 
wouldn’t bet against me. 
 
As I was waving so long to Sam, Bobo came running out of the back room 
waving the five. “Hey, Mike,” he yelled. “Queens don’t need no kings. I can’t buy a 
king bee.” 
 
“Sure they do, Bobo,” I called over my shoulder. “All queens have to have kings. 
Ask Sam there, hell tell you.” Bobo was trying to find out why from Sam when I 
left. He’d probably spend the rest of his life getting the answer. 
 
The drive home took longer than I had expected. Traffic was heavy and it was 
nearly six when I got there. After I parked the car I took the stairs to my apartment 
and started to undress. My clean shirt was a mess. Blood was spattered all over 
the front of it and my tie was halfway around my neck. The pocket of my jacket 
was ripped down the seam. When I saw that I wished I’d killed that bogie. In these 
days decent suits were too hard to get. 
 
A hot and cold shower made me feel fine. I got rid of my beard in short order, 
brushed my teeth and climbed into some fresh clothes. For a moment I wondered 
whether it would be decent to wear a gun when calling on a lady, but habit got the 
better of me. I slipped the holster on over my shirt, shot a few drops of oil in the 
slide mechanism of my .45 and checked my clip. Everything in order, I wiped the 
gun and shoved it under my arm. Anyway, I thought, my suit wouldn’t fit unless 
old ironsides was inside it. This was a custom-made job that had space built into 
it for some artillery. 
 
I checked myself in the mirror to be sure I hadn’t forgotten anything. Without 
Velda to give me a once-over before I went anywhere, I couldn’t tell whether I was 
dolled up for a circus or a night club. Now I wished I had been more careful with 
the Bellemy mouse. Velda was too good a woman to lose. Guess I could expect the 
silent treatment for a week. Someday I’d have to try treating her a little better. She 
was kind of hard on a guy though, never approved of my morals. 

 
The jalopy needed gas so I ran it into a garage. Henry, the mechanic, and an old 
friend of mine, lifted the hood to check the oil. He liked that car. He was the one 
who installed an oversized engine in it and pigged down the frame. From the 
outside it looked like any beat-up wreck that ought to be retired, but the rubber 
was good and the engine better. It was souped up to the ears. I’ve had it on the 
road doing over a hundred and the pedal was only half down. Henry pulled the 
motor from a limousine that had the rear end knocked in and sold it to me for a 
song. Whenever a mech saw the power that was under the hood, he let out a long 
low whistle. In its own way it was a masterpiece. 
 
I pulled out of the garage and turned down a one-way street to beat the lights to 
Charlotte’s apartment. I couldn’t forget the way she looked through me the last 
time we met. What a dish. 
 
The road in front of her house was lined with cars, so I turned around the block 
and slid in between a black sedan and a club coupé. Walking back to her place I 
kept hoping she didn’t have a dinner date or any company. That would be just my 
luck. What we would talk about was something else again. In the back of my mind 
was the idea that as a psychiatrist, she would have been more observant than any 
of the others. In her line it was details that counted, too. 
 
I rang the downstairs bell. A moment later the buzzer clicked and I walked in. 
The maid was at the door to greet me, but this time she had on her hat and coat. 
 
“Come right in, Mistah Hammah,” she said. “Miss Charlotte’s expecting ya’ll.” At 
that I really raised my eyebrows. I threw my hat down on a table beside the door 
and walked in. The maid stayed long enough to call into the bedroom, “He’s heah, 
Miss Charlotte.” 
 
That cool voice called back. “Thank you. You can go ahead to the movies now.” I 
nodded to the maid as she left and sat on the couch. 
 
“Hello.” I jumped to my feet and took the warm hand she offered me. 
 
“Hello yourself,” I smiled. “What’s this about expecting me?” 
 
“I’m just vain, I guess. I was hoping so hard that you’d call tonight. I got ready 
for you. Like my dress?” She swirled in front of me, and glanced over her shoulder 
at my face. Gone was the psychiatrist. Here was Charlotte Manning, the woman, 
looking delightfully young and beautiful. Her dress was a tight-fitting blue silk 
jersey that clung to her like she was wet, concealing everything, yet revealing 
everything. Her hair hung long and yellow to her neck, little tight curls that 
sparkled. Even her eyes had cupids in them. 
 
She strode provocatively across the room and back toward me. Under the dress 
her body was superb, unlike what I imagined the first time. She was slimmer, 
really, her waist thin, but her shoulders broad. Her breasts were laughing things 
that were firmly in place, although I could see no strap marks of a restraining bra. 
Her legs were encased in sheer nylons and set in high heels, making her almost as 
tall as I was. Beautiful legs. They were strong looking, shapely.... 
 
“Well, do you like it?” she asked again. 
 
“Lovely. And you know it.” I grinned at her. “You remind me of something.” 
 
“What?” 
 
“A way of torturing a guy.” 
 
“Oh, please, I can’t be that bad. Do I affect you like that? Torture you, I mean?” 

 
“No, not quite. But if you take a guy that hasn’t seen a woman in five years, let’s 
say, and chain him to a wall and let you walk past him the way you did just now—
well, that would be torture. See what I’m getting at?” 
 
Her laugh was low and throaty. She threw back her head a little and I wanted to 
grab her and kiss the beauty of her throat. Charlotte took my arm and led me to 
the kitchen. The table was laid out for two. On the table was a big pile of fried 
chicken and another equally large basket of French fries. 
 
“Just for us. Now sit down and eat. I’ve already held supper an hour waiting for 
you.” 
 
I was dumbfounded. Either she kept a complete file of my likes and dislikes or 
she was clairvoyant. Chicken was my specialty. 
 
As I pulled out a chair and sat down, I said, “Charlotte, if there was an angle to 
this, I’d think the chow was poisoned. But even if it is, I’m going to eat it anyway.” 
 
She was putting a red-bordered apron on. When she finished she poured the 
coffee. “There is an angle,” she said casually. 
 
“Let’s have it,” I said through a mouthful of chicken. 
 
“When you came in to see me I saw a man that I liked for the first time in a long 
time.” She sat down and continued. “I have hundreds of patients, and surprisingly 
enough, most of them are men. But they are such little men. Either they have no 
character to begin with or what they had is gone. Their minds are frail, their 
conception limited. So many have repressions or obsessions, and they come to me 
with their pitiful stories; well, when you constantly see men with their masculinity 
gone, and find the same sort among those whom you call your friends, you get so 
you actually search for a real man.” 
 
“Thanks,” I put in. 
 
“No, I mean it,” Charlotte went on. “I diagnosed you the moment you set foot in 
my office. I saw a man who was used to living and could make life obey the rules 
he set down. Your body is huge, your mind is the same. No repressions.” 
 
I wiped my mouth. “I got an obsession though.” 
 
“You have? I can’t imagine what it is.” 
 
“I want a killer. I want to shoot a killer.” I watched her over a drumstick, 
chewing a mile a minute on the succulent dark meat. She tossed her hair and 
nodded. 
 
“Yes, but it’s a worthwhile obsession. Now eat up.” 
 
I went through the pile of chicken in nothing flat. My plate was heaped high 
with bones. Charlotte did all right, too, but I did most of the damage. After a piece 
of pie and a second cup of coffee I leaned back in my chair, contented as a cow. 
 
“That’s a wonderful cook you’ve got there,” I remarked. 
 
“Cook, hell,” she laughed. “I did all that myself. I haven’t always been wealthy.” 
 
“Well, when the time comes for you to get married, you’re not going to have to go 
out of your way to get a husband.” 
 
“Oh, I have a system,” she said. “You’re getting part of it right now. I lure men to 
my apartment, cook for them, and before they go home I have my proposal.” 
 
“Don’t look now,” I told her, “but it’s been tried on me before.” 
 
“But not by an expert.” We both laughed at that. I suggested we do the dishes 
and she handed me an apron. Very politely, I laid it on the back of a chair. It just 

wouldn’t go well with my mug. If anyone I knew happened to breeze in and catch 
me in a rig like that I’d spend the rest of my life living it down. 
 
After we finished the dishes we went into the living room. Charlotte curled up in 
the armchair and I half fell on the sofa. We lit cigarettes, then she smiled at me 
and said, “All right, you can tell me why you came up to see me. More questions?” 
 
I shook my head. “I confess. Don’t beat me with that whip. I started out with 
two things in mind. The first one was to see you with your hair down. It turned out 
better than I expected.” 
 
“And the other?” 
 
“To see if you, as a practicing psychiatrist, could throw some light on the 
murder of my good friend, Jack Williams.” 
 
“I see. Perhaps if you tell me more explicitly what you want, I’ll be able to help 
you.” 
 
“Good enough. I want details. The murder isn’t old enough to get well into it yet, 
but I will. It’s entirely reasonable that someone at the party knocked off Jack. It’s 
just as reasonable that it was someone completely outside. I’ve made some 
character studies, and what I’ve found I don’t like. However, that may not be a 
good reason for murder. What I want from you is an opinion, not one based on fact 
or logic, but an opinion, purely professional, on how you think those I mentioned 
may tie into this thing and whom you’d line up for the killer.” 
 
Charlotte took a deep drag on her cigarette, then crushed it out in an ashtray. 
Her mind was working hard, it was reflected in her expression. A minute passed 
before she spoke. “You are asking me to do a difficult thing, pass judgment on a 
person. Usually it takes twelve men and a judge, after hours of deliberation, to do 
the same thing. Mike, after I met you, I made it my job to look into your character. 
I wanted to know what a man like you was made of. It wasn’t hard to find out. The 
papers have been full of your episodes, editorials were even written about you, and 
not very favorable ones, either. Yet I found people who knew you and liked you. 
Little people and big people. I like you. But if I were to tell you what I thought I’m 
afraid I’d be passing a sentence of death on a person. No, I won’t tell you that, 
you’d be too quick to kill. That I don’t want. There’s so much about you that could 
be nice if only your mind wasn’t trained to hate too fiercely. 
 
“What I will do is give you that which I have observed. It takes time to think 
back, and I’ve taken the whole afternoon to do just that. Little things I thought I 
had forgotten are clear now and they may make sense to you. I’m used to personal 
conflict, the struggle that goes on within one’s mind, not with differences between 
two or more people. I can notice things, put them in their proper places, but I can’t 
do more than file them away. If a person hates, then I can find the reason for his 
hatred and possibly help him to rationalize more clearly, but if that hatred has 
consumed him to the point of murder, then I can but say I might have expected it. 
The discovery of murderers and motives belongs to more astute minds than mine.” 
 
I was listening intently to every word, and I could see her point. “Fair enough,” I 
said, “then tell me what you have observed.” 
 
“It isn’t too much. Jack had been in a state of nervous tension for a week before 
the party. I saw him twice and neither time had he seemed any better. I remarked 
about it, but he laughed and told me he was still trying to rehabilitate himself to 

civilian life. At the time it seemed reasonable to me. A man who has lost a limb 
would naturally find life awkward for some time. 
 
“The night of the party he was still as tense as ever. Somehow, it radiated to 
Myrna. She worried about him anyway, and I could see that she was nearly as 
upset as he was. Nothing visible, however, just those little things. A tendency to 
anger at the dropping of a glass or a sudden sound. Both Jack and she covered it 
up nicely, so I imagine that I was the only one who noticed anything. 
 
“Mr. Kalecki came to the party in a grouch. Perhaps anger would be a better 
word, but I couldn’t figure out with whom he was angry. He snapped at Harold 
Kines several times and was completely uncivil to Mary Bellemy.” 
 
“How?” I asked. 
 
“They were dancing and she said something or other. I didn’t hear what it was, 
but he scowled and said, ‘The hell with that stuff, sister.’ Right after that he took 
her back to the group and walked away.” 
 
I laughed. She didn’t know what was so funny until I told her. “Mary Bellemy 
probably propositioned George right on the floor. Guess he’s getting old. She’s a 
nymphomaniac.” 
 
“Oh, yes? How did you find out?” The way she said it was with icebergs. 
 
“Don’t get ideas,” I said. “She tried it on me but I wasn’t in the market.” 
 
“Right then?” 
 
“No, never. I like to do some of the work myself, not have it handed to me on a 
platter.” 
 
“I’ll have to remember that. I did suspect that Mary was like that, but I never 
gave it much thought. We were only casual friends. Anyway, when we were 
leaving, Jack stopped me by the door and asked me to stop back to see him 
sometime during the week. Before he could say anything further, the gang called 
me and I had to leave. I never saw him again.” 
 
“I see.” I tried to mull it over in my mind, but it didn’t work out. So Jack had 
something bothering him, and so did Myrna. It might have been that they were 
worried about the same thing. Maybe not. And George. He was upset about 
something, too. 
 
“What do you make of it?” Charlotte asked. 
 
“Nothing, but I’ll think it over.” Charlotte got up from the chair and came over to 
the sofa and sat down. She laid her hand on mine and our eyes met. 
 
“Mike, do me a favor. I’m not asking you to stay out of this and let the police 
handle it, all I want is for you to be careful. Please don’t get hurt.” 
 
When she spoke like that I felt as if I had known her a lifetime. Her hand was 
warm and pulsing lightly. I felt myself going fast—and I had seen her only twice. 
 
“I’ll be careful,” I told her. “Why are you worrying?” 
 
“Here’s why.” She leaned forward, her lips parted, and kissed me on the mouth. 
I squeezed her arms so hard my hands hurt, but she never moved. When she drew 
away her eyes were soft and shining. Inside me a volcano was blazing. Charlotte 
looked at the marks on her arms where I held her and smiled. 
 
“You love hard, too, don’t you, Mike?” 
 
This time I didn’t hurt her. I stood up and drew her toward me. I pressed her to 
me, closely, so she could feel the fire I had in me. This kiss lasted longer. It was a 

kiss I’ll never forget. Then I kissed her eyes, and that spot on her throat that 
looked so delicious. It was better than I expected. 
 
I turned her around and we faced the windows overlooking the street. She 
rubbed her head against mine, holding my arms around her waist tightly. “I’m 
going now,” I said to her. “If I don’t, I’ll never leave. The next time I’ll stay longer. I 
don’t want to do this wrong. I will if you keep me here.” 
 
She tilted her head up and I kissed her nose. “I understand,” she said softly. 
“But whenever you want me, I’ll be here. Just come and get me.” 
 
I kissed her again, lightly this time, then went to the door. She handed me my 
hat and pushed my hair back for me. “Good-bye, Mike.” 
 
I winked at her. “So long, Charlotte. It was a wonderful supper with a wonderful 
girl.” 
 
It was a wonder I got downstairs at all. I hardly remember getting to my car. All 
I could think of was her face and that lovely body. The way she kissed and the 
intensity in her eyes. I stopped on Broadway and dropped into a bar for a drink to 
clear my head. It didn’t help so I went home and hit the sack earlier than usual. 
 
 
Chapter  7 
 
 
 
I woke up before the alarm went off, which is pretty unusual. After a quick 
shower and shave, I whipped up some scrambled eggs and shoveled them into me. 
When I was on my second cup of coffee the boy from the tailor shop came in with 
my suit nicely cleaned and pressed. The pocket was sewed up so that you could 
never have told it was torn. I dressed leisurely and called the office. 
 
“Hammer Investigating Agency, good morning.” 
 
“Good morning yourself, Velda, this is your boss.” 
 
“Oh.” 
 
“Aw, come on, honey,” I pleaded, “quit being sore at me. That lipstick came 
under the line of business. How can I work when you’ve got me by the neck?” 
 
“You seem to do all right,” her reply came back. “What can I do for you, Mister 
Hammer?” 
 
“Any calls?” 
 
“Nope.” 
 
“Any mail?” 
 
“Nope.” 
 
“Anybody been in?” 
 
“Nope.” 
 
“Will you marry me?” 
 
“Nope.” 
 
“Well, so long then.” 
 
“Marry? Hey… wait a minute, Mike. MIKE! Hello… hello…” 
 
I hung up very gently, laughing to myself. That would fix her. The next time 
she’d do more than say “nope.” I’d better start watching that stuff. Can’t afford to 
trip myself up; though with Velda maybe it wouldn’t be so bad at that. 

 
The police had taken their watchdog away from Jack’s apartment. The door was 
still sealed pending further investigation and I didn’t want to get in dutch with the 
D.A.’s office by breaking it, so I looked around a bit. 
 
I had just about given up when I remembered that the bathroom window 
bordered on an air shaft, and directly opposite it was another window. I walked 
around the hall and knocked on a door. A small, middle-aged gent poked his head 
out and I flashed my badge on him. “Police,” was all I had to say. 
 
He didn’t bother looking the badge over, but opened the door in haste. A good 
respectable citizen that believed in law and order. He stood in front of me, 
clutching a worn smoking jacket around his pot belly and trying to look innocent. 
Right then he was probably thinking of some red light he ran a month ago, and 
picturing himself in the line-up. 
 
“Er… yes, officer, what can I do for you?” 
 
“I’m investigating possible entries into the apartment of Mr. Williams. I 
understand you have a window that faces his. Is that right?” 
 
His jaw dropped. “Wh-why, yes, but nobody could have gone through our 
window without us seeing him.” 
 
“That isn’t the point,” I explained to him. “Somebody could have come down 
from the roof on a rope. What I want to do is see if that window can be opened 
from the outside. And I don’t want to shinny down a rope to do it.” 
 
The guy sighed with relief. “Oh, I see. Well, of course, just come this way.” A 
mousey-type woman stuck her head from the bedroom door and asked, “John, 
what is it?” 
 
“Police,” he told her importantly. “They want me to help them.” He led me to the 
bathroom and I pushed up the window. It was some job. Those modest folks, 
fearing somebody might peek, must never have had it open. When it went up, a 
shower of paint splinters fluttered to the floor. 
 
There was Jack’s bathroom window, all right. A space of three feet separated the 
two walls. I worked myself to the outside sill while the little guy held my belt to 
steady me. Then I let myself fall forward. The guy let out a shriek and his wife 
came tearing in. But all I did was stick my hands out and lean against the 
opposite wall. He thought I was a goner. 
 
The bathroom window went up easily. I pulled myself across the space, thanked 
the guy and his wife, and slithered inside. Nothing had been moved around much. 
The fingerprint crew had left powder tracings on most of the objects that could 
have been handled, and where Jack’s body had lain were the chalk marks 
outlining the position. His artificial arm was still on the bed where he had put it. 
The only thing that was gone was his gun, and stuck in the empty holster was a 
note. I pulled it out and read it. “Mike,” it said, “don’t get excited over the gun. I 
have it at headquarters.” It was signed, “Pat.” 
 
How do you like that? He thought I’d find a way to get in. I put the note back 
with an addition at the bottom. “Thanks, chum,” I wrote, “I won’t.” I scrawled my 
name underneath it. 
 
It was easy to see that the police had been over everything in the place. They 
had gone at it neatly, but completely. Everything was replaced much the same as 
it had been. There were just a few things not quite in order that made it possible 
to tell that it had been searched. 

 
I started in the living room. After I pushed the chairs to the middle of the floor 
and examined them, I went around the edges of the carpet. Nothing there but a 
little dirt. I found three cents under the cushions of the couch, but that was all. 
The insides of the radio hadn’t been touched for months, as evidenced by the dust 
that had settled there. What books were around had nothing in them, no 
envelopes, no bookmarks or paper of any sort. If they had, the police got them. 
 
When I finished, I replaced everything and tried the bathroom but, except for 
the usual array of bottles and shaving things in the cabinet, it was empty. 
 
The bedroom was next. I lifted the mattress and felt along the seams for any 
possible opening or place where it may have been stitched up. I could have cursed 
my luck. I stood in the middle of the floor stroking my chin, thinking back. Jack 
had kept a diary, but he kept it on his dresser. It wasn’t there now. The police 
again. I even tried the window shades, thinking that a paper might have been 
rolled up in one of them. 
 
What got me was that I knew Jack had kept a little pad of notes and addresses 
ever since he was on the force. If I could find that, it might contain something 
useful. I tried the dresser. I took every shirt, sock and set of underwear out of the 
drawers and went through them, but I might as well not have taken the time. 
Nothing. 
 
As I emptied the bottom drawer a tie caught and slipped over the back. I pulled 
the drawer all the way out and picked up the tie from the plywood bottom. I also 
picked up something else. I picked up Jack’s little book. 
 
I didn’t want to go through it right then. It was nearly ten o’clock and there was 
a chance that either the police might walk in on me or the little guy get suspicious 
enough of my being away so long he’d call a copper. As quickly as I could, I put 
the stuff back in the drawers and replaced them in the dresser. The book I stuck 
in my hip pocket. 
 
The little guy was waiting for me in his own bathroom. I squeezed out Jack’s 
window and made a pretense of looking for rope marks along the upper sill. His 
eyes followed me carefully. “Find anything, officer?” he asked me. 
 
“Afraid not. No marks around here at all. I checked the other windows and they 
haven’t even been opened.” I tried to look up to the roof, but I couldn’t get back far 
enough until I stepped across to his side, then I wormed my way into the 
bathroom and poked my head out and craned my head to make it look like I was 
really trying. 
 
“Well, I guess that’s all. Might as well go out through your door as climb back 
inside there, okay?” 
 
“Certainly, officer, right this way.” He steered me to the front room like a seeing-
eye dog and opened up for me. “Any time we can be of service, officer,” he called to 
me as I left, “let us know. Glad to help.” 
 
I drove back to the office in short order and walked into the reception room, 
pulling the book from my pocket. Velda stopped typing. “Mike.” 
 
I turned around. I knew what was coming. 
 
“What is it, honey?” 
 
“Please don’t fool with me like that.” 
 
I gave her a big grin. “I wasn’t fooling,” I said. “If you were on your toes I’d be an 
engaged man right now. Come on inside a minute.” She trailed in after me and sat 

down. I swung my feet up on the battered desk and riffled through the book. Velda 
was interested. 
 
“What is it?” she asked curiously, leaning over to get a better look. 
 
“A notebook of Jack’s. I swiped it from his room before the police could get it.” 
 
“Anything in it?” 
 
“Maybe. I haven’t looked yet.” Starting at the front was a list of names, all 
crossed out. Each page was dated, the earliest starting three years ago. 
Occasionally there were references to departmental cases with possible suspects 
and the action to take. These, too, were crossed out as having been completed. 
 
About the middle of the book notes began to appear that apparently were still 
active or pending, for no black X’s marked them. I jotted these down on a list and 
Velda checked them against news clippings in my files. When she finished she laid 
down my notes with the word “solved” after each. Evidently the cases had been 
cleared up while Jack was still in the army. 
 
I wasn’t getting much at all from this. Jack had inserted a single page with one 
word across it. “WHOOPIE!” It was dated the day of his discharge. The next page 
had a recipe for veal paprika, and at the bottom was a notation to put more salt in 
than the recipe called for. 
 
There were two more pages of figures, an itemized account of what he had spent 
for clothes balanced against what he had in a bank account somewhere. Then 
came a brief remark: “Eileen Vickers. Family still in Poughkeepsie.” 
 
She must have been a girl from home. Jack was born in Poughkeepsie and lived 
there until he went to college. The next few pages had some instructions from the 
insurance company. Then Eileen Vickers’ name cropped up again. This time it 
read: “Saw E. V. again. Call family.” The date was exactly two weeks before Jack 
had been killed. 
 
She turned up again five pages further on. In heavy pencil Jack had: “R. H. 
Vickers, c/o Halper. Pough. 221. Call after 6.” Then below it: “E.V. al. Mary 
Wright. No address. Get it later.” 
 
I tried to puzzle out what it meant. To me it looked like Jack had met a girl from 
home and had talked to her. She had told him that her family was still in 
Poughkeepsie. Evidently he tried to call them and found that they were staying 
with Halper, and in order to get them, called at supper time. Then the next part. 
E.V., Eileen Vickers, all right, but she was traveling under an alias of Mary Wright 
and gave no address. 
 
I thumbed through the pages quickly, and there she was again. “E.V. Call 
family. Bad shape. Trace and raid 36904 the 29th.” And today was the 29th. There 
was one page left. It was an afterthought, a memo to himself: “Ask C.M. what she 
can do.”… 
 
C.M., Charlotte Manning. He had reference to what Charlotte told me about. He 
wanted her to stop back during the week, but never got the chance to see her. 
 
I reached for the phone and dialed operator. When she cut in I asked for the 
Poughkeepsie number. There were some clicks as the connection was completed, 
then a timid voice answered. 
 
“Hello,” I said. “Is this Mr. Vickers?” 
 
“No,” the voice replied, “this is Mr. Halper. Mr. Vickers is still at work. Can you 
leave a message?” 

 
“Well, I wanted to find out if he had a daughter in the city. Do you know…” 
 
The voice interrupted me. “I’m sorry, but it would be better if you didn’t mention 
that to Mr. Vickers. Who is calling, please?” 
 
“This is Michael Hammer, investigator. I’m working with the police on a murder 
and I’m trying to run down what might be a lead. Now, can you tell me what the 
story is here?” 
 
Halper hesitated a moment, then said, “Very well. Mr. Vickers hasn’t seen his 
daughter since she went to college. She became enmeshed in a sinful life with a 
young man. Mr. Vickers is a very stem gentleman, and as far as he is concerned, 
she might as well be dead. He’ll have nothing to do with her.” 
 
“I see, thank you.” I hung up and turned to Velda. She was staring at the 
number I had jotted down. 36904. 
 
“Mike.” 
 
“What?” 
 
“Do you know what this is?” I looked at the number. It could have been a 
reference to a police file, but when I glanced at it a third time, I felt as though I 
had seen it before. 
 
“Uh-uh. I should know it, I think. Something vaguely familiar about it.” 
 
Velda took a pencil from her pocket and swung the pad around. “Suppose you 
write it this way,” she said. She put the numbers down to read: XX3-6904. 
 
“Well, I’ll be damned! A phone number.” 
 
“Roger, pal. Now fill in the first two letters of an exchange for the X’s and you’ll 
have it.” 
 
I jumped to my feet and went to the files. Now I remembered where I had seen 
that number before. It was on the back of a card I had taken from a pimp. The 
little runt had tried to sell me a deal and I slapped him silly for it. I came back 
with a folder of note paper, cards, and numbers, scratched on the back of menus. 
 
I picked one out of the file. “LEARN TO DANCE” it read, “TWENTY BEAUTIFUL 
GIRLS.” On the back of it was a number. I compared it to the one from Jack’s 
book. The same. Only this one had an exchange, LO, for Loellen. That was the 
number, all right, LO3-6904. Velda took it from my hand and read it. 
 
“What is it, Mike?” 
 
“It’s the telephone number of a call house. If I’m not mistaken, that’s where I’m 
going to find the Vickers girl.” I reached for the phone, but Velda put her hand out 
to stop me. 
 
“You’re not actually going there, are you?” 
 
“Why not?” 
 
“Mike!” Her voice was indignant, hurt. 
 
“For Pete’s sake, honey, do I look like a dope? I’m not going to buy anything. 
After all those pictures the army showed me of what happens to good little boys 
who go out with bad little girls, I’m even afraid to kiss my own mother.” 
 
“Okay, go ahead, but watch your step, by damn, or you’re going to have to get a 
new secretary.” I ran my fingers through her hair and dialed the number. 
 
The voice I got this time had a little life in it. Behind the “hello” I could see a 
frowsy blonde about fifty in a gaudy dress dangling a butt from her lips. 
 
“Hello,” I said, “you booked for the night?” 
 
“Who is this?” 

 
“Pete Sterling. Got your number from a little guy downtown.” 
 
“All right. Come up before nine or you won’t make the beginning of the 
entertainment. Want to stay all night?” 
 
“Maybe. I’ll know better then. Book me for the night anyway. Guess I can get 
away from home.” I winked at Velda when I said it, but she didn’t wink back. 
 
“You’re down. Bring cash. Ring three longs and a short when you come.” 
 
“I got it.” I cradled the phone. 
 
There were tears in Velda’s eyes. She was trying to remain grim, but she 
couldn’t hold them back. 
 
I put my arms around her and hugged her gently. “Aw, look, honey,” I 
whispered, “I have to take a realistic approach to this case. Otherwise, how the 
hell am I going to get anywhere?” 
 
“You don’t have to go that far,” she sniffled. 
 
“But I told you I wouldn’t. For crying out loud, I’m not that bad off that I have to 
patronize those places. There’s lots of dames I could park with if I felt like it.” 
 
She put her hands against my chest and shoved. “And don’t I know it,” she 
practically yelled. “I wouldn’t trust you to… oh, gee, Mike, I’m sorry. I only work 
here. Forget it.” 
 
I pinched her nose and smiled. “Work here, hell. I wouldn’t know what to do 
without you. Now behave yourself and stick near your phone either here or at 
home. I may need you to pick up a few angles for me.” 
 
Velda gave a little laugh. “Okay, Mike. I’ll watch the angles, you watch out for 
the curves. Huba buba.” 
 
She was cleaning off my desk when I left. 
 
 
Chapter  8 
 
 
 
My first call was to Pat. He wanted to know how I was making out but I didn’t 
give him much. Later he could know about the Vickers girl, but first I wanted to 
get in my two bits. I picked a few numbers from the phone book and included the 
call-house number among them. I held on while Pat checked the addresses for me 
and passed on the information. After I thanked him, I checked with the phone 
book to make sure he had given me straight stuff. They checked. Pat was playing 
it square enough. 
 
In case he fished around with the numbers I gave him, it would be some time 
before he got to the one I was working on. 
 
This time I left my heap halfway down the block. 501 was the number I wanted, 
and it turned out to be an old brownstone apartment three stories high. I cased it 
from a spot across the street, but no one came or went. On the top floor a room 
was lit up faintly with no signs of life in it. Evidently I was early. The house was 
flanked on each side by another equally as drab and with as little color to it as the 
streets of a ghost town. 
 
This was no regular red-light district. Just a good spot for what went on. An old, 
quiet neighborhood patrolled several times nightly by a friendly cop, a few 
struggling businesses in the basement apartments. No kids—the street was too 

dull for them. No drunks lounging in doorways either. I pulled on my cigarette for 
the last time, then crushed it under my heel and started across the street. 
 
I pushed the button three longs and a short. Very faintly I heard the ring, then 
the door opened. It wasn’t the frowsy blonde I had expected. This woman was 
about fifty, all right, but her dress was conservative and neat. She had her hair 
done up in a roll with only the slightest suggestion of make-up. She looked like 
somebody’s mother. 
 
“Pete Sterling,” I said. 
 
“Oh, yes, won’t you come in?” She closed the door behind me while I waited, 
then motioned toward the sitting room off the hall. I went in. The transformation 
was startling. Unlike the dull exterior, this room was exciting, alive. The furniture 
was modem, yet comfortable. The walls were paneled in rich mahogany to blend 
with the redecorated mantel and the graceful staircase that curved down into the 
far end of the room. I could see why no light shone through the windows. They 
were completely blocked off with black velvet curtains. 
 
“May I take your hat?” I snapped out of it long enough to hand over my lid. 
Upstairs a radio was playing, but there was no other sound. The woman came 
back after a moment and sat down, motioning me to be seated opposite her. 
 
“Nice place you have here,” I remarked. 
 
“Yes, we’re very secluded here.” I was waiting for her to ask the questions, but 
she seemed in no hurry. “You told me on the phone that you had met one of our 
agents and he sent you here. Which one was it?” 
 
“A little ratty guy. He didn’t make it sound as good as this. I slapped him 
around some.” 
 
She gave me a tight smile. “Yes, I remember, Mr. Hammer. He had to take the 
week off.” If she thought she’d catch me jumping she was crazy. 
 
“How did you spot me?” 
 
“Please don’t be so modest. You’ve made too many headlines to be entirely 
unknown. Now tell me something, why did you choose to come here?” 
 
“Guess,” I said. 
 
She smiled again. “I imagine it can even happen to you, too. All right, Mr… er… 
Sterling, would you like to go upstairs?” 
 
“Yeah. Who’s up there?” 
 
“An assortment you’ll find interesting. You’ll see. But first, twenty-five dollars, 
please.” I fished out the dough and handed it over. 
 
She led me as far as the stairs. There was a push button mounted on the side of 
the newel post and she pushed it. Upstairs a chime rang and a door opened, 
flooding the stairs with light. A dark-haired girl wrapped in a transparent robe 
stood in the doorway. 
 
“Come on up,” she said. 
 
I took the stairs two at a time. She wasn’t pretty, I could see that, but the make-
up enhanced what she had. A beautiful body, though. I walked in. Another sitting 
room, but this one was well occupied. The madam had meant what she said when 
she told me there was an assortment. The girls were sitting there reading or 
smoking; blondes, brunettes and a pair of redheads. None of them had much on. 
 
Things like this were supposed to make your heart beat faster, only I didn’t 
react that way. I thought of Velda and Jack. Something was here that I wanted 

and I didn’t know how I was going to take it. Eileen Vickers was the one, but I 
never saw her. The alias—Mary Wright. It seemed feasible that she would not use 
her right name working here and not to evade income taxes either. 
 
Nobody gave me a tumble, so I supposed I was to make the selection. The girl 
who led me in kept watching me expectantly. “Want someone special?” she asked. 
 
“Mary Wright,” I told her. 
 
“She’s in her room. Wait here, I’ll get her.” The girl disappeared through the 
door and was back a moment later. “Right down the hall, next to last door.” 
 
I nodded and went through the door and found myself in a long hallway. On 
either side the wall was peppered with doors, newly built. Each one had a knob, 
but no key hole. The next to last door was the same as the others. I knocked and a 
voice called out for me to come in. I turned the knob and pushed. 
 
Mary Wright was seated in front of a dressing table, combing her hair. All she 
was wearing was a brassiere and a pair of step-ins. That and house slippers. She 
eyed me through the mirror. 
 
She might have been pretty once, but she wasn’t any longer. There were lines 
under her eyes that weren’t put there by age. She had a faint twitch in her cheek 
that she tried to conceal, but it came through anyway. I guessed her age 
somewhat in the late twenties. She looked a lot older, but I accounted for that. 
 
Here was a girl that had seen plenty of life, all raw. Her body was just a shade 
too thin, well fed, but emotionally starved. Empty, like a dead snail. Her profession 
and her past were etched into her eyes. She was a girl you could beat without 
getting a whimper out of her. Maybe her expression would change, but another 
beating more or less would mean nothing. Like the others, she wasn’t too made-
up. Far from being plain, but not at all gaudy. 
 
Her hair was a chestnut brown like the irises of her eyes. She must have had 
some sun lately or spent time under a lamp, for there was a faint tinge of tan 
covering what I could see of her skin. There was nothing startling about her shape. 
Average. Not very heavy in the breasts, but her legs were nice. I felt sorry for the 
girl. 
 
“Hello.” Her voice was pleasant enough. She sat there as though she was getting 
ready to go out and I was a husband casually looking for a cuff link. “Early, aren’t 
you?” 
 
“Sort of, but I was getting tired of hanging around a bar.” I got in a quick look 
around the room, then went to an end table and ran through a set of books. My 
fingers felt under the table edge before I inspected the walls. I was looking for 
wires. These places have been rigged for sound more than once and I didn’t want 
to get snared in a trap. The bed was next. I got down on my hands and knees and 
looked under it. No wires. 
 
Mary had been watching me curiously. “If it’s a dictaphone you’re searching for, 
we haven’t any,” she said. “And the walls are soundproofed besides.” She stood up 
in front of me. “Want a drink first?” 
 
“No.” 
 
“Afterwards, then.” 
 
“No.” 
 
“Why?” 
 
“Because I didn’t come here for that.” 

 
“Well, for goodness’ sake, what did you come for, to make small talk?” 
 
“You hit it, Eileen.” I thought she’d pass out. At first she got deathly white, then 
her eyes hardened and her lips tightened. I could see that this wasn’t going to be 
so easy. 
 
“What’s the gag, mister? Who are you?” 
 
“The monicker is Mike Hammer, kid. I’m a private eye.” 
 
She knew who I was all right. She tightened up all over when she heard my 
name. A traceless fear crept into her body. “So you’re a shamus. What does that 
have to do with me? If my father sent you…” 
 
I cut her short. “Your father didn’t send me. Nobody did. A pal of mine got killed 
a short time ago. His name was Jack Williams.” Her hand flew to her mouth. For a 
second I thought she’d scream. But she didn’t. She sat down on the edge of the 
bed, and a tear trickled down her cheek leaving a streak in the make-up. 
 
“No. I—I didn’t know.” 
 
“Don’t you read the papers?” She shook her head. “Among his things I found 
your name. He’d seen you just before, hadn’t he?” 
 
“Yes. Please, am I under arrest?” 
 
“No. I don’t want to arrest anybody. I just want to shoot somebody. The killer.” 
The tears were coming freely now. She tried to wipe them away but they came too 
fast. 
 
It was hard to understand. Here was a dame I had tagged as being as hard as 
they come, yet she thought enough of Jack to cry when I told her he was dead. 
And she hated her father, apparently. Well, that was a woman. There was still that 
much left in her. 
 
“Not Jack. He was so nice. I—I really tried to keep this from him, but he found 
out. He even got me a job before, but I couldn’t keep it.” Mary rolled over on her 
face and buried her head in the pillow. She was sobbing hard now. 
 
I sat down next to her. “Crying won’t help. What I want are a few answers. Come 
on, sit up and listen.” I raised her by the shoulders. “Jack wanted to have this 
place raided tonight, but the message never reached the police. He was killed 
before he could do anything about it. What’s going on tonight?” 
 
Mary straightened up. Her tears were gone now and she was thinking. I had to 
let her take her time. “I don’t know,” she said finally. “Jack had no cause to do 
anything. Places like this flourish in the city and they don’t have to pay off to any 
one.” 
 
“Maybe there’s more to it than you think,” I added. “Just who is expected 
tonight?” 
 
She continued, “The show. Lots of people come to see it. You know the kind. 
Usually there’s a convention in town and prospective buyers are brought here for a 
little fun. I never see any important people. The kind that are in the public eye, I 
mean. Just fairly prosperous people.” 
 
I knew the kind. Fat greasy people from out of town. Slick city boys who played 
the angles and were willing to shell out the dough. Rich jokers of both sexes who 
liked smut and filth and didn’t care where they got it. A pack of queers who 
enjoyed exotic, sadistic sex. Nasty people. Clerks who scraped their nickels to go 
and then bragged on the street corners. 
 
I tried a different approach. “How did you get in this, Mary?” 

 
“Nuts. It’s a long story, but I wouldn’t tell you.” 
 
“Listen. I’m not trying to pry into your life. I want you to talk about this, the 
whole thing. Something you say may have no meaning to you, but may throw 
some light on the whole affair. I’m convinced that whatever you are connected with 
has a contributing factor to Jack’s death. I could do it differently. I could slap it 
out of you. I could wreck this whole setup if I felt like it. But I’m not going to; it 
would take too long. It’s up to you.” 
 
“All right. If you think it would help. I wouldn’t do it if it weren’t for him. In all 
my life he was one of the very few square guys I ever met. He gave me plenty of 
breaks, trying to help me, but I failed him, every time. Generally I start bawling 
when I tell this, but too much water has gone under the bridge to make it upset 
me any more.” 
 
I sat back and dragged out a cigarette and offered her one. She took it and we lit 
up. I leaned back on the bed and waited. 
 
“It started in college. I went to the Midwest to become a teacher. It was a co-ed 
school, and in due time I met a fellow. His name was John Hanson. Tall and good-
looking. We intended to get married. One night we parked after a football game 
and you know what happened. Three months later I had to leave school. John 
didn’t want to get married yet, so he took me to a doctor. When the operation was 
over I was shaky and nervous. We set up an apartment, John and I, and for a 
while lived as man and wife without benefit of clergy. 
 
“How my folks got wind of it, I don’t know. Those things happen. I got a letter 
from my father completely disowning me. That same night John didn’t come home. 
I waited and waited, then called the school. He had dropped from the curriculum. 
Disappeared. My month was nearly up in the apartment and I didn’t know what to 
do. 
 
“Now the unpleasant part. I started to receive visitors. Male visitors. What they 
offered was the only way I could make any money. That kept on for a few weeks 
before the landlord found out and kicked me out of the place. No, I didn’t walk the 
streets. A car came and got me and I was driven to a rooming house. 
 
“It wasn’t like this. It was dirty and dingy. The madam was an old hag with a 
mean temper and liked to throw things at us. The first thing she did was to tell me 
that she had a record of my activities that she would hand over to the police if I 
didn’t cooperate. What could I do? 
 
“Then one night I had a talk with my roommate. She was a character. Tough as 
an apple and she knew how to sell herself. I told her all that had happened to me 
and she laughed like a fiend. The same damned thing had happened to her. But 
here’s the hitch. I described John. He was the guy that put her in the spot, too. 
She flew off the handle when she heard that. Both of us looked all over for him, 
but that was the last time I saw him. 
 
“I was part of a big outfit. We were shipped around wherever we were needed. I 
wound up here quite awhile ago and that’s that. Any questions?” 
 
The same old story. I felt sorry for her even if she didn’t feel sorry for herself. 
“How long ago were you in college?” I asked. 
 
“That was twelve years ago.” 
 
“Umm.” As far as I could see there wasn’t a thing to be gained. I reached in my 
wallet and pulled out a five spot and a card. “Here’s where you can locate me if 

you dig up anything else. And here’s a fin for yourself. I have some heavy thinking 
to do so I’m going to blow.” 
 
She looked at me amazed. “You mean… you don’t want anything else?” 
 
“No. But thanks anyway. Keep your eyes open.” 
 
“I will.” 
 
I found a different way out and hit the downstairs hall from a rickety flight of 
steps that was half hidden behind a flowered set of drapes. The woman in charge 
was sitting in the waiting room reading. She put down the book long enough to 
say, “Leaving already? I thought you wanted to spend the night.” 
 
As I picked up my hat, I said, “I did, but I guess I’m not as young as I used to 
be.” She didn’t bother to get up to let me out. 
 
Back in the car I started up and ran it closer to the house. I wanted to see who 
might be coming. Jack had a good reason for wanting that place raided or he 
wouldn’t have mentioned it in his book. A show. A show with convenient chambers 
for the indiscreet later on. A place that quack doctors like to see well packed so 
they could work their own racket on suckers that got caught up with V. D. 
Inwardly, I said a silent thanks to Uncle Sam for showing me those posters and 
films. 
 
I sat back against the cushions and waited for something to happen. Just what, 
I couldn’t say. So far there was no rhyme or reason to anything. It was too jumpy. 
Jack’s death. The people he was connected with. His book of notes and this. The 
only thing there was in common was an undertone. The deep tone that spelled 
hate and violence, a current of fear that seemed to fit in whenever I looked. I could 
feel it, yet see nothing. 
 
Take Eileen: A prostitute. Taking a quick trip to the grave because she got 
messed up with a rat who knocked her up, played with her awhile, then took off. 
That kind of guy ought to be hunted down and strung up by the thumbs. I’d like 
to do it personally. And her roommate. Another dame in the same profession who 
got there the same way. It must have made Eileen feel pretty low when she found 
out the same guy put her in the fix, too. John Hanson, never heard of him. She 
might have been a decent kid, too. Those guys get it in the neck in the long run. 
But that was over twelve years ago. That would make Eileen about ... let’s see, 
entered college around eighteen ... maybe she met him when she was nineteen, 
and twelve would put her at thirty-one. Hell, she looked a lot older. If her father 
had been the least bit sensible he could have prevented all this. A kind word when 
kindness was important, a home to go to, and she never would have been trapped. 
Just the same, it seemed pretty damned funny that the old man could get wind of 
what went on in a Midwest college when he was living a thousand miles away in 
Poughkeepsie, New York. That kind of news travels fast anywhere, though. 
Probably a jealous schoolgirl with a dirty mind and a poison pen. Maybe another 
of Hanson’s babes. I’ll bet he had plenty of them. Going from bad to worse. Not 
financially—Eileen was making plenty of cash even if she only got a ten-percent 
cut. The joint she worked in had money written all over it. A syndicated outfit with 
lots of the long green. For instance, this show tonight. It meant a rake-off in the 
thousands. And… 
 
I was letting my mind ramble on so fast I hardly noticed the taxi that pulled up 
in front of the stoop. A young punk in a double-breasted suit stepped out and gave 

a hand to the fat boy with him. A greasy slob, coming in for the show or some fun, 
maybe both. I thought I recognized the kid from a bookie’s uptown, but I wasn’t 
sure. The fat guy I had never seen before. There were no questions at the door, so I 
supposed they were well known there. 
 
Five minutes later another car drove up and a pair of dillies climbed out. The 
man, if you could call him that, was done up in a camel’s-hair coat, his skinny 
neck protruding above a flaming-red ascot. He had a marcel that was brand-new. 
His companion was a woman. The only way you could tell was by the skirt. The 
rest of her was strictly male. She walked with a swagger and he minced his way to 
the sidewalk holding on to her arm. Fruit. 
 
She did the bell ringing and pushed him in ahead of her. Fine people. There’s 
everything in this world. It’s too bad they were hiding behind the door when sexes 
were handed out. They got what was left over and not enough of it at that. 
 
I sat there a whole hour watching a cross section of humanity that came from 
every walk of life. If I had an infrared camera I could have made a fortune. Eileen 
probably wasn’t well read enough to identify persons as being important, but I 
was. There were four politicians from my own ward there. Plus a few who hardly 
skipped a week without having their pictures in the papers for something or other. 
Everyone was going in, no one coming out. That meant the show was on. 
Generally a half hour was enough time to transact their kind of business. 
 
Twenty minutes went by and no more cars. If Jack had expected to snag 
somebody in there it wasn’t anyone at the party or someone whom he had 
connections with that I knew about. I didn’t get it. 
 
Then I did. Or at least I thought I did. 
 
I started the motor and pulled away from the curb, then made a U turn in the 
middle of the block. I tried to beat out the red lights, but the traffic got away from 
me. Even the short cuts didn’t help, so I cut back to the main thorough-fare and 
took it straight up to Jack’s apartment. 
 
This time I went in the front door. I broke the seal and the flimsy padlock with 
my gun butt and opened the lock with one of my skeleton keys. Before I did 
anything else I went for the phone hoping that it hadn’t been disconnected. It 
hadn’t. I dialed my number and waited. Then, “Police Headquarters.” 
 
“Hello, give me Captain Chambers, Homicide. Shake it.” Pat was on in an 
instant. 
 
“Captain Chambers speaking.” 
 
“Pat, this is Mike Hammer, I’m at Jack’s apartment. Listen, get a couple of men 
and whip up here, and if you took any books from here bring them along. One 
other thing. Better tell the riot squad to stand by for an emergency call.” 
 
Pat grew excited. “What’s up, Mike, got anything?” 
 
“I may have,” I answered, “but if you don’t snap it up I may lose it.” I hung up 
before he could ask any more questions. I turned on the lamp in the living room 
and pulled out what books were lying between cast bronze ends and stacked in 
the bookcase. I found what I was looking for. Three of them were college 
yearbooks, and they were dated from the past fifteen years. I remembered having 
seen them when I was in the apartment the last time. They didn’t mean much 
then, but they did now. 

 
While I was waiting for Pat I scanned through them. They were student 
publications, all from Midwestern schools. What I was looking for was a picture of 
John Hanson. 
 
It might be that simple. Jack saw Eileen after a long time and knew what she 
was doing. A cop wouldn’t have much trouble checking those things. He knew 
what happened to her and he knew the guy. On the flyleaf of each book was the 
name and address of a secondhand bookstore near Times Square, and the tab it 
was typed on was clean, so they had been recently bought. If Jack had tracked the 
guy down and approached him he set himself up for murder. Maybe the guy had a 
business or a family, but what he had could easily be wrecked by having that kind 
of information passed on to the wrong people. 
 
I went through them fast, then again very carefully, but there was no picture 
labeled with the name Hanson. I was cursing softly to myself when Pat came in. 
Under his arm he had three more of the same kind of books. 
 
“Here you are, Mike,” he said, dumping the books on the sofa beside me. “Now 
give.” In as few words as possible I told him where I stood. He watched me gravely 
and made me repeat a few things to keep track of things in his mind. 
 
“So you think this Eileen Vickers may be the key, huh?” 
 
I signified with a nod of my head. “Possibly. You go through these books and 
look for the guy. She said he was tall and good-looking, but dames in love all think 
their men are good-looking. By the way, why did you pick up these books?” 
 
“Because these three were in the living room, open. He was reading them just 
before he was killed. It seemed funny to me that he should be going through old 
college yearbooks and I took them along to match the pics with some of our 
samples.” 
 
“And…?” 
 
“And I found two women who had been committed for bigamy, one guy that later 
hung for murder, and a friend of mine who runs a hardware store downtown and I 
see every day. Nothing else.” 
 
The both of us sat down and read those damn books from cover to cover. When 
we were done we traded and read them again to make sure we didn’t skip 
anything. John Hanson was nowhere to be found. 
 
“Looks like a wild-goose chase, Mike.” Pat was frowning at the pile. He stuck a 
cigarette in his mouth and lit it. “Are you sure that was what Jack was looking 
for?” 
 
“Hell, yes, why not? The dates on these things tie in. They’re twelve years old.” I 
dragged the black book out of my hip pocket and tossed it to him. “Take a look,” I 
said, “and don’t tell me I was withholding evidence.” 
 
As Pat glanced through it he said, “I won’t. I was up here the day after you. 
Found it under the bottom drawer of his dresser, didn’t you?” 
 
“Yeah, how did you know?” 
 
“At home I happened to drop something over the back of a drawer like that 
myself. When I thought it over, I knew it was one place we hadn’t looked. 
Incidentally, I found your note.” 
 
He finished with the pad and stuck it under his coat. I didn’t need it anymore. “I 
think you may be right, Mike. Where to now?” 

 
“The bookstore. Jack may have had other books. I should have asked Eileen 
what school she went to, damn it, but I didn’t catch on until later.” 
 
Pat went to the phone book and thumbed through it until he found the number 
of the bookstore. The place was closed, but the owner was still there. Pat told him 
who he was and to stay put until we arrived. I turned out the lights and we left 
after Pat posted one of his men at the door. 
 
I didn’t bother with the jalopy. We piled into the squad car and headed for 
Times Square with the siren wailing. Traffic pulled off to one side to let us pass 
and we made record time. The driver turned off on Sixth and stopped across the 
street from the bookstore. 
 
The blinds were drawn, but a light still glowed from within. Pat knocked and the 
weazened little proprietor fussed with the lock and let us in. He was nervous as a 
hen with a yardful of chicks and kept pulling at the bottom of his vest. Pat got to 
the point after he flashed his badge. 
 
“You had a customer come in here a few days ago and buy several college 
yearbooks.” The little guy shook all over. “Do you keep a record of the sales?” 
 
“Yes and no. We record the sales tax, yes, but the books we don’t keep. This is 
old stock as you can see.” 
 
“Never mind,” Pat said. “Do you remember what ones he took out with him?” 
 
The guy hesitated a second. “N-no. Maybe I can find out, yes?” 
 
With the little guy leading the way, we went to the rear of the store and he 
climbed a rickety ladder to the top shelf. “We don’t have many calls for these. I 
remember we had about two dozen. Ah, yes. There are perhaps ten gone.” 
 
Ten. Three were in Jack’s apartment, and Pat had three. That left four 
unaccounted for. “Hey,” I called up to him, “can you remember what schools they 
were from?” 
 
He shrugged his skinny shoulders. “I don’t know. They have been here a long 
time. I didn’t even take them down. I remember I was busy and showed him where 
they were and he climbed up and got them.” 
 
This wasn’t getting us anyplace. I shook the ladder and he grabbed the wall for 
support. “Take ’em all down,” I told him. “Just toss them to me. Come on, we 
haven’t got all night.” 
 
He pulled the books from the shelves and let them tumble to the floor. I caught 
a few, but the rest spilled all over. Pat helped me carry them to the wrapping table, 
then the little guy came over to join us. “Now,” I said to him, “get out your 
invoices. These must have been signed for when you bought ’em and I want to see 
the receipts.” 
 
“But that was so long ago, I…” 
 
“Damn it, shake your tail before I boot it all over the store. Don’t be piddling 
around with me!” He shot off like a scared rabbit. 
 
Pat laid his hand on my arm. “Slack off, Mike. Remember, I work for the city 
and this guy is a taxpayer.” 
 
“So am I Pat. We just haven’t got time to fool around, that’s all.” 
 
He was back in a minute with an armful of dusty ledgers. “Some place in here I 
have the items marked. You want to look for them now?” I could see he was 
hoping we’d take them along, otherwise it would mean an all-night job. Pat knew 
that, too, but he used his head. He called headquarters and asked for a dozen 

men. Ten minutes later they were there. He told them what to look for and passed 
the ledgers out. 
 
The guy was a hell of a bookkeeper. His handwriting was hardly legible. How he 
arrived at his balances I didn’t know, but I wasn’t after that. I threw down the 
ledger I had after a half hour and picked up another. I was in the middle of the 
second when a patrolman called Pat over. 
 
He pointed to a list of items. “This what you’re looking for, sir?” 
 
Pat squinted at it. “Mike. Come here.” 
 
There it was, the whole list, bought at one time from an auctioneer who had 
sold the estate of a deceased Ronald Murphy, a book collector. 
 
“That’s it,” I said. We took the list to the table and compared it with the books 
there while Pat was dismissing the men. I found the four that were missing. One 
was from the Midwest, the others were from schools in the East. Now all we had to 
do was to get a copy of the yearbooks from somewhere. 
 
I handed the list to Pat. “Now locate them. I haven’t got an idea where well do 
it.” 
 
“I have,” Pat said. 
 
“Where?” I asked hopefully. 
 
“Public library.” 
 
“At this time of night?” 
 
He gave me a grin. “Cops do have some privileges,” he told me. Once again he 
got on the telephone and made a few calls. When he was done he called the 
bookman over and pointed to the mess we had made of his wrapping desk. “Want 
us to help you with that?” 
 
The guy shook his head vigorously. “No, no. In the morning is plenty of time. 
Very glad to help the police. Come again if you want.” The city was full of self-
respecting citizens. He’ll probably want a ticket fixed sometime and come knocking 
on Pat’s door—as if that could help him in this town. 
 
Pat’s calls were very effective. They were waiting for us when we got to the 
library. An elderly gentleman, looking extremely nervous, and two male 
secretaries. We passed through the turnstile and a guard locked the door behind 
us. 
 
The place was worse than a morgue. Its high, vaulted ceilings were never 
reached by the feeble light that struggled to get out of the bulbs. Our footsteps 
echoed hollowly through the corridors and came back to us in dull booming 
sounds. The statues seemed to come alive as our shadows crossed them. The 
place was a bad spot to be in at night if you had the jitters. 
 
Pat had told him what we were looking for and we wasted no time. The elderly 
librarian sent his two men somewhere into the bowels of the building and they 
returned in ten minutes with the four yearbooks. 
 
We sat down there under the light of a table lamp in a reading room and took 
two books apiece. Four books. Jack had had them and somebody had taken them. 
He had ten altogether, but the others hadn’t been of any use to the one that stole 
the rest. 
 
The librarian peered at us intently over our shoulders. We flipped page after 
page. I was about to turn the last leaf of the sophomore section over when I 

stopped. I found John Hanson. I couldn’t speak, I just stared. Now I had the whole 
picture. 
 
Pat reached out and tapped my hand and pointed to a picture. He had found 
John Hanson, too. I think Pat caught on as quickly as I did. We both reached for 
another book and went through them, and we both found John Hanson again. I 
threw the books on the table and yanked Pat to his feet. 
 
“Come on,” I said. 
 
He raced after me, stopping long enough in the main lobby to put through 
another call for a squad. Then we shot past a startled guard and dashed to the 
curb and into the police car. Pat really let the siren go full blast and we threaded 
our way through traffic. Ahead of us we saw the blinking red light of the police 
truck and pulled up on it. Another car came out of a side street and joined us. 
 
The same cars were still there. The police blocked the street off at either end 
and fell in behind Pat and me as we went up the stoop. This time there were no 
three longs and a short. A fire ax crashed against the lock and the splintered door 
swung inward. 
 
Somebody screamed and others picked it up. The place was a bedlam, but the 
cops had it under control in a minute. Pat and I didn’t stick around downstairs. 
He let me lead the way through the modern waiting room, up the stairs and into 
the room on the landing. It was empty. We took the door off the small foyer into 
the hall of doors and ran to the next to last one on the left. 
 
The door opened under my touch and a blast of cordite fumes stung my 
nostrils. Eileen Vickers was dead. Her body was completely nude as she lay there 
on the bed, eyes staring vacantly at the wall. A bullet hole was directly over the 
heart, a bullet hole that was made by a .45. 
 
We found John Hanson, all right. He lay at the foot of the bed with his head in a 
puddle of his own blood and brains, and with a hole squarely between the eyes. 
On the wall was more of his goo, with the plaster cracked from where the bullet 
entered. 
 
He was a mess, this John Hanson. At least that’s what he called himself. I called 
him Hal Kines. 
 
 
Chapter  9 
 
 
 
We left the place exactly as it was. Pat whistled for a patrolman and had him 
stand guard inside the door. All exits to the house had been blocked off, and the 
crowd milled within the ring of cops on the main floor. Two other captains and an 
inspector joined us. I threw them a nod and ran for the back of the house. 
 
Those shootings had taken place not two minutes before we came in. If the killer 
wasn’t in the crowd he was just around the comer. I found the back door in a 
hurry. It led into an undersized yard that was completely surrounded by an eight-
foot-high fence. Someone had taken the trouble to keep the grass cut and the 
place cleaned out. Even the fence had been whitewashed. 
 
I went around that place looking for prints, but the grass hadn’t been trampled 
in a week. If anyone had gone over that fence he certainly would have left some 

sort of a mark. There was none. The cellar opened into the place, but the door was 
locked from the outside with a padlock; so was the door that led between the 
building and the one next door. The killer never took the back way. 
 
I jumped the steps into the small kitchen and went through the hall to the 
showroom. Quite a place. All the restraining partitions had been torn down and a 
stage set up at one end. The cops had the audience back in the cushioned movie-
type seats and the girls of the show herded into a compact group on the stage. 
 
Pat came at me from across the room. “What about the back?” he asked 
breathlessly. 
 
“Nothing doing. He didn’t go that way.” 
 
“Then the killer is in here. I couldn’t find a place even a mouse could get out. 
The streets are blocked and I got some men behind the houses.” 
 
“Let’s go over the gang here,” I said. 
 
The both of us went down the rows of seats looking over the faces that didn’t 
want to be seen. There was going to be a lot of fixing done tomorrow if some of 
these jokers didn’t want to lose their happy homes. We searched every face. We 
were looking for George Kalecki, but he either got out in time or never was there. 
 
Neither was the madam. 
 
The homicide boys arrived and we went to Eileen’s room. They found what I 
expected them to find. Nothing. Downstairs I could hear the anguished wails of the 
girls and the louder voices of some of the men yapping in pretty determined tones. 
How the commissioner was going to get around this was beyond me. When the 
pics were taken Pat and I took a good look of what was left of Hal Kines. With a 
pencil I traced a few very faint lines along his jaw line. 
 
“Very neat, isn’t it?” 
 
Pat shot a quick look at me. “Neat enough, but tell me about it. I know who, but 
not why.” 
 
I had difficulty keeping my voice under control as I spoke. “Hal isn’t a college 
kid. I caught that when I saw a shot of him and George against the background of 
the Morro Castle, but I never fitted it in. This bastard was a procurer. I told you 
George had his finger in the rackets. I thought it was the numbers, but it turned 
out to be more than that. He was part of a syndicate that ran houses of 
prostitution. Hal did the snatch jobs, oh, very subtly, then turned them over to 
George. It wouldn’t surprise me if Hal had been the big cheese.” 
 
Pat looked more closely at the lines on his face and pointed out a few more just 
under his hairline. They were hard to see because the blood had matted the hair 
into a soggy mass. 
 
“Don’t you see, Pat,” I went on. “Hal was one of these guys who looked eternally 
young. He helped nature a bit with a few plastic-surgery operations. Look at those 
yearbooks we found, every one from a different college. That’s where he got his 
women, small-town girls going to an out-of-state school. Knocks them up, puts the 
squeeze on them and here they are. God knows how many he got from each place. 
I bet he never spent more than one semester in a place. Probably worked out a 
scheme for falsifying his high-school records to gain admittance, then got busy 
with his dirty work. Once he had the dames, they couldn’t get out of it any more 
than a mobster can break away from the gang.” 
 
“Very cute,” Pat said, “very cute.” 

 
“Not too,” I told him. “This wrecks my theory. I had him slated for the first kill, 
but I know now he didn’t do it. Jack got on to him somehow, and either Hal saw 
the books in his apartment and caught wise or the other one did. This was why 
Jack wanted the place raided tonight, before this could happen. He knew Hal 
would be here and he wanted him caught with his pants down. If I had taken his 
advice Eileen might have been alive.” 
 
Pat walked over to the wall and dug the slug out of the plaster with a penknife. 
The one in Eileen hadn’t gone all the way through; the coroner was busy 
dislodging it. When he had it out he handed it to Pat. Under the light Pat 
examined them carefully before he spoke. Then, “They’re both.45’s, Mike. And 
dumdums.” 
 
He didn’t have to tell me that. “Somebody sure likes to make sure they stay 
dead,” I said through tight lips. “The killer again. There’s only one. The same lousy 
bastard that shot Jack. Those slugs will match up sure as hell. Damn,” I spat out, 
“he’s kill crazy! Dumdums in the gut, head and heart. Pat, I’m going to enjoy 
putting a bullet in that crazy son of a bitch more than I enjoy eating. I’d sooner 
work him over with a knife first.” 
 
“You’re not going to do anything of the sort,” Pat remarked softly. 
 
The coroner’s men got the bodies out of there in a hurry. We went downstairs 
again and checked with the cops who were taking down the names and addresses 
of the people. The patrol wagon was outside and the girls were loading into it. An 
officer came up to Pat and saluted him. 
 
“No one got through the line, sir.” 
 
“Okay. Have some men hold and the rest search the alleyways and adjacent 
buildings. Make everyone identify himself satisfactorily or arrest them. I don’t care 
who they are, understand?” 
 
“Yes, sir.” The cop saluted and hurried away. 
 
Pat turned to me. “This madam, would you recognize her again?” 
 
“Hell, yes. Why?” 
 
“I have a folder of persons convicted or suspected of running call houses at the 
office. I want you to look them over. We got her name from the girls, or at least the 
only name they knew her by. She was called Miss June. None of the guests here 
knew her at all. Half the time one of the girls answered the door. She always came 
herself if the proper signal wasn’t given.” 
 
I held Pat back a moment. “But what about George Kalecki. He’s the guy I 
want.” 
 
Pat grinned. “I have the dragnet out for him. Right now a thousand men are 
looking for the guy. Think you stand a better chance?” 
 
I let that one ride. Before I went looking for George Kalecki I wanted to do a few 
other things first. Even if he was the killer, there were others behind the racket 
that had to be nailed and I wanted them all, not just the trigger puller. It was like 
a turkey dinner. The whole outfit would be the meal, the killer the dessert. I wish I 
knew how Jack had gotten the lead on Hal. Now I would never know. 
 
But Jack had connections. Maybe he had run across Hal before, or knew 
Kalecki’s end of it and suspected the rest, and when he met up with Eileen, put 
two and two together. A guy that operated as long as Hal had couldn’t cover 
himself completely. There had to be a break in the trail somewhere. Whatever Jack 

did, he did it fast. He knew right where to look to find John Hanson, and he found 
him the way we did and maybe plenty more times—in the yearbooks of the 
colleges. 
 
Even if Hal killed Jack, how did his own murderer get the gun? That weapon 
was as hot as the killer and not a toy to be passed around. No, I didn’t think Hal 
killed Jack. He might have spotted the books and told someone else. That would 
be the killer. That was what the killer was after. Or was it? Maybe it was just 
incidental. Maybe the killer only had a remote tie-up with Hal. If that was it Jack 
was killed for another reason, and the killer, knowing there still was the bare 
possibility of being traced through that tie-up, didn’t take the chance and swiped 
the books to keep Hal clean. 
 
And where the hell did that leave me? Right up the creek again. I couldn’t sit 
back and wait for something to happen again and work from there. Right now I 
had to start thinking. Little things were beginning to show their heads. Not much, 
but enough to show that behind it all was a motive. I didn’t see it yet, but I would. 
I wasn’t after a killer now. I was after a motive. 
 
I told Pat that I was going home to bed and he wrote me a pass to get through 
the police lines. I walked down the street and gave the note to a red-faced cop and 
went on. A cruising cab came by and I grabbed it to Jack’s apartment. My buggy 
was still outside, and after I paid off the cabby I got in my own heap. There was a 
lot of work to do tomorrow and I needed some sleep. 
 
Twenty minutes later I was home in bed smoking a cigarette before I went to 
sleep, still thinking. I couldn’t get anywhere, so I crushed out the butt and turned 
over. 
 
My first stop after breakfast was Kalecki’s apartment. As I expected, Pat had 
been there before me. I asked the cop on duty at the entrance if there was any 
message for me and he handed over a sealed envelope. I ripped the flap open and 
pulled out a sheet of paper. Pat had scrawled. “Mike… nothing here. He pulled out 
without bothering to pack a bag.” He signed it with a large “P.” I tore the note up 
and dumped the pieces in a trash basket outside the apartment house. 
 
It was a fine day. The sun was warm and the streets full of kids making a racket 
like a pack of squirrels. I drove to the comer and stopped in a cigar store where I 
put in a call to Charlotte’s office. She wasn’t there, but her secretary had been told 
to tell me that if I called, I could find her in Central Park on the Fifth Avenue side 
near 68th Street. 
 
I drove in from the cutoff on Central Park West and drove all around the place, 
circling toward Fifth. When I came out I parked on 67th and walked back to the 
park. She wasn’t on any of the benches, so I hopped the fence and cut across the 
grass to the inside walk. The day had brought out a million strollers, it seemed 
like. Private nurses in tricky rigs went by with a toddler at their heels, and more 
than once I got the eye. 
 
A peanut vendor had just finished giving me change when I saw Charlotte. She 
was pushing a baby carriage toward me, waving her hand frantically to catch my 
attention. I hurried up to her. 
 
“Hello, kitten,” I said. It made my mouth water to look at her. This time she had 
on a tight green suit. Her hair resembled a waterfall cascading over her collar. Her 
smile was brighter than the day. 

 
“Hello, Mike. I’ve been waiting for you.” She held out her hand and I took it. A 
firm grip, not at all like a woman’s. Without letting go I hooked her hand under my 
arm and fell behind the carriage. “We must look like the happiest newlyweds in 
the world,” she laughed. 
 
“Not so new,” I said, motioning toward the carriage. Her face flushed a little and 
she rubbed her head against mine. “How come you’re not working?” I asked her. 
 
“On a day like this? Besides, I don’t have an appointment until two, and a friend 
asked me if I would mind her child while she attended to some business.” 
 
“Like kids?” 
 
“I love them. Someday I’m going to have six of my own.” 
 
I whistled. “Wait up, take it easy. Maybe I won’t make that much money. Six 
mouths are a lot to feed.” 
 
“So what, I’m a working girl, and, er, is that a proposal, Mr. Hammer?” 
 
“Could be,” I grinned. “I haven’t been pinned down yet, but when I look at you 
I’m ready to be.” 
 
If the conversation had gone any further there’s no telling where it would have 
wound up. But I got back to the case again. “By the way, Charlotte, have you seen 
the morning papers?” 
 
“No, why?” She glanced at me curiously. 
 
“Hal Kines is dead.” 
 
Her jaw dropped and wrinkles of amazement appeared in her forehead. “No,” 
she breathed heavily. I took a tabloid out of my back pocket and showed her the 
headlines. I could see that she was taken aback. “Oh, Mike, that is terrible! What 
happened?” 
 
I pointed toward an empty bench. “Can we sit down a few minutes?” 
 
Charlotte consulted her watch and shook her head. “No,” she told me, “I have to 
meet Betty in a few minutes. Tell you what, walk me to the gate, then we can drive 
back to my office for a few drinks after I meet her. You can tell me on the way.” 
 
I went through the entire previous evening without omitting a detail. Charlotte 
listened carefully without once asking a question. Her mind was trying for the 
psychological aspect of it. I had to stop near the end. Betty was waiting for her. 
After the introduction, we had a few minutes’ chat and said good-bye to Betty, who 
walked off with the baby. 
 
We went in the other direction, following the stone wall of the fence to 67th. I 
don’t think we had gone more than ten feet, when a car pulled abreast of us. No 
time to think. I saw the ugly snout of the gun sticking out the window and landed 
in a heap on Charlotte. The bullet smashed against the wall waist high, throwing 
rock splinters in our faces. George Kalecki didn’t have time for a second shot. He 
threw the car into gear and went tearing down Fifth Avenue. If it had worked it 
would have been perfect. No other cars around to give chase. For the first time, not 
even a taxi. 
 
I picked Charlotte up and dusted her off. Her face was white and shaken, but 
her voice was steady enough. Two strollers came hurrying up, thinking we had 
fallen. Before they reached us, I got the slug from the dirt under the wall where it 
had dropped. It was a .45. I thanked the two who tried to help us, explaining that 
we had tripped, and we went on. 

 
Charlotte waited a moment, then said: “You’re getting close, Mike. Somebody 
wants you out of the way.” 
 
“I know it. And I know who that was—our friend, Kalecki.” I gave a short laugh. 
“He’s scared. It won’t be long now. That skunk is ready to break any minute. If he 
weren’t he wouldn’t make a play for me in broad daylight.” 
 
“But, Mike, please don’t laugh about it. It wasn’t that funny.” 
 
I stopped and put my arms around her shoulders. I could feel her trembling a 
little. “I’m sorry, darling. I’m used to being shot at. You might have gotten hit, too. 
Let me take you home, you’ll have to change your clothes. That spill didn’t do you 
much good.” 
 
Charlotte didn’t speak much riding home. She started to, but stopped. Finally I 
said, “What is it, Charlotte?” 
 
She frowned a little. “Do you think it was because of the rash promise you made 
to Jack after he was killed that Kalecki wants you out of the way?” 
 
“Maybe. That’s the best reason I know of. Wh y. ?” 
 
“Could it be that you know more than anyone else concerning this whole affair?” 
 
I thought that over a moment before I said, “I don’t think so. The police have 
every bit of information I have except, perhaps, the incentive and the personal 
insight I picked up.” 
 
We drove on in silence after that. It was nearly ten o’clock when we got to the 
apartment. We went up the stairs instead of waiting for the elevator and rang the 
bell. No one came to the door and Charlotte fumbled for her key. “Damn,” she 
said. “I forgot this is the maid’s day off.” We went inside and the bell rang again 
when we opened the door. 
 
“Make a drink while I shower, Mike.” Charlotte laid a bottle of bourbon on the 
coffee table and went into the kitchen for some ice and ginger ale. 
 
“Okay. Do you mind if I use your phone first?” 
 
“Not at all. Go right ahead,” she called back. 
 
I dialed Pat’s number and had to wait for the operator to go through a half-
dozen extensions before he finally located him. “Pat?” 
 
“Yeah, Mike, go ahead.” 
 
“Get this. Kalecki didn’t take a powder, he’s still in the city.” 
 
“How do you know?” 
 
“He tried to dust me off a little while ago.” Pat listened intently as I gave him the 
details. When I got through, he asked: 
 
“Did you get the number of the car?” 
 
“Uh-uh. It was a late model Caddy, about a ’41. Dark blue with lots of chrome. 
He passed me going toward the city.” 
 
“Swell, Mike, I’ll put it on the air. Have you got the bullet with you?” 
 
“Hell, yes. And it’s a .45, too. Better get ballistics to check it. This one wasn’t a 
dumdum, though. Just a nice normal slug. Suppose I drive down to see you this 
afternoon.” 
 
“Do that,” Pat answered. “I’ll be here the rest of the day unless something 
breaks. 
 
“And one other thing, Mike,” he added. 
 
“Yeah?” 
 
“We checked the slugs that killed Kines and the Vickers woman.” 

 
“They came from the same gun? The one that…” 
 
“Right, Mike. The killer again.” 
 
“Damn,” I said. 
 
I hung up and took the slug from my pocket. Maybe it would match, maybe not. 
I was thinking of the rod Kalecki had in his luggage under his bed. And he had a 
permit for it too, he said. I wished now that I had taken that gun along to compare 
it in a ballistics box instead of leaving it to my sense of smell and sight to 
determine whether or not it had been fired recently. 
 
I wrapped the hunk of metal in a wad of paper and stuck it in my pocket, then 
whipped up a pair of highballs. I called out to Charlotte to come and get it, but she 
yelled for me to bring it in to her. 
 
Maybe I should have waited a second, or knocked. I did neither. Charlotte was 
standing beside the bed completely naked. When I saw her beautiful body that 
way my blood boiled inside me and the drink shook in my hand. She was more 
beautiful than I imagined. So damned smooth. She was more startled than I. She 
made a grab for the robe on the bed and held it in front of her, but not before I 
saw a blush suffuse her entire body. 
 
She was having as hard a time getting her breath as I was. “Mike,” she said. Her 
voice trembled slightly when she spoke, and her eyes never left mine. I turned my 
back while she slipped into the robe, then turned back and handed her the drink. 
 
Both of us finished them in one draught. It added nothing to the fire that was 
running through me. I felt like reaching out and squeezing her to pieces. We put 
the glasses down on the dresser top. We were awfully close then. One of those 
moments. 
 
She came into my arms with a rush, burying her face in my neck. I tilted her 
head back and kissed her eyes. Her mouth opened for me and I kissed her, hard. I 
knew I was hurting her, but she didn’t pull away. She returned that kiss with her 
lips, her arms and her body. She was on fire too, trying desperately to get close to 
me through space that wasn’t there any more. 
 
I had my arm around her shoulders and my hands fastened in her hair, 
crushing her to me. Never before had I felt like this, but then, never before had I 
been in love. She took her mouth away from mine and lay in my arms, limp, 
breathing heavily, her eyes closed. 
 
“Mike,” she whispered, “I want you.” 
 
“No,” I said. 
 
“Yes. You must.” 
 
“No.” 
 
“But, Mike, why? Why?” 
 
“No, darling, it’s too beautiful to spoil. Not now. Our time will come, but it must 
be right.” 
 
I put my arm under her and carried her out of the room. If I stayed in that 
bedroom any longer I couldn’t have held on to my sanity. I kissed her again as she 
lay in my arms, then put her down outside the bathroom door and mussed her 
hair. “Go take your shower,” I said in her ear. 
 
She smiled at me through sleepy eyes and entered, then closed the door softly. I 
picked up the glasses, and for a brief second eyed the bed, longingly. Maybe I was 
a damned fool, I don’t know. I went on into the living room. 

 
I waited until I heard the shower running before I picked up the phone. 
Charlotte’s secretary answered promptly with the usual hello. 
 
“This is Mike Hammer again,” I said. “I’m expecting a friend and I told him to 
call your office, so when he does tell him where I went, will you?” 
 
“Oh, that won’t be necessary,” she replied. “He already has. I told him you’d be 
in the park. Did you miss him?” 
 
“No, he’ll be along,” I lied. 
 
So, somebody is on my tail, I told myself as I hung up. Good old George. 
Followed me, lost me, but figured I’d see Charlotte, very clever. 
 
I made another drink, then stretched out on the sofa. He must have tailed me 
and I never got wise. I couldn’t figure how he knew I’d see Charlotte unless it was 
written all over me. They say love is like that. But what a way to get put on the 
spot. He picked the time and place nicely. If I hadn’t ducked, Kalecki would have 
scored a bull’s-eye. He did his shooting at point-blank range. What the hell, 
Kalecki knew the score. If the cops picked him up in the dragnet it would be a 
miracle. I’ll bet he had plenty of places he could hole up in if the time came. 
George was a smart apple. I wasn’t worried about the police flushing him any 
more. Mr. Kalecki was reserved—for me. Pat was going to be awfully sore. 
 
Charlotte was out and dressed in record time. Neither of us spoke about what 
had happened, but each knew that it was foremost in the other’s mind. She made 
herself a drink, then sat down beside me. “How did you know I was coming 
today?” 
 
She gave me a bright smile. “Mike, darling, I’ve been expecting you ever since I 
saw you. Or am I doing it wrong?” 
 
“Not as far as I’m concerned.” 
 
“But you told me that you like to do the chasing.” 
 
“Not with you. Time is too damned important.” 
 
When she settled in my arms I told her about the call to her office. She didn’t 
like it a bit. “You’re not trying to be very careful, Mike. If it is Kalecki, he is smart. 
Please, Mike, watch yourself. If anything happens to you, I’ll…” 
 
“You’ll what?” 
 
“Oh, Mike, can’t you see that I love you?” 
 
I stroked her golden hair and blew in her ear. “Yes, silly, I can see it. It must be 
sticking out all over me the same way.” 
 
“Yes,” she said, “it is.” We both grinned at each other. I felt like a school kid. 
“Now, let’s get back to business before I rush off to the office,” she went on. “You 
came to see me for something besides just being nice. What was it?” 
 
It was my turn to be amazed. “Now, how the hell did you know that?” I 
demanded. 
 
Charlotte patted my hand. “How many times do I have to remind you that I am 
a practicing psychiatrist? It doesn’t mean that I can read minds, but I can study 
people, observe their behavior and determine what lies underneath. Especially,” 
here she gave a coy smile, “when you really take an interest in a person.” 
 
“You win.” I blew a couple of smoke rings and continued. “What I want is 
everything you know about Hal Kines.” 
 
She came back to earth abruptly at the mention of his name. “That’s what I 
thought after you spoke about what happened. Well, you know that he was in a 

medical school. Pre-med to be exact. From what you said, he was there ostensibly 
to procure women for this vice syndicate. Isn’t that an unusual way of doing it?” 
 
“No. Not when you know people,” I said. “In order to have a good hold on the 
girls they have to break them away from their homes, then get them trapped in the 
mill. I imagine they have some sort of evidence concerning their activities that they 
hold over their heads. So what can the girls do? They’ve been betrayed, kicked out 
of their homes, no one to turn to, but the door is open to the old profession. At 
least they can eat and have a roof over their heads—and make plenty of cash. 
Then once they’re in they can’t get out even if they wanted to. It takes time, but it’s 
big business and pays off. Using a method like this, Hal could get the girl he 
wanted without running too much of a personal risk.” 
 
“I see.” She mulled over what I had said a moment, then gave me the rest. 
“Anyway, I gave a lecture at the school by invitation of the board and, after 
examining the records and work of the student body specializing in psychiatry, 
chose several students to study my clinical methods. Hal Kines was one of them. 
He was an excellent worker, knew what he was doing every minute. He was far in 
advance of the others. 
 
“At first I credited it to natural ability and a medical home background, but now 
I can see that it was simply the result of so much training in the field. After sixteen 
years of being exposed to teaching you are bound to pick up something.” 
 
“I guess so,” I cut in. “How about his outside contacts?” 
 
“He lived at an apartment hotel three blocks from me while he was here. During 
the time he was at school he lived in a dorm, I suppose. On weekends he would 
visit the clinic and stay with Mr. Kalecki. Hal never spoke much about outside 
matters, he was so wrapped up in his work. He was in a scrape one day and Jack 
Williams helped him out.” 
 
I nodded. “Yeah, I know all about that from Hal himself. What about his 
personal side? Did he ever make a pass at you?” 
 
“No. Never attempted one. Do you think he might have been, er, after me to join 
his syndicate?” 
 
“Why, that dirty…” I stopped there when I saw her laughingly silently at me. “I 
doubt that. You were too smart to get caught in that kind of web. I think he was 
with you either to have an excuse to stay in the city, or really study psychiatry to 
help him in his work.” 
 
“Did it ever occur to you that he might have been here to kill Jack?” 
 
That idea wasn’t a new one to me. I’d been playing with it all day. “Could have 
been. I thought it over. Maybe he was here because Jack had already caught on 
and was making him stay. Jack was soft-hearted, but not when it came to a thing 
like that. Not being in the department any longer, he couldn’t put the screws on 
him officially, but held something over his head to make him stay.” 
 
“Then who killed Jack—Hal?” 
 
“That,” I said, “is something I’d give both legs and one arm to know. Just so long 
as I had one arm to shoot with. And that’s something I’m going to find out before 
long.” 
 
“And what about Hal and this girl, Eileen?” 
 
“The killer got them both. The way I see it, Hal Kines went there to kill the girl, 
but before he got the chance the killer knocked them both off.” 

 
“But if that was the case, how would Jack have known he would be there to kill 
her?” 
 
“You’ve got something there, Charlotte. Maybe Jack knew he’d be there for some 
reason. Think so?” 
 
“Perhaps. Either that or he knew the killer would be there, too. But until then 
the killer hadn’t killed, so he had another purpose in the visit. Sounds sort of 
scrambled, doesn’t it?” 
 
“You’re not kidding,” I laughed. “But as the plot thickens it thins out, too. 
Whatever the motive, it takes in a lot of people. Three of them are dead, one is 
running around the city taking pot-shots at me, and the killer is someplace sitting 
back quietly giving all of us the horse laugh. What the hell, let him laugh. He won’t 
be doing it much longer. There’s too many people working on this case and they’ll 
uncover something. Murder is a hard thing to hide. Pat is setting a fast pace in 
this race. He wants the trigger-happy son as badly as I do, but I’ll be damned if 
he’s going to get him. From now on I’m going to get out in front of Pat and stay 
there. Let him stick close to my heels; when the time comes for me to put a bullet 
in the killer’s gut I’m going to be alone. Just me, the rat and a single bullet It’ll go 
in neat, right in the soft part of the belly. One steel-jacketed slug that will be as 
effective as ten dumdums.” 
 
Charlotte was listening intently, her eyes wide. She was making a typical study 
of me as though she were hearing the story of a confessed murderer and trying to 
analyze the workings of the mind. I cut in short and gave her a friendly push. 
“Now you think I’m off my nut, I bet.” 
 
“No, Mike, not at all. Have you been like that just since the war? So hard, I 
mean.” 
 
“I’ve always been like that,” I said, “as long as I could remember. I hate rats that 
kill for the fun of it. The war only taught me a few tricks I hadn’t learned before. 
Maybe that’s why I lived through it.” 
 
I checked my watch; it was getting late. “If you want to keep your appointment, 
you’d better hurry.” 
 
Charlotte nodded. “Drive me back to the office?” 
 
“Sure. Get your coat.” 
 
We drove back slowly, timing it so that we’d have as much time together as 
possible. We made small talk, mentioning neither the case nor the near affair in 
the apartment. When we reached Park Avenue, and turned off to stop, Charlotte 
said, “When will I see you again, Mike?” 
 
“Soon,” I answered. “If the joker that called today to see where I went tries it 
again, have your secretary tell him that I’m meeting you on this corner. Then try to 
get hold of me and maybe we can ambush the lug. It was Kalecki, all right; your 
secretary will probably recognize his voice when she hears it again.” 
 
“Okay, Mike. What if Mr. Chambers calls on me?” 
 
“In that case, verify the story of the shooting, but forget about the phone call. If 
we can trap him, I want it to be my own party.” 
 
She leaned in and kissed me again before she left. As she walked away I 
watched the flashing sleekness of her legs disappear around the corner. She was a 
wonderful woman. And all mine. I felt like I should let out a loud whoop and do a 
jig. 

 
A car honked behind me, so I threw the car into gear and pulled away from the 
curb. I was stopped for a red light two blocks away when I heard my name yelled 
from across the street. The cars alongside me obscured the person, but I could see 
a brown-suited figure dancing between them trying to get to my jalopy. I opened 
the door and he got in. “Hello, Bobo,” I said. “What are you doing up this way?” 
 
Bobo was all excited over meeting me. “Golly, Mike. Sure is nice seeing you. I 
work up here. No place special, just all the places.” Words bubbled out of him like 
out of a water faucet. “Where are you going?” 
 
“Well, I was going downtown, but maybe I can drive you someplace. Where are 
you going?” 
 
Bobo scratched his head. “Lessee. Guess I can go downtown first. Gotta deliver 
a letter around Canal Street.” 
 
“Swell, I’ll drop you off there.” 
 
The light turned and I swung on to Broadway and turned left. Bobo would wave 
at the girls on the street, but I knew how he felt. “Hear anything more about 
Kalecki?” I asked. 
 
He shook his head. “Naw. Something’s happened to him. I saw one of the guys 
today and he ain’t working for him no more.” 
 
“How about Big Sam’s place? No news from there?” 
 
“Nope. Anyway, since you beat up the two jigs nobody will talk to me. They’re 
scared I might get you after ’em.” Bobo let out a gleeful chuckle. “They think I’m a 
tough guy, too. My landlady heard about it and told me to stay away from you. 
Isn’t that funny, Mike?” 
 
I had about as many friends as a porcupine up that way. “Yeah,” I said. “How’s 
the bee situation?” 
 
“Oh, good, good, good. Got me a queen bee. Hey. That wasn’t true what you 
said. A queen bee don’t need a king bee. It said so in the book.” 
 
“Then how are you going to get more bees?” That puzzled him. 
 
“Guess they lay eggs, or something,” he muttered. 
 
Canal Street lay straight ahead, so I let Bobo out when I stopped for the red 
light. He gave me a breezy “so long” and took off down the street at a half trot. He 
was a good kid. Another harmless character. Nice, though. 
 
 
Chapter  10 
 
 
 
Pat was waiting for me on the firing range. A uniformed patrolman took me to 
the basement and pointed him out. Pat was cursing over a bad score when I 
tapped him on the shoulder. 
 
“Having trouble, bub?” I grinned at him. 
 
“Nuts. I think I need a new barrel in this gun.” He took another shot at the 
moving target, a figure of a man, and got it high up on the shoulder. 
 
“What’s the matter with that, Pat?” 
 
“Hell, that would just knock him over.” Pat was a perfectionist. He caught me 
laughing at him and handed me the gun. “Here, you try it.” 

 
“Not with that.” I pulled the .45 out and kicked the slide back. The target 
popped up and moved across the range. The gun bucked in my hand. I let three go 
one after the other. Pat stopped the target and looked at the three holes in the 
figure’s head. 
 
“Not bad.” I felt like pasting him. 
 
“Why don’t you tell me I’m an expert?” I said. “That’s shooting where it counts.” 
 
“Phooey. You’ve just been working at it.” I shoved the rod under my coat and Pat 
pocketed his. He pointed toward the elevator. 
 
“Let’s go up. I want to check that slug. Got it with you?” I took the .45 out and 
unwrapped it, then handed it over. Pat studied it in the elevator, but markings 
weren’t defined clearly enough to be certain of anything. A bullet hitting a stone 
wall has a lot less shape left than one that has passed through a body. 
 
The ballistics room was empty save for ourselves. Pat mounted the slug inside a 
complicated slide gadget and I turned the lights out. There was a screen in front of 
us, and on it was focused an image of two bullets. One was from the killer’s gun, 
the other was the slug Kalecki fired at me. My souvenir still had some lines from 
the bore of the gun that came out under magnification. 
 
Pat turned the bullet around on its mount, trying to find markings that would 
match with the other. He thought he did once, but when he transposed the images 
one on top of the other there was quite a difference. After he had revolved the slug 
several times he flicked the machine off and turned on the lights. “No good, Mike. 
It isn’t the same gun. If Kalecki did the other shooting, he used another gun.” 
 
“That isn’t likely. If he kept it after the first killing he’d hang on to it.” 
 
Pat agreed and rang for one of his men. He handed the bullet over to him and 
told him to photograph it and place it in the files. We sat down together and I gave 
him the full details of the shooting and my views on the Kines kill. He didn’t say 
much. Pat is one of those cops who keep facts in their heads. He stores them away 
without forgetting an item, letting them fume until they come to the surface by 
themselves. 
 
It constantly amazed me that there were men like him on the force. But then, 
when you get past the uniforms and into the inner workings of the organization 
you find the real thinkers. They have all the equipment in the world to work with 
and plenty of inside contacts. The papers rag the cops too much, I thought, but in 
the pinch they called the game. Not much went on that they didn’t know about. 
There was vice. As much as in any outfit, but there were still men like Pat that no 
money could buy. I would have been one myself if there weren’t so damn many 
rules and regulations to tie a guy down. 
 
When I finished, Pat stretched and said, “Nothing I can add to it for you. Wish I 
could. You’ve been a great help, Mike. Now tell me one thing. You gave me facts, 
this time give me an opinion. Who do you think did it?” 
 
“That, chum, is the sixty-four-dollar question,” I countered. “If I had any definite 
idea, you’d have a justified homicide on your hands. I’m beginning to think of 
someone outside of those we know. Hell, man, look at the corpses we have floating 
around. And Kalecki on the loose with a rod. Maybe he did it. He has reason to. 
Maybe it’s the guy behind him again. It could fit in with this syndicate that runs 
the houses of prostitution. Or the numbers racket George worked. Jack could have 
found out about that, too. Maybe it was a revenge kill. Hal fouled up enough 

women in his life. Suppose one of them found out how he did it and made a play 
for him. When she saw that Jack was going to arrest him she killed Jack, then 
killed Hal, shooting Eileen to keep her from spouting off what she had seen. 
 
“Maybe it wasn’t a girl like that. Could be the brother or father of one. Or a boy 
friend for that matter. There’s lots of angles.” 
 
“I thought of that, Mike. For my money, it’s the most plausible idea I’ve had.” 
Pat stood up. “I want you to come upstairs with me. We have a friend of yours 
there that you might like to see.” 
 
A friend? I couldn’t begin to guess whom he was talking about. When I queried 
him about it he smiled and told me to be patient. He led me into a small room. 
Two detectives were there with a woman. Both of them fired questions at her, but 
received no answers. She sat with her back to the door and I didn’t recognize her 
until I stood in front of her. 
 
Friend, hell. She was the madam that ran out the night Hal and Eileen were 
killed. 
 
“Where did you pick her up, Pat?” 
 
“Not far from here. She was wandering on the streets at four A.M. and the 
patrolman picked her up on suspicion.” 
 
I turned to the madam. Her eyes were vacant from the long hours of 
questioning. She held her arms across her ample breasts in a defiant attitude, 
though I could see that she was near the breaking point. “Remember me?” I asked 
her. 
 
She stared at me through sleep-filled eyes a moment, then said dejectedly, “Yes, 
I remember.” 
 
“How did you get out of that house when it was raided?” 
 
“Go to hell.” 
 
Pat drew up a chair in front of her and sat backwards on it. He saw what I was 
driving at right away. “If you refuse to tell us,” Pat said quietly, “you’re liable to 
find yourself facing a charge for murder. And we can make it stick.” 
 
She dropped her arms at that one and licked her lips. This time she was scared. 
Then her fear passed and she sneered. “You go to hell, too. I didn’t kill them.” 
 
“Perhaps not,” Pat answered, “but the real killer left the same way you did. How 
do we know you didn’t show him the way? That makes you an accessory and you 
might just as well have pulled the trigger.” 
 
“You’re crazy!” Gone was the composure she had the first time I met her. She 
didn’t look respectable any more. By now her hair had a scraggly appearance and 
the texture of her skin showed through in the light. White, porous skin. She bared 
her teeth and swallowed. “I-I was alone.” 
 
“The charge will still stick.” 
 
Her hands fell into her lap and shook noticeably. “No. I was alone. I was at the 
door when the police came up. I knew what it was. I ran for the exit and left.” 
 
“Where is the exit?” I cut in. 
 
“Under the stairs. A button that works the panel is built into the woodwork.” 
 
I thought back fast. “All right, so you saw the cops coming. If you ran for the 
stairs the killer would have been coming down as you ran out. Who was it?” 
 
“I didn’t see anybody, I tell you! Oh, why don’t you let me alone!” Her nerve 
broke and she sank into the chair with her face buried in her hands. 

 
“Take her out,” Pat directed the two detectives. He looked at me. “What do you 
make of it?” 
 
“Reasonable enough,” I told him. “She saw us coming and beat it. But the killer 
had a little luck. We broke in about two minutes after the shooting. The rooms are 
soundproofed and no one heard the shots. The killer probably figured on mixing 
with the crowd and leaving when the show was over or before, if there was nobody 
at the door. He was coming down the stairs and heard us. 
 
“However, when the madam made a run for it those plans had to be tossed 
overboard. He ducked back long enough so the old hag didn’t see him and followed 
her through the secret panel. When we examine it I’ll bet we find that it doesn’t 
close very fast. We ran upstairs, you remember, and the others took care of the 
guests. The way we set the road block, the killer had time to get away before the 
policemen could take their places. We were in a hurry and didn’t have a chance to 
plan this thing.” 
 
I proved to be right. We went back to the house and looked for the panel. It was 
right where she said it was. The thing wasn’t too cleverly contrived. The button 
was built into the heart of a carved flower. It activated a one sixteenth horsepower 
motor connected to the electric circuit with a cutoff and a reverse. Pat and I 
entered the passage. Light seeping through the cracks in the wall was all we 
needed. When the place was redecorated this was built in. It ran back ten feet, 
took a sharp left turn and steps led down to the basement. There we were between 
walls. A door led into the basement of the house next door. When it was closed it 
looked like a part of the wall. 
 
It was a safe bet that the people in the house didn’t know that it was there 
themselves. The rest was easy. Out the basement door to an open yard that led to 
the street. The time consumed was less than a minute. We went through the 
passageway with a searchlight, not skipping an inch, but there wasn’t a clue to be 
found. Generally when someone was in haste he could be counted on to lose 
something or mark a trail. But no such luck. We went back to the waiting room 
and pulled out a smoke. 
 
“Well?” 
 
“Well what, Pat?” 
 
“Well, I guess you were right about the timing,” he laughed. 
 
“Looks that way. What did you get on Kines’ past, if anything?” 
 
“Reports from twenty-seven schools so far. He never spent more than a semester 
anywhere except at this last place. More often a month was enough. When he left 
there were several girls who’d dropped from the school too. Add it up and you get a 
nice tally. We’ve had a dozen men on the phone all day and they’re not half 
finished yet.” 
 
I thought that over and cursed Hal before I said, “What did he have in his 
pockets when the boys went over him?” 
 
“Nothing much. Fifty some in bills, a little loose change, a driver’s license and 
an owner’s certificate for his car. There were some club cards, too, but of the 
school. He went around clean. We found his car. It was empty except for a pair of 
silk panties in the glove compartment. By the way, how did he get in here if you 
had your eyes open?” 

 
I dragged on the butt, thinking over those that came in here. “Got me. He never 
came alone, that’s a sure thing. The only way he could have done it was to 
impersonate someone by stuffing pillows or something under his jacket, or…” I 
snapped my fingers. “Now I remember. A crowd of six or more came in and they 
blocked out a few others that were behind them. They all mingled at the foot of the 
steps and came in together to get off the street as fast as they could.” 
 
“Was he alone?” Pat waited anxiously for my answer. 
 
I had to shake my head. “I can’t say, Pat. It does seem funny that he would 
come in here deliberately with the murderer, knowing that he was going to get 
knocked off.” 
 
The afternoon was running into evening and we decided to call it a day. Pat and 
I separated outside and I drove home to clean up. The case was beginning to get 
on my nerves. It was like trying to get through a locked door with a bulldog tearing 
at you. 
 
So far I had investigated a lot of angles; now I had one more to go. I wanted to 
find out about that strawberry mark on a certain twin’s hip. 
 
I had my dinner sent up from a place down at the comer and polished off a 
quart of beer with it. It was nearly nine when I put in a call to the Bellemy 
apartment. A soft voice answered. 
 
“Miss Bellemy?” 
 
“Yes.” 
 
“This is Mike Hammer.” 
 
“Oh,” she hesitated a second, then. “Yes?” 
 
“Is this Mary or Esther?” 
 
“Esther Bellemy. What can I do for you, Mr. Hammer?” 
 
“Can I see you this evening?” I asked. “I have some questions I’d like to ask 
you.” 
 
“Can’t they be asked over the phone?” 
 
“Hardly. It would take too long. May I come up?” 
 
“All right. I’ll be waiting.” 
 
I thanked her and said good-bye, then climbed into my coat and went 
downstairs to my car. 
 
Esther was the replica of her sister. If there was a difference, I couldn’t see it. I 
hadn’t taken time to look for any the first time I met them. Probably all in the 
personality. Mary was strictly a nymphomaniac, now let’s see how this sister was. 
 
She greeted me cordially enough. She was wearing a dinner dress that was a 
simple thing, cunningly revealing the lovely lines of her body. Like Mary, she too 
had a tan and the appearance of having led an athletic life. Her hair was different. 
Esther had hers rolled up into a fashionable upsweep. That was the only thing I 
objected to. With me, a girl in upswept hair looks like she needs a pail and mop, 
ready to swab down the kitchen floor. But the way she was otherwise built more 
than made up for that objection. 
 
I took a seat on the divan I had before. Esther went to a cabinet and took out 
glasses and a bottle of Scotch. When she came back with the ice and had the 
drinks poured she said, “What is it you wanted me to tell you, Mr. Hammer?” 
 
“Call me Mike,” I said politely. “I’m not used to formalities.” 
 
“Very well, Mike.” We settled back with the drinks. 

 
“How well did you know Jack?” 
 
“Casually. It was a friendship that comes with constantly meeting after an 
introduction, but not an intimate one.” 
 
“And George Kalecki? How well did you know him?” 
 
“Not well at all. I didn’t like him.” 
 
“Your sister gave me the same impression. Did he ever make a pass at you?” 
 
“Don’t be silly.” She thought a moment before continuing. 
 
“He was grouchy about something the night of the party. Hardly sociable, I’d 
say. He didn’t strike me as being a gentleman. There was something about his 
manner that was repulsive.” 
 
“That isn’t unusual. He was a former racketeer. Still active in some circles, too.” 
 
When she crossed her legs I couldn’t think of anything more to ask her. Why 
don’t women learn to keep their skirts low enough to keep men from thinking the 
wrong things? Guess that’s why they wear them short. 
 
Esther saw my eyes following the outlines of her legs and made the same old 
instinctive motion of covering up. It didn’t do a bit of good. “On with the game,” 
she told me. 
 
“What do you do for a living, if you don’t mind?” I knew the answer already, but 
asked it just to have something to say. 
 
Her eyes glittered impishly. “We have a private income from stock dividends. 
Father left us his share in some mills down South. Why, are you looking for a rich 
wife?” 
 
I raised my eyebrows. “No. But if I were I’d be up here more often. What about 
your home? You have quite an estate, haven’t you?” 
 
“About thirty acres in lawn and ten in second-growth woods. A twenty-two-room 
house sits right in the middle surrounded by a swimming pool, several tennis 
courts and generally a round dozen ardent swains who never tire of telling me how 
lovely I am just to get their paws on half of it.” 
 
I whistled. “Hell, someone told me you occupied a modest residence.” Esther 
laughed gaily, the sound coming from deep in her throat. With her head tilted 
back like that she gave me the full view of her breasts. They were as alive as she 
was. 
 
“Would you like to visit me sometime, Mike?” 
 
I didn’t have to think that over. “Sure. When?” 
 
“This Saturday. I’m having quite a few up there to see a tennis match under 
lights at night. Myrna Devlin is coming. Poor girl, it’s the least I can do for her. 
She’s been so broken up since Jack died.” 
 
“That’s an idea. I’ll drive her up. Anybody else coming that I know?” 
 
“Charlotte Manning. No doubt you’ve met her.” 
 
“No doubt,” I grinned. 
 
She saw what I meant and wiggled a finger at me. “Don’t get any ideas like that, 
Mike.” 
 
I tried to suppress a smile. “How am I going to have any fun in a twenty-two-
room house if I don’t get ideas?” I teased her. 
 
The laugh in her eyes died out and was replaced by something else. “Why do 
you think I’m asking you up as my guest?” she said. 

 
I put my drink down on the coffee table, then circled it and sat down beside her. 
“I don’t know, why?” 
 
She put her arms around my neck and pulled my mouth down close to hers. 
“Why don’t you find out?” 
 
Her mouth met mine, her arms getting tighter behind me. I leaned on her 
heavily, letting my body caress hers. She rubbed her face against mine, breathing 
hotly on my neck. Whenever I touched her she trembled. She worked a hand free 
and I heard snaps on her dress opening. I kissed her shoulders, the tremble 
turned into a shudder. Once she bit me, her teeth sinking into my neck. I held her 
tighter and her breathing turned into a gasp. She was squirming against me, 
trying to release the passion that was inside her. 
 
My hand found the pull cord on the lamp beside the divan and the place was in 
darkness. Just the two of us. Little sounds. No words. There wasn’t need for any. 
A groan once or twice. The rustle of the cushions and the rasping sound of 
fingernails on broadcloth. The rattle of a belt buckle and the thump of a shoe 
kicked to the floor. Just the breathing, the wetness of a kiss. 
 
Then silence. 
 
After a bit I turned the light back on. I let my eyes rove. “What a little liar you 
are,” I laughed. 
 
She pouted. “Why do you say that?” 
 
“No strawberry mark—Mary.” 
 
She gave another chuckle and pulled my hair down in my face. “I thought you’d 
be interested enough to go looking for it.” 
 
“I ought to swat you.” 
 
“Where?” 
 
“Forget it. You’d probably like it.” 
 
I got up from the divan and poured a drink while Mary readjusted herself. She 
took the drink from me and polished it off in one gulp. I reached for my hat as I 
rose to leave. “Does that date still hold for Saturday?” I asked. 
 
“Damn well told,” she smirked, “and don’t be late.” 
 
I sat up late that night with a case of beer. We were coming around the turn 
into the home stretch now. With a spare pack of butts and the beer handy, I 
parked in the overstuffed rocker by the open windows and thought the thing out. 
Three murders so far. The killer still on the loose. 
 
Mentally, I tried to list the things that were still needed to clean up the case. 
First, what did Jack have that caused his death? Was it the books, or something 
else? Why did Hal die? Did he go to that house to kill her, to threaten her, to warn 
her? If the killer was someone I knew how did he follow him in without me seeing 
him? Plenty to go over here. Lots of probable answers. Which was right? 
 
And George Kalecki. Why was he on the loose? If he had no part in it there was 
no reason for him to lam. Why did he shoot at me—just because he knew I was 
after the killer? Possible, and very probable. He had every reason to be the one. 
 
There wasn’t a single person at the party who didn’t have the opportunity to kill 
Jack. But motive was another thing. Who had that? Myrna? —I’d say no. Purely 
sentimental reasons. 

 
Charlotte? Hell, no. More sentimental reasons. Besides, her profession didn’t go 
with crime. She was a doctor. Only a casual friend of Jack’s through Myrna’s 
sickness. No motive there. 
 
The twins, how about them? One a nymphomaniac, the other I never studied. 
Plenty of money, no troubles that I knew about. Where did they fit? Did Esther 
have a motive? Have to find out more about her. And the strawberry mark. Could 
Mary have been snubbed by Jack? Possible. The way she was, her passions could 
get the better of her. Could she have made a play for Jack, been rebuffed, then 
taken it out in murder? If so, why take the books? 
 
Hal Kines. He’s dead. 
 
Eileen Vickers. Dead. Too late to do anything about it now. 
 
Could there be two murderers? Could Hal have killed Jack, then killed Eileen, 
and been in turn killed with his own gun there in the room? A great possibility, 
except that there was no sign of a struggle. Eileen’s nude body. Was she 
professionally prepared to receive a visitor and surprised when her old lover 
walked in! Why? Why? Why? 
 
Where was the secret to all this hidden? Who did it? It wasn’t in Kalecki’s 
apartment; not in Jack’s, unless I couldn’t read signs any more. 
 
Was there an outsider? 
 
Hell. I finished another bottle of beer and set the empty down at my feet. I was 
slowing up. Couldn’t think any more. I wish I knew just where George Kalecki 
came in. That tie-up would prove important. To me, it looked as if the next step 
would be to find him. If Hal were alive ... 
 
I cut my thoughts short and slapped my leg. Damn, how could I be so simple. 
Hal hadn’t operated out of the city. He had been going to school. If he had any 
record of his operations they were there. And that might be exactly what I needed. 
 
As quickly as I could, I dressed. When I had my coat on I shoved an extra clip of 
cartridges in my pocket and phoned the garage to bring my car around. 
 
It was almost midnight, and a sleepy attendant drove up as soon as I got 
downstairs. I stuffed a dollar bill into his hand, hopped in and pulled away. 
Luckily, there was no traffic to worry about this time of night. I beat out a few 
lights and turned on the West Side Express Highway and headed north. Pat had 
told me the town the college was in. Ordinarily it was a good three hours’ drive 
from the city, but I didn’t intend to take that long. 
 
Twice the highway patrol came out of a cutoff after me, but they didn’t stay with 
my overpowered load very long. I was a little afraid that they might radio ahead to 
try to throw up a road block to stop me, but nothing happened. 
 
The signs told me when to turn and I got on an unkept country road that had so 
many ruts I had to slow down, but when the counties changed, so did the road. It 
changed into a smooth macadam, and I made the rest of the trip going full out. 
 
Packsdale was five miles ahead. The chamber of commerce sign said it was a 
town of thirty thousand and the county seat. Huba huba. The college wasn’t hard 
to find. It sat on a hill a mile north of town. Here and there some lights were lit, 
probably those in the corridors. I slammed on the brakes in time to swing into a 
gravel drive and roll up to an impressive-looking two-story house squatting a 
hundred feet back on the campus. The guy must have been in the army. Along the 
drive he had a yellow and black sign that read: Mr. Russell Hilbar, Dean of Men. 

 
The house was completely blacked-out, but that didn’t stop me. I put my finger 
on the bell and never took it off until the lights blazed up in the place and I could 
hear footsteps hurrying to the door. The butler stood there with his mouth open. 
He had thrown on his working jacket on top of a nightshirt. Most ridiculous sight I 
ever saw. Instead of waiting to be admitted and announced, I pushed into the 
room and nearly knocked over a tall distinguished guy in a maroon dressing robe. 
 
“What is this, sir? Who are you?” 
 
I flashed my badge and he squinted at it. “Mike Hammer, Investigator from New 
York.” 
 
“Aren’t you out of your territory?” he stormed. “What do you want?” 
 
“You had a student here named Harold Kines, didn’t you? I want to see his 
room.” 
 
“I’m afraid that’s impossible. Our county police are handling the affair. I’m sure 
they are capable. Now if you’ll please…” 
 
I didn’t let him go any further. “Listen, buddy,” I pounded on his chest with a 
stiffened forefinger, “it’s quite possible that right now there’s a murderer loose on 
this campus. If he isn’t a murderer he’s liable to be one if you don’t use your knob 
and tell me where I can find the room. And if you don’t,” I added, “I’ll smack you 
so hard you’ll spill your insides all over the joint!” 
 
Russell Hilbar backed up and grabbed the edge of a chair for support. His face 
had gone pasty white and he looked ready to faint. “I—I never thought…” he 
stammered, “…Mr. Kines’ room is on the lower floor in the east wing. The room 
number is 107, right on the southeast corner. But the county police have closed it 
pending a further investigation and I have no key.” 
 
“The hell with the county police. I’ll get in. Turn these lights off and don’t move 
out of the house. And stay away from the phone.” 
 
“But the students—will they…?” 
 
“I’ll take care of them,” I said as I closed the door. 
 
Outside I had to orientate myself to find the east wing. I picked a low 
rectangular building out to be the dorms and I wasn’t wrong. The grass muffled 
any sounds I made, and I crept up on the corner of the wing. I prayed silently that 
my hunch wasn’t wrong and that I wasn’t too late. As much as possible, I stayed 
in the shadows, working my way behind the bushes set against the wall. 
 
The window was shoulder high, and down all the way. I took off my hat and put 
my ear close to the pane, but I couldn’t detect any sound from inside. I took the 
chance. My fingers went under the sash and I pushed the window up. It slid 
without a creak. I jumped, and pulled myself into the room, then slid off the sill 
and landed on my face. 
 
That fall saved my life. Two shots blasted from the comer of the room. The slugs 
smashed into the window sill behind me and threw splinters in my face. For a brief 
moment the room was lit up with the weird red glow of the gunflash. 
 
My hand darted under my coat and came out with my rod. Our shots came 
almost together. I let three go as fast as my finger could pull the trigger. 
Something tugged at my jacket and I felt my ribs burn. There was another shot 
from across the room, but it wasn’t directed at me. It went off into the floor of the 
room and the guy that fired it followed it down. 

 
This time I didn’t take a chance. I jumped the gap between us and landed on a 
body. I kicked for the gun and heard it skid across the floor. Only then did I switch 
on the lights. 
 
George Kalecki was dead. My three shots had all caught him in the same place, 
right in the chest around the heart. But he had time to do what he came to do. In 
one comer, and still warm, was a pile of ashes in a green metal box. 
 
 
Chapter  11 
 
 
 
The next second there was a furious pounding on the door and voices raising 
cain outside. “Get away from that door and shut up,” I yelled. 
 
“Who’s in there?” a voice demanded. 
 
“Your uncle Charlie,” I shot back. “Now can that chatter and get the dean up 
here fast as you can and tell him to call the police.” 
 
“Watch the window, fellows,” the voice hollered. “The door is still sealed and he 
must have gone in that way. That’s it, Duke, take the rifle. No telling who it is.” 
 
These crazy college kids. If one of them got jumpy with that rifle I’d be a dead 
duck. I stuck my head out the window as four of them came tearing around the 
corner at top speed. When they saw me they stopped in a flurry of dust. I waved to 
the big tow-headed kid carrying a .22 repeater. “Come here, you.” 
 
He marched up to the window with the gun out in front of him like he was going 
to bayonet somebody. He was scared stiff. I palmed my tin and shoved it under his 
nose. “See this badge?” I said. “I’m a cop, New York. Now keep your noses out of 
here. If you want to do something, post a guard around the campus until the cops 
get here and don’t let anyone out. Understand?” 
 
The kid bobbed his head eagerly. He was glad to get away from there. The next 
second he was shouting orders all over the place. Good ROTC material. The dean 
came running up blowing like a sick horse. “What happened?” His voice nearly 
broke when he spoke. 
 
“I just shot a guy. Call the cops and be sure the kids stay out of here.” He took 
off like a herd of turtles and I was left alone save for the curious voices outside the 
door. What I had to do had to be done before a lot of hayseed county cops took 
over. 
 
I let George lay where he had fallen, taking time only to notice the gun. It was a 
.45, same as mine, and the one he had in his room when I searched it. I 
recognized a scratch on the butt. 
 
The green box was my next step. I sifted the ashes carefully, trying to determine 
what they had been. The blackened cover of a note pad lay on the bottom, but it 
dissolved into dust at my touch. These ashes had been one or more books. I would 
have given a million dollars to know what they had had in them. 
 
Not a word was visible, so thoroughly had George burned them. I looked around 
the spot on the floor where the box was originally. A few ashes were there, too. 
One was larger than the rest and not as well burned through. It had a string of 
numbers on it. I wondered how he concealed the fire. From outside it would have 
lit the room up as much as the overhead light would have. 

 
I found out in a moment. A throw rug lay on the floor. When I turned it over the 
underside was blackened. Stuck to the mesh of the weave was a half-page leaf of 
the paper. It would have gone well at a murder trial. George was named as the 
trigger man in a murder, and where the proof could be found was also revealed—
in a safe-deposit box in an uptown bank. It even gave the number and the code 
word. The key was in trust with the bank officer. 
 
So George was a murderer. I had always thought he went that far back in the 
old days. Well, here was something to prove it. At least it more than justified my 
self defense act in gunning him down. I tucked the charred bit into a small 
envelope I carry for things like this, addressed it to myself and put a stamp on it. 
This time I used the door. I broke the seal with my shoulder and nearly bowled 
over a half-dozen kids. When I shooed them away I looked around for a post box 
and found one at the end of the corridor. I dropped it in and went back to wait for 
the arrival of the cops. 
 
It was coming out now. Heretofore I thought Kalecki was the big wheel behind 
the syndicate, but now I could see that he was only a small part of it. Hal Kines 
had been the big shot. His methods were as subtle as those he used in obtaining 
his women. He went to enough trouble, but it was worth it. First he picked on 
guys with a dubious past, and ones against whom he wouldn’t run into much 
trouble obtaining evidence. When he compiled it, he presented the stuff, or a 
photostat, and made the guy work with him. If I could have gotten the information 
that was burned we could have broken the filthiest racket in the world. Too late 
now, but at least I had a start. Maybe there were duplicates in the strong box, but 
I doubted that. Hal probably kept his evidence in different boxes for different 
people. That way, if he had to put the pressure on the group, he could send a note 
to the cops to investigate such and such a box without having any of his others 
disturbed. Nice thinking. Very farsighted. 
 
I felt sort of good over having nailed Kalecki, but he still wasn’t the one I 
wanted. If this kept up there wouldn’t be anyone left at all. There was an outsider 
in this case. There had to be. One that nobody knew about, except, perhaps, those 
that were dead. 
 
The county police arrived with all the pomp and ceremony of a presidential 
inaugural address. The chief, a big florid-faced farmer, pranced into the room with 
his hand on the butt of a revolver and promptly placed me under arrest for 
murder. Two minutes later, after a demonstration of arm waving, shouting and 
bulldozing of which I did not think myself capable, he retreated hastily and just as 
promptly unarrested me. However, to soothe his ruffled feelings I let him inspect 
my private operator’s license, my gun permit and a few other items of 
identification. 
 
I let him listen to me put in the call to Pat. These county cops have no respect 
for authority outside their own limits, but when he got on the phone, Pat 
threatened him with calling the governor unless he cooperated with me. I gave him 
what details were necessary to keep him busy awhile, then took off for New York. 
 
Going back I took it easier. It was early morning when I stopped outside of Pat’s 
office and my eyes wouldn’t stay open. He was waiting for me nevertheless. As 
quickly as I could I gave him the details of the shooting. He dispatched a car 

upstate to get photographs and see if there was anything to be learned from the 
ashes of the burned notebooks. 
 
I didn’t feel like going home, so I called Charlotte. She was up and dressed for 
an early appointment. 
 
“Can you stay put until I get there?” I queried. 
 
“Certainly, Mike. Hurry up. I want to hear what happened.” 
 
“Be there in fifteen minutes,” I said, then hung up. 
 
It took thirty, traffic was pretty heavy. Charlotte was in the door while Kathy 
was dusting. She took my coat and hat and I headed for the sofa. I relaxed with a 
sigh, and she bent down and kissed me. I hardly had enough energy to kiss her 
back. With her there beside me I told the whole story. Charlotte was a good 
listener. When I finished she stroked my forehead and my face. 
 
“Is there anything I can do to help?” she asked. 
 
“Yeah. Tell me what makes a nymphomaniac.” 
 
“So? You’ve been to see her again!” Her answer was indignant. 
 
“Business, darling.” I wondered when I’d be able to stop using that line. 
 
Charlotte laughed. “That’s all right. I understand. As for your question, a 
nymphomaniac can be either a case of gradual development through environment 
or born into a person. Some people are oversexed, a glandular difficulty. Others 
can be repressed in childhood, and when they find themselves in an adult world, 
no longer the victim of senseless restrictions, they go hog wild. Why?” 
 
I evaded the why and asked, “Can the ones with emotional difficulty go bad?” 
 
“You mean, will they kill as a result of their emotional overload? I’d say offhand, 
no. They find an easier out for their emotions.” 
 
“For instance,” I parried. 
 
“Well, if a nymphomaniac showers a great deal of emotion on a person, then is 
rebuffed, instead of killing the one who spurned her, she simply finds another with 
whom to become emotionally entangled. It’s quicker, besides being more effective. 
If she suffers a loss of prowess from the rebuff, this new person renews her. See?” 
 
I got what she was driving at, but there was still something else. “Would it be 
likely for both the twins to be nymphomaniacs?” 
 
Charlotte gave me that delightful laugh. “Possible, but it doesn’t happen to be 
so. You see, I know them rather well. Not too well, but enough to determine their 
characters. Mary is beyond help. She likes to be the way she is. I daresay she has 
more fun than her sister, but Esther has seen so many of her escapades and 
helped her out of trouble, that she has a tendency to turn away from love affairs 
herself. Esther is a charming enough person, all right. Just about everything her 
sister has without the craze for men. When a man does drop into Esther’s life, 
shell take it naturally.” 
 
“I’ll have to meet her,” I said, sleepily. “By the way, are you going up to their 
place this weekend?” 
 
“Why yes, Mary invited me. I’ll be late getting there, but I won’t miss the game. 
However, I have to come back right after it. Are you going?” 
 
“Uh-huh. I’m going to drive Myrna up. That is, I still have to call her so she’ll 
know about it.” 
 
“Swell,” she said. That was the last word I heard. I fell into a sleep as deep as 
the ocean. 

 
When I awoke I glanced at my watch. It was nearly four in the afternoon. Kathy 
heard me stir and came into the room with a tray of bacon and eggs and coffee. 
 
“Heah’s yo’ breakfast, Mistah Hammah. Miss Charlotte tell me to take good care 
of ya’ll till she comes home.” Kathy gave me a toothy white smile and waddled out 
after setting the tray down. 
 
I gulped the eggs hungrily and polished off three cups of coffee. Then I called 
Myrna and she told me that it was okay to pick her up at ten A.M. Saturday. I 
hung up and poked around the bookshelves for something to read while I waited. 
Most of the fiction I had read, so I passed on to some of Charlotte’s textbooks. One 
was a honey called Hypnosis as a Treatment for Mental Disorders. I skimmed 
through it. Too wordy. It gave the procedure for putting a patient into a state of 
relaxation, inducing hypnosis, and suggesting treatment. That way, the patient 
later went about effecting his own cure automatically. 
 
That would have been a nice stunt for me to learn if I could do it. I pictured 
myself putting the eye on a beautiful doll and—hell, that was nasty. Besides, I 
wasn’t that bad off. I chose one that had a lot of pictures. This one was titled, 
Psychology of Marriage. Brother, it was a dilly. If it weren’t for the big words I 
would have enjoyed it. I wished they would write stuff like that in language for the 
layman. 
 
Charlotte came in when I was on the last chapter. She took the book out of my 
hand and saw what I was reading. “Thinking of anything special?” she asked. 
 
I gave her a silly grin. “Better get the low-down now while I’m able to. Can’t say 
how long I’m going to have the strength to hold off.” She kissed me and whipped 
me up a Scotch and soda. When I downed it I told Kathy to get my hat and coat. 
Charlotte looked disappointed. 
 
“Have to leave so soon? I thought you’d stay to dinner at least.” 
 
“Not tonight, honey. I have a job for my tailor and I want to get cleaned up. I 
don’t suppose you’d have a razor handy.” I pointed to the bullet hole in my coat. 
Charlotte got a little white when she saw how close it had come. 
 
“Are… are you hurt, Mike?” 
 
“Hell, no. Got a bullet burn across the ribs but it never broke the skin.” I pulled 
up my shirt to confirm it, then got dressed. The phone rang just then and she took 
it. 
 
She frowned once or twice, said, “Are you sure? All right, I’ll look into it.” When 
she hung up I asked her what the matter was. “A client. Responded to treatment, 
then lapsed into his former state. I think I’ll prescribe a sedative and see him in 
the morning.” She went to her desk. 
 
“I’ll run along then. Maybe I’ll see you later. Right now I want to get a haircut 
before I do anything else.” 
 
“Okay, darling.” She came over and put her arms around me. “There’s a place 
on the corner.” 
 
“That’ll do as well as any,” I told her between kisses. 
 
“Hurry back, Mike.” 
 
“You bet, darling.” 
 
Luckily, the place was empty. A guy was just getting out of the chair when I 
went in. I hung my coat on a hook and plunked into the seat. “Trim,” I told the 
barber. After he ogled my rod a bit, he draped me with the sheet and the clippers 

buzzed. Fifteen minutes later he dusted me off and I walked out of there slicked 
down like an uptown sharpie. I got the boiler rolling and turned across town to get 
on Broadway. 
 
I heard the sirens wailing, but I didn’t know it was Pat until the squad car shot 
past me and I saw him leaning out of the side window. He was too busy to notice 
me, but cut across the intersection while the cop on the corner held traffic back. 
Further down the avenue another siren was blasting a path northward. 
 
It was more a hunch than anything else, the same kind of a hunch that put me 
on the trail of George Kalecki. And this one paid off, too, but in a way I didn’t 
recognize at first. As soon as the cop on the corner waved us on, I followed the 
howl of police cars and turned left on Lexington Avenue. Up ahead I saw the white 
top of Pat’s car weaving in and out of the lanes. It slowed down momentarily and 
turned into a side street. 
 
This time I had to park a block away. Two police cars had the street barred to 
traffic at either end. I flashed my badge and my card to the patrolman on the 
corner. He let me pass and I hurried down to the little knot of people gathered 
outside a drugstore. Pat was there with what looked like the whole homicide 
bureau. I pushed my way through the crowd and nodded to Pat. I followed his eyes 
down to the crumpled figure on the sidewalk. Blood had spilled out of the single 
hole in the back, staining the shabby coat a deep maroon. Pat told me to go ahead 
and I turned the face around to see who it was. 
 
I whistled. Bobo Hopper would keep bees no longer. 
 
Pat indicated the body. “Know him?” 
 
I nodded. “Yeah. Know him well. His name is Hopper, Bobo Hopper. A hell of a 
nice guy even if he was a moron. Never hurt anything in his life. He used to be one 
of Kalecki’s runners.” 
 
“He was shot with a .45, Mike.” 
 
“What!” I exploded. 
 
“There’s something else now. Dope. Come over here.” Pat took me inside the 
drugstore. The fat little clerk was facing a battery of detectives led by a heavy-set 
guy in a blue serge suit. I knew him all too well. He never liked me much since I 
blew a case wide open under his very nose. He was Inspector Daly of the narcotics 
squad. 
 
Daly turned to me. “What are you doing here?” he demanded. 
 
“Same thing you are, I think.” 
 
“Well, you can start walking as of now. I don’t want any private noses snooping 
around. Go on, beat it.” 
 
“One moment, Inspector.” When Pat talked in that tone of voice he could 
command attention. Daly respected Pat. They were different kinds of cop. Daly had 
come up the hard way, with more time between promotions, while Pat had 
achieved his position through the scientific approach to crime. Even though they 
didn’t see eye to eye in their methods, Daly was man enough to give Pat credit 
where credit was due and listen to him. 
 
“Mike has an unusual interest in this case,” he continued. “It was through him 
we got as far as we have. If you don’t mind, I would like him to keep in close touch 
with this.” 

 
Daly glared at me and shrugged his beefy shoulders. “Okay. Let him stay. Only 
be sure you don’t withhold any evidence,” he spat at me. 
 
The last time I was involved in a case he was working on I had to play my cards 
close to my vest, but hanging on to the evidence I had led me to a big-time drug 
dealer we never would have nailed otherwise. Daly never forgot that. 
 
The head of the narcotics bureau was blasting away at the druggist and I picked 
up every word. “Once more now. Give me the whole thing and see what else you 
can remember.” 
 
Harried to the breaking point, the druggist wrung his pudgy hands and looked 
at the sea of faces glaring at him. Pat must have had the most sympathetic 
expression, so he spoke to him. 
 
“I was doing nothing. Sweeping out under the counter, maybe. That is all. This 
man, he walks in and says fill a prescription. Very worried he was. He hands me a 
broken box that has nothing written on the cover. He says to me he will lose his 
job and nobody will trust him if I can’t do it. He drops the box he was delivering 
and somebody steps on it and his prescription is all over the sidewalk. 
 
“This powder was coming out of the sides. I take it in the back and taste it yet, 
then test it. Pretty sure I was that I knew what was in it, and when I test it I was 
positive. Heroin. This should not be, so like a good citizen I phone the police and 
tell them what I have. They tell me to keep him here, but how do I know that he is 
not a gangster and will shoot me?” Here the little guy stopped and shuddered. 
 
“I have a family yet. I take my time, but he tells me to hurry up and puts his 
hand in a pocket. Maybe he has a gun. What can I do? I fill another box with boric 
acid, charge him a dollar and he walks out. I leave my counter to go see where he 
goes, but before I get to the door he falls to the sidewalk. He is shot. All the way 
dead. I call police again, then you come.” 
 
“See anyone running off?” Pat asked. 
 
He shook his head. “Nobody. At this time it is slow. Nobody on the street.” 
 
“Did you hear a shot?” 
 
“No. That I could not understand. I was too scared. I see the blood from the hole 
and I run back inside.” 
 
Pat stroked his chin. “How about a car. Did any go by at that time?” 
 
The little guy squinted his eyes and thought back. Once he started to speak, 
stopped, then reassured, said, “Y-yes. Now that you remind me, I think one goes 
by just before. Yes. I am sure of it. Very slow it goes and it was turning.” He 
continued hurriedly from here. “Like it was coming from the curb maybe. It goes 
past, then when I am outside it is gone. I don’t even look for it after that, so scared 
I am.” 
 
Daly had one of his men taking the whole thing down in shorthand. Pat and I 
had heard enough. We went outside to the body and checked the bullet angle. 
From the position of where it lay, the killer had been going toward Lexington when 
the shot was fired. The packet of boric acid, now a blood red, lay underneath 
Bobo’s hand. We patted the pockets. Empty. His wallet held eight dollars and a 
library card. Inside the coat was a booklet on the raising of bees. 
 
“Silencer,” Pat said. “I’ll give ten to one it’s the same gun.” 
 
“I wouldn’t take that bet,” I agreed. 
 
“What do you make of it, Mike?” 

 
“I don’t know. If Kalecki were alive it would involve him even deeper. First 
prostitution, now dope. That is, if Bobo was still working for Kalecki. He said not, 
and I believed him. I thought Bobo was too simple to try to deceive anybody. I’m 
not so sure now.” 
 
We both stared at the body a bit, then walked down the street a way by 
ourselves. I happened to think of something. 
 
“Pat.” 
 
“Uh-huh.” 
 
“Remember when Kalecki was shot at in his home? When he tried to put the 
finger on me?” 
 
“Yeah. What of it?” 
 
“It was the killer’s gun. The killer we want fired that shot. Why? Can you make 
anything out of it? Even then Kalecki was on the spot for something and he moved 
to town for his own protection. That’s what we want, the answer to the question of 
why he was shot at.” 
 
“That’s going to take some doing, Mike. The only ones that can tell us are dead.” 
 
I gave him a grin. “No. There’s still someone. The killer. He knows why. Have 
you anything to do right now?” 
 
“Nothing I can’t put off. This case will be in Daly’s hands for a while. Why?” 
 
I took his arm and walked him around the block to my car. We got in and 
headed toward my apartment. 
 
The mailman was just coming out when we got there. I opened my box and drew 
out the envelope I addressed to myself at the college and ripped it open. I 
explained to Pat I had to get the piece of charred evidence out of the hands of 
those hick cops while I could and he agreed that I did it right. 
 
Pat knew the ropes. He put in three phone calls and when we reached the bank 
a guard ushered us into the office of the president. By that time he had already 
received the court order by phone to permit us to inspect the box listed on the slip. 
 
It was there, all of it. Evidence enough to hang George Kalecki a dozen times 
over. I was really grateful now that I had put a slug into him. The guy was a rat, 
all right. He had his fingers in more than I had suspected. There were photostats 
of checks, letters, a few original documents, and plenty of material to indict George 
Kalecki for every vice charge there was, including a few new ones. But nothing 
else. Where George had gone there was no need for a court. Hal Kines had tied 
him up in a knot with both ends leading to the hot squat if he had tried to make a 
break. 
 
Pat ran over the stuff twice, then scooped them all into a large envelope, signed 
for it and left. Outside I asked, “What are you going to do with the junk?” 
 
“Go over it carefully. Maybe I can trace these checks even though they are made 
out to cash and don’t show the signature on the reverse side. How about you?” 
 
“Might as well go home like I planned. Why, got something else?” 
 
Pat laughed. “Well see. I had the idea you might be holding out on me, so I 
wasn’t going to tell you this, but since you’re still playing it square I’ll let you in on 
something.” 
 
He took a pad from his pocket and flipped it open. “Here’s some names. See if 
you know anything about them.” 
 
Pat cleared his throat. 

 
“Henry Strebhouse, Carmen Silby, Thelma B. Duval, Virginia R. Reims, Conrad 
Stevens.” Pat stopped and waited, looking at me expectantly. 
 
“Strebhouse and Stevens spent a stretch in the big house,” he said. “I don’t 
know the others. Think I saw the Duval girl’s name in the society columns once.” 
 
“You did. Well, you’re not much help, so I’ll tell you. Each one of these people is 
in city or private sanitariums. Dope fiends.” 
 
“That’s nice,” I mused. “How did it get out?” 
 
“Vice squad reported it.” 
 
“Yeah. I know they’ve been on something like that, but it’s funny it didn’t reach 
the papers. Oh, I get it. They haven’t found the source yet, huh? What is it?” 
 
Pat gave me a wry grin. “That’s what Daly would like to know. None of them will 
reveal it. Not even under threat of imprisonment. Unfortunately for us, some of 
them have connections too high up for us to try to extract information the hard 
way. We did get this, though, the stuff was delivered to them via a half-witted little 
guy who didn’t know from nothing.” 
 
I let my breath go out hard. “Bobo!” 
 
“Exactly. They’ll be able to identify him—if they will. Maybe his death will make 
them clam up even tighter.” 
 
“Damn,” I said softly, “and while they’re under treatment we can’t push them. 
Our hands are tied very neatly. There’s a tie-up, Pat, there has to be. Look how 
closely all this is connected. At first glance it seems to be loose as hell, but it’s not. 
Bobo and Kalecki… Hal and Kalecki… Hal and Eileen… Eileen and Jack. Either 
we’ve run into an outfit that had a lot of irons in the fire or else it was a chain 
reaction. Jack started it going and the killer knocked him off, but the killer had to 
cover up something else. From then on it was a vicious circle. Brother, have we 
run into something!” 
 
“You’re not kidding. And we’re standing right in the bottom of the well. Now 
what?” 
 
“Beats me, Pat. I see a little light now, a few things are falling into place.” 
 
“What?” 
 
“I’d rather not say. Just little things. They don’t point in any direction except to 
tell me that the killer has a damn good motive for all this.” 
 
“Still racing me, Mike?” 
 
“You can bet your pretty white tail on that! I think we’re in the home stretch, 
but the track is muddy now and bogging us down. We’ll have to plod through it to 
firmer ground before we can start whipping it up.” I grinned at him. “You won’t 
beat me out, Pat.” 
 
“What do you bet?” 
 
“A steak dinner.” 
 
“Taken.” 
 
I left him then. He grabbed a cab back to the office and I went up to my 
apartment. When I took off my pants I felt for my wallet. It was gone. That was 
nice. Had two hundred berries in my billfold and I couldn’t afford to lose it. I put 
my pants back on and went down to the car. Not there, either. I thought. I might 
have dropped it in the barber shop, but I paid that bill with change I had in my 
side pocket. Damn. 

 
I climbed back in the car and turned it over, then headed south to Charlotte’s 
apartment. The lobby door was open and I walked up. I rang the bell twice, but no 
one answered. Someone was inside, though, and I could hear a voice singing 
Swanee River. I pounded on the door and Kathy opened it up. 
 
“What’s the matter,” I asked her, “doesn’t the bell ring anymore?” 
 
“Sho’ nuff, Mistah Hammah. Ah think so. Come in. Come in.” 
 
When I walked in the door Charlotte came running out to meet me. She had on 
a stained smock and a pair of rubber gloves. “Hey, honey,” she smiled at me. “You 
sure made that trip fast. Goody, goody, goody.” She threw her arms around me 
and tilted her head for a kiss. Kathy stood there watching, her teeth flashing 
whitely in her mouth. 
 
“Go ’way,” I grinned. Kathy turned her back so I could kiss her boss. Charlotte 
sighed and laid her head against my chest. 
 
“Going to stay now?” 
 
“Nope.” 
 
“Oh… why? You just got here.” 
 
“I came to get my wallet.” I walked over to the sofa with her and ran my hand 
down behind the cushions. I found it. The darn thing had slipped out of my hip 
pocket while I was asleep and stuck there. 
 
“Now I suppose you’re going to accuse me of stealing all your money,” Charlotte 
pouted. 
 
“Idiot.” I kissed the top of her blonde head. 
 
“What are you doing in this outfit?” I fingered the smock. 
 
“Developing pictures. Want to see them?” She led me to her darkroom and 
turned out the lights. As she did so, a red glow came from the shield over the sink. 
Charlotte put some films in the developer, and in a few moments printed up a pic 
of a guy sitting in a chair, hands glued to the metal arms, and a strained 
expression on his face. She flicked the overhead on and looked over the photo. 
 
“Who’s this?” 
 
“A clinical patient. As a matter of fact, that is one that Hal Kines had released 
from the charity ward of the city hospital to undergo treatment in our clinic.” 
 
“What’s the matter with him? The guy looks scared to death.” 
 
“He’s in a state of what is commonly known as hypnosis. Actually there’s 
nothing more to it than inducing in the patient a sense of relaxation and 
confidence. In this case, the patient was a confirmed kleptomaniac. It wasn’t 
found out until he was admitted to the city ward after being found nearly dead of 
starvation on the streets. 
 
“When we got to the bottom of his mental status, we found that in childhood he 
had been deprived of everything and had to steal to get what he wanted. Through 
a friend, I got him a job and explained why he had been like that. Once 
understanding his condition, he was able to overcome it. Now he’s doing quite 
well.” 
 
I put the pic back in a rack and looked the place over. She had certainly spent 
enough fixing up the darkroom. I saw where I was going to have to earn more than 
I did to support a wife who had such a lavish hobby. 
 
Charlotte must have read my mind. “After we’re married,” she smiled, “I’ll give 
all this up and have my pictures developed at the corner drugstore.” 

 
“Naw, we’ll do all right.” She grabbed me and hung on. I kissed her so hard I 
hurt my mouth this time. It was a wonder she could breathe, I held her so tightly. 
 
We walked to the door arm in arm. “What about tonight, Mike? Where will we 
go?” 
 
“I don’t know. To the movies, maybe.” 
 
“Swell, I’d like that.” I opened the door. When I did I pointed to the chime 
behind it. “How come it doesn’t ring anymore?” 
 
“Oh, phooey.” Charlotte poked under the rug with her toe. “Kathy has been 
using the vacuum in here again. She always knocks out the plug.” I bent down 
and stuck it back in the socket 
 
“See you about eight, kitten,” I said as I left. She waited until I was nearly out of 
sight down the stairs, then blew me a kiss and shut the door. 
 
 
Chapter  12 
 
 
 
My tailor had a fit when he saw the bullet hole in my coat. I guess he was afraid 
he was coming close to losing a good customer. He pleaded with me to be careful, 
then told me he’d have the cloth rewoven by next week. I picked up my other suit 
and went home. 
 
The phone was ringing when I opened the door. I dropped the suit over the back 
of a chair and grabbed the receiver. It was Pat. 
 
“I just got a report on the bullet that killed Bobo Hopper, Mike.” 
 
“Go on.” I was all excited now. 
 
“Same one.” 
 
“That does it, Pat. Anything else?” 
 
“Yeah, I have Kalecki’s gun here, too. The bullet doesn’t fit except with the ones 
he let loose at you. We traced the serial number and it was sold down South. It 
went through two more hands and wound up in a pawnshop on Third Avenue 
where it went to a guy named George K. Masters.” 
 
So that was how George got the gun. No wonder there was no record of it before. 
Kalecki was his middle, and probably a family, name. I thanked Pat and hung up. 
Now why the hell would Kalecki be using that name? Not unless he was liable to 
be traced through his real one for a crime committed some time ago. At any rate, 
the question would have to remain unanswered unless Pat could make some sense 
out of the evidence we found in the safe-deposit box. You can’t prosecute a corpse. 
 
After I ate, I showered and was getting dressed when the phone went off again. 
This time it was Myrna. She wanted me to pick her up earlier, if I could, tomorrow 
morning. That was all right with me and I told her so. She still sounded pretty bad 
and I was glad to do what I could to help her out. Maybe the ride into the country 
would do her good. Poor kid, she needed something to cheer her up. The only 
thing that had me worried was that she might try going back on the junk again to 
get Jack’s death out of her mind. She was a smart girl. There were other ways. 
Some day she would settle down with a nice fellow and Jack would be but a 
memory. That’s the way nature made us. Maybe it’s best. 

 
Charlotte met me in front of the apartment house. When she saw me coming 
she tapped her foot impatiently as though she had been waiting an hour. “Mike,” 
she said fiercely, “you’re late. A whole five minutes. Explain.” 
 
“Don’t beat me with that whip,” I laughed. “I got held up in traffic.” 
 
“A likely excuse. I bet you were trying to see what makes a nymphomaniac tick 
again.” She was a little devil. 
 
“Shut up and climb in. Well never get a seat in the show otherwise.” 
 
“Where are we going?” 
 
“I’m in the mood for a good who-dun-it if you are. Maybe I can pick up 
something new in detecting techniques.” 
 
“Swell. Let’s go, Macduff.” 
 
We finally found a small theater along the stem that didn’t have a line outside a 
mile long, and we sat through two and a half hours of a fantastic murder mystery 
that had more holes in it than a piece of swiss cheese, and a Western that moved 
as slowly as the Long Island Rail Road during a snowstorm. 
 
When we got out I thought I had blisters on my butt. Charlotte suggested having 
a sandwich, so we stopped in a dog wagon for poached eggs on toast, then moved 
on down to a bar for a drink. I ordered beer, and when Charlotte did the same I 
raised my eyebrows. 
 
“Go ahead, get what you want. I got dough.” 
 
She giggled. “Silly, I like beer. Always have.” 
 
“Well, glad to hear it. I can’t make you out. An expensive hobby, but you drink 
beer. Maybe you aren’t going to be so hard to keep after all.” 
 
“Oh, if it comes to a pinch, I can always go back to work.” 
 
“Nothing doing. No wife of mine is going to work. I want her at home where I 
know where she is.” 
 
Charlotte laid her beer down and looked at me wickedly. “Has it ever occurred to 
you that you’ve never even proposed to me? How do you know I’ll have you?” 
 
“Okay, minx,” I said. I took her hand in mine and raised it to my lips. “Will you 
marry me?” 
 
She started to laugh, but tears came into her eyes and she pushed her face 
against my shoulder. “Oh, Mike, yes. Yes. I love you so much.” 
 
“I love you, too, kitten. Now drink your drink. Tomorrow night at the twins’ 
place we’ll duck the crowd and make some plans.” 
 
“Kiss me.” 
 
A couple of wise guys were watching me leeringly. I didn’t care. I kissed her easy 
like. 
 
“When do I get my ring?” she wanted to know. 
 
“Soon. I have a few checks coming in this week or next and we can go down to 
Tiffany’s and pick one up. How’s that?” 
 
“Wonderful, Mike, wonderful. I’m so happy.” 
 
We finished the beer, had another, then started out. The pair of wise guys threw 
me a “hey, hey” as I passed. I dropped Charlotte’s arm for a second, then put my 
hands on each side of their heads and brought them together with a clunk like a 
couple of gourds. Both the guys were sitting upright on their stools. In the mirror I 
could see their eyes. They looked like four agate marbles. The bartender was 

watching me, his mouth open. I waved to him and took Charlotte out. Behind me 
the two guys fell off their stools and hit the deck like wet rags. 
 
“My protector.” She squeezed my arm. 
 
“Aw shadup,” I grinned. I felt pretty good right then. 
 
Kathy was sleeping, so we tiptoed in. Charlotte put her hand over the chime to 
stop its reverberations, but even then we heard the maid stop snoring. She must 
have gone over on her back again because the snoring resumed. 
 
She took off her coat, then asked, “Want a drink?” 
 
“Nope.” 
 
“What then?” 
 
“You.” The next second she was in my arms, kissing me. Her breasts were 
pulsating with passion. I held her as closely as I could. 
 
“Tell me, Mike.” 
 
“I love you.” She kissed me again. I pushed her away and picked up my hat. 
 
“Enough, darling,” I said. “After all, I’m only a man. One more kiss like that and 
I won’t be able to wait until after we’re married.” She grinned and threw herself at 
me for that kiss, but I held her off. 
 
“Please, Mike?” 
 
“No.” 
 
“Then let’s get married right away. Tomorrow.” 
 
I had to smile. She was so damn adorable. “Not tomorrow, but very soon, honey, 
I can’t hold out much longer.” 
 
She held the chime while I opened the door. I kissed her lightly and slipped out. 
I could see where I wouldn’t get much sleep that night. When Velda heard about 
this she’d throw the roof at me. I hated to tell her. 
 
My alarm went off at six. I slapped the button down to stop the racket, then sat 
up and stretched. When I looked out the window the sun was shining—a beautiful 
day. A half-empty bottle of beer was on the night table and I took a swallow. It was 
as flat as a table-top mesa. 
 
After a shower I threw a robe around me and dug in the pantry for something to 
eat. The only box of cereal had teeth marks in it where a mouse had beaten me to 
it, so I opened a sack of potatoes and onions and stripped them into a pan of 
grease and let the whole mess cook while I made coffee. 
 
I burned the potatoes, but they tasted good just the same. Even my coffee was 
agreeable. This time next month I’d be eating across the table from a gorgeous 
blonde. What a wife she was going to make! 
 
Myrna was up when I called her. She said she’d be ready at eight and reminded 
me not to be late. I promised her I wouldn’t, then buzzed Charlotte. 
 
“Hello, lazy,” I yawned. 
 
“You don’t sound so bright yourself this time of the morning.” 
 
“Well, I am. What are you doing?” 
 
“Trying to get some sleep. After the state you left me in last night I didn’t close 
my eyes for three hours. I lay in bed wide awake.” 
 
That made me feel good. “I know what you mean. What time will you be at the 
Bellemy place?” 
 
“Still early in the evening unless I can break away sooner. At least I’ll be there 
for the game. Who is it that’s playing?” 

 
“I forget. A couple of fancy hot shots that Mary and Esther imported. I’ll be 
waiting for you to show up, so make it snappy.” 
 
“Okay, darling.” She kissed me over the phone and I gave her one back before I 
hung up. 
 
Velda wouldn’t be in the office yet, so I called her at home. When she answered I 
could hear a background of bacon sizzling on the fire. “Hello, Velda, Mike.” 
 
“Hey, what are you doing up so early?” 
 
“I have an important date.” 
 
“Anything to do with the case?” 
 
“Er… it may have, but I’m not sure. I can’t afford to miss it. If Pat calls, tell him 
I can be reached at the home of the Misses Bellemy. He has their number.” 
 
Velda didn’t answer at first. I knew she was trying to figure out what I was up 
to. “All right,” she said finally. “Just watch what you’re doing. Anything I can take 
care of while you’re gone?” 
 
“No, guess not.” 
 
“By the way, how long are you going to be gone this time?” 
 
“Maybe until Monday, maybe not.” 
 
“Very well, see you, Mike. So long.” 
 
I threw her a quick so long and put the phone on its chocks. Oh, how I hated to 
tell Velda about Charlotte! If only she wouldn’t cry. What the hell, that’s life. Velda 
just missed. If Charlotte hadn’t come along I would have tied up with her. I used 
to feel like I wanted to, but never had time. Oh, well. 
 
Myrna was dressed and ready when I arrived. She had packed a bag and I took 
it down to the car. She didn’t look too good. There were still dark spots under her 
eyes and her cheekbones were a little too prominent She had bought a new dress 
for the occasion, a nice flowered print, and under the light blue of the wool coat it 
made her face look lovely, that is, unless you looked too closely. 
 
I didn’t want to mention Jack at all, so we talked about the day and anything 
trivial that came up. I knew she had seen the front-page headlines about me 
knocking off Kalecki, but she avoided the subject. 
 
It was a nice day. Out of the city the roads were fairly empty and we rolled along 
at a conservative fifty. That way I didn’t have to bother about the highway patrol. 
We passed a few open lots where the kids were getting in an early ball game. I saw 
tears come into Myrna’s eyes when we passed some small cottages. I winced. She 
was taking it hard. 
 
Gradually I led the conversation around to the tennis match that night and got 
her mind off what she was thinking. It wasn’t long afterward that we pulled into 
the private drive of the Bellemy estate. I thought we were early, but there were two 
dozen others there before us. A row of cars ran along the side of the mansion and 
one of the twins came out to meet us. I didn’t know which one it was until she 
said, “Hello, sissy.” 
 
“Hello, Mary,” I said through a smile. She had on a halter and a pair of shorts 
that left nothing to the imagination. Both pieces were so tight every line of her 
body showed through and she knew it. I couldn’t get my eyes off her legs, and 
walking up to the house she kept brushing against me. 

 
That had to cease. I shifted Myrna’s grip over to keep a barrier between us and 
Mary broke out into a giggle. At the house she turned Myrna over to a maid, then 
turned to me. “Didn’t you bring some sport clothes along?” 
 
“Yup. But all the sports I intend to indulge in will be done at the bar.” 
 
“Nuts. Go get in a pair of slacks. There’s a golf game to be held behind the 
house and a lot of the kids are looking for partners for a tennis game.” 
 
“For Pete’s sake, I’m no athlete.” 
 
Mary stood off a few feet and looked me over from top to bottom. “You look like 
an athlete if I ever saw one.” 
 
“What kind?” I joked. 
 
“A bed athlete.” Her eyes said that she wasn’t joking. 
 
She walked back to the car with me to get my clothes. When we got in the house 
she showed me to a room, an oversized thing with a huge four-poster smack in the 
middle of it. 
 
Mary couldn’t wait until I closed the door. She flung herself at me and opened 
her mouth. Hell, couldn’t disappoint the hostess, so I kissed her. 
 
“Now scram while I get dressed,” I told her. 
 
“Her mouth went into a pout. “why?” 
 
“Look,” I tried to be convincing, “I don’t get undressed in front of women.” 
 
“Since when?” she asked impishly. 
 
“It was dark then,” I told her. “Besides, it’s too early for that.” 
 
I got another one of those sexy smiles. Her eyes were begging me to undress her. 
“Okay… sissy.” She closed the door behind her and I heard that deep-throated 
laugh. 
 
The gang outside was making a racket and I poked my head out the window to 
see what was up. Directly beneath me two underweight males were having a hair-
pulling match while four others egged them on. What a place. The two boys hit the 
dirt together and followed by a slap or two. I grinned. A couple of pansies trying to 
decide who would be Queen of the May. I drew a pitcher of water from the sink 
and let it go on their blonde heads. 
 
That ended the fight. They both let out a falsetto scream and got up running. 
The gang saw me and howled. It was a good gag. 
 
Mary met me downstairs. She was lounging against the porch railing smoking a 
cigarette. I came out in slacks and a sweat shirt and tossed her a hello. Myrna 
joined us at the same time swinging a tennis racket against her legs. I could see 
that Mary was disappointed at not getting me alone. The three of us walked across 
the lawn to the courts with Mary hanging on to my arm. Before we quite reached 
there another edition of her stepped out of a group of players and waved to us. 
Esther Bellemy. 
 
She was another to make your mouth drool. She recognized me immediately 
and offered a firm handshake. Her manner was cool and reserved. I saw what 
Charlotte meant when she said Esther wasn’t like her sister. However, there 
seemed to be no resentment or jealousy. Esther had her admirers, too. We were 
introduced all around to a lot of people whose names I forgot as soon as I met 
them, and Mary carted me off to a vacant court for a game of singles. 
 
Tennis wasn’t in my line, she found out. After a hectic ten minutes I had batted 
the balls over the fence and we gathered them up and put them in a box and laid 

the rackets down. Mary sat on a bench beside me with her brown legs stuck out in 
front of her while I cooled off. 
 
“Why are we wasting time out here, Mike? Your room is so much nicer.” 
 
Some dame. “You rush things, Mary. Why aren’t you more like your sister?” 
 
She gave me a short laugh. “Maybe I am.” 
 
“How do you mean?” 
 
“Oh, nothing, I guess. But Esther keeps her eyes open, too. She’s no virgin.” 
 
“How do you know?” 
 
Mary giggled and folded her knees under her hands. “She keeps a diary.” 
 
“I bet yours is a lot thicker,” I said. 
 
“Uh-huh, lots.” 
 
I took her hand and pulled her from the bench. “Come on, show me where the 
bar is.” 
 
We took a flagstone path back to the house and entered through a pair of 
French windows. The bar was built off a trophy room that was well packed with 
cups and medals, decorated with live-oak paneling and blown-up photographs of 
the Bellemy sisters winning everything from a golf game to a ski jump. They 
certainly were an active pair. The curious thing about it was that they didn’t like 
publicity. I wondered where the rumor started that they were looking for 
husbands. Husbands that would satisfy, maybe. 
 
I guess Mary gave me up as hopeless for a while. She left me with a bartender 
who sat at the end of the thirty-foot bar reading a stack of comic magazines, 
getting up only long enough to pour me a fresh drink every time I emptied my 
glass. 
 
Several times I had company, but not for long. Myrna came in once, then left 
after a few pleasant words. Some other tootsies tried their hand at making a 
strange face but were dragged off by their boy friends who chased them into the 
bar. One of the pansies I doused did his bit, too, and all it took to get him out was 
a strong hand on the seat of his shorts and another around his neck. The whole 
deal was getting very monotonous. I wished Charlotte would get here. I thought I’d 
have a nice time with Mary, but compared to Charlotte she was a flop. Mary only 
had sex. Charlotte had that—plus a lot more. 
 
I managed to sneak out without the bartender seeing me and found my room. 
There I changed back to my street clothes, patted old junior under my arm and lay 
down on the bed. Now I felt normal. 
 
The drinks did more to me than I thought. I didn’t pass out, I simply fell asleep, 
but quick. The next thing I knew someone was shaking me and I looked up into 
the prettiest face in the world. Before my eyes were all the way open, Charlotte 
kissed me, then mussed my hair. 
 
“Is this the way you greet me? I thought you’d be at the gate waiting for me with 
open arms.” 
 
“Hello, beautiful,” I said. 
 
I pulled her down on the bed and kissed her. “What time is it?” She looked at 
her watch. 
 
“Seven-thirty.” 
 
“Holy cowl I slept the whole day out practically!” 

 
“I’ll say you have. Now get dressed and come downstairs for dinner. I want to 
see Myrna.” 
 
We got up and I saw her to the door, then washed my face and tried to smooth 
the wrinkles out of my coat. When I thought I was presentable enough I went 
downstairs. Mary saw me and waved me over. “You’re sitting by me tonight,” she 
told me. 
 
The crowd was beginning to file in and I found the place card with my name on 
it. Charlotte was sitting directly opposite me at any rate. I felt much better at that. 
The two of them ought to be fun unless Mary started playing kneesy under the 
table. 
 
Charlotte sat down with a smile and Myrna was next to her. Through the 
appetizer they spoke to each other earnestly, laughing occasionally over some 
private joke. 
 
I glanced down the table to see if there was anyone I knew. One face seemed 
fairly familiar, although I couldn’t place it. He was a short, skinny guy, dressed in 
a dark grey flannel. His only conversation was with the heavy-set woman opposite 
him. There was so much chatter at the table I couldn’t get a line on what they 
were talking about, but I saw him sneak a few side glances my way. 
 
He happened to turn his full face toward me for a moment, then I recognized 
him. He was one of the men I had seen going into Madam June’s call house the 
night of the raid. 
 
I nudged Mary and she quit talking to the guy on her other side long enough to 
look my way. “Who’s the squirt down at the end?” I asked, motioning with my fork. 
 
Mary picked him out and said, “Why, that’s Harmon Wilder, our attorney. He’s 
the one who invests our money for us. Why?” 
 
“Just curious. I thought I recognized him.” 
 
“You should. He used to be one of the best criminal lawyers in the country 
before he gave it up for a private practice in something less sensational.” 
 
I said, “Oh,” then returned to my food. Charlotte had found my foot under the 
table and tapped it with her toe. Behind the table the lawn was moon-lit—a perfect 
night. I’d be glad when supper was over. 
 
Mary tried me out in conversation all too suggestive. I saw Charlotte give her a 
glance that was full of fire, winked, then cut Mary off pretty sharply. She sort of 
got the idea that something was up between me and Charlotte and whispered into 
my ear. “I’ll get you tonight, big stuff—after she’s gone.” 
 
She yelped when I stuck my elbow in her ribs. 
 
Dinner ended when one of the fruits fell out of his chair at the table’s end. Right 
after that there was a lot of noise and the two tennis players who were to be 
featured in the game that night stood up and toasted success to each other with 
glasses of milk. 
 
I managed to get through to Charlotte and took Myrna and her out to the courts 
together. A lot of cars were driving up, probably some neighbors invited just for 
the game. The floodlights had been turned on over the sunbaked clay, and 
bleacher seats had been erected sometime during the latter part of the afternoon 
while I was asleep. 
 
There was a general scramble for seats and we missed. Charlotte and Myrna 
spread their handkerchiefs down on the grass along the border of the playing field 

and we waited while the crowd got six deep behind us. I had never seen a real 
tennis game, but from what I had seen, I didn’t think there were that many people 
who liked the game. 
 
There were announcements over a portable loud-speaker and the players took 
their places. Then they went into action. I had more fun watching the spectators’ 
heads going back and forth like a bunch of monkeys on sticks than I did the game 
itself. 
 
These boys were pretty good. They worked up a terrific sweat but they kept after 
that ball, running themselves ragged. Occasionally there would be a spectacular 
play and the crowd would let out a cheer. On a high bench, the referee announced 
the score. 
 
Myrna kept pressing her hand to her head, then between sets she excused 
herself to Charlotte and me saying that she wanted to go to the cloakroom and get 
an aspirin. 
 
No sooner had she left when Mary plunked herself down in the same spot beside 
me and started her routine. I waited for Charlotte to start something, but she 
merely smiled grimly and let me fight it out myself. 
 
Mary tapped her on the shoulder. “Can I borrow your man a few minutes? I 
want him to meet some people.” 
 
“Sure, go ahead.” Charlotte winked gaily at me and made believe she was 
pouting, but she knew she had me. From now on Charlotte had nothing to worry 
about. Just the same I felt like throttling Mary. Just sitting there had been nice. 
 
We wormed out through the gang who had moved up to take new places and 
stretch themselves between sets. Mary took me around to the other side, then 
started walking toward the woods. 
 
“Where’re the people you wanted me to meet?” I asked. 
 
Her hand groped for mine in the darkness. “Don’t be silly,” she answered. “I just 
want you to myself for a while.” 
 
“Look, Mary,” I explained, “it’s no good. The other night was a mistake. 
Charlotte and I are engaged. I can’t be fooling around with you. It isn’t fair to 
either of you.” 
 
She tucked her arm under mine. “Oh, but you don’t have to marry me. I don’t 
want that. It takes all the fun out of it.” 
 
What was I going to do with a woman like that? “Listen,” I told her, “you’re a 
nice kid and I like you a lot, but you are a serious complication to me.” 
 
She let my arm go. We were under a tree now, and it was pitch black. I could 
barely see the outline of her face. The moon which not so long ago had been out in 
full brilliance had disappeared behind a cloud. I kept talking to her, trying to 
dissuade her from putting a line on me, but she didn’t answer. She hummed 
snatches from a tune I heard her breathing in the darkness, but that was all. 
 
When I had about exhausted myself, she said, “Will you kiss me just once more 
if I promise to let you alone?” 
 
I breathed a little easier. “Sure, honey. Just one more kiss.” 
 
Then I stretched out my arms to hold her to kiss, and I got the shock of my life. 
The little devil had taken off all her clothes in the darkness. 
 
That kiss was like molten lava. I couldn’t push her away, nor did I want to now. 
She clung to me like a shadow, squirming and pulling at me. The sound of the 

crowd cheering the game a hundred yards away dimmed to nothingness and all I 
could hear was the roaring in my ears. 
 
The game was almost over when we got back. I scrubbed the lipstick away from 
my mouth and dusted off my clothes. Mary saw her sister and was gracious 
enough to let me alone for a while, so while I still had the chance I skirted the 
crowd and tried to find Charlotte. She was where I had left her, only she had 
gotten tired of sitting down. She and a tall youngster were splitting a coke 
together. That made me mad. 
 
Hell, I was a fine one to be pulling a jealousy stunt after what I just did. I called 
to her and she came back to me. 
 
“Where have you been?” 
 
“Fighting,” I lied, “fighting for my honor.” 
 
“You look it. How did you make out? Or shouldn’t I ask?” 
 
“I did it all right. It took time though. You been here all the time?” 
 
“Yep. Just like a good little wife, I sit home while my husband is out with other 
women,” she laughed. 
 
The shout that ended the tennis game came simultaneously with the scream 
from the house. That scream stifled any cheer that might have been given. It rang 
out in the night again and again, then dwindled off to a low moan. 
 
I dropped Charlotte’s hand and ran for the house. The bartender was standing 
in the doorway as white as a sheet. He could hardly talk. He pointed up the stairs 
and I took them two at a time. 
 
The first floor opened on the cloakroom, an affair as big as a small ballroom. 
The maid was huddled on the floor, out like a light Beyond her was Myrna, a 
bullet hole clean through her chest. She still had her hands clutched futilely 
against her breasts as though to protect herself. 
 
I felt her pulse. She was dead. 
 
Downstairs the crowd was pounding across the lawn. I shouted to the bartender 
to shut the doors, then grabbed the phone and got the gatekeeper. I told him to 
close the gates and not let anyone out, hung up, and dashed downstairs. I picked 
out three men in overalls whom I had taken for gardeners and asked them who 
they were. 
 
“Gardener,” one said. The other was a handyman on the estate and the third 
was his helper. 
 
“Got any guns around here?” They nodded. “Six shot guns and a 30.30 in the 
library,” the handyman said. 
 
“Then get ’em,” I ordered. “There’s been a murder upstairs and the killer is 
someplace on the grounds. Patrol the estate and shoot anybody you see trying to 
get away. Understand?” 
 
The gardener started to argue, but when I pulled my badge on him, he and the 
others took off for the library, got the guns, returned a minute later and shot out 
the door. 
 
The crowd was gathered in front. I stepped outside and held up my hand for 
silence. When I told them what had happened there were a few screams, a lot of 
nervous talk, and everyone in general had the jitters. 
 
I held up my hand again. “For your own benefit you had better not try to leave. 
There are men posted with orders to shoot if anyone tries to run for it. If you are 

wise, you’ll find someone who was standing near by you during the game and have 
an alibi ready. Only don’t try to dummy one because it won’t work. Stay here on 
the porch where you can be reached at a moment’s notice.” 
 
Charlotte came in the door, her face white, and asked, “Who was it, Mike?” 
 
“Myrna. The kid has nothing to worry about any more. She’s dead. And I have 
the killer right under my nose someplace.” 
 
“Can I do something, Mike?” 
 
“Yeah. Get the Bellemy sisters and bring them to me.” 
 
When she went for them I called for the bartender. Shaking like a leaf he came 
over to me. “Who came in here?” 
 
“I don’ see nobody, boss. I see one girl come in. I never see her come out ’cause 
she’s daid upstairs.” 
 
“Were you here all the time?” 
 
“Yassuh. All de time. I watch for the folks to come in heah for a drink. Then I 
goes to the bar.” 
 
“What about the back door?” 
 
“It’s locked, boss. Only way is in through heah. Don’ nobody come in ’cept de 
girl. She’s daid.” 
 
“Quit saying that over and over,” I stormed. “Just answer my questions. Did you 
leave here for a second?” 
 
“Nosuh, boss, not hardly a second.” 
 
“What’s not hardly?” 
 
The kid looked scared. He was afraid to commit himself one way or another. 
“Come on, speak up.” 
 
“I got me a drink once, boss. Just beer, that’s all. Don’t tell Miss Bellemy.” 
 
“Damn,” I said. That minute was time enough to let a murderer in here. 
 
“How quickly did you come back? Wait a minute. Go in there and get a beer. Let 
me see how long it took you.” The bartender shuffled off while I timed him. Fifteen 
seconds later he was back with a bottle in his hand. 
 
“Did you do it that fast before? Think now. Did you drink it here or in there?” 
 
“Here, boss,” he said simply, pointing to an empty bottle on the floor. I yelled to 
him not to move, then ran for the back of the house. The place was built in two 
sections, this part an addition to the other. The only way in was through the 
French windows to the bar and the back door, or the one connecting door to the 
other section. The windows were bolted. So was the back door. The twin doors 
between the two sections of the building were firmly in place and locked. I looked 
for other possible entries, but there were none. If that were so I could still have the 
killer trapped somewhere inside. 
 
Quickly, I raced up the stairs. The maid was recovering and I helped her to her 
feet. She was pasty-faced and breathing hard, so I sat her down on the top step as 
Charlotte came in with the twins. 
 
The maid was in no condition to answer questions. I shouted down to Charlotte 
to call Pat Chambers as fast as she could and get him up here. He could call the 
local cops later. Mary and Esther came up and took the maid out of my hands and 
half carried her downstairs to a chair. 
 
I went into the murder room and closed the door after me. I didn’t worry about 
fingerprints. My killer never left any. 

 
Myrna had on her blue coat, though I couldn’t see why. The night was far too 
warm for it. She lay in front of a full-length mirror, doubled up. I looked closely at 
the wound. Another .45. The killer’s gun. I was bent down on my knees looking for 
the bullet when I noticed the stuff on the rug. A white powder. Around it the nap 
of the carpet had been ruffled as though someone had tried to scoop it up. I took 
an envelope from my pocket and got some of the grains inside. I felt the body. It 
was still warm. But then, at this temperature, rigor mortis wouldn’t set in until 
late. 
 
Myrna’s hands were clenched together so tightly I had difficulty working my 
fingers under hers. She had clawed at her coat trying to hold the wound, and 
fibers of wool were caught under her fingernails. She had died hard, but fast. 
Death was merciful. 
 
I felt under the coat, and there in the folds of the cloth was the bullet, a .45. I 
had my killer here. All I had to do was find him. Why he should kill Myrna was 
beyond me. She was as far out of the case as I was. The motive. The motive. What 
the hell kind of a motive was it that ate into so many people? The people the killer 
reached out and touched had nothing to give. They were all so different. 
 
Jack, yes. I could see where he’d got mixed up in murder, but Myrna, no. Look 
at Bobo. Nothing could make me believe he was part of the picture. Where was 
motive there? Dope, he had been delivering it. But the connection. He never lived 
long enough to tell where he got the package or to whom it was going. 
 
I shut the door softly behind me out of respect for the dead. Esther Bellemy had 
the maid in a chair at the foot of the stairs trying to comfort her. Mary was 
pouring herself a stiff whisky, her hands trembling. This hit her hard, whereas 
Esther was well composed. Charlotte came in with a cold compress and held it 
against the maid’s head. 
 
“Can she talk yet?” I asked Charlotte. 
 
“Yes, I think so. Just be easy with her.” 
 
I knelt in front of the maid and patted her hand. “Feel better?” She nodded. 
“Good, I just want to ask you a few questions, then you can lie down. Did you see 
anyone come or go?” 
 
“No. I—I was in the back of the house cleaning up.” 
 
“Did you hear a shot?” 
 
Another negative. 
 
I called over to the black man. “What about you, hear anything?” 
 
“Nosuh, I don’ heah nuthin’.” 
 
If neither had heard the shot, then the silencer must still be on the .45. And if 
the killer had it around, we’d find it. That kind of a rig is too big to hide. 
 
I went back to the maid. “Why did you go upstairs?” 
 
“To straighten out the clothes. The women had left them all over the bed. That’s 
when I saw the b-body.” She buried her face in her hands and sobbed quietly. 
 
“Now, one more thing, did you touch anything?” 
 
“No, I fainted.” 
 
“Put her to bed, Charlotte; see if you can find something to make her sleep. 
She’s pretty upset.” 
 
Between Charlotte and Esther they half dragged the maid to bed. Mary Bellemy 
was pouring one drink after another in her. She wouldn’t be standing up much 

longer. I took the bartender aside. “I’m going upstairs. Don’t let anyone in or out 
unless I say so, you hear? You do and you’ll wind up in jail yourself.” I didn’t have 
to say anything else. He stammered out a reply that I didn’t get, then locked and 
bolted the front door. 
 
My killer had to be somewhere around. He had to leave through the front door 
unless he went out an upstairs window. Everything else was locked up tightly. But 
except for the little bit of time the bartender was away from the door, someone was 
there. That time had been enough to let the killer in, but not enough to let him 
back out again. Not without being seen by the bartender, that is. If he had seen 
someone and had been told to keep his mouth shut, I would have known it. I 
could swear that he was telling the truth. Besides, my killer would have knocked 
him off as well, and as easily, rather than take the risk of exposure. 
 
From the top of the stairs, the hall crossed like a T. Doors opened off the one 
side, and each proved to be a guest room. I tried the windows. Locked. I went up 
and down both ends of the T trying to find where the exit was. Each room I 
inspected and searched with my rod in my fist, waiting, hoping. 
 
The murder room was the last room I tried. And that’s where the killer got out. 
The window slid up easily, and I looked down fifteen feet to a flagstone walk below. 
If he had jumped he wouldn’t be walking now. The drop was enough to break a 
leg, especially on those stones. Around the building and directly under the window 
ran a narrow ledge. It projected out about eight inches from the wall and was 
clean of dust or dirt on both sides of the window. I lit a match and looked for heel 
marks in the concrete of the ledge, but there were none. Not a mark. This was 
enough to drive me nuts. 
 
Even the eight inches wasn’t enough to walk across on barefaced brick. I tried 
it. I got out on the ledge and tried first to walk along with my face to the wall, then 
with my back to it. In both cases I almost took a spill. It would take a real athlete 
to cross that. Someone who was part cat. 
 
Inside the room, I pulled the window down and went back to the hall. At either 
end a window overlooked the grounds. I didn’t see it at first, but when I stuck my 
head out there was a fire-escape ladder built into the wall adjacent to the window. 
Oh, how pretty if it could be done. The killer strikes, then out the window to the 
ledge, and around to the fire escape. Now I had an acrobat on my hands. Swell, 
more headaches. 
 
I went downstairs and took the bottle away from Mary in time to salvage a drink 
from the wreckage and ease her into a chair. She was dead drunk. 
 
A half hour later I had still gotten nowhere when I heard the pounding of feet 
outside and told the bartender to open up. 
 
Pat and his staff walked in escorted by some county police. How that guy could 
get around the red tape of city limitations and restrictions was beyond me. He 
went upstairs at once, listening as I gave him the details. 
 
I finished as he was bent over the body. The county coroner bustled in, declared 
the girl officially dead and made out a report. “How long since she died?” Pat 
asked. 
 
The coroner hemmed and hawed, then said, “Roughly, about two hours. This 
warm weather makes it difficult to place the time exactly. Tell better after an 
autopsy.” 

 
Two hours was close enough. It had happened while I was out in the bushes 
with Mary Bellemy. 
 
Pat asked me, “Everyone here?” 
 
“Guess so. Better get a guest list from Esther and check up. I posted guards 
around the wall and at the gate.” 
 
“Okay, come on downstairs.” 
 
Pat herded the entire group of them into the main room in the other section of 
the building. He had them packed in like sardines. Esther gave him a guest list 
and he read off names. As each one heard his name called, he sat on the floor. The 
detectives watched closely to be sure none of them moved until they were 
supposed to. Half the group was seated when Pat called out “Harmon Wilder.” 
 
No answer. He tried again, “Harmon Wilder.” Still no answer. My little friend had 
vanished. Pat nodded to a detective who moved to a phone. The manhunt was on. 
 
Six names later Pat sang out, “Charles Sherman.” He called it three more times 
and no one answered. That was a name I hadn’t heard before. I walked over to 
Esther. 
 
“Who is this Sherman?” 
 
“Mr. Wilder’s assistant. He was here during the game. I saw him.” 
 
“Well, he’s not here now.” 
 
I relayed the information to Pat and another name went out to call cars and 
police stations. Pat read down the list; when he was done there were still twenty 
standees. Gate crashers. You find them everywhere. The total number crammed 
into that house was over two hundred and fifty persons. 
 
Pat assigned a certain number to each detective and some to me. Because I had 
been on the scene he let me take all the servants, the twins, Charlotte, and ten 
others from the party. Pat took the gate crashers for himself. As soon as he gave 
out the list, he quieted the assembly and cleared his throat. 
 
“Everyone present here is under suspicion for murder,” he said. “Naturally, I 
know that you all couldn’t have done it. You are to report to each of my men as 
your name is called. They will speak to you separately. What we want is your alibi, 
whom you were with at the game, or wherever you were”—he checked his watch—
“two hours and fifty minutes ago. If you can vouch for someone standing near you, 
do it. By doing so you are only insuring your own alibi. I want the truth. Nothing 
else. We will catch you if you try falsifying your statements. That is all.” 
 
I collected my group and took them out on the porch. The household help I 
disposed of first. They had all been together and spoke for one another. The ten 
new faces assured me that they had been with certain parties and I took their 
statements. Mary had been with me, so she was out. Esther had been beside the 
referee’s stand most of the time and this was corroborated by the rest. I shooed 
them away, Esther leading her still half-out sister. I saved Charlotte until last so 
we could have the porch together. 
 
“Now you, kitten,” I said. “Where were you?” 
 
“You have a nerve,” she said laughingly. “Right where you left me.” 
 
“Aw, don’t get sore, baby, I was trapped.” 
 
I kissed her and she said, “After that all is forgiven. Now I’ll tell you where I was. 
Part of the time I was sipping a coke with a nice young gentleman named Fields, 

and part of the time exchanging witticisms with a rather elderly wolf. I don’t know 
his name, but he was one of those that weren’t on the list. He has a spade beard.” 
 
I remembered him. I put down “spade beard,” no name. Charlotte stayed close 
to me as we walked back into the room. Pat was picking up the list as his men 
finished and cross-checking them to see if the stories held water. A couple had the 
names confused, but they were soon adjusted. When all were in we compared 
them. 
 
Not a single one was without an alibi. And it didn’t seem sensible that Wilder 
and Sherman should have run off—they had been accounted for, too. Pat and I let 
out a steady stream of curses without stopping. When we got our breaths Pat 
instructed his men to get names and addresses of everyone present and told them 
to inform the guests that they had better stay within reaching distance or else. 
 
He was right. It was practically an impossibility to hold that many people there 
at once. It looked like we were still following a hopeless trail. 
 
Most of the cars left at once. Pat had a cop handing out the coats since he didn’t 
want anyone messing up the murder room. I went up with Charlotte to get hers. 
The cop pulled out her blue job with the white wolf collar and I helped her into it. 
 
Mary was still out so I didn’t say good-bye to her. Esther was at the door 
downstairs, as calm as ever, seeing the guests out, even being nice to the ones 
that didn’t belong there. 
 
I shook hands with her and told her I’d see her soon and Charlotte and I left. 
Instead of driving up, she had taken the train, so we both got into my car and 
started back. 
 
Neither one of us spoke much. As the miles passed under my wheels I got 
madder and madder. The circle. It started with Jack and had ended with him. The 
killer finally got around to Myrna. It was crazy. The whole pattern was bugs. Now 
my motive was completely shot to hell. Myrna fitted in nowhere. I heard a sob 
beside me and caught Charlotte wiping tears from her eyes. That was easy to see. 
She had taken a liking to Myrna. 
 
I put my arm around her and squeezed. This must seem like a nightmare to her. 
I was used to death sitting on my doorstep, she wasn’t. Maybe when the dragnet 
brought in Wilder and Sherman there would be an answer to something. People 
just don’t run away for nothing. The outsider. The answer to the question. Could 
either of them have been the outsider that belonged in the plot? Very possible. It 
seemed more possible now than ever. Manhunt. The things the cops were best at. 
Go get them. Don’t miss. If they try to run, kill the bastards. I don’t care if I don’t 
get them myself, so long as someone does. No glory. Justice. 
 
When I stopped in front of Charlotte’s place I had to stop thinking. I looked at 
my watch. Well after midnight. I opened the door for her. 
 
“Want to come up?” 
 
“Not tonight, darling,” I said. “I want to go home and think.” 
 
“I understand. Kiss me good night.” She held out her face and I kissed her. How 
I loved that girl. I’d be glad when this was over with and we could get married. 
 
“Will I see you tomorrow?” 
 
I shook my head. “I doubt it. If I can find time I’ll call you.” 
 
“Please, Mike,” she begged, “try to make it. Otherwise I can’t see you until 
Tuesday.” 

 
“What’s the matter with Monday?” I asked her. 
 
“Esther and Mary are coming back to the city and I promised to have supper 
with them. Esther is more upset than you realize. Mary will get over it fast enough, 
but her sister isn’t like that. You know how women are when they get in a spot.” 
 
“Okay, baby. If I don’t see you tomorrow, I’ll give you a call Monday and see you 
Tuesday. Maybe then we can go get that ring.” 
 
This time I gave her a long kiss and watched her disappear into the building. I 
had some tall thinking to do. Too many had died. I was afraid to let it go further. It 
had to be now or not at all. I tooled the jalopy back to the garage, parked it and 
went upstairs to bed. 
 
 
Chapter  13 
 
 
 
Sunday was a flop. It opened with the rain splattering against the windows and 
the alarm shattering my eardrums. I brought my fist down on the clock, swearing 
at myself because I set it automatically when I didn’t have to get up at all. 
 
This was one day when I didn’t have to shower or shave. I burned my breakfast 
as usual and ate it while I was in my underwear. When I was stacking the dishes, I 
glanced at myself in the mirror, and a dirty, unkempt face glared back at me. On 
days like this I look my ugliest. 
 
Fortunately, the refrigerator was well stocked with beer. I pulled out two quarts, 
got a glass from the cabinet, a spare pack of butts, and laid them beside my chair. 
Then I opened the front door and the papers fell to the floor. Very carefully, I 
separated the funnies from the pile, threw the news section in the waste basket 
and began the day. 
 
I tried the radio after that. I tried pacing the floor. Every ashtray was filled to 
overflowing. Nothing seemed to help. Occasionally I would flop in the chair and 
put my head in my hands and try to think. But whatever I did, I invariably came 
up with the same answer. Stymied. Nuts. 
 
Something was trying to get out. I knew it. I could feel it. Way back in the 
recesses of my mind a little detail was gnawing its way through, screaming to be 
heard, but the more it gnawed, the greater were the defences erected to prevent its 
escaping. 
 
Not a hunch. A fact. Some small, trivial fact. What was it? Could it be the 
answer? Something was bothering me terrifically. I tried some more beer. No. No. 
No… no… no… no… no. The answer wouldn’t come. How must our minds be 
made? So complicated that a detail gets lost in the maze of knowledge. Why? That 
damn ever-present WHY. There’s a why to everything. It was there, but how to 
bring it out? I tried thinking around the issue, I tried to think through it. I even 
tried to forget it, but the greater the effort, the more intense the failure. 
 
I never noticed the passage of time. I drank, I ate, it was dark out and I turned 
the lights on and drank some more. Hours and minutes and seconds. I fought, but 
lost. So I fought again. One detail. What was it? What was it? 
 
The refrigerator was empty all of a sudden and I fell into bed exhausted. It never 
broke through. That night I dreamed the killer was laughing at me. A killer whose 

face I couldn’t see. I dreamed that the killer had Jack and Myrna and the rest of 
them hanging in chains, while I tried in vain to beat my way through a thin 
partition of glass with a pair of .45’s to get to them. The killer was unarmed, 
laughing fiendishly, as I raved and cursed, but the glass wouldn’t break. I never 
got through. 
 
I awoke with a bad taste in my mouth. I brushed my teeth, but that didn’t get 
rid of the taste. I looked out the window. Monday was no better than the day 
before. The rain was coming down in buckets. I couldn’t stand to be holed up any 
longer, so I shaved and got dressed, then donned a raincoat and went out to eat. It 
was twelve then; when I finished it was one. I dropped in a bar and ordered one 
highball after another. The next time I looked at the clock it was nearly six. 
 
That was when I reached in my pocket for another pack of cigarettes. My hand 
brushed an envelope. Damn, I could have kicked myself. I asked the bartender 
where the nearest drugstore was and he directed me around the corner. 
 
The place was about to close, but I made it. I took the envelope out and asked 
him if he could test an unknown substance for me. The guy agreed reluctantly. 
Together we shook the stuff on to a piece of paper and he took it into the back. It 
didn’t take long. I was fixing my tie in front of a mirror when he came back. He 
handed me the envelope with a suspicious glance. On it he had written one word. 
 
Heroin. 
 
I looked in the mirror again. What I saw turned the blood in my veins to liquid 
ice. I saw my eyes dilate. The mirror. The mirror and that one word. I shoved the 
envelope into my pocket viciously and handed the druggist a fin. 
 
I couldn’t talk. There was a crazy job bubbling inside me that made me go 
alternately hot and cold. If my throat hadn’t been so tight I could have screamed. 
All this time. Not time wasted, because it had to be this way. Happy, happy. How 
could I be so happy? I had the WHY, but how could I be so happy? It wasn’t right. 
I beat Pat to it after all. He didn’t have the WHY. Only I did. 
 
Now I knew who the killer was. 
 
And I was happy. I walked back to the bar. 
 
I took a last drag on the cigarette and flipped it spinning into the gutter, then 
turned and walked into the apartment house. Someone made it easy for me by not 
closing the lobby door tightly. No use taking the elevator, there was still plenty of 
time. I walked up the stairs wondering what the finale would be like. 
 
The door was locked but I expected that. The second pick I used opened it. 
Inside, the place was filled with that curious stillness evident in an empty house. 
There was no need to turn on the lights, I knew the layout well enough. Several 
pieces of furniture were fixed in my mind. I sat down in a heavy chair set 
catercorner against the two walls. The leaves of a rubber plant on a table behind 
the chair brushed against my neck. I pushed them away and slid down into the 
lushness of the cushions to make myself comfortable, then pulled the .45 from its 
holster and snapped the safety off. 
 
I waited for the killer. 
 
Yes, Jack, this is it, the end. It took a long time to get around to it, but I did. I 
know who did it now. Funny, the way things worked out, wasn’t it? All the 
symptoms were backwards. I had the wrong ones figured for it until the slip came. 
They all make that one slip. That’s what the matter is with these cold-blooded 

killers; they plan, oh, so well. But they have to work all the angles themselves, 
while we have many heads working the problem out. Yeah, we miss plenty, but 
eventually someone stumbles on the logical solution. Only this one wasn’t logical. 
It was luck. Remember what I promised you? I’d shoot the killer, Jack, right in the 
gut where you got it. Right where everyone could see what he had for dinner. 
Deadly, but he wouldn’t die fast. It would take a few minutes. No matter who it 
turned out to be, Jack, I’d get the killer. No chair, no rope, just the one slug in the 
gut that would take the breath from the lungs and the life from the body. Not 
much blood, but I would be able to look at the killer dying at my feet and be glad 
that I kept my promise to you. A killer should die that way. Hard, nasty. No 
fanfare except the blast of an unsilenced .45 going off in a small, closed room. 
Yeah, Jack, no matter whom it turned out to be, that’s the way death would come. 
Just like you got it. I know who did it. In a few minutes the killer will walk in here 
and see me sitting in this chair. Maybe the killer will try to talk me out of it, maybe 
even kill again, but I don’t kill easy. I know all the angles. Besides, I got a rod in 
my fist, waiting. Waiting. Before I do it I’ll make the killer sweat—and tell me how 
it happened, to see if I hit it right. Maybe I’ll even give the rat a chance to get me. 
More likely not. I hate too hard and shoot too fast. That’s why people say the 
things about me that they do. That’s why the killer would have had to try for me 
soon. Yes, Jack, it’s almost finished. I’m waiting. I’m waiting. 
 
The door opened. The lights flicked on. I was slumped too low in the chair for 
Charlotte to see me. She took her hat off in front of the wall mirror. Then she saw 
my legs sticking out. Even under the make-up I could see the color drain out of 
her face. 
 
(Yes, Jack, Charlotte. Charlotte the beautiful. Charlotte the lovely. Charlotte who 
loved dogs and walked people’s babies in the park. Charlotte whom you wanted to 
crush in your arms and feel the wetness of her lips. Charlotte of the body that was 
fire and life and soft velvet and respon siveness. Charlotte the killer.) 
 
 
She smiled at me. It was hard to tell that it wasn’t forced, but I knew it. She 
knew I knew it. And she knew why I was here. The .45 was levelled straight at her 
stomach. 
 
Her mouth smiled at me, her eyes smiled at me, and she looked pleased, so glad 
to see me, just as she had always been. She was almost radiant when she spoke. 
“Mike, darling. Oh, baby, I’m so glad to see you. You didn’t call like you promised 
and I’ve been worried. How did you get in? Oh, but Kathy is always leaving the 
door open. She’s off tonight.” Charlotte started to walk toward me. “And please, 
Mike, don’t clean that awful gun here. It scares me.” 
 
“It should,” I said. 
 
She stopped a few feet away from me, her face fixed on mine. Her brows creased 
in a frown. Even her eyes were puzzled. If it were anyone but me they’d never have 
known she was acting. Christ, she was goodl There was no one like her. The play 
was perfect, and she wrote, directed and acted all the parts. The timing was exact, 
the strength and character she put into every moment, every expression, every 
word was a crazy impossibility of perfection. Even now she could make me guess, 
alinost build a doubt in my mind, but I shook my head slowly. 
 
“No good, Charlotte, I know.” 

 
Her eyes opened wider. Inside me I smiled to myself. Her mind must have been 
racing with fear. She remembered my promise to Jack. She couldn’t forget it. 
Nobody could, because I’m me and I always keep a promise. And this promise was 
to get the killer, and she was the killer. And I had promised to shoot the killer in 
the stomach. 
 
She walked to an end table and picked a cigarette from a box, then lit it with a 
steady hand. That’s when I knew, too, that she had figured an out. I didn’t want to 
tell her that it was a useless out. The gun never left her a second. 
 
“But…” 
 
“No,” I said, “let me tell you, Charlotte. I was a little slow in catching on, but I 
got it finally. Yesterday I would have dreaded this, but not now. I’m glad. Happier 
than I’ve been in a long time. It was the last kill. They were so different. So damn 
cold-blooded that I had it figured for a kill-crazy hood or an outsider. You were 
lucky. Nothing seemed to tie up, there were so many complications. It jumped 
around from one thing to another, yet every one of those things was part of the 
same basic motive. 
 
“Jack was a cop. Someone always hates cops. Especially a cop that is getting 
close to him. But Jack didn’t know just who he was getting close to until you held 
a rod on him and pumped one into his intestines. That was it, wasn’t it?” 
 
She looked so pathetic standing there. Twin tears welled up and rolled down her 
cheeks. So pathetic and so helpless. As though she wanted to stop me, to tell me I 
was wrong—to show me how wrong I was. Her eyes were pools of supplication, 
begging, pleading. But I went on. 
 
“It was you and Hal at first. No, just you alone. Your profession started it. Oh, 
you made money enough, but not enough. You are a woman who wanted wealth 
and power. Not to use it extravagantly, but just to have it. How many times have 
you gone into the frailty of men and seen their weaknesses? It made you afraid. 
You no longer had the social instinct of a woman—that of being dependent upon a 
man. You were afraid, so you found a way to increase your bank account and 
charge it to business. A way in which you’d never be caught, but a dirty way. The 
dirtiest way there is—almost” 
 
(The sorrow drifted from her eyes, and there was something else in its stead. It 
was coming now. I couldn’t tell what it was, but it was coming. She stood tall and 
straight as a martyr, exuding beauty and trust and belief. Her head turned slightly 
and I saw a sob catch in her throat. Like a soldier. Her stomach was so flat against 
the belt of her skirt. She let her arms drop simply at her sides, her hands asking to 
be held, and her lips wanting to silence mine with a kiss. It was coming, but I dared 
not stop now. I couldn’t let her speak or I would never be able to keep my promise.) 
 
 
“Your clientele. It was wealthy, proud. With your ability and appearance and 
your constant studies, you were able to draw such a group to you. Yes, you 
treated them, eased their mental discomfitures—but with drugs. Heroin. You 
prescribed, and they took your prescription—to become addicts, and you were 
their only source for the stuff and they had to pay through the nose to get it. Very 
neat. So awfully neat. Being a doctor, and through your clinic, you could get all 
the stuff you needed. I don’t know how your delivery system worked, but that will 
come later. 

 
“Then you met Hal Kines. An innocent meeting, but isn’t that the way all things 
start? That’s why I had trouble with the answer, it was all so casual. You never 
suspected him of his true activities, did you? But one day you used him as a 
subject for an experiment in hypnosis, didn’t you? He was a fool to do it, but he 
had no choice if he wanted to play his role. And while he was under hypnosis you 
inadvertently brought to light every dirty phase of his life. 
 
“You thought you had him then. You told him what you had discovered and 
were going to fit him into your plans. But you were fooled. Hal was not a college 
kid. He was an adult. An adult with a mature, scheming mind, who could figure 
things out for himself—and he had already caught wise to what you were doing 
and was going to hold it over your head. All you got out of that was a stalemate. 
Remember the book on your shelf—Hypnosis as a Treatment for Mental Disorders? 
It was well thumbed. I knew you were well versed in that angle, but I never caught 
on until yesterday.” 
 
(She was standing in front of me now. I felt a hot glow go over me as I saw what 
she was about to do. Her hands came up along her sides pressing her clothes tightly 
against her skin, then slowly ran under her breasts, cupping them. Her fingers 
fumbled with the buttons of the blouse, but not for long. They came open—one by 
one.) 
 
 
“You and Hal held on tightly, each waiting for the other to make a break, but 
there was too much of a risk to take to start anything. That’s where Jack came in. 
He was a shrewd one. That guy had a brain. Sure, he helped Hal out of a small 
jam, but in doing so something aroused his suspicions, and all the while he 
pretended to be helping Hal with his work he was really investigating him. Jack 
found out what Hal was up to, and when by accident he met Eileen, she confirmed 
it. Jack knew about the show through her, and since Hal was the brains of the 
outfit, knew, too, that he would be there. 
 
“But let’s jump back a little bit. Jack wanted to see you about something during 
the week. You yourself told me that. No, Jack didn’t suspect you, but he thought 
that since you were connected with him through the school and the clinic, you 
might be able to keep tab on him. 
 
“But the night of the party you saw the yearbooks Jack had collected and knew 
why he had them. And you were afraid that if he exposed Hal, the guy would think 
you had something to do with it and turn you in, too. So you came back. When 
your maid went back to sleep you simply detached the chime behind the door and 
left, being careful not to be seen. What did you do, swipe Jack’s key to the place 
before you left? I don’t doubt it. Then you got him in the bedroom. You shot him 
and watched him die. And while he tried to pull himself toward his gun you made 
a psychological study of a man facing death, telling the story, and drawing the 
chair back inch by inch until his body gave up. Then you went home. That was it, 
wasn’t it? No, you don’t have to answer me because there could be no other way.” 
 
(Now there were no more buttons. Slowly, ever so slowly, she pulled the blouse 
out of her skirt. It rustled faintly as silk does against wool. Then the cuff snaps—
and she shrugged the blouse from her shoulders and let it fall to the floor. She wore 
no bra. Lovely shoulders. Soft curves of hidden muscles running across her body. 
Little ripples of excitement traversing the beautiful line of her neck. Breasts that 

were firm and inviting. Soft, yet so strong. She was so pretty. Young and delicious 
and exciting. She shook her head until her hair swirled in blonde shimmering waves 
down her back.) 
 
 
“But in the yearbooks you took from Jack’s apartment were notations about 
Eileen. Her picture was in one, too, with Hal’s. You knew that murder didn’t stop 
there and saw how to cover one killing by committing another. You told Hal what 
you found, and sent him to threaten Eileen, and followed him in. Then, while the 
show went on, you killed them both, thinking that the murders would have to be 
hushed and the bodies disposed of by the others in the syndicate if they wanted to 
continue operation of the call house. You were right there. Somebody would have 
taken care of the matter if we hadn’t come along so fast. When we crashed the 
joint you saw the madam run for it and followed her, and she never knew it, did 
she? How damn lucky you were. Coincidence and Lady Fortune were with you all 
the way. Neither Pat nor I thought to query you on an alibi for that night, but I bet 
you had a honey prepared. 
 
“Let’s not leave out George Kalecki. He found out about you. Hal must have 
gotten drunk and spilled the works. That’s why he was surly the night of the 
party. He was worried and sore at Hal. Hal told you that George knew and you 
tried to pot him and missed. The only time you did miss. So he moved to town to 
get closer to the protection of the police. He couldn’t tell them why, though, could 
he? You were still safe. He tried to implicate me to get me on the ball and run the 
killer down before the killer got to him. 
 
“And after Hal’s death, when we were walking along the park and George tried 
his hand with a gun, he wasn’t shooting at me as I thought It was you whom he 
wanted. He tailed me figuring I’d lead him to you. He knew he would be next on 
your list unless he got you first. George wanted out, but before he could blow he 
had to try to get the evidence Hal compiled or else take a chance on being sent to 
the chair if the stuff was ever found. Tough. I got him first. If he hadn’t shot at me 
I wouldn’t have killed him and he would have talked. I would have loved to make 
him yell his lungs out. Once more you were lucky.” 
 
(Her fingers were sliding the zipper of her skirt. The zipper and a button. Then the 
skirt fell in a heap around her legs. Before she stepped out of it she pushed the half 
slip down. Slowly, so I could get the entire exotic effect. Then together, she pushed 
them away with a toe. Long, graceful, tanned legs. Gorgeous legs. Legs that were all 
curves and strength and mode me see pictures that I shouldn’t see any more. Legs 
of a golden color that needed no stockings to enhance. Lovely legs that started from 
a flat stomach and rounded themselves into thighs that belonged more in the 
imagination than reality. Beautiful calves. Heavier than those you see in the movies. 
Passionate legs. AU that was left were the transparent panties. And she was a real 
blonde.) 
 
 
“Then Bobo Hopper. You didn’t plan his death. It was an accident. Coincidence 
again that he had a former connection with George Kalecki. He had a job that he 
was proud of. He worked in your neighborhood running errands, delivering 
messages and sweeping floors. Only a simple moron who worked for nickels, but a 
happy egg. A guy that wouldn’t step on ants and kept a beehive for a hobby. But 

one day he dropped a package he was delivering for you—a prescription, you told 
him. He was afraid he’d lose his job, so he tried to get the prescription refilled at a 
druggist, and it turned out to be heroin that you were sending to a client. But 
meanwhile the client called you and said the messenger hadn’t shown up. I was 
there in your apartment that day, remember? And when I went for a haircut, you 
hurried out in your car, followed the route Bobo would have taken and saw him go 
in the drugstore, waited, and shot him when he came out. 
 
“No, your alibi is shot. Kathy was home and never saw or heard you leave. You 
pretended to be in your darkroom, and no one ever disturbs a person in a 
darkroom. You detached the chimes and left, and came back without Kathy being 
any the wiser. But in your hurry you forgot to reconnect the chimes. I did it. 
Remember that, too? I came back for my wallet and there you were, a perfect alibi. 
 
“Even then I didn’t get it. But I started narrowing it down. I knew there was a 
motive that tied the thing up. Pat has a list of narcotic addicts. Someday, when 
they are cured, we’ll get something from them that will lay it at your feet. 
 
“Myrna was next. Her death was another accident. You didn’t plan this one, 
either, but it had to be. And when I left you at the tennis game it gave you the 
chance. When did the possibilities of the consequence of her leaving occur to you? 
Immediately, I bet, like Bobo. You have an incredible mind. Somehow you think of 
everything at once. You knew how Bobo’s mind would work and what might have 
happened, and you knew the woman, too. That comes as a result of being a 
psychiatrist. I was asleep when you arrived at the Bellemy place. You had a coat 
the same color as Myrna’s, but with a fur collar. And you knew, too, that women 
have a bad habit of trying on each other’s clothes in private. You couldn’t afford 
that chance because you had a deck of heroin in your coat pocket, or possibly 
traces of the stuff. And you were delivering it to Harmon Wilder and Charles 
Sherman—that’s why they ran, because they had some of the junk on them. 
 
“Yes, you were a little too late. Myrna found the stuff in your pocket. She knew 
what it was. She should. Until Jack came along she lived on the stuff. You found 
her with it in her hand and shot her. Then you took off your coat, threw it on the 
bed with the others, and put Myrna’s on her while she lay there on the floor. As for 
powder bums, simple. Pull the nose out of a slug and fire the gun at her body as a 
blank. You even dropped the slug that went through her in the folds of the coat. 
Have you burned your coat yet? I bet—since it had powder burns on it. But some 
of the blue fibers were still under her fingernails, from a coat the same color as 
yours. That and the mirror was the final clue. That and the heroin you missed. A 
girl stands in front of a mirror for just one thing, especially in a room full of 
clothes. 
 
“I don’t know where you get your luck, Charlotte. You came in while the 
bartender went for a drink, but you couldn’t afford to be seen going out. Not after 
you committed a murder. So you took the ledge around the building to the fire 
escape like a human fly. I was too broad to make it, but you weren’t. You took 
your shoes off, didn’t you? That’s why there were no scratches in the cement. 
During the excitement of the game no one noticed you leave or return. Some kind 
of mass psychology, right? 

 
“No, Charlotte, no jury would ever convict you on that, would they? Much too 
circumstantial. Your alibis were too perfect. You can’t break an alibi that an 
innocent person believes is true. Like Kathy, for instance. 
 
“But I would, Charlotte. And later we can take our time to worm out the truth 
without the interference of a court trial. We won’t have to worry about a smart 
lawyer cracking our chains of circumstance and making them look foolish to a 
jury. We will know the answer as we do the problem, but the solution will take 
time. A trial wouldn’t give us that time. 
 
“No, Charlotte, I’m the jury now, and the judge, and I have a promise to keep. 
Beautiful as you are, as much as I almost loved you, I sentence you to death.” 
 
(Her thumbs hooked in the fragile silk of the panties and pulled them down. She 
stepped out of them as delicately as one coming from a bathtub. She was completely 
naked now. A suntanned goddess giving herself to her lover. With arms outstretched 
she walked toward me. Lightly, her tongue ran over her lips, making them glisten 
with passion. The smell of her was like an exhilarating perfume. Slowly, a sigh 
escaped her, making the hemispheres of her breasts quiver. She leaned forward to 
kiss me, her arms going out to encircle my neck.) 
 
 
The roar of the .45 shook the room. Charlotte staggered back a step. Her eyes 
were a symphony of incredulity, an unbelieving witness to truth. Slowly, she 
looked down at the ugly swelling in her naked belly where the bullet went in. A 
thin trickle of blood welled out. 
 
I stood up in front of her and shoved the gun into my pocket. I turned and 
looked at the rubber plant behind me. There on the table was the gun, with the 
safety catch off and the silencer still attached. Those loving arms would have 
reached it nicely. A face that was waiting to be kissed was really waiting to be 
splattered with blood when she blew my head off. My blood. When I heard her fall I 
turned around. Her eyes had pain in them now, the pain preceding death. Pain 
and unbelief. 
 
“How c-could you?” she gasped. 
 
I only had a moment before talking to a corpse, but I got it in. 
 
“It was easy,” I said. 
 

