ISLAND OF THE SEQUINED LOVE

NUN

CHRISTOPHER MOORE

Contents

MAP

PART ONE: THE PHOENIX

ONE
Tucker Case awoke to find himself hanging from a breadfruit…

TWO
Most jets (especially those unburdened by the weight of passengers…

THREE
As with most things in his life, Tucker Case was…

FOUR
A low buzz of anticipation ran through the halls of…

FIVE
The High Priestess of the Shark People ate Chee-tos and…

SIX
At the last minute Mary Jean changed her mind about…

SEVEN
“I can’t believe you hit him,” Tucker said. He was…

EIGHT
Once on the plane, Tucker unfolded the letter from the…

NINE
The pilot said, “The local time is 9:00 A.M. The…

TEN
Jefferson Pardee dialed the island communications center and asked them…

ELEVEN
The Shark men had been beating drums and marching with…

TWELVE
Tuck was sweating through a slow-motion dream rerun of the…

THIRTEEN
Tuck’s first thought of the new morning was I’ve got…

FOURTEEN
Yap was cleaner than Truk and hotter, if that was…

FIFTEEN
Out on the edge of the world, with no place…

SIXTEEN
The High Priestess sat on the lanai watching the sunset…

SEVENTEEN
Tuck was amazed by what the human body could achieve…

EIGHTEEN
The island was little more than a coral cupcake with…

NINETEEN
At first light the coconut palm that had saved them…

TWENTY
The storm had been easy on the Shark People. A…

TWENTY-ONE
Watching the sharks circle the boat, Tuck felt as if…

TWENTY-TWO
The octopus jetted across the bottom, over a giant head…

PART TWO: ISLAND OF THE SHARK PEOPLE

TWENTY-THREE
The Sky Priestess first appeared in 1944 on the nose…

TWENTY-FOUR
Vincent Bennidetti was sitting at an oversized table dealing five-card…

TWENTY-FIVE
Tucker Case heard the beating of wings above his head…

TWENTY-SIX
Kimi had freed his hands and feet with the knife…

TWENTY-SEVEN
Sepie washed the pilot’s hair in a bowl with pounded…

TWENTY-EIGHT
Tucker Case rolled through a fever dream where he was…

TWENTY-NINE
“How are you feeling today?” Sebastian Curtis pulled the sheet…

THIRTY
Kimi sat under a coconut palm outside of the bachelors’ house…

THIRTY-ONE
Sarapul twisted the last of the fibers into his rope…

THIRTY-TWO
The guards came for Tucker at sunset, just as he…

THIRTY-THREE
Natives slept side by side, crisscrossed, and piled on the…

THIRTY-FOUR
Jefferson Pardee was trying desperately not to look like a…

THIRTY-FIVE
Jefferson Pardee sat on a metal office chair in the…

THIRTY-SIX
The Lear 45 was a working corporate issue, the seats…

THIRTY-SEVEN
The itching started a week after the first flight. It…

THIRTY-EIGHT
Tucker Case spent the next week watching the compound, trying…

THIRTY-NINE
The Sky Priestess rolled over in bed and slapped the…

FORTY
Tuck spooled up the jets as he watched the guards…

FORTY-ONE
Privacy is a rare commodity on a small island and…

PART THREE: COCONUT ANGEL

FORTY-TWO
Just before dawn, Tuck crawled through the bottom of the…

FORTY-THREE
“Oh, come in, Mr. Case. Sebastian is out on the…

FORTY-FOUR
Back at his bungalow, an argument went on in the…

FORTY-FIVE
Tucker Case dreamed of machine-gun fire and jerked as the…

FORTY-SIX
Tuck’s other partner showed up at his bungalow that evening…

FORTY-SEVEN
The Shark men were breaking into their second jug of…

FORTY-EIGHT
Back at the drinking circle, Malink opened a copy of…

FORTY-NINE
Tuck slept through most of the day, then woke up…

FIFTY
He was sleeping, dreaming of flying, but not in a…

FIFTY-ONE
The Sorcerer paced back and forth across the lanai. “I…

FIFTY-TWO
Tuck twisted the guts out of the stick pen and…

FIFTY-THREE
When the pounding came at his door just after dawn…

FIFTY-FOUR
The Sky Priestess threw the straw hat across the room…

FIFTY-FIVE
Tuck went into the bathroom and washed his face, then…

FIFTY-SIX
Kimi was trying to call up thunder and was having…

FIFTY-SEVEN
The Sorcerer stood on the beach over the supine body…

FIFTY-EIGHT
“They’re flying the new pilot in tomorrow,” said Sebastian Curtis.

FIFTY-NINE
They had missed Guam and Saipan (passing at night) and…

SIXTY
Mary Jean sat behind a desk fashioned entirely of rose…

SIXTY-ONE
Tuck stood at the arrival gate amid a group of…

SIXTY-TWO
Malink found the old cannibal in a small clearing in…

SIXTY-THREE
The Sky Priestess was drunk. She and the Sorcerer had…

SIXTY-FOUR
Beth and Sebastian Curtis were cleaning the operating room and…

SIXTY-FIVE
Malink joined Tuck on the flight deck and tried to…

SIXTY-SIX
Mary Jean brought the pink Gulfstream in right on the…

SIXTY-SEVEN
The Sky Priestess awoke with a terrible pain in her…

EPILOGUE
Due to the influence of Mary Jean Dobbins, who opened…

AFTERWORD AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
PRAISE
BOOKS BY CHRISTOPHER MOORE
CREDITS
COPYRIGHT
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

PART ONE
The Phoenix

The Cannibal Tree

Tucker Case awoke to find himself hanging from a breadfruit tree by a
coconut fiber rope. He was suspended facedown about six feet above the
sand in some sort of harness, his hands and feet tied together in front of
him. He lifted his head and strained to look around. He could see a white
sand beach fringed with coconut palms, a coconut husk fire, a palm frond
hut, a path of white coral gravel that led into a jungle. Completing the
panorama was the grinning brown face of an ancient native.

The native reached up with a clawlike hand and pinched Tucker’s

cheek.

Tucker screamed.

“Yum,” the native said.

“Who are you?” Tucker asked. “Where am I? Where’s the navigator?”

The native just grinned. His eyes were yellow, his hair a wild tangle of

curl and bird feathers, and his teeth were black and had been filed to points.
He looked like a potbellied skeleton upholstered in distressed leather.
Puckered pink scars decorated his skin; a series of small scars on his chest
described the shape of a shark. His only clothing was a loincloth woven
from some sort of plant fiber. Tucked in the waist cord was a vicious-

looking bush knife. The native patted Tucker’s cheek with an ashy callused
palm, then turned and walked away, leaving him hanging.

“Wait!” Tucker shouted. “Let me down. I have money. I can pay you.”

The native ambled down the path without looking back. Tucker

struggled against the harness, but only managed to put himself into a slow
spin. As he turned, he caught sight of the navigator, hanging unconscious a
few feet away.

“Hey, you alive?”

The navigator didn’t stir, but Tucker could see that he was breathing.

“Hey, Kimi, wake up!” Still no reaction.

He strained against the rope around his wrists, but the bonds only

seemed to tighten. After a few minutes, he gave up, exhausted. He rested
and looked around for something to give this bizarre scene some meaning.
Why had the native hung them in a tree?

He caught movement in his peripheral vision and turned to see a large

brown crab struggling at the end of a string tied to a nearby branch. There
was his answer: They were hung in the tree, like the crab, to keep them
fresh until they were ready to be eaten.

Tucker shuddered, imagining the native’s black teeth closing on his

shin. He tried to focus on a way to escape before the native returned, but his
mind kept diving into a sea of regrets and second guesses, looking for the
exact place where the world had turned on him and put him in the cannibal
tree.

Like most of the big missteps he had taken in his life, it had started in a

bar.

The Seattle Airport Holiday Inn lounge was all hunter green, brass rails,

and oak veneer. Remove the bar and it looked like Macy’s men’s
department. It was one in the morning and the bartender, a stout, middle-
aged Hispanic woman, was polishing glasses and waiting for her last three

customers to leave so she could go home. At the end of a bar a young
woman in a short skirt and too much makeup sat alone. Tucker Case sat
next to a businessman several stools down.

“Lemmings,” the businessman said.

“Lemmings?” asked Tucker.

They were drunk. The businessman was heavy, in his late fifties, and

wore a charcoal gray suit. Broken veins glowed on his nose and cheeks.

“Most people are lemmings,” the businessman continued. “That’s why

they fail. They behave like suicidal rodents.”

“But you’re a higher level of rodent?” Tucker Case said with a smart-

ass grin. He was thirty, just under six foot, with neatly trimmed blond hair
and blue eyes. He wore navy slacks, sneakers, and a white shirt with blue-
and-gold epaulets. His captain’s hat sat on the bar next to a gin and tonic.
He was more interested in the girl at the end of the bar than in the
businessman’s conversation, but he didn’t know how to move without being
obvious.

“No, but I’ve kept my lemming behavior limited to my personal

relationships. Three wives.” The businessman waved a swizzle stick under
Tucker’s nose. “Success in America doesn’t require any special talent or
any kind of extra effort. You just have to be consistent and not fuck up.
That’s how most people fail. They can’t stand the pressure of getting what
they want, so when they see that they are getting close, they engineer some
sort of fuckup to undermine their success.”

The lemming litany was making Tucker uncomfortable. He’d been on a

roll for the last four years, going from bartending to flying corporate jets.
He said, “Maybe some people just don’t know what they want. Maybe they
only look like lemmings.”

“Everyone knows what they want. You know what you want, don’t

you?”

“Sure, I know,” Tucker said. What he wanted right now was to get out

of this conversation and get to know the girl at the end of the bar before
closing time. She’d been staring at him for five minutes.

“What?” The businessman wanted an answer. He waited.

“I just want to keep doing what I’m doing. I’m happy.”

The businessman shook his head. “I’m sorry, son, but I don’t buy it.

You’re going over the cliff with the rest of the lemmings.”

“You should be a motivational speaker,” Tuck said, his attention drawn

by the girl, who was getting up, putting money on the bar, picking up her
cigarettes, and putting them into her purse.

She said, “I know what I want.”

The businessman turned and gave his best avuncular-horndog smile.

“And what’s that, sweetheart?”

She walked up to Tucker and pressed her breasts against his shoulder.

She had brown hair that fell in curls to her shoulders, blue eyes, and a nose
that was a tad crooked, but not horribly so. Up close she didn’t even look
old enough to drink. Heavy makeup had aged her at a distance. Looking the
businessman in the eye, as if she didn’t notice Tucker at all, she said, “I
want to join the mile-high club, and I want to join it tonight. Can you help
me?”

The businessman looked at Tucker’s captain’s hat on the bar, then back

at the girl. Slowly, defeated, he shook his head.

She pressed harder against Tucker’s shoulder. “How about you?”

Tucker grinned at the businessman and shrugged by way of apology. “I

just want to keep doing what I’m doing.”

The girl put on his captain’s hat and pulled him off of the barstool. He

dug into his pocket for money as she dragged him toward the exit.

The businessman raised a hand. “No, I’ve got the drinks, son. You just

remember what I said.”

“Thanks,” Tuck said.

Outside in the lobby the girl said, “My name’s Meadow.” She kept her

eyes forward as she walked, taking curt marching steps as if she was
leading him on an antiterrorist mission instead of seducing him.

“Pretty name,” Tucker said. “I’m Tucker Case. People call me Tuck.”

She still didn’t look up. “Do you have a plane, Tuck?”

“I’ve got access to one.” He smiled. This was great. Great!

“Good. You get me into the mile-high club tonight and I won’t charge

you. I’ve always wanted to do it in a plane.”

Tucker stopped. “You’re a…I mean, you do this for…”

She stopped and turned to look him in the eye for the first time. “You’re

kind of a geek, aren’t you?”

“Thank you. I find you incredibly attractive too.” Actually, he did.

“No, you’re attractive. I mean, you look fine. But I thought a pilot

would have a little more on the ball.”

“Is this part of that mistress-humiliation-handcuff stuff?”

“No, that’s extra. I’m just making conversation.”

“Oh, I see.” He was beginning to have second thoughts. He had to fly to

Houston in the morning, and he really should get some sleep. Still, this
would make a great story to tell the guys back at the hangar—if he left out
the part about him being a suicidal rodent and her being a prostitute. But he
could tell the story without really doing it, couldn’t he?

He said, “I probably shouldn’t fly. I’m a little drunk.”

“Then you won’t mind if I go back to the bar and grab your friend? I

might as well make some money.”

“It could be dangerous.”

“That’s the point, isn’t it?” She smiled.

“No, I mean really dangerous.”

“I have condoms.”

Tucker shrugged. “I’ll get a cab.”

Ten minutes later they were heading across the wet tarmac toward a

group of corporate jets.

“It’s pink!”

“Yeah, so?”

“You fly a pink jet?”

As Tuck opened the hatch and lowered the steps, he had the sinking

feeling that maybe the businessman at the bar had been right.

I Thought This Was a Nonsmoking Flight

Most jets (especially those unburdened by the weight of passengers or fuel)
have a glide rate that is quite acceptable for landing without power. But
Tucker has made an error in judgment caused by seven gin and tonics and
the distraction of Meadow straddling him in the pilot seat. He thinks,
perhaps, that he should have said something when the fuel light first went
on, but Meadow had already climbed into the saddle and he didn’t want to
seem inattentive. Now the glide path is too steep, the runway a little too far.
He uses a little body English in pulling back on the steering yoke, which
Meadow takes for enthusiasm.

Tucker brings the pink Gulfstream jet into SeaTac a little low, tearing

off the rear landing gear on a radar antenna a second before impact with the
runway, which sends Meadow over the steering yoke to bounce off the
windscreen and land unconscious across the instrument panel. The jet’s
wings flap once—a dying flamingo trying to free itself from a tar pit—and
rip off in a shriek of sparks, flame, and black smoke, then spin back into the
air before beating themselves to pieces on the runway.

Tucker, strapped into the pilot’s seat, lets loose a prolonged scream that

pushes the sound of tearing metal out of his head.

The wingless Gulfstream slides down the runway like hell’s own

bobsled, leaving a wake of greasy smoke and aluminum confetti. Firemen
and paramedics scramble into their vehicles and pull out onto the runway in

pursuit of it. In a moment of analytical detachment, one of the firemen turns
to a companion and says, “There’s not enough fire. He must have been
flying on fumes.”

Tucker sees the end of the runway coming up, an array of antennae,

some spiffy blue lights, a chain-link fence, and a grassy open field where
what’s left of the Gulfstream will fragment into pink shrapnel. He realizes
that he’s looking at his own death and screams the words “Oh, fuck!”,
meeting the FAA’s official requirement for last words to be retrieved from
the charred black box.

Suddenly, as if someone has hit a cosmic pause button, the cockpit goes

quiet. Movement stops. A man’s voice says, “Is this how you want to go?”

Tucker turns toward the voice. A dark man in a gray flight suit sits in

the copilot’s seat, waiting for an answer. Tuck can’t seem to see his face,
even though they are facing each other. “Well?”

“No,” Tucker answers.

“It’ll cost you,” the pilot says. Then he’s gone. The copilot’s seat is

empty and the roar of tortured metal fills the cabin.

Before Tucker can form the words “What the hell?” in his mind, the

wingless jet crashes through the antenna, the spiffy blue lights, the chain-
link fence, and into the field, soggy from thirty consecutive days of Seattle
rain. The mud caresses the fuselage, dampens the sparks and flames, clings
and cloys and slows the jet to a steaming stop. Tuck hears metal crackle as
it settles, sirens, the friendly chime of the FASTEN SEAT BELTS sign turning
off.

Welcome to Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. The local time is 2:00

A.M., the outside temperature is 63 degrees, there is a semiconscious hooker
gurgling at your feet.

The cabin fills with black smoke from fried wires and vaporized

hydraulic fluid. One breath burns down his windpipe like drain cleaner,
telling Tucker that a second breath may kill him. He unfastens the harness

and reaches into the dark for Meadow, connecting with her lace camisole,
which comes away in shreds in his hands. He stands, bends over, wraps an
arm around her waist, and picks her up. She’s light, maybe a hundred
pounds, but Tucker has forgotten to pull up his pants and Jockey shorts,
which cuff his ankles. He teeters and falls backward onto the control
console between the pilot seats. Jutting from the console is the flap actuator
lever, a foot-long strip of steel topped by a plastic arrowheadlike tip. The tip
catches Tuck in the rear of the scrotum. His and Meadow’s combined
weight drive him down on the lever, which tears though his scrotum, runs
up inside the length of his penis, and emerges in a spray of blood.

There are no words for the pain. No breath, no thought. Just deafening

white and red noise. Tucker feels himself passing out and welcomes it. He
drops Meadow, but she is conscious enough to hold on to his neck, and as
she falls she pulls him off the lever, which reams its way back through him
again.

Without realizing it, he is standing, breathing. His lungs are on fire. He

has to get out. He throws an arm around Meadow and drags her three feet to
the hatch. He releases the hatch and it swings down, half open. It’s designed
to function as a stairway to the ground, designed for a plane that is standing
on landing gear. Gloved hands reach into the opening and start pulling at it.
“We’re going to get you out of there,” a fireman says.

The hatch comes open with a shriek. Tuck sees blue and red flashing

lights illuminating raindrops against a black sky, making it appear as if it is
raining fire. He takes a single breath of fresh air, says, “I’ve torn off my
dick,” and falls forward.

And You Lost Your Frequent Flyer Miles

As with most things in his life, Tucker Case was wrong about the extent of
his injuries. As they wheeled him though the emergency room, he continued
to chant, “I’ve torn off my dick!, I’ve torn off my dick!” into his oxygen
mask until a masked physician appeared at his side.

“Mr. Case, you have not torn off your penis. You’ve damaged some

major blood vessels and some of the erectal tissue. And you’ve also severed
the tendon that runs from the tip of the penis to the base of the brain.” The
doctor, a woman, pulled down her mask long enough to show Tucker a grin.
“You should be fine. We’re taking you into surgery now.”

“What about the girl?”

“She’s got a mild concussion and some bruises, but she’ll be okay.

She’ll probably go home in a few hours.”

‘That’s good. Doc, will I be able to? I mean, will I ever…?”

“Be still, Mr. Case. I want you to count backward from one hundred.”

“Is there a reason for that—for the counting?”

“You can say the Pledge of Allegiance if you want.”

“But I can’t stand up.”

“Just count, smart-ass.”

“Tuck, you’re famous. You made the Enquirer.” The voice of Jake

Skye, Tuck’s only male friend and premier jet mechanic for Mary Jean.
“You crashed just in time to make the latest edition.”

“My dick?” Tuck said, struggling to sit up. There was what appeared to

be a plaster ostrich egg sitting on his lap. A tube ran out the middle of it.

Jake Skye, tall, dark, and unkempt—half Apache, half truck stop

waitress—said, “That’s going to smart. But the doc says you’ll play the
violin again.” Jake sat in a chair next to Tuck’s bed and opened the tabloid.

“Look at this. Oprah’s skinny again. Carrots, grapefruit, and

amphetamines.”

“Tucker Case moaned. “What about the girl? What was her name?”

“Meadow Malackovitch,” Jake said, looking at the paper. “Wow,

Oprah’s fucking Elvis. You got to give that woman credit. She stays busy.
By the way, they’re going to move you to Houston. Mary Jean wants you
where she can keep an eye on you.”

“The girl, Jake?”

Jake looked up from the paper. “You don’t want to know.”

“They said she was going to be okay. Is she dead?”

“Worse. Pissed off. And speaking of pissed off, there’s some FAA guys

outside who are waiting to talk to you, but the doctor wouldn’t let them in.

And I’m supposed to call Mary Jean as soon as you’re coherent. I’d advise
against that—becoming coherent, I mean. And then there’s a whole bunch
of reporters. The nurses are keeping them all out.”

“How’d you get in?”

“I’m your only living relative.”

“My mother will be pleased to hear that.”

“Brother, your mother doesn’t even want to claim you. You totally

fucked the dog on this one.”

“I’m fired, then?”

“Count on it. In fact, I’d say you’d be lucky to get a license to operate a

riding lawnmower.”

“I don’t know how to do anything but fly. One bad landing?”

“No, Tuck, a bad landing is when the overheads pop open and dump

people’s gym bags. You crashed. If it makes you feel any better, with the
Gulfstream gone I’m not going to have any work for at least six months.
They may not even get another jet.”

“Is the FAA filing charges?”

Jake Skye looked at his paper to avoid Tuck’s eyes. “Look, man, do you

want me to lie to you? I came up here because I thought you’d rather hear it
from me. You were drinking. You wrecked a million dollars’ worth of
SeaTac’s equipment in addition to the plane. You’re lucky you’re not dead.”

“Jake, look at me.”

Jake dropped the paper to his lap and sighed. “What?”

“Am I going to jail?”

“I’ve got to go, man.” Jake stood. “You heal up.” He turned to leave the

room.

“Jake!”

Jake Skye stopped and looked over his shoulder. Tucker could see the

disappointment in his friend’s eyes.

“What were you thinking?” Jake said.

“She talked me into it. I knew it wasn’t a good idea, but she was

persistent.”

Jake came to the side of the bed and leaned in close. “Tucker, what’s it

take for you to get it? Listen close now, buddy, because this is your last
lesson, okay? I’m out of a job because of you. You’ve got to make your
own decisions. You can’t let someone else always tell you what to do. You
have to take some responsibility.”

“I can’t believe I’m hearing this from you. You’re the one who got me

into this business.”

“Exactly. You’re thirty years old, man. You have to start thinking for

yourself. And with your head, not your dick.”

Tucker looked at the bandages in his lap. “I’m sorry. It all got out of

hand. It was like flying on autopilot. I didn’t mean to…”

“Time to take the controls, buddy.”

“Jake, something weird happened during the crash. I’m not sure if it

was a hallucination or what. There was someone else in the cockpit.”

“You mean besides the whore?”

“Yeah, just for a second, there was a guy in the copilot seat. He talked to

me. Then he disappeared.”

Jake sighed. “There’s no insanity plea for crashing a plane, Tuck. You

lost a lot of blood.”

“This was before I got hurt. While the plane was still skidding.”

“Here.” Jake tucked a silver flask under Tuck’s pillow and punched him

in the shoulder. “I’ll call you, man.” He turned and walked away.

Tuck called after him, “What if it was an angel or something?”

“Then you’re in the Enquirer next week too,” Jake said from the door.

“Get some sleep.”

Pinnacle of the Pink Pyramid

A low buzz of anticipation ran through the halls of the hospital. Reporters
checked the batteries in their microrecorders and cell phones. Orderlies and
nurses lingered in the hallways in hope of getting a glimpse of the celebrity.
The FAA men straightened their ties and shot their cuffs. One receptionist
in administration, who was only two distributorships away from earning her
own pink Oldsmobile, ducked into an examining room and sucked lungfuls
of oxygen to chase the dizziness that comes from meeting one’s Messiah.
Mary Jean was coming.

Mary Jean Dobbins did not travel with an entourage, bodyguards, or

any other of the decorative leeches commonly attached to the power-
wielding rich.

“God is my bodyguard,” Mary Jean would say.

She carried a .38-caliber gold-plated Lady Smith automatic in her bag:

the Clara Barton Commemorative Model, presented to her by the Daughters
of the Confederacy at their annual “Let’s Lynch Leroy” pecan pie bake-off,
held every Martin Luther King Jr. Day. (She didn’t agree with their politics,
but the belles could sure sell some makeup. If the South did not rise again,
it wouldn’t be for lack of foundation.)

Today, as Mary Jean came through the doors of the main lobby, she was

flanked by a tall predatory woman in a black business suit—a severe

contrast to Mary Jean’s soft pastel blue ensemble with matching bag and
pumps. “Strength and femininity are not exclusive, ladies.” She was sixty-
five; matronly but elegant. Her makeup was perfect, but not overdone. She
wore a sapphire-and-diamond pin whose value approximated the gross
national product of Zaire.

She greeted every orderly and nurse with a smile, asked after their

families, thanked them for their compassionate work, flirted when
appropriate, and tossed compliments over her shoulder as she passed,
without ever missing a step. She left a wake of acutely charmed fans, even
among the cynical and stubborn.

Outside Tucker’s room the predatory woman—a lawyer—broke

formation and confronted the maggotry of reporters, allowing Mary Jean to
slip past.

She poked her head inside. “You awake, slugger?”

Tuck was startled by her voice, yanked out of his redundant reverie of

unemployment, imprisonment, and impotence. He wanted to pull the sheets
over his head and quietly die.

“Mary Jean.”

The makeup magnate moved to his bedside and took his hand, all

compassion and caring. “How are you feeling?”

Tucker looked away from her. “I’m okay.”

“Do you need anything? I’ll have it here in a Texas jiffy.”

“I’m fine,” Tucker said. She always made him feel like he’d just struck

out in his first Little League game and she was consoling him with milk and
cookies. The fact that he’d once tried to seduce her doubled the humiliation.
“Jake told me that you’re having me moved to Houston. Thank you.”

“I have to keep an eye on you, don’t I?” She patted his hand. “You sure

you’re feeling well enough for a talk?”

Tucker nodded. He wasn’t buying the outpouring of warm fuzzies she

was selling. He’d seen her doing business on the plane.

“That’s good, honey,” Mary Jean said, rising and looking around the

room for the first time. “I’ll have some flowers sent up. A touch of color
will brighten things up, won’t it? Something fragrant too. The constant
smell of disinfectant must be disturbing.”

“A little,” Tuck said.

She wheeled on her heel and looked at him. Her smile went hard. Tuck

saw wrinkles around her mouth for the first time. “Probably reminds you of
what a total fuckup you are, doesn’t it?”

Tucker gulped. She’d faked him out of his shoes. “I’m sorry, Mary Jean.

I’m…”

She raised a hand and he shut up. “You know I don’t like to use

profanity or firearms, so please don’t push me, Tucker. A lady controls her
anger.”

“Firearms?”

Mary Jean pulled the Lady Smith automatic out of her purse and leveled

it at Tucker’s bandaged crotch. Strangely, he noticed that Mary Jean had
chipped a nail drawing the gun and for that, he realized, she really might
kill him.

“You didn’t listen to me when I told you to stop drinking. You didn’t

listen when I told you to stay away from my representatives. You didn’t
listen when I told you that if you were going to amount to anything, you
had to give your life to God. You’d better damn well listen now.” She
racked the slide on the automatic. “Are you listening?”

Tuck nodded. He didn’t breathe, but he nodded.

“Good. I have run this company for forty years without a hint of scandal

until now. I woke up yesterday to see my face next to yours on all the

morning news shows. Today it’s on the cover of every newspaper and
tabloid in the country. A bad picture, Tucker. My suit was out of season.
And every article uses the words ‘penis’ and ‘prostitute’ over and over. I
can’t have that. I’ve worked too hard for that.”

She reached out and tugged on his catheter. Pain shot though his body

and he reached for the ringer for the nurse.

“Don’t even think about it, pretty boy. I just wanted to make sure I had

your attention.”

“The gun pretty much did it, Mary Jean,” Tucker groaned. Fuck it, he

was a dead man anyway.

“Don’t you speak to me. Just listen. This is going to disappear. You are

going to disappear. You’re getting out of here tomorrow and then you’re
going to a cabin I have up in the Rockies. You won’t go home, you won’t
speak to any reporters, you won’t say doodly squat. My lawyers will handle
the legal aspects and keep you out of jail, but you will never surface again.
When this blows over, you can go on with your pathetic life. But with a
new name. And if you ever set foot in the state of Texas or come within a
hundred yards of anyone involved in my company, I will personally shoot
you dead. Do you understand?”

“Can I still fly?”

Mary Jean laughed and lowered the gun. “Sweetie, to a Texas way a

thinkin’ the only way you coulda screwed up worse is if you’d throwed a
kid down a well after fessing up to being on the grassy knoll stompin’
yellow roses in between shootin’ the President. You ain’t gonna fly, drive,
walk, crawl, or spit if I have anything to say about it.” She put the gun in
her purse and went into the tiny bathroom to check her makeup. A quick
primping and she headed for the door. “I’ll send up some flowers. Y’all heal
up now, honey.”

She wasn’t going to kill him after all. Maybe he could win her back.

“Mary Jean, I think I had a spiritual experience.”

“I don’t want to hear about any of your degenerate activities.”

“No, a real spiritual experience. Like a—what do you call it?—an

epiphany?”

“Son, you don’t know it, but you’re as close to seeing the Lord as

you’ve ever been in your life. Now you hush before I send you to
perdition.”

She put on her best beatific smile and left the room radiating the power

of positive thinking.

Tucker pulled the covers over his head and reached for the flask Jake

had left. Perdition, huh? She made it sound bad. Must be in Oklahoma.

Our Lady of the Fishnet Stockings

The High Priestess of the Shark People ate Chee-tos and watched afternoon
talk shows over the satellite feed. She sat in a wicker emperor’s chair. A red
patent leather pump dangled from one toe. Red lipstick, red nails, a big red
bow in her hair. But for a pair of silk seamed stockings, she was naked.

On the screen: Meadow Malackovitch, in a neck brace, sobbed on her

lawyer’s shoulder—a snapshot of the pilot who had traumatized her was
inset in the upper-right-hand corner. The host, a failed weatherman who
now made seven figures mining trailer parks for atrocities, was reading the
dubious résumé of Tucker Case. Shots of the pink jet, before and after.
Stock footage of Mary Jean on an airfield tarmac, followed by Case in a
leather jacket.

The High Priestess touched herself lightly, leaving a faint orange stripe

of Chee-to spoor on her pubes (she was a natural blonde), then keyed the
intercom that connected her to the Sorcerer.

“What?” came the man’s voice, weary but awake. It was 2:00 A.M. The

Sorcerer had been working all night.

“I think we’ve found our pilot,” she said.

Who’s Flying This Life?

At the last minute Mary Jean changed her mind about sending Tucker Case
to her cabin in the mountains. “Put him in a motel room outside of town and
don’t let him out until I say so.”

In two weeks Tucker had seen only the nurse who came in to change his

bandages and the guard. Actually, the guard was a tackle, second-string
defense from SMU, six-foot-six, two hundred and seventy pounds of
earnest Christian naïveté named Dusty Lemon.

Tucker was lying on the bed watching television. Dusty sat hunched

over the wood-grain Formica table reading Scripture.

Tucker said, “Dusty, why don’t you go get us a six-pack and a pizza?”

Dusty didn’t look up. Tuck could see the shine of his scalp through his

crew cut. A thick Texas drawl: “No, sir. I don’t drink and Mrs. Jean said
that you wasn’t to have no alcohol.”

“It’s not Mrs. Jean, you doofus. It’s Mrs. Dobbins.” After two weeks,

Dusty was beginning to get on Tuck’s nerves.

“Just the same,” Dusty said. “I can call for a pizza for you, but no beer.”

Tuck detected a blush though the crew cut. “Dusty?”

“Yes sir.” The tackle looked up from his Bible, waited.

“Get a real name.”

“Yes, sir,” Dusty said, a giant grin bisecting his moon face, “Tuck.”

Tucker wanted to leap off the bed and cuff Dusty with his Bible, but he

was a long way from being able to leap anywhere. Instead, he looked at the
ceiling for a second (it was highway safety orange, like the walls, the doors,
the tile in the bathroom), then propped himself up on one elbow and
considered Dusty’s Bible. “The red type. That the hot parts?”

“The words of Jesus,” Dusty said, not looking up.

“Really?”

Dusty nodded, looked up. “Would you like me to read to you? When my

grandma was in the hospital, she liked me to read Scriptures to her.”

Tucker fell back with an exasperated sigh. He didn’t understand

religion. It was like heroin or golf: He knew a lot of people did it, but he
didn’t understand why. His father watched sports every Sunday, and his
mother had worked in real estate. He grew up thinking that church was
something that simply interfered with games and weekend open houses. His
first exposure to religion, other than the skin mag layouts of the women
who had brought down television evangelists, had been his job with Mary
Jean. For her it just seemed like good business. Sometimes he would stand
in the back of the auditorium and listen to her talk to a thousand women
about having God on their sales team, and they would cheer and
“Hallelujah!” and he would feel as if he’d been left out of something—
something beyond the apparent goofiness of it all. Maybe Dusty had
something on him besides a hundred pounds.

“Dusty, why don’t you go out tonight? You haven’t been out in two

weeks. I have to be here, but you—you must have a whole line of babes
crying to get you back, huh? Big football player like you, huh?”

Dusty blushed again, going deep red from the collar of his practice

jersey to the top of his head. He folded his hands and looked at them in his
lap. “Well, I’m sorta waitin’ for the right girl to come along. A lot of the
girls that go after us football players, you know, they’re kinda loose.”

Tuck raised an eyebrow. “And?”

Dusty squirmed, his chair creaked under the strain. “Well, you know,

it’s kinda…”

And suddenly, amid the stammering, Tucker got it. The kid was a

virgin. He raised his hand to quiet the boy. “Never mind, Dusty.” The big
tackle slumped in his chair, exhausted and embarrassed.

Tuck considered it. He, who understood so much the importance of a

healthy sex life, who knew what women needed and how to give it to them,
might never be able to do it again, and Dusty Lemon, who probably could
produce a woody that women could chin themselves on, wasn’t using it at
all. He pondered it. He worked it over from several angles and came very
close to having a religious experience, for who but a vicious and vengeful
God would allow such injustice in the world? He thought about it. Poor
Tucker. Poor Dusty. Poor, poor Tucker.

He felt a lump forming in his throat. He wanted to say something that

would make the kid feel better. “How old are you, Dusty?”

“I’ll be twenty-two next March, sir?”

“Well, that’s not so bad. I mean, you might be a late bloomer, you know.

Or gay maybe,” Tuck said cheerfully.

Dusty started to contract into the fetal position. “Sir, I’d rather not talk

about it, if you don’t mind,” he whimpered. There was a knock on the door
and he uncurled, alert and ready to move. He looked to Tucker for
instructions.

“Well, answer it.”

Dusty lumbered to the door and pulled it open a crack. “Yes?”

“I’m here to see Tucker Case. It’s okay, I work for Mary Jean.” Tuck

recognized Jake Skye’s voice.

“Just a second.” Dusty turned and looked to Tucker, confused.

“Who knows we’re here, Dusty?”

“Just us and Mrs. Jean.”

“Then why don’t you let him in?”

“Yes, sir.” He opened the door and Jake Skye strode through carrying a

grocery bag and a pizza box.

“Greetings.” He threw the pizza on the bed. “Pepperoni and

mushroom.” He glanced at Dusty and paused, taking a moment to look the
tackle up and down. “How’d you get this job? Eat your family?”

“No, sir,” Dusty said.

Jake patted the tackle’s mammoth shoulder. “Good to be careful, I

guess. Momma always said, ‘Beware of geeks bearing gifts.’ Who are
you?”

“Jake Skye,” Tuck said, “meet Dusty Lemon. Dusty, Jake Skye, Mary

Jean’s jet mechanic. Be nice to Dusty, Jake, He’s a virgin.”

Dusty shot a vicious glare at Tuck and extended a boxing glove size

mitt. Jake shook his hand. “Virgin, huh?”

Jake dropped his hand. “Not including farm animals, though, right?”

Dusty winced and moved to close the door. “You-all can’t stay long. Mr.

Case isn’t supposed to see no one.”

Jake put the grocery bag down on the table, pulled out a four-inch-thick

bundle of mail, and tossed it on the bed next to Tucker. “Your fan mail.”

Tucker picked it up. “It’s all been opened.”

“I was bored,” Jake said, opening the pizza box and extracting a slice.

“A lot of death threats, a few marriage proposals, a couple really interesting
ones had both. Oh, and an airline ticket to someplace I’ve never heard of
with a check for expenses.”

“From Mary Jean?”

“Nope. Some missionary doctor in the Pacific. He wants you to fly for

him. Medical supplies or something. Came FedEx yesterday. Almost took
the job myself, seeing as I still have my pilot’s license and you don’t, but
then, I can get a job here.”

Tucker shuffled through the stack of mail until he found the check and

the airline ticket. He unfolded the attached letter.

Jake held the pizza box out to the bodyguard. “Dopey, you want some

pizza?”

“Dusty,” Dusty corrected.

“Whatever.” To Tuck: “He wants you to leave ASAP.”

“He can’t go anywhere,” said Dusty.

Jake retracted the box. “I can see that, Dingy. He’s still wired for

sound.” Jake gestured toward the catheter that snaked out of Tucker’s
pajama bottoms. “How long before you can travel?”

Tucker was studying the letter. It certainly seemed legitimate. The

doctor was on a remote island north of New Guinea, and he needed
someone to fly jet loads of medical supplies to the natives. He specifically
mentioned that “he was not concerned” about Tucker’s lack of a pilot’s
license. The “need was dire” and the need was for an experienced jet pilot
who could fly a Lear 45.

“Well,” Jake said, “when can you roll?”

“Doctor says not for a week or so,” Tucker said. “I don’t get it. This guy

is offering more money than I make for Mary Jean. Why me?”

Jake pulled a Lone Star from the grocery bag and twisted off the cap.

Tuck zeroed in on the beer. Dusty snatched it out of Jake’s hand.

“The question is,” Jake said, glaring at Dusty, “what the fuck is a

missionary doctor in Bongo Bongo land doing with a Lear 45?”

“God’s work?” Dusty said innocently.

Jake snatched back his beer. “Oh blow me, Huey.”

“Dusty,” Dusty corrected.

Tucker said, “I’m not sure this is a good idea. Maybe I should stay here

and see how things pan out with the FAA. This guy wants me right away. I
need more time.”

“Like more time will make a difference. Damn, Tucker, you don’t have

to sink eyeball deep in shit to know it’s a good idea to pull yourself out.
Sometimes you have to make a decision.”

Tucker looked at the letter again. “But I…”

Before Tucker could finish his protest, Jake brought the Lone Star in a

screaming arc across Dusty Lemon’s temple. The bodyguard fell like a dead
tree and did a dead-cat bounce on the orange carpet.

“Jesus!” Tucker said. “What the fuck was that?”

“A decision,” Jake said. He looked up from the fallen tackle and took a

pull on the foaming Lone Star. “Sometimes this high-tech world calls for
low-tech solutions. Let’s go.”

Travel Tips

“I can’t believe you hit him,” Tucker said. He was in the passenger seat of
Jake Skye’s camouflaged Land Rover. It was much more car than was
required for the Houston expressway, but Jake was into equipment overkill.
Everything he owned was Kevlar, GorTex, Polarfleece, titanium alloy,
graphite-polymer composite, or of “expedition quality.” He liked machines,
understood how they worked, and could fix them if they didn’t. Sometimes
he spoke in an incomprehensible alphabet soup of SRAM, DRAM,
FORTRAN, LORAN, SIMMS, SAMS, and ROM. Tuck, on the other hand,
knew most of the words to “Mommas, Don’t Let Your Babies Grow Up to
Be Cowboys” and could restore burned toast to new by scraping off the
black stuff.

Of the two, Jake was the cool one. Tucker had always found being cool

a little elusive. As Jake put it, “You’ve got the look, but you can’t walk the
walk or talk the talk. Tucker, you are a hopeless geek trapped in a cool
guy’s body, but out of the goodness of my heart, I will take you on as my
student.” They’d been friends for four years. Jake had taught Tuck to fly.

“He’ll be fine. He’s a jock,” Jake shouted over the buffeting wind. He

hadn’t bought a top for the Land Rover, opting instead for the Outback
package with the “patented rhinoceros poking platform.”

“He was just a kid. He was reading the Bible.”

“He would have ripped my arms off if I’d let him.”

Tuck nodded. That was probably true. “Where are we going?”

“The airport. Everything you need is in that pack in the back.”

Tucker looked into the back of the Rover. There was a large backpack.

“Why?”

“Because if I don’t get you out of the country right now, you’re going to

jail.”

“Mary Jean said she had that handled. Said her lawyers were on it.”

“Right, and I go around smacking kids with beer bottles for recreation.

The hooker filed a civil suit this morning. Twenty million. Mary Jean has to
throw you to the wolves to save her own ass. She has to let the court prove
that you fucked up all on your own. I grabbed your passport and some
clothes when I got your mail.”

“Jake, I can’t just take off like this. I’m supposed to see a doctor

tomorrow.”

“For what?”

Tuck pointed to the lump of bandages in his lap. “What do you think?

He’s supposed to take this damn tube out of me.”

“We’ll do it in the bathroom at the airport. There’s some antibiotics in

the first-aid kit in the pack. I confirmed you for a flight to Honolulu that
leaves in an hour. From there you go to Guam, then to someplace called
Truk. That’s where this doctor is supposed to meet you. I’ve got it all
written down. There was an e-mail address at the bottom of the letter. I sent
him a message to expect you tomorrow.”

“But my car, my apartment, my stuff.”

“Your apartment is a pit and I put your stuff worth keeping in a

ministorage. I’ve got the pink slip for your Camaro. Sign it over to me. I’ll

sell it and send you the money.”

“You were pretty fucking sure I’d want to do this.”

“What choice do you have?”

Jake parked the Land Rover in short-term parking, shouldered the pack,

and led Tucker into the international terminal. They checked the pack and
found a rest room near Tucker’s departure gate.

“I can do this myself,” Tucker said.

Jake Skye was peering over the door into the stall where Tucker was

preparing to remove his bandages and, finally, the catheter. A line of
businessmen washed their hands at a line of lavatories while trying not to
notice what was going on behind them in the stall.

“Just yank it,” Jake Skye said.

“Give me a minute. I think they tied a knot inside it.”

“Don’t be a wuss, Tucker. Yank it.”

The businessmen at the sinks exchanged raised eyebrows and one by

one broke for the rest room door.

Jake said, “I’m going to give you to five, then I’m coming over the stall

and yanking it for you. One, two…”

A rodeo cowboy at the urinals hitched up his Wranglers, pulled his hat

down, and made a bowlegged beeline for the door to get on a plane to
someplace where this sort of thing didn’t happen.

“Five!”

Security guards rushed through the terminal toward the screaming.

Someone was being murdered in the men’s room and they were responsible.
They burst into the rest room with guns drawn. Jake Skye was coiling up
some tubing by the sinks. There was whimpering coming from one of the

stalls. “Everything’s fine, officers,” Jake said. “My friend’s a little upset. He
just found out that his mother died.”

“My mother’s not dead!” Tucker said from the stall.

“He’s in denial,” Jake whispered to the guards. “Here, you better takes

this.” He handed the tubing to one of the guards. “We don’t want him
hanging himself in grief.”

Jake droned, “The stove will run on anything: diesel, jet fuel, gasoline,

even vodka. There’s a mask, fins, and snorkel, and a couple of waterproof
flashlights.”

The job with Mary Jean had been perfect. A different city every few

days, nice hotels, an expense account, and literally thousands of earnest
Mary Jean ladies to indulge him. And they did, one or two at each
convention. Inspired by Mary Jean’s speeches on self-determination,
motivation, and how they too could be a winner, they sought Tucker out to
have their one adventurous affair with a jet pilot. And because no matter
how many times it happened, he was always somewhat surprised by their
advances, Tucker played a part.He behaved like a man torn from the cover
of some steamy romance novel: the charming rogue, the passionate pirate
who would, come morning, take his ship to sea for God, Queen, and
Country. Of course, usually, sometime before morning, the women would
realize that under the smooth, gin-painted exterior was a guy who sniffed

his shorts to check their wearability. But for a moment, for them and for
him, he had been cool. Sleazy, but cool.

When the sleaze got to him, he needed only to suck a few hits of oxygen

from the cabin cylinder to chase the hangover, then pull the pink jet into the
sky to convince himself he was a professional, competent and in control. At
altitude he turned it all over to the autopilot.

But now he couldn’t seduce anyone or allow himself to be seduced, and

he wasn’t sure he could fly. The crash had juiced him of his confidence. It
wasn’t the impact or even the injuries. It was that last moment, when the
guy, or the angel, or whatever it was appeared in the copilot’s seat.

“You ever think about God?” Tucker asked Jake.

Jake Skye’s face went dead with incomprehension. “You’re going to

need to know about this stuff if you get into trouble. Kinda like checking
the fuel gauges—if you know what I mean.”

Tucker winced. “Look, I heard every word you said. This seemed

important all of a sudden, you know?”

“Well, in that case, Tuck, yes, I do think about God sometimes. When

I’m with a really hot babe, and we’re going at it like sweaty monkeys, I
think about it then. I think about a big old pissed-off Sistine Chapel finger-
pointin’ motherfucker. And you know what? It works. You don’t come
when you’re thinking about shit like that. You should try it sometime. Oh,
sorry.”

“Never mind,” Tucker said.

“You can’t let that kid with the Bible get to you. He’s too young to have

given up on religion…doesn’t have enough sin under his belt. Guys like us,
best bet is that it’s all bullshit and we go directly to worm food. Try not to
think about it.”

“Right,” Tucker said, totally unsatisfied. If you had a question about

any piece of gadgetry on the planet, Jake Skye was your man. But

spiritually, he was a hamster. Which, actually, was one of the things Tucker
used to like about him. He tried not to think about it and changed the
subject.

“So what do I need to know about flying a Lear 45?”

Jake seemed relieved to be back into the realm of technology. “I haven’t

seen one yet, but they say it flies just like Mary Jean’s old Lear 25, only
faster and a longer range. Better avionics. Read the manuals when you get
there.”

“What about navigation equipment?” Tucker’s navigation was weak.

Since he’d gotten his jet license, he’d depended completely on automatic
systems.”

“You’ll be fine. You don’t buy a four-million-dollar plane and cheap out

on the navigation and radios. This doctor’s got an e-mail address, which
means he’s got a computer. You’ll be able to access charts and weather, and
file flight plans with that. Check the facilities at your destinations, so you’ll
know what to expect. Some of these Third World airstrips just have a native
with a candle for night landings. And check your fuel availability. They’ll
sell you sewer water instead of jet fuel if you don’t check. You ever deal
with Third World airport cops?”

Tucker shrugged. Jake knew damn well he hadn’t. He’d gotten his hours

flying copilot in the Mary Jean jet, and they’d never taken that outside of
the continental United States except for one trip to Hawaii.

“Well,” Jake continued, “the catchword is ‘bribe, bribe, and bribe.’

Offer the highest amount you can at the lowest level of authority. Always
have a thick roll of American dollars with you, and don’t bring it to the
table if you’re not willing to lose it. Keep something stashed in your shoe if
they tap you out.”

“You think this doctor is going to have me hauling drugs?”

“Good chance of it, don’t you think? Besides, it doesn’t matter. These

people are brutal. Half the time the government guys have the same last

name, so if you move up the ladder, you’re just talking to the uncle of the
last one that hit you. He has to charge you more out of pride.”

Tucker cradled his head in his hands and stared into his gin and tonic.

“I’m fucked.”

Jake patted him on the arm, then drew back at the intimacy of the act.

“They’re calling your flight. You’ll be fine.”

They rose and Jake threw some cash on the table. At the gate Tucker

turned to his friend. “Man, I don’t know what to say.”

Jake extended his hand. “No sweat, man. You’d have done it for me.”

“I really hate flying in the back. Check on that kid from the motel,

okay.”

“I’m on it. Look, everything you need is in the pack. Don’t leave it

behind.”

“Right,” Tucker said. “Well…” He turned and walked down the ramp to

the plane.

Jake Skye watched him go, then turned, walked to a pay phone, dialed

some numbers, and waited. “Yeah, it’s Jake. He’s on his way. Yeah, gone
for good. When can I pick up my check?”

The Humiliation of the Pilot As a Passenger

Once on the plane, Tucker unfolded the letter from the mysterious doctor
and read it again.

Dear Mr. Case:

I have become aware of your recent difficulties and I believe I have
a proposition that will be of great benefit to us both. My wife and I
are missionaries on Alualu, a rather remote atoll at the north-
western tip of the Micronesian crescent. Since we are out of the
normal shipping lanes and we are the sole medical provider for the
people of the island, we maintain our own aircraft for the transport
of medical supplies. We have recently procured a Lear 45 for this
purpose, but our former pilot has been called to the mainland on
personal business for an indefinite time.

In short, Mr. Case, given your experience flying small jets and

our unique requirements, we feel that this would be a perfect
opportunity for us both. We are not concerned with the status of
your license, only that you can perform in the pilot’s seat and fulfill
a need that can only be described as dire.

If you are willing to honor a long-term contract, we will provide

you with room and board on the island, pay you $2,000 a week, as
well as a generous bonus upon completion of the contract. As a

gesture of our sincerity, I am enclosing an open airline ticket and a
cashier’s check for $3,000 for traveling expenses. Contact us by e-
mail with your arrival time in Truk and my wife will meet you there
to discuss the conditions of your employment and provide
transportation to Alualu. You’ll find a room reserved for you at the
Paradise Inn.

Sincerely,
Sebastian Curtis, M.D.
Sebcurt@Wldnet.COM.JAP

Why me? Tuck wondered. He’d crashed a jet, lost his job and probably

his sex life, was charged with multiple crimes, then a letter and a check
arrived from nowhere to bail him out, but only if he was willing to abandon
everything and move to a Pacific island. It could turn out to be a good job,
but if it had been his decision, he’d still be lingering over it in a motel room
with Dusty Lemon. It was as if some combination of ironic luck and Jake
Skye had been sent along to make the decision for him. Not so strange, he
thought. The same combination had put him in the pilot’s seat in the first
place.

Tuck had grown up in Elsinore, California, northeast of San Diego, the

only son of the owner of the Denmark Silverware Corporation. He had an
unremarkable childhood, was a mediocre athlete, and spent most of his
adolescence surfing in San Diego and chasing girls, one of whom he finally
caught.

Zoophilia Gold was the daughter of his father’s lawyer, a lovely girl

made shy by a cruel first name. Tuck and Zoo enjoyed a brief romance,
which was put on hold when Tuck’s father sent him off to college in Texas
so he could learn to make decisions and someday take over the family
business. His motivation excised by the job guarantee, Tuck made passing
grades until his college career was cut short by an emergency call from his
mother. “Come home. Your father’s dead.”

Tuck made the drive in two days, stopping only for gas, to use the

bathroom, and to call Zoophilia, who informed him that his mother had

married his father’s brother and his uncle had taken over Denmark
Silverware. Tuck screeched into Elsinore in a blind rage and ran over
Zoophilia’s father as he was leaving Tuck’s mother’s house.

The death was declared an accident, but during the investigation a

policeman informed Tuck that although he had no proof, he suspected that
the riding accident that killed Tuck’s father might not have been an
accident, especially since Tuck’s father had been allergic to horses. Tuck
was sure that his uncle had set the whole thing up, but he couldn’t bring
himself to confront his mother or her new husband.

In the meantime, Zoophilia, stricken with grief over her father’s death,

overdosed on Prozac and drowned in her hot tub, and her brother, who had
been away at college also, returned promising to kill Tucker or at least sue
him into oblivion for the deaths of his father and sister. While trying to
come to a decision on a course of action, Tucker met a brace of Texas
brunettes in a Pacific Beach bar who insisted he ride back with them to the
Lone Star state.

Disinherited, depressed, and clueless, Tucker took the ride as far as a

small suburban airport outside of Houston, where the girls asked him if he’d
ever been nude skydiving. At that point, not really caring if he lived or died,
he crawled into the back of a Beechcraft with them.

They left him scraped, bruised, and stranded on the tarmac in a

jockstrap and a parachute harness, shivering with adrenaline. Jake Skye
found him wandering around the hangars wearing the parachute canopy as a
toga. It had been a tough year.

“Let me guess,” Jake said. “Margie and Randy Sue?”

“Yeah,” Tucker said. “How’d you know?”

“They do it all the time. Daddies with money—Rosencrantz and

Guildenstern Petroleum. Hope you didn’t cut up that canopy. You can get a
grand for it used.”

“They’re gone, then?”

“An hour ago. Said something about going to London. Where are your

clothes?”

“In their car.”

“Come with me.”

Jake gave Tucker a job washing airplanes, then taught him to fly a

Cessna 172 and enrolled him in flight school. Tucker got his twin-engine
hours in six months, helping Jake ferry Texas businessmen around the state
in a leased Beech Duke. Jake turned the flying over to Tuck as soon as he
passed his 135 commercial certification.

“I can fly anything,” Jake said, “but unless it’s helicopters, I’d rather

wrench. Only steady gig in choppers is flying oil rigs in the Gulf. Had too
many friends tip off into the drink. You fly, I’ll do the maintenance, we split
the cash.”

Another six months and Jake was offered a job by the Mary Jean

Cosmetics Corporation. Jake took the job on the condition that Tucker
could copilot until he had his Lear hours (he described Tuck as a “little lost
lamb” and the makeup magnate relented). Mary Jean did her own flying,
but once Tucker was qualified, she turned the controls over to him full-time.
“Some members of the board have pointed out that my time would be better
spent taking care of business instead of flying. Besides, it’s not ladylike.
How’d you like a job?”

Luck. The training he’d received would have cost hundreds of

thousands of dollars, and he’d gotten most of it for free. He had become a
new person, and it had all started with a bizarre streak of bad luck followed
by an opportunity and Jake Skye’s intervention. Maybe it would work out
for the better this time too. At least this time no one had been killed.

Cult of the Autopilot: A History Lesson

The pilot said, “The local time is 9:00 A.M. The temperature is 90 degrees.
Thank you for flying Continental and enjoy your stay in Truk.” Then he
laughed menacingly.

Tuck stepped out of the plane and felt the palpable weight of the air in

his lungs. It smelled green, fecund, as if vegetation was growing, dying,
rotting, and giving off a gas too thick to breathe. He followed a line of
passengers to the terminal, a long, low, cinderblock building—nothing more
really than a tin roof on pillars—teeming with brown people; short, stoutly
built people, men in jeans or old dress slacks and T-shirts, women in long
floral cotton dresses with puff shoulders, their hair held in buns atop their
heads by tortoiseshell combs.

Tuck waited, sweating, at one end of the terminal while young men

shoved the baggage through a curtain onto a plywood ramp. Natives
retrieved their baggage, mainly coolers wrapped with packing tape, and
walked by the customs officer’s counter without pausing. He looked for a
tourist, to see how they were treated, but there were none. The customs
officer glared at him. Tucker hoped there was nothing illegal in his pack.
The airport here looked like a weigh station for a death camp; he didn’t
want to see the jail. He fingered the roll of bills in his pocket, thinking,
Bribe.

The pack came sliding through the curtain. Tucker moved through the

pall of islanders and pulled the pack onto his shoulders, then walked to the
customs counter and plopped it down in front of the officer.

“Passport,” the officer said. He was fat and wore a brass button uniform

with dime store flip-flops on his feet.

Tuck handed him his passport.

“How long will you be staying?”

“Not long. I’m not sure. A day maybe.”

“No flights for three days.” The officer stamped the passport and

handed it back to Tucker. “There’s a ten-dollar departure fee.”

“That’s it?” Tucker was amazed. No inspection, no bribe. Luck again.

“Take your bag.”

“Right.” Tucker scooped up the pack and headed for an exit sign, hand-

painted on plywood. He walked out of the airport and was blinded by the
sun.

“Hey, you dive?” A man’s voice.

Tuck squinted and a thin, leathery islander in a Bruins hockey jersey

stood in front of him. He had six teeth, two of them gold. “No,” Tucker
said.

“Why you come if you no dive?”

“I’m here on business.” Tucker dropped his pack and tried to breathe.

He was soaked with sweat. Ten seconds in this sun and he wanted to dive
into the shade like a roach under a stove.

“Where you stay?”

This guy looked criminal, just an eye patch short of a pirate. Tucker

didn’t want to tell him anything.

“How do I get to the Paradise Inn?”

The pirate called to a teenager who was sitting in the shade watching a

score of beat-up Japanese cars with blackened windows jockeying for
position in the dirt street.

“Rindi! Paradise.”

The younger man, dressed like a Compton rapper—oversized shorts,

football jersey, baseball cap reversed over a blue bandanna—came over and
grabbed Tucker’s pack. Tuck kept one hand on an arm strap and fought the
kid for control.

“You go with him,” the pirate said. “He take you Paradise.”

“Come on, Holmes,” the kid said. “My car air-conditioned.

Tucker let go of the pack and the kid whisked it away through the jostle

of cars to an old Honda Civic with a cellophane back window and bailing
wire holding the passenger door shut. Tuck follow him, stepping quickly
between the cars, each one lurching forward as if to hit him as he passed.
He looked for the driver’s expressions, but the windshields were all blacked
out with plastic film.

The kid threw Tuck’s pack in the hatchback, then unwired the door and

held it open. Tucker climbed in, feeling, once again, completely at the
mercy of Lady Luck. Now I get to see the place where they rob and kill the
white guys, he thought.

As they drove, Tuck looked out on the lagoon. Even through the tinted

window the blue of the lagoon shone as if illuminated from below. Island
women in scuba masks waded shoulder deep; their floral dresses flowing
around them made them look like multicolored jellyfish. Each carried a
short steel spear slung from a piece of surgical tubing. Large plastic buckets
floated on the surface in which the women were depositing their catch.

“What are they hunting?” Tuck asked the driver.

“Octopus, urchin, small fish. Mostly octopus. Hey, where you from in

United States?”

“I grew up in California.”

The kid lit up. “California! You have Crips there, right?”

“Yeah, there’s gangs.”

“I’m a Crip,” the kid said, pointing to his blue bandanna with pride.

“Me and my homies find any Bloods here, we gonna pop a nine on ’em.”

Tucker was amazed. On the side of the road a beautiful little girl in a

flowered dress was drinking from a green coconut. Here in the car there
was a gang war going on. He said, “Where are the Bloods?”

Rindi shook his head sadly. “Nobody want to be Bloods. Only Crips on

Truk. But if we see one, we gonna bust a cap on ’em.” He pulled back a
towel on the seat to reveal a beat-up Daisy air pistol.

Tuck made a mental note not to wear a red bandanna and accidentally

fill the Blood shortage. He had no desire to be killed or wounded over a
glorified game of cowboys and Indians.

“How far to the hotel?”

“This it,” Rindi said, wrenching the Honda across the road into a dusty

parking lot.

The Paradise Inn was a two-story, crumbling stucco building with a

crown of rusting rebar beckoning skyward for a third floor that would never
be built. Tuck let the boy, Rindi, carry his pack to an upstairs room: mint
green cinder block over brown linoleum, a beat-up metal desk, smoke-
stained floral curtains, a twin bed with a torn 1950s bedspread, the smell of
mildew and insecticide. Rindi put the pack in the doorless closet and
cranked the little window air conditioner to high.

“Too late for shower. Water come on again four to six.”

Tuck glanced into the bathroom. Mistake. An exotic-looking orange

thing was growing on the shower curtain. He said, “Where can I get a
beer?”

Rindi grinned. “We have lounge. Budweiser, ‘king of beers.’ MTV on

satellite.” He cocked his wrists and performed a gangsta rap move that
looked as if he’d contracted a rhythmic cerebral palsy. “Yo, G, we chill with
the phattest jams? Snoop, Ice, Public Enemy.”

“Oh, good,” Tuck said. “We can do a drive-by later. How do I get to the

lounge?”

“Down steps, outside, go right.” He paused, looking concerned. “We

have to shoot out driver’s side. Other window not go down.”

“We’ll manage.” Tuck flipped the kid a dollar and left the room, proud

to be an American.

An unconscious island man marked the entrance to the lounge. Tuck

stepped over him and pushed his way through the black glass door into a
cool, dark, smoke-hazed room lit by a silent television tuned to nothing and
a flickering neon BUDWEISER sign. A shadow stood behind the bar; two
more sat in front of it. Tuck could see eyes in the dark—maybe people
sitting at tables, maybe nocturnal vermin.

A voice: “A fellow American here to buy a beer for his countryman.”

The voice had come from one of the shadows at the bar. Tuck squinted

into the dark and saw a large white man, about fifty, in a sweat-stained dress
shirt. He was smiling, a jowly yellow smile under drink-dulled eyes. Tuck
smiled back. Anyone that didn’t speak broken English was, at this point, his
friend.

“What are you drinkin’, pardner?” Tuck always went Texan when he

was being friendly.

“What you drink here.” He held up two fingers to the bartender, then

held his hand out to shake. “Jefferson Pardee, editor in chief of the Truk
Star.”

“Tucker Case.” Tuck sat down on the stool next to the big man. The

bartender placed two sweating Budweiser cans in front of them and waited.

“Run a tab,” Pardee said. Then to Tuck: “I assume you’re a diver?”

“Why would you assume that?”

“It’s the only reason Americans come here, other than Peace Corps or

Navy CAT team members. And if you don’t mind my saying, you don’t
look idealistic enough to be Peace Corps or stupid enough to be Navy.”

“I’m a pilot.” It felt good saying it. He’d always liked saying it. He

didn’t realize how terrified he’d been that he’d never be able to say it again.
“I’m supposed to meet someone from another island about a job.”

“Not a missionary air outfit, I hope.”

“It’s for a missionary doctor. Why?”

“Son, those people do a great job, but you can only get so much out of

those old planes they fly. Fifty-year-old Beech 18s and DC3s. Sooner or
later you’re going into the drink. But I suppose if you’re flying for God…”

“I’ll be flying a new Learjet.”

Pardee almost dropped his beer. “Bullshit.”

Tuck was tempted to pull out the letter and slam it on the bar, but

thought better of it. “That’s what they said.”

Pardee put a big hairy forearm on the bar and leaned into Tuck. He

smelled like a hangover. “What island and what church?”

“Alualu,” Tuck said. “A Dr. Curtis.”

Pardee nodded and sat back on his stool. “No-man’s Island.”

“What’s that mean?”

“It doesn’t belong to anyone. Do you know anything about

Micronesia?”

“Just that you have gangs but no regular indoor plumbing.”

“Well, depending on how you look at it, Truk can be a hellhole. That’s

what happens when you give Coke cans to a coconut culture. But it’s not all
that way. There are two thousand islands in the Micronesian crescent,
running almost all the way from Hawaii to New Guinea. Magellan landed
here first, on his first voyage around the world. The Spanish claimed them,
then the Germans, then the Japanese. We took them from the Japanese
during the war. There are seventy sunken Japanese ships in Truk’s lagoon
alone. That’s why the divers come.”

“So what’s this have to do with where I’m going?”

“I’m getting to that. Until fifteen years ago, Micronesia was a U.S.

protectorate, except for Alualu. Because it’s at the westernmost tip of the
crescent, we left it out of the surrender agreement with the Japanese. It kind
of got lost in the shuffle. So Alualu was never an American territory, and
when the Federated States of Micronesia declared independence, they didn’t
include Alualu.”

“So what’s that mean?” Tuck was getting impatient. This was the

longest lecture he’d endured since flight school.

“In short, no mother government, no foreign aid, no nothing. Alualu

belongs to whoever lives on it. It’s off the shipping lanes, and it’s a raised
atoll, only one small island, not a group of islands around a lagoon, so
there’s not enough copra to make it worth the trip for the collector boats.
Since the war, when there was an airstrip there, no one goes there.”

“Maybe that’s why they need the jet?”

“Son, I came here in ’66 with the Peace Corps and I’ve never left. I’ve

seen a lot of missionaries throw a lot of money at a lot of problems, but I’ve
never seen a church that was willing to spring for a Learjet.”

Tuck wanted to beat his head on the bar just to feel his tiny brain rattle.

Of course it was too good to be true. He’d known that instinctively. He
should have known that as soon as he’d seen the money they were offering
him—him, Tucker Case, the biggest fuckup in the world.

Tuck drained his beer and signaled for two more. “So what do you

know about this Curtis?”

“I’ve heard of him. There’s not much news out here and he made some

about twenty years back. He went batshit at the airport in Yap after he
couldn’t get anyone to evacuate a sick kid off the island. Frankly, I’m
surprised he’s still out there. I heard the church pulled out on him. Cargo
cults give Christians the willies.”

Tuck knew he was being lured in. He’d met guys like Pardee in airport

hotel bars all over the U.S.: lonely businessmen, usually salesmen, who
would talk to anyone about anything just for the company. They learned
how to make you ask questions that required long windy answers. He’d felt
sympathetic toward them ever since he’d played Willie Loman in Miss
Patterson’s third-grade class production of Death of a Salesman. Pardee just
needed to talk.

“What’s a cargo cult?” Tuck asked.

Pardee smiled. “They’ve been in the islands since the Spanish landed in

the 1500s and traded steel tools and beads to the natives for food and water.
They’re still around.”

Pardee took a long pull on his beer, set it down, and resumed. “These

islands were all populated by people from somewhere else. The stories of
the heroic ancestors coming across the sea in canoes are part of their
religions. The ancestors brought everything they need from across the sea.
All of a sudden, guys show up with new cool stuff. Instant ancestors, instant
gods from across the sea, bearing gifts. They incorporated the newcomers

into their religions. Sometimes it might be fifty years before another ship
showed up, but every time they used a machete, they thought about the
return of the gods bearing cargo.”

“So there are still people waiting for the Spanish to return with steel

tools.”

Pardee laughed. “No. Except for missionaries, these islands didn’t get

much attention from the modern world until World War II. All of a sudden,
Allied forces are coming in and building airstrips and bribing the islanders
with things so they would resist the Japanese. Manna from the heavens.
American flyers brought in all sorts of good stuff. Then the war ended and
the good stuff stopped coming.

“Years later anthropologists and missionaries are finding little altars

built to airplanes. The islanders are still waiting for the ships from the sky
to return and save them. Myths get built around single pilots who are
supposed to bring great armies to the islands to chase out the French, or the
British, or whatever imperial government holds the island. The British
outlawed the cargo cults on some Melanesian islands and jailed the leaders.
Bad idea, of course. They were instant martyrs. The missionaries railed
against the new religions, trying to use reason to kill faith, so some
islanders started claiming their pilots were Jesus. Drove the missionaries
nuts. Natives putting little propellers on their crucifixes, drawing pictures of
Christ in a flight helmet. Bottom line is the cargo cults are still around, and
I hear that one of the strongest is on Alualu.”

“Are the natives dangerous?” Tuck asked.

“Not because of their religion, no.”

“What’s that mean?”

“These people are warriors, Mr. Case. They forget that most of the time,

but sometimes when they’re drinking, a thousand years of warrior tradition
can rear its head, even on the more modernized islands like Truk. And there
are people in these islands who still remember the taste of human flesh—if
you get my meaning. Tastes like Spam, I hear. The natives love Spam.”

“Spam? You’re kidding.”

“Nope. That’s what Spam stands for: Shaped Protein Approximating

Man.”

Tucker smiled, realizing he’d been had. Pardee let loose an explosive

laugh and slapped Tuck on the shoulder. “Look, my friend, I’ve got to get to
the office. A paper to put out, you know. But watch yourself. And don’t be
surprised if your Learjet is actually a beat-up Cessna.”

“Thanks,” Tucker said, shaking the big man’s hand.

“You going to be around for few days?” Pardee asked.

“I’m not sure.”

“Well, just a word of advice”—Pardee lowered his voice and leaned

into Tucker conspiratorially—“don’t go out at night by yourself. Nothing
you’re going to see is worth your life.”

“I can take care of myself, but thanks.”

“Just so,” Pardee said. He turned and lumbered out of the bar.

Tuck paid the bartender and headed out into the heat and to his room,

where he stripped naked and lay on the tattered bedspread, letting the air
conditioner blow over him with a welcome chill. Maybe this won’t be so
bad, he thought. He was going to end up on an island where God was a
pilot. What a great way to get babes!

Then he looked down at his withered member, stitched and scarred as if

it had been patched from the Frankenstein monster. A wave of anxiety
passed through him, bringing sweat to his skin even in the electric chill. He
realized that he had really never done anything in his adult life that had not
—even at some subconscious level—been part of a strategy to impress
women. He would have never worked so hard to become a pilot if it hadn’t
been for Jake’s insistence that “Chicks dig pilots.” Why fly? Why get out of
bed in the morning? Why do anything?

He rolled over to bury his face in the pillow and pinned a live cockroach

to the spread with his cheek.

Coconut Telegraph

Jefferson Pardee dialed the island communications center and asked them to
connect him to a friend of his in the governor’s office on Yap. While he
waited for the connection, he looked down from his office above the Food
Store on the Truk public market: women selling bananas, coconuts, and
banana leaf bundles of taro out of plywood sheds; children with bandannas
on their faces against the rising street dust; drunk men languishing red-eyed
in the shade. Across the street lay a stand of coconut palms and the vibrant
blue-green water of the lagoon dotted with outboards and floating pieces of
Styrofoam coolers. Another day in paradise, Pardee thought.

Pardee had been out here for thirty years now. He’d come fresh out of

Northwestern School of Journalism full of passion to save the world, to help
those less fortunate than himself, and to avoid the draft. After his two years
in the Peace Corps were up—his main achievement was teaching the
islanders to boil water—he’d stayed. First he worked for the budding island
governments, helping to write the charters, the constitutions, and the
requests for aid from the United States. That work finished, he found
himself afraid to go home. He’d gone to fat on breadfruit and beer and
become accustomed to dollar whores, fifty-cent taxis, and a two-hour
workday. The idea of returning to the States, where he would have to live
up to his potential or face being called a failure, terrified him. He wrote and
received a grant to start the Truk Star. It was the last significant thing that
he’d done for twenty-five years. Covering the news in Truk was akin to
taking a penguin census in the Mojave Desert. Still, deep inside, he hoped

that something would happen so that he could flex his atrophied journalistic
muscles. Something he could get passionate about. Why couldn’t the United
States nuke a nearby island? The French did it in Polynesia all the time. But
no, the United States nukes one little atoll in Micronesia (Bikini) and they
go away, saying, “Well, I guess that ought to do for twenty-five thousand
years or so.” Wimps.

Then again, maybe there was something going on out on Alualu.

Something clandestine and dirty. Jefferson Pardee had lost his ambition, but
he still had hope.

“Go ahead,” the operator said.

“Ignatho, how you doing, man?”

Ignatho Malongo, governor’s assistant for outer island affairs, was not

in the mood to chat. It was lunchtime and he was out of cigarettes and betel
nut and no one had come to relieve him on the radio so he could leave. His
office was in a bright blue corrugated steel shed tucked behind the offices
of the governor. It housed a military-style steel desk, a shortwave radio, a
new IBM computer, and a wastebasket full of tractor-feed paper stained
with red betel nut spit under a sign that emphatically declared NO SPITTING.
He was round, brown, and wore only a loincloth, a Casio watch, and a Bic
pen on a string around his neck. He was sweating into a puddle that
darkened the concrete floor around his desk.

“Pardee, what do you need?”

“I was wondering if you’ve heard anything going on out on Alualu?”

“Just the same. Occasionally the doctor radios for supplies to be sent

out on the Micro Trader. They’re not officially in Yap state, so they don’t
go through my office. Why?”

“You hear any rumors, maybe from the Micro Trader crew?”

“Like what? The Shark People don’t have contact with anyone since I

can remember. Just that Dr. Curtis.”

Pardee didn’t want to be in the business of starting rumors. More than

once he’d had to track down a story to find out that it had started with a
drunken lie he’d told in a bar that had circulated through the islands,
changed enough to sound credible, and landed back on his desk. Still,
Malongo wasn’t giving anything today. “I hear they have a new aircraft out
there. A Learjet.”

Malongo laughed. “Where did you hear that?”

“I’ve heard it twice now. A couple of months ago from a guy who said

he was going out there to fly it for them and just now from another pilot on
his way.”

“Maybe they’re starting a new airline. Be serious, Jeff. Are you that

desperate for a story? I’ve got some grants you can write if you need the
work.”

Pardee was a little embarrassed. Still, he had no doubt that Tucker Case

had been contacted by Dr. Curtis. Something was up. He said, “Well, maybe
you can ask the guys on the Trader to keep an eye out. Ask around and call
me if you hear anything.”

Suddenly Pardee had a flash of motivational inspiration. “If someone’s

buying jet airplanes, there might be some untapped government money out
there that you guys don’t know about.” He could almost hear Malongo snap
to attention.

Malongo was thinking air conditioner, laser printer, a new chair. “Look,

I’ll ask out at the airport. If someone’s flying a jet off of Alualu, then they
have to use the radio, right?”

“I suppose,” Pardee said.

“I’ll call you.” Malongo hung up.

Pardee sighed. “And once again,” he said to himself, “we lead with the

‘Pig Thief Still at Large’ story.”

A half hour later the phone rang. The phone never rang. Pardee picked

it up and could tell by the clicking that he was being connected off-island.
Ignatho Malongo came on the line. He sounded like he was in a better
mood. Pardee guessed that he was in a state of foreign aid arousal.

“Jeff, the Trader is in the harbor. Some of the crew was having lunch at

the marina and I asked them about your Learjet.” Malongo was smoking a
Benson & Hedges and chewing a big cud of betel nut. He was in a better
mood now.

“And?”

“No one’s seen it, but they did see some Japanese on the island the last

time they were there.”

“Japanese? Tourists?”

“They were carrying machine guns.”

“No shit.”

“Do you think this means there’s some military money coming our

way?” Malongo was thinking air-conditioning, a case of Spam, a ticket to
Hawaii to go shopping.

Pardee scratched his two-day growth of beard. “Probably the crew off

of a tuna boat. They’ve been threatening to shoot some of the islanders off
Ulithi if they keep stealing their net floats. I’ll check with the Australian
Navy, see if they know about a Japanese boat fishing those waters.
Meantime, I owe you a bag of betel nut.”

Malongo laughed. “You owe me about ten bags by now. How you going

to pay if you never leave that shithole of an island?”

“You’ll see me soon enough.” Pardee hung up.

Paging the Goddess

The Shark men had been beating drums and marching with bamboo rifles
since dawn, while the Shark women prepared the feast for the appearance of
the High Priestess.

In her bed chamber the High Priestess was doing her nails. The Sorcerer

entered through a beaded curtain, moved up behind her, and cupped her
naked breasts. Without looking up, she said, “You know, I used to get a
pretty good buzz doing this in my studio apartment. Close the windows and
let the fumes build up. Want a whiff?” She held the polish bottle out behind
her.

He shook his head. He was in his mid-fifties, tall, thin, with short gray

hair and ice blue eyes. He wore a green lab coat over Bermuda shorts.
“Missionary Air just radioed. Their Beech is broken. They’re waiting for a
part from the States and won’t have it fixed for a month. Our pilot’s stuck
on Truk.”

The High Priestess fired a glare over her shoulder and he could feel

himself going to slime, changing, melting into the lowest form of sea slug.
She could do that to him. Her breasts felt like chilled river rocks in his
hands. He stepped away.

“It’s all right,” he said. “I’ve sent him a message to fly to Yap. He can

catch the Micro Trader there tomorrow and he’ll be here two days later.”

She was not impressed. “Don’t you think it might be a good idea for me

to meet this one before he gets here? It took long enough to find him.”

The Sorcerer had backed all the way to the beaded curtain. “You were

the one that didn’t want any more military types.”

“Because it worked so well last time. It’s bad enough I have to be

surrounded by ninjas. I don’t like it.”

The Sorcerer couldn’t believe anyone could walk that slowly and still

express so much; it was positively symphonic. He said, “They’re not ninjas.
They’re just guards. This will all be over soon and you can live in a palace
in France if you want.”

He held his arms out to receive her embrace. She turned on a red spiked

heel and quickstepped back to the vanity. “We’ll talk about this later. I have
to go on in an hour.”

Feeling stupid, he dropped his arms and backed through the beaded

curtain. In the distance the Shark People began the chant to call forth the
Priestess of the Sky.

Friendly Advice

Tuck was sweating through a slow-motion dream rerun of the crash. The
end of the runway was coming up too quickly. Meadow Malackovitch was
bouncing off of various consoles in the cockpit. Someone in the copilot seat
was screaming at him, calling him a “fuckin’ mook.” He turned to see who
it was and was awakened by a knock on the door.

“Mr. Case. Message for you.”

“Just a second.” Tucker scrambled in the darkness until he found his

khakis on the floor, shook them to evict any insect visitors, then pulled
them on and stumbled to the door. Rindi, the driver-rapper, stood outside
holding a slip of paper.

“This just come for you from the telecom center.” He reached past Tuck

and clicked the light switch. A bare bulb went on over the desk.

Tuck took the note, dug in his pants pocket for a tip, and came up with a

dollar, but Rindi had already shuffled off.

The note, on waxy fax paper, was covered with greasy fingerprints.

Tuck guessed it had probably passed through a dozen hands before getting
to him. He unfolded it and read.

To: Tucker Case c/o Paradise Hotel

From: Dr. Sebastian Curtis

Mr. Case,

I deeply regret that my wife will not be able to meet you on Truk as
planned. We have reserved a seat for you on tomorrow’s Air
Micronesia flight to Yap, where we have arranged transport aboard
the supply ship, Micro Trader, to Alualu. Your plane will arrive at
11:00 A.M. and the Micro Trader is scheduled to sail at noon, so it
will be necessary for you to take a taxi to the dock as soon as you
clear customs.

I apologize for the inconvenience and would ask that you refrain

from discussing the purpose of your visit with the crew of the Micro
Trader—or with anyone else, for that matter. It would be
unfortunate if this research reached the FAA before it had been
thoroughly investigated. Rumors travel quickly in these islands.

I look forward to discussing the intricacies of the particular

strain of staphylococci with you.

Sincerely, 
Sebastian Curtis, M.D.

Staphylococci? Germs? He wants to discuss germs? Tuck couldn’t have

been more confused if the message had been in Eskimo. He folded it and
looked again at the fingerprints.

That was it. He knew that other people would be reading the note. The

germ thing was just a red herring to confuse nosy natives. The bit about the
FAA obviously referred to Tuck’s revoked pilot’s license. In a way, it was a
threat. Maybe he ought to find out a little more about this doctor before he
went running out to this remote island. Maybe the reporter, Pardee, knew
something.

Tuck dressed quickly and went down to the desk, where Rindi was

listening to a transistor radio with a speaker that sounded like it had been

fashioned from wax paper. Someone was singing a Garth Brooks song in
nasal Trukese accompanied by an accordion.

“It sounds like someone’s hurting animals.” Tuck grinned.

Rindi did not smile. “You going out?” Rindi was eager to get into

Tuck’s room and go through his luggage.

“I need to find that reporter, Jefferson Pardee.”

Rindi looked as if he was going to spit. He said, “He at Yumi Bar all the

time. That way.” He pointed up the road toward town. “You need ride?”

“How far is it?”

“Maybe a mile. How long you be gone?” Rindi wanted to take his time,

make sure he didn’t miss any of Tuck’s valuables.

“I’m not sure. Do you lock the door at midnight or something?”

“No, I come get you if you drunk.”

“I’ll be fine. I’ll be checking out in the morning. Can I get an eight

o’clock wake-up call?”

“No. No phone in room.”

“How about a wake-up knock?”

“No problem.”

“Thanks.” Tucker went out the front door and was nearly thrown back

by the thickness of the air. The temperature had dropped to the mid-80s, but
it felt as if it had gotten more humid. Everything dripped. The air carried
the scent of rotting flowers.

Tuck set off down the road and was soaked with sweat by the time he

reached a rusted metal Quonset hut with a hand-painted sign that read YUMI

BAR. The dirt parking lot was filled with Japanese beaters parked freestyle.

A skeletal dog with open running sores, a crossbreed of dingo and sewer
rat, cowered in the half-light coming through the door and looked at him as
if pleading to be run over. Tuck’s stomach lurched. He made a wide path
around the dog, who looked down and resumed concentration on its
suffering.

“Hey, kid, you’re not going in there, are you?”

Tuck looked up. There was a cigarette glowing in the dark at the corner

of the building. Tuck could just make out the form of a man standing there.
He wore some kind of uniform—Tuck could see the silhouette of a
captain’s hat. Anywhere else Tuck might have ignored a voice in the dark,
but the accent was American, and out here he was drawn to the familiarity
of it. He’d heard it before.

He said, “I thought I’d get a beer. I’m looking for an American named

Pardee.”

The guy in the dark blew out a long stream of cigarette smoke. “He’s in

there. But you don’t want to go in there right now. Wait a few minutes.”

Tuck was about to ask why when two men came crashing through the

door and landed in the dirt at his feet. They were islanders, both screaming
incomprehensibly as they punched and gouged at one another. The one on
the top held a bush knife, a short machete, which he drew back and
slammed into the other man’s head, severing an ear. Blood sprayed on the
dust.

A stream of shouting natives spilled out of the bar, waving beer bottles

and kicking at the fighters. Earless leaped to his feet and backed off to get a
running attack at Bush Knife, who was rising to his feet. Earless hit him
with a flying tackle as Bush Knife hacked at his ribs. A pickup truck full of
policemen pulled into the parking lot and the crowd scattered into the dark
and back into the bar, leaving the fighters rolling in the dirt. Six policemen
stood over the fighters, slamming them with riot batons until they both lay
still. The police threw the fighters into the bed of their truck, climbed in
after them, and drove off.

Tuck stood stunned. He’d never seen violence that sudden and raw in

his life. Ten more seconds and he would have been in the middle of it
instead of backpedaling across the parking lot.

“Should be okay to go in now,” said the voice from the dark.

Tuck looked up, but he couldn’t even see the cigarette glowing now.

“Thanks,” he said. “You sure it’s okay?”

“Watch your ass, kid,” said the voice, and this time it seemed to come

from above him. Tucker spun around, nearly wrenching his neck, but he
couldn’t see anyone. He shook off the confusion and headed into the bar.

The skeletal dog crawled from under a truck, seized the severed ear

from the dust, and slunk into the shadows. “Good dog,” said the voice out
of the dark. The dog growled, ready to protect its prize. A young man,
perhaps twenty-four, dark and sharp-featured, dressed in a gray flight suit,
stepped out of the shadows and bent to the dog, who lowered its head in
submission. The young man reached out as if to pet the dog, then grabbed
its head and quickly snapped its neck. “Now, that’s better, ain’t it, ya little
mook?”

Pardee looked up with red-rimmed eyes. “You just missed all the

excitement.”

“No, I saw it. I was outside.”

Pardee signaled for two more beers. “I thought I told you not to go out

at night.”

“I’m leaving for Yap in the morning and I need to ask you some

questions.”

Pardee grinned like a child given a surprise favor. “I’m at your service,

Mr. Tucker.”

Tuck weighed his need for information against the ignominy of telling

Pardee about the crash. He pulled the crumpled fax paper from his pants
pocket and set it on the bar before the reporter.

Pardee lit a cigarette as he read. He finished reading and handed the fax

back to Tucker. “It’s not unusual to have changes in travel plans out here.
But what’s this about bacteria? I thought you were a pilot.”

Tucker took Pardee though the crash and the mysterious invitation from

the doctor, including Jake’s theories about drug smuggling. “I think the
bacteria stuff was just to throw off anyone who got hold of the fax.”

“You’re right there. But it’s not drugs. There aren’t any drugs produced

in these islands except kava and betel nut, and nobody wants those except
the islanders. Oh, they grow a little pot here and there, but it’s consumed
here by the gangsta wanna-bes.”

“Gangsta wanna-bes?” Tuck asked.

“A few of the islanders have satellite TV. The people who look like

them on TV are gangsta rappers. The old rundown buildings they see in the
hood look like the buildings here. Except here they’re new and run-down.
It’s a Coke and a smile and baby formula their babies can’t digest. It’s
packaged junk food shipped here without expiration dates.”

“What in the hell are you talking about, Pardee?”

“They buy into the advertising bullshit that Americans have become

immune to. It’s like the entire Micronesian crescent is one big cargo cult.
They buy the worst of American culture.”

“Are you saying I’m the worst America has to offer?”

Pardee patted his shoulder and leaned in close. Tuck could smell the

sour beer sweat coming off the big man. “No, that’s not what I’m saying. I
don’t know what’s going on out on Alualu, but I’m sure it’s no big deal.
Evil tends to grow in proportion to the profit potential, and there’s just
nothing out there that’s worth a shit. Go to your island, kid. And get in
touch with me when you figure out what’s going on. In the meantime, I’ll
do some checking.”

Tuck shook the reporter’s hand. “I will.” He threw some money on the

bar and started to leave. Pardee called to him as he reached the door.

“One more thing. I checked around. I heard that there’s some armed

men on Alualu. And there was another pilot that came through here a few
months ago. Nobody’s seen him. Be careful, Tucker.”

“And you weren’t going to tell me that?”

“I had to be sure that you weren’t part of it.”

Out of the Frying Pan

Tuck’s first thought of the new morning was I’ve got to catch a plane. His
second was, My dick’s broke.

It happens that way. One has a “private” irritation—hemorrhoids,

menstrual cramps, swollen prostate, yeast infection, venereal disease,
bladder infection—and no matter how hard the mind tries to escape the
gravity of the affliction, it is inexorably pulled back into a doomed orbit of
circular thought. Anything that distracts from the irritation is an irritation.
Life is an irritation.

Inside Tuck’s head sounded like this: I have to catch a plane. I’m

pissing fire. I need a shower. Check the stitches. No water. It looks infected.
Probably leprosy. I hate this place. I’m sure it’s infected. When does the
water come on? It’s going to turn black and fall off. Whoever heard of a
place with satellite TV but no running water? I’ll never fly again. I’m thirty
years old and I have no job. And no dick. And who in the hell was that guy
in the parking lot last night? I smell like rancid goat meat. Probably the
infection. Gangrene. I can’t believe there’s no running water. I’m going to
die. Die, die, die.

Not a pleasant place to be: inside Tuck’s head.

Outside Tuck’s head the shower came on; brown, tepid water ran down

his body in gutless streams; pipes shuddered and trumpeted as if trying to

extrude a vibrating moose. The soap, a brown minibar made from local
copra, lathered like slate and smelled of hibiscus flowers and suffering dog.

Tuck dried himself on a translucent swath of balding terry cloth and

slipped into his clothes, three days saturated with tropical travel funk. He
shouldered his pack, noticing that the zippered pockets had been tampered
with and not giving a good goddamn, then trudged down to the front desk.

Rindi was sleeping on the desk. Tuck woke him, made sure that the

room had been paid by the doctor as promised, then stood in the tropical
sun and waited as Rindi brought the car around.

It seemed like a very long ride to the airport. Rindi ran over a chicken,

then got out and fought an old woman who claimed the chicken, each
tugging on a leg, testing the tensile strength of poultry to its limit before
Rindi busted a kung fu move that secured his dinner and left the old woman
sitting in the dust with a sacred chicken foot in her hand. (The old woman
was from the island of Tonoas, where magic chickens were once called up
by a sorcerer to level a mountain for a temple, the Hall of the Magic
Chickens.)

At the airport Tuck gave Rindi a dollar for the cab ride, which was

twice the going rate, and waved off the bloody handshake the aspiring
gangsta offered. “Keep the peace, home boy,” Tuck said.

Espionage and Intrigue

Yap was cleaner than Truk and hotter, if that was possible. Here the beat-up
taxis actually had radio antennas to identify them. The roads were paved as
well. The airport, another tin roof over concrete pylons, was filled with
natives: men in loincloths and topless women in hand-woven wraparound
skirts. Tuck caught a cab at the airport and told the driver to take him to the
dock.

The driver spat out the window and said, “The ship gone.”

“It can’t be gone.” What had moments ago been a pleasant drunk from

four airline martinis turned instantly to a headache. “Maybe it was another
ship that left.”

The driver smiled. His teeth were black, his lips bright red. “Ship gone.

You want to go to town?”

“How much?” Tuck asked, as if he had a choice.

“Fourteen dollar.”

“Fourteen dollars? It’s only fifty cents on Truk!”

“Okay, fifty cents,” the driver said.

“That’s your counteroffer?” Tuck asked. He was thinking about what

Pardee had said about these islanders absorbing the worst of American
culture. This was his chance to help, if only in a small way. “That’s the
most helpless bargaining I’ve ever heard. How do you ever expect your
country to get out of the Third World with that weak shit?”

“Sorry,” the driver said. “One dollar.”

“Seventy-five cents,” Tuck said.

“You find another taxi,” the driver said, digging in his fiscal heels.

“That’s better,” said Tuck. “A dollar it is. And there’s another one in it

for you if you don’t run over any chickens.”

The driver put the car in gear and started off. They passed though

several miles of jungle before breaking into a brightly lit, surprisingly
modern-looking town with concrete streets. Occasionally, they passed a tin
house with stone wheels leaning against the walls. The stones ranged from
the size of a small tire to seven feet in diameter and were covered with
varying degrees of green moss. “What are those millstone-looking things?”
Tuck asked the driver.

“Fei,” the driver said. “Stone money. Very valuable.”

“No shit, money?” Tuck looked at a piece of fei standing in a yard as

they passed. It was five feet tall and nearly two feet thick. “What do your
pay phones look like?” Tuck asked with a grin.

The driver didn’t find it funny. He let Tucker out at the dock, which was

suspiciously shipless.

Tuck saw a bearded, red-faced white man sitting in the shade of a

forklift, smoking a cigarette.

“G’day,” the man said. He was about thirty. In good shape. “Impela my

tribe?”

“Huh?” Tuck said.

“American, then?”

Tuck nodded. “You Australian?”

“Royal Navy,” the man said. He pulled a hat from behind him and

tapped on it. “Join me?” He motioned for Tuck to sit next to him on the
concrete.

Tuck dragged his pack into the shade, dropped it, and extended his hand

to the Australian. “Tucker Case.”

The Australian took his hand and nearly crushed it. “Commander Brion

Frick. Have a seat, mate. Looks like you been on the piss for a fortnight, if
you don’t mind my saying.”

He handed Tucker a business card. It bore the seal of the Royal

Australian Navy, Frick’s name and rank, and the designation NAVAL

INTELLIGENCE. Tuck looked again at the scruffy Australian, then back at the
card.

“Naval Intelligence, huh? What do you do?”

“I’m a spy, mate. You know, secret stuff. Very hush-hush.”

Tuck wondered just how secret a spy could be who had his status

printed on a business card.

“Espionage, huh?”

“Well, right now we’re watching the Yapese Navy don’t make a move.”

“Yap has a navy?”

“Only one patrol boat, and she’s broken right now. Yapese put gas in the

diesel engine. But you can’t be too careful, lest the little buggers get it in
their mind to launch a surprise attack. That’s her over there.” He nodded
down the wharf. Tuck spotted a rusted boat designed like a Chinese junk
with the word YAP stenciled on the side in flaking orange Rust-Oleum. A

half-dozen Yapese, thin brown men with high cheekbones and potbellies,
were lounging on the deck in loincloths, drinking beer.

Tuck said, “I guess an attack would be a surprise.”

“Ain’t as easy a job as it looks. Yapese can lull you into a false sense of

security. They might sit there without moving for two, three weeks, then
just when you start to relax, wham, they make their move.”

“Right,” Tucker said. The only damage the patrol boat looked capable

of inflicting was a case of tetanus for the crew.

A mile past the Yapese Navy waves crashed on the reef, just a line of

white against the turquoise sea. Cottony clouds rose out of the sea into
shining columns. Tuck scanned the horizon for a ship.

“Is the Micro Trader in yet?”

“Been in and gone,” Frick said. “She’ll be back around in six weeks or

so.”

“Dammit,” Tuck said. “I can’t fucking believe it. I need to get to

Alualu.”

“Why’d you want to go out there?”

“I’m a pilot. I’m supposed to be flying for a missionary out there.”

“Boys and I were out there in the patrol boat last week. Godforsaken

place.”

Tuck lit up at the mention of the patrol boat. Maybe he could catch a

ride. “You have a patrol boat?”

“Seventy-footer. Some of the boys are out with it now, tuna fishin’ with

the CIA. Don’t mention it, though. Secret, you know.”

“What’s the CIA doing down here?”

Frick raised a blond eyebrow. “Keepin’ an eye on the Yapese Navy.”

“I thought you were doing that.”

“Well, I am, ain’t I? And when they come back, it’s my turn to go

fishin’. Lovely, us bein’ allies and all. Cuts the work in half. Want to suck
some piss?”

“Pardon?” Tuck wasn’t ready for any kind of bizarre native customs.

“Drink some beers, mate. If you keep an eye on the Yappies, I’ll run

down to the store and grab some beers.”

“Sounds good.” Tuck was ready to take the edge off his headache.

Besides, there was still a chance for a ride out to the island.

Frick put his hat on Tuck’s head. “Right then. By the power invested in

me by the Australian Royal Navy, et cetera, et cetera, I hearby deputize you
as official intelligence officer until I get back. Do you swear?”

“Swear what?”

“Just swear.”

“Sure.”

“There it is.” Frick started walking off.

“What do I do if they make a move?”

“How the bloody hell should I know?”

Tuck watched the Yapese Navy for an hour before they all stood up and

left the boat. He was pretty sure that this did not constitute a defense
emergency, but just in case he decided to walk up the street to see what had
happened to Frick. The pack felt even heavier now, and he guessed that it
was the responsibility for Australian people that weighed him down. (A
woman had once offered Tucker a goldfish in a bowl, and Tuck had

graciously declined it on the basis that it was too much responsibility and
would probably die anyway. He felt the same way about the Australians.)

The concrete streets of Colonia were bleached white and stained with

three-foot red strips of betel nut spit on either side and lined with thick
jungle vegetation. Off the streets Tuck could see tin hovels, children playing
in the mud, women passing the hottest part of the day combing lice from
each other’s hair in the shade of a tin-roofed porch. The women wore
wraparound skirts, black with brightly colored stripes, and went topless. All
but the youngest of them were enormously fat by Western standards, and
Tuck felt his idealized picture of the beautiful island girls fade to a lice-
infested, rotund reality. Still, there was something in their gentle grooming
and in the quiet concentration of the children that made him feel sad and a
little lonely. If only he could run into a woman he could talk to. A Western
woman—she wouldn’t have to know he was a eunuch.

He broke out of the jungle into the open street of Colonia’s main

“business district.” On one side was a marina with a restaurant and bar (or
so the sign said), on the other a two-story, stucco minimall of shops and
snack bars. Around it, in the shade of the modern portico, stood perhaps a
hundred Yapese, mostly women, some young men in bright blue loincloths,
all shirtless. The islanders all had bright red lips and teeth from chewing
betel nut. Even the little children were chewing the narcotic cud and spitting
periodically into the street. Tuck walked in among them, hoping to find
someone to ask about Frick’s whereabouts, but none made eye contact. The
women and girls turned their backs to him. The men just looked away or
pretended to pay attention to sprinkling powdered coral on to a split green
betel nut before beginning a chew.

He went into a surprisingly modern grocery store and was relieved to

see that the prices were in American dollars, the signs in English. He picked
up a quart of bottled water and took it to the checkout counter, where a
woman in a lavalava and a blue polyester smock rang up his purchase and
held out her hand for the money.

“Do you know where I can find Commander Brion Frick?” Tuck asked

her.

She took his money, turned to the cash drawer, and turned back to him

with his change without uttering a word. Tuck repeated his question and the
woman turned away from him. Finally he left, thinking, She must not speak
English.

He ran into Frick coming out of the store. The spy had a six-pack

tucked under his arm.

“I was looking for you,” Tuck said. “The Yapese Navy took off.”

“You could have asked inside. They knew where I was.”

“I did. The woman wouldn’t talk to me.”

“Not allowed to,” Frick said. “It’s bad manners to make eye contact.

Yapese women aren’t allowed to talk to a man unless he’s a relative. If a
woman and a man are seen speaking in public, they’re considered married
on the spot. Shame too. Ever seen so many bare titties in all your life?
Tough grabbin’ a snog if you can’t talk to them.”

Tucker didn’t want to talk about it. “You were supposed to come back to

the wharf.”

Frick looked affronted. “I was on my way. Didn’t think you’d desert

your post. I hope you’re a better pilot than you are a spy. Letting them
sneak off like that.”

“Look, Frick, I need to get to Alualu right away. Can you take me in

your patrol boat?”

“Love to, mate, but we’ve got a mission as soon as the boys get back

from fishin’. We’ve got to tow the Yapese patrol boat down to Darwin for
repairs. Won’t be back for a fortnight at least.”

“Doesn’t it make more sense to leave it broken? I mean, in the interest

of watching them?”

The spy raised an eyebrow. “What threat are they with a broken boat?”

“Exactly,” Tuck said.

“You obviously don’t know a wit about maintaining job security.

Missionary Air might take you out, but I hear their plane is down for a
while. Fishing boats are all Chinese. Buggers wouldn’t piss on you if you
were on fire. You might charter a dingy, but I doubt that you’ll find anyone
willing to take you across four hundred kilometers of open sea in an
outboard. There’s fellows do it off Perth, but the West Coast is full of
loonies anyway. Get yourself a room and wait. We’ll take you out when we
get back.”

“I don’t know if I can wait that long.” Tuck stood up. “Where should I

go to charter a boat?”

Frick pointed to a large Mobil oil tank at the edge of the harbor. “Try

heading down to the fueling station. Should be able to find someone down
there who needs the gas money.”

“Thanks, Frick, I appreciate it.” Tucker shook the spy’s hand.

“No worries, mate. You watch yourself out there. I hear that doctor’s a

bedbug.”

“Good to know.” He waved over his shoulder as he walked down to the

edge of the harbor. A group of women chewing betel nut in the shade of a
hibiscus tree turned away from him as he passed.

He walked along the bank and looked into the cloudy green water at the

harbor’s edge. Tiny multicolored fish darted in and out of the shallows,
feeding on some kind of shrimp. Brown mud skippers, their eyes atop their
heads like a frog’s, walked on their pectoral fins across a small mudflat that
had formed around the roots of a mangrove tree. Tucker stopped and
watched them. They were fish, yet they spent most of their time on land. It
was as if they had evolved to a certain point, then just couldn’t make a
decision to leave the water, grow into mammals, and finally invent personal
stereos. For sixty million years they had been hanging out on the mudflats,
looking at each other with periscope eyes and goofy froggy grins and
saying: “What do you want do?” “I don’t know. What do you want to do?”

“I don’t know. Want to go up on the land or stay in the water?” “I don’t
know. Let’s hang out on the mudflat a little longer.”

Tuck completely understood. Although if he had been a mud skipper,

after a couple of million years of dragging himself around the mudflat, he
would have lost his patience and yelled, “Hey, can I get some feet over
here!”, thus moving evolution along.

He was enjoying the superiority of the Monday morning quarterback

(And in a world created in six days, what day but Monday could it be?),
feeling a little smarter, a little more worldly than the mud skippers, when it
occurred to him that he had no idea how to proceed. He could find the
telecom center, if there was one, and contact the doctor, but then what
would he do? Sit for two weeks on Yap until the Australians returned?
Maybe they were wrong. Maybe there was a privately owned plane on the
island. What about a dingy? How bad could it be. The sea looked calm
enough. That’s it, take to the sea.

Or perhaps he should just stay on Yap and find a sympathetic woman to

take his mind off the problem. It had always worked before, not to positive
results, but it had worked, dammit. Women made him feel better. He ached
for a Mary Jean Cosmetics consultant. A cool, thin, married woman,
armored in pantyhose and a bulletproof bouffant. A sweet, shocked,
backsliding Born Again on a one-time sin quest to remind her of why
redemption was so so good. Mud skipper thinking.

He was reeling with the heat and the lack of possibilities when he saw

her, up ahead, walking by the water’s edge, her back to him: a thin blonde
in a flowered dress with a swing to her walk like a welcome home parade.

The Navigator

Out on the edge of the world, with no place to stay, no way to move on, no
job, no life, no friends; hurt, confused, hot, thirsty, and irritated, Tuck was
desperate. Desperate for just the momentary satisfaction that might come
from attracting an attractive woman. No matter that he couldn’t do anything
about the attraction.

What was she doing out here? Who cares? What a walk!

He quickened his pace, his legs and shoulders protesting against the

weight of his pack, and approached within a couple of steps of the blonde.

“Excuse me,” he called.

She turned. Tuck stopped and backed up a step. Something is wrong

here. Very, very wrong.

“Oh, baby,” she said, hand to her chest as if trying to catch her breath.

“You scare little Kimi. Why you sneakin’ up like that?”

Tuck was dumbfounded. She wasn’t a natural blonde. Her skin was dark

and she had the high cheekbones and angular features of a Filipino. Long
false eyelashes, bright red lipstick, but lines in the face that were a little too
harsh, a jawline that was a little too square. The dress was tight around the
chest and there was nothing there but muscle. She wore a huge black

medallion at her throat that looked as if it was made of animal fur. She
needed a shave.

“I’m sorry,” Tuck said. “I thought you were something—er, someone

else.”

Then the medallion turned its head and looked at him. Tuck let out an

involuntary scream and jumped back. The medallion was wearing tiny
rhinestone sunglasses. It squeaked at Tucker. It was the biggest bat he had
ever seen, hanging there upside down with its wings folded.

“That’s a bat!”

“Fruit bat, baby. Don’t be scared. This Roberto. He no like the light. He

like you, though.” Roberto squeaked again. He had the face of a fox or
perhaps a small dog—a shaven Pomeranian with wings. “I’m Kimi. What
you name, baby?” Kimi extended his hand limply to shake or perhaps for a
kiss.

Tuck took two fingers, keeping his eye on the bat. “Tucker Case. Nice

to meet you, Kimi.” He was horrified. Thirty seconds ago he’d been having
lustful thoughts about a guy! A guy wearing a fruit bat!

“You look like you need a date. Kimi love you good long time, twenny

bucks. Whatever you need, Kimi can do.”

“No, thanks. I don’t need a date. What I need is a boat.”

“Kimi can get boat. You like it in boat? Kimi take you round the world

in a boat?” He giggled and patted Roberto’s little upside-down head. “That
funny, huh?”

Tucker forced a smile. “No, I need a boat and someone who can pilot it

out to an island.”

“You need a boat, Kimi can get boat. Kimi can pilot too.”

“Thanks anyway, but I really…”

Roberto shrieked. Tuck jumped back. Kimi said, “Roberto say he want

to go on boat with you. How far is island?”

Tucker couldn’t believe he was having this conversation. He hadn’t

really decided he would go by boat. “It’s called Alualu. It’s about two
hundred and fifty miles north of here.”

“No problem,” Kimi said without hesitation. “My father was great

navigator. He teach me everything. I take you to island and maybe we have
party too. You have money?”

Tuck nodded.

“You wait over there in shade. We be right back.” Kimi turned and

wiggled away. Tucker tried not to watch him walk. He was feeling sick to
his stomach. He walked to a grove of palm trees that grew along the harbor
and sat down to wait.

Tucker walked to the dock and looked at the boat, then out past the

harbor, where waves were crashing on the reef, then back at the little boat.
He wasn’t sure what he had expected, but he was sure this wasn’t it.
Something bigger, maybe a cabin cruiser, with twin diesels and a big
wheelhouse with some radar stuff spinning on the top—a modest but well-
stocked wet bar, perhaps.

“I got you boat!” Kimi said. “You give me money now, I go get gas and

look at map.”

Tucker didn’t budge. The engine was a forty-horse Yamaha out-board.

A rubber tube ran from the motor to a gas tank that took up nearly all the
space between the two seats. Tuck guessed it would hold at least a hundred

gallons of fuel, maybe more. “Are you sure this thing has the range to make
it out there?”

“No problem. Give me money for gas. Five hundred dollar.”

“You’re insane!”

“Gas very expensive here.”

“You’re insane and your bat’s glasses are crooked.”

“I have to pay man for boat. The rest is for pilot. You buy water,

flashlight, and two mango, two papaya for Roberto, and two box Pop Tarts
for Kimi. Strawberry.”

Tucker felt he was being hustled. “For five hundred dollars you can get

your own mangoes and Pop Tarts.”

“Okay, bye-bye.” Kimi said. “Say bye-bye to cheap sweaty American,

Roberto.” Kimi moved Roberto onto his shoulders and pulled the cord to
start the engine.

Tuck imagined himself stuck on Yap for another two weeks. “No, wait!”

He unclipped the flap of his pack and dug inside.

Kimi killed the outboard, turned, and grinned. There was lipstick on his

teeth. “Money, please.”

Tuck handed down a stack of bills. He didn’t like it, but he didn’t have a

choice. Actually, not having a choice made it a little easier. “Are we going
to leave right away?”

“We go through reef before dark so we no smash up and drown. After

that it better to go in dark. Go by stars.”

Smash up? “Shouldn’t we call for weather?”

Kimi laughed. “You smell storm? See storm in sky?”

Tuck looked around. Except for a few mushroom-shaped clouds beyond

the reef, it was clear. He smelled only tropical flowers on the breeze and
something skunky rising up from his armpits. “No.”

“Meet me here in half hour.” Kimi started the motor and putted off

across the harbor toward a big tank with the Mobil logo stenciled on the
side.

Tuck walked to the store and bought the supplies, then found the

telecom center a few doors down and sent a handwritten fax to the doctor
on Alualu to let him know that his new pilot was on the way.

He was waiting at the dock when Kimi returned in the skiff, his wig tied

down with a red chiffon scarf. Roberto wore a smaller scarf with holes cut
for his ears. Strangely, the scarf, in conjunction with the sunglasses, made
Roberto look a little like Diana Ross. They say there is a finite number of
faces in the world…

Tucker threw the heavy pack into the front of the boat, then climbed in

and sat down in front of the enormous gas tank. Kimi threw the
transmission lever on the motor, twisted the hand grip, and piloted the skiff
out into the harbor toward the reef.

Kimi steered the boat out of the deep green of the harbor to the

turquoise water of the channel. Tuck could see the reef, tan and red coral,
just a few feet below the surface at the edge of the channel. He spotted
small fish darting around great heads of brain coral. They were more like
streaks of color than animals, and as one disappeared another appeared in
the line of sight. A few long, slender trumpet fish, looking as if they had
been forged from silver, swam adjacent to the boat, then turned and cruised
into the reef.

They passed the edge of the reef and into the open sea with only a slight

bump into the first few swells. Kimi cranked up the motor and the skiff
lifted and rode across the tops of the waves, bucking and dropping a gentle
six inches, thumping out a drumbeat as counterpoint to the whining
outboard. Tucker relaxed and leaned back as Kimi skirted the reef, traveling

toward the setting sun until he cleared the island and could make the turn
north to Alualu.

For the first time since the crash, Tucker felt good, felt as if he was on

his way to something better. He’d made a decision and acted on it and in
eighteen hours he would be ready to start his new job. He’d be a pilot again,
making good money, flying a great aircraft. And with some healing, he’d be
a man again too.

A quarter mile from Yap, Kimi made a gradual turn that put the sun at

their left shoulders. Tuck watched the sun bubble into the ocean. Columns
of vertical cumulus clouds turned to cones of pink cotton candy, then as the
sun became a red wafer on the horizon, they turned candy-apple red, with
purple rays reaching out of them like searchlights. The water was neon over
wet asphalt, blood-spattered gunmetal—colors from the cover of a detective
novel where heroes drink hard and beauty is always treacherous.

Tucker searched the sky for cumulus clouds that looked like they might

have aspirations to become thunderheads. How in the hell were you
supposed to see weather from sea level?

Just then a swell lifted the front of the boat and slammed it down. Tuck

felt his tailbone bark on the edge of the seat and was just bracing himself
when another swell bucked him to the floor of the boat and a sudden gust of
wind soaked him with spray.

And Now, the Weather Report

The High Priestess sat on the lanai watching the sunset, taking sips from a
glass of chilled vodka between bites of a banana. The intercom beeped
inside the house and she cocked an ear to the open window.

“Beth, can you come down to my office? This is important.” The

Sorcerer was in a panic.

He’s always in a panic, she thought. She put her vodka down on the

bamboo table and tossed the banana out into the sand. She padded across
the teak deck, through the french doors to the intercom, and laid an elegant
finger on the talk button.

“I’m on my way,” she said.

She started toward the back door of the house—a two-room bungalow

fashioned from bamboo, teak, and thatch—and caught sight of herself in the
full-length mirror. “Shit.” She was naked, of course, and she’d have to cut
across the compound to get to the Sorcerer’s office. Life had become a lot
more complicated since they had hired the guards.

She stormed into the bedroom and grabbed an oversized 49ers jersey

with the sleeves cut off out of her closet, then stepped into some sandals
and headed out the back door. She wasn’t really dressed, but it might keep
the Sorcerer off her back and the ninjas off her front.

The compound consisted of half a dozen buildings spread over a three-

acre clearing covered with white coral gravel and concrete and surrounded
by a twelve-foot chain-link fence topped with razor wire. At the front of the
compound was a pier and a small beach that led to the only channel through
the reef. At the back a new Learjet sat on a concrete pad, just inside the
fence. Outside of the fence, the concrete runway bisected the island. Past
the runway lay the jungles, the taro patches, the villages, and the beaches of
the Shark People.

The office was a low concrete building with steel doors and a roof

covered in solar electric panels that shone red in the setting sunlight. She
nodded to the guard by the door, who didn’t move until she passed, then
tried to get a glimpse in the side of her jersey. She slammed the door behind
her.

“What’s up? You almost done with the satellite dish? My shows are

coming on.”

He turned from a computer screen, a piece of fax paper crumpled in his

hand. “We’ve hired an idiot.”

“Do you want to be specific or should I assume that one of the ninjas

has distinguished himself above the others?”

“The pilot, Beth. He missed the Micro Trader on Yap.”

“Shit!”

“It’s worse.” He held out the fax to her. “It’s from him. He’s chartered a

small boat. He says he’ll be here tomorrow.”

She looked over the fax, confused. “That’s sooner than he was going to

get here. What’s the problem?”

“This.” The Sorcerer pushed back in his chair and pointed to the

computer screen. The image looked like a blender full of green and black
paint.

“It looks like a blender full of green paint,” she said. “What is it?”

“That, my dear, is Marie.”

“Sebastian, you’ve been out here too long. I know you like abstract art

and all…”

“It’s a satellite picture of typhoon Marie. And she’s a big one.” He

pointed to a dot to one side of the screen. “That’s Alualu.”

“So it’s going to miss us.”

“We’ll catch the edge of it. We’ll have to put the jet in the hangar, tie

everything down, but it shouldn’t be too bad. The problem is that the eye
will pass right over where our pilot is going to be. I can’t believe he went to
sea without checking the weather.”

She shrugged. “So we have to get a new pilot. Tucker Case, meet

Marie.” She smiled and her eyes shone like desolate stars. Too bad, she
thought. The pilot would have been fun.

Foul-Weather Friend

Tuck was amazed by what the human body could achieve when pressed to
its limits: lift tractors, trek a hundred miles through the tundra after being
partially eviscerated by a Kodiak bear, live for months on grubs and water
sucked from soak holes, and in this particular case, vomit for two hours
straight after having ingested nothing but alcohol and airline peanuts for
two days. The stuff coming out of him was pure bile, burning acrid and
sour, and with the bull rider pitching of the boat, half of it always ended up
down the front of him. And between heaves there was no respite, just
constant motion and soaking spray. His stomach muscles twisted into knots.

It started with the swells rising, first a few feet, then to ten. Kimi piloted

the boat up the face of each as if climbing a hill; they were dashed by the
whitecap, then a sled ride down into a trough where they were faced with
the next black wall of water. Roberto climbed down into Kimi’s dress and
clung there like a furry tumor. The navigator cried out each time the spray
washed over him as Roberto’s wing claws dug into his ribs.

“Tie down you pack. Tie you belt to the boat,” Kimi shouted.

Tuck found a coil of nylon rope and a folding knife in his pack and tied

himself and the pack to the front seat. He noticed that the space under the
seat was filled with dense Styrofoam. The boat was, theoretically,
unsinkable. Good, someone would find their beaten, shark-eaten bodies. He
threw a length of rope to Kimi, who secured it around his own waist.

The wind came up as if someone had spooled up a jet engine, going

from ten to sixty knots in an instant, dumping gallons of water into the boat
with each wave, drowning out the sound of the outboard.

Kimi screamed an order to Tuck, but it was lost in the wind. Tuck

caught one word: “Bail!”

Riding down the face of a wave, he took the time to look around the

boat for a container, but found only the gallon of drinking water. He took
the folding knife from his pocket and slashed the top off of the jug. He
dumped the fresh water, then, with his feet braced against the inside of the
bow and his spine against the seat, he began bailing between his legs, taking
a full gallon with each scoop, throwing it with the wind. He bailed as if in a
“run for your life” sprint and he was winded and aching after only a minute,
but he couldn’t seem to get ahead of the storm. The boat was riding lower in
the water.

He ventured a glance back to Kimi and saw the navigator had found a

coffee can and was braced between the seat and the gas tank, bailing with
one hand while steering with the other. His scarf and fallen around his neck
and was trailing the blonde wig behind him in the wind. The motor was
cranked full-out, and Kimi was trying to keep the boat steered into the
waves. If one caught them from the side, they would roll and continue to
roll until the storm consumed them.

Tuck slowed his pace and tried to fall into some kind of sustainable

rhythm. It began to rain, the drops coming in almost horizontal, and as they
topped the next wave Tuck realized that half of the sky had disappeared.
They were only at the edge of the storm. The navigator was screaming at
him. The sea, the sky, the boat faded to black. One second he was squinting
saltwater out of his eyes and staring at an obsidian wall ahead of the bow,
then everything went black. Total sensory overload, total sensory
deprivation. He looked around for the stars, the moon, a highlight or
shadow somewhere, but there was nothing but wind and wet and cold and
ache. He shivered and nearly curled into the fetal position in the bow to
wait for death. The navigator’s screaming gave him a bearing.

“We need light!”

Tuck braced himself, then dug into the saturated pack until he came out

with two waterproof flashlights. Bless you, Jake Skye.

He hit the sealed switches.

Light. Enough to see that Kimi was steering them parallel to an

ominous wall of water. They would be swamped. The navigator slammed
the outboard to one side and gunned it. The little boat whipped around just
in time to meet the oncoming wave, ride up and over it. Tucker clung to the
boat like a newborn monkey to its mother.

Tuck lashed the lights to the anchor pulley at the bow, one pointed

forward, one into the boat, then he resumed bailing.

A monster wave rose up thirty feet and slammed down over them.

When Tuck blinked the salt out of his eyes, he saw that the boat was all but
a foot full of water. Another wave like that would swamp the motor.
Without the motor to steer, they were lost. Bailing wasn’t enough.

We’re going to die, he thought.

Then the noise of the storm was gone.

“No, you’re not,” came the voice, “you fuckin’ mook.” The roar of the

wind and the screams of the navigator were gone. There was only the voice.
“There’s a tarpaulin in your pack. Lash it over the boat so you don’t take on
any more water. Then move to the stern and bail.”

Now there was a picture in Tuck’s mind of what he was to do. There

were eyelets on the outside of the gunwales to accommodate the line around
the edges of the tarp. He needed only to hook the line around the boat and
tie it off back by Kimi, leaving just enough of the boat open for the
navigator to steer and him to bail water.

“You got it, ace?”

Tuck could see it and he knew he could do it. “Thanks,” he said. Forget

questioning where the voice was coming from. He nodded. The storm

roared back over him.

Five minutes later the boat was covered and began to rise in the water as

Tuck sat next to the navigator and bailed.

“You steer!” Kimi screamed.

Tucker took the tiller as the navigator let go and tried to rub his hand

out of a cramped claw.

Tuck took the boat up the face of a monster wave and the skiff went

airborne. With no resistance on the propeller, the motor shrieked and Tuck
dumped the throttle to keep it from blowing up. The bow tilted skyward and
Kimi grabbed the gunwale just in time to avoid being dumped off the stern.
They landed hard and the motor nearly went under. The motor sputtered.
Tuck worked the throttle to bring it back to life.

They were already going up the face of another wave, steeper than the

last. If the wind caught them at the top, they would flip. Tuck suddenly
remembered a surfing move from his youth. The cutback. There was no
way they could continue into the wind and into the waves. Halfway up the
face of the wave, he twisted the throttle and threw the motor sideways. It
coughed as if expelling a hairball, then roared, sending them across the face
of the wave.

“What you doing?” Kimi shouted.

Tuck didn’t answer. He was looking for the pocket, the place where the

face of the wave would stay the same. If only the motor could maintain
speed.

The wave was creeping up on them, looming above their backs, but then

they were high enough for the wind to catch them. Just enough boost. Just
enough speed. The boat flattened out on the face of the wave. They were
surfing, a thirty-foot wall of water waiting to crush them from behind
should Tuck lose the pocket.

Strangely, Tuck felt elated. It was a small victory, maybe even a

temporary one, but they were running with the storm and he was in control
of something for the first time since the plane crash. He watched the angle
of the boat on the face of the wave, gauged its speed, its steepness, and
made the adjustments that would keep them alive. The black water seemed
to eat up the flashlight beams, but he could see the wave becoming steeper
and rising higher as it climbed the ocean shelf toward the hungry reef.

Land Ho

The island was little more than a coral cupcake with a guano frosting. Not a
hundred yards wide at its widest point and only five feet above sea level at
its highest, it served as a resting place for seabirds, a nesting place for
turtles, and purchase for forty-eight coconut palms. The foliage and
coconuts had all been torn from the palms, and the storm-driven waves
breaking on the surrounding reef frothed over the island, beating against the
trunks and washing away the precious topsoil. Heavy as they were, some of
the palms were being undermined by the sea and would soon wash away.

Of the three travelers, only Roberto knew the island was there. As a

young bat, he had stopped there to rest after leaving Guam, his birthplace,
on his way to someplace where the mangoes were sweet and the natives did
not consider fruit bat a delicacy. But right now he was too busy hiding
inside Kimi’s dress, screeching and clawing and generally trying to keep
warm, to mention to the navigator that the reason they were suddenly riding
the face of an increasingly steep fifty-foot wave was because they were
about to crash over a reef.

By the time Tucker Case realized what was happening, they were inside

an immense tube of water, surfing inside of the curl of the wave. The
flashlights refracted off the green water, illuminating the tube, making it
appear as if they were inside a giant seething Coke bottle. Tuck tried to
keep the boat pointed toward the narrow circle of blackness where the
bottle cap would go, where they would have to go to escape. He’d seen

films of surfers shooting the curl on the North Shore of Hawaii. It could be
done. He clung to that vision, even as the wave passed over the reef and
collapsed upon them.

The boat rolled once, twice, three times, then tossed end over end and

spun just under the surface as the wave frothed over the island. Kimi and
Tuck were wound against the boat by their lifelines, beaten against the
trunks of the palms, tossed and battered against the boat. For Tucker there
was no up, no down, no way to know when he might take a breath of life-
giving air or suck seawater and die. He held his breath until he felt as if he
would explode, then was slammed between the boat and a tree and he let
go.

Roberto’s wing claws cut deep furrows into Kimi’s ribs as he scrambled

for air. The navigator had taken a glancing blow across the forehead as the
boat rolled over him and was knocked unconscious.

Tuck felt himself pulled away from the boat, spun for a moment, then

the pressure of the lifeline around his waist. He could see the lights attached
to the boat, still shining, the only visual input in the sensory chaos. The boat
had caught on something and he was trailing out behind it. Something
bumped against his ribs and he reached for it instinctively, catching a
handful of Kimi’s dress. Roberto was clinging to Kimi’s head, growling into
the wind.

They had passed through the island and come out on the other side. The

boat had caught on the last palm tree before they were swept out to sea
again.

Tuck caught his lifeline with one hand, then wrapped his other arm

around Kimi’s chest. Slowly, working against the streaming current, more
like a river now that the waves had been broken by the reef and the island,
he pulled them back to the boat.

The boat was afloat, but barely, held up by the Styrofoam underseats

and the air trapped in the gas tank. Only an inch or two of gunwale showed
above the water. Tuck crawled in, took one deep breath, then dragged the
lifeless navigator in after him. Roberto scrambled on Kimi’s head to escape

the sea and was almost taken by the wind. Tucker caught the giant bat by
the throat and lifted him from Kimi’s head to his own back, wincing as
Roberto’s claws penetrated his shirt. Then he hung the navigator over the
side and began pumping the water out of his lungs.

After a few seconds, he flipped him again and administered mouth-to-

mouth until Kimi coughed and vomited up a stream of seawater. Tuck held
his head.

“You okay?”

Kimi nodded as he sucked in painful lungfuls of air. Once he had his

breath, he said, “Roberto?”

Tuck pointed to the little dog face that was looking over his shoulder.

Kimi managed a smile. “Roberto! Come.” He took the bat from Tuck’s

back and held him to his chest.

They were safe, relatively; sheltered by the island from the monster

swells, they had only the wind and the rain to deal with. The tarpaulin was
gone. The boat was full of water, but it was afloat. Miraculously, the
flashlights were still attached. Tucker could see the tree that had caught
them. He fell back into the bow, hooking his armpits over the gunwales,
then slipped into a state of exhausted unconsciousness that could almost be
called sleep.

Water, Water

At first light the coconut palm that had saved them finally gave up and
tipped over, releasing the boat to the sea. The outgoing tide carried the skiff
and its sleeping passengers through a break in the reef to the open ocean.

Tuck, sitting chest deep in seawater in the bow, was dreaming of being

lost in the desert when a flying fish smacked him in the side of the head.
Startled, he reached up instinctively, as one might slap at a biting mosquito,
and caught the fish in his right hand. He opened his eyes. In his mind he
was still in the desert, dying of thirst, and the fact that he was now holding
on to something that looked like a trout with wings seemed a cruel surrealist
joke. He looked around, saw the boat, Kimi slumped in the back, ocean and
sky, and nothing else—there was no land in sight.

He threw the fish at Kimi. It bounced off the navigator’s forehead and

into the sea. Kimi screamed and sat up abruptly. Roberto—sunglasses
akimbo—poked his head out the neck of Kimi’s dress and screeched at
Tucker.

“What you do that for?” Kimi said.

“Nice piece of navigation,” Tuck said. Then he mocked Kimi’s broken

English. “You smell storm? You see storm in sky?”

“Oh, you big-time pilot. Why you not check weather? What kind of

dumb fuck American try to go two hundred miles in outboard, huh?”

“You told me it was no problem.”

“You paying Kimi big money. Not a problem.”

“Well, it’s a fucking problem now, isn’t it?”

Kimi stroked Roberto’s head to calm him. “Stop yelling. You scare

Roberto.”

“I don’t care about Roberto. We’re half-sunk in the middle of the

Pacific and we don’t have a motor. I’d say we have a problem.”

Kimi stopped ministering to Roberto and looked up. “No motor?” He

turned and looked back at the empty motor board. There were marks where
the clamps had raked across it as the motor pulled off in the tumble. He
turned back to Tuck and grinned sheepishly. “Whoops.”

“We’re dead,” Tuck said.

Kimi looked back again where the motor should have been, just to make

sure that it was still gone. “I ask that man, ‘Is motor on good?’ He say, ‘Oh
yes, is clamp on very tight.’ I pay him good money and he lie. Oh, Kimi is
very mad.”

Roberto barked in agreement.

“Stop it!” Tucker shouted. Roberto ducked into Kimi’s dress again.

“We’ve got to get some of this water out of here. We have no motor. We
can’t go anywhere. We’re adrift, lost…”

“Alive,” Kimi interrupted. “I get you out of typhoon alive and you just

yell and say bad things. I quit. You get new navigator. Roberto say you
mean, nasty, Chevy-driving, milk-drinking, American dog fucker.”

“I don’t drink milk,” Tuck said. Ha! Won that round.

“That what he say.”

“Roberto does not talk!”

“Not to you, dog fucker. You no…” Kimi paused in mid-rant and

retrieved the coffee can, which had been tied to the boat with a string, and
started furiously scooping water out of the boat. “You right. Now we bail.”

“What?” Tuck looked up to see Kimi was looking, wide-eyed, out to

sea. Tuck followed his gaze to a spot twenty yards in front of the boat
where a triangular fin was describing slow arcs in the swells.

“Hurry,” Kimi shouted. “He coming in.”

Tucker reached for his pack, causing the bow to dip under the water by

a foot. Before he could adjust his weight to counterbalance the boat, the
shark came over the gunwale, snapping its jaws like a man-eating puppet.

Tuck stood up to escape the jaws and the bow lurched deeper

underwater. The shark slid into the boat as Tuck went backward over the
side.

Fear bolted through his body as if the water had been electrified. He

wanted to move in all directions at once. He kicked hard and came up a few
feet from the boat to see the shark slide back into the water.

“Get in boat!” Kimi screamed. He was standing with his feet wide,

trying to keep the boat from capsizing.

Tuck kicked so hard that he raised out of the water to the waist, then he

fell toward the boat, catching the gunwale with one hand. Kimi shifted his
weight to counterbalance and Tuck pulled himself in just as something hit
his foot. He jerked his foot so hard he nearly went out of the boat on the
opposite side, then he twisted in time to see the shark sliding down into the
water with his shoe in its mouth.

“Behind you!” Kimi screamed.

Another shark rose up at Tuck’s back. He swung around and punched it

on the snout as hard as he could, taking the skin off of his knuckles on the
shark’s sandpaper skin. The shark slid away.

The motion in the bow caused the stern to dip underwater and the next

attack came at Kimi. He tossed Roberto into the air as the shark came into
the boat. Roberto spread his wings and soared into the sky. Kimi reached
down and came up with the rubber fuel line.

Tucker looked for anything they could use as a weapon, then

remembered the folding knife he had put in his pocket the night before. It
was still there.

Kimi was slapping the shark with the rubber hose and backing his way

up onto the huge gas tank that made up the midsection of the boat. Tuck
opened the knife, then lunged forward at the navigator. “Kimi!”

Kimi reached back and Tuck fit the handle of the knife into his hand.

The shark had worked half of its nine-foot body into the boat. Its tail
thrashed at the water to power the shark up onto the gas tank. Kimi
scrambled backward. Roberto swooped and screeched in the air above.

Kimi’s right foot found purchase on the screw cap of the gas tank and

he sat up. Tuck thought he was going to strike the shark with the knife, but
instead he cut the gas line and squirted a stream of gas into the shark’s
gaping mouth. The shark thrashed and slid off the side of the boat.

Kimi brandished the knife in the air. “Yeah, fuckface, you run away.

That not taste so sweet as Kimi, huh?” He fell back onto the gas tank and
took a deep breath. “We show that shark who the boss.”

Tuck said, “Kimi, there’s more.” He pointed to set of fins approaching

from the stern.

Leadership’s a Bitch

The storm had been easy on the Shark People. A little thatch lost from a
roof here and there, a cookhouse blown over, some breadfruit and coconuts
stripped from the trees, but not enough to cause hardship. Some seawater
had washed into the taro patch, but only time would tell if it was enough to
kill the crop. The Shark People went slowly about the business of cleaning
up, the women doing most of the work while the men sat in the shade of the
men’s house, drinking alcoholic tuba and pretending to discuss important
religious matters. Mainly they were there to pass the heat of the day and get
good and drunk before dinner.

Malink, the high chief of the Shark People, was late rising. He awoke

shivering and afraid, trying to figure out how to interpret a strange dream.
He rolled off of his grass sleeping mat, then rose creakily and ambled out of
the hut to relieve himself at the base of a giant breadfruit tree.

He was a short, powerfully built man of sixty. His hair was bushy and

gone completely white. His skin, once a light butterscotch, had been burned
over the years to the dark brown of a tarnished penny. Like most of the
Shark men, he wore only a cotton loincloth and a wreath of fresh flowers in
his hair (left there by one of his four daughters while he slept). The image
of a shark was tattooed on his left pectoral muscle, a B-26 bomber on the
other.

He went back into the hut and pulled a steel ammo box out of the

rafters. Inside lay a nylon web belt with a holster that held a portable phone,
his badge of leadership, his direct line to the Sorcerer. The only time he had
ever used it was when one of his daughters had come down with a fever
during the night. He had pushed the button and the Sorcerer had come to the
village and given her medicine. He was afraid to use the phone now, but the
dream had told him that he must deliver a message.

Malink would have liked to go down to the men’s house and discuss his

decision for a few hours with the others, but he knew that he couldn’t. He
had to deliver the dream message. Vincent had said so, and Vincent knew
everything.

As he pushed the button, he wished he had never been born a chief.

“What?”

“I just got a call from Malink. He says he’s had a message from

Vincent.”

The High Priestess was awake now. Wide awake. She sat upright in bed

and the Sorcerer’s eyes fell immediately to her naked breasts. “What do you
mean he’s had a message from Vincent? I didn’t give him any message.”

The Sorcerer finally looked up at her face. “He was terrified. He said

that Vincent came to him in a dream and told him—get this—to tell me that
‘the pilot was alive and on his way, and to wait for him.’”

She rubbed the sleep out of her eyes and shook her head. “I don’t get it.

How did he know about a pilot coming? Did you say something?”

“No, did you?”

“Are you kidding? I’m not stupid, Sebastian, despite what you might

think.”

“Well, how did he find out? The guards don’t know anything. I haven’t

said anything.”

“Maybe it’s a coincidence,” she said. “Maybe he was just having bad

dreams from the storm. Vincent is all he thinks about. It’s all any of them
think about.”

The Sorcerer stood and backed away from the bed, eyeing her

suspiciously. “Coincidence or not, I don’t like it. I think you need to have
an audience with the Shark People and give them a direct message from
Vincent. This whole operation depends on us being the voice of Vincent.
We can’t let them think that they can reach him directly.” He turned and
started out of the room.

“Sebastian,” she said and the Sorcerer paused and looked over his

shoulder at her. “What about the pilot? What if Malink is right about the
pilot being on his way?”

“Don’t be stupid, Beth. The only way to control the faithful is to not

become one of them.” He turned to leave and was struck in the back of the
head by a high-velocity whiskey tumbler. He turned as he dropped to the
floor grasping his head.

The High Priestess was standing by the bed wearing nothing but a fine

golden chain at her hips and an animal scowl. “You ever call me stupid
again and I’ll rip your fucking nuts off.”

How the Navigator Got from There to Here

Watching the sharks circle the boat, Tuck felt as if he was being sucked
down the vortex of a huge bathroom drain.

“We need a better weapon,” Tuck said. He remembered a movie once

where Spencer Tracy had battled sharks from a small boat with a knife
lashed to an oar. “Don’t we have any oars?”

Kimi looked insulted. “What wrong with me?”

“Not whores. Oars!” Tucker pantomimed rowing. “For rowing.”

“How I know what you talking about? Malcolme always say oars.

‘Bloody oars,’ he say. No, we don’t have oars.”

“Bail,” Tuck said.

The navigator began scooping water with the coffee can as Tuck did his

best to bail with his hands.

A half hour later the boat was only partially full of water and the sharks

had moved on to easier meals. Tucker fell back onto the bow to catch his
breath. The sun was still low in the morning sky, but already it burned his
skin. The parts of his body not soaked with seawater were soaked with

sweat. He dug into the pack and pulled out the liter bottle of water he had
bought the day before. It was half-full and it was all they had.

Tuck eyed the navigator, who was bailing intently. He’d never know if

Tuck drank all of the water right now. He unscrewed the cap and took a
small sip. Nectar of the gods. Keeping his eye on Kimi, he a took a large
gulp. He could almost feel his water-starved cells rejoicing at the relief.

As he bailed, Kimi sang softly in Spanish to Roberto, who clung to his

back. Whenever he tried to hit a high note, his voice cracked like crumpled
parchment. Salt was crusted at the corners of his mouth.

“Kimi, you want a drink?” Tucker crawled onto the gas tank and held

the bottle out to the navigator.

Kimi took the bottle. “Thank you,” he said. He wiped the mouth of the

bottle on his dress and took a deep drink, then poured some water into his
palm and held it while Roberto lapped it up. He handed the bottle back to
Tucker.

“You drink the rest. You bigger.”

Tucker nodded and drained the bottle. “Who’s Malcolme?”

“Malcolme buy me from my mother. He from Sydney. He a pimp.”

“He bought you?”

“Yes. My mother very poor in Manila. She can’t feed me, so she sell me

to Malcolme when I am twelve.”

“What about your father?”

“He not with us. He a navigator on Satawan. He meet my mother in

Manila when he is working on a tuna boat. He marry her and take her to
Satawan. She stay for ten years, but she not like it. She say women like dirt
to Micronesians. So she take me and go back to Manila when I am nine.
Then she sell me to Malcolme. He dress me up and I make big money for
him. But he mean to me. He say I have to get rid Roberto, so I run away to

find my father to finish teach me to be a navigator. They hear of him on
Yap. They say he lost at sea five year ago.”

“And he was the one that taught you to navigate?” Tucker knew it was a

snotty question, but he had no idea what to say to someone whose mother
had sold him to a pimp.

Kimi didn’t catch the sarcasm. “He teach me some. It take long time to

be navigator. Sometime twenty, thirty year. You want learn, I teach you.”

Tucker remembered how difficult it had been to learn Western

navigation for his pilot’s license. And that was using sophisticated charts
and instruments. He could imagine that learning to navigate by the stars—
by memory, without charts—would take years. He said, “No, that’s okay.
It’s different for airplanes. We have machines to navigate now.”

They bailed until the sun was high in the sky. Tuck could feel his skin

baking. He found some sunscreen in the pack and shared it with Kimi, but it
was no relief from the heat.

“We need some shade.” The tarp was gone. He rifled the pack, looking

for something they could use for shade, but for once Jake Skye’s bag of
tricks failed them.

By noon Tuck was cursing himself for pouring out the gallon of fresh

water during the storm. Kimi sat in the bottom of the boat, stroking
Roberto’s head and mumbling softly to the panting bat.

Tuck tried to pass the time by cleaning his cuts and applying the

antibiotic ointment from Jake’s first-aid kit. By turning his back and
crouching, he was able to create enough privacy to check on his damaged
penis. He could see infection around the sutures. He imagined gangrene,
amputation, and consequently suicide. Then, looking on the bright side, he
realized that he would die of thirst long before the infection had gone that
far.

Finding Spam

The octopus jetted across the bottom, over a giant head of brain coral, and
tucked itself into a tiny crevice in the reef. Sarapul could see the light
purple skin pulsing in the crevice three fathoms down. He took a deep
breath and dove, his spear in hand.

The octopus, sensing danger, changed color to the rust brown of the

coral around it and adjusted its shape to fit the crannies of its hiding place.
Sarapul caught the edge of the crevice with his left hand and thrust in his
spear with his right. The spear barely pierced one of the octopus’s tentacles
and it turned bright red in a chromatic scream, then released its ink. The ink
expanded into a smoky cloud in the water. Sarapul dropped his spear to
wave the ink away before making another thrust. But his air was gone. He
left his spear in the crevice and shot to the surface. The octopus sensed the
opening and jetted out of the crevice to a new hiding place before Sarapul
knew it was gone.

Sarapul broke the surface cursing. Only three fathoms, eighteen feet,

and he couldn’t stay down long enough to tease an octopus out of its hole.
As a young man, he could dive to twelve fathoms and stay down longer
than any of the Shark men. He was glad that no one had been there to see
him: an old man who could barely feed himself.

He pulled off his mask and spit into it, then rinsed it with seawater. He

looked out to sea, checking for any sign of the sharks that lived in

abundance off the reef. There was a boat out there, perhaps half a mile off
the reef, drifting. He put on his mask and looked down to get a bearing on
his spear so he could retrieve it later. Then he swam a slow crawl toward
the drifting boat.

He was winded when he reached the boat and he hung on the side for a

few minutes, bobbing in the swell, while he caught his breath. He made his
way around to the bow and pulled himself up and in. A huge black bat flew
up into his face and winged off toward the island. Sarapul cursed and said
some magic words to protect himself, then took a deep breath and examined
the bodies.

A man and a woman—and not long dead. There was no smell and no

swelling of the bellies. The meat would still be fresh. It had been too long
since he’d tasted the long pig. He pinched the man’s leg to test the fat. The
man moaned. He was still alive. Even better, Sarapul thought. I can eat the
dead one and keep the other one fresh!

PART TWO

Island of the Shark People

Deus Ex Machina

The Sky Priestess first appeared in 1944 on the nose of a B-26 bomber.
Conjured out of cans of enamel by a young aviator named Jack Moses, she
lay cool and naked across the aluminum skin, a red pump dangling from a
dainty toe, a smile that promised pleasure that no mortal woman could offer.
As soon as Moses laid the final brushstroke on her black-seamed stocking,
he knew there was something special about this one, something electric and
alive that would break his heart when they flew her off to the Pacific. He
caught a kiss in his palm and placed it gently on her bottom, then backed
down the ladder to survey his work.

He stood on the tarmac for perhaps half an hour, just looking at her,

charmed, wishing that he could take her home, or to a museum, or lift her
off the skin of the bomber and put her on the ceiling of a cathedral.

Jack Moses didn’t notice the major standing at his side until the older

man spoke.

“She’s something,” the major said. And although he wasn’t sure why, he

removed his hat.

“Ain’t she,” Moses said. “She’s off to Tinian tomorrow. Wish I was

going with her.”

The major reached out and squeezed Moses’s shoulder; he was a little

short of breath and the Sky Priestess had set off a stag film in his head. “Put
some clothes on her, son. We can’t have muffin showing up on a newsreel.”

“Yes, sir. I don’t have to put a top on her, do I?”

The major smiled. “Son, you put a top on her, I’ll have you court-

marshaled.”

“Yes, sir.”

Moses saluted the major and scampered back up the ladder with his

brushes and his red enamel and painted a serpentine scarf between her legs.

A week later, as a young pilot named Vincent Bennidetti was leading

his crew across the runway to take the Sky Priestess on her first mission, he
turned to his navigator and said, “I’d give a year’s pay to be that scarf.”

The copilot chattered over the intercom to the navigator, airspeed, fuel

consumption, and now descent rate. If they lost any more airspeed, the B-26
would stall, so Captain Vinnie was bringing her down into sweet, thick
lower air at the rate of a hundred feet per minute. But the lower they flew,
the faster the fuel would burn.

“I’m going to level her off at two thousand,” Captain Vinnie said.

The navigator did some quick calculations and came back with: “At two

thousand we’ll be short of base by three hundred miles, Captain. I
recommend we level at three thousand for a safer bailout.”

“Oh ye of little fucking faith,” Vincent said. “Check your charts for

somewhere we can ditch her.”

The navigator checked their position on the charts. There was a flyspeck

atoll named Alualu about forty nautical miles to the south. And it showed
that it was now in American hands. He relayed the information to the
captain.

“The chart shows an uncompleted airstrip. We must have chased the

Japs out before they finished it.”

“Give me a course.”

“Sir, there might not be anything there.”

“Ya fuckin’ mook, look out the window. You see anything but water?”

The navigator gave him the course.

Vincent patted the throttles and said, “Come on, sweetheart. You get us

there safe and I’ll build you a shrine.”

the drinking circle: how the Shark People needed to return to the old ways
and how he had just the ritual to get everyone started. Nothing like a little
cannibalism to get people thinking right. But now that was all ruined.
Everyone would be out on the airstrip, drumming and chanting and
marching around like a bunch of idiots, and when the Sky Priestess finally
left and the men finally did show up at the drinking circle, all they would
talk about was the wonderful words of Vincent. Sarapul wouldn’t be able to
get a word in edgewise. He took the path that led away from the village and
made his way toward the runway. After all, the Sky Priestess might pass out
some good cargo and he didn’t want to miss out on his share.

Sarapul had been permanently banished from the village of the Shark

People ever since one of the chief’s grandchildren had mysteriously
disappeared and was later found in the jungle with Sarapul, who was
building a child-sized earthen oven (an oom) and gathering various fragrant
fire woods. Oh, the men tolerated him at the nightly drinking circle, and he
was allowed to share in the village’s take of shark meat, and the members of
his clan saw to it that he got part of the wonderful cargo passed out by the
Sorcerer and the Sky Priestess, but he was forbidden to enter the village
when women and children were present. He lived alone in his little hut on
the far side of the island and was regarded by the Shark People as little
more than a monster to frighten children into behaving: “You stay inside the
reef or old Sarapul will catch you and eat you.” Actually, scaring children
was the only real joy Sarapul had left in life.

As he emerged from the jungle, the old cannibal saw the torches where

the Shark People waited in a semicircle around a raised platform. He
stopped in a grove of betel nut palms, sat on the ground, and watched. He
heard a click from the PA speakers mounted on the gate across the runway
and the Shark People stopped drumming. Two of the Japanese guards
appeared out of the compound and Sarapul felt the hair rise on his neck as
they rolled back the gate and fifty years of residual hatred rose in his throat
like acid. The Japanese had killed his wife and children, and if there was
any single reason to return to the old ways of the warrior, it was to take
revenge on the guards.

Music blared out of the PA speakers: Glenn Miller’s “String of Pearls.”

The Shark People turned toward the gate and dropped to their knees. Pillars
of red smoke rose from either side of the gate and wafted across the runway
like sulfurous serpents. The distant whine of airplane propellers replaced
the big band sound from the PA and grew into a roar that ended with a flash
and explosion that sent a mushroom cloud of smoke a hundred feet into the
night sky.

And half-naked, the Sky Priestess walked out of the smoke into the

moonlight.

Chief Malink turned to his friend Favo and said, “Excellent boom.”

“Very excellent boom,” Favo said.

The B-26 was sputtering on her last few drops of fuel. Vincent nosed

her over and started his descent. “There’s a strip cut right across the center
of the island. Let’s hope we didn’t bomb the shit out of it when the Japs had
it.”

His last few words seemed unusually loud as the engine cut out.

“No go-around, boys. We’re going down. Rig for a rough one and be

ready for extreme dampness if we come in short.”

Vincent could see patches of dirt on the airstrip, as well as fingers of

vines and undergrowth from the jungle trying to reclaim the clearing.

“You going in gear up?” the copilot asked, thinking that they might

have a better chance of survival going over a bomb crater if they skidded in
on the plane’s belly.

“Gear down,” Bennidetti said, making it a command. “We might be able

to land her gear up, but she’d never take off again.”

“Gear down and locked,” the copilot said.

They glided in about ten feet over the reef. A dozen Shark men who

were standing on the reef dove underwater as the airplane passed over them
as silent and ominous as a manta ray. Bennidetti flared the B-26 to drop the
rear gear first and they bounced over a patch of ferns and began the rocket
slide down the coral gravel airstrip. Without the engines to reverse thrust,
Vincent had only the wheel brakes to stop the bomber. He applied them
gingerly at first, then, realizing that the runway was obscured by vines that
might be covering a bomb crater, laid into them, causing the wheels to plow
furrows into the gravel and filling the still air with a thick white cloud of
dust.

“We still burning?” Vincent asked the copilot over the rumble.

The copilot looked out the window. “Can’t see anything but a little

black smoke.”

The bomber rolled to a stop and a cheer went up from the crew.

“Everybody out. Now,” Vincent ordered. “We still might have fire.

They stumbled over each other to get out of the plane into the dust

cloud. Bennidetti led them away at a run. They were a hundred yards from
the plane before anyone looked back.

“She looks okay, Captain. No fire.”

That set off a round of cheering and backslapping and when they turned

around again they saw group of native children approaching them from the
jungle led by a proud ten-year-old boy carrying a spear.

“Let me handle this,” Vincent told the crew as he dug into his flight suit

pocket for a Hershey bar.

“Hey, squirts, how you doing?”

The boy with the spear stood his ground, keeping his eye trained on the

downed bomber while the other children lost their nerve and backed away

like scolded puppies.

“We’re Americans,” Vincent said. “Friendly. We are bringing you many

good things.” He held the chocolate bar out to the spear boy, who didn’t
move or take his eyes off of the airplane.

Vincent tried again. “Here, kid. This stuff tastes good. Chocolate.” He

smacked his lips and mimed eating the candy bar. “You savvy American,
kid?”

“No,” the boy said. “I no speak American. I speak English.”

Vincent laughed. “Well, I’m from New York, kid. We don’t speak much

English there. Go tell your chief that Captain Vincent is here with presents
for him from a faraway and most magical place.”

“Who she?” the kid asked, pointing to the image of the Sky Priestess.

“She your queen?”

“She works for me, kid. That’s the Sky Priestess. She’s bringing

presents for your chief.”

“You are chief?”

Vincent knew he had to be careful here. He’d heard of island chiefs

refusing to deal with anyone but Roosevelt because he was the only
American equal to their status.

“I’m higher than chief,” Vincent said. “I’m Captain Vinnie Fuckin’

Bennidetti, Bad-ass of Brooklyn, High Emperor of the Allied Forces, Pilot
of the Magic Sky Priestess, Swinging Dick of the Free Fuckin’ World, and
Protector of the Innocent. Now take me to your chief, squirt, before I have
the Sky Priestess burn you to fucking ashes.”

“Christ, Cap’n!” the bombardier said.

Vincent shot him a grin over his shoulder.

The kid bowed his head. “Christ, Cap’n. I am Malink, chief of the Shark

People.”

Malink rose and approached the Sky Priestess with a coconut shell cup

of the special tuba they had made for her. He was as stunned by her now as
when he had first seen her painted on the side of Vincent’s plane.

She drained the cup and handed it back to the chief, who bowed over it.

“Still tastes like shit,” she said.

“Tastes like shit!” the Shark People chanted.

Beth Curtis turned her head to suppress a smile and a belch. When she

turned back to Malink, her eyes were fury.

“Who speaks for Vincent?”

“The Priestess of the Sky,” Malink answered.

“Who brings the words and cargo from Vincent?”

“The Priestess of the Sky,” Malink repeated.

“And who takes the chosen to Vincent?”

“The Priestess of the Sky,” Malink said again, backing away a step.

He’d never seen her so angry.

“And who else, Malink?”

“No one else.”

“Damn straight no one else!” She spat so violently she nearly

disengaged the bow from her hair. “You told the Sorcerer that Vincent came
to you in a dream. This is not true.”

The Shark People gasped. Despite what the Sky Priestess and the

Sorcerer thought, Malink had told none of his people about the dream. But
Malink was confused. He had dreamed of Vincent. “Vincent said that the
pilot is coming. That he is still alive.”

“Vincent speaks only through me.”

“But—”

“No coffee or sugar for a month,” the Sky Priestess said. She pulled her

scarf from her shoulders and the music began again. The Shark People
watched as she walked away. There was an explosion across the runway
and the Sky Priestess disappeared into the smoke.

Valhalla: From the Runyonese

Vincent Bennidetti was sitting at an oversized table dealing five-card draw
to five other guys and relating the story of the crash landing of the Sky
Priestess in hopes that the tale would distract his opponents from his
creative shuffling.

“So the squirt says to me, he says, ‘I’m Malink, chief of the Shark

People,’ and he puffs up his little chest like I’m supposed to be impressed
and drop down and kiss his ring, except he ain’t wearing any ring; in fact,
he ain’t wearing nothing but a loincloth and a little hat made of palm leaves,
so I says, ‘Honored and charmed I’m sure, Chief.’ And I gives him a grade
A Hershey bar as a peace offering to assure that the kid doesn’t get any
ideas about ventilating me with his spear. Although I have a roscoe handy
in my flight suit, in Manhattan it is considered very bad luck indeed to
shoot a kid unless he deserves it, so I am trying to take the diplomatic route.

“So the squirt chief takes the sweet and slaps a lip over a morsel and his

little mug splits in a grin so big that I’m figuring I know now how his tribe
gets named Shark People. And before I know it the kid yells something to
his pals and they vamoose to the jungle while I watch the squirt’s spear and
he keeps a peeper peeled at the Sky Priestess like any minute she’s gonna
jump off the plane and do the bump and grind across the airstrip.

“Now we are sure that Sky Priestess is not burning or blowing up,

Sparky goes back in and sings Mayday on the radio until I am thinking that

even Marconi is sorry he ever invented the machine (another distinguished
Italian genius, if I may point out, and it would be impolite for anyone, at
this juncture, to mention Mussolini, as I will have to delay the game whilst I
pop him in the beezer, thank you), and finally HQ comes back on and
requests more than somewhat sternly that we cease broadcasting our
position, as they will send someone as soon as they can unless the Japs find
us first, in which case it has been an honor serving with us.

“Call and raise a buck.

“So the squirt asks me do I kill Japs? And I tell him that I am killing so

many Japs I have to come rest on his island for a few days to give the Japs a
chance to send in reinforcements for me to kill, when out of the jungle
comes a whole platoon of native guys, mostly real old guys, carrying
baskets of fruit and coconuts and dried fish which they are laying at my feet
after doing enough bowing and chanting to fill a year of encores on
Broadway.

“And the kid says, ‘You more powerful than Father Rodriquez. Japs kill

him.’ From which I figure where the kid learns to speak English and why I
am seeing no young guys, because it is well known that the Japs have killed
any missionaries they find and have taken most of the able-bodied native
guys which they do not kill off to build airstrips and boat landing ramps and
other Jap military stuff.

“‘Yeah,’ I tells the kid, ‘too bad about Father Rodriquez, and all the

other guys that don’t make it, but Vincent and the Sky Priestess is here now
and you got nothing to worry about.’ Then I inquire as to if there are any
available dolls on the island and the kid jabbers something to one of the old
guys, who wobbles off and comes back about ten minutes later with a line
of young native dolls who are wearing skirts on their bottom but are nothing
but bounce and bosoms on the top, except for the odd garnish of flowers
here and there for fragrance and color.

“I swear on my mother’s grave (should she pass away before I get

home) that I am looking at more brown curves than I have seen since I fly
over the Mississippi at ten Gs, and they are by no means an unpleasant
sight, but as soon as I pick out one of the young dolls and give her my best

Tyrone Power wink, she starts bawling like I have broken her heart and runs
into the jungle followed, posthaste, by the other lovelies until the airstrip is,
once again, strictly stag.

“‘What goes?’ I ask the kid. And he explains that because I am a god

the dames are most frightened that I will destroy them. Then the squirt
starts bawling himself, and I am beginning to feel very low indeed, as I can
see that the little guy has taken my god action and it is six to five that he
thinks he is on the destruction express along with the dames, and some
explanation and consolation are then needed to caulk the kid’s waterworks
and generally ease his mind.

“So I sits down with the kid under the wing of the Sky Priestess and by

and by along comes an old native guy with a jug of the local hooch, of
which I am somewhat dubious and which tastes like matchheads mixed
with dishwater but smooths out considerably after the first four or five belts,
and soon the mood becomes most festive and a good time is had by all
(except for Sparky, who is bending over the runway looking at everything
he drinks for the second time).

“Now all of this time I am thinking that the kid is running a game on me

about being chief until he explains that the Japs killed his father and his
older brother as examples and he is next in line, so he is chief whether he
likes it or not. And now he is worried that his people will not have enough
to eat, as the Japs have taken most of the fruit and coconuts and destroyed
all the canoes and cargo, like rice, which the late Father Rodriquez brings
in, and my heart is breaking for the kid, who should be playing stickball and
stealing candy and other assorted kid activities instead of worrying about a
whole population of citizens. So I look at my guys eating all the food the
kid gives us, and my heart is feeling very heavy indeed, so I tell him not to
worry, as Vincent and the Sky Priestess will see that his people get
everything they need and I gives the kid a pack of Luckys and my Zippo to
seal the promise. Then, as soon as Sparky finishes doing the rainbow yawn,
I tells him to get on the radio to a friend of mine who is in the quartermaster
corps, and I gives him a list of things to place on the PT boat which is
coming to get us.

“So as the evening wears on, the kid is telling me stories of how the

island was made by a dame from Yap who rides on a turtle with a basketful
of dirt which she dumps in the ocean, making the island, which must have
been quite some basket, and she tells all the children she is having on the
island (although the kid says nothing about her having an old man) that she
isn’t going to give them a good reef for fishing, so they are going to be
eating sharks. And although the people of all the other islands are afraid of
sharks, here the sharks are afraid of the people. ‘They will be called the
Shark People,’ the dame with the dirt says.

“And I says, ‘Yeah, I know that dame.’ That, in fact, I take her to the

races one day and she is such good luck that I win the trifecta for five Gs.
And I can see the kid is most impressed, even though he wouldn’t know a G
from a G-string. So I begins to lay it on a bit thick and by the time we have
consumed all of the local bug juice and most of the fruit and fish, the kid is
convinced that if I am not the Second Coming, I am at least pinch-hitting
that day.

“By now I am feeling I am in serious need of female company and I

mention this to the kid, who says maybe there is something he can do, as
there is one doll in the village whose job it is to change the oil of the
unmarried native guys (I am at once reminded of a costume optional dancer
named Chintzy Bilouski, who performs a similar service for myself and
many other unmarried male citizens in the Broadway district) and it seems
that this native doll has been short of work of late, as all of the young
unmarried guys are either killed or taken away. And the kid says he will
approach this doll on my behalf if I promise that she will not burst into
flames or be otherwise harmed and as long as I keep it quiet. As these are
similar terms I agree to with Chintzy Bilouski (and a sawbuck cheaper, in
fact), I tell the kid to lead the way, which he does. And soon we are in a big
grass house by the beach, which he calls the bachelors’ house, and which is
clearly intended to house many citizens, but is currently only the home of
one doll, who is by no means hard on the peepers and who proceeds
immediately to catch up on any work she has been missing in a most
enthusiastic and friendly manner, if you know what I mean.

“So, to make a long story short, the guys and I spend three more days

telling stories to the kid and drinking bug juice and creeping to the
bachelors’ house until the PT boat shows with some mechanics and welders
and all the supplies I have requested from my pal the quartermaster. And
the islanders all line up while I pass out many machetes and knives and
chocolate bars and various other luxuries from Uncle Sam. And that night
they throw a big party in my honor with much drinking and dancing and a
swell time is had by one and all. But as we are ready to leave, the kid chief
comes up all leaky-eyed, asking why am I leaving and will I come back and
what will his people do without me. So I promise him I will be back soon
with many wonderful things and to save me a spot in the bachelors’ house,
but until then, every time he sees a plane, he and his people will know that
me and the Sky Priestess are looking out for them.

“Then when we are back at base I am working something with the

colonel to run a recon mission to inspect the airstrip for emergency use. No
bombs. I am thinking we will fill the Sky Priestess up with medicine and
supplies for the Shark kid and his people as soon as permission comes
through. And I’m fully intending to come through, as I gives the kid my
word and he believes it, but how am I to know that on our very next
bombing run a squadron of Zeros will surprise us and fill the Sky Priestess
with all manner of cannon and machine gun slugs, sending us down in a
ball of flames and killing me and everyone aboard quite dead.”

The guy with the beard cleared his throat and said, “That was a swell

story the first dozen times we heard it, Vinnie, but are you going to talk or
play cards?”

“Bite me, Jewboy, it ain’t like we haven’t had to fight the yawns

through your loaves and fishes epic a hundred fuckin’ times.” Then Vincent
flashed him a feral grin. “And since it is now your bet, I will advise you to
fold, as I am now holding a hand that is so hot it is about to burst into
flames like the proverbial bush.”

The guy with the beard held up a punctured palm to silence Vincent.

“You’re holding a pair of eights, Vinnie.”

“I hate fuckin’ playing with you,” Vincent said.

We Ask the Gods for Answers and They Give us Questions

Tucker Case heard the beating of wings above his head and suddenly there
was a familiar little face in front of him. Roberto was hanging upside down
from the harness ropes around Tuck’s chest. He never thought he’d be glad
to see the little vermin.

“Roberto! Buddy!” Tuck smiled at the bat.

Roberto squeaked and bent forward to lick Tucker’s face.

Tucker sputtered. He could smell papaya on the bat’s breath.

“How about climbing up there and gnawing through these ropes, little

guy?”

Roberto looked at him quizzically, then laid a big lick on him, right

across the lips.

“Ack! Bat spit!”

Tuck heard a weak voice from above. “He no gnaw rope. His teeth too

little,” Kimi said.

Roberto took flight and landed on Kimi’s head and began licking and

clawing him ecstatically.

Kimi was suspended about two feet above Tucker and about five feet

away. It hurt his neck, but he could see the navigator dangling if he
stretched. “You’re alive!” Tucker said. “I thought you were dead.”

“I am bery thirsty. Why you put us in tree?”

“I didn’t. It was an old island guy. I think he’s going to eat us.”

“No, no, no. No cannibal in these islands for many years.”

“Good. You tell him that when he comes back.”

Kimi struggled against his bonds and set himself spinning. “These ropes

hurt on my arms. Someone put us in crab harness.”

“I figured that out,” Tuck said. He craned his neck and eyed Kimi’s

harness. “Maybe I can swing to you and catch on to your harness. If I can
get hold of it, I might be able to untie you.”

“Good plan,” Kimi said.

“Yankee know-how, kid.”

As Tuck started to swing his arms and legs, he felt the harness tighten

around his chest. Soon he was swinging in a wide elliptical pattern that
brought him within a foot of Kimi, but the harness was so tight he could
barely breathe. Weakened from lack of food and water, he gave up. “I can’t
breathe,” he gasped.

“That good plan, though,” Kimi said. “Now I have Roberto bring that

knife over by door of house and I cut the ropes. Okay?”

“Roberto can fetch?”

“Yes.”

“Why didn’t you say so?”

“I want to see Yankee know-how.”

Why, if Malink dreamed a message from Vincent, did the white bitch

say that he did not? And if Vincent had sent a pilot, why did the Sky
Priestess not know about him? And if Vincent had not sent a pilot, who is
hanging in the breadfruit tree?

In the old days Sarapul would have asked the turtle, his clan animal, for

an answer to his questions. Then he would have watched the waves and
listened to the wind for an answer, perhaps he would have gone to a
sorcerer for an interpretation. But he was too deaf and blind to see a sign
now. And the only sorcerer left was the white man who lived behind the big
fence and gave medicine to the Shark People: Vincent’s Sorcerer. Sarapul
didn’t believe in Vincent any more than he believed in the god Father
Rodriquez had worn around his neck on a chain.

Father Rodriquez had said that the old ways—the taboos and the totem

animals—were lies and that the skinny white god on the cross was the only
real god. Sarapul was prepared to believe him, especially when he offered
everyone a piece of the body of Christ. But Christ tasted like dried pounded
taro and Father Rodriquez lost the old cannibal as a convert when he said
that you would be thrown into fire forever if you ate anyone besides the
stale starchy god on the cross.

Then the Japanese came and cut off Father Rodriquez’s head and threw

his god on a chain into the sea. Sarapul knew for sure then that the Father
had been lying all along. The Japanese raped and killed his wife and made
his two sons work building the airstrip until they became sick and died. He
asked the Turtle why his family had been taken away, and when the sign
came in the form of a cloud shaped like an eel, the sorcerer said that it had
happened because the Shark People had broken the taboos, had eaten their

totem animals and taken fish from the forbidden reef: They were being
punished.

The next night Sarapul killed a Japanese soldier and built an oom to

bake him in, but none of the Shark People would help him. Some were
afraid of the god of Father Rodriquez and the rest were afraid of the
Japanese. They took the body and fed it to the sharks who lived at the edge
of the reef.

In the morning the Japanese lined up the old sorcerer and a dozen

children and machine-gunned them. And Sarapul lost his mind.

Then the American planes came, dropping their bombs and fire from the

sky for two days, and when the explosions stopped and the smoke cleared,
the Japanese left, taking with them all the coconuts and breadfruit on the
island. A week later Vincent arrived in the Sky Priestess.

Sarapul still had the machete that the flyer had given him. It was more

than he had ever gotten from Father Rodriquez’s god, but the cannibal did
not believe that Vincent was a god. Even if Vincent had scared away the
Japanese and brought the food that saved the Shark People, Sarapul had
angered the old gods before and he would not do it again.

When the white Sorcerer arrived, he too talked of the god on the cross

and although the Shark People took the food and medicine he gave them
and even attended his services, they would not forsake Vincent, their savior.
The god on the cross had let them down before. Eventually, the white
Sorcerer turned to Vincent too. But Sarapul clung to the old ways, even
when the Sky Priestess returned with her red scarf and explosions. It was all
just entertainment: Christ was just a cracker, Vincent was just a flyer, and
he, Sarapul, was a cannibal.

Still, he did not blame Malink for banishing him or for clinging to

Vincent’s promises. Vincent was the god of Malink’s childhood, and Malink
clung to him in the same way that Sarapul clung to the old ways. Faith grew
stronger when planted in a child. Sarapul knew that. He was mad, but he
was not stupid.

Until now he had never put an ounce of faith in Vincent, but this dream

of Malink’s vexed him. He would have to figure things out before he ate the
man in his breadfruit tree. He had to talk to Malink now.

The cannibal took the path that led into the village. He crept between

the houses where the sweet rasp of snoring children wafted through the
woven grass walls like the sizzle of frying pork, through the smoke of dying
cook fires, past the bachelors’ house, the men’s house, and finally to the
beach, where the men sat in a circle, drinking and talking softly, the moon
spraying their shoulders with a cold blue light.

The men continued to talk as Sarapul joined the circle, politely ignoring

the creak and crackle of his old joints as he sat in the sand. Some of the
younger men, those who had grown up with the disciplinary specter of the
cannibal, subtly changed position so they could reach their knives quickly.
Malink greeted Sarapul with a nod, then filled the coconut shell cup from
the big glass jug and handed it to him.

“No coffee or sugar for a month,” Malink said. “Vincent is angry.”

Sarapul drained the cup and handed it back. “How about cigarettes?”

“The Sorcerer says that cigarettes are bad.”

“Vincent smoked cigarettes,” Sarapul pointed out. “He gave you the

lighter.”

The young men fidgeted at the firsthand reference to Vincent. It

disturbed them when the old men spoke of Vincent as if he was a person.
Malink reached inside the long flat basket where he kept the lighter along
with his other personal belongings. He touched the Zippo that Vincent had
given him.

“Cigarettes aren’t good for us,” he repeated.

“Then they should give us cigarettes for punishment,” Sarapul insisted.

Malink pulled a copy of People magazine from his basket, drawing

everyone’s attention away from the cannibal. The old chief tore a small
square from the masthead page and handed it to Abo, a muscular young
man who tended the tobacco patch for the Shark People.

“Roll one,” Malink said. Abo began filling the paper with tobacco from

his basket.

Malink opened the magazine on the sand in front of him and squinted at

the pages in the moonlight. Everyone in the circle leaned forward to look at
the pictures.

“Oprah’s skinny again,” Malink pronounced.

Sarapul scoffed and the men angrily looked up, the young ones looking

away quickly when they saw who had made the noise. Abo finished rolling
the cigarette and held it out to Malink. The chief gestured to Sarapul and
Abo gave the smoke to the old cannibal. Their hands brushed lightly in the
exchange and Sarapul held the young man’s gaze as he licked his finger as
if tasting a sweet sauce. Abo shuddered and backed to the outside of the
circle.

Malink lit the cigarette with the sacred Zippo, then he returned to his

magazine. “There will be no more People for a while, not with the Sky
Priestess mad at us.”

A communal moan rose up from the men and the drinking cup was

filled and passed.

“We are cut off,” Malink added.

Sarapul shrugged. “All the people in this book, they shit. It does not

matter. They die. It does not matter. If we put them all in a big boat and
sank it, you would not even know for six months when the Sky Priestess
gives you her old copy, and it still would not matter. This is stupid.”

“But look!” Malink pointed to a picture of a man with unnaturally large

ears, “This man is a king and he wishes to be a tampon. It is quoted.”

Sarapul scrunched up his face, his wrinkles folding over each other like

venetian blinds, while he tried to figure out what, exactly, a tampon was.
Finally he said, “I was a tampon once, back in the old days, before you
were born. All warriors became tampons. It was better then.”

“You have never been a tampon,” Malink stated, although he couldn’t

be sure. “Only a king may be a tampon. And now, without People, we will
never know if this man who would be a tampon succeeded. It has been a
dark day.”

The cup had come around again to Sarapul and he drained it before

answering. “Tell me of this dream you had.”

“I should not speak of it.” Malink pretended to be engaged in the

magazine.

Sarapul pushed on. “The Sky Priestess said that Vincent spoke to you of

a pilot. Is that true?”

Malink nodded. “It is true. But it is only a dream or the Sorcerer would

have known.”

Sarapul was torn now. This was his chance to discredit the Sorcerer and

his white bitch, but if he told Malink about the man in the tree, then he
would lose his chance to taste the long pig again. Then again, he found
them first, and he was willing to share the meat. “What if your dream was
true?”

“It was just a dream. Vincent speaks to us only through the Sky

Priestess now. She has spoken.”

“Vincent smoked and she says smoking is bad. Vincent was an enemy

of the Japanese and now she has Japanese guards inside the fence. She lies.”

Some of the men moved away from the circle. It was one thing to drink

with a cannibal, but it was quite another to tolerate a heretic. (Of the twenty
men in the circle, three of the elders were named John, four who had been
born during Father Rodriquez’s tenure were named Jesus [Hey-zeus], and

three of the younger men were named Vincent.) They were a group that
honored the gods, whoever the gods might be that week.

“The Sky Priestess does not lie,” Malink said calmly. “She speaks for

Vincent.”

Sarapul pinched the flame of his cigarette with his ashy fingers, then

popped the stub into his mouth and began to chew as he grinned. “Your
dream was true, Malink. I have seen the pilot. He is on Alualu and he is
alive.”

“You are old and you drink too much.”

“I’ll show you.” Sarapul leaped to his feet to show that he was not

drunk, and in doing so scared the hell out of the younger men. “Come with
me,” he said.

Swing Time

Kimi had freed his hands and feet with the knife, only to find that he could
not reach the rope suspending him from the middle of his back. Now he was
forced to follow Tuck’s plan of swinging like a human pendulum until he
could grab the pilot’s rope and cut him down. Roberto hung upside down
from a nearby branch, wondering why his friends were behaving like
fighting spiders.

Tucker found he could only hold his head up for a few seconds at a time

before dizziness set in, so he watched the navigator’s swinging shadow to
gauge his distance. “One more time, Kimi. Then grab the rope.” It bothered
him some that when he was cut loose he would fall six feet and land face-
first in the coral gravel, but he was learning to take things as they came and
figured he would deal with that on the way down.

“I hear someone,” Kimi said. On the apex of his arc, he grabbed for

Tuck’s rope, missed, and accidentally raked the knife across the pilot’s
scalp.

“Ouch! Shit, Kimi. Watch what you’re doing.” Tuck braced himself for

the next attack, which never came. He looked up to see that Kimi’s arc had
been stopped in mid-swing. A rotund gray-haired native had caught the
navigator around the waist and was prying the knife out of his hand.

Tuck felt the hope drain out of him. The leathery old cannibal stood

amid a group of twenty men. All of them seemed to be waiting for the fat
guy to say something. It was time for a last-ditch effort.

“Look, you motherfuckers, people are expecting me. I’m supposed to be

flying medical supplies for a big-time doctor, so if you fuck with me you’re
all going to die of the tropical creeping crud and I won’t give you so much
as a fucking aspirin.”

The native released Kimi into the hands of two younger men and

regarded Tuck. “You pilot?” He said in English.

“Damn right I am. And I’m sick and infected and stuff, so if you eat me

you’re going to die like a gut-shot dog—and in addition I would like to add
that I don’t taste anything like Spam.” Tuck was breathless from the diatribe
and he was starting to black out from trying to hold his head back.

The native said something in his own language, which Tuck took to be

“Cut him down,” because a second later he found himself falling into the
arms of four strong islanders who lowered him to the ground.

Tucker’s arms and legs burned as the blood rushed back into them.

Above him he saw a circle of moonlit brown faces. He managed to grab
enough breath to squeak, “Soon as I’m on my feet, your asses are mine. You
all might as well just go practice falling down for a while so you’ll be used
to it. Just order the body bags now ’cause when I’m done, you’re going to
look like piles of chocolate pudding. They’ll be cleaning you up with
shovels—you…” Tuck’s breath caught in his throat and he passed out.

Malink looked at his old friend Favo and smiled. “Excellent threat,” he

said.

“Most excellent threat,” Favo said.

Sarapul pushed his way through the kneeling men. “He’s dead. Let’s eat

him.”

“He no like that,” Kimi said. “Not even for free.”

“Did you see, ’Bastian? Was I great or what?”

He held her for a second, smelling the perfume in her hair. “You were

great,” he said. When he released her, there were two pink spots on his lab
coat from the rouge she had rubbed on her nipples.

She skipped around the lab like a little girl. “Malink was shaking in his

shoes,” she said. Well, not in his shoes, but you know what I mean.” She
stopped and looked into the microscope. “What’s this?”

He watched a delicate line of muscle run down the back of her thigh and

postulated what kind of genetics went into preserving a body like that on
Chee-tos and vodka. He thought a lot about genetics lately. “I’m doing the
last of the tissue typing. I should be finished in a couple of days.”

She said, “Did you like ‘String of Pearls’ better than ‘In the Mood’?”

High Priestess of the nonsequiter, Sebastian thought. “It was perfect.

You were perfect.”

She moved away from the microscope and paced around the table,

frowning now, as if she was working on an equation in her head. “I’ve been
thinking about ‘Pennsylvania 6-5000,’ putting the ninjas in top hats and
tails in kind of a chorus line. You know, they could carry me across the
runway and pause and shout the chorus. There’s no singing on the
recording; they would just have to shout. I mean, if we have to have them
around, they might as well do something.” She stopped pacing and turned
to him. “What do you think?”

It took Sebastian a second to realize that she was serious. “I’m not sure

that would be a good idea. The Shark People are suspicious of the nin—,
the guards. I wish Akiro would have listened to me and found some non-

Japanese. This business with Malink’s dream is a sign that our credibility is
slipping.”

“That’s what I’m saying. If we show that they’re under the control of

the Sky Priestess—”

“I don’t think it’s a good idea, Beth.”

She dismissed the thought with a wave. “Fine. We can talk about it

later.”

Sebastian wanted to stop himself before he ruined her ebullient mood,

but he pressed on despite himself. “Don’t you think that no coffee or sugar
for a month was a little harsh?”

“You really don’t get it, do you? I’ll give it all back after a week,

’Bastian, and they’ll love me for it. Generosity of the gods: The Sky
Priestess taketh away and the Sky Priestess giveth back. It’s how these
things work. You put a few people on a boat, then you drown every living
creature on the planet—the people on the boat are pretty goddamn
grateful.” She flipped the end of her red scarf over her shoulder.

“I wish you wouldn’t talk like that.”

“You make the rules and you play the game, ’Bastian. What’s wrong

with that?”

He turned from her and pretended to go through some notes. “I guess

you’re right,” he said, but he felt acid rising from his stomach. She was
calling it a game.

She came up behind him, pushed her breasts into his back, and reached

around inside his lab coat. “Poor baby. You still feel like you did the right
thing by burning your Beatles records.”

“Beth, please.”

She unzipped his khakis and snaked her hand in his fly. “Deep down,

you feel like John Lennon got what he deserved, don’t you, sweetheart?

Saying he was more popular than Jesus. That loony-toon Chapman was the
instrument of God, wasn’t he?”

He whirled on her and grabbed her shoulders. “Yes, dammit.” His face

had gone hot. He could feel the veins pulse in his forehead, in his crotch.
“That’s enough, Beth.”

“No, it’s not.” She ripped open the front of his trousers and fell back on

the lab table, pulling him on top of her. “Come on, show me the wrath of
the Sorcerer.”

Girl Talk

Sepie washed the pilot’s hair in a bowl with pounded coconut and brackish
water. She had been taking care of the unconscious white man for two days
and it was starting to get tedious. She was mispel of the bachelors’ house,
and washing and ministering to a sick and stinky white man was not in her
job description. This was women’s work.

There are legends in the islands, and some of the old men swear they

are true, that the women who service the bachelors’ houses, the mispels,
were taken to the secret island of Maluuk, known only to the high
navigators, where they were trained in the art of pleasuring a man.

After months of training, a mispel was required to pass a test before she

was allowed to return to her home island to take over the duty of tending to
the sexual needs of the men of the bachelors’ house. The test? She was sent
into the ocean with a ripe brown coconut clutched between her thighs, and
there she floated, in heavy surf, for the entire circuit of the tides. Should the
coconut pop loose or the mispel touch it with her hands, she failed the test
(although there was some leeway in the event of shark attack). It is said that
the inner thighs of the mispels of old were as strong as net cable. The
second part of the test required the girl to find a delicate dragonfly orchid
with a straight stem, and while her teachers looked on, she would lower
herself over the flower until it disappeared inside of her, then rise again
after a few minutes, leaving the stem unbent and the petals unbruised. The
mispel held a position of honor, respected and revered among the islanders.

She was not required to do housekeeping, cooking, or weaving, and while
the other women toiled in taro fields from the time they could walk, a
mispel was allowed to nap in the shade, conserving her energy for her
nocturnal duties. A mispel often ended her tour of duty by marrying a man
of high status. No stigma followed her into married life, and she would be
sought out to the end of her days by the other women for advice on
handling men.

Sepie, however, had not been chosen because of any special skill, nor

had she passed through any vigorous concubinal boot camp. Sepie had been
marked for mispel from the moment of her menses, when she emerged from
the women’s house with her lavalava tied a bit too high and showing a bit
too much cappuccino thigh, her skin rubbed with copra until she glistened
all over, and her breasts shining like polished wooden tea cups. She had
painted her lips with the juice of crushed berries and peppered her long
black hair with scores of sweet jasmine blossoms. She giggled coquettishly
in the presence of all the men, danced dangerously close to the taboo of
speaking to them in public, risked beatings by refusing to fall to her knees
when her male cousins passed, and went about her chores with a wiggly
energy that had caused more than one of the distracted village boys to fall
out of a breadfruit tree during harvest. (She broke ankles as well as hearts.)
Sepie was all titter and tease, a lazy girl who excelled at leisure, a natural at
invoking and denying desire, a wet dream deferred. At fifteen she took up
residence in the bachelors’ house and had lived there for four years.

When Malink and the men brought the flyer and the man in the dress to

her, she knew she was in for some trouble.

“Take care of them,” Malink said. “Feed them. Help to make them

strong.”

Sepie kept her head bowed while Malink spoke, but when he finished

she took his hand and led him into the bachelors’ house, gesturing to the
other men to lay the flyer and his friend on the ground outside. The men
smiled among themselves, thinking that old Malink was going inside to
receive a special favor from the mispel. What, in fact, he was receiving was
an ass chewing.

“Why don’t you take them to your house, Malink? I don’t want them

here.”

“It’s a secret. If my wife and daughters find out they are here, then

everyone will know.”

“I’m the only one who can keep a secret in the bachelors’ house. Take

them to old Sarapul’s house. No one goes there.”

“He wants to eat them.” Malink couldn’t remember ever having to

argue with a woman and he wasn’t at all prepared for it.

“You’re chief. Tell him not to. I will not cook for them. If I feed them,

they will shit. I’m not going to clean it up.”

“Sepie, what will you do when you marry and have children? You will

have to do these things then. I am asking you as your chief to do these
things.”

“No,” Sepie said.

Malink sighed. “I am asking you to do these things because these men

have been sent to us by Vincent.”

Sepie didn’t know what to say. She had heard the Sky Priestess chastise

Malink in front of the people, but she had been more concerned with losing
coffee and sugar for a month than with the actual offense. “You will tell the
men to cook for them?”

“Yes.”

“And they will carry them to the beach and wash them if they shit?”

“I will tell them. Please, Sepie.”

No man had ever said “please” to her before, let alone the chief. It was

not a courtesy that women deserved. For the first time she realized how
desperate Malink really was. “And you will tell Abo to wash his dick when
it is his turn.”

“What does that have to do with this?”

“He is stinky.”

“I will tell him.”

“And you will tell Favo to quit making me put beads in his ass.”

“Favo does that?”

“He said he learned it from the Japanese.”

“Really? Favo?”

“Yes.”

“But he’s old, and he has a wife and many grandchildren.”

“He says it makes his spear stronger.”

“He does? I mean, does it work?” Malink had momentarily forgotten

why he was here.

“I don’t like it. It is evil and unclean.”

“You’re talking about my old friend Favo, right? He’s the one you’re

talking about?”

“I told him only bachelors were suppose to stay here, but he says his

wife doesn’t understand him. His hands are like the skin of a shark.”

“What kind of beads?”

“Tell him,” Sepie said.

“Okay,” Malink said in English. Then to himself he said: “Old Favo.”

He shook his head as he walked out of the bachelors’ house. “Beads.”

Sepie watched him go, wishing that she had asked for more favors.

Outside the men were grinning when Malink stepped into the

moonlight. He hitched up his loincloth and averted his eyes from theirs.

“Take them inside. You must cook and clean for them. Don’t let the

woman do it. It is too important for her.”

As the men carried Tuck and Kimi into the bachelors’ house, Favo

ambled up to Malink. “How was it?”

Malink looked at his old friend and noticed for the first time that Favo

wore a long string of ivory beads around his neck. “I have to go home
now,” Malink said.

“Where is Roberto?” the Filipino said.

Sepie jumped. It didn’t surprise her so much that he had spoken, but that

he had spoken in her language. Although the words were clipped, the way
someone from Iffallik or Satawan might speak.

“He’s right here,” she said. “Your friend stinks. You should take him

outside and wash him in the sea.”

“That’s not Roberto. That’s Tucker. Roberto is shorter.” Kimi crawled

over to Tuck and laid his hand on the flyer’s forehead. “He has bad fever.
You have medicine?”

“Aspirin,” Sepie said. Malink had given her a bottle of the tablets to

crush into the flyer’s broth, but after he gagged on the first dose she had

stopped giving it to him.

“He is more sick than aspirin. He needs a doctor. You have a doctor?”

“We have the Sorcerer. He does our medicine. He was a doctor before

the Sky Priestess came.”

Kimi looked at her. “What island is this?”

“Alualu.”

“Ha! We have to get doctor for Tucker. He owes me five hundred

dollars.”

Sepie’s eyes went wide. No wonder he wears such a fine dress. Five

hundred dollars! She said, “The chief says I have to be secret about this
man. Everyone knows he is here. The boys get drunk and talk. But I can’t
get the doctor.”

“Why are you taking care of him? You are just a girl.”

“I am not just a girl. I am mispel.”

Kimi scoffed. “There are no mispels anymore.”

Sepie threw down the rag she was using to wipe the floor. “What do you

know? You are a man in a dress, and I don’t believe you have five hundred
dollars.”

“It was a nice dress before the typhoon,” Kimi said. “Wash-and-wear.

No dry cleaning.”

Sepie nodded as if she knew what he was talking about. “It is a very

pretty dress. I like it.”

“You do?” Kimi picked at the crushed pleats around his legs. “It’s just

an old thing I picked up in Manila. It was on sale. You really like it?”

Sepie didn’t understand. Among her people, if you admired someone’s

else possession, manners bound them to give it to you. How could this silly
man speak her language and still not know her customs. And he wasn’t
even looking at her that way all men looked at her.

“What island do you come from?”

“Satawan,” Kimi said. “I am a navigator.”

Sepie scoffed. “There are no more navigators.”

Just then the doorway darkened and they looked up to see Abo, the

fierce one, entering the bachelors’ house. He was lean and heavily muscled
and he wore a permanent scowl on his face. The sides of his head were
shaved and tattooed with images of hammerhead sharks. He wore his hair
tied into a warrior’s topknot that had gone out of fashion a hundred years
ago.

“Has the pilot awakened?” he growled.

Sepie looked down and smiled coyly. Abo was the one boy in the

bachelors’ house who didn’t seem to accept the communal nature of her
position. He was always jealous, enraged, or brooding, but he brought her
many presents, sometimes even copies of People that he stole from the
men’s drinking circle. Sepie thought she might marry him someday.

“He is too sick for this,” Kimi said. “We need to take him to the doctor.”

“Malink says he must stay here until he is well.”

“He is dying.” Kimi said.

Abo looked at Sepie for confirmation.

“Well, he smells dead,” she said. The sooner they sent the pilot to the

Sorcerer, the sooner she could get back to spending her days swimming and
preening. “Malink will be angry if he dies,” she added for good measure.

Abo nodded. “I will tell him.” He pointed to Kimi. “You come with

me.”

Kimi got up to leave, then turned back to Sepie when he reached the

doorway. “If Roberto comes, tell him I’ll be right back.”

Sepie shrugged. “Who is Roberto?”

“He’s a fruit bat. From Guam. You can tell by his accent.”

“Oh, him. I think Sarapul ate him,” Sepie said casually.”

Kimi turned and ran screaming into the village.

“Good morning, Chief,” Abo said.

“Food?” Malink answered, gesturing with his breakfast.

Abo had already eaten, but it would have been rude not to accept.

“Yes.”

Malink’s wife poked her head out of the cookhouse and saw the chief

nod. In a second she was giving her own breakfast to Abo, who neither
thanked her or acknowledged her presence.

“The pilot is sick,” Abo said. “Very bad fever. Sepie and the girl-man

say that he will die soon without the Sorcerer’s help.”

Malink suddenly lost his appetite. He set his breakfast on the ground

and one of his daughters appeared out of nowhere to take it to the
cookhouse, where the women shared what was left.

“And what do you think?” Malink asked.

“I think he is dying. He smells of sickness. Like when Tamu was bitten

by the shark and his leg turned black.”

Malink rubbed his temples. How to handle this? The Sky Priestess was

angry with him for even dreaming of the pilot. What would happen if he
suddenly showed up with him?

“What about the girl-man?”

“He is not sick, but he has gone crazy. He runs around the village

looking for Sarapul.”

Malink nodded. “Catch him and tie him up. Make a litter and take the

pilot to the betel nut trees by the runway. Leave him there.”

“Leave him there?”

“Yes, quickly. And bring the litter back with you. Make it look as if he

walked to the runway. Send a boy to me when it is done. Go now.”

Abo put down his food and ran off down the path.

Malink went into his house and pulled the ammo box out of the rafters.

Inside, next to the portable phone, he found the Zippo that Vincent had
given him. He clicked it open, lit it, and sat it on the floor while it burned.
“Vincent,” he said, “It’s your friend Malink here. Please tell the Sky
Priestess that this is not my fault. Tell her that you have sent the pilot.
Please tell her for your friend Malink so she will not be angry. Amen.”

His prayer finished, Malink snapped the lighter shut, put it away, then

took the portable phone and went outside to wait for the boy to tell him
everything was in place.

Choose Your Own Nightmare

Tucker Case rolled through a fever dream where he was tossed in great
elastic waves of bat-winged demons—crushed, smothered, bitten, and
scratched—and there, amid the chaos, a pink fabric softener sheet passed by
the corner of his eye, confirming that he had been stuffed into a dryer in the
laundromat of Hell. He tumbled toward the pink, ascended out of the
clawing mass, and awoke gasping, with no idea where he was.

The pink was a dress on a heart-faced woman who said, “Good

morning, Mr. Case. Welcome back to the world.”

A man’s voice: “After your message and the typhoon, we thought for

sure you’d been lost at sea.” He was a white blur with a head, then a lab
coat wrapped around a tall, smiling middle-aged man, gray and balding, a
stethoscope around his neck.

The doctor had his arm around the heart-faced woman. She too was

smiling, with the aspect of an angel, the vessel of human kindness. Together
they looked as if they had walked off of fifties television.

The man said, “I’m Dr. Sebastian Curtis, Mr. Case. This is my wife,

Beth.”

Tuck tried to speak, but emitted only a rasping squeak. The woman

lifted a plastic cup of water to his lips and he drank. He eyed the IV bag

running into his arm.

“Glucose and antibiotics,” the doctor said. “You’ve got some badly

infected wounds. The islanders found you washed up on the reef.”

Tucker did a quick inventory of his limbs by feel, then looked at them

lest he had lost a leg that was still giving off phantom feeling. He raised his
head to look at his crotch, which was sending pulses of pain up through his
abdomen.

The woman gently pushed him down. “You’re going to be fine. They

found you in time, but you’re going to need more rest. ’Bastian can give
you something for the pain if you need it.”

She smiled beatifically at her husband, who patted Tuck’s arm. “Don’t

be embarrassed, Mr. Case. Beth is a surgical nurse. I’m afraid the catheter
will have to stay in for a few days.”

“There was another guy with me,” Tuck said. “A Filipino. He was

piloting the boat.”

The doctor and his wife shot each other a glance and the “Ozzie and

Harriet” calm shattered into panic, but only for a second, then they were
back to their reassuring cooing. Tuck wasn’t even sure he had seen the
break.

“I’m sorry, but the islanders didn’t find anyone else. He must have been

lost in the storm.”

“But the tree. He was hung in the tree…”

Beth Curtis put her finger gently on his lips. “I’m sorry you lost your

friend, Mr. Case, but you need to get some rest. I’ll bring you something to
eat in a little while and we’ll see if you can hold down some solid food.”

She pulled her hand away and put her arm around her husband’s waist

as he pushed a syringe of fluid into Tuck’s IV tube. “We’ll check on you
shortly,” the doctor said.

Tucker watched them walk away and noticed that for all her “Little

House on the Prairie” purity, Beth Curtis had a nice shape under that calico.
Then he felt a little sleazy, as if he’d been caught horning on a friend’s
mom. Like the time, drunk and full of himself, he’d hit on Mary Jean
Dobbins.

To hell with solid food. Gin—in large quantities over a tall column of

ice—that’s the rub. Tonic to chase away the blues of bad dreams and men
lost at sea.

Tuck looked around the room. It was a small hospital ward. Only four

beds, but amazingly clean considering where it was. And there was some
pretty serious-looking equipment against the walls: technical stuff on
casters, stuff you might use in complicated surgery or to set the timing on a
Toyota. He was sure Jake Skye would know what it was. He thought about
the Learjet, then felt himself starting to doze.

Sleep came with the face of a cannibal, leg-jerk dreams, and finally

settled in on the oiled breasts of a brown girl brushing against his face and
smelling of coconut and flowers. There was a scratch and scuttle on the tin
roof, followed by the bark of a fruit bat. Tuck didn’t hear it.

You could run down the leads, pound the pavement, check all your facts

with two sources, then structure your meticulously gathered information
into the inverted pyramid form and what you got was: The pig’s owner had
gotten drunk and beat up his wife, so she sold his pig to someone on the
outer islands and bought a used stun gun from an ensign with the Navy Cat
team. The next time her husband got rough, a group of Japanese tourists
found him by the side of the road, sizzling in the dirt like a strip of frying
bacon. Mistaking him for a street performer, the tourists clapped joyously,

took pictures of each other standing beside the electrocuted man, and gave
his wife five dollars. The whole intrigue had been exposed when police
found the pig-stealing wife in front of the Continental Hotel charging
tourists a dollar apiece to watch her zap her husband’s twitching supine
body. The stun gun was confiscated, no charges were pressed, and the wife
beater was pronounced unharmed by a Peace Corps volunteer, although he
did need to be reminded several times of his name, where he lived, and how
many children he had.

The mystery was solved and the Truk Star had no lead story. Jefferson

Pardee was miserable. He was actually going to have to go out and find a
story or, as he had done so many time before, make one up. The Micro
Spirit was in port. Maybe he’d go down to the dock and see if he could stir
up some news out of the crew. He slid his press card into the band of his
Australian bush hat and waddled out the door and down the dusty street to
the pier where rock-hard, rope-muscled islanders were loading fifty-five-
gallon drums into cargo nets and hoisting them into the holds of the Micro
Spirit.

The Micro Spirit and the Micro Trader were sister ships: small

freighters that cruised the Micronesian crescent carrying cargo and
passengers to the outer islands. There were no cabins other than those of the
captain and crew. Passengers traveled and slept on the deck.

Pardee waved to the first mate, a heavily tattooed Tongan who stood at

the rail chewing betel nut and spitting gooey red comets over the side.

“Ahoy!” Pardee called. “Permission to come aboard.”

The mate shook his head. “Not until we finish loading this jet fuel. I’ll

come down. How you doing, Scoop?”

Pardee had convinced the crew of the Micro Spirit to call him “Scoop”

one drunken night in the Yumi Bar. He watched the mate vault over the
railing at the bow and monkey down a mooring line to the dock with no
more effort than if he was walking down stairs. Watching him made Pardee
sad that he was a fat man.

The mate strolled up to Pardee and pumped his hand. “Good to see

you.”

“Likewise,” Pardee said. “Where you guys in from?”

“We bring chiefs in from Wolei for a conference. Pick up some tuna and

copra. Same, same.”

Pardee looked back at the sailors loading the barrels. “Did you say jet

fuel? I thought the Mobil tankers handled all the fuel for Continental.”
Continental was the only major airline that flew Micronesia.

“Mobil tankers won’t go to Alualu. No lagoon, no harbor. We going to

Ulithi, then take this fuel special order to the doctor on Alualu.”

Pardee took a moment to digest the information. “I thought the Micro

Trader did Yap and Palau States. What are you going all the way over there
for?”

“Like I say, special order. Moen has jet fuel, we here in Moen, doctor

wants jet fuel soon, so we go. I like it. I never been Alualu and I know a girl
on Ulithi.”

Pardee couldn’t help but smile. This was a story in itself. Not a big one,

but when the Trader or the Spirit changed schedules it made the paper. But
there was more of a story somewhere in those barrels of jet fuel, in the
rumor of armed guards, and in the two pilots that had passed through Truk
on the way to No One’s Island. The question for Pardee was: Did he want to
track it down? Could he track it down?

“When do you sail?” he asked the mate.

“Tomorrow morning. We get drunk together tonight Yumi Bar. My boys

carry you home if you want. Hey?” The mate laughed.

Pardee felt sick. That was what they knew him for, a fat, drunken white

man who they could carry home and then tell stories about.

“I can’t drink tonight. I’m sailing with you in the morning. I’ve got to

get ready.”

The mate removed the betel nut cud from his cheek and tossed it into

the sea, where tiny yellow fish rose to nip at it. He eyed Pardee
suspiciously. “You going to leave Truk?”

“It’s not that big a deal. I’ve gone off-island before for a story.”

“Not in ten years I sail the Spirit.”

“Do you have room for another passenger or not?”

“We always have room. You know you have to sleep on deck?”

Pardee was beginning to get irritated. He needed a beer. “I’ve done this

before.”

The mate shook his head as if clearing his ears of water and laughed.

“Okay, we sail six in morning. Be on dock at five.”

“When do you come back this way?”

“A month. You can fly from Yap if you don’t want to come back with

us.”

“A month?” He’d have to get someone to run the paper while he was

gone. Or maybe not. Would anyone even notice he was gone?

Pardee said, “I’ll see you in the morning. Don’t get too drunk.”

“You too,” the mate said.

Pardee made his way down the dock, feeling every bit of his two

hundred and sixty pounds. By the time he made it back to the street, he was
soaked with sweat and yearning for a dark air-conditioned bar. He shook off
the craving and headed for the Catholic high school to ask the nuns if they
had any bright students who might keep the paper running in his absence.

He was going to do it, dammit. He’d be on the dock at five if he had to

stay up all night drinking to do it.

Safe in the Hands of Medicine

“How are you feeling today?” Sebastian Curtis pulled the sheet down to
Tuck’s knees and lifted the pilot’s hospital gown. Tucker flinched when the
doctor touched the catheter. “Better,” Tuck said. “That thing is itching,
though.”

“It’s healing.” The doctor palpated the lymph nodes in Tucker’s crotch.

His hands were cold and Tuck shivered at the touch. “The infection is
subsiding. This happened to you in the plane crash?”

“I fell back on some levers while I was trying to get a passenger out of

the plane.”

“The hooker?” The doctor didn’t look up from his work.

Tuck wanted to throw the sheets over his head and hide. Instead, he

said, “I don’t suppose it would make a difference if I said I didn’t know she
was a hooker.”

Sebastian Curtis looked up and smiled; his eyes were light gray flecked

with orange. With his gray hair and tropical tan, he could have been a
retired general, Rommel maybe. “I’m not really concerned with what the
woman was doing there. What does concern me is that you had been
drinking. We can’t have that here, Mr. Case. You may have to fly on a

moment’s notice, so you won’t be able to drink or indulge in any other
chemical diversions. I assume that won’t pose a problem.”

“No. None,” Tuck said, but he felt like he’d been hit with a bag of sand.

He’d been craving a drink since he’d regained consciousness. “By the way,
Doc, since we’re going to be doing business together, maybe you should
call me Tucker.”

“Tucker it is,” Curtis said. “And you can call me Dr. Curtis.” He smiled

again.

“Swell. And your wife’s name is?”

“Mrs. Curtis.”

“Of course.”

The doctor finished his examination and pulled the sheet back up to

Tuck’s waist. “You should be on your feet in a few days. We’ll move you to
your bungalow this afternoon. I think you’ll find everything you need there,
but if you do need anything, please let us know.”

A gin and tonic, Tuck thought. “I’d like to find out what happened to

the guy who was piloting my boat.”

“As I told you, the islanders found you and a few pieces of your boat.”

There was a finality in his voice that made it clear that he didn’t want to talk
about Kimi or the boat.

Tuck pressed on. Respect for authority had never been his long suit. “I

guess I’ll ask around when I get out of here. Maybe he washed up on a
different part of the island. I remember being hung in a tree with him by an
old cannibal.”

Tuck saw a frown cross the doctor’s face like a fleeting shadow, then

the professional smile was back. “Mr. Case, there haven’t been any
cannibals in these islands for a hundred years. Besides, I will have to ask
you to stay inside the compound while you are here. You’ll have access to

beaches and there’s plenty of room to roam, but you won’t be having any
contact with the islanders.”

“Why, I mean if they saved me?”

“The Shark People have a very closed society. We try not to intrude on

that any more than is necessary for us to do our work.”

“The Shark People? Why the Shark People?”

“I’ll explain it all to you when you are feeling better. Right now you

need to rest.” The doctor took a syringe from a metal drawer by the wall
and filled it from a vial of clear fluid, then injected it into Tuck’s IV. “When
do you think you’ll be ready to fly?”

Tuck felt as if a veil of gauze had been thrown over his mind.

Everything in the room went soft and fuzzy. “Not real soon if you keep
giving me that stuff. Wow, what was that? Hey, you’re a doctor. Do you
think we taste like Spam?”

He was going to ask another question, but somehow it didn’t seem to

matter anymore.

The Sky Priestess looked up from her magazine. “A little stressed,

darling?” She was lying out on the lanai, naked except for a wide-brimmed
straw hat, her white skin shining in the sun like pearl.

The Sorcerer joined her and fell onto a chaise lounge, a hand still

clamped on his temples. “Case says there was another man with him on the
island. He said an old cannibal hung them in a tree.”

“I heard him,” the Sky Priestess said. “He’s delirious?”

“I don’t think so. I think Malink lied. That they found the boat pilot and

didn’t tell us.”

She moved next to him on the chaise lounge and pried the glass of

vodka out of his hand. “So send the ninjas on a search mission. You’re
paying them. They might as well do something.”

“That’s not an option and you know it.”

“Well, then go yourself. Or call Malink on it. Tell him that you know

there was another man and you want him brought here chop-chop.”

“I think we’re losing them, Beth. Malink wouldn’t have dared lie to me

a month ago. It’s that dream. He dreams that Vincent is sending them a
pilot, then you tell him it’s not true, then a pilot washes up on the reef.”

The Sky Priestess drained the glass of vodka and handed it back to him

empty. “Yeah, nothing fucks up a good religion like the intervention of a
real god.”

“I wish you wouldn’t talk that way.”

“So what are you going to do, after you get a refill, I mean?”

The Sorcerer looked up at her as if noticing her for the first time. “Beth,

what are you doing out here? The Priestess of the Sky does not have a tan.”

She reached under the chaise lounge and came up with a plastic bottle

of lotion. “SPF 90. Relax, ’Bastian, this stuff would keep me creamy white
in a nuclear flare. You want to rub some on me?” She pushed her hat back
on her head so he could see the predator seriousness in her eyes.

“Beth, please. I’m on the cusp of a crisis here.”

“It’s not a crisis. It’s obvious why the Shark People are getting restless.”

“It is?”

“No one has been chosen in over two months, ’Bastian.”

He shook his head. “Case isn’t ready to fly.”

“Well, get him ready.”

Fashion Statements

Kimi sat under a coconut palm outside of the bachelors’ house sulking. His
flowered dress was gone and he wore a blue thu, the long saronglike
loincloth worn by the Shark men. Gone too was his blond wig, his high
heels, and his best friend, Roberto, who he had not seen since the cannibal
tree. Now it looked as if he had no place to sleep. Sepie had thrown him
out.

Sepie came out of the bachelors’ house wearing Kimi’s floral dress and

glared at him. She paused on the coral pathway. “I am not a monkey,” she
said. Then she picked up a stone from the path and hurled it at him, barely
missing his head.

Kimi scuffled to the leeward side of the tree and peeked around. “I

didn’t say you were a monkey. I said that if you didn’t shave your legs, you
would soon look like a monkey.”

A rock whizzed by his face so close he could feel the wind of it. She

was getting more accurate with each throw. “You know nothing,” she said.
“You are just a girl-man.”

Kimi dug a stone from the sand at his feet and hurled it at her, but his

heart wasn’t in it and it missed her by five feet. In English he said, “You
just a poxy oar with a big mouth.” He hoped this verbal missile hit closer to
home. They were the last words of Malcolme, Kimi’s pimp back in Manila.

In retrospect, Malcolme’s mistake had been one of memory. He had
forgotten that the overly made-up little girl standing in front of him with a
machete was, in fact, a wiry young man with the anger of hundreds of
beatings burning in his memory.

“I no have the pox,” Kimi said to Malcolme, whose look of surprise

remained fixed even as his head rolled into the corner of the hotel room,
where a rat darted out and gently licked his shortened neck.

“I no have the pox,” Sepie said in English, punctuating her statement

with a thrown lump of coral.

“I know,” Kimi said. “I’m sorry I say that.” He skulked off down the

beach.

Sepie stood outside the bachelors’ house watching him, totally

disarmed. No man had ever apologized to her before.

Bats. Kimi missed Roberto.

The Shark men wouldn’t talk to him, the women ignored him, except

for Sepie, who was angry at him now, and even Tucker had been taken
away to the other side of the island. Kimi was lonely. And as he walked
down the beach, past the children playing with a trained frigate bird, past
the men lounging in the shade of an empty boathouse, his loneliness turned
to anger. He turned up the beach and took a path into the village to look for
a weapon. It was time to go see the old cannibal.

Outside each of the houses, near the cook sheds, stood an iron spike—a

pick head that was driven into the ground and used to husk coconuts. Kimi
stopped at one house and yanked on the spike, but it wouldn’t budge. He

moved between the houses, vacant now in the early morning, the women
working in the taro field, the men lounging in various patches of shade. He
peeked into a cook shed, and there, by the pot that held the crust of this
morning’s rice, he found a long chef’s knife. He looked around to make
sure that no one was watching, then bolted into the shed and snatched the
knife, fitting it into his thu so that only the handle protruded at the small of
his back.

Ten minutes later he was hiding in a patch of giant ferns, watching the

old cannibal roll coconut husk fibers into rope on his leathery old thighs. He
sat with his back against a palm tree, his legs straight out in front of him,
pulling the fibers that had been soaked and separated out of a basket and
measuring by feel the right amount to add to the coil of cord that was
building on the ground beside him. From time to time he stopped and took a
drink from a jar of milky liquid that Kimi was sure was alcoholic tuba.
Good, he was drunk.

Kimi moved slowly around the house, staying in the undergrowth of

ferns and elephant ears, careful not to kick up any of the coral gravel that
rang like broken glass if you didn’t place your feet carefully.

Once he was behind the old man, he drew the knife from the small of

his back and moved forward to kill that man who had eaten his friend.

He’d been in the one-room bungalow for four days now, but this was

the first time he’d felt well enough to get up and move around, other than to
use the bathroom, which to his surprise, had hot and cold running water, a
flush toilet, and a shower stall made of galvanized metal. The walls were
tightly woven grass between a sturdy frame of teak and mahogany logs; the
floor was unfinished teak, sanded smooth and pink; and the furniture was
wicker with brightly colored cushions. A ceiling fan spun languidly above a
double bed that was draped with a canopy of mosquito netting. The
windows looked out on the compound and hangar on one side and through a
grove of palm trees to the ocean on the other. He could see several
bungalows perched near the beach, a small dock, and the cinderblock
hospital building, its tin roof arrayed with antennae, solar electric panels,
and a massive satellite dish.

Tuck backed away from the window and sat down on the wicker couch.

A few minutes on his feet and he felt exhausted. He was twenty pounds
lighter than when he had left Houston and there wasn’t a six-inch patch of
skin on his body that didn’t have some kind of bandage on it. The doc had
said that between the cuts on his arms, knees, and scalp, he had taken a
hundred sutures. The first time he looked in the little mirror in his
bathroom, he thought he was looking at a human version of the mangy feral
dog he’d seen on Truk. His blue eyes lay like dull ice in sunken brown
craters and his cheeks were drawn into his face like a mummified bog
man’s. His hair had been bleached white by the sun and stuck out in straw-
dry tufts between pink patches where the doctor had shaved his scalp to
stitch him up. He took small comfort in the fact that there were no women
around to see him. No real women, anyway. The doctor’s wife, who came
several times a day to bring him food or to change his bandages, seemed
robotic, like some Stepford/Barbie hybrid with the smooth sexless carriage
of a mannequin and a personality pulled out of an Eisenhower-era soap
commercial. She made the straight-laced cosmetic reps from his past seem
like a tribe of pillbox nympho hose hunters.

There was a tap on the door and Beth Curtis breezed in carrying a

wooden serving tray with plates of pancakes and fresh fruit. “Mr. Case,
you’re up. Feeling better today?”

She set the tray down on the coffee table in front of him and stepped

back. Today she was in pleated khaki pants and a white blouse with puffed
shoulders. Her hair was tied back with a big white bow at the back of her
neck. She might have just walked out of a Stewart Granger safari movie.

“Yes, better,” Tuck said, “But I wore myself out just walking to the

window.”

“Your body is still fighting off the infection. The doctor will be by soon

to give you some antibiotics. For now you need to eat.” She sat on the chair
across from him.

Tuck cut a divot out of the stack of pancakes with a fork and speared it

through a piece of papaya. After the first bite, he realized how hungry he
really was and began wolfing down the pancakes.

Beth Curtis smiled. “Have you had a chance to look over the manuals

for the airplane?”

Tuck nodded, his mouth still full. She’d left the operations manuals on

his bed two days ago. He’d leafed through them enough to know that he
could fly the thing. He swallowed and said, “I used to fly a Lear 25 for
Mary Jean. This one is a little faster and has longer range, but basically it’s
the same. Shouldn’t be a problem.”

“Oh, good,” she said, sporting one of her plastic smiles. “When will you

be able to fly?”

Tucker put down his fork. “Mrs. Curtis, I don’t mean to be rude, but

what in the hell is going on around here?”

“Regarding what, Mr. Case?”

“Well, first, regarding the man I came to this island with. I was sick, but

I wasn’t hallucinating. We were strung up in a tree by an old native guy and
cut down by a bunch of others. What happened to my friend?”

She shifted in her chair, and the wicker crackled like snapping rat bones.

“My husband told you what the islanders told us, Mr. Case. The natives live
on the other side of the island. They have their own society, their own chief,
their own laws. We try to take care of their medical needs and bring a few
souls into the fold, but they are a private people. I’ll ask them about your
friend. If I find out anything, I’ll let you know.” She stood and straightened
the front of her slacks.

“I’d appreciate that,” Tuck said. “I promised him I’d get him back to

Yap and I owe him some money. The natives didn’t find my backpack, did
they? My money was in it.”

She shook her head. “Just the clothes you had on. We burned them.

Fortunately, you and Sebastian are about the same size. Now, if you’ll
excuse me, Mr. Case, I have some work to do. Sebastian will be along in a
bit with your medicine. I’m glad you’re feeling better.” She turned and
walked out the door into the blinding sunlight.

Tucker stood and watched her walk across the compound. The Japanese

guards stopped their work and leered at her. She spun on them and waited,
her hands on her hips, until one by one they lost their courage and returned
to their work, not embarrassed but afraid, as if meeting her direct gaze
might turn them to frost. Tuck sat down to his half-eaten pancakes and
shivered, thinking it must be the fever.

A half hour later the doctor entered the bungalow. Tucker was spread

out on the couch descending into a nap. They’d been doing this since they’d
moved him to the bungalow, tag-teaming him, one showing up at least
every hour to check on him, bring him food or medicine, change the sheets,
take his temperature, help him to the bathroom, wipe his forehead. It looked
like concerned care, but it felt like surveillance.

Sebastian Curtis took a capped syringe from his coat pocket as he

crossed the room.

Tuck sighed. “Another one?”

“You must be feeling like a pin cushion by now, Mr. Case. I need you to

roll over.”

Tuck rolled over and the doctor gave him the injection. “It’s either this

or the IV. We’ve got this infection on the run, but we don’t want it to get a
foothold again.”

Tuck rubbed his bottom and sat up. Before he could say anything, the

doctor stuck a digital thermometer in his mouth.

“Beth tells me that you’re worried about your friend, the one you say

came to the island with you?”

Tuck nodded.

“I’ll check into it, I promise you. In the meantime, if you’re feeling up

to it, Beth and I would like you to join us for dinner. Get to know each other
a little. Let you know what’s expected of you.” He pulled the thermometer
out of Tuck’s mouth and checked it but made no comment. “You up for
dinner tonight?”

“Sure,” Tuck said. “But…”

“Good. We’ll eat at seven. I’ll have Beth bring you down some clothes.

I’m sorry about the hand-me-downs, but it’s the best we can do for now.”
He started to leave.

“Doc?”

Sebastian turned. “Yes.”

“You’ve been out here, what, thirty years?”

The doctor stiffened. “Twenty-eight. Why?”

“Well, Mrs. Curtis doesn’t look…”

“Yes, Beth is quite a bit younger than I am. But we can talk about all

that at dinner. You should probably rest now and let those antibiotics do

their work. I need you healthy, Mr. Case. We have a round of golf to play.”

“Golf?”

“You do play, don’t you?”

Tuck took a second to catch up with the abrupt change of subject, then

said, “You play golf here?”

“I am a physician, Mr. Case. Even in the Pacific we have Wednesdays.”

Then he smiled and left the bungalow.

Revenge: Sweet and Low in Calories

Sarapul twisted the last of the fibers into his rope and drew his knife to trim
the ragged end. It was a good knife, made in Germany, with a thin flexible
blade that was perfect for filleting fish or cutting microthin slices from
coconut stems to keep the tuba running. He’d had the knife for ten years
and he kept it honed and polished on a piece of tanned pig hide. The blade
flashed blue as he picked it up and he saw the face of vengeance reflected in
the metal.

Without turning, he said, “The young ones are going to kill you.”

Kimi stopped, his knife held ready to strike the old man in the neck.

“You ate my friend.”

Sarapul gripped his knife blade down so he might turn and slash at the

same time. There was no quickness in his bones, though. The Filipino
would kill him before he got halfway around. “Your friend is with the white
Sorcerer and Vincent’s bitch. Malink took him away.”

“Not that one. Roberto. The bat.”

“Bats are taboo. We don’t eat bats on Alualu.”

Kimi lowered his knife an inch. “You are not supposed to eat people

either, but you do.”

“Not people I know. Come over here where I can see you. I am old and

my neck won’t turn that far around.”

Kimi walked a crescent around the tree and crouched at ready in front

of the old man.

Sarapul said, “You were going to kill me.”

“If you ate Roberto.”

“I like that. Nobody kills anybody anymore. Oh, the young ones are

talking about killing you, but I think Malink will talk them out of it.”

Kimi cleared his throat. “Were you going to eat me when they killed

me?”

“Someone brought that up at the drinking circle. I don’t remember

who.”

“Then how do I know you did not eat Roberto?”

“Look at me, little one. I am a hundred years old maybe. Sometimes I

go to the beach to pee and the tides change before my water comes. How
would I catch a bat?”

Kimi sat down on the ground across from the old man and dropped his

knife in the gravel. “Something happened to Roberto. He flew off.”

“Maybe he found a girl bat,” Sarapul said. “Maybe he will come back.

You want a drink?” The old cannibal offered his jar of tuba to Kimi, who
leaned forward and snatched it before retreating out of knife range.

Kimi took a sip and grimaced. “Why are they going to kill me?”

“They say you are a girl-man and that you make Sepie forget her duties

as mispel. And they don’t like you. Don’t worry, no one kills anyone
anymore. It is just drunk talk.”

Kimi hung his head. “Sepie sent me away from the bachelors’ house.

She is mad at me. I have nowhere to go.”

Sarapul nodded in sympathy, but said nothing. He’d been exiled for so

long that he’d gotten used to the alienation, but he remembered how he had
felt when Malink had first banished him.

“You speak our language pretty good,” Sarapul said.

“My father was from Satawan. He was a great navigator. He taught

me.”

“You’re a navigator?” In the old days the navigators stood above even

the chiefs—and just below the gods. As a boy, Sarapul idolized the two
navigators of Alualu. The long-dead dream of his boyhood surfaced and he
remembered learning from them, watching them draw star charts in the
sand and stand at the beach lecturing on tides and currents and winds. He
had wanted to be a navigator, had begun the training, for in the rigid caste
system of the Yapese islands it was the one way for a man to distinguish
himself. But one of the navigators had died of a fever and the other was
killed in a fight before he could pass on his knowledge. The navigators and
warriors were ghosts of the past. If this girl-man was a navigator, then the
bachelors were piss ants to talk of killing him. Sarpul felt infused with an
energy he hadn’t felt in years.

“I can show you something,” Sarapul said. He tried to climb to his feet

and fell back into a crouch. Kimi took him by a bony arm and helped him
up. “Come,” Sarapul said.

The old man led Kimi down the path to the beach and stopped at the

water’s edge. He began to sing, his voice like dried palm leaves rattling in
the wind. He waved his arms in arcs, then threw them wide to the sky so
that his chest looked as if it might crack open like a rotten breadfruit. And
the wind came up.

He took handfuls of sand and cast them into the wind, then clapped his

hands and resumed singing until the palms above them were waving in the
wind. Then he stopped.

“Now we wait,” he said. He pointed out to sea. “Watch there.”

A column of fog rose off the ocean at the horizon and boiled black and

silver into a huge thunderhead. Sarapul clapped his hands again and a
lightning bolt ripped out of the cloud and across the sky like a jagged white
fissure in blue glass. The thunderclap was instant, deafening, and crackled
for a full ten seconds.

Sarapul turned to Kimi, who was staring at the thunderhead with his

mouth open. “Can you do that?”

Kimi shook off his astonishment with a shiver. “No, I never learned

that. My father said he could send the thunder, but I didn’t see him do it.”

Sarapul grinned. “Ever eat a guy?”

Kimi shook his head. “No.”

“Tastes like Spam,” Sarapul said.

“I heard that.”

“I can teach you to send the thunder. I don’t know the stars, though.”

“I know the stars,” Kimi said.

“Go get your things,” Sarapul said.

The Missionary Position

The guards came for Tucker at sunset, just as he was slipping into the
cotton pants and shirt the doctor had left for him. The doctor’s clothes were
at least three sizes too big for him, but with the bandages he had to put them
over, that was a blessing. He still had his own sneakers, which he put on his
bare feet. He asked the guards to wait and they stood just inside his door, as
straight and silent as terra-cotta soldiers.

“So, you guys speak English?”

The guards didn’t answer. They watched him.

“Japanese, huh? I’ve never been to Japan. I hear a Big Mac goes for

twelve bucks.”

He waited for some response and got none. The Japanese stood

impassive, silent, small beads of sweat shining through their crew cuts.

“Sorry, guys, I’d love to hang around with you chatterboxes, but I’m

due for dinner with the doc and his wife.”

Tuck limped to the guards and offered each an arm in escort. “Shall we

go?”

The guards turned and led him across the compound to one of the

bungalows on the beach. The guards stopped at the steps of the lanai and
Tuck dug into his pants pockets. “Sorry guys, no cash. Have the concierge
put a couple of yen on my bill.”

The doctor came through the french doors in a white ice cream suit,

carrying a tall iced drink garnished with mango. “Mr. Case, you’re looking
much better. How are you feeling?”

“Nothing wrong with me one of those won’t cure.”

Sebastian Curtis frowned. “I’m afraid not. You shouldn’t drink alcohol

with the antibiotics I have you on.”

Tucker felt his guts twist. “Just one won’t hurt, will it?”

“I’m afraid so. But I’ll make you one without alcohol. Come in. Beth is

making a wonderful grouper in ginger sauce.”

Tucker went though the french doors to find a bungalow decorated

much like his own, only larger. There was an open kitchen nook where Beth
Curtis was stirring something with a wooden spoon. She looked up and
smiled. “Mr. Case, just in time. I need someone to taste this sauce.” She was
wearing a cream-colored Joan Crawford number with middle linebacker
shoulder pads and buff-colored high heels. The dress was straight out of the
forties, but Tuck had been around Mary Jean long enough to know that Mrs.
Curtis had dropped at least five hundred bucks on the shoes. Evidently,
missionary work paid pretty well.

She held a hand under Tuck’s chin as she presented the spoon. The

sauce was sweet citrus with a piquant bite to it. “It’s good,” he said. “Really
good.”

“No fibbing, Mr. Case. You’re going to have to eat it.”

“No, I like it.”

“Well, good. Dinner will be ready in about a half hour. Now, why don’t

you men take your drinks out on the lanai and let a girl do her magic.”

Sebastian handed Tuck an icy glass filled with an orange liquid and

garnished with mango. “Shall we?” he said, leading Tuck back outside.

They stood at the railing, looking out at the moon reflecting in the

ocean.

“Would you be more comfortable sitting, Mr. Case?” the doctor asked.

“No, I’m fine. And please call me Tuck. Anyone calls me Mr. Case

more than three times, I start thinking I’m going to get audited.”

The doctor laughed, “We can’t have that. Not with the kind of money

you’re going to be making. But legally, you know, it’s tax-free until you
take it back into the United States.”

Tuck stared out at the ocean for a moment, wondering whether it was

time to give this gift horse a dental exam. There was just too damn much
money showing on this island.

The equipment, the plane, Beth Curtis’s clothes. After Jake Skye’s

lecture, Tuck had imagined that he might encounter some sweaty drug-
smuggling doctor with a Walther in his belt and a coke whore wife, but
these two could have just flown in from an upscale church social. Still, he
knew they were lying to him. They had referred to the Japanese as their
“staff,” but he’d seen one of them carrying an Uzi out behind the hangar. He
was going to ask, he really was, but as he turned to face the doctor, he heard
a soft bark at the end of the lanai and looked up to see a large fruit bat
hanging from the edge of the tin roof. Roberto.

The doctor said, “Tucker, about the drinking.”

Tuck pulled his gaze away from the bat. The doctor had seen him.

“What drinking?”

“You know that we saw the reports on your—how should I put it?”

“Crash.”

“Yes, on your crash. I’m afraid, as I told you, we can’t have you

drinking while you’re working here. We may need you to fly on very short
notice and we can’t risk that you might not be ready.”

“That was an isolated incident,” Tuck lied. “I really don’t drink much.”

“Just a momentary lapse of judgment, I understand. And it may seem a

bit draconian, but as long as you don’t drink or go out of the compound,
everything will be fine.”

“Sure, no problem.” Tuck was watching the bat over the doctor’s

shoulder. Roberto had unfurled his wings and was turning in the sea breeze
like an inverted weather vane. Tuck tried to wave him off behind the
doctor’s back.

“I know this may all seem very limiting, but I’ve worked with the Shark

People for a long time, and they’re very sensitive to contact with outsiders.”

“The Shark People? You said you’d explain that.”

“They hunt sharks. Most of the natives in Micronesia won’t eat shark.

In fact, it’s taboo. But the reef fish here often have a high concentration of
neurotoxin, so the natives developed shark as a food source. You would
think that the sharks, being higher on the food chain, would have a higher
concentration of the toxin, wouldn’t you?”

“You’d think,” Tuck said, having no idea whatsoever what the doctor

was talking about.

“They don’t, though. It’s as if something in their system neutralizes the

toxin. I’ve done a little research in my spare time.”

“I’ve seen a lot of shark shows on the Discovery Channel. They go on

and on about how harmless sharks are. It’s bullshit. Half of these stitches
you put in me are because of a shark attack.”

“Maybe they don’t have cable,” the doctor said.

Tuck turned to him, amazed. “A joke, Doc?”

The doctor looked a little embarrassed. “I’m going to go see how dinner

is coming along. I’ll be right back.” He turned and went into the house.

Tucker bolted to the end of the lanai where Roberto was hanging.

“Shoo. Go away.”

Roberto made a trilling noise and tried to catch Tuck’s drink with his

wing claw.

“Okay, you can have the mango, but then you have to get out of here.”

Tucker held out the piece of cut mango and the fruit bat took it in his wing
claw and slurped it down.

“Now get out of here,” Tucker said. “Go find Kimi. Shoo, shoo.”

Roberto tilted his head and said, “Back off on these people, Tuck. You

push them too hard, they’ll pull your plug. Just keep your eyes open.”

Tuck moved away from the bat with stiff jerking steps out of the line

dance of the undead. The bat had said something. It was a tiny voice, high
but raspy, the voice of a chain-smoking Topo Gigio, but it was clear. “You
didn’t talk,” Tucker said.

“Okay,” said Roberto. “Thanks for the mango.”

Roberto took off, the beat of his wings like the shuffle of a deck of

leather cards. Tuck backed though the french doors into a wicker emperor’s
chair and sat down.

“Come sit,” Beth Curtis said as she carried a tray to the table. “Dinner’s

ready.”

“What kind of drugs have you been giving me, Doc?”

“Broad-spectrum antibiotics and some Tylenol. Why?”

“Any chance they could cause hallucinations?”

“Not unless you were allergic, and we’d know that by now. Why?”

“Just wondering.”

Beth Curtis came to him and patted his shoulder. Her nails, he noticed,

were perfect. “You had a fever when they brought you in. Sometimes that
can give a person bad dreams. I think you’ll feel a lot better after a good
meal.”

She helped him up and led him to the table, which was set with a white

tablecloth and black linen napkins around a centerpiece of orchid sprigs
arranged in a crystal bowl. A whole grouper stared up between fanned
slices of plantain on a serving tray, his eye a little dry but clear and
accusing.

Tuck said, “If that thing starts talking, I want to be sedated—and right

now.”

“Oh, Mr. Case.” Beth Curtis rolled her eyes and laughed as they sat

down to dinner.

Tuck could almost feel his body absorbing the nourishment. He told

them the story of his journey to the island, exaggerating the danger aspect
and glossing over his injuries, Kimi, and his craving for alcohol. He didn’t
mention Roberto at all. By the time Tucker was in the typhoon, the Curtises
were well into their second bottle of white wine. Beth’s cheeks were flushed
and her eyes sparkled with enthusiasm for Tuck’s every word.

Tuck really intended to ask about Kimi, their cryptic messages, the

guards, the rules for his employment, and of course, where the hell all the
money came from, but instead he found himself playing to Beth Curtis like
a comedian on a roll and he left the bungalow at midnight quite taken with
both himself and the doctor’s wife.

The Curtises stood arm in arm at the door as the guards escorted Tucker

back to his quarters. Halfway across the compound, he did a giddy turn and
waved to them, feeling as if he had been the one to consume two bottles of
wine.

“What do you think?” the Sorcerer asked his wife.

“Not a problem,” she said, keeping a parade smile pointed Tuck’s way.

“I really expected him to be a little more resistant to our conditions.”

“As if he’s in a position to bargain. The man has nothing, is nothing. He

shatters this little illusion we’ve given him and he has to face himself.”

“He looks at you like you’re some sort of beatific vestal virgin. I don’t

like it.”

“I can handle that. You just get flyboy ready to do his job.”

“He’ll be able to fly within a week. He brought up his navigator again

while we were outside.”

“If he’s here, you’d better find him.”

“I’ll speak to Malink tonight. The Micro Spirit is due in day after

tomorrow. If we find the navigator, we can send him back on the ship.”

“Depending on what he’s seen,” she said.

“Yes, depending on what he knows.”

He changed into a pair of the doctor’s pajama bottoms and grabbed a

paperback spy novel from a stack someone had left on the coffee table.

They had a TV. There had been a TV in the Curtises’ bungalow. He’d

have to ask them to get him one. No, dammit, demand a television. What
did Mary Jean always say? “You can sell all day, but if you don’t ask for the
money, you haven’t made a sale.” Good food, good money, and a great

aircraft to fly—he’d stumbled into the best gig on the planet. I am the
Phoenix, rising from the ashes. I am the comeback kid. I am the entire 1980
gold-medal-winning U.S. Olympic hockey team. I am the fucking walrus,
coo-coo ka-choo.

He went into the bathroom to brush his teeth, caught his reflection in the

mirror. His mood went terminal. I am never going to get laid again as long
as I live. I should have pressed them about Kimi. I didn’t even ask about
what in the hell kind of cargo I’m going to be flying. I am a spineless worm.
I’m scum. I’m the Hindenburg, I’m Michael Milken, Richard Nixon. I’m
seeing ghosts and bats that talk and I’m stuck on an island where the only
woman makes Mother Theresa look like a lap dancer in a leper colony. I am
the man who put the F in failure, the P in pathetic, the G in gullible. I am
the ringworm poster boy of Gangrene City. I’m an insane, unemployed bus
driver for the death camp cartel.

Tuck went to bed without brushing his teeth.

Chasing the Scoop

Natives slept side by side, crisscrossed, and piled on the deck of the Micro
Spirit until—with a thu showing here, or a lavalava there, streams of
primary color among all that gelatinous brown flesh—it looked as if
someone had dropped a big box of candy in the hot sun and they had melted
together and spilled their fillings. Amid the mess, Jefferson Pardee, rolled
and pitched with the ship, finding three sleeping children lying on him
when the ship moved to starboard, a rotund island grandmother washing
against him when the ship listed to port. He’d been stepped on three times
by ashy callused feet, once on the groin, and he was relatively sure he could
feel lice crawling in his scalp.

Unable to sleep, he stood up and the mass moved amoebalike into the

vacated deck space. A three-quarter moon shone high and bright, and
Pardee could see well enough to make his way through to the railing, only
stepping on one woman and evoking colorful island curses from two men.
Once at the rail, the warm wind washed away the cloying smell of sweat
and the rancid nut smell of copra coming from the holds. The moon’s
reflection lay in the black sea like a tossing pool of mercury. A pod of
dolphins rode the ship’s bow wave like gray ghosts.

He took several deep breaths, relieved himself over the side, then dug a

bent cigarette out of his shirt pocket. He lit it with a disposable lighter and
exhaled a contrail of smoke with a long sigh. Thirty years in the tropics had
given him a high tolerance for discomfort and inconvenience, but the break

in routine was maddening. Back on Truck, he’d be toweling off the smell of
stale beer and the residue of an oily tumble with a dollar whore, preparing
to pass out with a volume of Mencken under his little air conditioner. No
thought of the day to come or the one just passed, for one was like the next
and they were all the same. Just cool cloudy sleep that made him feel, if
only for a minute, like that young Midwestern boy on an adventure,
exhausted from passion and fear, rather than a fat old man worn down by
ennui.

And here, in the salt and the moonlight, on the trail of a story or maybe

just a rumor, he felt the fungus growing in his lungs, the pain in his lower
back, the weight of ten thousand beers and half a million cigarettes and
thirty years of fish fried in coconut oil pressing on his heart, and none of it
—none of it—was so heavy as the possibility of dashed hopes. Why had he
opened himself up to a future and failure, when he had been failing just fine
already?

“You can’t sleep?” the mate said.

Pardee hadn’t heard the wiry sailor move to the rail. He was drinking a

Bud tallboy, against regulations, and Pardee felt a craving twist like a worm
in his chest at the sight of the can.

“You got another one of those?”

The mate reached into the deep front pocket of his shorts, pulled out

another beer, and handed it to Pardee. It was warm, but Pardee popped the
top and drank off half of it in one gulp.

“How long before we make Alualu?” Pardee asked.

“Three, maybe four hour. Sunrise. We drop you on north side of island,

you swim in.”

“What?” Pardee looked down to the black waves, then back at the mate.

“The doctor no let anyone go on the island except to bring cargo. You

have to swim in on other side of island. Maybe half mile, maybe less.”

“How will I get back to the ship?”

“Captain say he will swing back around the island when we leave.

Captain say he wait half an hour. You swim back out. We pick you up.”

“Can’t you send a boat?”

“No boat. No break in reef except on south side where we unload. We

have many fuel barrel and crates. You will have seven, maybe eight hour.”

Pardee had seen the Spirit arrive in Truk lagoon a thousand times; the

ship was always surrounded by outboards and canoes filled with excited
natives. “Maybe I can get one of the Shark People to ferry me.” He did not
want to get in that water, and he certainly didn’t want to swim half a mile to
shore, wasn’t sure he could.

“Shark People no have boat. They no leave island.”

“No boats?” Pardee was amazed. Living in these islands without a boat

was akin to living in Los Angeles without a car. It wasn’t done; it couldn’t
be done.

The mate patted Pardee’s big shoulder. “You be fine. I have mask and

fins for you.”

“What about sharks?”

“Sharks afraid around there. On most island people afraid of shark. On

Alualu shark afraid of people.”

“You’re sure about that?”

“No.”

“Oh, good. Do you have another beer?”

Three hours later the rising sun lay like a silver tray on the horizon and

Jefferson Pardee was having swim fins duct-taped to his feet by the first
mate. The deck bustled with excited natives eating rice balls and taro paste,

smoking cigarettes, shitting over the railings, and milling around the ship’s
store, trying to buy Cokes and Planter’s cheese balls, Australian corned
beef, and, of course, Spam. A small crowd had gathered around to watch
the white man prepare for his swim. Pardee stood in his boxer shorts,
maggot white except for his forearms and face, which looked like they’d
been dipped in red barn paint. The mate stuffed Pardee’s clothes and
notebook into a garbage bag and handed it to him, then slathered the
journalist with waterproof sunscreen, a task on par with basting a hippo.
Pardee snarled at a group of giggling children and they ran off down the
deck screaming.

Pardee heard the ship’s big screws grind to a halt and the mate

unhooked a chain gate set in the railing. “Jump,” he said.

Pardee looked at the crystal water forty feet below. “You’re out of your

fucking mind. Don’t you have a ladder?”

“You can’t climb ladder with fins.”

“I’ll take the fins off until I get in the water.”

“No. Straps broken. You have to jump.”

Pardee shook his head and the flesh on his shoulders and back followed

suit. “It’s not gonna happen.”

Suddenly the children Pardee had frightened came running around the

bridge like a squealing pack of piglets. Two little boys broke formation and
ran toward the journalist, who looked around just as he felt four tiny brown
hands impact with his back.

Pardee saw sky, then water, then sky, then the island of Alualu laying on

the sea like a bad green toupee, then the impact with the water took his
breath, ripped the mask from his face, and forced streams of brine into his
sinuses strong enough to bring blood.

Before he could even find the surface, he heard the ship’s screws begin

to grind as the Micro Spirit steamed away.

“Where did you see the Sorcerer?”

“He comes across Vincent’s airstrip.”

“Good boys. You go eat breakfast now.”

Malink went to a stand of ferns behind his house, pulled aside his thu,

and waited to relieve himself. This took longer every day it seemed. The
Sorcerer had told Malink that he had angered the prostate monster and the
only way to appease him was to quit drinking coffee and tuba and to eat the
bitter root of the saw palmetto. Malink had tried these things for almost two
full days before giving up, but it was too hard to wake up without coffee,
too hard to go to sleep without tuba, saw palmetto made his stomach hurt,
and he seemed to have a headache all the time. The prostate monster would
just have to remain angry. Sometimes the Sorcerer was wrong.

He finished and straightened his thu, passed a thundering cannonade of

gas, then went back to the sitting spot on the porch to get his cigarettes. The
women had made a fire to boil water for coffee; the smoke from the burning
coconut husks wafted out of the corrugated tin cookhouse and hung like
blue fog under the canopy of breadfruit, mahogany, and palm trees.

Malink lit a cigarette and looked up to see the Sorcerer coming down

the coral path, his white lab coat stark against the browns and greens of the
village.

“Saswitch” (good morning), Malink said. The Sorcerer spoke their

language.

“Saswitch, Malink,” the Sorcerer said. At the sound of his voice

Malink’s wife and daughters ran out of the cookhouse and disappeared
down the paths of the village.

“Coffee?” Malink asked in English.

“No, Malink, there is no time today.”

Malink frowned. It was rude for anyone to turn down an offer of food or

drink, even the Sorcerer. “We have little Tang. You want Tang? Spacemen
drink it.”

The Sorcerer shook his head. “Malink, there was another man here with

the pilot you found. I need to find him.”

Malink looked at the ground. “I no see any other man.” The Sorcerer

didn’t seem angry, but just the same, Malink didn’t like lying to him. He
didn’t want to anger Vincent.

“I won’t punish anyone if something happened to him, if he was hurt or

drowned, but I need to know where he is. Vincent has asked me to find him,
Malink.”

Malink could feel the Sorcerer staring a hole in the top of his head.

“Maybe I see another man. I will ask at the men’s house today. What he
look like?”

“You know what he looks like. I need to find him now. The Sky

Priestess will give back the coffee and sugar if we can find him today.”

Malink stood. “Come, we find him.” He led the Sorcerer through the

village, which appeared deserted except for a few chickens and dogs, but
Malink could see eyes peeking out from the doorways. How would he
explain this when they asked why the Sorcerer had come? They passed out
of the village, went past the abandoned church, the graveyard, where great
slabs of coral rock kept the bodies from floating up through the soil during
the rainy season, and down the overgrown path to Sarapul’s little house.

The old cannibal was sitting in his doorway sharpening his machete.

Malink turned to the Sorcerer and whispered, “He rude sometime. He

very old. Don’t be mad.”

The Sorcerer nodded.

“Saswitch, Sarapul. The Sorcerer has come to see you.”

Sarapul looked up and glared at them. He had red chicken feathers stuck

in his hair, two severed chicken feet hung from a cord above his head. “All
the sorcerers are dead,” Sarapul said. “He is just a white doctor.”

Malink looked at the Sorcerer apologetically, then turned back to

Sarapul. “He wants to see the man you found with the pilot.”

Sarapul ran his thumb over the edge of his machete. “I don’t know what

happened to him. Maybe he went swimming and a shark got him. Maybe
someone eat him.”

Sebastian Curtis stepped forward. “He won’t be hurt,” he said. “We are

going to send him out on the ship.”

“I want to go to the ship,” Sarapul said. “I want to buy things. Why

can’t we go to the ship?”

“That’s not the issue here, old man. Vincent wants this man found. If

he’s dead, I need to know.”

“Vincent is dead.”

The Sorcerer crouched down until he was eye-to-eye with the old

cannibal. “You’ve seen the guards at the compound, Sarapul. If the man
isn’t at the gate in an hour, I’m going to have the guards tear the island apart
until they find him.”

Sarapul grinned. “The Japanese? Good. You send them here.” He swung

his machete in front of the sorcerer’s face. “I have a present for them.”

Curtis stood. “An hour.” He turned and walked away.

Malink ambled along behind him. “Maybe he is right. Maybe the man

drown or something.”

“Find him, Malink. I meant it about the guards. I want this man in an

hour.”

Kimi dropped out of the rafters of Sarapul’s little house. “What is he

talking about—guards?”

“Ha!” Sarapul said. “He knows nothing. He didn’t even know I had

this.” Sarapul reached down and pulled out a headless chicken he had been
sitting on. “He is no sorcerer.”

“He said there were guards.” Kimi said.

Sarapul laid his chicken on the ground. “If you are afraid, you should

go.”

“I have to find Roberto.”

“Then let them send the guards,” Sarapul said, brandishing his machete.

“They can die just like this chicken.”

Kimi stepped back from the old cannibal, who was on the verge of

foaming at the mouth. “We friends, right?”

“Build a fire,” Sarapul said. “I want to eat my chicken.”

Water Hazard

Jefferson Pardee was trying desperately not to look like a sea turtle. He’d
managed to find the surface, catch his breath, and put his mask on. Blood
from his nose was now swishing around inside it like brandy in a snifter.
After locating the floating garbage bag that contained his clothes and
propping it under his chest as a life preserver, his main focus was not to
look like a turtle. To a shark living in the warm Pacific waters off Alualu,
sea turtles were food. Not that there was any real danger of a shark making
that particular mistake. Even a mentally challenged shark would figure out
that sea turtles did not wear boxer shorts printed in flying piggies, and no
turtles did not wear boxer shorts printed in flying piggies, and no turtle
would be yattering streams of obscenities between chain-smoker gasps of
breath. Still, a couple of harmless white-tipped reef sharks smelled blood in
the water and cruised by to check out the source, only to retreat, regretting
that in one hundred and twenty million years on the planet they had never
evolved the equipment to laugh.

The surf was calm and the tide low, and considering Pardee’s buoyancy,

the swim should have been easy. But when Pardee saw the two black
shadows cruise by below him, his heart started playing a sternum-rattling
drum solo that kept up until he barked his knees on the reef. An antler of
coral caught the plastic bag, stopping Pardee’s progress long enough for
him to notice that here on the reef the water was only two feet deep. He
flipped over on his back, then sat on the coral, not really caring that it was
cutting into his bottom. Waves lapped around him as he fought to catch his

breath. He lifted his mask and let the blood run down his face and over his
chest to expand into a rusty stain in the water. Tiny blue and yellow reef
fish rose around him looking for food and nipping at his skin, tickling him
like teasing children.

He looked toward the beach, perhaps two hundred yards away. Inside

the reef the danger of sharks was minimal—minimal enough that he would
sit here and rest for a while. He watched the waves breaking softly around
him, lapping against his back, and realized, with horror, that he was going
to have to do this again in a few hours, against the waves and probably the
tide. He’d have to find someone with a boat; that was all there was to it.

Ten minutes passed before his heart slowed down and he was able to

steel his courage enough to swim the final leg. He picked out a stand of
coconut palms above a small beach and slid across the reef toward the
island. He kicked slowly, scanning the water around him for any sign of
sharks. Except for a moment of temporary terror when a manta ray with a
seven-foot wingspan flew out of the blue and passed below him, the swim
to the beach was safe and easy. If manta rays are going to be harmless, they
should look more harmless, Pardee thought. Fuckers look like aquatic
Draculas.

He sat in the wash at the water’s edge and was tearing the tape that held

the fins on his feet when he heard a sharp mechanical click behind him. He
turned to see two men in black pointing Uzis at his head. Pardee grinned.
“Konichi-wa,” he said. “You guys have a dry cigarette? I seem to have torn
my garbage bag.”

Tucker Case did not play golf. He’d tried it once, and although he’d

enjoyed the drinking and driving the little electric car into the lake, he just
didn’t get the appeal. It seemed—and he’d examined the game closely
because his father had loved it—an awful lot like a bunch of rich white
guys in goofy clothing walking around on an absurdly large lawn hitting
absurdly small white balls with crooked sticks. If the greens were at

opposite ends of the same fairway and foursomes had to play against each
other, defending their own green while assaulting the opponents’ and
risking getting hit with a ball or a club at close quarters, well, then you’d
have a game. If the game was scored on how quickly one got through the
eighteen holes instead of the fewest strokes and they dropped small-block
Chevys into the little carts, why, then you’d have yourself a game. (Maybe
put those little Ben-Hur food processors on the wheels and make it legal to
hamstring competitors.) But traditional golf, as it was, had always left Tuck
cold. Strange, then, that he absolutely yearned for a seven iron, or maybe a
shotgun.

Tuck had been up since before dawn, awakened rudely and kept awake

by what seemed like eight million roosters. It was now ten o’clock and they
were still going strong. What joy to feel the thwack of a seven iron on red
feathers, the satisfying impact of balanced metal on poultry (suddenly
silenced and somewhat tenderized for your trouble). He saw himself wading
into a bucket of roosters, swinging his seven iron madly (but always
keeping his head down and his left arm straight), dealing death and
destruction like the Colonel’s own avenging angel. Welcome to Tucker
Case’s chicken death camp, my little feathered friends. Now, kindly prepare
to have your nuggets knocked off.

Tucker Case was not a morning person.

He decided that he’d give them five more minutes to shut up, then he

was going to get dressed and go borrow a seven iron from the doc. Five
minutes later he was preparing to leave when Beth Curtis knocked and
opened his door without waiting for an answer. She was wearing disposable
surgical blues and a hairnet; she wore no makeup and the vapid housewife
smile was gone from her eyes.

“Mr. Case, we need you to be ready to fly in two hours. Can you do it?”

“Uh, sure. I guess. Where are we going?”

“Japan. The navigational settings should already be programmed into

the plane’s computer. I need you to have your preflight finished and the
Lear fueled and on the runway, ready to go.”

Tucker felt as if he was talking to a different person than the one he had

seen for the last week. There was no hint of the soft femininity, just hard
business.

“I haven’t had time to go over the controls for the Lear.”

“You took the job, didn’t you? Can you fly it?”

Tuck nodded.

“Then be ready in two hours.” She turned and marched toward the

hospital building. Tuck started to follow her, then noticed movement
through the trees, down by the beach: men unloading fuel drums from a
longboat onto the pier. He could see a white freighter anchored outside the
reef.

“Mrs. Curtis!” he called.

She turned and regarded him like an annoying insect. “Yes, Mr. Case.”

“That ship. You didn’t tell me there was a ship.”

“It doesn’t concern you. They are simply delivering some supplies.

Now please, prepare the plane.”

“But if they’re delivering supplies, why do we need to…?”

“Mr. Case,” she barked, “do your job. The doctor needs me.” She threw

open the hospital door and stepped inside.

“Ask him if I can borrow his seven iron,” Tuck said weakly.

Tuck shuffled back toward his bungalow. Just a few seconds in the sun

had given him a headache and he felt as if he would pass out any second.
He was going to fly again. He was sick and dizzy and suffered from talking
bat hallucinations and he was going to get to do the only thing he had ever
been any good at. It scared the hell out of him.

It had been fifty years since men with guns had entered the village of the
Shark People. As the four guards went from house to house, Malink walked
the paths of the village, his cordless phone in hand so the people could see
that he had things under control. He’d been calling the Sorcerer since the
four Japanese had arrived in the village, but he’d only gotten the answering
machine. He had told everyone to go inside their houses and not to resist the
guards, and even now the village seem deserted, except for the sobs of a
few frightened children. He could hear the guards kicking their way through
the coconut husks that had been piled in the cookhouses for fuel.

Suddenly Favo was at his side. Favo, who had seen the coming of the

Japanese during the war, had seen the killing. “Why does Vincent allow
this?”

Malink really didn’t have an answer. He had lit the Zippo and asked

Vincent that very morning. “It is the will of the Sorcerer, so it must be the
will of Vincent. They want the girl-man.”

“We should fight,” Favo said. “We should kill the guards.”

“Spears against machine guns, Favo? Should the children grow up

without fathers like we did? No, they will find the girl-man and they will go
away.”

“The girl-man has gone to live with Sarapul. Did you tell them?”

“I told them. I took the Sorcerer there.”

The guards came out of the old church and crunched in single file down

the path toward Favo and Malink. The old men stood their ground, making
the guards walk into a stand of ferns to get around them. They made no eye
contact and said nothing. Favo hurled a curse at them, but it had been too
long since he had spoken Japanese and it was not a language suited for
swearing. He ended up telling them that their truck tires smelled of
sardines, which elicited no response whatsoever.

“Excellent curse,” Malink said, trying to raise his friend’s spirits.

“It needs work. English is the best for swearing.”

“They have machine guns, Favo.”

“Fuckin’ mooks,” Favo said.

“Amen,” Malink said, crossing himself in the sign of the B-26 bomber.

The two old men fell in behind the guards, following them from house

to house, waiting outside on the path so the villagers could see them when
they were roused out of their houses.

For the guards’ part, it was a wholly unsatisfying endeavor. They had

been looking forward to kicking in some doors, only to find that the Shark
People had no doors. There were no beds to throw over, no back rooms to
burst into, no closets, no place, in fact, where a man could hide and not be
exposed by the most perfunctory inspection. And the doctor had told them
that no one was to be hurt. They did not want to make a mistake. For all the
appearance of military efficiency, they were screwups to a man. One, a
former security guard at a nuclear power plant, had been fired for taking
drugs; two were brothers who had been dismissed from the Tokyo police
department for accepting Yakuza bribes; the fourth, from Okinawa, had
been a jujitsu instructor who had beaten a German tourist to death in a bar
over a gross miscarriage of karaoke. The man who had recruited them, put
them in the black uniforms, and trained them made it clear that this was
their last chance. They had two choices: succeed and become rich or die.
They took their jobs very seriously.

“He might be in the trees,” Favo said in Japanese. “Look in the trees!”

The guards scanned the trees as they marched, which caused them to

bump into each other and stumble. Above them there was a fluttering of
wings. A glout of bat guano splatted across the Okinawan’s forehead. He
threw the bolt on his Uzi and the air was filled with the staccato roar of nine
millimeters ripping through the foliage. When at last the clip was empty,
palm fronds settled to the ground around them. Frightened children
screamed in their mothers’ arms, and Favo, who was lying next to his friend
with his arms thrown over his head, snickered like an asthmatic hyena.

The guards scuffled for a moment, not sure whether to disarm their

companion or shove their clips home and begin the massacre. Above the
crying, the scuffle, the snickering, and the tintinnabulation of residual
gunfire, a girl giggled. The guards looked up. Sepie stood in the doorway of
the bachelors’ house, naked but for a pair of panties she’d recently acquired
from a transvestite navigator. “Hey, sailors,” she said, trying out a phrase
she’d also acquired from Kimi, “you want a date?” The guards didn’t
understand the words, but they got the message.

“Go inside, girl,” Malink scolded. Women, even the mispel, were not

permitted to show their thighs in public. Not even when swimming, not
when bathing, not when crapping on the beach, not ever.

“Go back inside,” Favo said. “When they go away, you will be beaten.”

“I have been beaten before,” Sepie said. “Now I will be rich.”

“Tell her,” Favo said to Malink.

Malink shrugged. His authority as chief worked only as long as his

people willingly obeyed him. The key to retaining their respect was to find
out what they wanted to do, then tell them to do it. He levied the most
severe punishment he knew. “Sepie, you may not touch the sea for ten
days.”

She turned and wiggled her bottom at him, then disappeared into the

bachelors’ house. The stunned guards ceased their scuffle and moved
tentatively toward the doorway, looking to each other for permission.

“This is your fault,” Malink said to Favo. “You shouldn’t have started

giving her things.”

“I didn’t give her things,” Favo said.

“You gave her things for”—and here Malink paused, trying to catch

himself before losing a friend—“for doing favors for you.”

Free Press, My Ass

Jefferson Pardee sat on a metal office chair in the corner of a windowless
cinder-block room. The guard stood by the metal door, his machine gun
trained on Pardee’s hairy chest. The reporter was trying to affect an attitude
of innocence tempered with a little righteous indignation, but, in fact, he
was terrified. He could feel his heartbeat climbing into his throat and sweat
rolled down his back in icy streams. He’d given up on trying to talk to the
guards; they either didn’t speak English or were pretending they didn’t.

He heard the throw of the heavy bolt on the door and expected the other

guard to return, but instead a woman wearing surgical garb entered the
room. Her eyes were the same color as the surgical blues and even in the
oppressive heat she looked chilly.

“At last,” Pardee said. “There’s been some kind of mistake here.” He

offered his hand, trying not to show how unsteady he was, and the guard
threatened him with the Uzi. “I’m Jefferson Pardee from the Truk Star.”

She nodded to the guard and he left the room. Her voice was friendly,

but she wasn’t smiling.

“I’m Beth Curtis. My husband runs the mission clinic on this island.”

She didn’t offer her hand. “I’m sorry you’ve been treated this way, Mr.
Pardee, but this island is under quarantine. We’ve tried to limit the contact
with the outside until we have a better handle on this epidemic.”

“What epidemic? I haven’t heard anything about this?”

“Encephalitis. It’s a rare strain, airborne and very contagious. We don’t

let anyone off island who’s been exposed.”

Jefferson Pardee exhaled a deep sigh of relief. So this was the big story.

Of course he’d promise not to say a word, but Time magazine would kill for
this. He’d leave out the part about being taken prisoner in his flying piggy
boxers. “And the guards?”

“World Health Organization. They’ve also given us an aircraft and lab

equipment, as I’m sure you’ve seen.”

He’d seen an awful lot of lab equipment as he was led through the little

hospital, but the aircraft was still a rumor. He decided to go for the facts.
“You have a new Learjet, is that correct?”

“Yes.” She seemed genuinely taken aback by his comment. “How did

you know?”

“I have my sources,” Pardee said, wishing he wore glasses so he could

take them off in a meaningful way.

“I’m sure you do. Information is like a virus sometimes, and the only

way to find a cure is to trace it to the source. Who told you about the jet?”

Pardee wasn’t giving anything for free. “How long have you known

about the encephalitis?”

For the first time Pardee noticed that Beth Curtis had been holding her

right hand behind her back the entire time they had been talking. He noticed
because when the hand appeared, it was holding a syringe. “Mr. Pardee, this
syringe contains a vaccine that my husband and I have developed with the
help of the World Health Organization. Because you took it on yourself to
sneak onto Alualu, you have exposed yourself to a deadly virus that attacks
the nervous system. The vaccine seems to work even after exposure to the
disease, but only if administered in the first few hours. I want to give you
this vaccine, I really do. But if you insist on drawing out this little game of

liar’s poker, then I can’t guarantee that you won’t contract the disease and
die a horrible and painful death. So, that said, who told you about the jet?”

Pardee felt the sweat rising again. She hadn’t raised her voice, there

wasn’t even a detectable note of anger there, but he felt as if she was
holding a knife to his throat. Okay, to hell with the adventurous journalist.
He could still get a byline based on what she’d already told him. “I talked to
a pilot who passed through Truk a few months ago.”

“A few months ago? Not more recently?”

“No. He said he was going to fly a jet for some missionaries on Alualu.

I came out to check it out.”

“And that was all you heard? Just that we had a jet?”

“Yes, it’s pretty unusual for a missionary clinic to have money for a jet,

wouldn’t you say?”

She smiled. “I guess it is. So how did you plan to get off the island after

you got your story?”

“The Micro Spirit was going to pick me up on the other side of the

island. That’s it. I was just curious. It’s an occupational hazard.”

“Who knows you’re here, besides the crew of the Spirit?”

Pardee considered her question; what would be the best answer. Surely

she wouldn’t let him die of some dreaded disease, but how stupid would he
have been to come out here without telling anyone? “The people who work
for me at the Star and a friend of mine at AP who I called for some
background before I left.”

“Oh, that’s good,” she said, still smiling. Pardee couldn’t help but feel

pleased with himself. It had been a long time since he’d gotten any approval
—or attention for that matter—from a beautiful woman.

She uncapped the syringe. “Now, before I give you the vaccine, a few

medical questions, okay?”

“Sure. Shoot.”

“You smoke and drink to excess, correct?”

“I indulge from time to time. Another occupational hazard.”

“I see,” she said. “And have you ever had a test for HIV?”

“A month ago. Clean as a whistle.” This was true. He’d been motivated

to take the test by a creepy rash on his stomach that turned out to be caused
by skin-burrowing mites. The medic with the Navy CAT team had given
him an ointment that cleared it up in a few days.

“Have you ever had hepatitis, cancer, or kidney disease?”

“Nope.”

“How about your family? Anyone with a history of kidney disease or

cancer?”

“Not last time I heard. I haven’t talked with my family in twenty-five

years.”

She seemed especially pleased at that. “And you’re not married? No

children?”

“No.”

“Very good,” she said. She plunged the needle into his shoulder and

pushed the plunger.

“Ouch. Hey, you could have warned me. Aren’t you supposed to swab

that with alcohol first or something?”

She stepped to the door and smiled again. “I don’t think infection is

going to be a problem, Mr. Pardee. Now don’t panic, but in a minute or so
you are going to go to sleep. I can’t believe you bought that bit about the
encephalitis. People get stupid living in the tropics, don’t you think?”

She went out of focus and the lines of the room started to heave as if the

entire structure was breathing. “What was in…?” His tongue was too
heavy; the words wouldn’t come.

“You don’t have a staff and you didn’t call anyone at AP, Mr. Pardee.

That was a stupid lie. We’ll have to put ‘self-importance’ down under cause
of death.”

Pardee tried to stand, but his legs wouldn’t obey him. He slid off the

chair and his legs splayed straight out in front of him.

Beth Curtis bent over him, pushed her lips into a pout, and baby-talked.

“Oh, are his wittle wegs all wobbly?” She stood up straight and put her
hands on her hips. To Pardee her face floated like the moon through clouds.

She said, “You’re probably thinking that I’m being unusually cruel to

tease a dying man, but you see, you’re not dying right now. Soon, but not
right now.”

Pardee tried to form a question, but the room seemed to go liquid and

crash over him like a black wave.

The Micro Spirit’s first mate, who was drinking a Coke while

supervising the unloading, jumped up on the dock to meet the doctor.
“Good morning.”

“Good morning,” Curtis said. “Are you in charge here?”

“I’m the first mate.”

Curtis regarded the tattooed Tongan. “Mr. Pardee will be staying with us

for a while. He’s asked me to tell you not to wait for him.”

“That don’t bother you?” the mate asked. It seemed strange to him after

the effort Pardee had made to sneak onto the island.

“No, of course not. In fact, we’ve offered to fly Mr. Pardee to Hawaii

when he finishes his work.”

The mate had never heard Pardee’s name in the same sentence as the

word “work.” It didn’t sound right. Still, he had his job to do and the doctor
was paying double freight for these barrels. He said, “Is he going to pay his
fare?”

Curtis smiled and pulled a wad of bills out of the pocket of his shorts.

“Of course. He asked me to give you the money. How much is it?”

“From Truk, one way, is three hundred.”

The doctor counted out a stack of twenties and held it out to the mate.

“Here’s six hundred. Mr. Pardee asked me to pay the round-trip fare, since
that’s what he originally contracted for.”

The mate stared at the stack of bills. He had known Jefferson Pardee for

ten years and had never even known the man to buy a beer; now he was just
giving him three hundred extra dollars? Three hundred dollars that the
company and the captain didn’t know about. “Okay,” he said. He snatched
the money out of the doctor’s hand and shoved it into his pocket before the
crew could see.

He would get the whole crew drunk and they would toast the generosity

of Jefferson Pardee.

Return to the Sky

The Lear 45 was a working corporate issue, the seats upholstered in muted
blues and grays, facing each other over small worktables. For some reason
Tucker had expected something more unusual: bright carnival colors with a
monkey in a flight attendant outfit perhaps; a stark metal interior stripped
for cargo; maybe stainless steel over enamel with a lot of complicated
medical gizmos. Nope, this was the standard, run-of-the-mill station wagon
model of your basic four-million-dollar jet.

He slid into the pilot’s seat and a rage of adrenaline coursed through

him, as if his body was reliving the crash of the pink Gulfstream. He fought
the urge to bolt, let the adrenaline jag settle to a low-grade nausea, then
started his preflight checklist. Everything looked normal; the instruments
and controls were in place. He snapped on the power for the gauges and
nothing happened: no lights, no LEDs, nothing.

He felt the plane move as someone came up the retractable steps and

suddenly one of the guards reached around him and inserted a cylindrical
key into a socket on the instrument board. The guard turned the key several
times and the cockpit whirred to life.

“This thing has a main power cutoff?” Tuck said to the guard.

The guard removed the key and walked off the plane without saying a

word.

“Nice chatting with you,” Tuck said. He’d never seen a plane with an

ignition key and he was sure that this one was not factory-issue. Why? Who
would steal a jet airplane? Who could? I could, that’s who. The doctor had
installed the key to keep him from repeating his performance in Seattle. The
missionary bastard didn’t trust him.

Tuck checked the navigation computer. It was, as Beth Curtis had told

him, set for an airfield in southern Japan. He watched as the LEDs on the
nav computer came on, indicating that it was acquiring the satellites it
needed to locate his position. When three were lit, his longitude and latitude
flashed on the screen; when a fourth satellite was acquired, he had his
current altitude: eight feet above sea level. He thought of Kimi navigating
by the stars and felt a twinge of guilt for not trying harder to find him. He
resolved to look for the navigator personally when he got back to Alualu.

He ran through the checklist and threw the autostart switches for the

engines. As the twin jets spooled up, Tuck felt his anxiety float away like an
exorcised ghost. This is where he was supposed to be. This is what he did.
For the first time in weeks he felt like his head was clear.

He pushed the controls through their full range of motion and checked

out the window to make sure that the flaps and ailerons were moving as
well. Beth Curtis was coming across the compound toward the plane. At
least he thought it was Beth Curtis. She wore a sharp, dark business suit
with nylons and high heels. Her hair was pulled back into a severe bun and
she wore wire-frame aviator sunglasses. She carried a small plastic cooler
in one hand and an aluminum briefcase in the other. She looked like one of
Mary Jean’s corporate killer attorneys. Her third identity in as many days.

She walked into the plane and the guard pushed the hatch shut behind

her. She stashed the cooler and briefcase in the overhead, then climbed into
the cockpit and strapped herself in the copilot’s seat.

“Any problems?” she said.

“You look nice today, Mrs. Curtis.”

“Thank you, Mr. Case. Are we ready?”

“Tuck. You can call me Tuck. I need you to look out the window and

tell me if the flaps and ailerons move when I move the controls.”

“They look fine. Shall we go?”

Tuck released the ground brakes and taxied out onto the runway. “I need

to pick up some sunglasses while we’re in Japan.”

“I’ll get you some. You won’t be leaving the plane.”

“I won’t?”

“We’ll only be on the ground for a few minutes, then we’ll be coming

back.”

“Look, Mrs. Curtis, I know you think that because of the circumstances

that brought me here that I’m a total fuckup, but I am really good at what I
do. You don’t have to treat me like a child.”

She looked at him and took off her sunglasses. Tuck wished he had

sunglasses so he could whip them off like that.

She said, “Mr. Case, I’m putting my life in your hands right now. How

much more confidence would you like?”

Tuck didn’t really know how to answer. “I guess you’re right. Sorry.

You could be a little less mysterious about what’s going on here. I know
that we’re not flying supplies, not with this plane and the kind of money
you’re paying me.”

“If you really want to know, I can tell you. But if I tell you, I’ll have to

kill you.”

Tuck looked from the instruments to catch her expression. She was

grinning, a deep silly grin that crinkled the corners of her eyes.

He looked at the instruments. “I’m going to take off now. Okay?”

“And I haven’t even shown you the best way to fight boredom on our

little island.”

Tuck concentrated on the gauges and the runway. He said, “What

church do you and your husband work for?”

“Methodist.”

“You’ll have to tell me about it.”

“What’s there to tell? Methodists rock!” she said, then she giggled like a

little girl as Tuck pulled the plane into the sky.

Malink waved him off as he drank from the coconut shell cup and made

a great show of enjoying his first drink before handing the cup to Abo, who
was pouring. Then he stalled another few seconds by lighting a Benson &
Hedges with the Zippo, making sure everyone saw it and remembered, then
after a long drag he said, “I’m fucked if I know.” He said this in English—
English being the best language for swearing.

“It is not good,” said John.

“They came to the bachelors’ house,” said Abo, who, as usual, was

angry. “They looked at our mispel’s thighs.”

“We should kill them,” said one of the younger men who had been

named for Vincent.

“And eat them!” someone added—and it was as if the air had been

pulled on the circle before it could inflate to well-rounded violent mob.

Everyone turned to see Sarapul walking out of the shadows. For once,

Malink was glad to see him. The old cannibal seemed to have a spring in
his step, seemed younger, stronger.

“I need an ax,” Sarapul said. The men who owned axes all stared into

the sand or examined their fingernails.

“What for?” Malink asked.

“I can’t tell you. It’s a secret.”

“You’re not going to start headhunting, are you?” Malink said. “We’ve

put up with your talk of eating people, but I draw the line at headhunting.
No headhunting while I’m chief.”

Everybody grunted in agreement and Malink was glad to have been able

to assert his authority in a way that no one could dispute. An anthropologist
had once come to the island and given him a book about headhunters.
Malink felt very cosmopolitan discussing the topic.

Sarapul looked confused. He’d never read the headhunting book, had

never read any book, but he did have a Classic Comics version of The
Count of Monte Cristo, which a sailor had given him in the days before the
Shark People were forbidden to meet visiting ships. He’d made Kimi read it
to him every night. Sarapul liked the thread of revenge and murder that ran
through the story.

Sarapul said, “What is this headhunting? I just want to cut a tree.”

“Cutting trees is taboo,” said one of the younger men.

“I will get special dispensation,” Sarapul said, using a term he had

learned from Father Rodriquez.

Malink shook his head. “We don’t have that anymore. We only had that

when we were Catholics.”

“I need an ax,” Sarapul said, as if he might do better if he started over.

“And I need permission from the great Chief Malink to cut a tree.”

Malink scratched a mosquito bite and looked at his feet. It was true that

he could give permission to break a taboo, and Sarapul had distracted the
circle before they ganged up on him. “You may cut one tree, on your side of
the island, and you must show it to me before you cut it. Now, who has an
ax?”

Everyone knew who owned axes, but nobody volunteered. Malink

chose one of the young Vincents. “You, go get your ax.” Then to Sarapul he
said: “Why do you need to cut a tree?”

Sarapul considered holding out, but decided that a credible lie would be

better. “My house is falling down from the girl-man climbing in the
rafters.”

It was the wrong answer to give in front of a group of men whose

houses had been rifled only hours ago. Malink cradled his head in his
hands.

They were somewhere in southern Japan, a small jetport, probably

private, with no tower and only a few hangars. Tuck had gotten them there

by following the nav computer, which, he found in midflight, had only two
coordinates programmed into it: Alualu and this airfield.

“What happens if we have a problem and have to divert?” he asked

Beth.

“Don’t worry about it,” she said. She had spent most of the flight

grilling him about the navigational instruments, as if she wanted to know
enough to be able to check the course herself. He complied, feeling insulted
by the whole conversation.

Another Lear was spooling up on the tarmac and Beth Curtis instructed

him to taxi to it. As the jet bumped to a stop and he prepared to shut down,
she pulled her briefcase and cooler out of the overhead and turned to him.
“Stay here. We’ll take off in a few minutes.”

“What about loading supplies?”

“Mr. Case, please just prepare the plane for departure. I won’t be long.”

Two men in blue coveralls crossed the tarmac from the other jet and

lowered the hatch for her. Tuck watched out the window as she met a third
Japanese man in a white lab coat. She handed him the cooler and a folder
from the briefcase, then traded bows with him and quickstepped back to the
Lear. One of the men in blue coveralls followed her into the plane with a
cardboard box, which he strapped into one of the passenger seats.

“Domo,” Beth Curtis said.

He bowed quickly, left the plane, and sealed the hatch. She stashed the

briefcase in the overhead again climbed into the copilot’s seat.

“Let’s go.”

“That’s it?”

“That’s it. Let’s go.”

“We should top off the fuel tanks while we’re here.”

“I understand why you might be a little nervous about that, Mr. Case,

but we have plenty of fuel to make it back.”

“One box. That’s all we’re picking up?”

“One box.”

“What’s in it?”

“It’s a case of ’78 Bordeaux. Sebastian loves it. Let’s go.”

“But I have to use the bathroom. I thought…”

“Hold it,” Beth Curtis said.

“Bitch.”

“Exactly. Now don’t you need to do your checklist thingy?”

Bombs and Bribes

The itching started a week after the first flight. It began on his scalp and a
few days later, as the wounds on his arms, legs, and genitals healed, Tucker
would have stripped off his skin to escape it. If there had been some other
distraction, something to do besides sit in his bungalow waiting to be called
for a flight, it might have been bearable, but now the doctor came only once
a day to check on him, and he hadn’t seen Beth Curtis since they landed. He
read spy novels, listened to the country western radio station out of Guam
until he thought that if he heard one more wailing steel guitar, he’d rip the
rest of his hair out. Sometimes he lay under the mosquito netting, acutely
aware of his comatose member, and tried to think of all the women he had
had, one by one, then all the women he had ever wanted, including
actresses, models, and famous figures from history (the Marilyn
Monroe/Cleopatra double-team-in-warm-pudding scenario kept him
distracted for almost an hour). Twice a day he cooked himself a meal. The
doctor had set him up with a double hot plate and a pantry full of canned
goods, and occasionally one of the guards dropped off a parcel of fruit or
fresh fish. Mostly, though, he itched.

Tuck tried to engage Sebastian Curtis in conversation, but there were

few subjects about which the missionary was not evasive, and most
reminded him that he had left some pressing task at the clinic. Questions
about Kimi, the guards, the lack of cargo, his personal history, his wife, the
natives of the island, or communication with the outside world evoked half-
answers and downright silence.

He asked the doctor for some cortisone, for a television, for access to a

computer so he could send a message back to Jake Skye, and while the
doctor didn’t say no outright, Tuck was left empty-handed except for a
suggestion that he ought to go swimming and a reminder of how much
money he was making for reading spy novels and scratching at scabs. Tuck
wanted a steak, a woman (although he still wasn’t sure he could do anything
but talk to her), and a chilled bottle of vodka. The doctor gave him some
fins, a mask and snorkel, and a bottle of waterproof sunscreen.

When, one morning, Tuck spent an empty hour trying to will his

member to life by mentally wrapping his fifth-grade teacher, Mrs. Nelson,
in Saran Wrap, only to find his fantasy foiled by her insistence that he had
no lead in his Number 2 pencil, he grabbed the snorkeling gear and made
his way to the beach.

Two of the guards followed at a distance. They were always there.

When he looked out the window, if he tried to take a walk, if he wanted to
check on the Lear, they clung to him like stereo shadows. They stood over
him as he sat in the sand, pulling the fins on.

“Why don’t you guys go put on some trunks and join me? Those

jumpsuits have to be pretty uncomfortable.” It wasn’t the first time he’d
tried to talk to them, and it wasn’t the first time he’d been ignored. They
just stood there, as silent as meditating monks. Tuck hadn’t been able to
discern if they understood a word of English.

“Okay, then, I’m going to do the Cousteau thing, but later let’s get

together for some raw fish and karaoke?” He gave them a wink.

No reaction.

“Then let’s play some cards and talk about how you guys recite haiku

while blowing each other every night?” Tuck thought that might do it, but
still there was no reaction.

As he started toward the water, Tuck said, “I heard the Japanese flag

was modeled after a used sanitary napkin. Is that true?” He looked over his
shoulder for a response and his fin caught and bent double on a rock. An

instant later he was facedown on the beach, sputtering to get the sand out of
his mouth, and the guards were laughing.

“Asshole,” he heard one say, and he was on his feet and looming over

the Japanese like a giant rabid duck.

“Just back off, Odd Job!”

The guard who had spoken stood his ground, but his companion backed

away looking lost without his Uzi.

“What’s the matter, no submachine gun? You chickenshits so busy

crawling up my back that you forgot your toys?” Tuck poked the guard in
the chest to punctuate his point.

The guard grabbed Tuck’s finger and bent it back, then swept the pilot’s

feet out from under him and drew a Glock nine-millimeter pistol from a
holster at the small of his back and pressed the barrel to Tucker’s forehead
hard enough to dent the skin. The other guard barked something in
Japanese, then stepped forward and kicked Tuck in the stomach. Tucker
rolled into a ball in the sand, instinctively throwing one arm over his face
and clenching the other at his side to protect his kidneys as he waited for the
next blow. It didn’t come. When he looked up, the guards were walking
back to the compound.

Getting them to leave him alone had been the desired result, but the

process was a little rougher than he’d expected. Tuck wiggled his finger to
make sure it wasn’t broken and examined the boot toe print under his rib
cage. Then the anger unlocked his imagination and plans for revenge began.
The easiest thing to do would be to tell the doctor, but Tuck, like all men,
had been conditioned against two responses: You don’t cry and you don’t
rat. No, it would have to be something subtle, elegant, painful, and most of
all, humiliating.

Tuck almost skipped into the water, running on his newfound energy:

adrenalized vengeance. He paddled around at the inside edge of the reef,
watching anemones pulse in the current while small fish in improbable neon
colors darted in and out of the coral. The ocean was as warm as bathwater,

and after a few minutes with his face in the water, he felt detached from his
body and the color and movement below became as meaningless as the
patterns in a campfire. The only reminder that he was human was the sound
of his breath rushing through the snorkel and the images of cold revenge in
his mind.

He looked down the ragged curve of the reef and saw a large shadow

moving across the bottom, but before fight-or-flight panic could even set in,
he saw it was the shadow of a loggerhead turtle flying through the water
like a saurian angel. The turtle circled him and cruised by close enough for
Tuck to see the movement in the creature’s silver-dollar-sized eye as it
studied him, and a message there: “You don’t belong here,” it said. And that
part of Tuck that had recognized the saltwater as its mother rebelled and he
felt alien and vulnerable and cold, and a little rude, as if he had been
attending a black-tie dinner only to realize as dessert was served that he was
wearing pajamas. It was time to go.

He lifted his head, took a bearing on the chain-link fence that ran to the

edge of the beach, and started a slow crawl toward shore. As the water went
shallow, he banged his knee on a submerged rock, then stood and slogged
through the lapping surf as his fins tried to drag him back off the beach.
Once clear of the water, he fell in the sand and tore the fins off his feet. He
threw them up the shore without looking and a half a breath later a
deafening explosion lifted him up and he landed ten feet away, stunned and
breathless, as damp sand and pieces of swim fin rained down upon him.

Sebastian Curtis was seated at a computer terminal. He quickly clicked

off the screen and swiveled in his chair. “I heard the explosion, but birds
and turtles have set them off before. Was anyone hurt?”

“Other than I’m going to hear a high-pitched wail for the rest of my life

and my sphincter won’t relax until I’m dead a couple of years, no, no one

was hurt. What I want to know is why you have mines on the beach.”

“Calm down, Mr. Case. Please sit down.” The doctor gestured to a

folding metal chair. “Please.” He looked sad, not at all confrontational, not
like the kind of man who would mine a tropical beach. “I suppose there are
some things you need to know. First, I have something for you.” He opened
a drawer under the keyboard, withdrew a check, and handed it to Tuck.

Tucker’s rage dropped a level when he looked at the amount. “Ten

grand? What’s this for?”

“Call it a first-flight bonus. Beth said you did very well.”

Tucker fingered the check, then brushed the sand off it and read it again.

If he had any self-respect, he’d throw it in the doctor’s face. He didn’t, of
course. “This is great, Doc. Ten grand for picking up a case of wine. I’m not
even going to ask you what was in the cooler she gave that guy, but I was
almost killed on the beach a few minutes ago.”

“I’m very sorry about that. There’s a lot of Japanese ordnance scattered

around the island. The area at the edge of the fence used to be a minefield.
The staff and the natives all know not to go there.”

“Well, you might have mentioned it to me.”

“I didn’t want to alarm you. I told a couple of members of the staff to

keep an eye on you and steer you away from there. I’ll speak to them.”

“They’ve been spoken to. I spoke to them myself. And I’m a little tired

of being watched by them.”

“It’s for your own safety, as I’m sure you can see now.”

“I’m not a child and I don’t expect to be treated like one. I want to go

where I want, when I want, and I don’t want to be watched by a bunch of
ninjas.”

The doctor sat bolt-upright in his chair. “Why do you refer to them as

ninjas? Who told you to call the staff that?”

“Look at them. They’re Japanese, they wear all black, they know

martial arts—hell, the only thing they’re missing are T-shirts that say, ‘Ask
me about being a ninja.’ I call them that because that’s what they look like.
They sure as hell aren’t medical staff.”

“No, they’re not,” Sebastian said, “but I’m afraid they are a necessary

evil, and one that I can’t do much about.”

“Why not? It’s your island.”

“This island belongs to the Shark People. And even this clinic isn’t

mine, Mr. Case. As I’m sure you’ve guessed, we are not financed by the
Methodist Mission Fund.”

“Yeah, I kinda figured that.”

“We do have some very powerful corporate sponsors in Japan, and they

have insisted that we keep a small contingent of security men on the island
if we want to keep our funding.”

“Funding for what, Doc?”

“Research.”

Tuck laughed. “Right. This is the perfect environment for research. No

sense using some sterile high-tech facility in Tokyo. Do your R and D out
on the asshole of the Pacific. Come clean. What’s really going on?”

The doctor pointed to the check Tucker was holding. “If I tell you, Mr.

Case, that’s the last one of those you will see. You make the choice. If you
want to work here, you have to work in the dark. There is no compromise.
It’s research, it’s secret, and the people who are paying for it want it to stay
that way or they wouldn’t have hired the guards and they wouldn’t allow
me to pay you so well.” He pushed back his gray hair and stared into
Tucker’s eyes, not threatening, not challenging, but with the compassion of
a physician concerned about the welfare of a patient. “Now, do you really
want to know what we’re doing here?”

Tuck looked at the check, looked back at the doctor, then looked at the

check. If it was good, it was the largest amount of money he’d ever
possessed at one time. He said, “I just want the guards to lighten up, give
me some room to breathe.”

The doctor smiled. “I think we can do that. But I need your word that

you won’t try to leave the compound.”

“To go where? I’ve seen this island from the air, remember? I can’t be

missing much.”

“I’m only interested in your safety.”

“Right,” Tucker said, as sincerely as he could muster. “But I want a TV.

I’m going nuts sitting around in that room. If I read one more spy novel, I’ll
qualify for a Double-O number. You guys have a TV, so I know you have
one of those satellite dishes hooked up. I want a TV.”

Again the doctor smiled. “You can have ours. I’m sure Beth won’t

mind.”

The Sorcerer stood in the door of her chambers. He’d felt rather proud

of himself until the tone in her voice struck him like an ice pick in the neck.

“Your television. But it’s only temporary. I’ll have another one waiting

for you at the airstrip on the next flight.”

“Which is when?”

“As soon as I can set up an order. I promise, Beth.”

“Which means that I also have to do a performance without my soaps. I

depend on my soaps to practice my sense memories, Sebastian. How do you
expect me to play a goddess if I can’t find my emotional moment?”

“Maybe, just this once, you could try emotions that don’t come by

satellite feed.”

She dropped her magazine and bit her lip, looking off to the corner of

the room as if considering it. “Fine. Give him the TV.”

“I gave him ten thousand dollars, as well.”

Her eyes narrowed. “What does he get if he blows himself up again, a

night with the Sky Priestess?”

“If I can bargain him down to that,” the Sorcerer said. He turned and

walked out of the room smiling to himself.

Native Customs

Tucker Case spent the next week watching the compound, trying to get a
clue to what was going on. The doctor had brought the TV as he promised,
and even loaned Tucker a seven iron, but since then Tuck had only seen him
from a distance, making his way back and forth from the clinic to one of the
small bungalows at the other side of the beach. The guards still watched
him, following him at a distance when he went for a swim or a search-and-
destroy mission for roosters, but there had been no sign of Beth Curtis.

If indeed the doctor was doing some sort of research, there was no hint

as to what it involved. Tuck tried stopping by the clinic several times, only
to find the door locked and no response when he knocked.

Boredom worked on Tuck, pressed down on him like a pile of wet

blankets until he felt as if he would suffocate under the weight. In the past
he had always fought boredom with alcohol and women, and the trouble
that ensued from that combination filled the days. Here there was nothing
but spy novels and bad Asian cooking shows (the doctor had refused to let
him hook up to the satellite dish) and although he was pleased that he now
knew nine different ways to prepare beagle, it wasn’t enough. He needed to
get out of the compound, if for no other reason than because they told him
he couldn’t.

Fortunately, over the years, Tuck had acquired an encyclopedic

knowledge of women-in-prison movies, so he had at his disposal a plethora

of escape strategies. Of course, many of them weren’t applicable. He
immediately rejected the idea of seducing and shiving the large lesbian
matron, and faking menstrual cramps would only get him sent to the clinic
with a Mydol IV, but strangely enough, as he was acting out the gratuitous
shower scene, his plan burst forth: soap-slathered, silicone-enhanced, and in
total defiance of time, gravity, and natural proportion…

The shower drain opened directly onto the coral gravel below.

He could see it down there, the ground, and a small hermit crab

scuttling to escape the soapy water. He’d lost weight, but not enough to
slide down the drain. The entire bottom of the shower was no more than a
tray of galvanized metal. He bent, grasped the edge, and lifted. It didn’t
come free, but it moved. A little time, a little patience, and he’d have it free.
Planning and patience. Those were the keys to a successful escape.

So he could get out of the bungalow without being seen. The next

obstacle would be the fence.

Tuck found out early on that the fence around the compound was

electrified. He’d found a rooster stuck to the wires, doing a convulsive
imitation of the funky chicken while its feathers smoldered and sparks shot
from its grounded foot. Satisfying as the discovery was, Tuck realized that
there would be no going over the fence, and the gate to the airfield was
locked with a massive chain and padlock. The only way past the fence was
around it, and the only place to get around it was at the beach. Sure, he
could swim out and come in farther down the beach, but how far did the
minefield extend? He began testing it by hitting rocks into the minefield
with his seven iron under the auspices of practicing his swing. He managed
to produce several impressive craters and scare the guards with the
explosion before finding the edge of the minefield some fifty yards down
the beach. He decided to risk it.

He picked up a coconut on his way back to the bungalow, then climbed

into bed and waited for darkness to fall.

After the sun set and the three-quarter moon rose, Tuck waited for the

guard to peek through the window, then as he heard him crunch away,

began building the decoy (a trick he learned from Falling Fingers: Leper
Bimbos Behind Bars II). Two pillows and a coconut head made for a
reasonable likeness, especially when viewed by moonlight through
mosquito netting. He slipped out of bed and crawled below window level to
the bathroom, where he had left his mask, fins, and a candle.

He shoved a towel under the door to keep the light from leaking out,

then lit the candle and began working the metal shower tray out of its
frame. After five minutes of tugging, stopping for a moment when he heard
the guard’s boots crunching outside, he released the shower tray and leaned
it up on its side.

Tuck blew out the candle and dropped to gravel four feet below, then

reached back and pulled his fins and mask through the opening. The coral
gravel felt like broken glass on his tender feet, but he decided to endure the
pain rather than risk the noise of shoes. Tuck heard the guard coming again
and dropped to the ground where he could look out under the bungalow into
the courtyard.

The guard thumped up the steps, paused as he looked through the

window, then, satisfied that Tucker was asleep, walked across the
compound to the guards’ quarters and sat in a folding chair outside the door.

Tuck checked behind him, then scrambled out of the crawl space into

the grove of coconut palms. He paused and caught his breath, then planned
his path to the beach. He would have to cover fifty yards between his
bungalow and the clinic, fifty yards that weren’t completely open but
visible from where the guard sat. He could hop from tree to tree, but if the
guard happened to be looking that way, he was done.

A lizard scampered up the tree he was leaning on and Tuck felt his heart

stop. What was he thinking? There could be scorpions out here, sharks and
barracudas and other creepy stuff in the dark ocean. And what happened
when he got to the other side of the fence? More sand and scorpions and
possibly hostile natives. He was waiting, thinking about how easy it would
be to crawl back through the shower and go to bed, when a lighter flared
across the compound and he saw the guard’s face illuminated orange, and

Tuck bolted for the rear of the clinic building, hoping the lighter would
blind the guard long enough for him to cover the fifty yards.

Halfway across, he dropped a fin, then fell to the ground beside it and

looked up. The guard was smoking peacefully, watching blue streams of
smoke rise in the moonlight.

Tuck grabbed the fin and crawled on his belly the final ten yards to the

clinic, fighting the urge to cry out as the gravel dug into his elbows. A
hermit crab scuttled over his back sending a bolt of the electric willies
shooting up his spine to speed him to cover.

The guard didn’t look up. Tuck climbed to his feet, dusted himself off,

and made his way to the beach.

A light breeze rattled the palm leaves and Tuck could hear the surf

crashing out on the reef, but at the shore the waves lapped only shin high.
Tuck waded into the warm water carrying his fins. When he was waist
deep, he crouched and slipped them on, then paddled out on his back,
looking back toward shore.

There were lights on in both of the Curtises’ bungalows. He could see

Beth Curtis moving past the windows. She appeared to be naked, but from
this distance he couldn’t tell for sure. He tore himself away and swam out
past the surf line to make his way down the beach.

It was an easy swim to the fence, the biggest challenge being to keep his

mind off what might be lurking under the dark water. He swam another
hundred yards down the beach, then started toward shore. When his hand
brushed a rock, he reached down and pulled off his fins. He gritted his teeth
as he put his feet down to stand, expecting the shooting pain of an urchin or
a ray. He cursed himself for not bringing his sneakers.

As he slogged up the beach, Tuck heard a rustling in the trees and

looked up to see a flash of color in the moonlight. He ran up the beach,
dove behind a log at the high-tide line, and lay there watching as tiny crabs
clicked and crawled around him.

She emerged from the trees only ten yards from where Tucker lay. She

was wearing a purple lavalava, which she unwrapped and dropped on the
sand.

Tuck stopped breathing. She walked by him, only a few feet away, her

body oiled and shining in the moonlight, her long black hair playing behind
her in the breeze. He risked lifting his head and watched her walk into the
water up to her knees and begin washing, splashing water on her thighs and
bottom.

From the time he had left Houston he had carried images in his head of

what it would be like to live on a tropical island. Those images had been
buried by cuts and scrapes, typhoons and humidity, sharks and ninjas and
enigmatic missionaries. This was why he had come: a naked island girl
washing her mocha thighs on a warm moonlit beach.

He felt a stirring under him and almost leaped to his feet, thinking he

was lying on some sea creature. Then he realized that the stirring came
from within. It had been so long since he’d felt signs of an erection that he
didn’t recognize it at first. He almost burst out laughing. It still worked. He
was still a man. Hell, he was more than just a man, he was Tucker Case,
secret agent, and for the first time in months, he was packing wood.

The girl walked out of the water and Tuck ducked his head as she

passed. He watched her wrap the lavalava around her hips and disappear
into the trees. He waited until she was gone, then followed her, enjoying the
tension in his trunks as he crept into the trees.

“Go home, Sepie!” Malink barked. “You are not to be here.”

Sepie ignored him and kept coming, her hips swaying. Several of the

young married men looked away, feeling regret that they wouldn’t be
bedding down in the bachelors’ house tonight. “There’s a white man
following me.”

Malink stood. “You talk nonsense. Now go home or you’ll have another

week away from the ocean.” He noticed that the ends of her hair were wet
and drops ran off her legs. She’d already broken her punishment for talking
with the Japanese guards.

“Fine,” Sepie said. “I don’t care if a white man is sneaking around in

the bushes. I just though you would want to know.”

She flipped her hair as she turned and made her way back up the beach.

As she passed the tree that Tuck had ducked behind, she said in English,
“The fat loud one is chief. You go talk to him. He tell you who I am.” And
she walked on, head high, without looking back.

Tuck felt his face flush and his ego deflate along with the swelling in

his pants. Busted. She’d known he was there all along. Some secret agent.
He’d be lucky to get back into the compound without getting caught.

He watched the men on the beach passing around the communal cup.

From the way they moved he could see that some of them were pretty
drunk. He remembered the warning of Jefferson Pardee about not drinking
with these latent warriors, but they looked harmless, even a little silly with
their loincloths and shark tattoos. One young man reached to take the cup
from the old guy who was pouring and fell on his face in the sand. That did
it. Tuck stepped out from behind his tree and started toward the circle.
Whatever was being poured from those jugs was probably not gin and tonic,
but it would definitely get you fucked up, and getting fucked up sounded
pretty good right now.

“Jambo,” Tuck said, using a greeting he’d heard in a Tarzan movie.

The whole group looked up. One man actually let out an abbreviated

scream. The fat old guy stood up, a fire in his eyes that cooled as Tuck
moved out of the shadows.

Mary Jean had always said, “Doesn’t matter if it’s a senator or a

doorman. No one is immune to a warm smile and a firm handshake.”

Tuck held out his hand and smiled. “Tucker Case. Pleased to meet you.”

Malink allowed the white man to shake his hand. As the others looked

on, still stunned, Malink said, “You are looking better than the last time I
saw you. The Sorcerer made you well.”

Tuck’s eyes were trained on the three-gallon jugs of milky liquid at the

center of the circle. “Yeah, I’m feeling on top of the world. You guys think
you could spare a sip of that jungle juice?”

“Sit,” Malink said, and he waved the young men aside to make space

for Tuck on one of the sitting logs. Tuck stepped in and sat as Favo handed
him the coconut shell cup. Tuck downed the contents in one gulp and
fought to keep from gagging. It tasted of sulfur, sugar, and a tint of
ammonia, but the alcohol was there, and the familiar warmth was coursing
through him before he’d even stopped shuddering from the taste.

“Good. Very good.” Tuck smiled and nodded around the circle. The

Shark men smiled and nodded back.

Malink sat beside him. “We thought you died.”

“So did I. How about another belt?”

Malink looked embarrassed. “The cup must come around again.”

“Fine, fine. Drink up, boys,” Tuck said, smiling and nodding like a

madman.

“How you come here?” Malink asked.

“A little stroll, a little swim. I wanted to get out and meet some people.

You know, get to know the local customs. Gets pretty boring up at the
clinic.”

Malink frowned. “You are the pilot. We see you fly the plane.”

“That’s me.”

“Vincent said you would come.”

“Who’s Vincent?”

The men, who had been whispering among themselves, fell silent. The

pouring and drinking stopped as they waited for Malink’s reply.

“Vincent is pilot too. He come long time ago, bringing cargo. He send

the Sky Priestess until he come back. You see her with the Sorcerer. At
hospital. She have yellow hair like yours.”

Tuck nodded, as if he had any idea what the chief was talking about.

Right now he just wanted to see the cup finish its lap and get back to him.
“Yeah, right. I’ve seen her. She’s the doctor’s wife.”

Abo, who was drunk and for once not angry, laughed and said, “She is

nobody’s wife, you fuckin’ mook. She’s the Sky Priestess.”

Tuck froze. A plane crash and a talking bat rose like demons, ruining

his oncoming buzz.

Malink looked apologetic. “He is young and drunk and stupid. You not

fuckin’ mook.”

“Where’d you hear that?” Tuck asked. “Where’d you hear ‘fuckin’

mook’?”

“Vincent say that. We all say that.”

“Vincent? What’s Vincent look like?”

The young men looked to Favo and Malink. Favo spoke. “He is

American. Have dark hair like us, but his nose point. Young. Maybe as old
as you.”

“And he’s a pilot? What’s he wear?”

“He wear gray suit, sometimes a jacket with fur here.” Favo mimed a

collar and lapels.

“A bomber jacket.”

Malink smiled. “Yes, Sky Priestess is bomber.”

Tuck snatched the cup from one of the Johns and drained it, then

handed it back. “Sorry. Emergency.” He looked at Malink. “And this
Vincent said I was coming?”

Malink nodded. “He tell me in a dream. Then Sarapul find you and your

friend on the reef.”

“My friend? Is he around?”

“We no see him now. He go to live with Sarapul on other side of

island.”

“Take me to him.”

“We drink tuba now. Go in morning?”

“I have to be back before morning. And you can’t tell anyone that I was

here.”

“One more,” Malink said. “The tuba is good tonight.”

“Okay, one more,” Tuck said.

Showtime

The Sky Priestess rolled over in bed and slapped the beeping intercom as if
it was a mouthy stepchild. “I’m sleeping here,” she said.

“Get in character, Beth. We have an order, due in Japan in six hours.”

“Why don’t these fuckers ever call at a civilized hour?”

“We guarantee freshness. We have to deliver.”

“Don’t grow a sense of humor on me at this point, Sebastian. The shock

might kill me. Who’s the chosen?”

“Sepie, female, nineteen, a hundred and ten pounds.”

“I know her,” the Sky Priestess said. “What about our pilot?”

“I’m putting two of the staff on him to make sure he stays in his

bungalow.”

“He’s still going to hear it. Are you sure you don’t want to sedate him?”

“Use your head, Beth. He has to fly. We’ll do it with smaller explosions.

Maybe he’ll sleep through it.”

She was wide awake now and starting to feel the excitement and anxiety

of a performance. “I’ll be ready in twenty minutes. Have the ninjas start my
music.”

Malink had never seen noogies and wondered why this bizarre ritual

had never showed up in the party scenes in People. He prided himself on
understanding white people’s habits, but this was a new one. Favo didn’t
seem to be enjoying the ritual nearly as much as Tuck was. The tuba had all
been drunk. Maybe it was time to rescue his friend.

“Now we go find the girl-man,” Malink said.

Tuck looked up, still holding Favo, whose eyes were starting to bug out

a little. “’Kay,” the pilot said.

Malink led them into the village, his bowlegged gait more wobbly than

normal. A dozen Shark men and Tucker crashed and staggered behind him.
As they passed by the bachelors’ house and onto the trail that led to
Sarapul’s side of the island, the music started: big band sounds with easy
liquid rhythms echoed through the jungle. The Shark men stopped in their
tracks and when the music paused, just for a second, they shouted,
“Pennsylvania 6-5000!” and the music began again.

“What’s that?” Tucker asked.

Women and children were stirring from their sleep, creeping off into the

bushes to pee, rubbing sleepy eyes and stretching creaky backs. Malink
said, “The Sky Priestess is coming.”

“Who?” Tuck finally released Favo, who he had been dragging by his

head. The old man gasped, then grinned and sat splayed-legged on the trail.

“We have to go,” Malink said. “You should go back now.”

The music paused and Malink, along with the rest of the Shark People,

shouted, “Pennsylvania 6-5000!”

“Go now,” Malink ordered, once again the chief. “The Sky Priestess

comes. We must get ready.” He turned and strode back into the village. The
other Shark men scattered, leaving Tucker standing on the trail by himself.

Tuck heard the sound of large prop planes mixing with the big band

music. The Shark People were draining out of the village onto the trails that
led to the runway. Within seconds, the village was deserted. Tuck staggered
back to the beach where he’d left his fins and mask. As he stepped over the
logs of the drinking circle, there was an explosion and he thought for a
moment that he’d found another land mine until he realized that the sound
had come from the direction of the runway.

Not trusting himself to find the path through the village, Tucker decided

to follow the beach back to the compound. After he’d gone a hundred yards
or so, he saw something white lying on the beach and bent to pick it up. A
long spiral notebook. The moon was high in the sky and he could see a
name printed on the cover in bold permanent marker: JEFFERSON PARDEE.

“Case, get up. We’ve got to fly.”

The body did not stir. “Case?” She pulled aside the netting and poked

the sleeping figure. A green coconut rolled out of the bed and thumped at
her feet. “You sleep with a coconut? You pathetic bastard.”

She jumped back and a groggy Tucker Case groaned. “What?”

“Wake up. We fly in half an hour.”

Tuck rolled over and blinked through the hangover fog. The sun was

coming up and the roosters were going off all over the island. The room
was only half-lit.

“What time is it?”

“It’s time to go. Get the plane ready.” Beth Curtis walked out.

Tuck rolled out of bed, crawled to the bathroom, and emptied his

stomach into the bowl with a trumpeting heave.

Unfriendly Skies

Tuck spooled up the jets as he watched the guards scramble around the
Lear. Each time one walked past the nose, Tuck flipped on the radar and
chuckled. The microwave energy wasn’t enough to boil the guards in their
skins, which was Tuck’s fantasy, but he could be reasonably certain that
they would never have any children and he might have planted the seeds of
a few choice tumors. Once in Houston a maintenance man made the
mistake of walking in front of Mary Jean’s jet with an armload of
fluorescent bulbs meant for the hangar, and Jake Skye had shown Tucker a
little trick.

“Watch this, Jake had said.” He flipped on the radar and the bulbs,

bombarded by the microwaves from the radar, lit up in the maintenance
man’s arms. The poor guy threw the bulbs in the air and ran off the field,
leaving a pile of glass shards and white powder behind. It was the second-
coolest thing Tucker had ever seen, the first being the time they had used
the Gulfstream’s jets to sandblast the paint off a Porsche whose owner
insisted on parking on the tarmac. Tuck was waiting for one of the guards to
walk behind the jets when Beth Curtis came on board.

She wore her business suit and carried the briefcase and the cooler, but

this time she sat in one of the passenger seats in the back and fell asleep
before they took off. Tuck took the opportunity to suck some oxygen from
the emergency supply to help cut through his hangover.

When they were five hundred miles out over the Pacific, Tuck peeked

into the passenger compartment to make sure Beth Curtis was still sleeping.
When he was sure she was still out, he checked the fuel gauges, then
pushed the yoke forward and dropped the Lear down to level off at a
hundred feet.

Traveling at almost six hundred miles per hour at only a hundred feet

off the water did exactly what Tuck had hoped it would. He was absolutely
ecstatic with an adrenaline rush that chased his hangover back to the Dark
Ages. He dropped another fifty feet and laughed out loud when some salt
spray dashed the windscreen.

It was a clear sunny day with only a few wispy columnar clouds rising

off the water. Tuck flew under and through them as if they were enemy
ghosts. Then a speck appeared on the horizon. A second later Tuck
recognized it as a ship and pulled the jet up to two hundred feet. Suddenly
something rose off the ship’s deck. A helicopter, going out to spot and herd
schools of tuna for the factory ship. Tuck pulled up on the yoke, but the
helicopter rose directly into his path. There wasn’t even time to key the
radio to warn the pilot. Tuck threw the Lear into a tight turn while pulling
the jet up and whizzed by the helicopter close enough to see the pilot’s eyes
go wide. He could just make out men shaking fists at him from the deck of
the factory ship.

“Eee-haa!” he shouted (a bad habit he’d picked up in Texas cowboy

bars, and if this wasn’t cowboy flying, what was?). He steered the jet back
on course and leveled off at two hundred feet. He was still dangerously low
and burning fuel four times faster than he would at altitude, but hell, a guy
had to have some fun. He wasn’t paying for the fuel, and there hadn’t been
much low-level flying when he’d worked for Mary Jean. People on the
ground might have trouble remembering the numbers on the side of the
plane to report to the FAA, but you don’t soon forget a pink jet flying close
enough to the ground to cool your soup.

“What in the hell was that?” Beth Curtis appeared in the cockpit

doorway. “Why are we so low?”

A wave of panic akin to being caught smoking in the boys’ room swept

over Tuck, but he couldn’t think fast enough to come up with a viable lie.
He said, “You haven’t surfed until you’ve surfed in a Learjet.”

Much to his amazement, Beth Curtis said, “Cool!” and strapped herself

into the copilot’s seat.

Tuck grinned and eased the jet down to fifty feet. Beth Curtis clapped

her hands like an excited child. “This is great!”

“We can’t do it for long. Burns too much fuel.”

“A little while longer, okay?”

Tuck smiled. “Maybe five more minutes. We can catch a tailwind at

altitude that’ll save us some time and fuel.”

“Is this what you were doing the night you crashed?”

Tuck winced. “No.”

“Because I could understand if it was. What a rush!” She reached out

and grabbed his shoulder affectionately. “I love this. How could you let me
sleep through this?”

“We can surf some more on the way back,” Tuck said. And with that his

resolve was gone. He’d planned to ask her about the music and explosions
from last night. He’d planned to ask her about Jefferson Pardee’s notebook,
which he carried in his back pocket, but he didn’t want to break this mood.
It had been too long since he’d had any attention from a beautiful woman,
and he gave himself to it like a jonesing junkie.

Tuck watched as Beth Curtis handed the cooler to one of the suits, who

ran to the waiting Lear. Within seconds, the door was pulled shut and the
other Lear was taxied out to the runway. Another one of the suits handed
Beth a thick manila envelope, which she stashed in her briefcase. She
turned and ran back into the plane. She stepped into the cockpit and put her
briefcase behind the copilot’s seat. “I’ll be right back, ten minutes max. I’ve
got to make sure these guys get my TV on board unbroken.”

“TV?”

“Thirty-two-inch Trinitron,” she said with a smile. “To replace the one

that you’re using.”

“I want a thirty-two-inch Trinitron,” Tuck said to her back, but she was

already out the door.

He looked out the window to make sure she was busy with the

television, then pulled her briefcase from behind the seat and threw the
latches. To his amazement, it was unlocked. He removed the manila
envelope. Under it lay a small automatic pistol. He could take it, but then
what? Hold it on Beth Curtis until she confessed to whatever she and the
doctor were doing? And what was that? Research? There was no law
against that. He left the gun untouched and opened the envelope.

He wasn’t sure what he expected to find: research notes, bearer bonds,

stock certificates, cash, something that would shed some light on all this
clandestine behavior for sure. What he found was four issues of People
magazine and four issues of Us. Beth Curtis was smuggling American
cheese out of Japan and that was it.

He put the envelope back into the briefcase and slid it behind the seat,

then pulled Jefferson Pardee’s notebook out of his pocket. Perhaps there
was something inside that would tell him how the notebook had gotten to a
beach some seven hundred miles from where its owner was supposed to be.

He flipped though the pages where Pardee had scribbled phone

numbers, dates, and a few notes, but the only things he recognized were his
own name, the names of Sebastian Curtis and his wife, and the word

“Learjet,” followed by “Why? How? Who paid?” and “Find other pilot.”
Pardee was obviously asking the same questions that were circling in
Tuck’s mind, but what was this about another pilot? Had Pardee come to
Alualu looking for the answers? And if he did, where was he now?

“What’s that?” Beth Curtis said as she came through the cockpit door.

Tuck flipped the notebook shut and stuffed it in his back pocket. “Some

flight notes. I’m used to keeping a log for the FAA. I guess I brought this
along out of habit.” In the midst of the lie, he almost panicked. If she asked
where he had gotten the notebook in the first place, he was dead. Maybe
better to confront her here in Japan anyway—while he knew where the gun
was.

She said, “I didn’t realize there was any paperwork to flying a plane.”

“More than you’d think,” Tuck said. “I’m still getting used to how this

plane handles. I’m just writing down things I need to remember, you know,
climb rates and engine exhaust pressures, fuel consumption per hour at
altitude, stuff like that.” Right, he thought. Baffle her with bullshit.

“Oh,” she said with what Tuck thought was indifference until she

reached behind her seat and pulled out her briefcase.

He held his breath, waiting for the gun to appear. She took out an issue

of People and opened it on her lap. She didn’t look away from the magazine
until they were well over the Pacific, heading home.

“You know, we haven’t seen much of you lately. Maybe you should

come up to the house and have dinner with Sebastian and me tonight.” She
had slipped on her fifties housewife personality.

Tuck had been thinking about Pardee’s notebook and where he’d found

it. He wanted to get back to the village tonight. If Pardee had come to
Alualu, maybe the old chief knew something about it.

“I’m a little tired. We got a pretty early start. I think maybe I’ll just fix

up something quick at my place and get to bed early.”

She yawned. “Maybe tomorrow night. Around seven. Maybe we can try

out my new TV.”

“That’ll be fine.” Tuck said. “I have a few things I’d like to discuss with

you and the doc anyway.”

“Good,” she said. “I think we should spend more time together. Now

explain to me what all these gauges mean.”

What’s a Kidney?

Privacy is a rare commodity on a small island and secrets weigh heavy on
their keepers. Malink was weary with the burden of too many secrets. If he
could only go to the drinking circle and let his secrets out, let the coconut
telegraph carry his secrets to the edges of the island and let him walk light.
But that wasn’t going to happen. Secrets sought him out now, even from the
old cannibal.

He stood with Sarapul and Kimi examining an eighty-four-foot

breadfruit tree with a trunk you couldn’t get your arms around. Kimi held
an ax on his shoulder, waiting for Malink’s judgment.

“Why so big?” Malink asked. “This tree will give much breadfruit.”

“This is the tree,” Sarapul said. “The navigator has chosen it.”

Kimi said, “We will plant ten trees to take its place, but this is the one.”

“Why do you need such a big tree?”

“I can’t tell you,” Sarapul said.

“You will tell me or you won’t cut the tree.”

“If I tell you, will you promise not to tell anyone else?”

Malink sighed. Yet another secret. “I will tell no one.”

“Come. We’ll show you.”

Sarapul led Malink and Kimi through the jungle to an overgrown spot

piled with dried palm leaves. Malink leaned on a tree while the old cannibal
pulled away the palm fronds to reveal the prow of a canoe. Not just any
canoe. A forty-foot-long sailing canoe. Malink hadn’t seen one since he was
a small boy.

“This is why we need the tree,” Sarapul said. “I have hidden it here for

many years, but the hull is rotten and we need to fix it.”

Malink felt something stir in him at the sight of the big eye painted on

the prow. Something that went back to a time before he could remember,
when his people sailed thousands of miles by the eye of the canoe and the
guidance of the great navigators. Lost arts made sad by this reminder. He
shook his head. “No one knows how to build a sailing canoe anymore,
Sarapul. You are so old you don’t remember what you’ve forgotten.”

“He can fix it,” Sarapul said, pointing to Kimi.

Kimi grinned. “My father taught me. He was a great navigator from

Satawan.”

Malink raised a grizzled eyebrow. “That is where you learned our

language?”

“I can fix it. And I can sail it.”

“He’s teaching me,” Sarapul said.

Malink felt the stirring inside him grow into excitement. There was

something here he hadn’t felt since the arrival of Vincent. This was a secret
that lifted him rather than weighing him down. But he was chief and dignity
forbade him from shouting joy to the sky.

“You may cut the tree, but there is a condition.”

“You can’t tell anyone,” Sarapul said.

“I will not tell anyone. But when the canoe is fixed, you must teach one

of the young ones to be a navigator.” He looked at Kimi. “Will you do
that?”

Kimi nodded.

“You have your tree, old man,” Malink said. “I will tell no one.” He

turned and walked and fell into a light bowlegged amble down the path.

Kimi called to him, “I hear my friend, the pilot, was in the village last

night.”

Malink turned. The coconut telegraph evidently ran even to Sarapul’s

little corner of the island. “He asked about you. He said he will come back.”

“Did he have a bat with him?”

“No bat,” Malink said. “Come tonight to the drinking circle. Maybe he

will come.”

“I can’t,” Kimi said. “The boys from the bachelors’ house hate me.”

“They hate the girl-man,” Malink said, “not the navigator. You come.”

He dropped through the opening and was reaching up to grab his mask

and fins when he heard the knock on the front door and froze.

He heard the door open and Beth Curtis call, “Mr. Case, are you asleep

already?”

He couldn’t let her see the dummy in his bed. “I’m in the bathroom. Just

a second.”

He caught the edges of the shower opening and vaulted back into the

bathroom. The metal tray fell back over the opening, sounding like the Tin
Man trying to escape from a garbage can.

He heard Beth Curtis pad to the bathroom door. “Are you all right in

there?”

“Fine,” Tuck said. “Just dropped the soap.” He snagged a bar of soap

off the sink and placed it in the bottom of the shower tray, then threw open
the bathroom door.

Beth Curtis stood there in a long red silk kimono that was open in a

narrow canyon of white flesh to her navel. Whatever Tuck was going to say,
he forgot.

“Sebastian wanted me to bring you this.” She held out a check. Tuck

tore his eyes from her cleavage and took the check.

“Five thousand dollars. Mrs. Curtis, this is really more than I bargained

for.”

“You deserve it. You were very sweet to take the time to explain all the

instrumentation to me.” She leaned over and kissed him on the forehead,
keeping the warm pressure of her lips there a little too long. Tuck imagined
her tongue darting though his skull and licking his brain’s pleasure center.
He could smell her perfume, something deep and musky, and his eyes
locked on her breasts, which were completely exposed when she leaned
forward. He felt as if he had been staring at an arc welder and that creamy
powdered image would travel across his field of vision for hours. A chasm
of silence opened up and wrenched his attention back into the room.

“This is very generous,” he said. “But it could have waited. It’s not like

I have anywhere to spend it.”

“I know. I just wanted to thank you again. Personally, without Sebastian

around. And I thought you might be able to explain some of the finer points
of flying a jet. It’s all so exciting.”

Never a man of strong resolve, the combination of sight, scent, and

flattery activated Tuck’s seduction autopilot. He glanced toward the bed and
the switch clicked off. Sexual response was replaced by the dummy Tuck
shaking its coconut head. He looked back at her and locked on her eyes—
only her eyes. “Maybe tomorrow,” he said. “I’m really bushed. I was just
going to catch a shower and go right to bed.”

For an instant her pouty smile disappeared and her lips seemed to

tighten into a red line, then just as quickly the smile was back, and Tuck
wasn’t sure he’d seen the change at all.

“Well, tomorrow, then,” she said, pulling the front of her kimono

together as if she had only just noticed that it had fallen open. “We’ll see
you at seven.” She turned at the door and threw Tuck a parade queen wave
as she left, once again the darling of the Eisenhower era.

When she was safely out of the bungalow, Tuck ran to the bed and

picked up the green coconut. “What in the hell was that about?”

The coconut didn’t answer. “Fine,” Tuck said, fitting the head back on

the sleeping dummy. “I am not impressed. I am not shaken, nor am I stirred.
Weirdness is my business.” Even as he said it, he dismissed the
hallucination as his own good sense manifesting a warning, but the duel
cravings for a drink and a woman yanked at his insides like dull fishhooks.
He turned off the light and let the cravings lead him out the bathroom hatch
to the moonlit sea.

Forty minutes later he took his place in the circle of the Shark men.

Chief Malink stood and greeted Tuck with a jarring backslap. “Good to see
you, my friend. How’s it hanging?”

“It hangs with magnificent splendor,” Tuck said, his programmed

response to the truck drivers and cowboys who used that expression,
although he wondered where Malink had heard it. “But I’m a little
parched,” he said.

A fat young man named Vincent was pouring tonight and he handed

Tucker the coconut cup with a smile. Tuck sipped at first, fighting that first
gag, then gulped down the coconut liquor and gritted his teeth to keep it
from coming back up.

The older men in the group seemed festive and yattered back and forth

in their native language, but Tuck noticed that the younger men were
sulking, digging their toes into the sand like pouting little boys.

“Why so glum, guys? Someone kill you dog?”

“No,” Malink said, not quite understanding the question. “We eat a

turtle today.”

Having your dog killed must mean something different here than it

means back in Texas, Tuck realized.

Malink sensed Tuck’s confusion. “They are sad because the Sky

Priestess has chosen the mispel from their house and she will be gone many
days now.”

“Mispel?”

“The girl you followed last night is mispel of the bachelors’ house.”

“Sorry to hear that, guys,” Tuck said, acting as if he had the slightest

idea what a mispel or being chosen was. He figured that maybe it had
something to do with PMS. Maybe when the women started getting cranky
with the old Sky Priestess cramps, they just checked her into a special
“chosen” hut until she mellowed out. He waited until the cup came around
the circle before he brought it up again. “So she was chosen by the old Sky
Priestess, huh? Tough luck there. Did you try giving her chocolate? That
takes the edge off sometimes.”

“We give her special tuba when she comes,” Malink said.

“Tastes like shit!” several of the men chanted.

Abo, the fierce one, said, “I am chosen and now Sepie is chosen. I will

marry her.”

Several of the other young men seemed less than pleased at Abo’s

announcement.

“Come on, man,” Tuck said. “You might need a little attitude

adjustment, but you’re not chosen.”

“I am,” Abo insisted. “Look.” He turned his back to the group and ran

his finger across a long pink scar that ran diagonally across his ribs. “The
Sky Priestess chose me for Vincent in the time of the ripe breadfruit.”

Tuck stared at the scar, stunned, hoping that what he was thinking was

as far off as his PMS theory had been. “The Sky Priestess? That was the
music last night, all the noise?”

“Yes,” Malink said, “Vincent brings her in his airplane. We never see it,

but we hear it.”

“And when someone is chosen, then does the jet always fly the next

day?”

Malink nodded. “No one was chosen for a long time until Vincent sent

you to fly the white airplane. We thought Vincent was angry with us.”

Tuck looked to Abo, who seemed satisfied that the chief was backing

him up. “Where do you go when you are chosen?”

“You go to the white house where the Sorcerer lives. There are many

machine.”

“And then what? What happens in the white house?”

“It is secret.”

Tuck was across the circle in Abo’s face. “What happens there?”

Abo seemed frightened and turned away. Tuck looked around at the

other men. “Who else here has been chosen?”

The fat kid who had been pouring twisted so Tuck could see the scar on

his back.

“What’s your name, kid?”

“Vincent.”

“I should have known. Vincent, what happens in the white house?”

Young Vincent shook his head. Tuck turned to Malink. “What

happens?”

Malink shook his head. “I don’t know. I have not been chosen.”

A familiar voice called out of the dark, “They make them sleep.”

Everyone turned to see Kimi coming down the path from the village.

The old cannibal creaked along behind him.

Abo barked a reproach to Kimi in his native tongue. Kimi barked back

something in the same language. Tuck didn’t have to know the language to
know that Kimi had told the fierce one to fuck off.

“Kimi, are you okay?” Tuck barely recognized the navigator. He was

wearing the blue loincloth of the Shark men and he seemed to have put on
some muscle. Tuck was genuinely delighted to see him. The navigator ran
to him and threw his arms around the pilot. Tuck found himself returning
the embrace.

Several of the young men had stood and were glaring at Kimi. One of

the jugs of tuba had been kicked over, but no one seemed to notice the
liquor running out on the sand.

“Kimi, do you know what’s going on here?”

“A pretty white woman with yellow hair. She come out of the fence and

take the girl away. They will put her to sleep and when she wakes up she
will have a cut here.” He drew his finger across the back of his ribs.

“No!” Abo screamed. He leaped over the crouching Malink to get to

Kimi. Without thinking, Tuck swung around and caught Abo under the jaw
with a roundhouse punch. Abo’s feet flew out from under him and he
landed on his back. Tuck rubbed his hand. Abo tried to struggle to his feet
and Malink barked an order to two of the young Vincents. Reluctantly, they
restrained their friend. “Vincent has sent the pilot,” Malink reminded them.

Tuck turned back to Kimi. “What happens then?”

“You owe me five hundred dollars.”

“You’ll get it. What happens then?”

“The chosen has to stay in bed for many days. There are tube stuck in

them and they are in much pain. Then they come back.”

“That’s it?”

“Yes,” Kimi said.

Malink stood now and addressed Kimi. “How do you know this?”

Kimi shrugged. “Sepie tells me.”

Malink turned to Abo, who had stopped struggling and now looked

terrified. “She said she would not tell. The girl-man put a spell on her.”

Tuck stood rubbing his knuckles, watching this little tropical opera and

feeling like someone had snapped on a light and found him french-kissing a
maggoty corpse. The cooler, the surgical garb, the flights on short notice,
the second jet waiting on the tarmac in Japan, the guards, the secrecy, the
money. How had he been so fucking stupid?

Malink was hurling a string of native curses at Abo, who looked as if he

would burst into tears any second.

“You dumb motherfuckers!” Tuck shouted.

Malink stopped talking.

“She’s selling your kidneys. The doc is taking out your kidneys and

selling them in Japan.”

This revelation didn’t have quite the effect that Tuck thought it would.

In fact, he seemed to be the only one concerned about it at all.

“Did you hear me?”

Malink looked a little embarrassed. “What is a kidney?”

PART THREE
Coconut Angel

Bedfellows

Just before dawn, Tuck crawled through the bottom of the shower like a
homesick cockroach, scuttled out of the bathroom under the mosquito
netting and into bed. There were things to do, big things, important things,
maybe even dangerous things, but he had no idea what they were and he
was too tired and too drunk to figure them out now. He had tried, he had
really tried to convince the Shark men that the doctor and his wife were
doing horrible things to them, but the islanders always came back with the
same answer: “It is what Vincent wants. Vincent will take care of us.”

To hell with them, Tuck thought. Dumb bastards deserve what happens

to them.

He rolled over and pushed the coconut-headed dummy aside. The

dummy pushed back.

Tuck leaped out of bed, tripped in the mosquito netting, and scooted on

his butt like a man backing away from a snake.

And the dummy sat up.

Tuck couldn’t see the face in the predawn light filtering into the

bungalow, just a silhouette behind the mosquito netting, a shadow. And the
shadow wore a captain’s hat.

“Don’t think I don’t know what you’re thinking because I’ll give you

six to five I do.” The accent was somewhere out of a Bowery Boys movie,
and Tuck recognized the voice. He’d heard it in his head, he’d heard it in
the voice of a talking bat, and he’d heard it twice from a young flyer.

“You do?”

“Yeah, you’re thinking, ‘Hey, I never wanted to find a guy in my bed,

but if you got to find a guy in your bed, this is the guy I’d want it to be,’
right?”

“That’s not what I was thinking.”

“Then you shoulda taken odds, ya mook.”

“Who are you?”

The flyer threw back the mosquito netting and tossed something across

the room. Tuck flinched as it landed with a thump on the floor next to him.

“Pick it up.”

Tuck could just see an object shining by his knee. He picked up what

felt like a cigarette lighter.

“Read what it says,” the shadow said.

“I can’t. It’s dark.”

Tuck could see the flyer shaking his head dolefully.

“You know, I saw a guy in the war that got his head shot off about the

hat line. Docs did some hammering on some stainless steel and riveted it on
his noggin and saved his life, but the guy didn’t do nothing from that day
forward but walk around in a circle yanking his hamster and singing just the
‘row’ part of ‘Row, Row, Row Your Boat.’ They had to tape oven mitts on
him to keep him from rubbing himself raw. Now, I’m not saying that the
guy didn’t know how to have a good time, but he wasn’t much for
conversation, if you know what I mean.”

“That was a beautiful story,” Tuck said. “Why?”

“Because the steelhead hamster-pulling ‘row’ guy was a genius

compared to you. Light the fuckin’ lighter, ya mook.”

“Oh,” Tuck said and he flipped open the lighter and sparked it. By the

firelight he could read the engraving: VINCENT BENNIDETTI, CAPTAIN U.S.A.F.

Tuck looked back at the flyer, who was still caged in shadow, even

though the rest of the room had started to lighten. “You’re Vincent?”

The shadow gave a slight bow. “Not exactly in the flesh, but at your

fuckin’ service.”

“You’re Malink’s Vincent?”

“The same. I gave the chief the original of that lighter.”

“You could have just said so. You didn’t have to be so dramatic.” Tuck

was glad he was a little drunk. He didn’t feel frightened. As strange as it all
was, he felt safe. This guy—this thing, this spirit—had more or less saved
his life at least twice, maybe three times.

“I got responsibilities, kid, and so do you.”

“Responsibilities?” Now Tuck was frightened. It was a conditioned

response.

“Yeah, so when you get up later today, don’t go storming into the doc’s

office demanding the facts. Just go swimming. Cool off.”

“Go swimming?”

“Yeah, go to the far side of the reef and swim away from the direction

of the village about five hundred yards. Keep an eye out for sharks outside
of the reef.”

“Why?”

“A guy appears out of nowhere in the middle of the night saying all

kinds of mystical shit and you ask why?”

“Yeah. Why?”

“Because I said so,” Vincent said.

“My dad always said that. Are you the ghost of my dad?”

The shade slapped his forehead. “Repeat after me—and don’t be getting

any on you, now—one and two and three and ‘Row, row, row, row, row…’”
He started to fade away with the chant.

“Wait,” Tuck said. “I need to know more than that.”

“Stay on the sly, kid. You don’t know as much as you think you do.”

“But…”

“You owe me.”

He pulled on his fins and bowed to them as he backed into the water.

“May your nads shrivel like raisins,” he said with a smile.

They bowed back, more out of reflex than respect.

The far side of the reef and five hundred yards down: The ninjas were

going to have a fit. He’d never gone to the ocean side of the reef. Inside was
a warm clear aquamarine where you could always see the bottom and the
fish seemed, if not friendly, at least not dangerous. But the ocean side, past
the surf, was a dark cobalt blue, as deep and liquid as a clear night sky. The
colorful reef fish must look like M&Ms to the hunters of the deep blue,
Tuck thought. The outer edge of the reef is the candy dish of monsters.

He kicked slowly out to the reef, letting the light surge lift and drop him

as he watched the multicolored links in the food chain dart around the
bottom. A trigger fish, painted in tans and blues that seemed more at home
in the desert, was crunching the legs off of a crab while smaller fish darted
in to steal the floating crumbs. He pulled up and looked at the only visible
break in the reef, a deep blue channel, and headed toward it. He’d have to
go out to the ocean side and swim the five hundred yards there, otherwise
the breaking surf would dash him against the coral when he tried to swim
over the reef.

He put his face in the water and kicked out of the channel until the

bottom disappeared, then, once past the surf line, turned and swam parallel
to the reef. It was like swimming in space at the edge of a canyon. He could
see the reef sloping down a hundred and fifty feet to disappear into a blue
blur. He tried to keep his bearing on the reef, let his eye bounce from coral
fan to anemone to nudibranch to eel, like visual stepping-stones, because to
his left there was no reference, nothing but empty blue, and when he looked
there he felt like a child watching for a strange face at the window, so
convinced and terrified it would come that any shape, any movement, any
play of light becomes a horror. He saw a flash out the side of his mask and
whipped around in time to see a harmless green parrot fish munching coral.
He sucked a mouthful of water into his submerged snorkel and choked.

He hovered in a dead man’s float for a full minute before he could

breathe normally and start kicking his way up the reef again, this time
resolved to faith. Whatever, whoever Vincent was, he had saved Tuck’s life,
and he knew things. He wouldn’t have gone to the trouble to have Tuck
eaten by barracudas.

Tuck ticked off his stepping-stones, trying to gauge how far he had

come. He would have to go out farther to see past the rising surf and use the
shore as a reference, and besides, what was above the water’s surface was
irrelevant. This was a foreign world, and he was an uninvited guest.

Then another flash, but this time he fought the panic. Sunlight on

something metal about thirty feet down the slope of the reef. Something
waving in the surge near the flash. He rested a second, gathered his breath,
and dove, swooping down to grab the object just as he recognized what it
was: a set of military dog tags on a beaded metal chain. He shot to the
surface and hovered as he caught his breath and read: SOMMERS, JAMES W.
James Sommers was a Presbyterian, according to the dog tag. Somehow
Tuck didn’t think that a thousand-yard swim was worth finding a pair of
dog tags. But there was the swath of fabric still down there. Tuck hadn’t
gotten a good look at it.

He tucked the tags into the inside pocket of his trunks and dove again.

He kicked down to the swath of cloth, holding his nose and blowing to
equalize the pressure on his ears, even as the air in his lungs tried to pull
him to the surface, away from his prize. It was some kind of printed cotton.
He grasped at it and a piece came away in his hand. He pulled again, but the
cloth was wedged into a crevice in the reef. He yanked and the cloth came
away, revealing something white. Out of breath, he shot to the surface and
examined the cloth. Flying piggies. Oh, good. He’d risked his life for
Presbyterian dog tags and a flying piggies print.

One more dive and he saw what it was that had wedged into the crevice:

a human pelvic bone. Whatever else had been here had been carried away,
but this bone had wedged and been picked clean. Someone wearing flying
piggies boxers had become part of the food chain.

The swim back to the channel seemed longer and slower, but this time

Tuck forgot his fear of what might lurk behind the vasty blue. The real
danger lay back on shore.

And how does one, over dinner, proffer the opinion that one’s

employers are murdering organ thieves? “Stay on the sly,” Vincent had said.
And so far he seemed to know what he was talking about.

Boiling the Puppets

“Oh, come in, Mr. Case. Sebastian is out on the lanai.” She wore a white
raw silk pant suit, cut loose in the legs and low at the neck, a rope of pearls
with matching earrings. Her hair was tied back with a white satin bow and
she moved before him like the ghost of good housekeeping. “How do you
feel about Pacific lobster?”

“I like it,” Tuck said, looking for some sign from her that she knew that

he knew. There was no acknowledgment of her appearance in his room last
night or that she had any suspicion of him at all. Tuck said, “I feel like I’m
taking advantage coming to dinner empty-handed. I ought to have you and
the doc over to my place some evening.”

“Oh, do you cook too, Mr. Case?”

“A few things. My specialty is blackened Pez.”

“A Cajun dish?”

“I learned to make it in Texas, actually.”

“A Tex-Mex specialty, then.”

“Well, a fifth of tequila does make it taste a little better.”

She laughed, a polite hostess laugh, and said, “Can I get you something

to drink?”

“You mean a drink or some liquid?”

“I’m sorry. It does seem constraining, I’m sure, but you understand, you

might have to fly.”

She had a large glass of white wine on the counter where she had been

working. Tuck looked at it and said, “But performing major surgery under
the influence is no problem, right?” That was subtle, Tuck thought. Very
smooth. I am a dead man.

Her eyes narrowed, but the polite smile never left her lips. “Sebastian,”

she called, “you’d better come in, dear. I think Mr. Case has something he
wants to discuss with us.”

Sebastian Curtis came through the french doors looking tall and

dignified, his gray hair brushed back, his tan face striking against the gray.
To Tuck he looked like any number of executives one might see at a yacht
club, a retired male model perhaps, a Shakespearean actor finally finished
with the young prince and lover roles, seasoned and ready to play Caesar,
Lear, or more appropriately, Prospero, the banished wizard of The Tempest.

Tuck, still in his borrowed clothes, baggy and rolled at the cuffs, felt

like a beggar. He fought to hold on to his righteous indignation, which was
an unfamiliar emotion to him anyway.

Sebastian Curtis said, “Mr. Case. Nice to see you. Beth and I were just

talking about how pleased we are with your work. I’m sure these
impromptu flights are difficult.”

“Mr. Case was just suggesting that we keep an eye on our alcohol

consumption,” Beth Curtis said. “Just in case we might have to perform an
emergency surgery.”

The jovial manner dropped from the doctor like a veil. “And just what

kind of surgery might you be referring to?”

Tuck looked at the floor. He should have thought this through a little

more. He fingered the dog tags in his pocket. The plan was to throw them
on the table and demand an explanation. What had happened to the
skeleton, the owner of the tags? And for that matter, what would happen to
Tucker Case if he threw this in their faces? Mary Jean used to say, “In
negotiations, always leave yourself a way out. You can always come back
later.”

Go slow, Tuck told himself. He said, “Doc, I’m concerned about the

flights. I should know what we’re carrying in case we’re detained by the
authorities. What’s in the cooler?”

“But I told you, you’re carrying research samples.”

“What kind of samples?” It was time to play a card. “I’m not flying

again until I know.”

Sebastian Curtis shot a glance at his wife, then looked back to Tucker.

“Perhaps we should sit down and have a talk.” He pulled a chair out for
Tucker. “Please.” Tuck sat. The doctor repeated the gesture for his wife and
then sat down next to her, across the table from Tuck.

“I’ve been on Alualu for twenty-eight years, Mr. Case.”

“What does that have to do…?”

Curtis held up a hand. “Hear me out. If you want answers, you have to

take them in the context that I give them.”

“Okay.”

“My family didn’t have the money for medical school, so I took a

scholarship from the Methodist Missions, on the condition that I work for
them when I graduated and go where they sent me. They sent me here. I
was full of myself and full of the Spirit of the Lord. I was going to bring
God and healing to the heathens of the Pacific. There hadn’t been a
Christian missionary on the island since World War II, and I was warned
that there might be a residual Catholic influence, but the Methodists have

liberal ideas about spreading the Word of God. A Methodist missionary
works with the culture he finds. But I didn’t find a Catholic population here.
What I found was a population that worshipped the memory of an
American pilot and his bomber.”

“A cargo cult,” Tuck said, hoping to move things along.

“Then you know about them. Yes, a cargo cult. The strongest I’d ever

heard of. Fortunately for me, it wasn’t based on the hatred of whites like the
cargo cults in New Guinea. They loved Americans and everything that
came from America. They took my medicine, the tools I brought, food,
reading material, everything I offered them, except, of course, the Word of
God. And I was good to them. The natives on this island are the healthiest
in the Pacific. Partly because they are so isolated that communicable
diseases don’t reach them, but I take some credit for it as well.”

“So that’s why you don’t let them have any contact with the ship when

it arrives?”

“No, well, that is one of the reasons, but mainly I wanted to keep them

away from the ship’s store.”

“Why?”

“Because the store offered them things that I couldn’t or wouldn’t give

them, and the store only accepted money. Money was becoming an icon in
their religion. I heard drums in the village one night and went into the
village to find all the women crouched around a fire holding wooden bowls
with a few coins in the bottom. They were oiled and waving their heads as
if in a trance, and as the drummers played, the men, wearing masks
fashioned to look like the faces on American currency, moved around
behind the women, copulating with them and chanting. It was a fertility
ceremony to make the money in the bowls multiply so they could buy
things from the ship’s store.”

“Well, it does sound better than getting a job,” Tuck said.

Curtis didn’t see the humor. “By forbidding them to have contact with

the ship, I thought I could kill the cargo cult, but it didn’t work. I would talk
of Jesus, and the miracles that he performed, and how he would save them,
and they would ask me if I had seen him. Because they had seen their
savior. Their pilot had saved them from the Japanese. Jesus had just told
them that they had to give up their customs and taboos. Christianity
couldn’t compete. But I still tried. I gave them the best care I could. But
after five years, the Methodist Missions sent a group of officials to check on
my progress. They cut my funding and wanted to send me home, but I
decided to stay and try to do the best I could without their support.”

“He was afraid to leave,” Beth Curtis said.

Sebastian Curtis looked as if he was going to strike his wife. “That’s not

true, Beth.”

“Sure it is. You hadn’t been off this island in years. You forgot how to

live with real people.”

“They are real people.”

As amusing as it was to watch the perfect couple illusion go up in

flames before his eyes, Tuck put out the fire. “A Learjet and millions in
electronics. Looks like you did pretty good with no funding, Doc.”

“I’m sorry.” And he looked as if he was. “I tried to make it on what the

islanders could raise by selling copra, but it wasn’t enough. I lost one of my
patients, a little boy, because I didn’t have the funds to fly him to a hospital
that could give him the care he needed. I tried harder to convert the natives,
thinking I might get another mission to sponsor us, but how can you
compete with a Messiah people have actually spoken to?”

Tuck didn’t answer. Having spoken to the “Messiah” himself, he was

convinced already.

Sebastian Curtis drained his glass of wine and continued. “I sent letters

to churches, foundations, and corporations all over the world. Then one day
a plane landed out on the airstrip and some Japanese businessmen got out.

They wouldn’t fund the clinic out of charity, but if I could get every able-
bodied islander to give blood every two weeks, then they would help. And
every two weeks the plane came and picked up three hundred pints of
blood. I got twenty-five American dollars for every pint.”

“How’d you talk the natives into it? I’ve given blood. It’s not that

pleasant.”

“They were coming on a plane, remember? Airplanes are a big part of

these people’s religion.”

“If you can’t beat ’em, join ’em, huh?”

“They always brought something on the plane for the natives. Rice,

machetes, cooking pots. I got all the medicines I needed and I was able to
get the materials to build most of this compound.”

Beth Curtis stood up. “Oh, as much as I love hearing this story, I think

we should eat. Excuse me.” She went to the kitchen area, where a large pot
was boiling on the stove, reached into a wooden crate on the floor, and
came up with a large live lobster in each hand. The giant sea bugs waved
their legs and antennae around looking for purchase. Beth Curtis held them
over the pot, puppeting them. “Oh, Steve, you got us a room with a hot tub.
How wonderful,” she made the left lobster say.

“Yes, I’m very romantic,” she said in a deeper voice, bouncing the bug

with the words. “Let’s go in now. I’m a little tense.”

“Oh, you’re wonderful.” Then she dropped the lobsters into the boiling

water.

A high-pitched squeal came from the pot and Beth Curtis went to the

crate for another victim.

“Beth, please,” the doctor said.

“I’m just trying to lighten things up a little, ’Bastian. Be still.”

She held the second lobster over the pot, then looked at Tucker as she

began her narration. “This is the crazed doctor talking. There’s always a
crazed megalomaniacal doctor. It’s traditional.”

Sebastian Curtis stood up. “Stop it, Beth!”

She affected a German accent. “You see, Mr. Bond, a man spends too

much time on an island alone, he changes. He loses his faith. He begins to
think of ways to improve his lot. My associates in Japan came to me with a
proposal. They would send me to a seminar in San Francisco to brush up on
organ transplant surgery. I would no longer be selling blood for pocket
change. They would send me specific orders for kidneys, and I could
deliver them within hours for a cool half-million apiece. A dying man will
pay a lot for a healthy kidney. In San Francisco I met a woman, a beautiful
woman.” Beth came out of character for a moment, grinned, and bowed
quickly, then went back to terrorizing the lobster. “I brought her here, and it
was she who devised the plan to get the natives to comply with having their
organs removed. Not only beautiful, but a genius as well, and she had a
degree as a surgical nurse. She used her abundant charms on the natives”—
she held the lobster where it could have a good view of her cleavage—“and
the savages were more than happy to donate a kidney. Meanwhile, I have
become rich beyond my wildest dreams, and as for you, Mr. Bond, now it’s
time for you to die.” She dropped the lobster into the pot and began to
shake with a diabolical laugh. She stopped laughing abruptly and said,
“They should be ready in about ten minutes. Salad, Mr. Case?”

Tuck couldn’t think. Somewhere in that little puppet show of the

damned was a confession to cutting out people’s organs and selling them
like so much meat, and the doctor’s wife not only didn’t seem to have any
regrets about it, she was absolutely gleeful. Sebastian Curtis, on the other
hand, had his head down on the table, and when he did look up, he couldn’t
make eye contact with Tuck. A minute passed in uncomfortable silence.
Beth Curtis seemed to be waiting for someone to shout “Encore!” while the
good doctor gathered his wits.

“What I’d like you to understand, Mr. Case, is that I—we—couldn’t

have taken care of these people without the funds we’ve received for what
we do. They would have no modern medical care at all.”

Tuck was thinking again, trying to measure what he could say and what

he wasn’t willing to reveal. He couldn’t let them know that he knew
anything at all about the Shark People, and, as Vincent had implied, he’d
better find out more before he threw down the dog tags and Pardee’s
notebook. The doc was obviously stretched pretty tight by the situation, and
Mrs. Curtis—well, Mrs. Curtis was just fucking scary. Play it chilly. They’d
brought him here because they thought he was as twisted as they were. No
sense in ruining his image.

“I understand.” Tuck said. “I wish you’d been a little more up front

about it, but I think I get all the secrecy now. But what I want to know is:
Why can’t I drink if you guys do? I mean, if you guys can perform major
surgery when you’re half in the bag, then I can fly a plane.”

Beth said, “We wanted to help you with your substance abuse problem.

We thought that if you weren’t exposed to other drinkers that you’d relapse
when you went back home.”

“Very thoughtful of you,” Tuck said. “But when exactly am I supposed

to go home?”

“When we’re finished,” she said.

The doctor nodded. “Yes, we were going to tell you, but we wanted you

to become used to the routine. We wanted to see if you could handle the job
first. We’re going to do the operations until we have a hundred million, then
we will invest it on behalf of the islanders. The proceeds will assure we can
continue our work and that the Shark People will be taken care of as long as
they are here.”

Tuck laughed. “Right. You’re not taking anything for yourself. This is

all a mercy mission.”

“No, we may leave, but there’ll be enough to keep someone running this

clinic and shipping in food and supplies forever. And then there’s your
bonus.”

“Go,” Tuck said. “Go ahead.”

“The plane.”

Tuck raised an eyebrow. “The plane?”

“If you stay until we finish our work, we will sign the plane over to you,

plus your salary and any other bonuses you’ve accumulated. You can go
anywhere in the world you want, start a charter business if you want, or just
sell it and live comfortably for the rest of your life.”

Tuck shook his head. Of all the weirdness that had gone on so far, this

seemed like the weirdest, if only because the doctor seemed so earnest. It
might have had something to do with the fact that it was one of those things
that a guy hopes all his life he is going to hear, but convinces himself that
it’s never going to happen. These people were going to give him his own
Learjet.

He didn’t want to do it, he fought not to do it, he strained, but

nevertheless, Tuck couldn’t stop himself from asking. “Why?”

“Because we can’t do it without you, and this is something that you

can’t get any other way. And because we’d rather keep you than have to
find another pilot and lose the time.”

“What if I say no?”

“Then, you understand, we’d have to ask you to leave and you would

keep the money that you’ve already earned.”

“And I can just go?”

“Of course. As you know, you are not our first pilot. He decided to

move on. But then again, we didn’t make him this offer.”

“What was your first pilot’s name?”

The doctor shot a look at his wife. She said, “Giordano, he was Italian.

Why?”

“The aviation community is pretty small. I thought I might know him.”

“Do you?” she said and there was too much sincerity in the question for

Tuck to believe that she didn’t know the answer.

“No.”

Sebastian Curtis cleared his throat and forced a smile. “So what do you

think? How would you like to own your own Learjet, Mr. Case?”

Tuck sat staring at the open wine bottle, measuring what he could say,

what answer they not only wanted to hear, but had to hear if he was going to
leave the island alive. He extended his hand for the doctor to shake. “I think
you’ve got yourself a pilot. Let’s drink to the deal.”

An electronic bell trilled from the bedroom and the doctor and his wife

exchanged glances. “I’ll take care of it,” Beth Curtis said. She stood and put
her napkin on the table.

“Excuse me, Mr. Case, but we have a patient in the clinic who requires

my attention.” Then the whiplash mood swing from officious to acid. “She
presses that buzzer so much you’d think it was attached to her clit.”

Sebastian Curtis looked at Tuck and shrugged apologetically.

Revealed: The Perfect Couple

Back at his bungalow, an argument went on in the still-sober brain of
Tucker Case.

I am scum. I should have told them to shove it.

But they might have killed you.

Yeah, but I would have at least had my integrity.

Your what? Get real.

But I’m scum.

Big deal. You’ve been scum before. You’ve never owned a Learjet

before.

You actually think they’ll give me the jet?

It could happen. Stranger things have happened.

But I should do something about this.

Why? You’ve never done anything before.

Well, maybe it’s time.

No way. Take the jet.

I’m scum.

Well, yes, you are. But you’re rich scum.

I can live with that.

The dog tags and Jefferson Pardee’s notebook lay on the coffee table,

threatening to set off another fusillade of doubt and condemnation. Tuck lay
back on the rattan couch and turned on the television to escape the noise in
his mind. Skinny Asian guys were beating the snot out of each other in a
kickboxing match from the Philippines. The Malaysian channel was
showing how to fillet a schnauzer. The cooking show reminded him of
surgery, and surgery reminded him that there was a beautiful island girl
lying in the clinic, recovering from an unnecessary major surgery that he
could have prevented. Definitely kickboxing.

He was just getting into the rhythm of the violence when the bat came

through the window and made an awkward swinging landing on one of the
bungalow’s open rafters. Tuck lost his breath for a minute, thinking there
might just be a wild animal in his house. Then he saw the sunglasses.

Roberto steadied himself into a slightly swinging upside-down hang.

Tuck sighed. “Please just be a bat in sunglasses tonight. Please.”

Thankfully, the bat said nothing. The sunglasses were sliding off his

nose.

“How do you fly in those things?” Tuck said, thinking out loud.

“They’re aviators.”

“Of course,” Tuck said. The bat had indeed changed from rhinestone

glasses to aviators, but once you accept a talking bat, the leap to a talking
bat with an eyewear wardrobe is a short one.

Roberto dropped from the rafter and took wing just before he hit the

floor. Two beats of his wings and he was on the coffee table, as awkward in
his spiderlike crawl as he was graceful in the air. With his wing claw, he
raked at Jefferson Pardee’s notebook until it was open to the middle, then he
launched himself and flew out the window.

Tuck picked up the notebook and read what Pardee had written. Tuck

had missed this page when he had looked at the notebook before. This page
had been stuck to the one before it; the bat’s clawing had revealed it. It was
a list of leads that Pardee had made for the story he had been working on.
The second item read: “What happened to the first pilot, James Sommers?
Call immigration in Yap and Guam.” Tuck flipped through the notebook to
see if he had missed something else. Had Pardee found out? Of course he
had. He’d found out and he’d followed Sommers to the last place anyone
had seen him. But where was Pardee? His notebook hadn’t come to the
island without him.

Tuck went through the notebook three more times. There were some

foreign names and phone numbers. Something that looked like a packing
list for a trip. Some notes on the background of Sebastian Curtis. Notes to
check up on Japanese with guns. The word “Learjet” underlined three
times. And nothing else. There didn’t seem to be any organizational form to
the notes. Just random facts, names, places, and dates. Dates? Tuck went
through it once more. On the third page in, all by itself, was printed:
“Alualu, Sept. 9.”

Tuck ran to the nightstand drawer, where the Curtises had left him a

calendar. He counted back the days to the ninth and tried to put events to
days. The ship had arrived on the ninth, and the morning of the tenth he had
made his first flight. Jefferson Pardee could be lying in the clinic right now,
wondering where in the hell his kidney was. If he was, Tuck needed to see
him.

Tuck looked in the closet for something dark to wear. This was going to

be different than sneaking out to the village. There were no buildings
between the guards’ quarters and the clinic, no trees, nothing but seventy-
five yards of open compound. Darkness would be his only cover.

In the movies the spies—the Navy SEALS, the Special Forces, the

demolition experts—always sneak through the night in their wet suits. Why,
Tuck wondered, don’t they squish and slosh and make squeaking raspberry
noises when they creep? Must be special training. You never hear James
Bond say, “Frankly, Q, I’ll trade the laser-guided cufflink missiles for a wet
suit that doesn’t make me feel like a bloody bag of catsick.” Which is how
Tuck felt as he sloshed around the side of the clinic and peeked across the
compound at the guard on duty, who seemed to be looking right at him.

Tuck pulled back around the corner. He needed a diversion if he was

going to make it to the clinic door unseen. The moon was bright, the sky
clear, and the compound of white coral gravel reflected enough light to read
by.

He heard the guard shout, and he was sure he’d been spotted. He

flattened against the wall and held his breath. Then there were more
Japanese from across the compound, but no footsteps. He ventured a peek.
The guard was gesturing toward the sky and brushing his head. Two other
guards had joined him and were laughing at the guard on duty. He seemed
to get angrier, cursing at the sky and wiping his hand on his uniform. The
other guards led him inside to calm him down and clean him up.

Tuck heard a bark from the sky and looked up to see the silhouette of a

huge bat against the moon. Roberto had delivered a guano air strike. Tuck
had his diversion.

He slipped around the front of the building, grabbed the doorknob, and

turned. It was unlocked. Given Beth Curtis’s irritation at being buzzed and
the amount of wine she’d consumed, Tuck had guessed that she’d get tired

locking and unlocking the door. What did Mary Jean always say? “Ladies,
if you do your job and assume that everyone else is incompetent, you will
seldom be disappointed.” Amen, Tuck thought.

He squished into the outer room of the clinic, which was dark except for

the red-eyed stare of a half-dozen machines and the dancing glow of a
computer screen running a screen saver. He’d try to get into that later, but
now he was interested in what, or who, lay in the small hospital ward, two
rooms back.

He sloshed into the examination/operating room by the light of more

LED eyes and pushed through the curtain to the four-bed ward. Only one
bed held a patient—or what looked like a patient. The only light was a
green glow from a heart monitor that blipped away silently, the sound
turned off. Whoever was in the bed was certainly large enough to be
Jefferson Pardee. There were a couple of IVs hanging above the patient.
Probably painkillers after such major surgery, Tuck thought.

He moved closer and ventured a whisper. “Pst, Pardee.”

The lump under the covers moved and moaned in a distinctly

unmasculine voice. “Pardee, it’s Tucker Case. Remember?”

The sheet was thrown back and Tuck saw a thin male face in the green

glow. “Kimi?”

“Hi, Tucker.” Kimi looked down at the other person under the covers.

“You remember Tucker? He all better now.”

The pretty island girl said, “I take care of you when you sick. You stink

very much.”

Tuck backed off a step. “Kimi, what are you doing here?”

“Well, she like pretty thing, and I like pretty thing. She tired of having

many means and so am I. We have a lot in common.”

“He the best,” Sepie added with an adoring smile at Kimi.

Kimi handed the smile off to Tuck. “Once you be a woman, you know

how to make a woman happy.”

Tuck was getting over the initial surprise and began to smell the smoke

of his beautiful island girl fantasy as it caught fire and burned to ash. He
hadn’t realized how much time he’d spent thinking about this girl. She, after
all, was the one who had revived his manhood. Sort of.

“You right,” Kimi said. “Women are better. I am lesbian now.”

“You shouldn’t be doing this. This girl just had major surgery.”

“Oh, we not doing nothing but kissing. She very hurt. But this make it

better.” Kimi held his arm up, displaying an IV line. “You want to try? Put
in you arm and push button. It make you feel very very nice.”

“That’s for her, Kimi. You shouldn’t be using it.”

“We share,” Sepie said.

“Yes, we share,” Kimi said.

“I’m very happy for you. How in the hell did you get in here?”

“Like you get out. I swim around mimes and come here to see Sepie.

No problem.”

“You don’t want to let them catch you. You’ve got to go. Now.”

“One more push.” Sepie held the button, ready to administer another

dose of morphine to Kimi.

Tuck grabbed it from her hand. “No. Go now. How did you know about

the mines?”

“I have other friend. Sarapul. I teach him how to be a navigator. He

know a lot of things too. He a cannibal.”

“You’re a cannibal lesbian?”

“Just learning. How come you have rubber suit? You kinky?”

“Sneaky. Look, Kimi, have you seen a fat white guy, an American?”

“No, but Sarapul see him. He see the guards take him from the beach.

He not here?”

“No. I found his notebook. I met him on Truk.”

“Sarapul say he see the guards bring him to the Sorcerer. He say it very

funny, the white man wear pigs with wings.”

Tuck felt his face go numb. All that was left of Pardee was a pelvic

bone wedged in the reef, stripped of flesh and wrapped in flying piggy
shorts. Oh, there might be the odd kidney left alive in someone in Japan, a
kidney that he had delivered. Had the fat man died on the operating table
during the operation, the surgery too much for his heart? Or was he put
under and never meant to wake up?

Tuck suddenly felt that getting into the doctor’s computer was more

important than ever. He grabbed Kimi’s arm and pulled the IV needle out of
his vein. The navigator didn’t resist, and he didn’t seem to feel it.

“Kimi, see if you can get that back in Sepie’s arm and come with me.”

“Okay boss.”

Tuck looked down at the girl, who had evidently picked up on the panic

in his voice. Her eyes were wide, despite the morphine glaze. “Don’t buzz
the doctor until after we’re gone. This button will let you have only so
much morphine, and Kimi’s used some of yours. But if it hurts, you still
have to wait, okay?”

She nodded. Kimi crawled out of the bed and nearly fell. Tuck caught

him by the arm and steadied him.

“I am chosen,” Sepie said. “When Vincent comes, he will give me many

pretty things.”

Tuck brushed back her hair with his fingers. “Yes, he will. You sleep

now. And thank you for taking care of me when I was sick.”

Kimi kissed the girl and after a minute Tuck pulled him away and led

him through the operating room to the office section of the clinic. In the
glow of the computer screen, Tuck said, “Kimi, the doctor and his wife are
killing people.”

“No, they not. They sent by Vincent. Sepie say Vincent come from

Heaven to bring people many good things. They very poor.”

“No, Kimi, they are bad people. Like Malcolme. They are taking

advantage of Sepie’s people. They are just pretending to be working for a
god.”

“How you know? You no believe in God.”

Tuck took the boy by the shoulders. He was no longer angry or even

irritated, he was afraid, and for the first time ever, not just for himself.
“Kimi, can you swim back around the mines?”

“I think.”

“You’ve got to go to the other side of the island and you can’t come

back. If the guards find you I’m pretty sure you’ll be killed.”

“You just want Sepie for yourself. She tell me you follow her.”

“I’ll check on her and I’ll meet you at the drinking circle tomorrow

night—tell you how she’s doing. I won’t touch her, I promise. Okay?”

“Okay.” Kimi leaned against the wall by the door.

Tuck studied him for a moment to try and determine just how fucked up

he was. It wasn’t a difficult swim. Tuck had done it stone drunk, but he’d
been wearing fins and a mask and snorkel. “You’re sure you can swim?”

Kimi nodded and Tuck cracked the door. The moon had moved across

the sky throwing the front of the clinic in shadow. The guard across the

compound was reading a magazine by flashlight. “When you get outside, go
left and get behind the building.” The navigator stepped out, slid down the
side of the building and around the corner. Tuck heard him trip and fall and
swear softly in Filipino.

“Shit,” Tuck said to himself. He glanced at the computer. It would have

to wait. He slid out the door, palming it shut behind him, then followed the
navigator around the building. He heard the guard shout from across the
compound, and for once in his life, Tuck made a definitive decision. He
grabbed the navigator under the arms and ran.

Confessions Over Tee

Tucker Case dreamed of machine-gun fire and jerked as the bullets ripped
into his back. He tossed forward into the dirt, mouth filling with sand,
smothering him as the life drained out of a thousand ragged wounds, and
still the guns kept firing, the rhythmic reports pounding like a violet storm
of timpanis, like a persistent fist on a rickety door.

“Just let me die!” Tuck screamed, most of the sound caught by his

pillow.

It was a persistent fist on a rickety door. “Mr. Case, rise and shine,” said

a cheery Sebastian Curtis. “Ten minutes to tee time.”

Tuck rolled into the mosquito netting, became entangled, and ripped it

from the ceiling. He was still wearing his wet suit and the fragile netting
clung to it like cobwebs. He arrived at the door looking like a tattered ghost
fresh out of Davy Jones’s locker.

“What? I can’t fly. I can’t even fucking walk. Go away.” Tuck was not a

morning person.

Sebastian Curtis stood in the doorway beaming. “It’s Wednesday,” he

said. “I thought you might want to play a few holes.”

Tuck looked at the doctor through bloodshot eyes and several layers of

torn mosquito netting. Behind Curtis stood one of the guards, sans machine
gun, with a golf bag slung over his shoulder. “Golf?” Tuck said. “You want
to play golf?”

“It’s a different game here on Alualu, Mr. Case. Quite challenging. But

then, you’ve been practicing, haven’t you?”

“Look, Doc, I didn’t sleep well last night…”

“Could be the wet suit, if you don’t mind my saying. Here in the tropics,

you want fabrics that breathe. Cotton is best.”

Tuck was beginning to come around, and as he did, he found he was

focusing an intense hatred on the doctor. “I guess we know who got laid last
night.”

Curtis looked down and smiled coyly. He was actually embarrassed.

Tuck couldn’t quite put it together. The doc didn’t seem to have any
problem with killing people or taking their organs—or both—but he was
blushing at the mention of sex with his wife. Tuck glared at him.

Curtis said, “You’d better change. The first tee is out in front of the

hangar. I’ll go down and practice a few drives while you get dressed.”

“You do that,” Tuck said. He slammed the door.

Twenty minutes later Tuck, his hair still wet from the shower, joined

Curtis and the guard in front of the hangar. He was feeling the weight of
three nights with almost no sleep, and his back ached from dragging Kimi
across the compound, then towing him in the water to the far side of the
minefield. The guard had never caught up to them, but he had come to the
edge of the water and shouted, waving his machine gun until Tuck and
Kimi were out of sight.

“We’ll have to share a set of clubs,” Curtis said. “But perhaps now that

you’ve decided to stay, we can order you a set.”

“Swell,” Tuck said. He couldn’t be sure, but he thought the guard might

be the same one that had chased them to the beach. Tuck sneered at him and
he looked away. Yep, he was the one.

“This is Mato. He’ll be caddying for us today.”

The guard bowed slightly. Tuck saluted him with a middle finger. If the

doctor saw the gesture, he didn’t comment. He was lining the ball up on a
small square of Astro Turf with a rubberized pad on the bottom. “We have
to hit off of this. At least until someone invents a gravel wedge.” He
laughed at his own joke.

Tuck forced a smile.

“The Shark People covered this entire island with gravel hundreds of

years ago. Keeps the topsoil from being washed away in typhoons. This
first hole is a dogleg to the left. The pin is behind the staff’s quarters about
a hundred yards.”

“Doc, now that we’ve come clean, why don’t we call them the guards?”

“Very well, Mr. Case. Would you like honors?”

“Call me Tuck. No, you go ahead.”

Curtis hit a long bad hook that arced around the guards’ quarters and

landed out of sight in a stand of palm trees behind the building.

“I have to admit that I may have a bit of an advantage. I’ve laid out the

course to accommodate my stroke. Most of the holes are doglegs to the
left.”

Tuck nodded as if he understood what Curtis was talking about, then

took the driver from the doctor and hit his own shot, a grounder that
skipped across the gravel to stop fifty yards in front of them. “Oh, bad luck.
Would you like to take a McGuffin?”

“Blow me, Doc,” Tuck said as he walked away toward his ball.

“I guess not, then.”

“Beth is quite a woman, isn’t she? Did I tell you how we met?”

“Yeah.”

“I was at a transplant symposium in San Francisco. Beth is quite the

nurse, the best I’ve ever seen in an operating room, but she wasn’t working
as a nurse when I met her.”

“Oh, good,” Tuck said.

Curtis seemed to be waiting for Tucker to ask. Tucker was waiting for

the guard to rat him out for sneaking out of the compound last night.

“She was a dancer in North Beach. An exotic dancer.”

“No shit.” Tuck said.

“Are you shocked?” Curtis obviously wanted him to be shocked.

“No.”

“She was incredible. The most incredible woman I had ever seen. She

still is.”

“But then, you’ve been a missionary on a remote island for twenty-eight

years,” Tuck said.

Curtis picked his club for the next shot: the seven iron. “What’s this?”

“Looks like blood and feathers,” Tuck said.

Curtis handed the club to Mato for him to clean it. “Beth did a dance

with surgical tubing and a stethoscope that took my breath away.”

“Pretty common,” Tuck said. “Choke you with the surgical tubing and

use the stethoscope to make sure you haven’t done the twitching fish.”

“Really?” Curtis said. “You’ve seen a woman do that?”

Tuck put on his earnest young man face. “Seen? You didn’t notice the

ligature marks on my neck when you examined me?”

“Oh, I see,” Curtis said. “Still, I, at least, had never seen anything like

it. She…” Curtis couldn’t seem to return to his story. “The wet suit this
morning. Was that a sexual thing? I mean, most people would find it
uncomfortable.”

“No, I’m just trying to lose a little weight.”

Curtis looked serious now. “I don’t know if that’s such a good idea.

You’re still very thin from your ordeal in getting here.”

“I’d like to get down to about eight pounds,” Tuck said. “There’s a big

Gandhi revival thing going on back in the States. Guys who look like
they’re starving have to beat the babes off with a stick. Started with female
fashion models, but now it’s moved to the men.”

Curtis look embarrassed. “I guess I’m a bit out of touch. Beth tries to

keep up with what’s going on in the States, but it, well, seems irrelevant out
here. I guess I’ll be glad when this is all over and we can leave the island.”

“Then why don’t you just leave? You’re a physician. You could open up

a practice in the States and pull down a fortune without all this.”

Curtis glanced at the guard, then looked back to Tuck. “A fortune

maybe, but not a fortune like we’re accumulating now. I’m too old to start
over at the bottom.”

“You’ve got twenty-eight years’ experience. You said yourself that the

people you take care of are the healthiest in the Pacific. You wouldn’t be
starting over.”

“Yes, I would. Mr. Case—Tuck—I’m a doctor, but I’m not a very good

one.”

Tuck had met a number of doctors in his life, but he had never met one

who could bear to admit that he was incompetent at anything. It was a
running joke among flight instructors that doctors made the worst students.
“They think they’re gods. It’s our job to teach them that they’re mortal.
Only pilots are gods.”

This guy seemed so pathetic that Tuck had to remind himself that the

good doctor was at least a double murderer. He watched Curtis hit a nice
hundred-yard bloodstained seven iron to within ten feet of the pin, which
was set up on a small patch of grass near the beach.

Tuck chased down his own skidding thwack of a nine iron that had

landed between the roots of a walking tree, an arboreal oddity that sat atop a
three-foot teepee of tangled roots and gave the impression that it might
move off on its own power at any moment. Tuck was hoping that it would.

The caddie followed Tuck, and when they were out of earshot of the

doctor, he turned to face the stoic Japanese. “You can’t tell him, can you?”

The guard pretended not to understand, but Tuck saw that he was

getting it, even if only by inflection. “You can’t tell him and you can’t
fucking shoot me, can you? You killed the last pilot and that got you in a
world of trouble, didn’t it? That’s why you guys follow me like a bunch of
baby ducks, isn’t it?” Tuck was guessing, but it was the only logical
explanation.

Mato glanced toward the doctor.

“No,” Tuck said. “He doesn’t know that I know. And we’re not going to

tell him, are we? Just shake your head if you’re getting this.”

The guard shook his head.

“Okay, then, here’s the deal. I’ll let you guys look like you’re doing

your job, but when I wave you off, you’re gone. You hear me? I want you
guys off my ass. You tell your buddies, okay?”

The guard nodded.

“Can you speak any English at all?”

“Hai. A rittle.”

“You guys killed the pilot, didn’t you?”

“He tly to take prane.” Mato looked as if the words were painful for him

to form.

Tuck nodded, feeling heat rise in his face. He wanted to smash the

guard’s face, knock him to the ground, and kick him into a glob of goo.
“And you killed Pardee, the fat American man.”

Mato shook his head. “No. We don’t.”

“Bullshit!”

“No, we…we…” He was searching for the English word.

“What?”

“We take him, but not shoot.”

“Take him where? To the clinic?”

The guard shook his head violently. Not saying no, but trying to say that

he couldn’t say.

“What happened to the fat man?”

“He die. Hospital. We put him water.”

“You took his body to the edge of the reef, where the sharks would find

it?”

The guard nodded.

“And the pilot? You put him in the same place?”

Again the nod.

“What’s going on. Are you going to hit or not?”

Tuck and the guard looked up like two boys caught trading curses in the

schoolyard. Curtis had come back down the fairway to within fifty feet of
them.

Tuck pointed to his ball. “Kato here won’t let me move that out for a

shot. I’ll take the penalty stroke, Doc. But hell, we don’t have mutant trees
like that in Texas. It’s unnatural.”

Curtis looked sideways at Tuck’s ball, then at Mato. “He can move it.

No penalty. You’re a guest here, Mr. Case. We can let you bend a few
rules.” Curtis did not smile. Suddenly he seemed very serious about his
golf.

“We’re partners now, Doc,” Tuck said. “Call me Tuck.”

Beans and Succubus

Tuck’s other partner showed up at his bungalow that evening as he was
sitting down to a plate of pork and beans. She didn’t knock, or call out, or
even clear her throat politely to let him know she was there. One minute
Tuck was studying a gelatinous white cube of unidentifiable carbon-based
life-form awash in a lumpy puddle of boiled legumes and tomato sauce, and
the next the door opened and she was standing there wearing nothing but a
red scarf and sequined high heels. Tuck dropped his spoon. Two partially
used beans dribbled out of his open mouth, tracing contrails of sauce down
the front of his shirt.

She executed a single flamenco heel stomp and Tuck watched the

impact move up her body and settle comfortably in her breasts. She threw
her arms wide, struck a pose, and said, “The Sky Priestess has arrived.”

“Yes, she has,” Tuck said with the glassy-eyed stupifaction of a newly

converted Moonie. He’d seen something like her before, either on the hood
of a Rolls-Royce or on a bowling trophy, but in the flesh the image was
much more immediate, awe-inspiring even.

She pirouetted and the tails of the scarf trailed around her like

affectionate smoke. “What do you think?”

“Uh-huh,” Tuck said, nodding.

“Come here.”

Tuck stood and moved toward her in the mindless shuffle step of a

zombie compelled by the promise of living flesh. His brain stopped
working, his entire life energy shifted to another part of his body, and it led
him across the room to within an inch of her. It wasn’t the first time this had
happened to him, but before he had always retained the power of speech
and most of his motor functions.

“What’s wrong with you?” she said. “Bolts in your neck too tight?”

“My entire body has an erection.”

She took him by the front of the shirt and backed him across the room

to the bed, then pushed him down and pulled his pants down to his knees.
She vaulted onto him in a straddle and he reached up for her breasts. She
caught his wrists.

“No. You’ll fuck up my makeup.”

And he noticed—like an accident victim might notice a butterfly in the

grille of the bus that is running over him—that her nipples had been rouged
to an unnatural pink.

He tried to sit up and she shoved him back down, then took him in her

hand, nicking him with a red fingernail, making him wince, and guided him
inside of her. He reached for her hips to drive her down and got his hands
slapped for the effort.

And she fucked him—precise and mechanical as a machine, a single

pounding motion repeated and lubricated and repeated again—until her
breath rasped in her throat like hissing hydraulics and she arched her back
and stalled, and misfired, then dieseled for a stroke or two, and she climbed
off. Somewhere in all that he had come and she had looked at him once.

He lay there looking at the remnants of torn mosquito netting over the

bed, breathing hard, feeling a little dizzy, and wondering what had just

happened. She went to the bathroom, then returned a few seconds later and
threw him a towel, which she had obviously used herself.

“We’re flying in three or four hours. Be ready.”

“Okay.” Was he supposed to say something? Didn’t this signify some

sort of change that should be acknowledged?

“I want you to watch me, but you can’t let them see you. Wait a few

minutes and go out by the hanger where you can see the airstrip. It’s a great
show. Theater makes it all possible, you know. Ask the Catholics. They
survived the Middle Ages by putting on performances in a language that no
one understood on grand stages that were built by the pennies of the poor.
That’s the problem with religion today. No theater.”

This must be her version of cuddling. “Performance?”

“The appearance of the Sky Priestess,” she said as if she was talking to

a piece of toast. She walked to the door, then paused and looked over her
shoulder. Almost as an afterthought she said, “Tucker,” and when he looked
up she blew him a kiss. Then she was out the door and he heard her shout,
“Cue the music!”

A big band sound blasted across the island, sending a shiver rattling

through Tuck’s body as if a chill ghost from the forties had jitterbugged
over his spine.

Grand Theft Aircraft

The Shark men were breaking into their second jug of tuba when the music
started. They all looked to Malink. Why hadn’t he told them there was
going to be an appearance of the Sky Priestess?

Malink thought fast, then grinned as if he had known this was coming

all along. “I wanted it to be a surprise,” he said. Why hadn’t this been
announced by the Sorcerer? Was he still angry because Malink had not
produced the girl-man on demand? Was Vincent himself angry at Malink
for something? Certainly Malink’s people would be angry at him for not
giving them the time to prepare the drums and the bamboo rifles of
Vincent’s army—and the women, oh, the women would be shitting
coconuts over not having time to oil their skins and paint their faces and put
on their ceremonial grass skirts.

As Malink trudged to the airstrip he tried to formulate some explanation

that would work with everyone. As if it wasn’t difficult enough being chief
with no coffee to drink in the morning—he’d had a headache for two weeks
from caffeine withdrawal—now his role as religious leader was giving him
problems. Leading a religion is tough work when your gods start stirring for
real and messing up your prophecies. And what if he did come up with an
explanation, only to have the Priestess of the Sky say something that
contradicted him? She was supposed to be Vincent’s voice, but that voice
had been angry lately, so he didn’t dare ask her for help as he had in the
past. Not in front of his people.

He came out of the jungle just in time to see the flash of the explosions.

The Sky Priestess walked out of the smoke and even from a hundred yards
away, Malink could tell by her step that she was pleased. Malink breathed a
sigh of relief. She was carrying magazines for them. If his people were
happy with what she said, then he could use the old “will of Vincent”
argument for not preparing them.

He could have never guessed the real reason the Sorcerer had not

forewarned him of the appearance of the Sky Priestess. At the time when he
normally called the warning, the Sorcerer had been watching through the
window as the Sky Priestess pumped away on Tucker Case.

Tuck fought the urge to bolt. He hadn’t had enough time to build up any

remorse about having sex with the doctor’s wife, and he didn’t excel at
remorse in the first place. “I was on my way to do the preflight. It doesn’t
take long.”

The doctor didn’t make eye contact. “You’ll forgive me if I seem

distracted. I have to perform major surgery in a few minutes. You should go
watch Beth’s little show.”

“What’s all the music and explosions?”

“It’s how we retrieve our donors. Beth will explain her theory of

religion and theater to you, I’m sure. Excuse me.” He pushed past Tucker
and looked at his shoes as he walked toward the clinic.

“Aren’t you going to watch?” Tuck said.

“Thank you, but I find it nauseating.”

“Oh,” Tuck said. “Then I’ll go check out the Lear. Great game today,

Doc.”

“Yes,” Curtis said. He resumed his stiff-armed walk to the clinic, his

fists balled so hard at his sides that Tuck could see them shaking.

The guards were gathered at the edge of the hangar. Mato looked up

quickly and made eye contact long enough for Tuck to see that he was
nervous. Tuck wished he had asked him if the other guards spoke English.

“Konichi-wa, motherfuckers,” Tuck said, covering his linguistic bases.

None of the guards responded. Except for Mato, their eyes were trained

on Beth Curtis dancing across the airstrip to Benny Goodman’s “Sing, Sing,
Sing.” One of the guards hit a button by the hangar and the music stopped
as Beth Curtis stepped onto a small wooden platform on the far side of the
runway. With the speakers silenced, Tuck could hear the drums of the Shark
People. Some were marching around in formation holding lengths of
bamboo painted red as rifles. Beth Curtis raised her hands, a copy of People
in each, and the drums stopped.

Tuck couldn’t hear what she was saying, but she was waving her arms

around like a soapbox preacher, and the crowd of natives moved, and
flinched, and hung on her every word. She paused at one point and handed
the magazines down to Malink, who backed away from the platform with
his head bowed.

Tuck didn’t find anything about her performance nauseating, but it was

nothing if not strange. Why all the pomp and circumstance? You have six
guys with machine guns, you can pretty much go rip a kidney out anytime
you want to.

He needed to think, and he didn’t particularly want to see whom she

would pick. Whoever it was, their face would be in his head all the way to
Japan and back. He went into the hangar, lowered the door on the Lear,
climbed into the dark plane, and lay down in the aisle between the seats. He
couldn’t hear the sound of the Sky Priestess or the natives oohing and
ahhhing, and here among the steel and glass and plastic and upholstery, it

felt like home. Here he could hear the sound of his own mind; here in his
very own Learjet, the weirdness was all outside. But for the lack of a key he
would have taken the plane right then.

The guard dangled the key to the Lear’s main power cutoff. It was time

to go. Tuck limped to the cockpit and strapped himself into the pilot’s seat.
Stripe inserted the power key into the instrument console, twisted it, and
stepped back to watch as Tuck started the power-up procedure.

The other ninjas pulled the Lear out of the hangar by a large T-bar

attached to the front wheel. When the plane was safely out of the hangar,
Tuck started to spool up the jets. Stripe remained with the Uzi at port arms.

Tuck made a big show of going though the checklist, testing switches

and gauges. He frowned and clicked the radar switch a couple of times. He
looked back at Stripe. “Go check the nose. Something’s not right.”

The guard shook his head. Tuck mimed his instructions again and Stripe

nodded, then he motioned through the window for another of the guards to
join them on board. Evidently, they weren’t going to leave him unguarded
in the plane with the power key in. Stripe turned over the guard duty to the
other ninja and appeared at the front of the plane. Tuck motioned for him to
get closer to the nose. Stripe did. Tuck turned on the radar. “And a lovely
brain tumor for you, you son of a bitch.” Stripe seemed to actually feel the
microwave energy and he jumped back from the plane. Tuck grinned and
gave him the okay sign. “I hope your tiny little balls are boiling,” he said
aloud. The guard behind him didn’t seem to understand what Tuck was
saying, but he nudged him with the barrel of his Uzi and pointed. Beth

Curtis, in her dark Armani, was coming across the compound with briefcase
and cooler in hand.

She stepped into the plane and nodded to the guard. Instead of leaving,

he took a seat back in the passenger compartment. Beth strapped herself
into the copilot’s seat.

“We taking him in for shore leave?” Tuck said.

“No. He’s just along for the ride tonight.”

“Oh, right.” Tuck powered up the jets and eased the Lear out of the

compound onto the runway.

Beth Curtis was silent until they were at altitude, cruising toward Japan.

Tuck did not engage the autopilot, but steered the Lear gradually, perhaps a
degree a minute, to the west.

“So what did you think?”

“Pretty impressive, but I don’t get it. Why the whole show to bring in

someone for surgery? Why not just send the guards?”

“We’re not taking their kidneys, Tucker. They’re giving them.”

Tuck didn’t want to give away what he had learned from Malink and

Sepie about the “chosen.” He said, “Giving them to who? A naked white
woman?”

She laughed, reached into her briefcase, and brought out an eight-by-ten

color photograph. “To the Sky Priestess.” She held the photograph where
Tuck could see it. He had to steer manually. If he hit the autopilot now, the
plane would turn back toward Japan, the only preset in the nav computer.
The photograph was in color but old. A flyer stood by the side of a B-26
bomber. On the side of the bomber was the painting of a voluptuous naked
woman and the legend SKY PRIESTESS. It could have been a painting of Beth
Curtis as she had looked when she arrived at Tuck’s bungalow. He

recognized the flyer as well. It was the ghost flyer he’d been seeing all
along. He felt his face flush, but he tried to stay cool. “So who’s that?”

“The flyer was a guy named Vincent Bennidetti,” Beth said. “The plane

was named the Sky Priestess. All the bombers had nose art like that in
World War II. We found the picture in the library in San Francisco.”

“So what’s that got to do with our operation? You’re dressing up like

the picture on an airplane.”

“No, I am the Sky Priestess.”

“I’m sorry, Beth. I still don’t get it.”

“This is the pilot that the Shark People worship. The cargo cult that

’Bastian told you about.”

Tuck nodded and tried to look surprised, but he was watching his course

without seeming to do so. If he had figured it right, they would be over
Guam in fifteen minutes and the American military would force them
down. The Air Force was very cranky about private jets flying though their
airspace.

“The natives on Alualu worship this Vincent guy,” Beth said. “I speak

for Vincent. They come to me when we play the music and I give them
everything. In return, I choose one of them for the honor of the mark of
Vincent, which, of course, is the scar they get from the operation.”

“Like I said, you’ve got armed guards. Why not just take what you

want?”

She looked shocked that he would ask. “And get out of show business?”

Then she smiled and reached over and gave his crotch a squeeze.

“When I met Sebastian in San Francisco, he was drunk and throwing

money around. One minute he was so dignified and erudite, the next he was
like a little native child. He told me about the cargo cult and I came up with
the idea of not just doing this to support the clinic, but to get really filthy

rich. We had to keep the people happy if we were going to do this in big
numbers.”

“So you thought all of this up?”

“It’s the reason I’m here.”

“But Sebastian said you were a”—Tuck caught himself before he said

“stripper”—“surgical nurse.”

“I was. So what? Did I get any respect for that? Did I get any power?

No. To the doctors I was just a piece of ass who could handle surgical
instruments and close a patient when they needed to get to the golf course.
Did Sebastian tell you I used to strip?”

“He mentioned something about it in passing.”

“Well, I did. And I was good.”

“I can imagine,” Tuck said. A few more minutes and they should be

joined by an F-16.

She smiled. “Fuck nursing. I was just a piece of meat to the men I

worked with, so I decided to go with it. I was pushing thirty and all single
women my age were walking around with a desperate look in their eye and
a biological clock ticking so loud you thought it was the crocodile from
Peter Pan. If I was going to be treated like meat, I was going to make
money at it. And I did. Not enough, but a lot more than I would have made
nursing.”

“Do tell,” Tuck said. He couldn’t remember ever saying “Do tell,” and

it sounded a little strange hearing it.

She looked out the window as if she had fallen into some reverie. Then,

without looking back, she said, “What’s that island?”

Tuck tensed. “I couldn’t say.”

She sighed. “Islands are amazing.”

“I always say that.”

She seemed to come out of her trance and looked at the instrument

board. Tuck acted as if he was concentrating on flying the plane. He
glanced at Beth Curtis. Her mouth had tightened into a line.

She reached into the briefcase and came out with the Walther automatic.

“What’s that for?” Tuck said.

“Get back on course.”

“I am on course.”

“Now!”

“But I am on course. Look.” He pointed to the nav computer, which still

showed the coordinates of the airstrip in Japan, although it wasn’t engaged
with the autopilot.

“No, you’re not.” She pointed to the compass. “You’re at least ninety

degrees off course. Turn the plane to Japan now or I’ll shoot you.”

Tuck was tired of it. “Right. And you’ll fly the plane? There’s a

difference between being able to read a compass and making a landing.”

“I didn’t say I would kill you. I’m good with this. You’ll still be able to

fly with one testicle. Now that would be a shame for both of us. Please turn
the plane.”

Tuck engaged the autopilot and let the Lear bring itself around to the

course to Japan.

“Sebastian said you might try something like that,” she said. “I told him

I could handle you. I can, can’t I? Handle you, I mean.”

Tuck was quiet for a minute, berating himself for overestimating the

efficiency of the military. Then finally he said, “You are a nefarious,
diabolical, and evil bitch.”

“And?”

“That’s all.”

“I’m impressed. ‘Nefarious’ has more than two syllables. I am a good

influence on you.”

“Fuck you.”

“You will,” she said.

Too Many Guns

Back at the drinking circle, Malink opened a copy of People reverentially
and read by kerosene lamp while the other men huddled to get a look at the
pictures.

“Cher is worst-dressed,” Malink announced.

“Too skinny,” said Favo. “I like Lady Di.”

Malink cringed. In the picture Lady Di was wearing a string of pearls,

obviously the reason for Favo’s preference. Malink turned the page.

“Celestine Raptors of Madison County is number one movie in

country,” Malink read.

“I want to see a movie,” Favo said. “You must tell the Sky Priestess to

tell Vincent to bring a movie.”

“Many movies,” said Abo. “And many delicious light and healthy

snacks with NutraSweet registered trademark,” he added in English.
“Vincent will bring many snacks.”

Malink was turning to the moving story of a two-thousand-pound man

who, after being forklifted out of his house, had dieted down to a svelte
fourteen hundred when the sound of a machine gun rattled across the island.

Malink put down the magazine and held up his hand to quiet the men. They
waited and there was another burst of gunfire. A few seconds later they
heard shouting and looked down the beach to see Sarapul running as fast as
his spindly old legs would carry him.

“Come help!” he shouted. “They shot the navigator!”

“Home, James.”

Tuck tossed his head toward the back of the plane where the guard was

taking his seat. “I guess you weren’t taking any chances about me taking off
while you were out of the plane.”

“Do I look stupid?” she said. A smile there, no hint of a challenge.

“No, I guess not.” Tuck pushed up the throttles and taxied the Lear back

out to the runway.

Again Beth Curtis reached over and gave him a light squeeze to the

crotch. She put on her headset so she could talk to him over the roar of the
engines as they took off. “Look, I know this is hard for you. Trust is
something you build, and you haven’t known me long enough to learn to do
that.”

Tuck thought, It would help if you weren’t changing personalities every

five minutes.

“Trust me, Tucker. What we are doing is not hurting the people of

Alualu. There are people in India who are selling off their organs for less
than the price of a used Toyota pickup. With what we make, we can be sure

that these people are always taken care of, and we can take care of
ourselves in the meantime.”

“If people are selling their organs on the cheap, then how are you—we

—making so much money?”

“Because we can do it to order. Transplant isn’t just a matter of blood

type, you know. Sure, in a pinch—and usually it is a pinch—you can go on
just blood type, but there are four other factors in tissue typing. If they
match, along with blood type, then you have a better chance of the body not
rejecting the organ. Sebastian has a database of the tissue types of every
native on the island. When there’s a need for an exact match, the order
comes in over the satellite and we run it through the database. If we have it,
the Sky Priestess calls the chosen.”

“Don’t the people have to be the same race?”

“It helps, but it seems that the people of Alualu have a very similar

genetic pattern to the Japanese.”

“They don’t look Japanese. How do you know this?”

“Actually, it was figured out by an anthropologist who came to the

island long before I did. He was studying the language and genetics of the
islanders to determine where they migrated from. Turns out there are both
linguistic and genetic links to Japan. They’ve been diluted by interbreeding
with natives from New Guinea, but it’s still very close.”

“So you guys opened up Kidneys ’R’ Us and started making a mint.”

“Except for the scar, their lives don’t change, Tucker. We’ve never lost a

patient to a botched operation or infection.”

But bullets, Tuck thought, are another matter. Still, there was nothing he

could do to stop them, and if he had to do nothing, a great salary and his
own jet were pretty good compensation. He’d spent most of his life not
doing anything. Was it so bad to be paid for what you’re good at?

He said, “So it doesn’t hurt them? In the long run, I mean.”

“Their other kidney steps up production and they never notice the

difference.”

“I still don’t get the Sky Priestess thing.”

She sighed. “Control the religion and you control the people. Sebastian

tried to bring Christianity to the Shark People—and the Catholics before
him—but you can’t compete with a god people have actually seen. The
answer? Become that god.”

“But I thought Vincent was the god.”

“He is, but he will bring wonderful cargo in the Sky Priestess. Besides,

it breaks the boredom. Boredom can be a lethal thing on a small island. You
know about that already.”

Tuck nodded. It wasn’t so bad now. The fear of being murdered had

gone a long way toward breaking his boredom.

Beth Curtis leaned over and kissed him lightly on the temple. “You and

I can fight the boredom together. That’s one of the reasons I chose you.”

“You chose me?” In spite of himself, he was thinking about her naked

body grinding away above him.

“Of course I chose you. I’m the Sky Priestess, aren’t I?”

“I’m not so sure it was you,” Tuck said, thinking about the ghost pilot.

She pushed away and looked at him as if he had lost his mind.

The Bedside Manner of Cannibals

Tuck slept through most of the day, then woke up with a pot of coffee over
a spy novel. He looked at the words and his eyes moved down the pages for
half an hour, but when he put it down he had no idea what he had read. His
mind was torn by the thought of Beth Curtis showing up at his door.
Whenever a guard crunched across the gravel compound, Tuck would go to
the window to see if it was her. She wouldn’t come here during the day,
would she?

He had promised Kimi that he would check on Sepie and meet him at

the drinking circle, but now he was already a day late on the promise. What
would happen if Beth Curtis came to his bungalow while he was out? She
couldn’t tell the doc, could she? What would her excuse be for coming
here? Still, Tuck was beginning to think that the doc wasn’t really the one
running the show. He was merely skilled labor, and so, probably, was
Tucker himself.

Tuck looked at the pages of the spy novel, watched a little Malaysian

television (today they were throwing spears at coconuts on top of a pole
while the Asian stock market’s tickers scrolled at the bottom of the screen
in thin-colored bands), and waited for nightfall. When he could no longer
see the guard’s face across the compound, he made a great show of yawning
and stretching in front of the window, then turned out the lights, built the
dummy in his bed, and slipped out through the bottom of the shower.

He took his usual path behind the clinic, then inched his way up on the

far side and peeked around the front. Not ten feet away a guard stood by the
door. He ducked quickly around the corner. There was no way into the
clinic tonight. He could wait or even try to intimidate the guard, now that he
knew they were afraid to shoot him. Of course, he wasn’t sure they knew
they were afraid to shoot him. What if Mato was the only one?

He slid back down the side of the building and through the coconut

grove to the beach. The swim had become like walking to the mailbox, and
he was past the minefield in less than five minutes. As he rounded the curve
of the beach, he saw a light and figures moving around it. The Shark men
had brought a kerosene lamp to the drinking circle. How civilized.

Some of the men acknowledged his presence as he moved into the

circle, but the old chief only stared into the sand between his feet. There
was a stack of magazines at his side.

“What’s going on, guys?”

A panic made its way around the circle to land on Abo, who looked up

and said, “Your friend is shot by the guards.”

Tuck waited, but Abo looked away. Tuck jumped in front of Malink.

“Chief, is he telling the truth? Did they shoot Kimi? Is he dead?”

“Not dead,” Malink said, shaking his head. “Hurt very bad.”

“Take me to him.”

“He is at Sarapul’s house.”

“Right. I’ll look it up in the guidebook later. Now take me to him.”

Old Malink shook his head. “He going to die.”

“Where is he shot?”

“In the water by the minefield.”

“No, numbnuts. Where on his body?”

Malink held his hand to his side. “I say, ‘Take him to the Sorcerer,’ but

Sarapul say, ‘The Sorcerer shoot him.’” Malink then looked Tuck in the eye
for the first time. His big brown face was a study in trouble. “Vincent send
you. What do I do?”

Tuck could sense a profound embarrassment in the old man. He had just

admitted in front of the men in his tribe that he didn’t have a clue. The loss
of face was gnawing at him like a hungry sand crab.

Tuck said, “Vincent is pleased with your decision, Malink. Now I must

see Kimi.”

One of the young Vincents stood up. Feeling very brave, he said, “I will

take you.”

Tuck grabbed his shoulder. “You’re a good man. Lead on.”

The young Vincent seemed to forget to breathe for a moment, as if Tuck

had touched him on the shoulders with a sword and welcomed him to a seat
at the Round Table, then he came to his senses and took off into the jungle.
Tuck followed close behind, nearly clotheslining himself a couple of times
on branches that the young Vincent ran right under. The coral gravel on the
path tore at Tuck’s feet as he ran.

When they emerged from the jungle, Tuck could see a light coming out

of Sarapul’s hut, which Tuck recognized from his day in the cannibal tree.
He turned to young Vincent, who was terrified. He had charged the dragon,
but had made the mistake of stopping to think about it.

“Kimi’s with the cannibal?”

Young Vincent nodded rapidly while bouncing from foot to foot,

looking like he would wet himself any second.

“Go on,” Tuck said. “Go tell Malink to come here. And have a drink.

You’re wigging out.”

Vincent nodded and ran off.

Tuck approached the door slowly, creeping up until he could see the old

man crouched over Kimi, trying to pour something into his mouth from a
coconut cup.

“Hey,” Tuck said, “how’s he doing?”

Sarapul looked around and gestured for Tuck to enter the house. Tuck

had to bend to get through the low door, but once inside the ceiling opened
to a fifteen-foot peak. Tuck knelt by Kimi. The navigator’s eyes were
closed, and even in the orange light of Sarapul’s oil lamp, he looked pale.
He was uncovered and a bandage was wrapped around his middle.

“Did you do this?” Tuck asked Sarapul.

The old cannibal nodded. “They shoot him in water. I pull him in.”

“How many times?”

Sarapu held up a long bent finger.

“Both sides? Did it go through?” Tuck gestured with his fingers on

either side of his hip.

“Yes,” Sarapul said.

“Let me see.”

The old cannibal nodded and unwrapped Kimi’s bandage. Tuck rolled

the navigator gently on his side. Kimi groaned, but didn’t wake. The bullet
had hit him about two inches above the hip and about an inch in. It had
passed right though, going in the size of a pencil and exiting the size of a
quarter. Tuck was amazed that he hadn’t bled to death. The old cannibal had
done a good job.

“Don’t take him to the Sorcerer,” Sarapul said. “The Sorcerer will kill

him. He is the only navigator.” The old cannibal was pleading while trying
to remain fierce. A sob betrayed him. “He is my friend.”

Tuck studied the wound to give the old cannibal a chance to gather

himself. He couldn’t remember any vital organs being in that area. But the
wounds would have to be stiched shut. Tuck wasn’t sure he had the stomach
for it, but Sarapul was right. He couldn’t take Kimi to Curtis.

“Do you guys have anything you use to kill pain?”

The cannibal looked at him quizzically. Tuck pinched him and he

yelped. “Pain. Do you have anything to stop pain?”

“Yes. Don’t do that anymore.”

“No, for Kimi.”

Sarapul nodded and went out into the dark. He returned a few seconds

later with a glass jug half-full of milky liquid. He handed it to Tuck.
“Kava,” he said. “It make you no ouch.”

Tuck uncapped the bottle and a smell like cooking cabbage assaulted his

nostrils. He held his breath and took a big slug of the stuff, suppressed a
gag, and swallowed. His mouth was immediately numb. “Wow, this ought
to do it. I need a needle and some thread and some hot water. And some
alcohol or peroxide if you have it.”

Sarapul nodded. “I put Neosporin on him.”

“You know about that? Why am I doing this?”

Sarapul shrugged and left the house. Evidently, he didn’t keep anything

inside but his skinny old ass.

Kimi moaned and Tuck rolled him over. The navigator’s eyes fluttered

open.

“Boss, that dog fucker shot me.”

“Curtis? The older white guy?”

“No. Japanese dog fucker.” Kimi drew his finger across his scalp in a

line and Tuck knew exactly who he meant.

“What were you doing, Kimi? I told you that I’d check on Sepie and

meet you.” Tuck felt a pleasant numbness moving into his limbs. This kava
stuff would definitely do the trick.

“You didn’t come. I worry for her.”

“I had to fly.”

“Sarapul say those people very bad. You should come live here, boss.”

“Be quiet. Drink this.” He held the jug to Kimi’s lips and tipped it up.

The navigator took a sip and Tuck let him rest before administering another
dose.

“That stuff nasty,” Kimi said.

“I’m going to stitch you up.”

The navigator’s eyes went wide. He took the jug from Tuck and gulped

from it until Tuck ripped it out of his hands. “It won’t be that bad.”

“Not for you.”

Tuck grinned. “Haven’t you heard? I’ve been sent here by Vincent.”

“That what Sarapul say. He say he don’t believe in Vincent until we

come, but now he do.”

“Really?”

Sarapul came through the door with an armload of supplies. “I don’t say

that. This dog fucker lies.”

Tuck shook his head. “You guys were made for each other.”

Sarapul set down a sewing kit and a bottle of peroxide, then crouched

over the navigator and looked up at Tuck. “Can you fix him?”

Tuck grinned and grabbed the old cannibal by the cheek. “Yum,” Tuck

said.

“Sorry,” Sarapul said.

“I’ll fix him,” Tuck said. Silently he asked for help from Vincent.

“I can’t feel my arms,” Kimi said. “My legs, where are my legs? I’m

dying.”

Sarapul looked at Tuck. “Good,” he said. “More kava.”

Tuck picked up the jug, now only a quarter full. “This is great stuff.”

“I’m dying,” Kimi said.

Tuck rolled the navigator over on his side. “Kimi, did I tell you I saw

Roberto?”

“See, I didn’t eat him,” Sarapul said.

“Where?” Kimi asked.

“He came to my house. He talked to me.”

“You lie. He only speak Filipino.”

“He learned English. Can you feel that?”

“Feel what? I am dying?”

“Good,” Tuck said and he laid his first stitch.

“What Roberto say? He mad at me?”

“No, he said you’re dying.”

“I’m dying, I’m dying,” Kimi wailed.

“Just kidding. He didn’t say that. He said you’re probably dying.” Tuck

kept Kimi talking, and before long the navigator was so convinced of his
approaching death he didn’t notice that Tucker Case, self-taught
incompetent, had completely stitched and dressed his wounds.

Don Quixote at the Miniature Golf Course

He was sleeping, dreaming of flying, but not in a plane. He was soaring
over the warm Pacific above a pod of hump-back whales. He swooped in
close to the waves and one of the whales breached, winked at him with a
football-sized eye, and said, “You da man.” Then the whale smiled and
blew the dream all to hell, for while Tuck knew himself to indeed “be da
man” and while he didn’t mind being told so, he also knew that whales
couldn’t smile and that bit of illogic above all the others broke the dream’s
back. He woke up. There was music playing in his bungalow.

“Dance with me, Tucker,” she said. “Dance with me in the moonlight.”

The smooth muted horns of “Moonlight Serenade” filled the room from

a portable boom box on his coffee table. Beth Curtis, wearing a sequined
evening gown and high-heeled sandals, danced an imaginary partner around
the room. “Oh, dance with me, Tucker. Please.”

She glided over to the bed and held her hand out to him. He gave her

the coconut man’s head, rolled over, and ducked under the sheet. “Go away.
I’m tired and you’re insane.”

She sat on the bed with a bounce. “You old stick in the mud.” A pouty

voice now. “You never want to have any romance.”

Tuck feigned sleep. Pretty well, he thought.

“I brought champagne and candles. And I made cookies.”

This is me sleeping, Tuck thought. This is exactly how I behave when I

sleep.

“I twisted up a joint of skunky green bud the size of your dick.”

“I hope you got help carrying it,” he said, still under the covers.

“I rolled it on the inside of my thigh the way the women in Cuba roll

cigars.”

“Don’t tell me how you licked the paper.”

She slapped him on the bottom. “Come on, dance with me.”

He rolled over and pulled the sheet off his face. “You’re not going to go

away, are you?”

“Not until you dance with me and have some champagne.”

Tuck looked at his watch. “It’s five in the morning.”

“Haven’t you ever danced till dawn?”

“Not vertically.”

“Oh, you nasty boy.” Coy now, as if anything short of being caught at

genocide could make her blush. The song changed to something slow and
oily that Tuck didn’t recognize.

“This is such a good song. Let’s dance.” She swooned. She actually

swooned. Swooning, Tuck noticed, looked very much like an asthma attack
wheezed in slow motion. A rooster crowed, and seven thousand six hundred
and fifty-two roosters responded in turn.

“Beth, it’s morning. Please go home.”

“Then you’re not going to dance with me?”

“No.”

“All right, I guess we’ll skip the dancing, but I want you to know that

I’m very disappointed.” She stood up, pulled the evening gown over her
head, and dropped it to the floor. The sequins sizzled against the floor like a
dying rattlesnake. She wore only stockings underneath.

Tuck said, “I don’t think this is such a good idea,” but there was no

conviction in his voice and she pushed him back on the bed.

He tried to worm his arm out from under her, then used the “old snuggle

method.” He rolled into her for a hug and when she responded with a sleepy
moan and tried to kiss him, the space under her neck opened up and he was
free. It worked as well on murdering bitch goddesses as it did on Mary Jean
ladies. Better even, Beth didn’t wear near as much hair spray, which can
slow a guy down. God, I’m good.

He rolled out of bed and crept into the bathroom. While he peed, he

softly chanted, “Yo, after this, I will not bone the crazy woman.” It had
taken on a rap cadence and he was feeling very hip along with the usual
self-loathing. His scars made him think of Kimi’s wound, and suddenly he
was angry. He padded naked back to the bed and jostled the sleeping icon.
“Get up, Beth. Go home.”

And someone pounded on the door. “Mr. Case, tee time in five.”

Tuck clamped his hand over Beth’s mouth, lifted her by her head in a

single sweeping move from the bed to the bathroom, where he released her

and shut the door. Fred Astaire, had he been a terrorist, would have been
proud of the move.

Tuck grabbed his pants off the floor, which is where he kept them,

pulled them on, and answered the door. Sebastian Curtis had a driver slung
over his shoulder. “You might want to put on a shirt, Mr. Case. You can get
burned, even this early.”

“Right,” Tuck said. He was looking at the caddie. Today Stripe carried

the clubs. The guard sneered at him. Tuck smiled back. Stripe, like Mato
before him, was doing caddie duty unarmed. Time to play a little round for
the navigator, he thought. He winked at Stripe.

“I’ll be right there.” Tuck closed the door and went to the bathroom to

tell Beth to wait until he’d gone before coming out, but when he opened the
door, she was gone.

“Nope,” Tuck said. He picked his ball up and put it on the rubberized

mat, then turned to Stripe. “Dopey, give me a five iron.”

They were on the fourth hole and had crisscrossed the compound

pretending to play golf for an hour. Tuck swung and skidded the ball fifty
yards across the gravel. “Heads up, Bashful,” Tuck said as he threw the club
back to Stripe.

“Islands are like evolutionary pressure cookers. New species pop up

faster and go extinct more quickly. It works the same way with religions.”

“No kidding, Doc?” They still had fifty yards to get to where

Sebastian’s first shot lay. Tuck had hit three times.

“The cargo cults have all the same events associated with the great

religions: a period of oppression, the rise of a Messiah, a new order, the
promise of an endless time of peace and prosperity. But instead of

developing over centuries like Christianity or Buddhism, it happens in just a
few years. It’s fascinating, like being able to see the hands of the clock
move right before your eyes and be a part of it.”

“So you must totally get off when daylight savings time comes around.”

“It was just a metaphor, Mr. Case.”

“Call me Tuck.” They had reached Tuck’s ball and he placed it on the

Astro Turf mat. “Sneezy, give me the driver.”

Sebastian cleared his throat. “That looks more like a nine iron to me.

You’ve only got fifty yards to the pin.”

“Trust me, Doc. I need a driver for this one.”

Stripe snickered and handed him the driver. Tuck examined it, one of

the large-headed alloy models that had become so popular in the States—all
metal. Tuck grinned at Stripe. “So, Doc, I guess you shitcanned the
Methodist thing to watch the clock spin.” Tuck lined up the shot and took a
practice swing. The club whooshed through the air.

“Have you ever had faith in anything, Mr. Case?”

Tuck took another practice swing. “Me? Faith? Nope.”

“Not even your own abilities?”

“Nope.” Tuck made a show of lining up the shot again and making sure

his hips were loose.

“Then you shouldn’t make jokes about it.”

“Right,” Tuck said. He tensed and put his entire weight behind the club,

but instead of hitting the ball, he swung it around like a baseball bat,
slamming the head into Stripe’s cheek, shattering the bone with a sickening
thwack. The guard’s feet went out from under him and he landed with a
crunch in the coral.

“Christ!” Sebastian yelled. He grabbed the club and wrenched it from

Tuck’s grasp. “What in the hell are you doing?”

Tuck didn’t answer. He bent over the guard until he was only inches

from his face and whispered, “Fore, motherfucker.”

A second later Tuck heard a mechanical click and the guard who had

been tending the pin had an Uzi pressed to his ear.

Sebastian Curtis was bent over Stripe, pulling his eyes open to see if his

pupils would contract. “Take Mr. Case to his bungalow and stay with him.
Send two men with a stretcher and find Beth. Tell her to—” Curtis suddenly
realized that the guard was only getting about a third of what he said.
“Bring my wife.”

“I’ll get back to you on that faith thing, Doc,” Tuck said.

Where Losers Flourish

The Sorcerer paced back and forth across the lanai. “I want to find another
pilot, Beth. We can’t let him act that way and get away with it.”

The Sky Priestess yawned. She was draped across the wicker emperor’s

chair, wearing a towel she’d wrapped above her breasts at the Sorcerer’s
request. He said he needed to think. “Did you ask him why he did it?”

“Of course I asked him. He said he was trying to liven up the game.”

“Worked, didn’t it?”

“It’s not funny, Beth. We’re going to have trouble with him.”

The Sky Priestess stood up and put her arms around the Sorcerer. “You

have to have a little faith in me,” she said. “I can handle Tucker Case.” She
didn’t want to have this conversation. Not yet. She hadn’t told the Sorcerer
about Tuck going off course. She had plans for the fair-haired pilot.

The Sorcerer pulled away from her and backed up to the rail. “What if I

don’t like the way you handle him?”

“And what’s that supposed to mean?”

“You know what it means.”

She approached him again, this time untucking the towel so it dropped

as she stepped into his arms. Her nipples just brushed the front of his shirt.
“’Bastian, if what happened today proved anything, it proved that Tucker
Case is a troglodyte. He’s no threat to you. I’m attracted to finesse, not
force. Case reacts to force with force. That’s why he hit Yamata. You use a
gentle touch with a guy like that and he’s helpless.”

Sebastian Curtis turned away from her. “I’m not taking the guards off

his house, not for a while anyway.”

“You do what you think is best, but it’s not good policy to make an

enemy of someone whose services you require. So what if he hates the
ninjas? I hate the ninjas. You hate the ninjas. But we need them, and we
need a pilot. We’re not likely to be as lucky next time.”

“Lucky? The man’s a reprobate.”

“Tucker Case is a loser. Losers flourish on islands, away from

competition. You taught me that.” Flattery might work where seduction
seemed to be failing.

“I did?”

She unzipped his pants. “Sure, that monologue about ninety percent of

the endangered species living on islands. That’s because they would have
died out years ago from real competition. Losers, like Tucker Case.”

“I was talking about unique ecosystems, like the Galápagos, where

evolution is speeded up. The way the religions take hold.”

“Same difference.”

He yanked her hand out of his pants and pushed her away. “What’s that

make us, Beth? What does that make me?”

The Sky Priestess was losing on all fronts. There was an element here

that she was not in control of, an unknown variable that was affecting the

Sorcerer’s mood. When sex and flattery don’t work, what next? Ah, team
spirit. “It makes us the fittest, ’Bastian. It makes us superior.”

He looked at her quizzically.

Easy now, she thought. You’re getting him back. She walked slowly

back to the emperor’s chair and sat down daintily, then threw a leg over
either arm and leaned back spread-eagle. “A quiz, ’Bastian, a quiz on
evolution: Why, after all these years, with all the fossil evidence, doesn’t
anyone know for sure what happened to the dinosaurs? Don’t answer right
away. Think.” She fiddled with her left nipple while she waited, and finally
a smile came over his face. He really did have great teeth. She had to give
him credit for keeping up his dental hygiene all these years on the island.

“No witnesses,” he said finally.

“We have a winner. But more precisely, no surviving witnesses. Losers

can only flourish until a dominant species appears, even on an island.”

A shade of concern crossed his face. “But dinosaurs ruled the Earth for

sixty million years. You can hardly call them losers.”

Could he be any more difficult? “Look, Darwin, there are absolutely no

dinosaurs getting laid tonight. Pick your team.”

Don’t Know Much About History

Tuck twisted the guts out of the stick pen and pried off the end cap with a
kitchen knife, making, in effect, a perfect compact blowgun. He found a
piece of notebook paper in the nightstand and seated himself on the wicker
couch so he had a good diagonal view of the guards posted outside his door.
He tore off a small piece of the paper with his teeth, worked it into a
sufficiently gooey ball, then fit it into the pen tube and blew. The spit wad
sailed through the window and curved harmlessly away from the guards.

Too much moisture. He squeezed the next one between his fingers

before loading, then let fly to strike the nearest guard in the neck. He
brushed at his neck as if waving off an insect, but otherwise didn’t react.

More moisture.

Tuck had taught himself deadly accuracy with the spitball blowgun at a

time when he was supposed to be learning algebra. In contradiction to what
his teacher had told him, he had never needed to know algebra in later life,
but mastery of the spitball was going to come in handy, although this skill
had not ended up on his permanent record, as had, presumably, his failure
of algebra.

The third wad struck the guard in the temple and stuck. He turned and

cursed in Japanese. Tuck had prechewed a follow-up shot that took the
guard in the neck. The guard gestured with his Uzi.

“Go ahead, fuckstick. Shoot me,” Tuck said, a gleam in his eye.

“Explain to the doc how you shot his pilot over a spit wad.” He tore off
another piece of paper with his teeth and chewed it while the guard glared.

The corrugated steel storm shutters above the windows were held open

with a single wooden strut. The guard clipped the strut and the shutter fell
with a clang.

Tuck moved to the next window down. He leaned out and fired. A splat

in the forehead of guard number two, another strut knocked out, another
clanging shutter.

One window to go, this one demanding a shot of almost twenty-five

feet. Tuck popped his head out and blew. A spiderweb of spittle trailed
behind the projectile as it traveled down the lanai. It struck the first guard
on the front of his black shirt and he ran toward Tuck, leading with his Uzi.
Tuck ducked back inside and the final shutter fell.

Tuck heard the guard at each shutter, latching it down.

Mission accomplished.

With the guards peeking in the window every two minutes, he would

have never been able to pull off the coconut dummy switch. And even in
the ambient moonlight, he’d have never made it to the bathroom unnoticed.
Of course, he couldn’t have closed the windows. That would have been
suspicious.

“Good night, guys. I’m turning in.” He stood, blowgun waiting, but the

shutters remained latched. He quickly turned off the lights and crawled into
bed, where he constructed the coconut man and waited until he heard the
guards start to talk and smelled tobacco smoke from their cigarettes. Then
he tiptoed to the bathroom and made his escape.

He half-expected the shower bottom to be nailed down. Beth Curtis had

used it to escape only this morning. Maybe she hadn’t figured that he knew
about it. No, she was nuts, but she wasn’t stupid. She knew he knew. She
even knew that he knew she knew. So why hadn’t she told Sebastian? And

she hadn’t said anything about their little detour to Guam either—or maybe
she had. Sebastian hadn’t sent a big postflight check like before. Tuck made
a mental note to ask the doc about the check the next time they were on the
golf course.

For now he snatched up his flippers and mask and headed for the beach.

Before entering the water, he pulled a bottle of pills from his pocket—
antibiotics left over from his dickrot—and made sure that the cap was on
tight. This might be the only chance he’d have to get medicine to Kimi.

He swam around the minefield and went straight into the village and

down the path toward Sarapul’s house. Women and children were still
sitting around outside their houses, the women weaving on small looms by
kerosene lantern, the children playing quietly or finishing up dinners off
banana leaf plates. Only the smallest children looked at Tuck as he passed.
The women turned away, determined, it seemed, not to make eye contact
with the strange American. Yet there was no alarm in their actions and no
fear, just a concerted effort to not notice him. Tuck thought, This must be
what New York was like before the white man came. And with that in mind,
he stared at a spot in the path exactly twelve feet in front of him and denied
their existence right back. It was better this way. He never knew when he
might have to fly one of their body parts to Japan.

He made his way quickly up the path and soon he could see a glow near

Sarapul’s house. He broke into the clearing and saw the old cannibal and
Kimi sitting around a fire, working on something. Sewing, it looked like.

“Kimi,” Tuck said, “you shouldn’t be up.”

Kimi looked up from his work. There was a huge piece of blue nylon

draped over his and Sarapul’s laps. “I feel better. You fixed me, boss.”

Tuck handed him the pills. “Take two of these now and two a day until

they’re gone.”

“Sarapul give me kava. It make the hurt stop.”

“These aren’t for the hurt. These are for infection. Take them, okay?”

“Okay, boss. You want to help?”

“What are you guys making?”

“I’ll show you.” Kimi started to rise and his face twisted with pain.

Sarapul pushed him back down. “I will show.” The old cannibal

snatched up the kerosene lantern and gestured for Tuck to follow him into
the jungle.

Tuck looked back at Kimi. “You take those pills. And don’t move

around much, I’m not sure how well those stitches will hold. You had a big
hole in you.”

“Okay, boss.”

Sarapul disappeared into the jungle. Tuck ran after him and almost ran

him over coming out of a patch of small banana trees into an area that
cleared into walking trees, mangroves, and palms. About fifty yards ahead,
Sarapul stopped near the beach. He stood by what appeared to be a large
fallen tree, but when Tuck got closer he saw it was a long sailing canoe.
Sarapul grinned up at Tuck, the light from the lamp making him appear like
some demon from the dark island past. “The palu—the navigator—he
make. I help.” Sarapul ran the light down the length of the canoe. Tuck
could see that one of the tall gunwales was darkened and glazed with age,
while the other had been hewn recently and was bright yellow. He could
smell the fresh wood sap.

There was an outrigger the size of a normal canoe and a platform across

the struts. As canoes went, it was a huge structure, and hewing the hull from
a single piece of wood with hand tools had taken an incredible amount of
work, not to mention skill.

“Kimi did this? This is gorgeous.”

Sarapul nodded, his eyes catching the fire of the lamp. “This boat

broken since before the time of Vincent. Kimi is great navigator.”

“He is?” Tuck had his doubts, given the storm, but then again, as Kimi

had said, they had survived a typhoon in a rowboat. And this craft was no
accident; this was a piece of art. “So you guys are sewing a sail for this?”

“We finish soon. Then palu will teach me to sail. The Shark People will

go to sea again.”

“Where’d you get the nylon for the sail? I can’t see Dr. Curtis thinking

this is a good idea.”

Sarapul climbed into the canoe and dug under a stack of paddles and

lines, each hand-braided from coconut fiber, until he came up with a
tattered mass of nylon straps, Velcro, and plastic buckles with a few shreds
of blue nylon hanging here and there.

“My pack. You guys used my pack?”

“And tent inside.”

“Do you have the stuff that was inside? There were some pills that can

help Kimi.”

Sarapul nodded. He led Tuck back through the jungle to his house. Kimi

had gone inside and was lying down.

“Boss, I don’t feel so good.”

“Hang on. I might have some more medicine.” Actually, Tuck had never

been sure of all the things that Jake Skye had loaded into the pack.

Sarapul retrieved a palm frond basket from the rafters and handed it to

Tucker. Tuck found the antibiotics he had been looking for, as well as
painkillers and aspirin. Even what was left of his cash was in the basket. All
the pills were still dry. Tuck doled out a dose and handed them to the
navigator. “Take these when you have pain, and these take like the other
ones, twice a day, okay?”

“You good doctor, boss.”

“You did a hell of a job on that boat.”

Kimi seemed distressed. “You not tell Sorcerer or Vincent’s white

bitch.”

“No, I won’t tell them.”

Kimi seemed to breathe easier. “Roberto come today. He say you must

see the canoe. But he say you should no tell the Sorcerer.”

“Roberto told you that.”

“He talk funny now,” Kimi said. “Like you, kinda. In American. He tell

me Sepie is okay. She come home soon.”

“I couldn’t get in to see her. There was a guard on the clinic.”

“Dog fuckers,” Kimi said.

Then Tuck told the navigator about the golf game and watched as the

old cannibal held him while he laughed, then curled with pain. “I better
sleep now, boss. You come back. I take you sailing.”

“You got it.” Tuck backed out of the house and waited until Sarapul

joined him with the lamp. “You know which pills to give him?”

Sarapul nodded. Tuck started down the path toward the village, but

pulled up a minute later when he heard the cannibal running after him.

“Hey, pilot. Vincent send you to us, huh?”

“I don’t know.”

“You tell Vincent I wasn’t going to eat you. Okay?”

Tuck smiled. “I’ll try to smuggle you some Spam next time I come.”

Sarapul smiled back.

The Shark men were applying new coats of red paint to their bamboo

rifles by the light of a kerosene lamp. They moved around on the logs and
Tuck took a seat by Malink. Without a word, the young man who was
pouring handed Tuck the cup. He drained it and handed it back.

“What’s the deal with the rifles?” Tuck asked Malink.

“Vincent’s army,” Malink said. “Vincent said we must always be ready

to fight the enemies of the United States of America.”

“Oh,” Tuck said. “Why red?”

Malink looked at Tuck as if he was something he had stepped in. “It is

the color of Vincent’s brother.”

“Yeah?” Tuck didn’t get it.

“Vincent’s brother, Santa Claus. Red is his color. You must know that.”

Tuck couldn’t help it. He let his mouth fall open. “Santa Claus is

Vincent’s brother?”

“Yes, Santa Claus brings excellent cargo for everyone, but only once a

year. He comes in a sleigh on the snow. You know, right?”

“Right. But I don’t get the connection.”

Malink looked as if it was all he could do not to tell Tuck how

incredibly dense he really was. “Well, we have no snow, so Vincent will
come in a plane. Not once a year. When Vincent come, he will bring cargo

every day. More than he gives through the Sky Priestess. More than Santa
Claus.”

“And Vincent told you this, that he was Santa’s brother?”

Malink nodded. “His skinny brother, he say. So we make rifles red.”

Malink watched for signs that Tuck was getting it. Tuck wasn’t giving
them. “Even Father Rodriguez know about Santa Claus,” Malink insisted.

“Okay,” Tuck said, “how about moving that cup around the circle a little

faster, guys?”

“Vincent will bring us real rifles when he come. We must be always

ready to fight,” Malink said.

“Who?” Tuck asked. “Have you guys ever been attacked?”

“Once,” Malink said. “When I was boy, some guys from New Guinea

come in canoe. We no like those guys. We go in our canoes to kill them.”

“And what happened?”

“It got dark.”

“And?”

“We come home. Those guys from New Guinea pretty lucky no one

know how to navigate in the dark.”

“No palu?” Tuck asked, using the native word for “navigator.”

“Japanese kill them. No palu left, except maybe one.”

“That’s why you didn’t turn Kimi over to the Sorcerer?”

Malink nodded and trouble crossed his brow. “I am thinking, if Vincent

send you, how come the Sorcerer not know you here? And how you not
know Santa Claus?”

Tuck noticed that the men had stopped painting their rifles and talking

among themselves to listen to his answer. There was pressure here, beyond
whether he’d be able to drink or not. He told them what they needed to hear.
“Vincent called me from the land of armored possums to come to the island
of the Shark People. I am a flyer, as Vincent was a flyer. He does not tell me
everything, and he does not tell the Sorcerer everything. Vincent is
sometimes mysterious, but we must trust his judgment.”

Malink smiled. “Let us drink to this flyer. Then we go to sleep.” To

Tuck, Malink said: “Tomorrow is the hunt.”

How the Shark People Got Their Name

When the pounding came at his door just after dawn, Tuck prepared himself
mentally to meet the smiling face of Sebastian Curtis, who would be overly
cheerful at the prospect of trouncing the pilot at another round of gravel
golf, but when he opened the door, there was Beth Curtis wearing a long-
sleeved white cotton dress and a huge sun hat with a brim that fell over her
face like a lampshade.

Tuck had on hand-me-down boxer shorts that showed more of his

morning bulge than he was comfortable with. Strange, a month ago he was
ready to sell his soul for this physiological phenomenon, and today it was
an embarrassment.

“Good morning,” he said. “I was expecting the doc.”

“Oh, did you two have plans?”

“No, I just…never mind. Would you like to come in for some coffee?”

He gestured to the small kitchen nook.

“Why don’t you make yourself a cup and bring it with you? I have

something to show you.”

“Sure. Just give me a second.”

She waited by the door while he threw a pot of water on the stove,

dressed quickly and combed his hair, then poured the water over some
coffee grounds and stirred in some powdered milk. “I’m ready. What’s up?”

“I want to show you something on the other side of the island.”

“Outside of the compound?”

“Near the village. I think you’ll enjoy it.”

Tuck walked with her out into the morning sun, nursing his coffee as

they went. There were no guards in sight anywhere. The wide gate to the
runway was open.

“Where’s the ninjas?”

“You call them that too? That’s funny.” She laughed, but because he

couldn’t see her face under the hat, he couldn’t tell if there was any
sincerity in it.

She put her hand on his arm and let him lead her across the runway like

a Victorian lady under escort.

“Do you ever miss your family?” she asked as they walked.

Tuck was taken by surprise. “My family? No. We parted on less than

favorable terms. I fell out of contact with them long before I came out
here.”

“I’m sorry. Really. Is it difficult for you?”

Tuck thought she might be joking. “My mother and my uncle are my

only real family. They married after my father was killed. I wasn’t pleased.”

“You’re kidding. I thought they only did that in West Virginia. Aren’t

you from California?”

“She married my father’s brother, not her brother. Still, I don’t miss

them.”

“What about your friends?”

Tuck thought for a second. Things had changed for him since he’d last

seen Jake Skye. In a way he’d taken on some responsibility. He was acting
on his own, without a net. He wished that he could tell Jake about it. “Yeah,
I miss my friends sometimes.”

“Me too, Tucker. I’d like to be your friend.”

“You have Sebastian.”

“Yes, I do, don’t I.”

They walked in silence until they entered the village, which was

deserted except for a few dogs and too many roosters. “Where is
everybody?” Tuck reminded himself not to let it appear that any of this was
familiar to him. “Is this where the natives live?”

“They’re all at the beach. Today is the day of the hunt.”

“The hunt?”

“You’ll see. It’s a surprise.”

As they passed the bachelors’ house, Tuck peeked through he door. He

could see someone sleeping inside. Beth led the way to the beach and
Tucker looked back. Sepie stood in the doorway wearing only a bandage
around her ribs. She waved and Tuck risked a quick smile and turned away.
They were going to give him away. One hint of recognition and he was
screwed.

The women, children, and old men were all lined up on the beach. Tuck

had never seen most of the women and children. There must have been
three hundred people there. The only familiar face was Favo, the old man
from the drinking circle, who showed no recognition when he looked at
Tuck. The younger men were out in the water, standing knee deep on the
reef in the light low-tide surf. Each of the men held a five-foot-long stick

with a rope tied at one end. They wore long knives tucked into cords tied
around their waists.

“Fishing?” Tuck asked.

“Just watch,” Beth said. “This is how the Shark People got their name.”

Tuck spotted Malink coming out of the jungle with four other men.

Each carried a large plastic bucket.

“They make the buckets out of net floats from the huge factory ships,”

Beth Curtis said. “The plastic is tougher than anything they can make.”

“What’s in them?” Tuck watched as each man swam out to the reef

holding a bucket on his head.

“Pig and chicken blood.”

Two men helped Malink onto the reef and took his bucket from him.

Malink looked out to sea and said something in his native language, then
looked to the people on the beach as if to say, “Ready.”

The chief shouted a command to the men in the water and they dumped

the buckets of blood. Soon they were all knee deep in crimson surf and the
bloodstain swept out into the ocean in a great cloud.

“Isn’t that dangerous?” Tuck asked.

“Of course. It’s insane.”

Interesting choice of words. Tuck was surprised that no one seemed to

notice or make a big deal of Beth’s presence. “Why aren’t they drumming
and kowtowing to you?”

“They aren’t allowed to when I’m dressed like this. It’s a rule. I need

my privacy at times.”

“Of course,” Tuck said.

A fin appeared in the water about twenty yards out from the reef.

Someone shouted and Tuck recognized Abo from his warrior’s topknot.
Malink nodded and Abo dove into the water and swam toward the shark.
Before he was ten yards out, the fin turned toward him.

More fins appeared and as Malink nodded, more young men dove into

the water with their sticks.

“Shit, this is suicide,” Tuck said. He watched as the first shark made a

pass at Abo, who moved out of its way like a bullfighter.

“You’ve got to stop this.” Tuck couldn’t remember ever feeling such

panic for another human being.

Beth Curtis squeezed his arm. “They know what they’re doing.”

The shark circled and made a second pass at Abo, but this time the

young warrior didn’t move out of the way. He shoved his stick into the
shark’s jaws as if it was a bit, then flipped himself on the shark’s back and
wrapped the cord just behind the pectoral fins, then back to the other end of
the stick so it wouldn’t come out. The water boiled around Abo as the shark
thrashed, but Abo stayed on and, holding the stick like handlebars, he
pulled back to keep the shark from diving and steered him into the shallow
water of the reef, where the other men waited with their knives drawn.

A roar went up from the crowd on the beach as Abo turned the shark

over to the slaughterers and held up his arms in triumph. The men on the
reef slit the shark’s belly and cut off a huge hunk of the liver, which they
handed to Abo. He bit into it, tearing out a ragged chunk and swallowing as
blood ran down his chest.

Soon others were steering sharks onto the reef and the water beyond

was alive with fins. The red cloud expanded as the sharks died and bled and
more came to take their place. The gutted sharks were brought onto the
beach, where the women continued the butchering, handing pieces of the
raw flesh to the children as treats or prying out serrated teeth and giving
them to little boys as trophies.

One of the men actually stood up on the back of a huge hammerhead

that he was steering to the reef and nearly castrated himself on the dorsal fin
as he fell. But the shark was held fast and died on the reef with the others.

In half an hour the shark hunt was over. The sea was red with blood for

a thousand yards in all directions and the beach was littered with the
corpses of a hundred sharks: black tips, white tips, hammerheads, blue, and
mako. Some of the deadliest creatures had been taken like they were
guppies in a net, and not one of the Shark People was hurt, although Tuck
noticed that many were bleeding from abrasions on the inside of their thighs
where they had rubbed against the sharks’ skin during their ride. The Shark
People were ecstatic, and every one of them was drenched in blood.

Tuck was stunned. He’d never seen such courage or such slaughter

before, and he was getting the willies thinking about all the time he had
spent swimming in these waters at night.

Malink walked up the beach dragging a leopard shark by its gills. His

Buddha belly was dripping in blood. He looked up at Tucker and risked a
smile.

“That’s the chief,” Beth Curtis said. “He’s really too old for this, but he

won’t stay on shore.”

“Do the sharks ever get any of them?”

“Sometimes. Usually just a bite. A lot of sutures, but no one’s been

killed since I’ve been on the island.”

No one hunting sharks, anyway, Tuck thought. A little girl who had

been helping her mother shyly peeked over the carcass of a big
hammerhead, then ran up to Tucker and quickly touched him on the knee
before retreating to the safety of her mother.

“That’s strange,” Beth Curtis said. “The women and girls won’t have

anything to do with a white man. Even when they come to Sebastian, they
talk to him through a brother or husband—and he speaks their language.”

Tuck didn’t answer. He was still looking at the little girl’s back. She had

a massive pink scar that ran like a smile from her sternum, under her arm, to
her backbone at exactly the place where the kidney would be. Tuck felt sick
to his stomach.

“I think I’ve seen enough, Beth. Can we go?”

“Can’t deal with the sight of blood?”

“Something like that.”

As they walked back through the village, Tuck noticed a woman and a

little boy sitting outside of one of the cookhouses. The mother was holding
the boy and singing to him softly as she rocked him. Both of his eyes were
bandaged with gauze pads. Tucker approached the woman and she pulled
the child to her breast.

Beth Curtis caught Tuck’s arm and tried to pull him back. Tuck shook

her off and went to the woman.

“What’s wrong with him?” Tuck asked.

The woman slid across the gravel, away from him.

“Tucker!” Beth Curtis said, “Leave her alone. You’re scaring her.”

“It’s okay,” Tuck whispered to the woman. “I’m the pilot. Vincent sent

me.”

The woman seemed to calm down, and although her eyes went wide

with wonder, she managed a small smile.

Tuck reached out and touched the child’s head. “What’s wrong with

him?”

The woman held out the boy as if presenting him for baptism. “He is

chosen,” she said. She looked at the Sky Priestess for approval.

Tuck stood and backed away from her. He was afraid to look at Beth,

afraid that he might strangle her on the spot. Instead, calmly, deliberately,
although it took all his effort to keep from shaking, he said, “We’d better
get back.” He led the way through the village and back to the compound.

Selling Tucker

The Sky Priestess threw the straw hat across the room, then tore at the high-
buttoned collar of the white dress. She was losing him. She hated that more
than anything: losing control. She ripped the dress down the front and
wrestled out of it.

She stormed across the room, the dress still trailing from one foot, and

pulled a bottle of vodka from the freezer. She poured herself a tumbler and
drank half of it off while still holding the bottle, then refilled the glass while
her temples throbbed with the cold. She carried the bottle and glass to a
chair in front of the television, sat down, and turned it on. Nothing but static
and snow. Sebastian was using the satellite dish. She threw the vodka bottle
at the screen, but missed and it bounced off the case, taking a small chip out
of the plastic.

“Fuck!” She keyed the intercom next to her chair. “’Bastian! Dammit!”

“Yes, my sweet.” His voice was calm and oily.

“What the fuck are you doing? I want to watch TV.”

“I’m just finishing up, sweetheart.”

“We need to talk.” She tossed back another slug of vodka.

“Yes, we do. I’ll be up in a moment.”

“Bring some vodka from your house.”

“As you wish.”

Ten minutes later the Sorcerer walked into her bungalow, the picture of

the patrician physician. He handed her the vodka and sat down across from
her. “Pour me one, would you, darling?”

Before she could catch herself, she’d gotten up and fetched him a glass

from the kitchen. She handed it to him along with the bottle.

“Your dress is torn, dear.”

“No shit.”

“I like the look,” the Sorcerer said, “although I’d have preferred to tear

it off you myself.”

“Not now. I think we have trouble.”

The Sorcerer smiled. “We did, but as of tonight at midnight, our

troubles are over. How was your walk this morning, by the way?”

“I took Case to see the shark hunt. I thought it would keep him from

getting island fever, something different to break the boredom.”

“As opposed to fucking him.”

She wasn’t going to show any surprise, not after he’d laid a trap like

that. “No, in addition to fucking him. It was a mistake.”

“The shark hunt or the fucking?”

She bristled, “The shark hunt. The fucking was fine. He saw the boy

whose corneas we harvested.”

“So.”

“He freaked. I shouldn’t have let him connect the people with the

procedure.”

“But I thought you could handle him.”

He was enjoying this entirely too much for her taste. “Don’t be smug,

’Bastian. What are you going to do, lock him in the back room of the clinic?
We need him.”

“No, we don’t. I’ve hired a new pilot. A Japanese.”

“I thought we’d agreed that…”

“It hasn’t worked using Americans, has it? He starts tonight.”

“How?”

“You’re going to go pick him up. The corporation assures me that he’s

the best, and he won’t ask questions.”

“I’m going to pick him up?”

“We have a heart-lung order. You and Mr. Case need to deliver it.”

“I can’t do it, ’Bastian. I can’t do a performance and a heart-lung

tonight. I’m too jangled.”

“You don’t have to do either, dear. We don’t have to do the surgery.

We’ll make less money on it, but we only have to deliver the donor.”

“But what about doing the choosing?”

“You’ve done that already. You chose when you went to bed with our

intrepid Mr. Case. The heart-lung donor is Tucker Case.”

a slice of mango. Mangoes he had, but anything containing ethyl alcohol
was not to be found. It would be hours before darkness could cover his
escape to the drinking circle, where he intended to get gloriously hammered
if he could look any of the Shark People in the eye and keep his stomach.
Sorry, you guys. Just had to take the edge off of the guilt of blinding a child
to get my own airplane.

He tried to distract himself by reading, but the moral certainties of the

literary spy guys only served to make him feel worse. Television was no
help either. Some sort of Balinese shadow puppet show and Filipino news
special on how swell it was to make American semiconductors for three
bucks a day. He punched the remote to off and tossed it across the room.

Frustration leaped out in a string of curses, followed by “All right, Mr.

Ghost Pilot, where in the hell are you now?”

And there was a knock on the door.

“Kidding,” Tuck said. “I was kidding.”

“Tucker, can I come in?” Beth Curtis said.

“It’s open.” It was always open. There was no lock on it.

He looked away as she entered, afraid that, like the face of the Medusa,

she might turn him to stone—or at least that part of him unaffected by
conscience. She came up behind him and began kneading the muscles in his
shoulders. He did not look back at her and still had no idea if she might be
naked or wearing a clown suit.

“You’re upset. I understand. But it’s not what you think.”

“There’s not a lot of room for misinterpretation.”

“Isn’t there? What if I told you that that boy was blind from birth. His

corneas were healthy, but he was born with atrophied optic nerves.”

“I feel much better, thanks. Kid wasn’t using his eyes, so we ripped

them out.”

He felt her nails dig into his trapezius muscles. “Ripped out is hardly

appropriate. It’s a very delicate operation. And because we did it, another
child is able to see. You seem to be missing that aspect of what we’re doing
here. Every time we deliver a kidney, we’re saving a life.”

She was right. He hadn’t thought about that. “I just fly the plane,” he

said.

“And take the money. You could have this same job back in the States.

You could be flying the organs of accident victims on Life Flight jets and
accomplishing the same thing, except you wouldn’t be making enough to
pay the taxes on what you make here, right?”

No, not exactly, he thought. Back in the States, he couldn’t fly anything

but a hang glider without his license. “I guess so,” he said. “But you could
have told me what you were doing.”

“And have you thinking about the little blind kid at five hundred miles

per hour. I don’t think so.” She bent over and kissed his earlobe lightly.
“I’m not a monster, Tuck. I was a little girl once, with a mother and a father
and a cat named Cupcake. I don’t blind little kids.”

Finally he turned in the chair to face her and was grateful to see that she

was wearing one of her conservative Donna Reed dresses. “What happened
to you, Beth? How in the hell do you get from ‘Here, Cupcake’ to the
Murdering Bitch Goddess of the Shark People?” He immediately regretted
saying it. Not because it wasn’t true, but because he’d given away the fact
that he knew it was. He braced himself for the rage.

She moved to the couch and sat down across from him. Then she curled

into a ball, her face against the cushions, and covered her eyes. He said
nothing. He just watched as her body quaked with silent sobs. He hoped this
wasn’t an act. He hoped that she was so offended that she would take his
murder accusation for hyperbole.

Five full minutes passed before she looked up. Her eyes were red and

she’d managed to smear mascara across one cheek. “It’s your fault,” she
said.

Tuck nodded and tried not to let a smile cross his lips. She was playing

another part, and she didn’t do the victim nearly as well as she did the
seduction queen. He said, “I’m sorry, Beth. I was out of line.”

She seemed surprised and broke character. Evidently, he’d stepped on

her line, the one she’d been thinking of while pretending to cry. A second
for composure and she was back at it. “It’s your fault. I only wanted to have
a friend, not a lover. All men are that way.”

“Then you must not have gotten the newsletter: ‘Men Are Pigs.’ Next

issue is ‘Water Is Wet.’ Don’t miss it.”

She fell out of character again. “What are you saying?”

“You might have been a victim once, but now that’s just a distant

memory you use to rationalize what you do now. You use men because you
can. I can’t figure out what happened in San Francisco, though. A woman
who looks like you should have been able to find an easier way to fuck her
way to a fortune. The doc must have been a cakewalk for you.”

“And you weren’t?”

Tuck felt as if someone had injected him with a truth serum that was

lighting up his mind, and not with revelations about Beth Curtis. The light
was shining on him.

“Yeah, I guess I was a cakewalk. So what? Did you think for a minute

that you might try not to go to bed with me?

“Other than when I found out that you’d almost torn your balls off, not

for a minute.” She was gritting her teeth.

“And how big a task do you think you took on? It’s not like you were

corrupting me or anything. I’ve been on the other end of the game for years.
I know you, Beth. I am you.”

“You don’t know anything.” She was visibly trying not to scream, but

Tuck could see the blood rising in her face.

He pushed on. “Freud says I’m this way because I was never hugged as

a child. What’s your excuse?”

“Don’t be smug. I could have you right now if I wanted.” As if to prove

her point, she placed her feet at either end of the coffee table and began to
pull up her dress. She wore white stockings and nothing else underneath.

“Not interested,” Tuck said. “Been there, done that.”

“You’re so transparent,” she said. She crawled over the table and did a

languid cat stretch as she ran her hands up the inside of his thighs. By the
time her hands got to his belt buckle, she was face-to-face with him, almost
touching noses. Tuck could smell the alcohol on her breath. She flicked her
tongue on his lips. He just looked in her eyes, as cold and blue as crystal,
like his own. She wasn’t fooling anyone, and in realizing that, Tuck realized
that he also had never fooled anybody. Every Mary Jean lady, every bar
bimbo, every secretary, flight attendant, or girl at the grocery store had seen
him coming and let him come.

Beth unzipped his pants and took him in her hand, her face still only a

millimeter from his, their eyes locked. “Your armor seems to have a weak
spot, tough guy.”

“Nope,” Tuck said.

She slid down to the floor and took him into her mouth. Tuck

suppressed a gasp. He watched her head moving on him. To keep himself
from touching her he grabbed the arms of the chair and the wicker creaked
as if it was being punished.

“That’s a pretty convincing argument,” said the male voice. Tuck

looked up to see Vincent sitting on the couch where Beth had been a minute
ago.

“Jesus!” Tuck said. Beth let out a muffled moan and dug her nails into

his ass.

“Wrong!” Vincent said. “But never play cards with that guy.” The flyer

was smoking a cigarette, but Tuck couldn’t smell it. “Oh, don’t worry. She
can’t hear me. Can’t see me either, not that she’s looking or anything.”

Tuck just shook his head and pushed up on the arms of the chair. Beth

took his movement for enthusiasm and paused to look up at him. Tuck met
her gaze with eyes the size of golf balls. She smiled, her lipstick a bit worse
for the wear, a string of saliva trailed from her lips. “Just enjoy. You lost.
Losers flourish here.” She licked her lips and returned to her task.

“Dame makes a point,” Vincent said. “I give you three to one she brings

you around to her way of thinking. Whatta ya say?”

“No.” Tuck waved the flyer off and shut his eyes.

“Oh, yes,” Beth said, as if speaking into the microphone.

Vincent flicked his cigarette butt out the window. “I’m not distracting

you, am I? I just dropped in to take up on the dame’s side, as she is unable
to speak for herself at present.”

Tuck was experiencing the worst case of bed spins he’d ever had—in a

chair. Sexual vertigo.

“Of course,” Vincent continued, “this is kinda turning into a religious

experience for you, ain’t it? Go with what you know, right? You let her run
the show, you got no decisions to make and no worries ever after. Not a
worry in the world. You got my word on that. Although, if it was me, I’d
check out her story just to be safe. Look in the doc’s computer maybe.”

Beth was working her mouth and hands like she was pumping water on

an inner fire that was consuming her with each second that passed. Tuck
heard his own breath rise to a pant and the wicker chair crackle and creak
and skid on the wooden floor. He was helping her now, wanting her to
quench that flame and that was all there was.

“You think about it,” Vincent said. “You’ll do the right thing. You owe

me, remember.” He faded and disappeared.

“What does that mean?” Tuck said, then he moaned, arched his back,

and came so hard he thought he would pass out, but she kept on and on until
he couldn’t stand the intensity and had to push her away. She landed on the
floor at his feet and looked up like an angry she-cat.

“You’re mine,” she said. She was still breathing hard and her dress was

still up around her waist. “We’re friends.”

It came out like a command, but Tuck heard a note of desperation below

the panting and the ire, and he felt a wrenching pain in his chest like
nothing he’d ever felt before. “I know you, Beth. I am you,” he said. But
not anymore, he thought. He said, “Yes, we’re friends.”

She smiled like a little girl who’d been given a pony for her birthday. “I

knew it,” she said. She climbed to her feet and smoothed down her skirt,
then bent and kissed him on the eyebrow. He tried to smile.

She said, “I’ll see you in a few hours. We’re flying out at nine. I have to

go see to Sebastian.”

Tuck zipped up his pants. “And get ready for your performance?” he

said.

“No, this isn’t a medical flight. Just supplies.”

Tuck nodded. “Beth, was that little boy blind from birth?”

“Of course,” she said, looking offended. She was more convincing as

the Sky Priestess.

“You go see to Sebastian,” Tuck said.

After she had left, Tuck looked at the ceiling and said, “Vincent, just in

case you’re listening, I’m not buying your bullshit. If you want to help me,
fine. But if not, stay out of my way.”

Pay No Attention to That Man Behind the Computer

Tuck went into the bathroom and washed his face, then combed his hair. He
studied his face in the mirror, looking for that scary glint that he’d seen in
Beth Curtis’s eyes. He wasn’t her. He wasn’t as smart as she was, but he
wasn’t as crazy either. He cringed with the realization that he had spent
most of his adult life being a jerk or a patsy and sometimes both
simultaneously. And it was no small irony to have had an epiphany during a
blow job. Vincent, whatever he was, had been playing some kind of game
from the beginning, mixing lies and truth, helping him only to get him into
trouble. There was no grand bailout coming, and if he was going to find out
what was really being planned for him, he had to get into the computer.

The best time to sneak into the clinic was right now, in broad daylight.

He hadn’t seen any of the guards all day and Beth was “seeing to
Sebastian.” If he got caught, he’d simply say he was trying to get the
weather for tonight’s flight. If the doc could e-mail and fax all over the
world, then surely he would have access to weather services. It didn’t
matter; he didn’t think he’d have a hard time convincing the doc that he was
just being stupid. His entire life had set up the cover.

He grabbed some paper and a pencil from the nightstand and stuffed

them into his back pocket. While he was in there, he might as well see if he
could pick up the coordinates for Okinawa. If he could sneak them into the
nav computer on the Lear, he might just be able to get the military to force

the jet down there. He didn’t have a chance in hell of getting there on his
own navigational skills.

He stepped out on the lanai and gave a sidelong glance to the guards’

quarters to make sure no one was just inside the door watching his
bungalow. Satisfied, he walked to the clinic and tried the door. It was
unlocked.

He checked the compound again, saw nothing, and slipped into the

clinic. He was immediately met by the sound of voices coming from the
back room. Male voices, speaking Japanese. He tiptoed through the door
that led into the operating room and opened it a crack. The door to the far
side was open. He could see all the ninjas gathered around one of the
hospital beds playing cards. It was visiting day for Stripe. He palmed the
door shut and went to the computer.

There had been a time when Tuck was so ignorant of computers that he

thought a mouse pad was Disney’s brand of sanitary napkin, but that was
before he met Jake Skye. Jake had taught him how to access the weather
maps, charts, and how to file his flight plans through the computer. In the
process Tuck had also learned what Jake considered the most important
computer skill, how to hack into someone else’s stuff.

The three CRTs were all on, two green over black and one color. Tuck

focused on the color screen. It was friendlier and it was displaying a screen
saver he recognized, a slide show of dolphins. He moved the mouse and the
familiar Windows screen appeared. There was a cheer from the back room
and Tuck nearly drove the mouse off the top of the desk. Must have been a
good hand.

He expected to see obscure medical programs, something he’d never

figure out, but it looked like the doc used the same stuff everyone in the
States did. Tuck clicked on the database icon and the program jumped to fill
the screen. He opened a file menu; there were only two. One was named

SUPPLIES, the other TT. Tissue types? He clicked it. The ENTER PASSWORD
field opened. “Shit.”

Jake had always told him that people used obvious passwords if you

knew the people. Something they wouldn’t forget. Put yourself in their
place, you’ll figure out their passwords, and don’t eliminate the possibility
that it may be written on a Post-it note stuck to the computer. Tuck looked
for Post-it notes, then open the desk drawers and riffled through the papers
for anything that looked like a password. He pushed out the chair and
looked under the desk. Bingo! There were two long numbers written on
tape on the bottom of the desk drawer. He pulled the paper and pencil from
his pocket and copied them down, then entered the first one in the password
field.

<INVALID PASSWORD> was the response

Tuck typed in the second number.

<INVALID PASSWORD>

Look for the obvious. Tuck typed SKY PRIESTESS.

<INVALID PASSWORD>

The guards were laughing in the other room. Tuck typed in VINCENT.

<INVALID PASSWORD>

DOCTOR.

<INVALID PASSWORD>

It would be something that the doc would be sitting here thinking about.

It would be on his mind.

Tuck typed BETH.

<INVALID PASSWORD>

BETHS TITS.

Wait a minute. This was the doc thinking. He typed BETHS BREASTS.

The file scrolled open, filling the screen with a list of names down the

left side followed by rows and columns of letters and numbers. All of the
names Tuck could see were native. Across the top were five columns that
must be the tissue types and blood types, next to those, kidney, liver, heart,
lung, cornea, and pancreas. Christ, it was an inventory sheet. And the heart,
lung, liver, and pancreas categories convinced him once and for all that
there was no benevolent intention behind the Curtises’ plan. They were
going to the meat market with the Shark People until the village was empty.

Tuck typed in SEPIE in the FIND field. An X had been placed in all the

organ categories except kidney. There he found an H and a date. H?
Harvested. The date was the day they harvested it.

He typed in PARDEE, JEFFERSON. No “x’s” in any of the columns, but two

H’s under heart and lungs. Of course the other organs weren’t marked.
They’d been donated to the sharks and were no longer available. There was
nothing under SOMMERS, JAMES. That too made sense. How would they get
the organs to Japan without a pilot. Tuck wished he’d gotten the little blind
boy’s name. He couldn’t take the time to scroll though all three hundred or
so names looking for missing corneas. He typed in CASE, TUCKER. There
were H’s marked under the heart and lung category. The harvest date was
today.

“You fuckers,” he said. There was a shuffling in the back room and he

stood so quickly the chair rolled back and banged into a cabinet on the other
side of the office. The database was still up on the screen. Tuck reached out
and punched the button on the monitor. It clicked off as Mato came through
the door.

“What are you guys doing here?” Tuck said.

Mato pulled up. He seemed confused. He was supposed to be doing the

yelling.

“We’re flying tonight,” Tuck said. “Do you guys have the plane fueled

up?”

Mato shook his head. “Then get on it. I wondered where you were.”

Mato just looked at him.

“Go!” Tuck said. “Now!”

Mato started to slink toward the door, obviously not comfortable with

leaving Tuck in the clinic. Another guard came into the office and when
Mato looked up, Tuck snatched his paper and pencil from the desk. He
dropped the pencil and when he bent to pick it up, he hit the main power
switch on the computer. The computer would reboot when turned on and
the doctor would only know that it had been turned off. He’d never suspect
that someone had been into the donor files.

“Let’s go, you guys.”

Tuck pushed past Mato out the office door, shoving the paper in his

pocket as he went.

He left the hangar and went back to his bungalow. Unless he found

some way to get off the island, he was going to be short a couple of lungs
and a heart come midnight. Beth would have at least one guard on the plane
with her, probably two, given the circumstances. And he had no doubt that
she’d shoot him in the crotch and make him fly to Japan anyway. There had
to be another way. Like a boat. Kimi’s boat. Didn’t these guys travel
thousands of miles over the Pacific in canoes like that? What could the doc
do? He’d been so careful about safeguarding the island that the guards
didn’t even have a boat to chase him with.

Tuck put on his shorts and took his fins and mask to the bathroom. He

knotted the ends of his trouser legs and started filling them with supplies. A
shirt, a light jacket, some disinfectant, sunscreen, a short kitchen knife. He
found a small jar of sugar in the kitchen, dumped the sugar into the sink,
and filled the jar with matches and Band-Aids. When he was ready to seal
it, he saw the slip of paper he’d written on in the office sticking from the
pocket of the trousers and shoved it into the jar as an afterthought. He
topped off the pants bag with a pair of sneakers, then pulled the webbed belt
tight to cinch it all up. He could swim with the pants legs like water wings.
The wet clothing would get heavy, but not until he hit the beach on the far
side of the minefield. To Tuck’s way of thinking, once he was past the
minefield he was halfway there. Then all he had to do was convince the old
cannibal to give him the canoe, enough food and water to get somewhere,
and Kimi to navigate. Where in the hell would they go? Yap? Guam?

One step at a time. First he had to get out of the compound. He checked

the guards’ positions. Leaning out the window, he could see three—no, four
—at the hangar. He waited. He’d never tried to make the swim while it was
still light. They’d be able to see him in the water from as far away as the
runway. He just had to hope that they didn’t look in that direction.

The guards were rolling barrels into the hangar to hand-pump the jet

fuel into the Lear. Two on each barrel, four out in the compound, bingo.
One guy had to be in the hangar cranking the pump. And Stripe was in the
clinic. Showtime!

Tuck went into the bathroom, lifted the hatch, threw down the pants bag

and his swimming stuff, and followed it through.

He weighed sneaking against running, stealth against speed, and

decided to go like a newborn turtle for the water. The only people who
might see him were the Doc and Beth, and they were probably in the
process of pushing the twin beds together and doing the Ozzie and Harriet
double-skin sweat slap—or whatever sort of weird shit they did. He hoped
it was painful.

He broke into a dead run across the gravel, feeling the coral dig at his

feet and the ferns whip at his ankles but keeping his focus on the beach. As

he passed the clinic, he thought he saw some movement out of the corner of
his eye, but he didn’t turn. He was Carl Lewis, Michael Johnson, and Edwin
Moses (except he was white and slow), a single head turn could cause him
to lose his stride and the race—and boy, does that beach seem farther when
you’re running than when you’re sneaking. He almost tumbled when he hit
the sand, but managed a controlled forward stumble that put him face-first
in four inches of water. The baby turtle had made it to the water, but now he
faced a whole new set of dangers at sea, not the least of which was trying to
swim with a pair of stuffed khakis around his neck.

He kicked a few feet out into the water, put on his fins and mask, and

began the swim.

Escape

Kimi was trying to call up thunder and was having no luck at all. He’d been
chanting and waving his arms for half an hour and there still wasn’t a cloud
in the sky.

“You’re not holding your arms right,” Sarapul said. He was lying under

a palm tree, chewing a betel nut and offering constructive criticism to the
navigator. Sepie lay nearby watching.

“I am too,” Kimi said. “I’m holding them the same way you do.”

“Maybe it doesn’t work for Filipinos.”

“It’s because I’m shot,” Kimi said. “If I wasn’t shot, I could do this.”

Sarapul scanned the horizon. Not even a bird. “That’s it. It’s because

you’re shot.” He spit out a red stream of betel nut juice. “And you’re not
holding your arms right.”

Kimi resumed chanting and waving his arms.

“Hey!” Sarapul said.

“What? Did you hear thunder? I knew I could do it.”

“No. Be quiet. Someone is calling you.”

Kimi listened. Someone was calling him, and they were getting closer.

He limped down the beach toward the voice and saw Tucker Case coming
around the island.

“Hey, boss, what you doin’ out here during the day? The Sorcerer gonna

be plenty mad at you.”

Tuck was out of breath. “He is mad. I need your boat, Kimi. And I need

you to navigate for me.”

“Not his ship,” Sarapul said. “My ship.”

“The doc is going to kill me if I don’t get off the island. Can I use your

boat?”

The old cannibal was silent for a moment, thinking. “Where you go?”

“I don’t know. Guam, Yap, anywhere.”

“Can I come?”

“Yes, yes, if I can use your boat.”

“Okay, we leave five days. Right, Kimi?”

Kimi looked at Tuck. “It not be good sailing for five days.”

“I have to go now, Kimi.”

“Can Sepie come?”

Sepie stepped back, surprised. “You want to take me? Women don’t

sail.”

“You come,” Kimi said. “Okay, boss?” he said to Tuck.

Tuck nodded. “Whatever. Sepie, go tell Malink that I need everyone to

bring drinking coconuts. Many drinking coconuts with the husks taken off.
Bananas, mangoes, papaya, and dried fish if he has any.”

“There is plenty shark meat,” Sepie said.

“I need it now, Sepie. Go. Tell Malink that Vincent demands it.”

Sarapul began to chop at the underbrush in front of the sailing canoe to

clear a path to the water. “Put down palm leaf to slide ship on,” he told
Tuck. Tuck began to gather long palm fronds and lay them down in a path
to the water.

“Kimi, can you go get the things from my pack? There’s things we can

use.”

“What about Roberto?”

“Call for him, but go get the stuff. The money too.”

“Okay, boss.”

Ten minutes later Tuck looked up to see Malink leading a line of Shark

People through the jungle. All were carrying baskets of food and husked
green coconuts.

“You are leaving?”

“Yes, I have to go, Chief.”

“You are taking our ship and our navigator.”

“And our mispel,” Abo added from behind Malink.

“I have to go, Malink. The Sorcerer and the Sky Priestess are going to

kill me.”

“But Vincent send you. How they hurt you?”

“They don’t really believe in Vincent. They use him to get you to give

up the chosen, Malink. They’re going to start killing off your people too.”

“They no kill the Chosen. Chosen are for Vincent.”

“No. I told you before. They take out your organs and sell them to be

put inside of other people.”

Malink scoffed. “You can no put one man kidney in other man.”

“It was in People magazine. Didn’t you see it? Demi Moore, Melanie

Griffith, Mariel Hemingway, all of them? You didn’t read about it?”

Recognition lit up Malink’s face. “Boob job!”

“Yes,” Tuck said. “Where do you think they get those boobs?”

“Oh, no.”

“Yes.”

“He speaks the truth,” Malink said to the islanders. “It was in People.

Put the food in the boat.”

He took Tuck aside. “You will come back?”

“I’ll try.”

“And bring our navigator.”

“I’ll try, Malink. I really will.”

“You try.”

“Tide,” Kimi called. “We go now.”

The center of the canoe was filled with coconuts, fruit, and bundles of

dried shark meat wrapped in banana leaves. Kimi directed the men to get on
either side of the canoe and push it over the mat of palm fronds to the water.
When it was afloat, Tuck lifted Sepie in, then climbed in himself. Kimi,
standing on the outrigger platform, started to hoist the sail. It was the shape
of a tortilla chip stood on end with a bite taken out at the top. Tuck
recognized the pieces of his pack sewn into the nylon patchwork.

“Where is Sarapul?” Kimi said.

“Here!” The old cannibal was running out of the jungle, seeming

stronger now than Tuck had ever seen him. He had gone back for his spear,
a long shaft of mahogany with a wickedly barbed metal tip. Tuck caught the
old man by the forearm and pulled him out of the surf and into the canoe.

The canoe was already fifty yards from the shore. Sarapul took the long

oar at the rear and steered it toward the channel as Kimi stood on the
outrigger platform and manipulated the sail.

The Shark People stood on the beach looking stunned. A few waved.

Malink looked forlorn, Abo heartbroken.

“Thanks,” Tuck shouted over the wave. “Thank you, Malink.”

“You will come back.” Malink said. It was not a question.

Tuck turned to look out to sea, then looked back to see the Shark People

wading into the water after them. Behind them he saw a dark figure come
out of the jungle.

There was no warning shot or demand to halt. Stripe came out onto the

beach and opened up with the Uzi. Tuck pushed Sepie’s head down under
the edge of the gunwale just as a line of bullets stitched and splintered the
wood. Kimi screamed and Tuck looked up to see a row of red geysers open
in his back. He clung to one of the lines for a second, then fell into the sea.

Another scream, this one from Sarapul, the hideous screech of a raging

lynx, and the old man went over the side. The gunfire stopped and Tuck
risked popping his head up to look back to the beach. Stripe was slamming
a new clip into the Uzi as he waded after the canoe. The Shark People had
fled from the water and disappeared into the jungle or were cowering on the
beach, unable to move.

With the sail loose, the canoe had swung around and was being carried

by the tide toward the reef. They would miss the channel by only a few feet,
but they would miss it and run aground on the reef. Tuck reached up to grab

the steering oar just as Stripe let off another burst from the Uzi. At a
hundred yards he was spraying a wide pattern, but Tuck heard a couple of
bullets thunk into the side of the canoe.

The normally crystal water near the shore was clouded with the sand

and silt thrown up by the Shark People’s retreat, so Stripe did not see the
dark shape moving through the water toward him. He wanted a shot. He set
the Uzi to semiautomatic and unfolded the stock to take careful aim.

Tuck was standing now, leaning hard on the steering oar to bring the

canoe around and through the channel. The outrigger scraped over the reef
as the canoe approached broadside.

Stripe lined up the sights between Tuck’s shoulder blades, held his

breath, let it out, then squeezed the trigger.

Sarapul came out of the water like an angry marlin, spear-first. The

metal point entered just under Stripe’s chin and exited his skull at the
crown, dragging brain and bone on its evil barb. As Stripe fell back, he
emptied the clip into the sky.

The canoe slipped through the channel into the open ocean. Out on the

horizon, a small cloud appeared and dropped a mercurial lightning bolt into
the sea, followed a few seconds later by Kimi’s thunder.

West with the Bat

The Sorcerer stood on the beach over the supine body of Yamata. The spear
was still sticking out of the guard’s skull like a gruesome note spindle
waiting for a canceled receipt from the Reaper.

“How did this happen?” the Sorcerer asked.

Malink looked at his feet. The Sorcerer seemed more surprised than

angry. A day had passed since Sarapul had killed Stripe, and Malink had
waited in fear for the time when the Sorcerer would come looking for him.
The other guards had torn the village apart looking for Tuck, and Malink
had confessed that the pilot had left the island in an old canoe, but he had
claimed ignorance of the whereabouts of the guard. Sarapul had been right.
They should have pushed the body out to the edge of the reef for the sharks
to eat. Actually, that had been Sarapul’s second suggestion for the disposal
of the body.

“It look like accident,” Malink said. “Maybe he running and fall on his

spear.”

“I want the man who did this, Malink,” the Sorcerer said.

“He is dead.”

“The Filipino did this?”

Malink nodded. The other guards had found Kimi’s body in the village,

where the Shark People had been preparing it for burial.

“I don’t think so. The Filipino took four bullets in the back. Whoever

did this was very strong. Now you must tell me the truth or Vincent will be
angry.”

Malink was not afraid of Vincent’s wrath. He only now realized that all

the wrath his people had ever felt from Vincent had come by way of the
Sorcerer and the Sky Priestess. He was afraid of the Sky Priestess.

“The American do this before he leave in the canoe. The guard shoot

the girl-man and the American kill the guard.”

“Why didn’t you tell me about this before?”

“I am afraid Vincent will be angry.”

“Where did they get a canoe? None of the Shark People know how to

build a canoe.”

“It was the girl-man. He know how. He build with Sarapul.”

The Sorcerer balled his fists. “And Sarapul is gone too.”

Malink nodded. “He sail away.”

“Do you know where they were going?”

Malink shook his head. “No. Sarapul is banished. We no talk with him.”

“Where’s the guard’s weapon?”

Malink shrugged.

The Sorcerer turned his back and began walking up the beach. “Have

your people bury this man, Malink. Don’t let the other guards see him. And
be ready. The Sky Priestess will visit you soon.”

Sarapul crawled out from some nearby ferns and stood at Malink’s side,

watching the Sorcerer walk away. “We should have eaten this guy,” he said,
kicking Yamata’s body.

“This is very bad,” Malink said.

“He killed my friend.” Sarapul kicked the body again.

“The Sky Priestess will be very angry.” Malink was, once again, feeling

the weight of his position.

The old cannibal shrugged. “Can I have my spear back?”

He did know how to sail. It was required knowledge for a kid growing

up in a wealthy family near San Diego, but celestial navigation was a
complete mystery. Sepie was no help at all. Even if she knew anything, she
hadn’t said a word since Kimi had been shot. Tuck forced her to drink the
water from a couple of green coconuts, but other than that, she had lain in
the bow motionless for twenty-four hours.

He was now looking at his second sunset at sea. He corrected his course

and realized that they must have been traveling north most of the day. How
far, he couldn’t guess. He steered southwest until the sun lay on the water
like a glowing platter, hoping to correct some of the damage.

He really wished that Sepie would come around. He needed some sleep,

and he needed some relief from his own thoughts. Thoughts of the Sky
Priestess, of the Sorcerer, and of his dead friend Kimi. Despite the
navigator’s surly manner, he had been a good kid. Tuck, who had been
brought up in relative luxury, couldn’t imagine having endured the life that

Kimi had lived. And the navigator had never given up. He had lived and
died with courage. And he would still be alive if he hadn’t met Tucker
Case.

“Fuck!” Tuck said to no one. He wiped his eyes on his sleeve and

squinted at the gunmetal waves.

There was a flapping noise up by the mast and Tuck adjusted the

steering oar to catch the wind. The sail filled again, but the flapping
continued for a second before it stopped.

Roberto caught the shroud line that was secured to the outrigger and did

an upside-down swinging landing that left him looking to the back of the
canoe.

Tuck couldn’t have been happier if it had been an angel hanging from

his shroud line.

“Roberto?”

“Yes,” the bat said. He was speaking in his own voice, not Vincent’s.

The accent Filipino, not Manhattan.

Tuck almost burst out laughing. His mood swings were so rapid and

wide now that he was afraid his sanity might be falling through the chasm.
“I didn’t recognize you without your glasses.”

“I no like the light,” Roberto said.

Tuck looked to Sepie, still lying in the bow. “Look, Sepie, it’s Roberto.”

The girl did not stir.

“You are very sad about Kimi,” Roberto said.

“Yes,” Tuck said, “I am sad.”

“He tell you he was great navigator and you no believe him.”

Tuck looked away. Something about bats increases shame by a factor of

ten.

“You are going the wrong way,” the bat said. “Go that way.” He pointed

with a wing claw. The wind caught his wing and nearly spun him off the
shroud line. He braced himself with the other wing claw and pointed again.
“I mean that way.”

“You’re shitting me,” Tuck said.

“That way.”

“That’s north. I’m going to Guam. West.”

“That’s west. I am born on Guam.”

“You’re a bat.”

“You ever see a lost bat?”

“No, but I’ve never seen a talking bat either.”

“See?” Roberto said, as if he had made his point. “That way.”

After all the evidence is in—after you’ve run all the facts by everything

you know—and you’re still lost, you have to do some things on faith. Tuck
steered in the direction Roberto was pointing.

A few minutes later he looked up to see Vincent sitting on the pile of

coconuts in the center of the canoe. “Good call, listening to the bat,”
Vincent said. “I just wanted you to know that the Shark People are going to
build some ladders.”

“Well, that’s a useful bit of information,” Tuck said.

“It will be,” Vincent said. Then he disappeared.

Malink’s Song

“They’re flying the new pilot in tomorrow,” said Sebastian Curtis. “I told
them that Tucker wouldn’t fly, so he had to be eliminated. They weren’t
happy about losing the heart and lungs.”

Beth Curtis sat at her vanity, putting on her eye makeup for the

appearance of the Sky Priestess. The red scarf was draped over the back of
the chair. “Did you check the database? Maybe we can send another set of
organs back with them. I can pick the chosen tonight and keep them in the
clinic until tomorrow morning.”

“The customer already died,” Curtis said.

“Well, I guess he really was sick, then.” She laughed, a girlish laugh full

of music.

Sebastian loved her laugh. He smiled over her shoulder into the mirror.

“I’m glad you’re not concerned about Tucker Case. I understand, Beth.
Really. I was just jealous.”

“Tucker who? Oh, you mean Tucker dead-at-sea Case? ’Bastian, dear, I

did what I did for us. I thought it would keep him under control. Write it off
as one of life’s little missteps. Besides, if he’s not dead now, he will be in a
day or so.”

“He made it here on the open ocean. Through a typhoon.”

“And with the navigator. Remember, I’ve seen him fly. He’s dead. That

old cannibal is probably munching on his bones right now.” She checked
her lipstick and winked at him in the mirror. “Showtime, darling.”

After the third day, Malink was ready to let the cannibal go back to his

house on the far side of the island. The guards were no longer searching,
and the Sorcerer had stopped asking questions. Perhaps things would go
back to the way they were. But maybe that wasn’t right either. Malink
didn’t want to, but he believed the pilot. The Sky Priestess and the Sorcerer
were going to hurt his people. He was too old for this. He was too old to
fight. And how do you fight machine guns with spears and machetes?

He paused by a giant mahogany tree and put the basket down while he

caught his breath. He saw smoke drifting in streams over the ferns and
looked in the direction it was coming from. Someone was there, obscured
by a tall stand of taro leaves as big as elephant ears.

There was a rustling there. Malink crouched.

“You’re not scared, are you, squirt?”

Malink recognized the voice from his childhood and he wasn’t scared.

But he knew he didn’t have to say so. “I am not a squirt. I am old man
now.”

Vincent swaggered out of the taro. His flight suit and bomber jacket

looked exactly as Malink remembered. “You’re always gonna be a squirt,
kid. You still got that lighter I gave you?”

Malink nodded.

“That was my lucky Zippo, kid. I shoulda hung on to it. Fuck it. Spilt

milk.” Vincent waved his cigarette in dismissal. “Look, I need you to build
some ladders. You know what a ladder is, right?”

“Yes,” Malink said.

“Of course you do, smart kid like you. So I am needing you to build, oh,

say six ladders, thirty feet long, strong and light. Use bamboo. Are you
getting this, kid?”

Malink nodded. He was grinning from ear to ear. Vincent was speaking

to him again.

“You’re talkin’ my ear off, kid. So, anyway, I need you to build these

ladders, see, as I am having big plans for you and the Shark People. Large
plans, kid. Hugely large. I’m talking about substantial fuckin’ plans I am
having. Okay?”

Malink nodded.

“Good, build the ladders and stand by for further orders.” The flyer

began to back away into the taro patch.

“You said you would come back,” Malink said. “You said you would

come back and bring cargo.”

“You don’t look like you been shorted on the feedbag, kid. You got your

cargo in spades.”

“You said you would come back.”

Vincent threw up his hands. “So what the fuck’s this? Western Union?

Don’t go screwy on me, kid. I need you.” The pilot started to fade, going as

translucent as his cigarette smoke.

Malink stepped forward. “The Sky Priestess will tell us orders?”

“The Sky Priestess took a powder fifty years ago, kid. This dame doing

the bump and grind on my runway is paste.”

“Paste?”

“She’s a fake, squirt. A boneable feast to be sure, but she’s running a

game on you.”

“She is not Sky Priestess?”

“No, but don’t piss her off.” With that the pilot faded to nothing.

Malink leaned back against the mahogany tree and looked up through

the canopy to the sky. His skin tingled and his breath was coming easy and
deep. The ache in his knees was gone. He was light and strong and full, and
every birdcall or rustle of leaves or distant crash of a wave seemed part of a
great and wonderful song.

Call in the Cavalry

They had missed Guam and Saipan (passing at night) and all the Northern
Mariana Islands (drifting in fog) and Johnston Island and all ships at sea (no
reason, they just missed). The sunscreen had run out on the seventh day.
The drinking coconuts ran out on the fourteenth.

They still had some shark meat that had been smoked and dried, but

Tuck couldn’t choke down a bite of it without water. They had had nothing
to drink for a full day.

They were at sea for three days before Sepie came out of her catatonia,

and after a day of sobbing, she started to talk.

“I miss him,” she said. “He listen to me. He like me even when I am

being mean.”

“Me too. I treated him badly sometimes too. He was a good guy. A

good friend.”

“He love you very much,” Sepie said. She was crying again.

Tuck looked down, shielding his face so she couldn’t see his eyes. “I’m

sorry, Sepie. I know you loved him. I didn’t mean to put him in danger. I
didn’t mean to put you in danger.”

She crawled to his end of the canoe and into his arms. He held her there

for a long time, rocking her until she stopped crying. He said, “You’ll be
okay.”

“Kimi say he would sail me to America someday. You will take me?”

“Sure. You’ll like it there.”

“Tell me,” she said.

She grilled Tuck about all things American, making him explain

everything from television to tampons. Tuck learned about men, about how
simple they were, about how easily they could be manipulated, about how
good they could make a woman feel when they were nice, and how much
they could hurt a woman by dying. Telling the things that they knew made
them each feel smart, and sharing the duties of sailing the boat made them
feel safe. It was easier to live in the little world inside the canoe rather than
face the vast emptiness of the open ocean. Sepie took to curling into Tuck’s
chest and sleeping while he steered. Twice Tuck fell asleep in her arms and
no one steered the boat for hours. Tuck didn’t let it bother him. He had
accepted that they were going to die. It seemed so easy now that he
wondered why he’d made such an effort to escape it on the island.

Roberto hadn’t spoken since the first night. He hung from the lines and

pointed with a wing claw when Tuck called to him. When Tuck was still
reckoning, he reckoned that they were traveling at an average speed of five
knots. At five knots, twenty-four hours a day, for fourteen days, he
reckoned that they had traveled well over two thousand miles. Tuck
reckoned that they were now sailing though downtown Sacramento. His
reckoning wasn’t any better than his navigation.

On the fifteenth day Roberto took flight and Tuck watched him until he

was nothing but a dot on the horizon, then nothing at all. Tuck didn’t blame
him. He accepted his own death, but he didn’t want to watch Sepie go
before him. At sunset he tied off the steering oar, took Sepie in his arms,
and lay down in the bottom of the boat to wait.

Sometime later—he couldn’t tell how long, but it was still dark—he

woke with a parched scream when a tube of mascara dropped out of the sky
and hit him in the chest. Sepie sat up and snatched the tube from the bottom
of the boat.

“To make you pretty,” she said. Her voice cracked on “pretty.”

Tuck was too disoriented to recognize what she was holding. He took it

from her and squinted at it. “It’s mascara.”

“Roberto,” Sepie said.

Tuck looked around in the sky, but didn’t see the bat. It was beginning

to get light. “You brought us mascara? We’re dying of thirst and you
brought us mascara?”

“Kimi teach him,” Sepie said.

Tuck didn’t think he had the energy left for outrage, but it was coming

nonetheless. “You…”

Sepie put a finger to his lips. “Listen.”

Tuck listened. He heard nothing. “What?”

“Surf.”

Tuck listened. He heard it. He also heard something else, a rhythmic

stirring in the water much closer to the canoe. He looked in the direction of
the noise and saw something moving over the water toward them.

“Aloha!” came out of the dark, followed by a middle-aged white man in

an ocean kayak. “I guess I’m not the only one who likes to get out early,”
he said.

worth of product from the minibar (five Pepsis and a box of Raisinets).

“You poop in here and it just goes away?”

“Yes.”

“In this big bowl?” She pointed.

“Yes.”

“You poop?”

“Yes.”

“And you push this?”

“Yes.”

“And it goes away?”

“That’s right.”

“Where?”

“To the next room.” Plumbing. They hadn’t talked about plumbing.

“And they push this and it goes away?”

“Look, Sepie, there’s a TV in here. You push this and it changes the

picture.”

Tuck couldn’t be sure because they’d never had sex and because she’d

told him about how she could fool a man, but he thought she might have
come right then.

He made her promise not to leave the room and left her there flushing

and clicking while he went to the police.

The desk sergeant at the Honolulu police department listened patiently and
politely and with appropriate concern right up until Tuck said, “I know I
look a little ratty, but I’ve been at sea in an open boat for two weeks.” At
which point the sergeant held up his hand signifying it was his turn to talk.

“You’ve been at sea for two weeks?”

“Yes. I escaped by boat.”

“So how long ago did these alleged murders happen?”

“I don’t know exactly. One about a month ago, one longer.”

“And you’re just getting around to reporting them now?”

I told you. I was trapped on Alualu. I escaped in a sailing canoe.”

“Then,” the sergeant said, “Alualu is not a street in Honolulu.”

“No. It’s an island in Micronesia.”

“I can’t help you, sir. That’s out of our jurisdiction.”

“Well, who can help me?”

“Try the FBI.”

So Tuck, on the cab ride to the FBI offices, changed his strategy. He’d

wait until he got past the front line of defense before spilling his guts. The
receptionist was a petite Asian woman of forty who spoke English so
precisely that Tuck knew it had to be her second language.

“I’m sure I can help you if you will just tell me what it is that you’d like

to report.”

“I can’t. I have to talk to an agent. I won’t be comfortable unless I talk

to a real agent.”

She looked offended and her speech became even crisper. “Perhaps you

can tell me the nature of the crime.”

Tuck thought for a moment. What did the FBI always handle on

television? Al Capone, Klansmen, bank robberies, and…“Kidnapping,” he
said. “There’s been a kidnapping.”

“And who has been kidnapped? Have you filed a missing persons report

with the local police?”

Tuck shook his head and stood his ground. “I’ll tell an agent.”

The receptionist picked up the phone and punched a number. She turned

away from him and covered her mouth with her hand as she spoke into the
mouthpiece. She hung up and said, “There’s an agent on his way.”

“Thanks,” Tuck said.

A few minutes later a door opened and a dark-haired guy who looked

like a mobile mannequin from a Brooks Brothers window display entered
the reception room and extended his hand to Tuck. “Mr. Case, I’m Special
Agent Tom Myers. Would you step into my office, please?”

Tuck shook his hand and followed him though the door and down a

hallway of identical ten-by-twelve offices with identical metal desks that
displayed identical photos of identical families in identical dime-store
frames. Myers motioned for Tuck to sit and took the seat behind the desk.

“Now, Rose tells me that you want to report a kidnapping?” Special

Agent Myers unbuttoned the top button of his shirt.

“You allowed to do that?” Tuck asked.

“Casual Fridays,” the special agent said.

“Oh,” Tuck said. “Yes. Kidnapping, multiple murder, and the theft and

sale of human organs for transplant.”

Myers showed no reaction. “Go on.”

And Tuck did. He began with the offer of the job on Alualu and ended

with his arrival in Hawaii, leaving out the crash of Mary Jean’s jet, the
subsequent loss of his pilot’s license and pending criminal charges,
anything to do with cargo cults, cannibals, transvestites, ghost pilots, talking
bats, and genital injuries. As he wrapped up, he thought the edited version
sounded pretty credible.

Special Agent Myers had not changed position or expression once in the

half hour that Tuck had talked. Tuck thought he saw him blink once,
though. Special Agent Myers leaned back in his chair (casual Fridays) and
templed his fingers. “Let me ask you something,” he said.

“Sure,” Tuck said.

“Are you the Tucker Case that got drunk and crashed the pink jet in

Seattle a few months ago?”

Tuck could have slapped him. “Yes, but that doesn’t have anything to do

with this.”

“I think it does, Mr. Case. I think it affects the credibility of what is

already an incredible story. I think you should leave my office and go about
the business of putting your life in order.”

“I’m telling you the truth,” Tuck said. He was fighting panic. He

worked to stay calm. “Why would I make up a story like that? As you
pointed out, I’ve got enough on my plate just rebuilding my life. I’m not so
stupid that I’d add charges for filing a false crime report to all the others. If
you have to take me into custody, do it. But do something about what’s
going on out on that island or a lot more people are going to die.”

“Even if I believed your story, what would you like me to do?”

And there Tuck lost it.” ‘Special agent.’ Does that mean that you had to

take the little bus to the academy?”

“I was at the top of my class.” A rise.

“Then act like it.”

“What do you want, Mr. Case?”

Tuck jumped up and leaned over the desk. Special Agent Myers rolled

back in his chair.

“I want you to stop them. I want covert action and deadly technology. I

want Navy SEALS and snipers and spies and laser-guided smart stealth
gizmos out the ying-yang. I want surgical strikes and satellite views and a
steaming shitload of every sort of Tom Clancy geegaw you got. I want
fucking Jack Ryan, James Bond, and a half-dozen Van Damme
motherfuckers who can jump through their own asses and rip your heart out
while it’s still beating. I want action, Special Agent Myers. This is evil
shit.”

“Sit down, Mr. Case.”

Tuck sat down. His energy was gone. “Look, I’m giving myself up.

Arrest me, throw me in jail, beat me with a rubber hose, do whatever you
want to do, but stop what’s going on out there.”

Special Agent Myers smiled. “I don’t believe a word you’ve told me,

but even if I did, even if you had evidence of what you’re claiming, I still
couldn’t do anything. The FBI can only act on domestic matters.”

“Then tell someone who handles international matters.”

“The CIA only handles matters that affect national security, and frankly,

I wouldn’t embarrass myself by calling them.”

“Fuck it, then. Take me away.” Tuck held out his arms to receive

handcuffs.

“Go back to your hotel and get some rest, Mr. Case. There are no

outstanding warrants for your arrest.”

“There aren’t?” Tuck felt as if he’d been gut-punched.

“I checked the computer before I brought you in here.” Myers stood.

“I’ll show you out.”

After another cab ride and another truncated telling of his story, Tuck

was also shown out of the Japanese embassy. He found a pay phone and
soon he had been hung up on by both the American Medical Association
and the Council of Methodist Missionaries. He found Sepie curled up on the
king-size bed, the television still blaring in the bathroom, three minibottles
of vodka empty on the floor. Tuck considered raiding the minibar himself,
but when he opened it, he opted for a grapefruit juice instead of gin. Getting
hammered wasn’t going to take the edge off this time, and at this rate, the
money he’d left on deposit at the desk in lieu of a credit card—the money
that Sarapul had found in Tuck’s pack—would run out in two days.

He sat down on the bed and stroked Sepie’s hair. She had put on

mascara while he was out and had made a mess of it. Funny, she’d walked
into the hotel wearing one of Tuck’s shirts—the first time she’d worn a top
in her life—looking very much the little girl and now she had on makeup
and was passed out drunk. Tuck had a feeling that coming to America was
not going to be easy on either of them. He kissed her on the forehead and
she moaned and rolled over. “Perfume tomorrow,” she said. “You get me
some, okay?”

“Okay,” Tuck said. “A woman who smells good is a woman who feels

good.” The phrase rattled off the walls of his brain. He snatched up the
phone and punched up information. When the operator came on, he said,
“Houston, area code 713…”

Meanwhile, Back at the Ranch

Mary Jean sat behind a desk fashioned entirely of rose quartz veined with
fool’s gold and stared out the window at the Houston skyline. A brown haze
had risen to the level of her fiftieth-floor office as the exhaust of a million
cars huddled against the stratosphere and curled around the city like a huge
rusty cat looking for a place to nap. It just made her made as a cowpoke
wearing bob-wire pants, but not mad enough, of course, to sell her shares of
GM and Exxon. Blue chips was blue chips, after all, and the great state of
Texas ran on oil.

The intercom beeped and Mary Jean keyed her speakerphone, not

because she needed her hands free to work, but because the phone receiver
either got caught in her hairdo or her clip-ons rattled against it making all
sorts of distracting racket. There’d been a time, before Prozac, when she’d
thought for six months that the FBI was tapping her phone line, only to find
out it was a pair of twenty-carat ruby cluster earrings banging against the
earpiece.

“Yes, Melanie.”

“Tucker Case on the phone, Mary Jean. He’s been calling all day. I’ve

tried to put him off, but he says that people are going to die if you don’t talk
to him.”

“Does he sound drunk?”

“No, Ma’am. He sounds serious.”

Mary Jean took a deep breath and looked up at the Monet hanging on

the far wall. Twenty million dollars, depreciated as office furnishings,
appreciated to twice its value and donated to a museum as a donation write-
off at full value, with no capital gains, and there it would hang until the day
of her death when it would go to the museum. And it also matched the
couch.

“Put him through,” she said.

“Mary Jean, it’s Tucker.”

“I was just thinking of you. How are you, sweetie?”

“Mary Jean, I’m stone sober and I need you to listen.”

“Go on, Tucker. I got more ears than a cornfield in June.”

“First, I know that there were never any criminal charges filed, and I

don’t blame you for trying to get me out of the way. But I could really use
some help.”

Mary Jean blanched. “Can you hold one second, darlin? Thanks.” She

pushed the hold button and then the intercom. “Melanie, dear, would you
mind bringing me a couple of number five Valiums and a little glass of
juice? Thank you.” She clicked back to Tuck. “Go on, honey.”

And Tuck did, for fifteen minutes, and when he finished, Mary Jean

said, “Well, that’s just not right. That’s just terrible.”

“Yes, it is, Mary Jean.”

“We just can’t have that,” she said. “You give Melanie your number

there. I’ll see what I can do.”

“Mary Jean, I really appreciate this. If I could go to anyone else, I

would.”

“And hurt my feelings? No, you wouldn’t. Tucker Case, I’ve been

selling the power to change yourself for forty years. Now, if I don’t believe
in the power of redemption, then I’m guilty of false advertising, aren’t I?
You sit tight, now. Bye.”

She clicked the intercom. “Melanie, get me Jake Skye on the line,

please. Thank you, dear.”

Roundhouse Aloha

Tuck stood at the arrival gate amid a group of Hawaiian college students
wearing grass skirts and sarongs and festooned with leis they were draping
on tourists as they came out of the tunnel from the 747. Tuck spotted Jake
Skye well before he came out of the tunnel. He was a head taller than most
of the tourists and one of the few who had a tan. Tuck waved to him and
Jake tossed his head to show he’d seen him. He came out grinning with his
hand extended.

Tuck smiled and hit Jake with a roundhouse to the jaw that knocked him

back into a group of pseudo hula girls. Jake apologized to the girls and
rubbed his jaw as he turned to Tuck.

“We done?”

“I guess so,” Tucker said. He knew that Jake would never apologize for

selling him out.

Jake fell in beside Tuck and they walked through the terminal. “I didn’t

see that coming. You’ve changed, buddy.”

“I guess so,” said Tuck. “Thanks for coming.”

“I’m just here to take you home.” Jake pulled two airline ticket folders

out of his shirt pocket. “Mary Jean says you can bring your new girlfriend.”

“I’m not going home, Jake.”

“You’re not?”

“No. I need your help, but I’m not going back to Houston.”

“There’s a stop in San Francisco. You can get off there.”

“No. I’ve got some things I need to do.”

“Buy me a drink.” Jake turned and walked into an open cocktail lounge

where a twenty-foot waterfall fell over black lava rock among a forest of
bromeliads and orchids. “Cool airport,” Jake said, pulling a stool up to the
bar. “You ever think about living in the tropics?”

Tuck whipped around on his stool and Jake held up his hands in

surrender.

“Just kidding. Okay, what’s the story?”

This time Tuck told the story leaving out none of the details, and to his

credit, Jake did not call him crazy at the end. “So what do you think you
can do?”

“Well, first, I thought you could hack the doctor’s computer and erase

the database. It might slow up the process if he has to do all the tissue types
again.”

Jake was shaking his head, “Can’t do it, buddy. Even if I wanted to.”

“Why not? I’ve got the password.”

Jake drained off the last of his third Mai Tai. “He’s on a satellite uplink

net. The connection only goes two ways if he wants it to. I won’t be able to
get in. Besides, it’s not in the mission parameters. I’m supposed to come
here, get you, and take you home. Period.”

Tuck dug a slip of paper from his back pocket and unfolded it. “I’ve got

these. Maybe they can help.”

Jake was still shaking his head, but he stopped when he saw the

numbers written on the paper. “Where did you get those numbers?”

“They were on the bottom of a desk drawer in Curtis’s clinic.”

“They’re not computer codes, Tuck. You see those letters at the end?

BSI? You know what that is?”

Tuck shook his head.

“Banc Suisse Italiano. Those are Swiss bank account numbers.” Jake

tried to snatch the paper and Tuck pulled it out of his reach.

“You willing to expand the mission parameters?” Tuck said.

Jake was staring at the paper in Tuck’s hand. “How much?”

“Half.”

Jake scratched his three-day growth of beard. “And they were getting

how much per kidney?”

“Half a mil.”

Jake cringed, then relaxed and put his hand on Tuck’s shoulder. “What

did you have in mind, partner?”

“I want to get the Shark People off the island.”

“How many? Three hundred and change? Hire a ship.”

“I want to go sooner. I want to fly them off.”

Jake smiled. The wheels were working now. “It’s going to take a big

plane: 747 or L-1011. That island got enough runway for something that
size?”

“Can we get something that size?”

“Not legally,” Jake said.

“I’m not worried about legally. I’m worried about logistically.”

Jake stood up. “I’m not flying it. I get you a plane, I get half. Deal?”

“I’ll give you one of the account numbers as soon as we get the plane.

You take your chances whether there’s money in it or not. If I don’t make it,
and the money’s in my account, you’re screwed.”

Jake considered it, then nodded. “I can live with that. Let’s go watch the

big planes take off.”

“The best thing,” Jake said, “about stealing a 747 is that no one assumes

that anyone is crazy enough to try it.”

“I thought people tried to steal them all the time. It’s a league sport in

the Middle East, isn’t it?”

“They hijack, they don’t steal. With hijacking, you have to take a pilot

with you.” Jake pointed to a row of planes docked at the terminal by rolling
walkways. “These guys? Out of the question,” he said.

“Why?”

“Because they’ve just come in and they’re low on fuel or they’re being

fueled to take off again, and most of the time, if you can get in them, there’s
a crew on board.” He pointed to some jets parked near hangars at the far
side of the airfield. “Those are our babies. They’ve got fuel, but they’re
waiting for a crew and passengers. After midnight nothing goes out of this

airport except FedEx. The advantage of a vacation destination. Nobody
wants to fly in our out at night.”

The planes were a good half a mile away. “That’s a long way to go

across an airfield without the tower seeing us and calling security. And we
have to drive a ramp over to it to get inside.”

“No, we don’t. There’s an emergency escape hatch for the pilots in the

roof over the cockpit.”

“That’s four stories up. How are you going to get up to it?”

“Down to it,” Jake said.

“Down?”

“The problem is how to get the hatch unlatched. They only open from

the inside.”

“I’m still a little unclear on the ‘down’ part of the plan,” Tuck said. At

some point he was going to be on top of a 747 and heights made him
nervous.

“Let me worry about that,” Jake said. Then he snapped his fingers as if

conjuring the answer to his problem out of thin air. “I’ve got the answer
right here in front of me. What was I thinking? I’m working with the
master.”

Tuck looked around, thinking that Jake was talking about someone else.

“Are you talking about me? I don’t know how to do anything.”

“But you’re wrong, Tuck, you’re wrong. For this part of the plan we

need the cooperation of a flight attendant. Come on, let’s get my bag. I’ve
got an extra change of clothes you can wear.”

“What’s wrong with these clothes?” Tuck asked. He was still wearing

the oversized and now distressed hand-me-downs of Sebastian Curtis.

“Like you have to ask.”

“What?”

“Maytag washer-dryer combination with minibasket and wrinkle guard.

How much?”

“I don’t know. Maybe a grand. Are you okay?”

She’d put the phone down and he heard her shouting at the TV, “Is a

grand! Is a grand! You fuckin’ mook! Oh, no.” She picked up the phone
again. “You wrong. Is eleven nine nine suggested retail. You lose.”

“You’re watching ‘The Price Is Right’?”

“They give you things if you know how much. Is very hard.”

“Do you need anything?” Tuck asked. “I can call room service from

here and have them bring you some food.”

“Perfume and lipstick,” Sepie said.

“That’ll have to wait. I’ll be back soon, okay?”

“Okay. Tuck?”

“What, Sepie?”

“What is washer-dryer combination?”

“I’ll explain later. I have to go now.”

She hung up on him. Evidently, her fascination with plumbing and

television didn’t extend to the telephone. He found Jake talking to a girl at

the United counter who was obviously taken with the grungy pilot’s charm.
He saw Tuck and said good-bye.

“I’ve found our plane and the crew assignments. We have a ten-minute

window to get to Gate 38 so you can work your magic.”

“Remember, you want to go ugly,” Jake said.

“I know,” Tuck said. He’d changed into Jake’s clothes, which fit him, at

least, even if he looked like a guitar player for a Seattle grunge band.

“And old if you can get it.”

“I know,” Tuck said.

“You want a woman who looks like she couldn’t get laid in a men’s

colony.”

“I know,” Tuck said. “Would you back off? I haven’t done this in a

while.”

“Like riding a bicycle, buddy.”

The first flight attendant out of the tunnel was a pretty blond woman,

about twenty-five. “Pass,” Jake said.

The next was a man, and the next a tall black woman who could have

been a runway model.

“They’re killing us here,” Jake said. “How would you feel about going

for the guy? He’s our best chance so far.”

“Fuck off, Jake.”

“Just an idea.”

They waited for five more minutes before a tired-looking woman in her

fifties came down the tunnel pulling her flight bag behind her.

“Go to it, stud,” Jake said. He gave Tucker a little shove.

Tuck shoved back without taking his eyes off the woman. “I can’t do

this, Jake.”

“What?” Jake Skye grabbed Tuck’s wrist and pretended to be taking his

pulse.

Tuck pulled away from him. “I can’t do this.”

“Don’t pull this shit on me, buddy. She’s getting away. This is what you

do.”

“Not anymore, I don’t.”

“Well, I sure as hell do.” Jake pulled off the flannel shirt he was wearing

open over his black T-shirt and threw it to Tuck. “Go back to your hotel and
wait for me to call. What room are you in?”

“Twelve-thirty.”

Jake pushed the T-shirt sleeves up just enough for his biceps to show

and took off down the concourse after the middle-aged flight attendant.

Tuck went outside and found the shuttle to the Hyatt Regency. During

the ride back to the hotel, he realized that he had no idea how to explain a
washer-dryer combination to someone who had never worn shoes or a shirt
until two days ago. He decided to go with magic.

Like Clockwork Spies

Malink found the old cannibal in a small clearing in the jungle, urinating on
a young banana tree. “I brought you food.” Malink dropped the basket and
sat down under a tree. Sarapul seemed to be taking a long time at his task.

“Sometimes it’s hard,” Malink said.

“Sometimes I can’t go at all,” Sarapul said. “It hurts.” He shuddered and

turned around with a grin, smoothing down his thu. “But not today.” He sat
down next to Malink and reached into the basket for a hunk of fish.

“I heard the music last night,” Sarapul said. “The white bitch comes

more often now.” He offered Malink a piece of fish and the chief took it.

“There are three chosen in only ten days. I think they won’t come back

sometimes. Vincent says that she is not the Sky Priestess. The pilot said she
will kill us.”

“Then we must fight.”

“Knives against guns? You remember the war.”

“I remember. Come.” He got up and led Malink through the underbrush

to a hollow log. He reached in and pulled out a long bundle wrapped in

oiled sharkskin. “A man must take the strength of his enemies. If he cannot
eat him and take his strength, he must take his weapon.”

Sarapul unwrapped the bundle to reveal a World War II vintage

Japanese bolt-action rifle. He had obviously been visiting this spot because
the rifle was covered with a thin coat of fish oil and gleamed like new. “I
cut off his head and took his gun.”

Malink remembered the wrath of the Japanese on his people after the

solider disappeared. “You did that? You were the one?”

“It was a long time ago,” Sarapul said. He reached into the bundle again

and pulled out three shining cartridges. “But I saved these.”

“They have machine guns,” Malink said.

“She doesn’t.”

“Take a cab to general aviation at the airport,” Jake said. “The hangar

you want says Island Adventures on the side. I’ll be waiting.”

Tuck climbed out of bed and turned off the television.

“Hey,” Sepie said. She was sitting cross-legged on the floor about a foot

from the screen. Tuck crouched and took her face in his hands. “Tomorrow
at six you take the tickets and go downstairs. Tell the man at the desk you
want to go to the airport. The bus will take you.”

“I know this,” she said.

“Just listen. A tall man with long hair will be there.”

“Right. Jake,” Sepie said. “I know this.”

“If he’s not there, go to one of the men in the blue hats and tell him you

need help getting on your plane. He’ll help you. When you get to Houston,
go into the airport and call this number. Tell the woman who answers that I
told you to call. She’ll help you.”

“And you will come and get me soon, right?”

“I’ll try.”

“What about Roberto?”

They hadn’t seen the fruit bat since the mascara bombing. “Roberto will

be fine. He’ll live here, but I have to go.” He kissed her on the forehead and
before he could pull away she wrapped her arms around his neck and kissed
him on the lips so hard he thought he might have cut his lip.

“You come get me.”

“I will.”

He stood and went out the door. A few seconds later he heard Sepie call

to him from down the hall. “Hey!”

Tuck turned.

“How come you don’t try to sex me?”

“I will.”

“Okay,” she said, and she went back into the room.

Tuck looked at the helicopter sitting on the pad like a huge black

dragonfly and he began to get a very bad feeling. “You don’t want me to do

what I think you want me to do, do you?”

“I’ll put the skid right over the hatch. You just step out of one aircraft

onto another. No problem. It can’t be half as bad as what I had to do to get
the hatch left open.”

Tuck began to protest, but Jake was already walking to the helicopter.

Tuck climbed into the helicopter and slipped on the headset. Jake threw the
switches and the turbine began to whine. In a few seconds the blades slowly
began to rotate.

Tuck keyed the intercom mike on his headset so Jake could hear him

over the blades. “You’ll never get past the tower.”

“I’ve done it before,” Jake said. “I had to repo a Jet Ranger for a guy

once.”

“They’ll never clear you.”

“There’s no traffic. Besides, you think they’re going to clear you? It’s

Captain Midnight’s rock ‘n’ roll express from here on out, big guy.”

Jake pulled the collective lever by the side of his seat and the helicopter

lifted into the air. Within seconds, Tuck heard the tower jabbering over the
radio, warning the Hughes 500 to wait for clearance. Jake brought the
helicopter up just high enough to clear the top of the hangar and flew in a
low wide circle around the airport, then began his own jabber.

“Honolulu Tower, this is Helicopter One, approaching from the west on

Runway Two. I have a problem with my tail rotor. Requesting emergency
landing.”

The tower came back: “Helicopter One, didn’t you just take off without

clearance?”

“Negative, Tower. I’m in from Maui. Request emergency clearance.”

Of course, Tuck thought. Jake flew the circle below the radar and

without the running lights. They have no idea whether this is the same

helicopter that just took off.

Jake sent the helicopter into a horizontal spin that moved it closer to the

planes by the hangars with every rotation, just as it moved Tuck closer to
throwing up. Jake stopped the spin for a second and nodded toward a
United 747. “That’s your baby. Get out of your harness and get ready. They
won’t know you’re there. Get inside and wait two hours before you start
your taxi. I don’t want them to connect the helicopter with the jet. By the
way, how’re you going to get your natives on board?”

“They’ve got ladders,” Tuck said. “I hope.” Tuck hung his headset

behind the seat and unsnapped his harness just as Jake resumed his spin.
Tuck grabbed on to the seat to keep from being thrown out the open door.
What looked like an out-of-control aircraft was, in fact, a pretty elementary
move called a pedal turn. Tuck found no comfort in that knowledge as he
watched the tarmac spin below.

Jake pulled the helicopter up just in time to miss the tail of the 747, then

leveled it off and crept forward along the length of the huge aircraft. The
tail would obscure the view from the tower. “You ready?” he shouted.

Tuck shook his head violently. He could see the line of the hatch he was

supposed to go through. He stepped out on the skid. Jake brought the
helicopter down and the skid touched the top of the jet. “Now!”

Tuck stepped off onto the plane and ducked instinctively below the

blades. He looked back at Jake, shrugged, and shouted, “That was easy.”

“I told you,” Jake shouted. He pulled the helicopter into the sky and

started his spin toward the Island Adventures pad.

Tuck got on his knees, dug his fingers into the seal around the hatch,

and pulled it open. He jumped into the dark plane, sealed the hatch behind
him, then sat in the pilot’s seat and began to study the controls. He clicked
on the nav computer and punched in the longitude and latitude for Alualu,
which he knew by heart, then pulled a piece of paper from his pocket and
put in the coordinates for his second destination. He put on a headset and
turned on the radios. The frequency was already set for the Honolulu tower.

Jake was receiving the official FAA ass-chewing of the century, but there
wasn’t a word about anyone dropping to the top of a United jet. He had just
taken off the headset to settle down for the wait when he heard a scratching
sound outside the escape hatch. He opened it and Roberto plopped inside.

No Frills

The Sky Priestess was drunk. She and the Sorcerer had made two million
dollars in the last ten days and she couldn’t even buy a pair of shoes. The
new pilot, Nomura, was a heavily tattooed, taciturn prick who spoke
marginal English and looked at her like he’d rape her in a second, not for
the pleasure of the violence, but to put her in her place. Since his arrival,
even the ninjas had started to get cocky, joking in Japanese and laughing
raucously when her back was turned. Even the Shark People seemed to be
losing their fear of her. The last time she had appeared to them the children
were left in the village. So the Sky Priestess was watching television in a
torn T-shirt and some sweatpants and she was drunk.

The intercom beeped and she let it. If it hadn’t run on batteries, she

would have unplugged it. Instead, she threw it through the french doors,
where it beeped the beach for two more minutes, then stopped. The next
time she saw it Sebastian was standing in the door holding it like a
prosecutor exhibiting a murder weapon to the jury.

“I suppose you think this is funny.”

“Not particularly. Now if it had hit you in the head, that would be

funny.”

“We have an order, Beth. A Kidney.”

“Oh, good. I’m in great shape to assist a surgery. Let’s do both kidneys.

Give the buyer a bonus. What do you say?” She sloshed her tumbler of
vodka.

Sebastian picked up the empty Absolut bottle from the end table. “This

isn’t going to work, Beth. You can’t appear as the Sky Priestess like that.”
He seemed more afraid than angry.

“You are absolutely correct, ’Bastian. The goddess has taken the night

off.”

Sebastian paced back and forth in front of her, rubbing his chin. “We

could stall. We could put you on some oxygen and amphetamines and you
could be ready in an hour.”

She laughed. “And ruin this buzz? I don’t think so. Tell them to find

another source for this one.”

He shook his head. “I don’t think I can do that. Nomura’s been on the

phone with them. He told them we could deliver in six hours.”

She hissed. “Nomura’s a fucking grunt. He does what we say. This is

our operation.”

“I’m not so sure, Beth. I really don’t want to tell him no. Please take a

shower and make some coffee. I’ll be back in a minute with an oxygen
cylinder.”

“No, ’Bastian,” she whined. “I don’t want to spend six hours in a plane

with that asshole.”

“You won’t have to, Beth. They’ve requested that we send him alone

this time.”

She sat up. “Alone? Who’s going to watch him?” Suddenly she felt very

sober.

“No one needs to watch him, Beth. He works for them, remember? You

were right. We shouldn’t have gotten a pilot from them.”

“You’re cookin’ with gas, buddy,” came over the radio. Jake was close

enough to see the big jet.

“Where are you, Jake?”

“Out of the way, buddy, but thanks for using my name on the radio. Just

thought you ought to know that you’re going to need fifty-one hundred feet
of runway to get that thing off the ground at your destination—and that’s
with full flaps, so save your fuel now. You’d better tell them what you’re
doing unless you’ve got collision insurance on that thing.”

Tuck keyed the mike button on the steering yoke. “Honolulu Tower, this

is United Flight One requesting immediate clearance for emergency takeoff
on Runway Two.”

“There’s no such thing as an emergency takeoff,” the controller said.

Tuck could tell he was close to losing it.

“Well, Tower, I’m taking off on Two, and if you’ve got anything headed

that way, I’d say you’ve got an emergency on your hands, wouldn’t you?”

The tower guy was almost screaming now. “Negative on the clearance!

Clearance denied, United jet. Return to the terminal. We have no flight plan
for a United Flight One.”

“Tower, United Flight One requesting you chill and be a professional

about this. Clear to ten thousand. I am starting my takeoff.”

“Negative, negative. Identify yourself…”

“This is Captain Roberto T. Fruitbat signing off, Honolulu Tower.” Tuck

clicked off the radio, pushed the throttles up, and watched the jet exhaust
pressure gauges. When they got to 80 percent of maximum thrust, he
released the ground brakes and one hundred and seventy thousand pounds
of aircraft rolled down the runway and swept into the sky.

At ten thousand feet he began his turn toward Alualu.

Tuck assumed they would be broadcasting across a number of

frequencies. “Yo, good morning, gents,” Tuck said.

“United 747, change your course and land at Guam Airport or we will

force you down.”

Tuck looked out the window at the sidewinder air to air missiles

hanging menacingly under the wings of the fighter. “And how, exactly, do
you propose to do that, gentlemen?”

“Repeat, change your course and land in Guam immediately or we will

force you down.”

“That would be fine,” Tuck said. “Go ahead, force me and my hundred

and fifteen passengers down.” Tuck let off the mike button and turned to
Roberto. “Okay, you go in the back and pretend to be a hundred and fifteen
people.”

As Tuck had calculated, the fighters backed off while they waited for

instructions. They were not about to shoot down an American passenger jet
without very specific orders, whether it was stolen or not. He believed his
biggest advantage was that the FAA and United would insist that no one
could steal a 747. That sort of thing just didn’t happen. Nice of them to give
him an escort, though. He punched some buttons and the nav computer told
him he was only half an hour from Alualu. He started his descent.

He checked the position of the fighters and hit the mike button. “This is

the UFO calling the F-18s.”

“Go ahead, United.”

“Are you guys both listening?”

“Go ahead.”

Tuck affected a singsong teasing tone: “Neener, neener, neener, you

can’t get me.” Then he locked the microphone in the on position and began
singing an off-key version of “Fly Me to the Moon.”

Malink, I hope you built those ladders, he thought.

“Morning, squirt,” the flyer said.

Malink stopped on the path and fought to catch his breath. “Vincent. I

build the ladders.”

“You did good, kid. Now get everyone together—and I mean everyone

—and tell them to go to the airstrip. Take the ladders. I’m sending a plane
for you.”

Malink shook his head. “You send cargo?”

Vincent laughed. “No, kid, I’m taking the Shark People to the cargo.

You’ll need the ladders to get on the plane. Don’t be afraid. Just get
everyone.”

“The Sky Priestess has three who have been chosen. One has just come

back to the village.”

Vincent looked at his feet. “I’m sorry, kid. You’ll have to leave them.

Go now. You don’t have very long. I’ll see you again.” And he disappeared.

Deliverance

Beth and Sebastian Curtis were cleaning the operating room and sterilizing
instruments when they first heard the jet.

“That sounds low,” Sebastian said casually.

Then the fighters, running ahead of the 747, passed over the island.

“What in the hell was that?” Beth said. She dropped a pan of

instruments and headed for the door.

“Probably just military exercises, Beth,” Sebastian called after her. “It’s

nothing to be concerned about.” He was glad to have help cleaning up and
didn’t want to lose it. Usually, at this point, she was on the plane heading
for Japan.

“’Bastian, come here!” she called. “Something’s up!”

Sebastian shoved the last of the surgical draperies into a canvas bag and

hurried outside. The sound of jet engines seemed to be everywhere.

Outside he found Beth staring at some coconut palms. The guards were

standing outside their quarters, looking in the same direction. “Look.” Beth
pointed to the north.

“What? I don’t see…” Then he saw movement behind the palms and a

747 coming toward the island at entirely too low an angle.

“It’s landing,” Beth said.

Sebastian’s gaze was caught by more movement in his peripheral

vision. He looked across the runway. The Shark People were coming out of
the jungle. All of the Shark People.

As all sixteen tires hit the runway, Tuck slammed the levers that

reversed the engines and they screamed in protest. Immediately, he hit the
ground brakes and watched the brake temperature gauge zoom into the red
as the jet screamed toward the ocean at the far end of the runway at a
hundred and fifty miles per hour.

“Did you see the ladders?” Roberto said, but this time it was Vincent’s

voice coming from the bat. “Ya fuckin’ mook, I told you they were makin’
ladders.”

Sarapul watched as the huge jet slowly turned at the end of the runway.

“No. I am too old. This is my home. They don’t want me where you are
going.”

“We don’t know where we are going.”

“Your people didn’t want me here. Would they want me in this new

place? I will stay.”

Malink looked to the runway. “I have to go now.”

Sarapul waved him off with a bony hand. “Go. You go.” He turned and

walked into the jungle.

Malink ran into the open and began shouting orders to the men with the

ladders. The Shark People poured onto the runway and surrounded the jet
like termites serving their swollen queen.

“He’s taking them away!” she screamed.

Sebastian Curtis stood stupefied.

Beth shouted to the guards, “Stop them, you idiots!”

The guards had been spellbound by the landing of the jet as well, but

her harpylike scream brought them to action. They were in and out of their
quarters in seconds, running toward the airstrip with their Uzis. Beth Curtis
ran behind them, screeching like a tortured siren.

All six doors of the 747 were open now, and the Shark People were

streaming up the ladders, mothers carrying children, the strongest men
helping the old.

The other guards piled up behind Mato while he unlocked the gate. He

fumbled with the key, then finally sent it home and pulled the chain from
around the bars.

Beth Curtis hit the chain-link and curled her fingers though it like claws

as she watched her fortune piling into the plane. “Shoot!” she screamed.

“Shoot that son of a bitch!”

The guards had no idea who she meant, but they understood the

command to shoot. The first one through the gate pulled up and pointed his
Uzi at the crowd of natives waiting to get up the ladder. There was a fat one
who seemed to be giving orders. He aimed for the center of his back.

A bullet took the guard high in the chest, knocking him back off his

feet. His Uzi clattered on the runway. The other guards pulled up, looking
for the source of the shot..

“Kill them all, you fucking cowards!” Beth Curtis yelled. “Shoot!”

The guards crouched to make themselves into smaller targets as they

scanned the edge of the jungle for movement.

There was a roar and the guards looked up to see two fighter jets

coming in low over the runway. Their decision was made. They ran for the
cover of the compound as Beth Curtis screamed at their backs.

She ran out to the dead guard, picked up his Uzi, and pointed it at the

747. A gunshot came from the jungle and a bullet ricocheted off the
concrete next to her. She turned the Uzi toward the trees and pulled the
trigger. It roared for three seconds, the recoil pulling her sideways as the
bullets chopped a pattern in the vegetation like a remotecontrol Cuisinart.
She brought the gun back around on the plane and pulled the trigger, but the
clip was empty.

She threw the gun to the ground and stood shaking as the last of the

ladders was thrown away from the plane and the doors were pulled shut.

Down to the Promised Land

Malink joined Tuck on the flight deck and tried to work the flight officer’s
harness around his belly as Tuck released the ground brakes and the jet
started rolling. The two fighters did another pass overhead, one of the pilots
warning Tuck not to attempt to take off.

“You forced me down,” Tuck said into the headset mike. “What more

do you guys want?”

He rammed the throttles to maximum. They either had enough runway

or they didn’t. What was certain was that he wouldn’t know in time to stop.
They were going into the ocean or into the sky and that was that.

The flaps were down for maximum lift, which would use three times as

much fuel as a regular takeoff, but that was a problem to deal with once
they were in the air. He looked at the ocean ahead, then at the airspeed
indicator, then at the ocean ahead—back and forth, waiting, waiting,
waiting for the airspeed indicator to reach the point where the plane would
lift. He was twenty knots short of takeoff speed when the end of the runway
disappeared from view and he started his pull up.

The rear wheels of the great plane grazed the water as it lifted into the

air. Tuck heard what he hoped was a cheer coming from the back of the
plane, but there was a distinct possibility that he was hearing collective
screams of terror. He had just lifted off with three hundred and thirty-two

people who had never flown before. Tuck thought of Sepie, who would
have started her first plane ride two hours ago.

“Where are we going?” Malink asked.

He was trying to compose himself, but when Tuck looked at him, he

saw that the old chief’s eyes were as wide as saucers.

“A place called Costa Rica,” Tuck said. “You ever heard of it?”

Malink shook his head. “Vincent tells you to take us there.”

“No, it was my idea, actually.”

“There is plenty cargo on Costa Rica?”

Couldn’t say, Malink, but the climate is nice and there’s no extradition.”

“That is good?” Malink said, as if he had the slightest idea what

extradition was.

Tuck admired the old chief. He was here because his god told him to be

here. He had just made a decision that would change the history of an entire
population, and he had done it on faith.

Tuck set the autopilot and crawled out of the pilot’s seat. “I’m going

back to make sure everyone is strapped in. Don’t touch anything.”

Malink’s eyes went wide again. “Who is flying the plane?”

Tuck winked. “I think you know.” He turned and headed down the steps

to check on his passengers.

before she started to calm down. He caught her by the shoulders and backed
her into the office chair in front of the computer.

“Don’t worry,” he said, “Nomura is on his way back with the Lear.

We’ll be long gone before anyone can get here.”

“How did he do it?” Beth’s voice was weak now, trailing off at the end.

“I don’t know. I’m surprised he’s even alive. We’ll be fine. We have

plenty of money. Not as much as we’d hoped, but if we’re careful…”

“He turned them against me,” she said. “My people…” She didn’t

finish.

Sebastian stroked her hair. The clinic door opened and Mato came

inside carrying his Uzi. “Phone,” he said.

“No,” Sebastian said. “I’ve already called Japan. The Lear is on its way.

Now give us some privacy.”

Mato threw the bolt on the Uzi and said something in Japanese.

Sebastian didn’t move. Mato dug the barrel of the gun into the doctor’s ribs.
“Phone,” he said.

Sebastian picked up the receiver that was connected to the satellite and

handed it over.

“Out,” Mato said.

Sebastian helped Beth to her feet. “Come on. We have to do as he says.”

Beth let him lift her to her feet, then she pointed a finger at Mato. “You

can kiss your Christmas bonus good-bye, ninja boy. That’s it.”

Sebastian dragged her through the door and helped her across the

compound to her bungalow. Inside he lay her on the bed. Getting her out of
the surgical greens was like trying to undress a rag doll. She babbled
incoherently the whole time, but did not fight him. When he turned to leave

the room, two of the guards were standing in the doorway grinning. One of
them motioned for him to leave the room. The other stared hungrily at Beth.

“No,” Sebastian said. He stepped into the doorway and pushed aside the

barrels of their weapons. They stepped back in unison and raised the Uzis.
Sebastian stepped toward them. They took another step back. He was a full
foot taller than either of them.

“Get out,” he said and he took another step. They stepped back. “Out.

Get out. Or do you want to lose all your fingers?” He’d found the magic
words. The people they worked for were notorious for taking the finger
joints of those who disobeyed. The guards looked at each other, then backed
out the door that led into the compound. One of them hurled a curse in
Japanese as he went. Behind them Sebastian saw Mato coming out of the
clinic. He marched right for Beth’s bungalow, almost stomping the ground
as he walked, his jaw clenched and his weapon held before him. Sebastian
closed the door, locked it, and ran to the bedroom.

“Come on, Beth. Get up. We’ve got to get out of here.” She was still

conscious, but had no coordination. He picked her up and threw her over his
shoulder in a fireman’s carry, then went out the french doors onto the lanai
and down the steps to the beach.

The warm water seemed to revive her somewhat and he managed to get

her to kick as together they made the swim around the minefield.

would happen to him when they got on the ground. It was true, Costa Rica
had no extradition treaty with the United States, but what he had done was
an act of international terrorism. He might have done better to head back to
Hawaii and take his chances with the FBI rather than risk rotting away in a
Central American jail. Still, something told him that this was where he
should be going. He didn’t know why, really, he had picked Costa Rica, any
more than he knew why he had stolen a plane and gone back to Alualu in
the first place.

As he started his descent for Palmar Airport on the coast, the B-52

veered off to the north and was soon out of sight. Tuck had turned the radio
off hours ago, tired of hearing the same threats and commands from the
military pilots. As much as he hated the idea of giving the authorities a
warning, however, he turned on the radio to advise the tower at Palmar that
he was coming in. A midair collision might be even worse than a Costa
Rican jail. Especially with three hundred and thirty-two lives riding his soul
to hell.

He called to the tower, then took off the headset and sat back and

relaxed, convinced that for once in his life he had done the right thing.
Somehow he would see to it that Sepie got half the money from the Swiss
bank accounts. He envisioned her in a big house with one bedroom and
seventy-two bathrooms with a television in every one. She’d be fine.

Malink, who had gone to the back to reassure his people, came up the

steps and climbed into the flight officer’s chair. “We are going down?” he
said.

“You’ll like it,” Tuck said. “The weather here is the same as Alualu.

There are beaches and jungles just like home.”

They could see the coast now, extending into the distance to the north

and south, the rainforest running from beaches to mountains. “This island
much bigger than Alualu.”

“It’s not an island.” Tuck realized that Malink had never walked more

than a mile without having to turn. “Your people will be fine.”

“Are there sharks here?”

“A lot of sharks,” Tuck said.

Malink nodded “My people will be fine.” He was quiet for a minute,

then said, “Will you come with us?”

“I don’t think so, Chief. I’m going to be in a lot of trouble when we

land.”

“But didn’t Vincent tell you to do this?”

“Sort of. Why?”

Malink sat back with a self-satisfied smile. “You’ll be fine.”

An alarm went off in the cockpit and Tuck scanned the instruments to

see what had gone wrong. The red air collision warning lights were
flashing. Tuck scanned the sky for another plane, then, seeing nothing, put
on the headset to see if the Palmar tower could tell him what was going on.

Before he could key the mike someone said, “Darlin’, I’ll be

whitewashed if stink don’t follow you like a manure wagon in summer.” A
familiar, melodic Texas drawl, probably the sweetest sound he had ever
heard.

“Mary Jean,” Tuck said. “Where are you?”

“Out your window at eleven o’clock.”

Tuck looked up and saw a brand-new pink Gulfstream running parallel

to them.

“If you’d a been wearing your headset, you would have known I was

here fifteen minutes ago.”

“What are you doing here?”

“Jake called me from Hawaii and told me what you was doing. We

cooked up a little plan. I’m gonna get your tail out of the fire one last time,
Tucker Case, but you owe me.”

“Boy, have I heard that before.”

“Do you remember the corporate address in Houston? The number?”

“Sure.”

“Well, you dial that up as a frequency and I’ll give you the skinny. It’s

unladylike to broadcast your personal matters over the same frequency the
tower’s using.”

“What’s going on?” Beth crawled up behind him. The effects of the

Valium were obviously wearing off.

“I think they’re leaving.”

“Not without us, they’re not. I am the Sky Priestess and I won’t allow

it.” She started to get up and Sebastian pulled her back down.

“They were coming to kill us, Beth. You were out.”

“Right. If you ever drug me again—”

“You’re insane,” he said.

She reared back to slap him and he caught her hand. “Keep it up, Beth.

I’m telling you that if they find us, they’ll kill us. Do you understand that?”

“They’re grunts. I won’t…”

Suddenly there was a huge explosion from across the runway and they

turned to see a mushroom of fire rising from where the clinic used to be.

The guards had loaded onto the jet and Nomura was taxiing to the end

of the runway.

The guards’ quarters went off next, then the hangar, the barrels of jet

fuel throwing a column of flame five hundred feet in the air.

“Where did they get explosives?” Beth said. “Did you know they had

explosives?”

“They’re destroying the evidence,” Sebastian said. “Orders from Japan,

I’m sure.”

The Learjet started its run for takeoff as Sebastian’s bungalow went off

like a fragmentation grenade, followed by Tuck’s old quarters and Beth’s
bungalow. Fire rained down across the island.

“My shoes! All of my shoes were in there. You bastards.” Beth pulled

away from Sebastian and ran out on the runway just as the Learjet passed.

“You rotten bastards!”

The Sky Priestess stood in the middle of the runway and screamed

herself mute as the Lear disappeared into the clouds.

If They’d Only Had Her at the Alamo

Mary Jean brought the pink Gulfstream in right on the tail of the 747. Tuck
kept the speed over eighty in the taxi, turning it away from the terminal,
where police jeeps and a hundred men in riot gear waited. He also noticed a
half-dozen TV news trucks there as well.

“Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Costa Rica, the new home of the

Shark People. The temperature outside is 85 degrees and it’s clear that
things are going to get ugly. I hope everybody’s ready.”

The police jeeps were speeding across the tarmac toward the two jets.

Mary Jean turned the Gulfstream so that it was facing back toward the
runway.

Tuck turned to Malink. “Where’s Roberto?”

Malink pointed up. Roberto hung from the handle of the emergency

hatch. There was a spring-loaded spool of steel cable attached to the ceiling
next to the hatch. “Mary Jean, you ready?”

“Sweetheart, we’d better git while the gitten’s good. We stirred a

hornet’s nest out here.”

Tuck grabbed Roberto and stuffed him inside his shirt. “Stay,” he said.

Then he opened the hatch and looked back at Malink. “I have to go now.”

Malink took Tuck in his big arms and squeezed until the bat screamed.

“You will come back.”

“If you say so, Chief.” Tuck flipped the intercom switch and picked up

the headset. “Go!” he said and climbed up into the hatch.

The six doors on the 747 all sprung open at once and the yellow

emergency slides inflated and extended to the ground as if the jet was a
huge insect suddenly growing legs. The Shark People piled down the
emergency slides and Mary Jean spooled up the Gulfstream for takeoff.

Tuck climbed onto the roof and reached back into the hatch for the loop

of nylon webbing that attached to the spool of cable. The police jeeps were
pulling up on the sides of the two jets; men with rifles stood in the back
trying to figure out what they should be shooting at. The Shark People
crowded in between the jets, making a human corridor. Tuck took a deep
breath and leaped off the top of the jumbo jet. The spring-loaded coil of
cable did exactly what Boeing had designed it to do: It lowered the pilot
safely to the ground from four stories up. Once on the ground, Tuck ran
under the cover of the Shark People and leaped into the open door of the
Gulfstream. “Go!” he yelled.

The Shark People scrambled away and Mary Jean released the ground

brakes. The jet shot forward. Tuck slammed the door and got to the cockpit
just as a jeep swerved out of the jet’s path and flipped over.

“Don’t try to play chicken with me, snotnose,” Mary Jean said grimly.

“I knew James Dean his own self.”

“Think they’ll let you get this thing in the air?”

“I’d like to see ’em try to stop me.”

The police jeeps seemed to part for the jet as it headed back to the

runway. For all the guns there, no one seemed interested in firing a shot.
Tuck looked back and saw the Shark People waving as Mary Jean made her
takeoff run.

When they were airborne, she said, “Tucker Case, when you make a

turnaround, boy, you don’t do it half-twiddle, do you?”

Tuck laughed. “Did you really know James Dean?”

“Sounded good, didn’t it?” She turned to him. Not surprisingly, her

makeup was done perfectly to complement her outfit and the Gulfstream’s
headset. She let out a little yelp. “Tucker, there’s a varmint in your shirt.”

“That’s Roberto,” Tuck said. “He no like the light.”

“Darlin’, if I had a face like that, I’d gravitate toward dim and unlit

territories myself. Remind me to give your friend a sample of our new
depilatory.”

“What was that all about back there?” Tuck asked.

“Heroics, son. I told you on the phone, I believe in redemption and I

thought it was time I practiced what I preached. Were they really selling
those poor heathens’ organs?”

“Beg your pardon, Mary Jean, I really do appreciate the rescue, but

don’t bullshit me. Any one of those cops could have shot out the tires of this
plane and we’d still be on the ground.”

She smiled, a knowing smile with a hint of mischief, the Mona Lisa in a

big blond wig. “Media event, son. You’d be surprised how far a little palm
grease goes in the Third World. Why, I couldn’t buy the media coverage my
company’s going to get on this with a year’s profits. And of course you’re
going to reimburse me for the bribes. Jake says you’ll be able to. The tax
boys frown on taking bribes. as a deduction. Although we could take it as
advertising expense. Never mind, you don’t owe me nothing.”

“So that’s the only reason you did it, the media coverage?”

“I was shabby to you, Tucker. Not that you didn’t deserve it, but I

wasn’t feeling so good about myself for doing it. I aways kinda looked at
you like my wayward little lamb. Course, I’m from cattle folk.”

Tuck smiled. “Whatever. Where are we going?”

“Little place of mine in the Cayman Islands. Jake’s going to meet us

there with your little friend.”

The Cannibal Tree Revisited

The Sky Priestess awoke with a terrible pain in her head. She couldn’t feel
her arms or legs, and something was cutting her between her breasts. She
and the Sorcerer had been living in the deserted village for two weeks. The
last thing she could remember was the Sorcerer going into the dark for more
firewood and hearing a thud. When he didn’t answer her call, she had gone
to look for him.

She opened her eyes and blinked to clear her vision. The world seemed

to be spinning and for a second all she could see was a green blur that was
the jungle. Then things popped into focus. She was slowly turning at the
end of a coconut fiber rope, suspended six feet above the ground. The
harness was digging in between her breasts and cutting off the circulation to
her limbs. She lifted her head and saw an ancient native tending a long
earthen oven that was spouting smoke from either end. The Sorcerer’s
clothes were piled nearby.

The old native looked up and ambled over to her on spindly legs. There

were chicken feathers stuck in his hair and his eyes had a rheumy yellow
cast to them.

He grinned at her with teeth that looked as if they had been filed to

points, then reached up and pinched her cheek. “Yum,” he said.

Epilogue

Due to the influence of Mary Jean Dobbins, who opened a manufacturing
plant in the capital, and a large land purchase by an anonymous buyer, the
Shark People were accepted as Costa Rican citizens and their land was set
aside as a national reserve. Malink remained chief for many years, and
when he became too old to carry the responsibility—since he had no sons—
he appointed Abo his successor. Abo learned to preside over the ceremonies
in honor of Vincent and led the prayers for his return, for they all believed
that he would return, but as time passed and history grew to legend, they
believed that this time Vincent would return in a pink jet and at his side
would be the prophet Tuck—who had delivered them from the Sky
Priestess—and the great navigator Kimi, without whom, it was said, the
prophet Tuck couldn’t find his ass with both hands.

He chartered his plane out to fishermen and scuba divers who wanted to

island-hop and made enough money to keep them in food and Sepie in
perfume, lipstick and Wonder Bras, the latter a new obsession she had
picked up and more often than not the only item of clothing she ever wore.

One morning, just before sunrise, after they had been on Little Cay for a

year, Tuck spotted a figure standing alone on the beach. He knew who it
was before he was close enough to see him. He could feel it.

As he got closer, he looked at the sharp dark features, the flight suit shot

with starch and free of wrinkles, and he said, “You look pretty good for a
dead guy.”

Vincent took a pack of cigarettes out of his jacket pocket, tapped one

out, and lit it. “You did good, kid. I’d have to call it even.”

“The least I could do,” Tuck said. “But can I ask you a question?”

“Shoot,” said Vincent.

“Why’d you do it?”

“I didn’t do anything. I didn’t move a thing, I didn’t touch a thing, I

didn’t change a thing. Believers do everything.”

“Come on,” Tuck said. “I deserve a straight answer.”

The flyer turned away for a moment and looked at the corona over the

water where the sun was about to rise. “You’re right, kid. You do. You
remember that speech the dame gave you about losers doing good on
islands because there’s no competition?”

“Yes.”

“Well, it ain’t the case. Islands are like, you know, incubators. You got

to start things and let em grow. Isolate ’em. That’s why all your loony-toon
cult guys have to get their people out in the boonies somewhere where no
one can talk any sense into ’em. Just nod if you’re gettin’ any of this, kid.
Good.

“Well, I had this bet with these guys I play cards with that my little cult

could go big-time if I could get enough citizens. I told ’em, ‘Two thousand
years ago you guys were just running cults. Get me to the mainland and
give me a thousand years and I’ll give you a run for your money.’ All the
conditions were right. You need some pressure, I got the war. You need a
promise, I got the promise I’ll come back with cargo. I’m on easy street.
Then this crazy dame and the doc come along and start selling me up the
river and I’m thinking it’s my chance to make the bigs. You’ve got to have
some bad guys so your citizens can recognize who the good guys are, right?
So I says to myself, ‘Vincent, it is time you got yourself a Moses. Get a guy
who can get your people out of trouble and give them some stories to build
a reputation on.’”

“And that was me?” Tuck said.

“That was you.”

“Why me? Why did you pick me?”

“You weren’t busy.”

“And that was it? I wasn’t busy?”

“Face it, kid, you were flying with full flaps down. You know that

saying? “The devil makes work for idle hands.”

“Yes.”

“It’s true, but only if he gets there first. He didn’t even want you, so I

showed.”

“So are you going to screw up the rest of my life?”

“You ain’t got it so bad. It ain’t like you have to go into the desert for

forty years. What are you worried about?”

“Yeah, I’m happy now, but are we finished?”

Vincent butted his cigarette in the sand. “That kind of depends on what

you believe, doesn’t it kid? He began to fade as he walked down the beach.
“Don’t do anything I wouldn’t do.”

Tuck watched as a sailing canoe materialized on the beach. Kimi was at

the tiller and waved as Vincent climbed into the front of the canoe. Tuck
waved back even as the canoe dissolved to mist, then he walked home to
have breakfast with Sepie. He stopped at the door to wipe his feet and
Roberto landed with a thud against the screen, digging his claws in to keep
from slipping.

“Boy, I’m glad all that supernatural stuff is over,” the bat said.

Afterword and Acknowledgments

My approach to research has always been: “Is this correct or should I be
more vague?” A quick word search of one of my books reveals that I use
the term “kinda-sorta” more than any living author. My readers, who are the
kindest and most intelligent people in the world, understand this. They
know that using my books as a reference source is tantamount to using
glazed doughnuts as a building material. They know that these pages serve
the masters of goofiness, not those of accuracy. So…

While some of the locations in Island of the Sequined Love Nun do

exist, I have changed them for my convenience. There is no island of
Alualu, nor do the Shark People exist as I have described them. There are
no active cargo cults in Micronesia, nor are there any cannibals. The
position of mispel did exist in Yapese culture but was abandoned almost a
hundred years ago. A strict caste system still exists on Yap and the
surrounding islands, and the treatment of Yapese women is portrayed as I
saw it. My decision to make the “organ smugglers” Japanese was dictated
by geography, not culture or race.

Most of the information on cargo cults comes, secondhand, from

anthropological research done in the Melanesian Islands. I have found since
finishing Island of the Sequined Love Nun that the “Cannibal-Spam
Theory” was first postulated in Paul Theroux’s book The Happy Isles of
Oceania, and I must give a jealous nod to Mr. Theroux for that twisted bit
of thinking. The information on Micronesian navigation and navigators
comes from Stephen Thomas’s wonderful book The Last Navigator. My
depiction of the shark hunt comes from a story told to me by a high school
teacher on Yap about the people of the island of Fais, and I have no idea
whether it is accurate. The day-to-day life on Alualu, with the exceptions of

the religious rites and outright silliness, comes from my experience on the
high island of Mog Mog in the Ulithi Atoll, where I had the privilege of
living with Chief Antonio Taithau and his family. Many thanks to Chief
Antonio, his wife, Conception, and his daughters, Kathy and Pamela, who
saw that I was fed and who pulled me out of the well that I fell in after too
much tuba at the drinking circle. Also, thanks to Alonzo, my Indiana Jones
kid, who followed me around and made sure I didn’t get killed on the reef
or eaten by sharks and who I forgive for letting me fall down the well.
Many thanks also to Frank the teacher, Favo the elder, Hillary the boat pilot,
and all the kids who climbed trees for my drinking coconuts.

I also owe a debt of gratitude to those people who helped me get to the

outer islands: Mercy and all the Peace Corps Volunteers on Yap, Chief
Ingnatho Hapthey and the Council of Tamil, and John Lingmar at the
Bureau of Outer Island Affairs on Yap, who educated me about local
customs, gave permission, and made arrangements. Also to the people of
Pacific Missionary Air, who got me there and back and answered my
questions on flying in the islands.

Thanks to the Americans I met on Truk: Ron Smith, who loaned me his

diving knife, and Mark Kampf, who gave me his sunscreen, Neosporin, and
duct tape, all of which saved my life. (Research Rule #1: Never go to an
undeveloped island without duct tape and a big knife.)

Here in the States, thanks goes out to the following people:

Bobby Benson, who told me about Micronesia in the first place.

Gary Kravitz for voluminous information on aircraft and flying.

Mike Molnar for more pilot stuff as well as patient explanations of

computer and communication technology.

Donna Ortiz, who gave me the phrase, “you’re just a geek in a cool

guy’s body” (and I have no idea who she was talking about at the time).

Dr. Alan Peters for medical information.

Shelly Lowenkopf for supplying out-of-print books on cargo cults.

Jim Silke and Lynn Rathbun for drawings and maps.

Ian Corsan for advice on equipment and how to survive in the tropics.

Charlee Rodgers, Dee Dee Leichtfuss, Liz Ziemska, and Christina

Harcar for careful readings and helpful suggestions.

Nick Ellison, my agent and friend, for helping to keep the wolf from the

door while I wrote.

Rachel Klayman and Chris Condry, my editors at Avon Books, for their

confidence and support.

And most of all, my thanks to novelist Jean Brody, who took the time

from her own writing to do a line edit on Love Nun.

While all the above people helped in the research and writing of this

book, none of them are responsible for the liberties I took with the
information they gave me. When in doubt, assume that I made everything
up.

—Christopher Moore

November 1996

About the Author

Christopher Moore is the author of seven novels, including this one. He began writing at age six and
became the oldest known child prodigy when, in his early thirties, he published his first novel. His
turn-ons are the ocean, playing the toad lotto, and talking animals on TV. His turn-offs are
salmonella, traffic, and rude people. Chris enjoys cheese crackers, acid jazz, and otter scrubbing. He
lives in an inaccessible island fortress in the Pacific. You can e-mail him at BSFiends@aol.com. Visit
the official Christopher Moore website at www.chrismoore.com.

Don’t miss the next book by your favorite author. Sign up now for AuthorTracker by visiting
www.AuthorTracker.com.

PRAISE FOR 

Christopher Moore

Fluke

“Moore is endlessly inventive…. This cetacean picaresque is no fluke—it is a sure winner.”

—Publishers Weekly (starred review)

Lamb

“An instant classic…. Terrific, funny, and poignant.”

—Rocky Mountain News

The Lust Lizard of Melancholy Cove

“Reads like author Christopher Moore laughed his head off while writing it, quite possibly taking hits
of nitrous oxide between sentences.”

—Miami Herald

Island of the Sequined Love Nun

“Humor that seamlessly blends lunacy with larceny…habit-forming zaniness…. The careers of the
writers with even a quarter as much wit and joie de vivre as Moore are always worth following.”

—USA Today

Bloodsucking Fiends

“Goofy grotesqueries…wonderful…delicious…bloody funny…like a hip and youthful ‘Abbott and
Costello Meet the Lugosis.’”

—San Francisco Chronicle

Coyote Blue

“Brilliant…. Moore’s raucous, lewd, hip novel is part love story and part spiritual search.”

—Santa Barbara Independent

Practical Demonkeeping

“Christopher Moore is a very sick man, in the very best sense of the word.”

—Carl Hiaasen

ALSO BY

Christopher Moore

Practical Demonkeeping

Coyote Blue

Bloodsucking Fiends

The Lust Lizard of Melancholy Cove

Lamb: The Gospel According to Biff,

Christ’s Childhood Pal

Fluke: Or, I Know Why the

Winged Whale Sings

Credits

Designed by Kellan Peck

Map by Lynn Rathbun

Copyright

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are products of the author’s
imagination or are used fictitiously and are not to be construed as real. Any resemblance to actual
events, locales, organizations, or persons, living or dead, is entirely coincidental.

ISLAND OF THE SEQUINED LOVE NUN. Copyright © 1997 by Christopher Moore. All rights
reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required
fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled,
reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in
any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented,
without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.

EPub Edition © MARCH 2006 ISBN: 9780061804755

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Moore, Christopher
     The lust lizard of Melancholy Cove/Christopher Moore.
     p. cm.
     ISBN 0-380-81654-7 (pbk.)
     ISBN 0-06-073544-9 (reissue)

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

About the Publisher

Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

 
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

 
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz

 
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

 
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.

