     VOLUME I 

         I.  M. Myriel 

        II.  M. Myriel becomes M. Welcome 

       III.  A Hard Bishopric for a Good Bishop 

        IV.  Works corresponding to Words 

         V.  Monseigneur Bienvenu made his Cassocks last too long 

        VI.  Who guarded his House for him 

       VII.  Cravatte 

      VIII.  Philosophy after Drinking 

        IX.  The Brother as depicted by the Sister 

         X.  The Bishop in the Presence of an Unknown Light 

        XI.  A Restriction 

       XII.  The Solitude of Monseigneur Welcome 

      XIII.  What he believed 

       XIV.  What he thought 

        II.  Prudence counselled to Wisdom 

       III.  The Heroism of Passive Obedience 

        IV.  Details concerning the Cheese-Dairies of Pontarlier 

         V.  Tranquillity 

        VI.  Jean Valjean 

       VII.  The Interior of Despair 

      VIII.  Billows and Shadows 

        IX.  New Troubles 

         X.  The Man aroused 

        XI.  What he does 

       XII.  The Bishop works 

      XIII.  Little Gervais 

        II.  A Double Quartette 

       III.  Four and Four 

        IV.  Tholomyes is so Merry that he sings a Spanish Ditty 

         V.  At Bombardas 

        VI.  A Chapter in which they adore Each Other 

       VII.  The Wisdom of Tholomyes 

      VIII.  The Death of a Horse 

        IX.  A Merry End to Mirth 

        II.  First Sketch of Two Unprepossessing Figures 

       III.  The Lark 

        II.  Madeleine 

       III.  Sums deposited with Laffitte 

        IV.  M. Madeleine in Mourning 

         V.  Vague Flashes on the Horizon 

        VI.  Father Fauchelevent 

       VII.  Fauchelevent becomes a Gardener in Paris 

      VIII.  Madame Victurnien expends Thirty Francs on Morality 

        IX.  Madame Victurnien's Success 

         X.  Result of the Success 

        XI.  Christus nos Liberavit 

       XII.  M. Bamatabois's Inactivity 

      XIII.  The Solution of Some Questions connected with the 

                 Municipal Police 

        II.  How Jean may become Champ 

        II.  The Perspicacity of Master Scaufflaire 

       III.  A Tempest in a Skull 

        IV.  Forms assumed by Suffering during Sleep 

         V.  Hindrances 

        VI.  Sister Simplice put to the Proof 

       VII.  The Traveller on his Arrival takes Precautions 

                 for Departure 

      VIII.  An Entrance by Favor 

        IX.  A Place where Convictions are in Process of Formation 

         X.  The System of Denials 

        XI.  Champmathieu more and more Astonished 

        II.  Fantine Happy 

       III.  Javert Satisfied 

        IV.  Authority reasserts its Rights 

         V.  A Suitable Tomb 

         I.  What is met with on the Way from Nivelles 

        II.  Hougomont 

       III.  The Eighteenth of June, 1815 

        IV.  A 

         V.  The Quid Obscurum of Battles 

        VI.  Four o'clock in the Afternoon 

       VII.  Napoleon in a Good Humor 

      VIII.  The Emperor puts a Question to the Guide Lacoste 

        IX.  The Unexpected 

         X.  The Plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean 

        XI.  A Bad Guide to Napoleon; a Good Guide to Bulow 

       XII.  The Guard 

      XIII.  The Catastrophe 

       XIV.  The Last Square 

        XV.  Cambronne 

       XVI.  Quot Libras in Duce? 

      XVII.  Is Waterloo to be considered Good? 

     XVIII.  A Recrudescence of Divine Right 

       XIX.  The Battle-Field at Night 

        II.  In which the reader will peruse Two Verses which are 

               of the Devil's Composition possibly 

        II.  Two Complete Portraits 

       III.  Men must have Wine, and Horses must have Water 

        IV.  Entrance on the Scene of a Doll 

         V.  The Little One All Alone 

        VI.  Which possibly proves Boulatruelle's Intelligence 

       VII.  Cosette Side by Side with the Stranger in the Dark 

      VIII.  The Unpleasantness of receiving into One's House a Poor 

               Man who may be a Rich Man 

        IX.  Thenardier at his Manoeuvres 

         X.  He who seeks to better himself may render his Situation Worse 

        XI.  Number 9,430 reappears, and Cosette wins it in the Lottery 

        II.  A Nest for Owl and a Warbler 

       III.  Two Misfortunes make One Piece of Good Fortune 

        IV.  The Remarks of the Principal Tenant 

         V.  A Five-Franc Piece falls on the Ground and produces a Tumult 

        II.  It is Lucky that the Pont d'Austerlitz bears 

               Carriages 

       III.  To Wit, the Plan of Paris in 1727 

        IV.  The Gropings of Flight 

         V.  Which would be Impossible with Gas Lanterns 

        VI.  The Beginning of an Enigma 

       VII.  Continuation of the Enigma 

      VIII.  The Enigma becomes Doubly Mysterious 

        IX.  The Man with the Bell 

         X.  Which explains how Javert got on the Scent 

        II.  The Obedience of Martin Verga 

       III.  Austerities 

        IV.  Gayeties 

         V.  Distractions 

        VI.  The Little Convent 

       VII.  Some Silhouettes of this Darkness 

      VIII.  Post Corda Lapides 

        IX.  A Century under a Guimpe 

         X.  Origin of the Perpetual Adoration 

        XI.  End of the Petit-Picpus 

        II.  The Convent as an Historical Fact 

       III.  On What Conditions One can respect the Past 

        IV.  The Convent from the Point of View of Principles 

         V.  Prayer 

        VI.  The Absolute Goodness of Prayer 

       VII.  Precautions to be observed in Blame 

      VIII.  Faith, Law 

        II.  Fauchelevent in the Presence of a Difficulty 

       III.  Mother Innocente 

               Austin Castillejo 

         V.  It is not Necessary to be Drunk in order to be Immortal 

        VI.  Between Four Planks 

       VII.  In which will be found the Origin of the Saying: Don't 

               lose the Card 

      VIII.  A Successful Interrogatory 

        IX.  Cloistered 

         II.  Some of his Particular Characteristics 

        III.  He is Agreeable 

         IV.  He may be of Use 

          V.  His Frontiers 

         VI.  A Bit of History 

                 of India 

       VIII.  In which the Reader will find a Charming Saying of the 

                 Last King 

         IX.  The Old Soul of Gaul 

          X.  Ecce Paris, ecce Homo 

         XI.  To Scoff, to Reign 

        XII.  The Future Latent in the People 

       XIII.  Little Gavroche 

         II.  Like Master, Like House 

        III.  Luc-Esprit 

         IV.  A Centenarian Aspirant 

          V.  Basque and Nicolette 

         VI.  In which Magnon and her Two Children are seen 

        VII.  Rule: Receive No One except in the Evening 

       VIII.  Two do not make a Pair 

         II.  One of the Red Spectres of that Epoch 

        III.  Requiescant 

         IV.  End of the Brigand 

          V.  The Utility of going to Mass, in order to become a 

                 Revolutionist 

         VI.  The Consequences of having met a Warden 

        VII.  Some Petticoat 

       VIII.  Marble against Granite 

         II.  Blondeau's Funeral Oration by Bossuet 

        III.  Marius' Astonishments 

         IV.  The Back Room of the Cafe Musain 

          V.  Enlargement of Horizon 

         VI.  Res Angusta 

         II.  Marius Poor 

        III.  Marius Grown Up 

         IV.  M. Mabeuf 

          V.  Poverty a Good Neighbor for Misery 

         VI.  The Substitute 

         II.  Lux Facta Est 

        III.  Effect of the Spring 

         IV.  Beginning of a Great Malady 

          V.  Divers Claps of Thunder fall on Ma'am Bougon 

         VI.  Taken Prisoner 

        VII.  Adventures of the Letter U delivered over to Conjectures 

       VIII.  The Veterans themselves can be Happy 

         IX.  Eclipse 

         II.  The Lowest Depths 

        III.  Babet, Gueulemer, Claquesous, and Montparnasse 

         IV.  Composition of the Troupe 

                 Man in a Cap 

         II.  Treasure Trove 

        III.  Quadrifrons 

         IV.  A Rose in Misery 

          V.  A Providential Peep-Hole 

         VI.  The Wild Man in his Lair 

        VII.  Strategy and Tactics 

       VIII.  The Ray of Light in the Hovel 

         IX.  Jondrette comes near Weeping 

          X.  Tariff of Licensed Cabs, Two Francs an Hour 

         XI.  Offers of Service from Misery to Wretchedness 

        XII.  The Use made of M. Leblanc's Five-Franc Piece 

       XIII.  Solus cum Solo, in Loco Remoto, non cogitabuntur 

                 orare Pater Noster 

        XIV.  In which a Police Agent bestows Two Fistfuls on a Lawyer 

         XV.  Jondrette makes his Purchases 

        XVI.  In which will be found the Words to an English Air 

                  which was in Fashion in 1832 

       XVII.  The Use made of Marius' Five-Franc Piece 

      XVIII.  Marius' Two Chairs form a Vis-a-Vis 

        XIX.  Occupying One's Self with Obscure Depths 

         XX.  The Trap 

        XXI.  One should always begin by arresting the Victims 

       II.  Badly Sewed 

      III.  Louis Philippe 

       IV.  Cracks beneath the Foundation 

        V.  Facts whence History springs and which History ignores 

       VI.  Enjolras and his Lieutenants 

      III.  Apparition to Father Mabeuf 

       IV.  An Apparition to Marius 

       II.  Jean Valjean as a National Guard 

      III.  Foliis ac Frondibus 

       IV.  Change of Gate 

        V.  The Rose perceives that it is an Engine of War 

       VI.  The Battle Begun 

      VII.  To One Sadness oppose a Sadness and a Half 

     VIII.  The Chain-Gang 

       II.  Mother Plutarque finds no Difficulty in explaining a Phenomenon 

       II.  Cosette's Apprehensions 

      III.  Enriched with Commentaries by Toussaint 

       IV.  A Heart beneath a Stone 

        V.  Cosette after the Letter 

       VI.  Old People are made to go out opportunely 

       II.  In which Little Gavroche extracts Profit from Napoleon the Great 

      III.  The Vicissitudes of Flight 

       II.  Roots 

      III.  Slang which weeps and Slang which laughs 

       IV.  The Two Duties: To Watch and to Hope 

       II.  The Bewilderment of Perfect Happiness 

      III.  The Beginning of Shadow 

       IV.  A Cab runs in English and barks in Slang 

        V.  Things of the Night 

       VI.  Marius becomes Practical once more to the Extent of 

                Giving Cosette his Address 

      VII. The Old Heart and the Young Heart in the Presence 

                of Each Other 

       II.  Marius 

      III.  M. Mabeuf 

       II.  The Root of the Matter 

      III.  A Burial; an Occasion to be born again 

       IV.  The Ebullitions of Former Days 

        V.  Originality of Paris 

                Poetry.  The Influence of an Academician on this Poetry 

       II.  Gavroche on the March 

      III.  Just Indignation of a Hair-dresser 

       IV.  The Child is amazed at the Old Man 

        V.  The Old Man 

       VI.  Recruits 

       II.  Preliminary Gayeties 

      III.  Night begins to descend upon Grantaire 

       IV.  An Attempt to console the Widow Hucheloup 

        V.  Preparations 

       VI.  Waiting 

      VII.  The Man recruited in the Rue des Billettes 

     VIII.  Many Interrogation Points with Regard to a Certain 

                Le Cabuc, whose Name may not have been Le Cabuc 

       II.  An Owl's View of Paris 

      III.  The Extreme Edge 

       II.  The Flag: Act Second 

       IV.  The Barrel of Powder 

        V.  End of the Verses of Jean Prouvaire 

       VI.  The Agony of Death after the Agony of Life 

      VII.  Gavroche as a Profound Calculator of Distances 

       II.  The Street Urchin an Enemy of Light 

      III.  While Cosette and Toussaint are Asleep 

       IV.  Gavroche's Excess of Zeal 

               Scylla of the Faubourg du Temple 

        II.  What Is to Be Done in the Abyss if One Does Not Converse 

       III.  Light and Shadow 

        IV.  Minus Five, Plus One 

         V.  The Horizon Which One Beholds from the Summit of a Barricade 

        VI.  Marius Haggard, Javert Laconic 

       VII.  The Situation Becomes Aggravated 

      VIII.  The Artillery-men Compel People to Take Them Seriously 

        IX.  Employment of the Old Talents of a Poacher and That 

               Infallible Marksmanship Which Influenced the 

               Condemnation of 1796 

         X.  Dawn 

        XI.  The Shot Which Misses Nothing and Kills No One 

       XII.  Disorder a Partisan of Order 

      XIII.  Passing Gleams 

       XIV.  Wherein Will Appear the Name of Enjolras' Mistress 

        XV.  Gavroche Outside 

       XVI.  How from a Brother One Becomes a Father 

      XVII.  Mortuus Pater Filium Moriturum Expectat 

     XVIII.  The Vulture Becomes Prey 

       XIX.  Jean Valjean Takes His Revenge 

       XXI.  The Heroes 

      XXII.  Foot to Foot 

     XXIII.  Orestes Fasting and Pylades Drunk 

      XXIV.  Prisoner 

        II.  Ancient History of the Sewer 

       III.  Bruneseau 

        IV.  Bruneseau 

         V.  Present Progress 

        VI.  Future Progress 

        II.  Explanation 

       III.  The "Spun" Man 

        IV.  He Also Bears His Cross 

         V.  In the Case of Sand, as in That of Woman, There Is a 

               Fineness Which Is Treacherous 

        VI.  The Fontis 

       VII.  One Sometimes Runs Aground When One Fancies That 

               One Is Disembarking 

      VIII.  The Torn Coat-Tail 

        IX.  Marius Produces on Some One Who Is a Judge of the 

               Matter, the Effect of Being Dead 

         X.  Return of the Son Who Was Prodigal of His Life 

        XI.  Concussion in the Absolute 

       XII.  The Grandfather 

        II.  Marius, Emerging from Civil War, Makes Ready for 

               Domestic War 

       III.  Marius Attacked 

        IV.  Mademoiselle Gillenormand Ends by No Longer Thinking 

               It a Bad Thing That M. Fauchelevent Should Have 

               Entered With Something Under His Arm 

        VI.  The Two Old Men Do Everything, Each One After His 

               Own Fashion, to Render Cosette Happy 

       VII.  The Effects of Dreams Mingled with Happiness 

      VIII.  Two Men Impossible to Find 

        II.  Jean Valjean Still Wears His Arm in a Sling 

       III.  The Inseparable 

        IV.  The Immortal Liver 

        II.  The Obscurities Which a Revelation Can Contain 

        II.  Another Step Backwards 

       III.  They Recall the Garden of the Rue Plumet 

        IV.  Attraction and Extinction 

        II.  Last Flickerings of a Lamp Without Oil 

       III.  A Pen Is Heavy to the Man Who Lifted the 

               Fauchelevent's Cart 

        IV.  A Bottle of Ink Which Only Succeeded in Whitening 

         V.  A Night Behind Which There Is Day 

        VI.  The Grass Covers and the Rain Effaces 

PREFACE 

destiny; so long as the three great problems of the century--the 

degradation of man through pauperism, the corruption of woman through 

so long as social asphyxia is possible in any part of the world;--in 

fail to be of use. 

BOOK FIRST--A JUST MAN 

CHAPTER I--M. MYRIEL 

of D---- since 1806. 

of what we are about to relate, it will not be superfluous, if merely 

of the bar. It was said that his father, destining him to be the heir of 

in accordance with a custom which is rather widely prevalent in 

though rather short in stature, elegant, graceful, intelligent; the 

whole of the first portion of his life had been devoted to the world and 

to gallantry. 

parliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, were dispersed. 

M. Charles Myriel emigrated to Italy at the very beginning of the 

even more alarming to the emigrants who viewed them from a distance, 

with the magnifying powers of terror,--did these cause the ideas of 

overwhelm, by striking to his heart, a man whom public catastrophes 

could have told: all that was known was, that when he returned from 

advanced in years, and lived in a very retired manner. 

his curacy--just what, is not precisely known--took him to Paris. 

parishioners was M. le Cardinal Fesch. One day, when the Emperor 

had come to visit his uncle, the worthy Cure, who was waiting in the 

anteroom, found himself present when His Majesty passed. Napoleon, 

turned round and said abruptly:-- 

man. Each of us can profit by it." 

he had been appointed Bishop of D---- 

to the early portion of M. Myriel's life? No one knew. Very few families 

had been acquainted with the Myriel family before the Revolution. 

where there are many mouths which talk, and very few heads which think. 

He was obliged to undergo it although he was a bishop, and because 

he was a bishop. But after all, the rumors with which his name 

was connected were rumors only,--noise, sayings, words; less than 

profound oblivion. No one would have dared to mention them; no one would 

have dared to recall them. 

Baptistine, and named Madame Magloire, who, after having been the 

servant of M. le Cure, now assumed the double title of maid to 

Mademoiselle and housekeeper to Monseigneur. 

that a woman must needs be a mother in order to be venerable. She 

had never been pretty; her whole life, which had been nothing but a 

what may be called the beauty of goodness. What had been leanness in 

her youth had become transparency in her maturity; and this diaphaneity 

person seemed made of a shadow; there was hardly sufficient body to 

provide for sex; a little matter enclosing a light; large eyes forever 

drooping;--a mere pretext for a soul's remaining on the earth. 

bustling; always out of breath,--in the first place, because of her 

activity, and in the next, because of her asthma. 

the honors required by the Imperial decrees, which class a bishop 

first call on him, and he, in turn, paid the first call on the general 

and the prefect. 

The episcopal palace of D---- adjoins the hospital. 

gallery which was situated on the ground-floor and opened on the 

Lords Charles Brulart de Genlis, archbishop; Prince d'Embrun; Antoine 

de Mesgrigny, the capuchin, Bishop of Grasse; Philippe de Vendome, Grand 

seven reverend personages decorated this apartment; and this memorable 

date, the 29th of July, 1714, was there engraved in letters of gold on a 

table of white marble. 

house. 

people have you at the present moment?" 

other." 

can be changed in them." 

convalescents." 

had the sweating sickness two years ago, and a hundred patients at 

times,--we know not what to do." 

one's self." 

ground-floor. 

director of the hospital. 

hold?" 

measures and calculations with his eyes. 

There is evidently a mistake here. There are thirty-six of you, in five 

yours. Give me back my house; you are at home here." 

Bishop's palace, and the Bishop was settled in the hospital. 

francs, which sufficed for her personal wants at the vicarage. M. Myriel 

received from the State, in his quality of bishop, a salary of fifteen 

thousand francs. On the very day when he took up his abode in the 

hand:-- 

NOTE ON THE REGULATION OF MY HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES. 

  Society of the  mission . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      100   " 

  For the Lazarists of Montdidier . . . . . . . . . .      100   " 

  Congregation of the Holy Spirit . . . . . . . . . .      150   " 

  Religious establishments of the Holy Land . . . . .      100   " 

  Charitable maternity societies  . . . . . . . . . .      300   " 

  Extra, for that of Arles  . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50   " 

  Work for the amelioration of prisons  . . . . . . .      400   " 

  Work for the relief and delivery of prisoners . . .      500   " 

  To liberate fathers of families incarcerated for debt  1,000   " 

  Addition to the salary of the poor teachers of the 

       diocese  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2,000   " 

  Public granary of the Hautes-Alpes  . . . . . . . .      100   " 

  Congregation of the ladies of D----, of Manosque, and of 

       Sisteron, for the gratuitous instruction of poor 

       girls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,500   " 

  For the poor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6,000   " 

  My personal expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1,000   " 

                                                        ------ 

       Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15,000   " 

that he occupied the see of D---- As has been seen, he called it 

regulating his household expenses. 

Baptistine. This holy woman regarded Monseigneur of D---- as at one and 

venerated him. When he spoke, she bowed; when he acted, she yielded her 

will be observed that Monsieur the Bishop had reserved for himself 

francs these two old women and the old man subsisted. 

the intelligent administration of Mademoiselle Baptistine. 

said:-- 

even claimed the allowance which the department owes him for the expense 

of his carriage in town, and for his journeys about the diocese. It was 

customary for bishops in former days." 

Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand under 

consideration, and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs, 

expenses of posting, and expenses of pastoral visits. 

of the Empire, a former member of the Council of the Five Hundred 

which favored the 18 Brumaire, and who was provided with a magnificent 

senatorial office in the vicinity of the town of D----, wrote to M. 

lines:-- 

four thousand inhabitants? Expenses of journeys? What is the use 

of these trips, in the first place? Next, how can the posting be 

accomplished in these mountainous parts? There are no roads. No one 

travels otherwise than on horseback. Even the bridge between Durance and 

greedy and avaricious. This man played the good priest when he 

until the Emperor has freed us from these black-capped rascals. Down 

francs for us! At last!" 

memorandum conceived in the following terms:-- 

  For the maternity charitable society of Aix . . . . . . .   250   " 

  For the maternity charitable society of Draguignan  . . .   250   " 

  For foundlings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   " 

  For orphans   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   " 

                                                            ----- 

       Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,000   " 

become the treasurer of all benevolence and the cashier of all those 

in distress. Considerable sums of money passed through his hands, but 

life, or add anything superfluous to his bare necessities. 

is brotherhood above, all was given away, so to speak, before it was 

received, he never had any. Then he stripped himself. 

the names and prenomens of their bishop, that which had a meaning for 

them; and they never called him anything except Monseigneur Bienvenu 

when we have occasion to name him. Moreover, this appellation pleased 

him. 

confine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original. 

The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted his 

very few plains and a great many mountains; hardly any roads, as we have 

and eighty-five auxiliary chapels. To visit all these is quite a task. 

a donkey in the mountains. The two old women accompanied him. When the 

trip was too hard for them, he went alone. 

mounted on an ass. His purse, which was very dry at that moment, did not 

necessity, I assure you, and not from vanity." 

the poor, on widows and orphans, the right to have their meadows mown 

them gratuitously when they are ruined. Therefore it is a country which 

is blessed by God. For a whole century, there has not been a single 

murderer among them." 

the people of Embrun! If, at the harvest season, the father of a family 

grain to his granary." To families divided by questions of money and 

wild that the nightingale is not heard there once in fifty years. 

Well, when the father of a family dies, the boys go off to seek their 

fortunes, leaving the property to the girls, so that they may find 

them. Mon Dieu! it is like a little republic. Neither judge nor bailiff 

is known there. The mayor does everything. He allots the imposts, 

is obeyed, because he is a just man among simple men." To villages where 

you know how they manage?" he said. "Since a little country of a 

school-masters who are paid by the whole valley, who make the round 

of the villages, spending a week in this one, ten days in that, and 

the people of Queyras!" 

many images, which characteristic formed the real eloquence of Jesus 

Christ. And being convinced himself, he was persuasive. 

two old women who had passed their lives beside him. When he laughed, 

Grace [Votre Grandeur]. One day he rose from his arm-chair, and went 

shelves. As the bishop was rather short of stature, he could not 

[grandeur] does not reach as far as that shelf." 

relatives, who were very old and near to death, and of whom her sons 

grand-aunt a good hundred thousand livres of income; the second was the 

heir by entail to the title of the Duke, his uncle; the eldest was to 

while Madame de Lo was relating once again the details of all these 

inheritances and all these "expectations." She interrupted herself 

impatiently: "Mon Dieu, cousin! What are you thinking about?" "I am 

thinking," replied the Bishop, "of a singular remark, which is to be 

dead man, but also the feudal and noble qualifications of all his 

on him, and how much wit must men have, in order thus to press the tomb 

into the service of vanity!" 

manner of which he was capable, and to win paradise, which he 

represented as charming and desirable. Among the audience there was 

a wealthy retired merchant, who was somewhat of a usurer, named M. 

Geborand, who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarse 

this charity, and said to his sister, with a smile, "There is M. 

Geborand purchasing paradise for a sou." 

a refusal, and on such occasions he gave utterance to remarks which 

an ultra-royalist and an ultra-Voltairian. This variety of man has 

must give me something, M. le Marquis." The Marquis turned round and 

to me," replied the Bishop. 

and twenty thousand peasants' dwellings in France which have but three 

openings; eighteen hundred and seventeen thousand hovels which have but 

two openings, the door and one window; and three hundred and forty-six 

thousand cabins besides which have but one opening, the door. And this 

pitch. That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of the hilly 

eatable. My brethren, have pity! behold the suffering on all sides of 

you!" 

anaras passa?" as in the Basses-Alpes; "Puerte un bouen moutu embe un 

bouen fromage grase," as in upper Dauphine. This pleased the people 

extremely, and contributed not a little to win him access to all 

the lower classes. He condemned nothing in haste and without taking 

fault has passed." 

of the asperities of austerity, and he professed, with a good deal 

of distinctness, and without the frown of the ferociously virtuous, a 

venial; it is a fall, but a fall on the knees which may terminate in 

prayer. 

fall, sin if you will, but be upright. 

of the angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is a 

gravitation." 

a great crime which all the world commits. These are hypocrisies 

themselves under shelter." 

the fathers, the masters, the strong, the rich, and the wise." 

He said, moreover, "Teach those who are ignorant as many things as 

possible; society is culpable, in that it does not afford instruction 

gratis; it is responsible for the night which it produces. This soul 

person who has committed the sin, but the person who has created the 

shadow." 

things: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel. 

held, but there were no proofs except against her. She alone could 

presented, in persuading the unfortunate woman that she had a rival, and 

that the man was deceiving her. Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy, she 

denounced her lover, confessed all, proved all. 

into play, he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath, he had 

educed the justice of revenge. The Bishop listened to all this in 

silence. When they had finished, he inquired,-- 

public. The town took a great interest in the trial. On the eve of the 

prison fell ill. A priest was needed to attend the criminal in his 

saying, "That is no affair of mine. I have nothing to do with that 

"Monsieur le Cure is right: it is not his place; it is mine." 

praying to God for the soul of the condemned man, and praying the 

condemned man for his own. He told him the best truths, which are also 

bless. He taught him everything, encouraged and consoled him. The man 

stood trembling on its mournful brink, he recoiled with horror. He 

was not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. His 

condemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner, broken 

made him see light. 

Bishop was still there. He followed him, and exhibited himself to the 

his neck, side by side with the criminal bound with cords. 

he said to him: "God raises from the dead him whom man slays; he whom 

aside to let him pass. They did not know which was most worthy of 

his sister, "I have just officiated pontifically." 

understood, there were people in the town who said, when commenting on 

this conduct of the Bishop, "It is affectation." 

admired him. 

and it was a long time before he recovered from it. 

it, from saying yes or no, so long as one has not seen a guillotine with 

it, like de Maistre; others execrate it, like Beccaria. The guillotine 

is the concretion of the law; it is called vindicte; it is not neutral, 

interrogation point around this chopping-knife. The scaffold is a 

vision. The scaffold is not a piece of carpentry; the scaffold is not 

wood, iron and cords. 

this machine heard, that this mechanism understood, that this wood, 

this iron, and these cords were possessed of will. In the frightful 

scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner; it devours, it eats 

flesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated 

horrible vitality composed of all the death which it has inflicted. 

following the execution, and on many succeeding days, the Bishop 

right do men touch that unknown thing?" 

Nevertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided 

passing the place of execution. 

his greatest labor. Widowed and orphaned families had no need to summon 

it by hope. He said:-- 

not of that which perishes. Gaze steadily. You will perceive the living 

gazes upon a grave by showing him the grief which fixes its gaze upon a 

star. 

The private life of M. Myriel was filled with the same thoughts as his 

public life. The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop of D---- lived, 

would have been a solemn and charming sight for any one who could have 

viewed it close at hand. 

This brief slumber was profound. In the morning he meditated for an 

hour, then he said his mass, either at the cathedral or in his own 

house. His mass said, he broke his fast on rye bread dipped in the milk 

of his own cows. Then he set to work. 

of the bishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly every day his 

vicars-general. He has congregations to reprove, privileges to grant, 

a whole ecclesiastical library to examine,--prayer-books, diocesan 

catechisms, books of hours, etc.,--charges to write, sermons to 

authorize, cures and mayors to reconcile, a clerical correspondence, an 

administrative correspondence; on one side the State, on the other the 

Holy See; and a thousand matters of business. 

his offices and his breviary, he bestowed first on the necessitous, 

garden," said he. 

of large bullion to droop from its three points. 

his presence had something warming and luminous about it. The children 

his house to any one who was in need of anything. 

he no longer had any, he visited the rich. 

cures to supper, Madame Magloire took advantage of the opportunity to 

fine game from the mountains. Every cure furnished the pretext for 

a good meal: the Bishop did not interfere. With that exception, his 

ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water, and oil 

the cheer of a cure, he indulges in the cheer of a trappist. 

a man of letters and rather learned. He left behind him five or six 

The winds of God blew; Flavius Josephus who says, A wind from above was 

precipitated upon the earth; and finally, the Chaldaic paraphrase of 

Onkelos, which renders it, A wind coming from God blew upon the face of 

pseudonym of Barleycourt. 

be which he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into a profound 

the book which contains them. We now have under our eyes a note written 

with Generals Clinton, Cornwallis, and the Admirals on the American 

station. Versailles, Poincot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot, 

bookseller, Quai des Augustins. 

Creator; the Epistle to the Ephesians calls you liberty; Baruch calls 

you Immensity; the Psalms call you Wisdom and Truth; John calls you 

beautiful of all your names." 

themselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone until 

morning on the ground floor. 

dwelling of the Bishop of D---- 

floor, and one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, three 

chambers on the first, and an attic above. Behind the house was a 

garden, a quarter of an acre in extent. The two women occupied the 

by passing through the bedroom, nor from the bedroom, without passing 

was a detached alcove with a bed, for use in cases of hospitality. 

The Bishop offered this bed to country curates whom business or the 

requirements of their parishes brought to D---- 

to the house, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into 

a kitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden a 

stable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital, and in 

gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sick people in 

the hospital. "I am paying my tithes," he said. 

having a compartment of boards constructed in the cow-shed. Here he 

winter salon. 

furniture than a square table in white wood, and four straw-seated 

antique sideboard, painted pink, in water colors. Out of a similar 

Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory. 

oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and had given it to 

the poor. "The most beautiful of altars," he said, "is the soul of an 

unhappy creature consoled and thanking God." 

seven or eight persons at one time, the prefect, or the general, or the 

staff of the regiment in garrison, or several pupils from the little 

stable, the prie-Dieu from the oratory, and the arm-chair from the 

visitors. A room was dismantled for each new guest. 

of the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling in the garden if it was 

summer. 

half gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of service 

among the possibilities in the way of furniture. 

the idea. However, who is there who has attained his ideal? 

bed,--a hospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in the 

shadow of the bed, behind a curtain, were the utensils of the toilet, 

other near the bookcase, opening into the dining-room. The bookcase was 

chimney stood a pair of firedogs of iron, ornamented above with two 

garlanded vases, and flutings which had formerly been silvered 

with silver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury; above the 

loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes; before the 

from the oratory. 

the bed. Small gilt inscriptions on the plain surface of the cloth at 

the side of these figures indicated that the portraits represented, 

them. All that he knew about these two persons was, that they had 

by time, and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbe of 

Grand-Champ with four wafers. 

Madame Magloire was forced to take a large seam in the very middle 

of it. This seam took the form of a cross. The Bishop often called 

attention to it: "How delightful that is!" he said. 

floor as well as those on the first floor, were white-washed, which is a 

fashion in barracks and hospitals. 

paper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the apartment 

Bishop permitted. He said, "That takes nothing from the poor." 

possessions six silver knives and forks and a soup-ladle, which 

more than once, "I find it difficult to renounce eating from silver 

dishes." 

When he had any one to dinner, Madame Magloire lighted the two candles 

and set the candlesticks on the table. 

the key was never removed. 

we have mentioned, was composed of four alleys in cross-form, radiating 

the white wall which enclosed it. These alleys left behind them four 

square plots rimmed with box. In three of these, Madame Magloire 

cultivated vegetables; in the fourth, the Bishop had planted some 

the Bishop, "you are mistaken. The beautiful is as useful as the 

useful." He added after a pause, "More so, perhaps." 

trimming, hoeing, and making holes here and there in the earth, into 

could have wished to see him. Moreover, he made no pretensions to 

Linnaeus. He did not study plants; he loved flowers. He respected 

summer evening with a tin watering-pot painted green. 

latch. All that the first passerby had to do at any hour, was to give it 

the priest should always be open." 

you. The very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one who needs 

shelter." 

Couloubroux or the cure of Pompierry, took it into his head to ask 

him one day, probably at the instigation of Madame Magloire, whether 

Monsieur was sure that he was not committing an indiscretion, to a 

mercy of any one who should choose to enter, and whether, in short, 

guarded. The Bishop touched his shoulder, with gentle gravity, and 

said to him, "Nisi Dominus custodierit domum, in vanum vigilant qui 

who guard it. 

Then he spoke of something else. 

tranquil." 

man the Bishop of D---- was. 

way to Piedmont, and suddenly reappeared in France, in the vicinity 

of Barcelonette. He was first seen at Jauziers, then at Tuiles. He hid 

towards the hamlets and villages through the ravines of Ubaye and 

Ubayette. 

and despoiled the sacristy. His highway robberies laid waste the 

always escaped; sometimes he resisted by main force. He was a bold 

wretch. In the midst of all this terror the Bishop arrived. He was 

making his circuit to Chastelar. The mayor came to meet him, and urged 

merely exposed three or four unfortunate gendarmes to no purpose. 

shall set out in an hour." 

They are my good friends, those gentle and honest shepherds. They own 

one goat out of every thirty that they tend. They make very pretty 

woollen cords of various colors, and they play the mountain airs on 

and then. What would they say to a bishop who was afraid? What would 

they say if I did not go?" 

meet them. They, too, need to be told of the good God." 

that Jesus has constituted me the shepherd. Who knows the ways of 

Providence?" 

To what purpose?" 

life!" 

the world to guard my own life, but to guard souls." 

about the country-side, and caused great consternation. 

mountain on mule-back, encountered no one, and arrived safe and sound 

of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace. 

nevertheless, Monsieur le Cure. Things will arrange themselves." 

magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed 

to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly. 

the chest was a paper, on which these words were written, "From Cravatte 

to Monseigneur Bienvenu." 

Bishop. Then he added, with a smile, "To him who contents himself with 

the surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop." 

"God--or the Devil." 

"God!" 

rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire, who were waiting 

for him, and he said to his sister: "Well! was I in the right? The poor 

have brought back the treasure of a cathedral." 

threatens our soul." 

may not fall into sin on our account." 

we know; but generally he passed his life in doing the same things at 

the same moment. One month of his year resembled one hour of his day. 

this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the hospital." 

his sons-in-law, his relations, and even to his friends, having wisely 

listened to him. 

perfectly dignified, exclaimed:-- 

going to make a confession to you. I have a philosophy of my own." 

so one lies on it. You are on the bed of purple, senator." 

Pyrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. I have all the 

philosophers in my library gilded on the edges." 

made sport of Needham, and he was wrong, for Needham's eels prove that 

but to produce shallow people, whose reasoning is hollow. Down with that 

Between you and me, and in order to empty my sack, and make confession 

to my pastor, as it behooves me to do, I will admit to you that I 

have good sense. I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, who preaches 

wolf. Let us stick to nature, then. We are at the top; let us have a 

superior philosophy. What is the advantage of being at the top, if 

below, anywhere, I don't believe; not one single word of it. Ah! 

there is no such thing as either good or evil; there is vegetation. 

Let us seek the real. Let us get to the bottom of it. Let us go into it 

out the truth; dig in the earth for it, and seize it. Then it gives you 

shoes. Ah! what a charming promise! trust to it, if you like! What a 

see God. Ta, ta, ta! What twaddle all these paradises are! God is a 

paradise is to let slip the prey for the shadow. Be the dupe of the 

infinite! I'm not such a fool. I am a nought. I call myself Monsieur le 

am I to do on this earth? The choice rests with me: suffer or enjoy. 

Whither will suffering lead me? To nothingness; but I shall have 

shall eat. It is better to be the tooth than the grass. Such is my 

Total liquidation. This is the vanishing-point. Death is death, believe 

but equal nothingness. You have been Sardanapalus, you have been Vincent 

de Paul--it makes no difference. That is the truth. Then live your life, 

above all things. Make use of your I while you have it. In truth, 

Bishop, I tell you that I have a philosophy of my own, and I have my 

Of course, there must be something for those who are down,--for the 

myself. The good God is good for the populace." 

burned alive like Jeanne d'Arc. Those who have succeeded in procuring 

this admirable materialism have the joy of feeling themselves 

uneasiness,--places, sinecures, dignities, power, whether well or 

ill acquired, lucrative recantations, useful treacheries, savory 

accessible to the rich alone, good for all sauces, and which seasons 

even, which are easily alarmed, to the habits and purposes of the 

explain them, we cannot do better than transcribe in this place a letter 

from Mademoiselle Baptistine to Madame the Vicomtess de Boischevron, the 

friend of her childhood. This letter is in our possession. 

                                        D----, Dec. 16, 18--. 

MY GOOD MADAM: Not a day passes without our speaking of you. It is our 

while washing and dusting the ceilings and walls, Madam Magloire has 

made some discoveries; now our two chambers hung with antique paper 

My drawing-room, which contains no furniture, and which we use for 

spreading out the linen after washing, is fifteen feet in height, 

was the hospital. And the woodwork was of the era of our grandmothers. 

But my room is the one you ought to see. Madam Magloire has discovered, 

being knighted by Minerva in some gardens, the name of which escapes 

shall I say to you? I have Romans, and Roman ladies [here occurs an 

the whole revarnished, and my chamber will be a regular museum. She has 

besides, and I should much prefer a round table of mahogany. 

great treats. 

fears nothing, even at night. That is his sort of bravery, he says. 

seem to notice it. One must know how to understand him. 

He goes out in the rain, he walks in the water, he travels in winter. He 

fears neither suspicious roads nor dangerous encounters, nor night. 

full of jewels, all the jewels of the cathedral of Embrun, which the 

thieves had given him. 

was making a noise, so that no one might hear me. 

good God with my brother and my bishop. It has cost Madam Magloire 

more trouble than it did me to accustom herself to what she terms his 

imprudences. But now the habit has been acquired. We pray together, we 

tremble together, and we fall asleep. If the devil were to enter this 

house, he would be allowed to do so. After all, what is there for us 

me. I understand him without his speaking, and we abandon ourselves to 

possesses grandeur of soul. 

everything, and that he has memories, because he is still a very 

good royalist. They really are a very ancient Norman family of the 

generalship of Caen. Five hundred years ago there was a Raoul de Faux, a 

Jean de Faux, and a Thomas de Faux, who were gentlemen, and one of whom 

was a seigneur de Rochefort. The last was Guy-Etienne-Alexandre, and was 

and lieutenant-general of the army. It is written Faux, Fauq, and 

Faoucq. 

not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me. 

She is well, works as you would wish, and loves me. 

and this forces me to leave you. A thousand good wishes. 

five years old? Yesterday he saw some one riding by on horseback who 

room, like a carriage, and saying, "Hu!" 

which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself. The Bishop 

of D----, in spite of the gentle and candid air which never deserted 

him, sometimes did things that were grand, bold, and magnificent, 

they let him alone. Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a remonstrance in 

was not even conscious of it himself in all probability, so perfect was 

his simplicity, they vaguely felt that he was acting as a bishop; then 

cares may be put under constraint. Thus, even when believing him to be 

to God. 

preceding pages, he did a thing which, if the whole town was to be 

infested with bandits. 

state at once, was a former member of the Convention. His name was G---- 

thou, and when they said "citizen." This man was almost a monster. 

He had not voted for the death of the king, but almost. He was a 

the legitimate princes? They need not have cut off his head, if you 

please; clemency must be exercised, agreed; but a good banishment for 

life. An example, in short, etc. Besides, he was an atheist, like all 

the rest of those people. Gossip of the geese about the vulture. 

element of ferocity in this solitude of his. As he had not voted for the 

had been able to remain in France. 

Since he had dwelt in that valley, the path which led thither had 

disappeared under a growth of grass. The locality was spoken of as 

though it had been the dwelling of a hangman. 

soul yonder which is lonely." 

hate, and which is so well expressed by the word estrangement. 

But what a sheep! 

then he returned. 

shepherd, who served the member of the Convention in his hovel, had come 

some added. 

threadbare cassock, as we have mentioned, and because of the evening 

breeze which was sure to rise soon, and set out. 

he recognized the fact that he was near the lair. He strode over a 

ditch, leaped a hedge, made his way through a fence of dead boughs, 

entered a neglected paddock, took a few steps with a good deal of 

lofty brambles, he caught sight of the cavern. 

against the outside. 

there was a white-haired man, smiling at the sun. 

the old man a jar of milk. 

child. 

surprise which a man can still feel after a long life. 

has entered here. Who are you, sir?" 

people call Monseigneur Welcome?" 

Bishop did not take it. The Bishop confined himself to the remark:-- 

seem to me to be ill." 

I shall stop. The sun is beautiful, is it not? I had myself wheeled 

out here to take a last look at things. You can talk to me; it does not 

fatigue me. You have done well to come and look at a man who is on 

moment. One has one's caprices; I should have liked to last until the 

dawn, but I know that I shall hardly live three hours. It will be night 

no need of the light for that. So be it. I shall die by starlight." 

himself:-- 

like the rest: he, who on occasion, was so fond of laughing at "His 

Grace," was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur, and he 

was not habitual with him. This man, after all, this member of the 

Convention, this representative of the people, had been one of the 

the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe. 

dust. 

which, in his opinion, bordered on a fault, could not refrain from 

of the law, even of the law of charity. G----, calm, his body almost 

the subject of astonishment to the physiologist. The Revolution had 

preserved all the gestures of health. In his clear glance, in his firm 

tone, in the robust movement of his shoulders, there was something 

calculated to disconcert death. Azrael, the Mohammedan angel of the 

sepulchre, would have turned back, and thought that he had mistaken 

was flesh above and marble below. 

reprimand. "You did not vote for the death of the king, after all." 

quite disappeared from his face. 

tyrant." 

of that tyrant. That tyrant engendered royalty, which is authority 

should be governed only by science." 

"It is the same thing. Conscience is the quantity of innate science 

which we have within us." 

which was very new to him. 

had the right to kill a man; but I felt it my duty to exterminate evil. 

I voted the end of the tyrant, that is to say, the end of prostitution 

In voting for the Republic, I voted for that. I voted for fraternity, 

concord, the dawn. I have aided in the overthrow of prejudices and 

have caused the fall of the old world, and the old world, that vase of 

of joy." 

wind is still there." 

demolition complicated with wrath." 

of Christ. Incomplete, it may be, but sublime. It set free all the 

enlightened; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over the 

humanity." 

capable of exclamation:-- 

forming for the space of fifteen hundred years; at the end of fifteen 

matter. He replied:-- 

commit no error." And he added, regarding the member of the Convention 

steadily the while, "Louis XVII.?" 

child? very good; in that case I mourn with you. Is it for the royal 

an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Greve, 

until death ensued, for the sole crime of having been the brother 

of having been grandson of Louis XV." 

full of lightnings, was a harsh speaker of truths. When he cried, 

It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of 

Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod. Innocence, Monsieur, is its own 

as in fleurs de lys." 

innocent, all martyrs, all children, the lowly as well as the exalted? 

with me over the children of the people." 

longer." 

judges, and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of 

the death agony. It was almost an explosion. 

seeing no one but that child who helps me. Your name has reached me in 

that honest goodman, the people. By the way, I did not hear the sound of 

your carriage; you have left it yonder, behind the coppice at the fork 

who have liveries, who make good cheer, who eat moor-hens on Friday, who 

servants, good table, all the sensualities of life; you have this like 

the rest, and like the rest, you enjoy it; it is well; but this says 

intrinsic and essential value of the man who comes with the probable 

humble. 

off behind the trees yonder, how my good table and the moor-hens which I 

eat on Friday, how my twenty-five thousand francs income, how my palace 

inexorable." 

away a cloud. 

that I shall not make use of them. I promise you to make no use of them 

in the future." 

we? What were you saying to me? That '93 was inexorable?" 

his hands at the guillotine?" 

of minds will have their fetiches, and they sometimes feel vaguely 

wounded by the want of respect of logic. 

The conventionary began to pant; the asthma of the agony which is 

mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice; still, there was a 

perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes. He went on:-- 

Apart from the Revolution, which, taken as a whole, is an immense human 

affirmation, '93 is, alas! a rejoinder. You think it inexorable, sir; 

is your opinion as to Lamoignon-Baville? Maillard is terrible; but 

Saulx-Tavannes, if you please? Duchene senior is ferocious; but what 

epithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier? Jourdan-Coupe-Tete 

French Revolution had its reasons for existence; its wrath will be 

most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the human race. I 

thoughts in these tranquil words:-- 

harshly, but that it has progressed." 

inmost intrenchments of the Bishop. One remained, however, and from this 

beginning:-- 

He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race." 

tear gathered slowly. When the eyelid was full, the tear trickled down 

his livid cheek, and he said, almost in a stammer, quite low, and to 

himself, while his eyes were plunged in the depths:-- 

would not exist. There is, then, an I. That I of the infinite is 

God." 

him. That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in death. 

The supreme moment was approaching. 

come: from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion; 

hand in his, and bent over the dying man. 

regrettable if we had met in vain?" 

was imprinted on his countenance. 

when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with its 

which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and 

the altar, it is true; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country. I 

have always upheld the march forward of the human race, forward towards 

when the occasion offered, protected my own adversaries, men of your 

profession. And there is at Peteghem, in Flanders, at the very spot 

where the Merovingian kings had their summer palace, a convent of 

1793. I have done my duty according to my powers, and all the good 

that I was able. After which, I was hunted down, pursued, persecuted, 

I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they 

of death. What is it that you have come to ask of me?" 

become august. He had just expired. 

morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about 

member of the Convention G----; he contented himself with pointing 

heavenward. 

towards all children and sufferers. 

not count for something in his approach to perfection. 

bishop? There was evidently no conversion to be expected. All those 

off by the devil." 

spiritual, addressed this sally to him, "Monseigneur, people are 

that's a coarse color," replied the Bishop. "It is lucky that those who 

despise it in a cap revere it in a hat." 

union, with conventionary G----, left behind it in his mind a sort of 

astonishment, which rendered him still more gentle. That is all. 

perhaps, the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the 

events of that epoch, supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed 

of having an attitude. 

Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire, in company with many other 

was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and Italy 

convened at Paris. This synod was held at Notre-Dame, and assembled 

for the first time on the 15th of June, 1811, under the presidency 

of Cardinal Fesch. M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five bishops who 

penetrated to them through me. I produced on them the effect of an open 

door." 

princes. I am only a poor peasant bishop." 

said that he chanced to remark one evening, when he found himself at 

the house of one of his most notable colleagues: "What beautiful clocks! 

trouble. I would not have all those superfluities, crying incessantly 

cold! There are poor people! There are poor people!'" 

intelligent hatred. This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts. 

representations and ceremonies. It seems to reveal habits which have 

very little that is charitable about them. An opulent priest is a 

in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress, all these 

little of that misery, like the dust of labor? Is it possible to imagine 

nails, nor a drop of sweat, nor a speck of ashes on his face? The first 

proof of charity in the priest, in the bishop especially, is poverty. 

of the century" on certain delicate points. He took very little part 

questions in which Church and State were implicated; but if he had 

ultramontane rather than a gallican. Since we are making a portrait, and 

in his diocese during the Hundred Days. 

general, the other a prefect. He wrote to both with tolerable frequency. 

He was harsh for a time towards the former, because, holding a command 

had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the 

Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous 

Cassette, remained more affectionate. 

Certainly, such a man would have done well not to entertain any 

humane, which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous 

connected with the subject of this book, we will simply say this: It 

fictions and the hatreds of this world, above the stormy vicissitudes of 

and charity. 

Monseigneur Welcome, we should have understood and admired his protest 

the exterminators of the last. He who has not been a stubborn accuser in 

disarm us. In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn 

which passed from one dunghill to another, insulting after having 

deified; in the presence of that idolatry which was loosing its footing 

and spitting on its idol,--it was a duty to turn aside the head. In 

discerned opening before Napoleon, the mournful acclamation of the army 

and, after making all allowance for the despot, a heart like that of 

and a great man on the brink of the abyss. 

he was tolerant and easy, more so, perhaps, than we who are speaking 

cross which Napoleon had given him; this made a hole, and he would not 

put anything in its place. "I will die," he said, "rather than wear the 

the cathedral. 

deeds and gentle manners, filled the town of D----with a sort of 

weakly flock who adored their emperor, but loved their bishop. 

just as a general is by a covey of young officers. This is what 

and mounts guard over monseigneur's smile. To please a bishop is 

equivalent to getting one's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate. 

disdain the canonship. 

diocese dance attendance in their person, who are connecting links 

between the sacristy and diplomacy, who are abbes rather than priests, 

prelates rather than bishops. Happy those who approach them! Being 

persons of influence, they create a shower about them, upon the 

assiduous and the favored, and upon all the young men who understand 

the scenes, into nice little promotions. The larger the diocese of the 

A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop, an archbishop who 

and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step, and between the Eminence 

dream of the tiara. The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a 

king in a regular manner; and what a king! the supreme king. Then what a 

faith, perchance, and deceiving itself, devotee that it is. 

the big mitres. This was plain from the complete absence of young 

Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forth its 

exit to a cardinalship, and who resembled their bishop, with this 

difference, that they were finished and he was completed. The 

understood, that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the 

seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix 

men wish to be pushed. A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation 

is a dangerous neighbor; he might communicate to you, by contagion, 

advancement, and in short, more renunciation than you desire; and 

lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption. 

the same profile as supremacy. Success, that Menaechmus of talent, has 

day, a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its 

service, wears the livery of success, and performs the service of its 

lucky, and you will have all the rest; be happy, and people will think 

you great. Outside of five or six immense exceptions, which compose 

short-sightedness. Gilding is gold. It does no harm to be the first 

consist. Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy: let a false 

let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the 

family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made minister 

of finances,--and men call that Genius, just as they call the face 

of Mousqueton Beauty, and the mien of Claude Majesty. With the 

made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks. 

from our own. 

souls enter naked. The point on which we are certain is, that the 

difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his 

conscience, and which whispers to a man, "Thou art with God!" 

beyond his faith, as it were, the Bishop possessed an excess of love. It 

takes its word of command from pedantry. What was this excess of love? 

It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men, as we have already 

for animals. The Bishop of D---- had none of that harshness, which is 

peculiar to many priests, nevertheless. He did not go as far as the 

Brahmin, but he seemed to have weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes: "Who 

deformity of instinct, troubled him not, and did not arouse his 

indignation. He was touched, almost softened by them. It seemed as 

is apparent, the cause, the explanation, or the excuse for them. He 

seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties. He examined 

without wrath, and with the eye of a linguist who is deciphering a 

revery sometimes caused him to utter odd sayings. One morning he was in 

him, unseen by him: suddenly he paused and gazed at something on the 

ground; it was a large, black, hairy, frightful spider. His sister heard 

him say:-- 

ankle in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant. Thus lived this just 

formations are indestructible. 

of taking long strolls on foot; his step was firm, and his form was 

Welcome had what the people term a "fine head," but so amiable was he 

that they forgot that it was fine. 

with him, and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person. His fresh and 

and which were displayed by his smile, gave him that open and easy air 

of an old man, "He is a fine man." That, it will be recalled, was the 

man. But if one remained near him for a few hours, and beheld him in the 

alms-giving, the consolation of the afflicted, the cultivation of a bit 

of land, fraternity, frugality, hospitality, renunciation, confidence, 

study, work, filled every day of his life. Filled is exactly the word; 

a very advanced hour of the night. He was there alone, communing with 

heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown. At such moments, 

their perfume, illuminated like a lamp amid the starry night, as he 

poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst of the universal radiance of 

the abysses of the universe! 

that strange mystery; of the eternity past, a mystery still more 

strange; of all the infinities, which pierced their way into all 

his senses, beneath his eyes; and, without seeking to comprehend the 

incomprehensible, he gazed upon it. He did not study God; he was dazzled 

formed and dissolved incessantly; hence life and death. 

of his fruit-trees. This quarter of an acre, so poorly planted, so 

encumbered with mean buildings and sheds, was dear to him, and satisfied 

his wants. 

life, where there was so little leisure, between gardening in the 

the heavens for a ceiling, sufficient to enable him to adore God in his 

what is there left to desire beyond it? A little garden in which to 

upon: some flowers on earth, and all the stars in the sky. 

One last word. 

to his credit or discredit, that he entertained one of those personal 

usurp the place of religion, we insist upon it, that not one of 

those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have thought himself 

man was his heart. His wisdom was made of the light which comes from 

there. 

that you must not enter. Woe to him who penetrates thither! 

situated, so to speak, above all dogmas, propose their ideas to 

God. Their prayer audaciously offers discussion. Their adoration 

interrogates. This is direct religion, which is full of anxiety and 

responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs. 

a sort of splendid reaction, it with it dazzles nature; the mysterious 

world which surrounds us renders back what it has received; it is 

was one of these men; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius. He would 

shortens,--the Gospel's. 

humble soul loved, and that was all. 

That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is 

probable: but one can no more pray too much than one can love too much; 

Jerome would be heretics. 

appeared to him like an immense malady; everywhere he felt fever, 

in finding for himself, and in inspiring others with the best way to 

priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation. 

of pity. Universal misery was his mine. The sadness which reigned 

Bishop: "Just survey the spectacle of the world: all war against 

all; the strongest has the most wit. Your love each other is 

nonsense."--"Well," replied Monseigneur Welcome, without contesting the 

point, "if it is nonsense, the soul should shut itself up in it, as the 

pearl in the oyster." Thus he shut himself up, he lived there, he 

abstraction, the precipices of metaphysics--all those profundities 

of man, the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal, the transformation 

which Lucretius, Manou, Saint Paul, Dante, contemplate with eyes 

cause stars to blaze forth there. 

mysterious questions without scrutinizing them, and without troubling 

his own mind with them, and who cherished in his own soul a grave 

respect for darkness. 

CHAPTER I--THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING 

moment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness. It was 

a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine; a tightly packed soldier 

knapsack, well buckled and perfectly new, on his back; an enormous, 

shaved head and a long beard. 

have been cut for some time. 

into D---- by the same street which, seven months previously, had 

witnessed the passage of the Emperor Napoleon on his way from Cannes 

to Paris. This man must have been walking all day. He seemed very much 

the market-place. 

a quarter of an hour later. A gendarme was seated near the door, on the 

stone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March to read 

gendarme. 

There then existed at D---- a fine inn at the sign of the Cross of 

Labarre, who kept the inn of the Three Dauphins in Grenoble, and had 

Three Dauphins. It was said that General Bertrand, disguised as a 

carter, had made frequent trips thither in the month of January, and 

Grenoble he had refused to install himself at the hotel of the 

Three Dauphins. This glory of the Labarre of the Three Dauphins was 

reflected upon the Labarre of the Cross of Colbas, at a distance of five 

of the man of Grenoble." 

country-side. He entered the kitchen, which opened on a level with the 

street. All the stoves were lighted; a huge fire blazed gayly in the 

fireplace. The host, who was also the chief cook, was going from one 

designed for the wagoners, whose loud talking, conversation, and 

laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment. Any one who has 

from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking. 

without raising his eyes from his stoves:-- 

paying for it." 

answered, "I have money." 

hand, and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire. D---- is in 

the mountains. The evenings are cold there in October. 

child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall. 

attentively, then tossed his head, and remained thoughtful for a moment. 

be immersed in reflections which were not very serene. 

"I cannot receive you, sir," said he. 

in advance? I have money, I tell you." 

straw. We will see about that after dinner." 

as grave. He rose. 

have travelled twelve leagues. I pay. I wish to eat." 

stoves: "Nothing! and all that?" 

at an inn; I am hungry, and I shall remain." 

start, "Go away!" 

brands into the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff; he turned 

quickly round, and as he opened his mouth to reply, the host gazed 

Jean Valjean. Now do you want me to tell you who you are? When I saw you 

reply that was sent to me. Can you read?" 

had just travelled from the inn to the town-hall, and from the town-hall 

pause. 

on the ground, and took his departure. 

of the Cross of Colbas standing on his threshold, surrounded by all 

the guests of his inn, and all the passers-by in the street, talking 

arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town. 

them. They know but too well the evil fate which follows them. 

whether he could not discover some shelter. 

public house, some hovel, however lowly. 

the Rue de Chaffaut. 

pot, suspended from a crane, bubbled over the flame. 

the door. 

him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack. 

pot. Come and warm yourself, comrade." 

feet, which were exhausted with fatigue, to the fire; a fine odor was 

his cap, which was well pulled down, assumed a vague appearance 

of comfort, mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitual 

suffering bestows. 

physiognomy was strangely composed; it began by seeming humble, and 

beneath brushwood. 

encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras 

when he met him, the man, who then seemed already extremely weary, had 

a member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin 

him. They exchanged a few words in a low tone. The man had again become 

absorbed in his reflections. 

the shoulder of the man, and said to him:-- 

children dispersed like a flock of birds. 

a bell. He rang. 

kindness to admit me, and give me a lodging for the night?" 

admitted." 

peered through the pane as he had done at the public house. Within was a 

soup-tureen. At this table sat a man of about forty, with a merry and 

the child was laughing, the mother was smiling. 

spectacle. What was taking place within him? He alone could have 

would find perhaps a little pity. 

knocking." 

enormous black whiskers, prominent eyes, the lower part of his face 

like a snout; and besides all this, that air of being on his own ground, 

which is indescribable. 

garden, in which to sleep? Tell me; can you? For money?" 

day long. I have travelled twelve leagues. Can you?--if I pay?" 

who would pay me. But why do you not go to the inn?" 

to Labarre?" 

receive me." 

receive me either." 

the newcomer from head to feet, and suddenly exclaimed, with a sort of 

shudder:-- 

placed the lamp on the table, and took his gun down from the wall. 

"Tso-maraude."[1] 

said:-- 

bar of iron which was placed against it was audible outside. 

which bordered the street, a sort of hut, which seemed to him to be 

from the cold. This sort of dwelling is not usually occupied at night. 

stretched out on this bed, without the power to make a movement, so 

as it furnished, moreover, a pillow ready to his hand, he set about 

unbuckling one of the straps. At that moment, a ferocious growl became 

the darkness at the entrance of the hut. 

best way he could, not without enlarging the rents in his rags. 

rose couverte. 

a dog!" 

him shelter. 

low hills covered with close-cut stubble, which, after the harvest, 

resemble shaved heads. 

upon the hill itself, and which were mounting and filling the whole 

gleam of light fell upon the earth. 

mean, was outlined vague and wan against the gloomy horizon. The whole 

effect was hideous, petty, lugubrious, and narrow. 

which writhed and shivered a few paces distant from the wayfarer. 

in that hill, in that plain, in that tree, which was so profoundly 

abruptly. There are instants when nature seems hostile. 

sustained sieges during the wars of religion, was still surrounded 

in 1815 by ancient walls flanked by square towers which have been 

demolished since. He passed through a breach and entered the town again. 

acquainted with the streets, he recommenced his walk at random. 

himself, were printed for the first time. 

she. 

sleeping." The good woman, who was well worthy the name, in fact, was 

the Marquise de R---- 

"to-day I have a mattress of stone." 

"Give it to me all the same." 

doubt. Some one might have given you a lodging out of charity." 

other side of the street a small, low house, which stood beside the 

Bishop's palace. 

duties of all; secondly, the duties of each individual, according to the 

are four of these. Saint Matthew points them out: duties towards God 

(Matt. vi.); duties towards one's self (Matt. v. 29, 30); duties towards 

one's neighbor (Matt. vii. 12); duties towards animals (Matt. vi. 20, 

25). As for the other duties the Bishop found them pointed out and 

Romans; to magistrates, to wives, to mothers, to young men, by Saint 

Peter; to husbands, fathers, children and servants, in the Epistle 

to the Ephesians; to the faithful, in the Epistle to the Hebrews; to 

to souls. 

knees, when Madame Magloire entered, according to her wont, to get the 

knowing that the table was set, and that his sister was probably 

dining-room. 

door opening on the street (as we have said), and a window opening on 

the garden. 

table. 

Baptistine. 

was burning there. 

which she had purchased at that date in Paris, and which had lasted 

suffice to express, Madame Magloire had the air of a peasant, and 

Mademoiselle Baptistine that of a lady. Madame Magloire wore a white 

quilted cap, a gold Jeannette cross on a velvet ribbon upon her neck, 

knotted round the waist with a green ribbon, with a stomacher of the 

a narrow, sheath-like skirt, puffed sleeves, with flaps and buttons. 

look. So long as Monseigneur held his peace, she talked to him 

resolutely with a mixture of respect and freedom; but as soon as 

predestined to gentleness; but faith, charity, hope, those three virtues 

which mildly warm the soul, had gradually elevated that gentleness to 

sanctity. Nature had made her a lamb, religion had made her an angel. 

Poor sainted virgin! Sweet memory which has vanished! 

who still recall the most minute details. 

accustomed. The question concerned the lock upon the entrance door. 

doors well. 

of the fire, and warmed himself, and then fell to thinking of other 

things. He did not take up the remark dropped with design by Madame 

bare-footed vagabond, a sort of dangerous mendicant, was at that moment 

the streets in the gloaming. A gallows-bird with a terrible face. 

she pursued triumphantly:-- 

Mademoiselle there says with me--" 

done." 

replace the ancient locks on the doors; we have them, and it is only the 

work of a moment; for I say that nothing is more terrible than a 

need to ask permission." 

energetic and resolute push. 

about in search of shelter. 

him. He had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel in his hand, a 

and stood with her mouth wide open. 

started up in terror; then, turning her head by degrees towards the 

once more profoundly calm and serene. 

As he opened his mouth, doubtless to ask the new-comer what he desired, 

in a loud voice:-- 

been walking for four days since I left Toulon. I have travelled a dozen 

They said to me, 'Be off,' at both places. No one would take me. I 

stars. I thought it was going to rain, and I re-entered the town, to 

on a stone bench. A good woman pointed out your house to me, and said 

"that's not it. Did you hear? I am a galley-slave; a convict. I come 

how to read. I learned in the galleys. There is a school there for those 

been nineteen years in the galleys: five years for house-breaking 

occasions. He is a very dangerous man.' There! Every one has cast me 

something to eat and a bed? Have you a stable?" 

women's obedience. 

and your bed will be prepared while you are supping." 

crazy man:-- 

me, so I told you at once who I am. Oh, what a good woman that was who 

like the rest of the world! a bed! It is nineteen years since I have 

slept in a bed! You actually do not want me to go! You are good 

a fine man. You are an inn-keeper, are you not?" 

going to demand any money of me? You are the cure, are you not? the cure 

skull-cap." 

As he spoke, he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner, 

Baptistine gazed mildly at him. He continued: 

priest is a very good thing. Then you do not require me to pay?" 

tell me one hundred and nine francs?" 

to earn that?" 

have spent only twenty-five sous, which I earned by helping unload some 

I say that very badly; but it is such a far-off thing to me! You 

is what a bishop is like." 

remained wide open. 

placed on the table. 

Alps. You must be cold, sir." 

thirsts for consideration. 

Madame Magloire understood him, and went to get the two silver 

placed them, lighted, on the table. 

have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortunate 

man." 

could not help telling me who you were. This is not my house; it is 

the house of Jesus Christ. This door does not demand of him who enters 

hungry and thirsty; you are welcome. And do not thank me; do not say 

have I to know your name? Besides, before you told me you had one which 

I knew." 

happened to me." 

cold, toil, the convicts, the thrashings, the double chain for nothing, 

the cell for one word; even sick and in bed, still the chain! Dogs, dogs 

are happier! Nineteen years! I am forty-six. Now there is the yellow 

passport. That is what it is like." 

repentant sinner than over the white robes of a hundred just men. If you 

mankind, you are deserving of pity; if you emerge with thoughts of 

good-will and of peace, you are more worthy than any one of us." 

water, oil, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, a 

added to the Bishop's ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves wine. 

her seat at his left. 

his custom. The man began to eat with avidity. 

on this table." 

spoons which were absolutely necessary. Now, it was the usage of the 

dignity. 

the three persons seated at the table. 

do better than to transcribe here a passage from one of Mademoiselle 

Baptistine's letters to Madame Boischevron, wherein the conversation 

between the convict and the Bishop is described with ingenious 

minuteness. 

". . . This man paid no attention to any one. He ate with the voracity 

of a starving man. However, after supper he said: 

a better table than you do.' 

good God were but just, you certainly ought to be a cure!' 

nights are cold, the days are hot.' 

Revolution my family was ruined. I took refuge in Franche-Comte at 

first, and there I lived for some time by the toil of my hands. My will 

paper mills, tanneries, distilleries, oil factories, watch factories 

least, four of which, situated at Lods, at Chatillon, at Audincourt, and 

at Beure, are tolerably large.' 

brother mentioned. Then he interrupted himself and addressed me:-- 

"'We did have some; among others, M. de Lucenet, who was captain of the 

gates at Pontarlier under the old regime.' 

relatives, one had only one's arms. I worked. They have, in the 

country of Pontarlier, whither you are going, Monsieur Valjean, a 

cheese-dairies, which they call fruitieres.' 

a double tally. It is towards the end of April that the work of the 

cheese-dairies begins; it is towards the middle of June that the 

cheese-makers drive their cows to the mountains.' 

he entered, which could remind the man of what he was, nor of what my 

mark of the passage might remain behind. This might have appeared to any 

to nourish his soul as well as his body, and to bestow upon him 

some reproach, seasoned with moralizing and advice, or a little 

future. My brother did not even ask him from what country he came, 

nor what was his history. For in his history there is a fault, and my 

of the mountaineers of Pontarlier, who exercise a gentle labor near 

heaven, and who, he added, are happy because they are innocent, he 

something which might wound the man. By dint of reflection, I think 

I have comprehended what was passing in my brother's heart. He was 

misfortune only too vividly present in his mind; that the best thing 

that he was a person like any other, by treating him just in his 

not, dear Madame, something truly evangelical in this delicacy which 

truest pity, when a man has a sore point, not to touch it at all? It has 

any case, what I can say is that, if he entertained all these ideas, he 

same air and in the same manner in which he would have supped with M. 

Gedeon le Provost, or with the curate of the parish. 

the door. It was Mother Gerbaud, with her little one in her arms. My 

had about me to give to Mother Gerbaud. The man was not paying much 

heed to anything then. He was no longer talking, and he seemed very much 

in great need of your bed.' Madame Magloire cleared the table very 

promptly. I understood that we must retire, in order to allow this 

traveller to go to sleep, and we both went up stairs. Nevertheless, I 

sent Madame Magloire down a moment later, to carry to the man's bed a 

frigid, and that keeps one warm. It is a pity that this skin is old; all 

ivory-handled knife which I use at table. 

drawing-room, where we hang up the linen, and then we each retired to 

our own chambers, without saying a word to each other." 

the two silver candlesticks from the table, handed the other to his 

guest, and said to him,-- 

situated, or to get out of it, it was necessary to traverse the Bishop's 

bedroom. 

This was her last care every evening before she went to bed. 

prepared there. The man set the candle down on a small table. 

sudden, and without transition, he made a strange movement, which would 

Even at this day it is difficult for us to explain what inspired him at 

that moment. Did he intend to convey a warning or to throw out a menace? 

monstrous:-- 

benediction on the man, who did not bow, and without turning his head or 

looking behind him, he returned to his bedroom. 

eyes which remain open. 

the bed, where he immediately fell into a profound sleep. 

to read in his childhood. When he reached man's estate, he became a 

tree-pruner at Faverolles. His mother was named Jeanne Mathieu; his 

contraction of viola Jean, "here's Jean." 

constitutes the peculiarity of affectionate natures. On the whole, 

been killed by a fall from a tree. All that remained to Jean Valjean 

husband she lodged and fed her young brother. 

The youngest, one. 

parts. He had not had the time to fall in love. 

his bowl while he was eating,--a bit of meat, a slice of bacon, the 

far from the Valjean thatched cottage, on the other side of the lane, 

their mother's name, which they drank behind a hedge or in some alley 

girls spilled it on their aprons and down their necks. If their mother 

had known of this marauding, she would have punished the delinquents 

severely. Jean Valjean gruffly and grumblingly paid Marie-Claude for 

punished. 

The family had no bread. No bread literally. Seven children! 

glass. The arm seized a loaf of bread and carried it off. Isabeau ran 

out in haste; the robber fled at the full speed of his legs. Isabeau ran 

arm was still bleeding. It was Jean Valjean. 

smacks too strongly of the brigand. Nevertheless, we will remark 

hideous assassin of the towns. The poacher lives in the forest, the 

men because they make corrupt men. The mountain, the sea, the forest, 

make savage men; they develop the fierce side, but often without 

destroying the humane side. 

the penal laws decree a shipwreck. What an ominous minute is that in 

which society draws back and consummates the irreparable abandonment 

galleys. 

to the Five Hundred, of the 2d of Floreal, year IV., calls Buona-Parte, 

except that it was horrible. It is probable that he, also, was 

disentangling from amid the vague ideas of a poor man, ignorant of 

being riveted behind his head with heavy blows from the hammer, he wept, 

his tears stifled him, they impeded his speech; he only managed to 

What became of his sister? What became of the seven children? Who 

the young tree which is sawed off at the root? 

of God, henceforth without support, without guide, without refuge, 

wandered away at random,--who even knows?--each in his own direction 

engulfs solitary destinies; gloomy shades, into which disappear in 

succession so many unlucky heads, in the sombre march of the human race. 

them. In that heart, where there had been a wound, there was a scar. 

the end of the fourth year of his captivity. I know not through what 

channels the news reached him. Some one who had known them in their 

to be there at six o'clock in the morning--long before daylight in 

winter. In the same building with the printing office there was a 

old. But as she entered the printing office at six, and the school only 

beheld this poor little being seated on the pavement, overcome with 

drowsiness, and often fast asleep in the shadow, crouched down and 

was told to Jean Valjean. 

as though a window had suddenly been opened upon the destiny of those 

forever. Nothing from them ever reached him again; he never beheld 

history they will not be met with any more. 

Towards the end of this fourth year Jean Valjean's turn to escape 

the slightest noise, to be afraid of everything,--of a smoking roof, 

of it, but could not accomplish his flight fully. He was missing at 

hidden under the keel of a vessel in process of construction; he 

resisted the galley guards who seized him. Escape and rebellion. This 

five years, two of them in the double chain. Thirteen years. In the 

tenth year his turn came round again; he again profited by it; he 

Finally, I think it was during his thirteenth year, he made a last 

attempt, and only succeeded in getting retaken at the end of four 

October, 1815, he was released; he had entered there in 1796, for having 

broken a pane of glass and taken a loaf of bread. 

Room for a brief parenthesis. This is the second time, during his 

this book has come across the theft of a loaf of bread as the point of 

impassive. He had entered in despair; he emerged gloomy. 

Let us try to say it. 

itself which creates them. 

meditated. 

punished. He admitted that he had committed an extreme and blameworthy 

act; that that loaf of bread would probably not have been refused to 

wait until he could get it through compassion or through work; that 

children; that it had been an act of madness for him, a miserable, 

unfortunate wretch, to take society at large violently by the collar, 

which infamy enters; in short, that he was in the wrong. 

it was not a serious thing, that he, a laborer, out of work, that he, an 

industrious man, should have lacked bread. And whether, the fault once 

committed and confessed, the chastisement had not been ferocious and 

disproportioned. Whether there had not been more abuse on the part of 

the law, in respect to the penalty, than there had been on the part 

excess of weights in one balance of the scale, in the one which contains 

situation, of replacing the fault of the delinquent by the fault of the 

into the creditor, and of ranging the law definitely on the side of the 

attempts at escape, had not ended in becoming a sort of outrage 

crime which had lasted nineteen years. 

of foresight, and in the other case for its pitiless foresight; and to 

work and an excess of punishment. 

it to account. He declared to himself that there was no equilibrium 

between the harm which he had caused and the harm which was being done 

not, in truth, unjust, but that it most assuredly was iniquitous. 

at bottom. Jean Valjean felt himself exasperated. 

which it shows to those whom it strikes. Men had only touched him to 

bruise him. Every contact with them had been a blow. Never, since 

his infancy, since the days of his mother, of his sister, had he ever 

suffering, he had gradually arrived at the conviction that life is a 

war; and that in this war he was the conquered. He had no other weapon 

with him when he departed. 

unfortunate men who had a mind for them. He was of the number who had 

a mind. He went to school at the age of forty, and learned to read, 

to write, to cipher. He felt that to fortify his intelligence was to 

fortify his hate. In certain cases, education and enlightenment can 

serve to eke out evil. 

caused his unhappiness, he judged Providence, which had made society, 

and he condemned it also. 

other. 

that he was becoming wicked; he there condemned Providence, and was 

conscious that he was becoming impious. 

man created good by God be rendered wicked by man? Can the soul be 

the heart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities and 

infirmities under the oppression of a disproportionate unhappiness, 

first spark, a divine element, incorruptible in this world, immortal in 

splendor, and which evil can never wholly extinguish? 

would probably have responded no, and that without hesitation, had 

his pocket to prevent its dragging, serious, silent, and thoughtful, 

a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath, condemned by 

civilization, and regarding heaven with severity. 

this soul, and, like Dante at the portals of hell, he would have effaced 

inscribed upon the brow of every man,--hope. 

perfectly clear to Jean Valjean as we have tried to render it for 

those who read us? Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive, after their 

formation, and had he seen distinctly during the process of their 

formation, all the elements of which his moral misery was composed? Had 

descended to the lugubrious aspects which had, for so many years, formed 

within him, and of all that was working there? That is something 

access of wrath, a surcharge of suffering, a livid and rapid flash which 

precipices and the sombre perspective of his destiny. 

longer knew. The peculiarity of pains of this nature, in which 

that which is pitiless--that is to say, that which is 

brutalizing--predominates, is to transform a man, little by little, by 

ferocious beast. 

Jean Valjean would have renewed these attempts, utterly useless and 

render him still more wild. 

weights on his back; and when the occasion demanded it, he replaced that 

nicknamed him Jean the Jack-screw. Once, when they were repairing the 

Puget, which support the balcony, became loosened, and was on the point 

his shoulder, and gave the workmen time to arrive. 

Jean Valjean. An angle of the wall being given, with the tension of his 

of the stone, he raised himself as if by magic to the third story. He 

sometimes mounted thus even to the roof of the galley prison. 

something terrible. 

each time that he turned his neck and essayed to raise his glance, 

he perceived with terror, mingled with rage, a sort of frightful 

here and there in that swarming and formless mass, now near him, now 

gendarme and his sword; yonder the mitred archbishop; away at the top, 

complicated and mysterious movement which God imparts to civilization, 

in its cruelty and inexorability in its indifference. Souls which have 

their heads. 

of his meditation? 

doubtless, think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought. 

is almost indescribable. 

rose in revolt. Everything which had happened to him seemed to him 

absurd; everything that surrounded him seemed to him impossible. He said 

a sudden the phantom dealt him a blow with his cudgel. 

nor radiant sky, nor fresh April dawns. I know not what vent-hole 

daylight habitually illumined his soul. 

into positive results in all that we have just pointed out, we will 

years, Jean Valjean, the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles, the 

formidable convict of Toulon, had become capable, thanks to the manner 

in which the galleys had moulded him, of two sorts of evil action: 

firstly, of evil action which was rapid, unpremeditated, dashing, 

entirely instinctive, in the nature of reprisals for the evil which 

consciously argued out and premeditated, with the false ideas which 

such a misfortune can furnish. His deliberate deeds passed through 

just, if there are any such. The point of departure, like the point 

dangerous man. 

the galleys it had been nineteen years since he had shed a tear. 

A man overboard! 

ship has a path which it is forced to pursue. It passes on. 

that retreating sail! He gazes and gazes at it frantically. It retreats, 

taken place? He has slipped, he has fallen; all is at an end. 

and crumbles. The billows, torn and lashed by the wind, encompass him 

It seems as though all that water were hate. 

an effort; he swims. He, his petty strength all exhausted instantly, 

combats the inexhaustible. 

the horizon. 

madness; he hears noises strange to man, which seem to come from beyond 

beyond. 

and he, he rattles in the death agony. 

vanished; he is alone in the formidable twilight gulf; he sinks, he 

billows of the invisible; he shouts. 

deaf. He beseeches the tempest; the imperturbable tempest obeys only the 

infinite. 

to be done? The desperate man gives up; he is weary, he chooses the 

of engulfment. 

Disastrous absence of help! Oh, moral death! 

their condemned. The sea is the immensity of wretchedness. 

resuscitate it? 

Jean Valjean heard in his ear the strange words, Thou art free! the 

the idea of liberty. He had believed in a new life. He very speedily 

perceived what sort of liberty it is to which a yellow passport is 

provided. 

sous, which had been counted out to him on his departure. He had 

the word--robbed. 

to work. He was intelligent, robust, adroit; he did his best; the master 

him, and demanded his papers. It was necessary to show him the yellow 

passport. That done, Jean Valjean resumed his labor. A little while 

evening arrived, as he was forced to set out again on the following day, 

objected. He was told, "That is enough for thee." He persisted. The 

master looked him straight between the eyes, and said to him "Beware of 

the prison." 

Now it was the individual who was robbing him at retail. 

from the sentence. 

was received at D---- 

sensation was too novel not to disturb his slumbers. 

accustomed not to devote many hours to repose. 

preoccupy the mind, one falls asleep once, but not a second time. 

Sleep comes more easily than it returns. This is what happened to Jean 

Valjean. He could not get to sleep again, and he fell to thinking. 

perturbed pool. Many thoughts occurred to him; but there was one which 

placed on the table. 

distant.--Just as he was traversing the adjoining room to reach the 

one in which he then was, the old servant-woman had been in the act 

nineteen years.--It is true that he would have earned more if "the 

administration had not robbed him." 

out his arm and felt of his knapsack, which he had thrown down on a 

corner of the alcove; then he hung his legs over the edge of the bed, 

knowing it, seated on his bed. 

been suggestive of something sinister for any one who had seen him 

attitude, and became motionless once more. 

indicated moved incessantly through his brain; entered, withdrew, 

a convict named Brevet, whom he had known in the galleys, and whose 

hour. It seemed to him that that stroke said to him, "Come on!" 

eclipses, then bright openings of the clouds; and indoors a sort of 

twilight. This twilight, sufficient to enable a person to see his way, 

intermittent on account of the clouds, resembled the sort of livid light 

tops of trees, spaced at regular intervals, which indicated that the 

it, fumbled in it, pulled out of it something which he placed on the 

bed, put his shoes into one of his pockets, shut the whole thing up 

again, threw the knapsack on his shoulders, put on his cap, drew the 

object which he had deposited there. It resembled a short bar of 

iron, pointed like a pike at one end. It would have been difficult to 

have been designed. Perhaps it was a lever; possibly it was a club. 

more than a miner's candlestick. Convicts were, at that period, 

the adjoining room, occupied by the Bishop, as we already know. 

it. 

furtive and uneasy gentleness of a cat which is desirous of entering. 

movement, which enlarged the opening a little. 

formed an embarrassing angle with it, and barred the entrance. 

to enlarge the aperture still further. 

emitted amid the silence a hoarse and prolonged cry. 

of Judgment. 

that that hinge had just become animated, and had suddenly assumed a 

terrible life, and that it was barking like a dog to arouse every one, 

and warn and to wake those who were asleep. He halted, shuddering, 

him, had taken the alarm, and had shouted; the old man would rise at 

uproar, and the gendarmerie on hand. For a moment he thought himself 

lost. 

rusty hinge had not awakened any one. 

as soon as possible. He took a step and entered the room. 

scattered on a table, open folios, volumes piled upon a stool, an 

were only shadowy corners and whitish spots. Jean Valjean advanced with 

the sleeping Bishop. 

sooner than he had thought for. 

heavens. At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front of the bed, 

which covered his arms to the wrists. His head was thrown back on the 

holy actions, was hanging over the edge of the bed. His whole face 

The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a mysterious heaven. 

within him. That heaven was his conscience. 

and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that white 

without being himself aware of it. 

he beheld anything like this. This confidence terrified him. The 

moral world has no grander spectacle than this: a troubled and 

contemplating the slumber of the just. 

about it something sublime, of which he was vaguely but imperiously 

conscious. 

order to attempt to form an idea of it, it is necessary to think of the 

most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle. Even on 

what was the nature of this emotion? 

to be inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange 

hand. 

deliberation, and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more, his cap in 

his left hand, his club in his right hand, his hair bristling all over 

his savage head. 

gaze. 

with a benediction for one and pardon for the other. 

and without troubling himself about the noise, gained the door, 

tiger, and fled. 

garden. Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation. 

the basket of silver is?" 

become of it." 

it to Madame Magloire. 

don't know where it is." 

stolen it." 

to the Bishop. The Bishop had just bent down, and was sighing as he 

as it fell across the bed. He rose up at Madame Magloire's cry. 

coping of the wall had been torn away. 

Ah, the abomination! He has stolen our silver!" 

and said gently to Madame Magloire:-- 

went on:-- 

wrongfully. It belonged to the poor. Who was that man? A poor man, 

evidently." 

Mademoiselle's. It makes no difference to us. But it is for the sake of 

Monseigneur. What is Monseigneur to eat with now?" 

Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister, who said nothing, and 

to Madame Magloire, who was grumbling under her breath, that one really 

one shudder to think of it!" 

a knock at the door. 

men were gendarmes; the other was Jean Valjean. 

military salute. 

raised his head with an air of stupefaction. 

"Silence!" said the gendarme. "He is Monseigneur the Bishop." 

great age permitted. 

are of silver like the rest, and for which you can certainly get two 

hundred francs. Why did you not carry them away with your forks and 

spoons?" 

with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of. 

is true, then? We came across him. He was walking like a man who is 

running away. We stopped him to look into the matter. He had this 

silver--" 

here? It is a mistake." 

"Certainly," replied the Bishop. 

inarticulate voice, and as though he were talking in his sleep. 

gendarmes. 

candlesticks. Take them." 

brought them to Jean Valjean. The two women looked on without uttering 

a word, without a gesture, without a look which could disconcert the 

Bishop. 

mechanically, and with a bewildered air. 

anything but a latch, either by day or by night." 

Then, turning to the gendarmes:-- 

in becoming an honest man." 

remained speechless. The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered 

them. He resumed with solemnity:-- 

the spirit of perdition, and I give it to God." 

of novel sensations. He was conscious of a sort of rage; he did not 

touched or humiliated. There came over him at moments a strange emotion 

which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness acquired during 

the last twenty years of his life. This state of mind fatigued him. 

him. He asked himself what would replace this. At times he would have 

through them in his march recalled to him memories of his childhood. 

had recurred to him. 

horizon except the Alps. Not even the spire of a distant village. Jean 

Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D---- A path which 

intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush. 

a little to render his rags terrifying to any one who might have 

encountered him, a joyous sound became audible. 

marmot-box on his back. 

a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers. 

time, and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his 

hand--his whole fortune, probably. 

tossed up his handful of sous, which, up to that time, he had caught 

with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand. 

brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean. 

sight of him. 

heavens at an immense height. The child was standing with his back to 

blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean. 

composed of ignorance and innocence, "my money." 

"Sir," resumed the child, "give me back my money." 

by the collar of his blouse and shook him. At the same time he made an 

then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a 

terrible voice, "Who's there?" 

sous, if you please! Take your foot away, sir, if you please!" 

see!" 

feet, his foot still resting on the silver piece, he added:-- 

of his speed, without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry. 

revery. 

all day; it is probable that he was feverish. 

child's flight. The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular 

to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient 

he shivered; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening. 

cudgel. 

had half ground into the earth, and which was shining among the pebbles. 

It was as though he had received a galvanic shock. "What is this?" 

there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him. 

gaze afar off over the plain, at the same time casting his eyes towards 

all points of the horizon, as he stood there erect and shivering, like a 

terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge. 

banks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight. 

and saw nothing. 

There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was 

lost, and a silence which engulfed his voice. 

sort of lugubrious life. The bushes shook their thin little arms with 

pursuing some one. 

hear, "Little Gervais! Little Gervais!" 

doubt already far away. 

priest. 

was a little lad, about ten years old, with a marmot, I think, and a 

hurdy-gurdy. One of those Savoyards, you know?" 

and gave them to the priest. 

taken. 

towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being 

or rocks nearly on a level with the earth. At length, at a spot where 

sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time, "Little 

Gervais! Little Gervais! Little Gervais!" His shout died away in the 

mist, without even awakening an echo. He murmured yet once more, "Little 

Gervais!" but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice. It was his last 

power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil 

conscience; he fell exhausted, on a large stone, his fists clenched in 

his hair and his face on his knees, and he cried, "I am a wretch!" 

had wept in nineteen years. 

could not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him. He 

I take it away from the spirit of perversity; I give it to the good 

God." 

he opposed pride, which is the fortress of evil within us. He was 

obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency; that if he 

begun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man. 

In the presence of these lights, he proceeded like a man who is 

he understand all those mysterious murmurs which warn or importune the 

wished to remain evil, he must become a monster? 

blinded, as it were, by virtue. 

him and had not touched him. 

was this the last effect and the supreme effort, as it were, of the 

evil thoughts which he had brought away from the galleys,--a remnant of 

impulse, a result of what is called in statics, acquired force? It 

unheard-of thoughts besetting it. 

Valjean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror. 

It was because,--strange phenomenon, and one which was possible only 

However that may be, this last evil action had a decisive effect on 

one element and clarifying the other. 

bewildered, like one who seeks to save himself, he tried to find the 

Valjean, cudgel in hand, his blouse on his hips, his knapsack filled 

with his thoughts filled with abominable projects. 

him. 

mind. 

sort of light which he at first took for a torch. On scrutinizing 

this light which appeared to his conscience with more attention, he 

was the Bishop. 

to this sort of ecstasies, in proportion as his revery continued, as the 

more weakness than a woman, with more fright than a child. 

life, his first fault, his long expiation, his external brutishness, his 

internal hardness, his dismissal to liberty, rejoicing in manifold plans 

that he had done, that theft of forty sous from a child, a crime all the 

life and this soul. It seemed to him that he beheld Satan by the light 

of Paradise. 

Whither did he go! No one ever knew. The only thing which seems to be 

the shadow, in front of the door of Monseigneur Welcome. 

CHAPTER I--THE YEAR 1817 

candid time at which Count Lynch sat every Sunday as church-warden in 

of profile peculiar to a man who has performed a brilliant action. 

1817 fashion swallowed up little boys of from four to six years of 

bore the names of departments; Napoleon was at St. Helena; and since 

had just asserted itself by cutting off the hand, then the head, of 

of this same Champ de Mars, two great cylinders of wood might have 

were the columns which two years before had upheld the Emperor's 

platform in the Champ de Mai. They were blackened here and there with 

head into the fountain of the Flower-Market. 

was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha. The palace of Thermes, in 

the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny, the little shed of boards, 

bridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes at one stroke. Louis 

who have become dauphins, had two anxieties,--Napoleon and Mathurin 

Bruneau. The French Academy had given for its prize subject, The 

Chateaubriand, named Marchangy, in the interim, until there should be a 

masterpieces; Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of the 

from its list of members. A royal ordinance erected Angouleme into a 

evident that the city of Angouleme had all the qualities of a seaport; 

otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound. In 

representing slack-rope performances, which adorned Franconi's 

should be tolerated. M. Paer, the author of Agnese, a good sort of 

by Edmond Geraud. The Yellow Dwarf was transferred into Mirror. The Cafe 

the Bourbons. The Duc de Berri, already surveyed from the shadow by 

had died a year previously. The body-guard hissed Mademoiselle Mars. 

but their liberty was great. The Constitutionnel was constitutional. 

La Minerve called Chateaubriand Chateaubriant. That made the good 

fact that letters sent to an exile by post very rarely reached him, as 

amusing; and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion. What 

to say the voters; to say the enemies, or to say the allies; to say 

O'Mahoney, and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch, to some 

stood every morning at his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique, clad in 

footed trousers, and slippers, with a madras kerchief knotted over his 

gray hair, with his eyes fixed on a mirror, a complete set of dentist's 

instruments spread out before him, cleaning his teeth, which were 

charming, while he dictated The Monarchy according to the Charter to 

signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote Therese Aubert. Divorce was 

colonel-general of dragoons--a serious inconvenience. The city of 

Serious men asked themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or 

such an occasion; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points 

de Montarlot. Fabvier was factious; Bavoux was revolutionary. The 

Liberal, Pelicier, published an edition of Voltaire, with the following 

title: Works of Voltaire, of the French Academy. "That will attract 

gnaw at him--a sign of glory; and this verse was composed on him:-- 

was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from Captain, 

afterwards General Dufour. Saint-Simon, ignored, was erecting his 

which smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of a swimming dog 

to the Pont Louis XV.; it was a piece of mechanism which was not 

a coup d'etat, the distinguished author of numerous academicians, 

not succeed in becoming one himself. The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the 

with their fists on the subject of the divinity of Jesus Christ. Cuvier, 

reaction by reconciling fossils with texts and by making mastodons 

flatter Moses. 

pronounced parmentiere, and succeeded therein not at all. The Abbe 

which we have made use--passed to the state of--has been condemned as a 

Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned; men who had gone over to the 

enemy on the eve of battle made no secret of their recompense, and 

the most barefaced manner. 

now forgotten. History neglects nearly all these particulars, and cannot 

details, which are wrongly called trivial,--there are no trivial facts 

in humanity, nor little leaves in vegetation,--are useful. It is of 

the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries is 

farce." 

CHAPTER II--A DOUBLE QUARTETTE 

These Parisians came, one from Toulouse, another from Limoges, the third 

from Cahors, and the fourth from Montauban; but they were students; and 

born in Paris. 

specimens of humanity taken at random; neither good nor bad, neither 

People had just emerged from Ossian; elegance was Scandinavian and 

Caledonian; the pure English style was only to prevail later, and 

the first of the Arthurs, Wellington, had but just won the battle of 

Waterloo. 

Blachevelle, of Montauban. Naturally, each of them had his mistress. 

Blachevelle loved Favourite, so named because she had been in England; 

flower; Fameuil idolized Zephine, an abridgment of Josephine; Tholomyes 

but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity of toil, 

and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives the first fall 

in woman. One of the four was called the young, because she was 

the youngest of them, and one was called the old; the old one was 

twenty-three. Not to conceal anything, the three first were more 

than Fantine the Blonde, who was still in her first illusions. 

There had already been more than one episode in their romance, though 

hardly begun; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the 

first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second, and Gustave 

stones which are thrown at them. They are overwhelmed with splendor of 

hungry? 

who went out to give lessons in spite of his age. This professor, when 

he was a young man, had one day seen a chambermaid's gown catch on 

bowed to her. One morning an old woman with the air of a devotee, 

had entered her apartments, and had said to her, "You do not know me, 

Mamemoiselle?" "No." "I am your mother." Then the old woman opened the 

sideboard, and ate and drank, had a mattress which she owned brought in, 

Favourite, remained hours without uttering a word, breakfasted, dined, 

and supped for four, and went down to the porter's quarters for company, 

where she spoke ill of her daughter. 

work? She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her hands. 

As for Zephine, she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and caressing 

little way of saying "Yes, sir." 

are always accompanied by such friendships. 

is that, after making all due allowances for these little irregular 

women, while Fantine was a good girl. 

the love of Fantine was a first love, a sole love, a faithful love. 

them. 

of the people. Though she had emerged from the most unfathomable depths 

unknown. She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents? Who can say? She had 

never known father or mother. She was called Fantine. Why Fantine? She 

name; the Church no longer existed. She bore the name which pleased 

the first random passer-by, who had encountered her, when a very small 

had entered life in just this way. At the age of ten, Fantine quitted 

her head, and her pearls were in her mouth. 

the heart, also, has its hunger,--she loved. 

of the Pantheon, where so many adventurers twine and untwine, but in 

such a way as constantly to encounter him again. There is a way of 

Tholomyes was the head. It was he who possessed the wit. 

four thousand francs; four thousand francs! a splendid scandal on 

Mount Sainte-Genevieve. Tholomyes was a fast man of thirty, and badly 

bald spot, of which he himself said with sadness, the skull at thirty, 

by a watering in one eye. But in proportion as his youth disappeared, 

He was dilapidated but still in flower. His youth, which was packing 

up for departure long before its time, beat a retreat in good order, 

was the leader. Iron is an English word. Is it possible that irony is 

derived from it? 

oracle, and said to them:-- 

just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius, 'Faccia 

gialluta, fa o miracolo, Yellow face, perform thy miracle,' so our 

your surprise?' At the same time our parents keep writing to us. 

discuss the question." 

their confidential colloquy was lost in shadow. 

young girls. 

of Fecamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days. The Paris 

of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts. 

warm, bright, summer day. On the preceding day, Favourite, the only one 

who knew how to write, had written the following to Tholomyes in the 

Saint-Cloud by the coach, looked at the dry cascade and exclaimed, "This 

they ascended Diogenes' lantern, they gambled for macaroons at the 

roulette establishment of the Pont de Sevres, picked bouquets at 

were perfectly happy. 

the wings of the dragonfly quiver. Oh, whoever you may be, do you not 

remember? Have you rambled through the brushwood, holding aside the 

branches, on account of the charming head which is coming on behind you? 

woman holding your hand, and crying, "Ah, my new boots! what a state 

they are in!" 

in the paths,--a sign of rain, children." 

Zephine and Dahlia, whom chance had made beautiful in such a way that 

never left each other, more from an instinct of coquetry than from 

first keepsakes had just made their appearance, melancholy was dawning 

for women, as later on, Byronism dawned for men; and the hair of the 

their professors, explained to Fantine the difference that existed 

between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau. 

arm on Sundays. 

sacred to him; he smoked. 

trousers! What energy!" 

her little hat of sewed straw, with its long white strings, in her hand 

up incessantly, seemed made for the flight of Galatea under the 

voluptuously turned up, as in the antique masks of Erigone, had an 

discreetly over the jollity of the lower part of the face as though to 

brown buskins, whose ribbons traced an X on her fine, white, open-worked 

stockings, and that sort of muslin spencer, a Marseilles invention, 

whose name, canezou, a corruption of the words quinze aout, pronounced 

midday. The three others, less timid, as we have already said, 

wore low-necked dresses without disguise, which in summer, beneath 

of these audacious outfits, blond Fantine's canezou, with its 

transparencies, its indiscretion, and its reticence, concealing and 

displaying at one and the same time, seemed an alluring godsend of 

prize for coquetry to this canezou, in the contest for the prize of 

through the muslin; a gayety cooled by dreaminess; sculptural and 

exquisite--such was Fantine; and beneath these feminine adornments and 

everything with perfection, would have caught a glimpse in this little 

ancient sacred euphony. This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred. 

of the ideal; rhythm is its movement. 

her athwart all the intoxication of her age, the season, and her 

of difference which separates Psyche from Venus. Fantine had the long, 

white, fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs the ashes of the 

was nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become so 

gravity resembled the disdain of a goddess. Her brow, her nose, her 

chin, presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct 

from equilibrium of proportion, and from which harmony of countenance 

love with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia. 

fault. 

That day was composed of dawn, from one end to the other. All nature 

jasmines; a whole bohemia of butterflies swooped down upon the yarrow, 

the clover, and the sterile oats; in the august park of the King of 

France there was a pack of vagabonds, the birds. 

the trees, were resplendent. 

stockings in the tall grass, fresh, wild, without malice, all received, 

to some extent, the kisses of all, with the exception of Fantine, 

who was hedged about with that vague resistance of hers composed of 

dreaminess and wildness, and who was in love. "You always have a queer 

look about you," said Favourite to her. 

expressly for those in love,--in that eternal hedge-school of lovers, 

is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis--what a transfiguration 

effected by love! Notaries' clerks are gods. And the little cries, 

d'Urfe mingles druids with them. 

Square to see a newly arrived plant from India, whose name escapes our 

by way of Vanvres and Issy. At Issy an incident occurred. The truly 

his grotto, tried the mysterious little effects of the famous cabinet 

Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus. They had stoutly shaken the swing 

of laughter, the Toulousan Tholomyes, who was somewhat of a Spaniard, 

full flight upon a rope between two trees:-- 

       Amor me llama,          And Love is my name; 

       Toda mi alma,           To my eyes in flame, 

       Es en mi ojos,          All my soul doth come; 

       Porque ensenas,         For instruction meet 

       A tuas piernas.         I receive at thy feet" 

with a good deal of acrimony. 

on Sunday, said Favourite; on Sunday fatigue does not work. 

above the trees of the Champs Elysees. 

stranded in Bombarda's public house, a branch establishment which had 

been set up in the Champs-Elysees by that famous restaurant-keeper, 

Bombarda, whose sign could then be seen in the Rue de Rivoli, near 

Delorme Alley. 

been obliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sunday 

crowd); two windows whence they could survey beyond the elms, the quay 

two tables; upon one of them a triumphant mountain of bouquets, mingled 

with the hats of men and women; at the other the four couples seated 

of beer mingled with flasks of wine; very little order on the table, 

some disorder beneath it; 

     A noise, a clatter of the feet that was abominable," 

but light and dust, the two things of which glory is composed. The 

horses of Marly, those neighing marbles, were prancing in a cloud 

of gold. Carriages were going and coming. A squadron of magnificent 

Avenue de Neuilly; the white flag, showing faintly rosy in the setting 

which had become the Place Louis XV. once more, was choked with happy 

promenaders. Many wore the silver fleur-de-lys suspended from the 

white-watered ribbon, which had not yet wholly disappeared from 

the Hundred Days with lightning, and which had for its refrain:-- 

                    Rendez-nous notre pere." 

                    Give us back our father." 

Groups of dwellers in the suburbs, in Sunday array, sometimes even 

decorated with the fleur-de-lys, like the bourgeois, scattered over the 

on the wooden horses; others were engaged in drinking; some journeyman 

security; it was the epoch when a special and private report of Chief 

terminated with these lines:-- 

very pretty men, Sire. It would take all of two of them to make one 

of your grenadiers. There is nothing to be feared on the part of the 

populace of Paris the capital. It is remarkable that the stature of 

itself into a lion; that does happen, however, and in that lies the 

eyes it was liberty incarnate; and as though to serve as pendant to 

Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too "rose-colored" a light; 

is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek: no one sleeps 

trusted nevertheless; he is ready for any sort of cool deed; but when 

there is glory at the end of it, he is worthy of admiration in every 

resource. Is it a question of country, he enlists; is it a question of 

liberty, he tears up the pavements. Beware! his hair filled with wrath, 

is epic; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of a chlamys. Take 

stature; this little man will arise, and his gaze will be terrible, and 

thanks to the suburban man of Paris, that the Revolution, mixed with 

but la Carmagnole, he only overthrows Louis XVI.; make him sing the 

Marseillaise, and he will free the world. 

our four couples. The dinner, as we have said, was drawing to its close. 

the other; the chat of love is a cloud; the chat at table is smoke. 

had purchased at Saint-Cloud. 

to cease to love me, I would spring after you, I would scratch you, 

arrested." 

tickled in his self-love. Favourite resumed:-- 

both eyes proudly. 

again. "He is avaricious. I love the little fellow opposite me in my 

house. He is very nice, that young man; do you know him? One can see 

There he goes with his shouting. But, my dear, you are splitting my 

that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes, he said to 

me: 'Mamselle, make your gloves into fritters, and I will eat them.' It 

I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow. Never 

mind; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him--how I lie! Hey! How I do 

lie!" 

Favourite paused, and then went on:-- 

you see it is horrible, here we are dining in a room with a bed in it, 

and that disgusts me with life." 

haste, it is done for; that is to say, it gets frozen. Excess of zeal 

agrees with Talleyrand." 

"Tholomyes," remarked Blachevelle, "contemplate my calmness [mon 

calme]." 

frogs held their peace. 

most sublime, the most charming of humanity, and perhaps outside of 

humanity, have made puns. Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter, Moses on 

the prudence of Amphiaraus and the baldness of Caesar. There must be a 

limit, even to rebuses. Est modus in rebus. 

preaching morality to stomachs. And remember this: each one of our 

must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent; the bolt must be drawn 

Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at Rome at the 

epoch when Munatius Demens was quaestor of the Parricide; because I 

am going to be a doctor, apparently it does not follow that it is 

resolve, and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes." 

it means prosper." 

labor; work yourself to death, drag blocks, sleep not, hold vigil, 

starve yourself, and add thereto cold baths, girdles of herbs, the 

application of a plate of lead, lotions made with the subacetate of 

lead, and fomentations of oxycrat." 

shop over the way." 

Spanish. And the proof of it, senoras, is this: like people, like cask. 

Balearic Isles, twenty-six; the boot of Tzar Peter, thirty. Long 

neighbor if you see fit. The property of love is to err. A love 

made for that; it errs gayly, our gentle love. It has been said, error 

is human; I say, error is love. Ladies, I idolize you all. O Zephine, O 

Josephine, face more than irregular, you would be charming were you not 

all askew. You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has 

sat down by mistake. As for Favourite, O nymphs and muses! one day 

when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guerin-Boisseau, 

displayed her legs. This prologue pleased him, and Blachevelle fell 

lips. There was a Greek painter named Euphorion, who was surnamed the 

Eve; beauty begins with thee. I have just referred to Eve; it is thou 

That touched me; but let us, whoever we may be, distrust names. They may 

possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun, who has 

strayed into the life of a grisette, but who takes refuge in illusions, 

and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure without very well 

prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming 

remember this, you eat too much sugar. You have but one fault, O woman, 

and that is nibbling sugar. O nibbling sex, your pretty little white 

withering. Sugar is the most desiccating of all salts; it sucks the 

the solidification of the blood; hence tubercles in the lungs, hence 

death. That is why diabetes borders on consumption. Then, do not crunch 

hostility is open. No quarter, war to the death! a pretty woman is a 

those unfortunate men who are widowers, I throw the sublime proclamation 

of Bonaparte to the army of Italy: "Soldiers, you are in need of 

everything; the enemy has it." 

"Take breath, Tholomyes," said Blachevelle. 

struck up to a plaintive air, one of those studio songs composed of 

take their flight with them. This is the couplet by which the group 

replied to Tholomyes' harangue:-- 

           "The father turkey-cocks so grave 

            Some money to an agent gave, 

            That master good Clermont-Tonnerre 

            Might be made pope on Saint Johns' day fair. 

            But this good Clermont could not be 

            Made pope, because no priest was he; 

            And then their agent, whose wrath burned, 

            With all their money back returned." 

glass, filled, refilled it, and began again:-- 

the digest. Let Justinian be the male, and Feasting, the female! Joy in 

is a gratuitous Elleviou. Summer, I salute thee! O Luxembourg! O 

Georgics of the Rue Madame, and of the Allee de l'Observatoire! O 

guard the children, amuse themselves! The pampas of America would please 

virgin forests and to the savannas. All is beautiful. The flies buzz in 

the sun. The sun has sneezed out the humming bird. Embrace me, Fantine!" 

"The dinners are better at Edon's than at Bombarda's," exclaimed 

Zephine. 

mirrors [glaces] on the walls." 

at Edon's. Now, silver is more valuable than bone." 

Bombarda's windows. 

discussion just now." 

"A discussion is a good thing," replied Tholomyes; "a quarrel is 

better." 

bursts forth from the syllogism. That is fine. There are still human 

beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of the 

an air is Madeira wine, you must know, from the vineyard of Coural das 

and Monsieur Bombarda, the magnificent eating-house keeper, gives you 

centimes." 

Again Fameuil interrupted him:-- 

bring me a Greek courtesan; for, oh, ladies! there were Bombardas in 

Nil sub sole novum, says Solomon; amor omnibus idem, says Virgil; and 

Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint-Cloud, as Aspasia 

know what Aspasia was, ladies? Although she lived at an epoch when women 

had, as yet, no soul, she was a soul; a soul of a rosy and purple 

hue, more ardent hued than fire, fresher than the dawn. Aspasia was 

a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met; she was the goddess 

prostitute; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut. Aspasia was created in case a 

had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment. The 

worn-out, exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further. This 

jade), backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip, when the jade fell, 

never to rise again. On hearing the hubbub made by the passersby, 

Tholomyes' merry auditors turned their heads, and Tholomyes took 

this melancholy strophe:-- 

          Ont le meme destin; 

      Et, rosse, elle a vecu ce que vivant les rosses, 

          L'espace d'un matin!" 

"Poor horse!" sighed Fantine. 

such a pitiful fool as that!" 

looked resolutely at Tholomyes and said:-- 

moment, ladies." 

out through the door, with their fingers on their lips. 

window to the other. 

latter turned round, made signs to them, smiled, and disappeared in 

that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the 

Champs-Elysees. 

which diverted them greatly. 

Champs-Elysees. The majority followed the quay and went through the 

and black, heavily loaded, noisily harnessed, rendered shapeless 

with dust for smoke, and an air of fury, grinding the pavements, 

changing all the paving-stones into steels. This uproar delighted the 

young girls. Favourite exclaimed:-- 

again at a gallop. This surprised Fantine. 

a traveller; I say to the diligence, 'I will go on in advance; you shall 

dear." 

entered. He held in his hand something which resembled a letter. 

to the ladies for an hour." 

letter. 

read]:-- 

such things. They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code, 

which is puerile and honest. Now, these parents groan, these old folks 

implore us, these good men and these good women call us prodigal sons; 

they desire our return, and offer to kill calves for us. Being virtuous, 

be bearing us to our papas and mammas. We are pulling up our stakes, as 

and on the wings of Caillard. The Toulouse diligence tears us from 

the abyss, and the abyss is you, O our little beauties! We return to 

society, to duty, to respectability, at full trot, at the rate of three 

should be, like the rest of the world, prefects, fathers of families, 

rural police, and councillors of state. Venerate us. We are sacrificing 

letter lacerates you, do the same by it. Adieu. 

no grudge for that.                                 "Signed: 

                                            BLACHEVELLE. 

                                            FAMUEIL. 

                                            LISTOLIER. 

                                            FELIX THOLOMYES. 

adventure, indeed." 

her first love affair, as we have said; she had given herself to this 

Tholomyes as to a husband, and the poor girl had a child. 

CHAPTER I--ONE MOTHER MEETS ANOTHER MOTHER 

century, a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists. This cook-shop was 

kept by some people named Thenardier, husband and wife. It was situated 

in Boulanger Lane. Over the door there was a board nailed flat against 

the wall. Upon this board was painted something which resembled a 

man carrying another man on his back, the latter wearing the big gilt 

epaulettes of a general, with large silver stars; red spots represented 

blood; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke, and probably 

represented a battle. Below ran this inscription: AT THE SIGN OF 

SERGEANT OF WATERLOO (Au Sargent de Waterloo). 

Nevertheless, the vehicle, or, to speak more accurately, the fragment of 

a vehicle, which encumbered the street in front of the cook-shop of the 

Sergeant of Waterloo, one evening in the spring of 1818, would certainly 

have attracted, by its mass, the attention of any painter who had passed 

that way. 

trunks of trees. This fore-carriage was composed of a massive iron 

axle-tree with a pivot, into which was fitted a heavy shaft, and 

which was supported by two huge wheels. The whole thing was compact, 

overwhelming, and misshapen. It seemed like the gun-carriage of an 

enormous cannon. The ruts of the road had bestowed on the wheels, the 

fellies, the hub, the axle, and the shaft, a layer of mud, a hideous 

of ornamenting cathedrals. The wood was disappearing under mud, and the 

worthy of some Goliath of a convict. This chain suggested, not the 

been detached from some monster. Homer would have bound Polyphemus with 

it, and Shakespeare, Caliban. 

the first place, to encumber the street; next, in order that it might 

finish the process of rusting. There is a throng of institutions in the 

about outdoors, and which have no other reasons for existence than the 

above. 

that particular evening, in exquisite interlacement, two little girls; 

frightful chain, and had said, "Come! there's a plaything for my 

children." 

old iron; their eyes were a triumph; their fresh cheeks were full of 

were two delighted surprises; a blossoming shrub which grew near wafted 

to the passers-by perfumes which seemed to emanate from them; the child 

chaste indecency of childhood. Above and around these two delicate 

heads, all made of happiness and steeped in light, the gigantic 

fore-carriage, black with rust, almost terrible, all entangled in curves 

and wild angles, rose in a vault, like the entrance of a cavern. A few 

paces apart, crouching down upon the threshold of the hostelry, the 

mother, not a very prepossessing woman, by the way, though touching 

watching them carefully, for fear of accidents, with that animal and 

resembled a cry of rage; the little girls were in ecstasies; the setting 

cherubim. 

romance then celebrated:-- 

                 "It must be, said a warrior." 

Her song, and the contemplation of her daughters, prevented her hearing 

and seeing what was going on in the street. 

near her ear:-- 

                 "To the fair and tender Imogene--" 

child, which she carried in her arms. 

heavy. 

possible to behold. It was a girl, two or three years of age. She could 

have entered into competition with the two other little ones, so far as 

her skirt were raised so as to permit a view of her white, firm, and 

dimpled leg. She was admirably rosy and healthy. The little beauty 

that they had magnificent lashes. She was asleep. 

profoundly. 

the air peculiar to a mother who has nursed her own child. A large blue 

with freckles, her forefinger was hardened and lacerated with the 

and coarse shoes. It was Fantine. 

scrutinizing her attentively, it was evident that she still retained 

wrinkled her right cheek. As for her toilette, that aerial toilette of 

full of bells, and perfumed with lilacs had vanished like that beautiful 

it melts and leaves the branch quite black. 

had neglected to keep her market open; it was now closed to her. She had 

no resource. Fantine barely knew how to read, and did not know how to 

second, then a third. Tholomyes replied to none of them. Fantine heard 

gloomy toward that man. But what was she to do? She no longer knew to 

nature, as will be remembered, was modesty and virtue. She was vaguely 

way she perceived the necessity of a separation which would be more 

painful than the first one. Her heart contracted, but she took her 

She had already valiantly renounced finery, had dressed herself in 

for her two hundred francs; her little debts paid, she had only about 

eighty francs left. At the age of twenty-two, on a beautiful spring 

had seen these two pass would have had pity on them. This woman had, 

in all the world, nothing but her child, and the child had, in all the 

world, no one but this woman. Fantine had nursed her child, and this had 

tired her chest, and she coughed a little. 

sake of resting herself, travelled, for three or four sous a league, in 

in the alley Boulanger. 

in the monster swing, had dazzled her in a manner, and she had halted in 

that at the moment when their mother was recovering her breath between 

the remark which we have just read:-- 

young. 

sit down on the bench at the door, she herself being seated on the 

threshold. The two women began to chat. 

"We keep this inn." 

her teeth:-- 

                 "It must be so; I am a knight, 

                  And I am off to Palestine." 

This Madame Thenardier was a sandy-complexioned woman, thin and 

angular--the type of the soldier's wife in all its unpleasantness; and 

what was odd, with a languishing air, which she owed to her perusal 

of romances. She was a simpering, but masculine creature. Old romances 

produce that effect when rubbed against the imagination of cook-shop 

woman had stood upright, her lofty stature and her frame of a 

traveller at the outset, troubled her confidence, and disturbed what 

of standing erect--destinies hang upon such a thing as that. 

on foot; that, as she was carrying her child, and felt fatigued, she had 

little children, which is a mystery of their luminous innocence in 

themselves to be angels, and that they know us to be men. Then the child 

stopped short, and put out her tongue, in sign of admiration. 

swing, and said:-- 

making holes in the ground, which was an immense pleasure. 

gayety of the child; she had seized a scrap of wood which served her 

grave-digger's business becomes a subject for laughter when performed by 

of Euphrasie the mother had made Cosette by that sweet and graceful 

instinct of mothers and of the populace which changes Josepha into 

Pepita, and Francoise into Sillette. It is a sort of derivative which 

known a grandmother who succeeded in turning Theodore into Gnon. 

profound anxiety and blissfulness; an event had happened; a big worm 

had emerged from the ground, and they were afraid; and they were in 

ecstasies over it. 

were three heads in one aureole. 

Thenardier; "one would swear that they were three sisters!" 

waiting for. She seized the Thenardier's hand, looked at her fixedly, 

and said:-- 

neither assent nor refusal. 

permit it. With a child one can find no situation. People are ridiculous 

in the country. It was the good God who caused me to pass your inn. When 

I caught sight of your little ones, so pretty, so clean, and so happy, 

it overwhelmed me. I said: 'Here is a good mother. That is just the 

thing; that will make three sisters.' And then, it will not be long 

before I return. Will you keep my child for me?" 

"I will give you six francs a month." 

man's voice. 

vaguely, with these figures:-- 

"I will pay it," said the mother. "I have eighty francs. I shall have 

enough left to reach the country, by travelling on foot. I shall 

darling." 

"The little one has an outfit?" 

outfit, everything by the dozen, and silk gowns like a lady. It is here, 

in my carpet-bag." 

queer if I were to leave my daughter quite naked!" 

up her money and left her child, fastened her carpet-bag once more, now 

arrange such departures tranquilly; but they are despairs! 

rend your heart." 

woman:-- 

nicely with your young ones." 

rejoices even over a lean mouse. 

on. 

them up, easily become monstrous. There was in the woman a substratum 

susceptible, in the highest degree, of the sort of hideous progress 

souls which are continually retreating towards the darkness, 

augment their deformity, growing incessantly worse, and becoming more 

woman possessed such souls. 

only look at some men to distrust them; for one feels that they are 

in front. There is something of the unknown about them. One can no more 

answer for what they have done than for what they will do. The shadow 

which they bear in their glance denounces them. From merely hearing them 

utter a word or seeing them make a gesture, one obtains a glimpse of 

sergeant, he said. He had probably been through the campaign of 1815, 

hostelry was in allusion to one of his feats of arms. He had painted it 

himself; for he knew how to do a little of everything, and badly. 

but ever more and more vulgar, having fallen from Mademoiselle de 

Scuderi to Madame Bournon-Malarme, and from Madame de Lafayette to 

of Paris aflame, and even ravaging the suburbs to some extent. Madame 

a romantically drooping fashion, began to grow gray, when the Magaera 

began to be developed from the Pamela, the female Thenardier was nothing 

but a coarse, vicious woman, who had dabbled in stupid romances. Now, 

by a romance of Ducray-Dumenil, she owed the fact that she merely bore 

the name of Azelma. 

may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names. By the side of 

of Arthur, Alfred, or Alphonse, and for the vicomte--if there are 

still any vicomtes--to be called Thomas, Pierre, or Jacques. This 

profound thing,--the French Revolution. 

cook-shop was in a bad way. 

Paris, and pawned it at the pawnbroker's for sixty francs. As soon 

as that sum was spent, the Thenardiers grew accustomed to look on the 

brats; that is to say, in rags. They fed her on what all the rest 

had left--a little better than the dog, a little worse than the cat. 

Moreover, the cat and the dog were her habitual table-companions; 

theirs. 

sur M., wrote, or, more correctly, caused to be written, a letter every 

invariably, "Cosette is doing wonderfully well." 

for the seventh month, and continued her remittances with tolerable 

expect us to do with her seven francs?" and he wrote to demand twelve 

twelve francs. 

Mother Thenardier loved her two daughters passionately, which caused her 

to hate the stranger. 

aspects. Little as was the space occupied by Cosette, it seemed to 

her as though it were taken from her own, and that that little child 

diminished the air which her daughters breathed. This woman, like many 

women of her sort, had a load of caresses and a burden of blows and 

of it; but the stranger did them the service to divert the blows to 

make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy shower of 

creatures like herself, who lived in a ray of dawn! 

is smaller; that is all. 

bringing up a poor child who was abandoned on their hands!" 

right into the middle of her secrets. I must have an increase." The 

mother paid the fifteen francs. 

children; as soon as she began to develop a little, that is to say, 

before she was even five years old, she became the servant of the 

age of five, as the official documents state, being alone in the world, 

"worked for his living and stole"? 

her payments. Some months she was in arrears. 

indescribably uneasy look. "The sly creature," said the Thenardiers. 

large as they were, it seemed as though one beheld in them a still 

larger amount of sadness. 

old, shivering in the winter in her old rags of linen, full of holes, 

red hands, and a tear in her great eyes. 

house or the village, and was always in the street or the fields before 

daybreak. 

CHAPTER I--THE HISTORY OF A PROGRESS IN BLACK GLASS TRINKETS 

the people at Montfermeil, seemed to have abandoned her child? Where was 

she? What was she doing? 

her journey, and had reached M. sur M. 

to wretchedness, her native town had prospered. 

grand events of small districts had taken place. 

length; we should almost say, to underline it. 

material, which reacted on the manufacture. At the moment when Fantine 

and, for bracelets in particular, slides of sheet-iron simply laid 

together, for slides of soldered sheet-iron. 

third place, to sell at a lower price, while trebling the profit, which 

was a benefit to the manufacturer. 

which is good, and had made every one about him rich, which is better. 

of the beginning of his career, very little. It was rumored that he had 

ingenious idea, developed by method and thought, that he had drawn his 

own fortune, and the fortune of the whole countryside. 

and the language of a workingman. 

risk of his own life, two children who belonged to the captain of the 

Afterwards they had learned his name. He was called Father Madeleine. 

who was good. That was all that could be said about him. 

Spain, which consumes a good deal of black jet, made enormous purchases 

end of the second year he was able to erect a large factory, in which 

Any one who was hungry could present himself there, and was sure of 

finding employment and bread. Father Madeleine required of the men good 

girls might remain discreet. On this point he was inflexible. It was the 

opportunities for corruption abounded. However, his coming had been a 

a healthy life of toil. A strong circulation warmed everything and 

penetrated everywhere. Slack seasons and wretchedness were unknown. 

There was no pocket so obscure that it had not a little money in it; no 

dwelling so lowly that there was not some little joy within it. 

Father Madeleine gave employment to every one. He exacted but one thing: 

Be an honest man. Be an honest woman. 

chief care. He appeared to be thinking much of others, and little of 

himself. In 1820 he was known to have a sum of six hundred and thirty 

million for the town and its poor. 

lived, had but one school, a miserable hovel, which was falling to ruin: 

salary from his own funds to the two instructors, a salary twice as 

established there a free dispensary. 

a jolly fellow who means to get rich." When they saw him enriching 

religious, and even practised his religion to a certain degree, a thing 

of Fouche, Duc d'Otrante, whose creature and friend he had been. He 

took a Jesuit confessor, and went to high mass and to vespers. Ambition 

twelve. 

to the effect that, on the representations of the prefect and in 

consideration of the services rendered by him to the country, Father 

Madeleine was to be appointed by the King, mayor of M. sur M. Those who 

the following day Father Madeleine refused. 

Honor. A fresh excitement in the little town. Well, so it was the cross 

that he wanted! Father Madeleine refused the cross. 

obliged to honor and respect him. His workmen, in particular, adored 

Madeleine, and that was what was most adapted to make him smile. In 

proportion as he mounted, throve, invitations rained down upon him. 

M. sur M., which, of course, had at first been closed to the artisan, 

a thousand advances to him. He refused. 

no education. No one knows where he came from. He would not know how to 

to read." 

When they saw him scattering his money about, they said, "He is an 

ambitious man." When he was seen to decline honors, they said, "He is 

brute." 

he had rendered to the district were so dazzling, the opinion of 

the whole country round about was so unanimous, that the King again 

resisted his refusal, all the notabilities of the place came to implore 

drawing back before the good which he can do?" 

Monsieur Madeleine. Monsieur Madeleine became Monsieur le Maire. 

thoughtful visage of a philosopher. He habitually wore a hat with a 

fulfilled his duties as mayor; but, with that exception, he lived in 

solitude. He spoke to but few people. He avoided polite attentions; 

he escaped quickly; he smiled to relieve himself of the necessity of 

talking; he gave, in order to get rid of the necessity for smiling, The 

women said of him, "What a good-natured bear!" His pleasure consisted in 

strolling in the fields. 

read. He had a well-selected little library. He loved books; books 

fortune, he seemed to take advantage of it to cultivate his mind. It had 

been observed that, ever since his arrival at M. sur M.. his language 

had grown more polished, more choice, and more gentle with every passing 

so infallible as to inspire terror. He never killed an inoffensive 

animal. He never shot at a little bird. 

stopped a runaway bull by the horns. He always had his pockets full 

surrounded him like a swarm of gnats. 

since he knew all sorts of useful secrets, which he taught to the 

the houses. 

in it. 

flax. Nettle cloth is as good as linen cloth. Chopped up, nettles are 

required for the nettle? A little soil, no care, no culture. Only the 

seed falls as it is ripe, and it is difficult to collect it. That 

is all. With the exercise of a little care, the nettle could be made 

many men resemble the nettle!" He added, after a pause: "Remember this, 

only bad cultivators." 

trifles of straw and cocoanuts. 

the other world. With his eyes fixed on heaven, he listened with a 

sort of aspiration towards all the mysteries of the infinite, those sad 

voices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of death. 

sometimes even forced, during his absence. The poor man made a clamor 

over it: some malefactor had been there! He entered, and the first 

furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones and 

and malicious young women of M. sur M. came to him one day, and asked: 

"Monsieur le Maire, pray show us your chamber. It is said to be a 

furnished in mahogany, which was rather ugly, like all furniture of 

hall-marked," an observation full of the type of wit of petty towns. 

Laffitte, with this peculiar feature, that they were always at his 

two or three millions in ten minutes. In reality, "these two or three 

forty thousand francs. 

Myriel, Bishop of D----, surnamed "Monseigneur Bienvenu," who had died 

in the odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two. 

be blind, as his sister was beside him. 

and because she cannot do without you; to know that we are indispensable 

one's affection by the amount of her presence which she bestows on us, 

to me, it is because I possess the whole of her heart"; to behold her 

thought in lieu of her face; to be able to verify the fidelity of one 

being amid the eclipse of the world; to regard the rustle of a gown 

sing, and to think that one is the centre of these steps, of this 

one's self all the more powerful because of one's infirmity; to become 

of life consists in the conviction that one is loved; loved for 

one's own sake--let us say rather, loved in spite of one's self; this 

and finds it. And this soul, found and tested, is a woman. A hand 

sustains you; it is hers: a mouth lightly touches your brow; it is her 

of her, from her worship to her pity, never to be left, to have that 

sweet weakness aiding you, to lean upon that immovable reed, to 

touch Providence with one's hands, and to be able to take it in 

celestial flower, undergoes a mysterious blossoming. One would not 

uninterruptedly there; if she departs, it is but to return again; she 

One sees nothing, but one feels that one is adored. It is a paradise of 

shadows. 

other. 

and with crape on his hat. 

into mourning for the Bishop of D----" said the drawing-rooms; this 

raised M. Madeleine's credit greatly, and procured for him, instantly 

and at one blow, a certain consideration in the noble world of M. sur 

M. The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditated raising 

more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentiful smiles 

doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D----?" 

Another thing which was remarked, was, that every time that he 

encountered in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the 

country and seeking chimneys to sweep, the mayor had him summoned, 

other about it: a great many of them passed that way. 

in virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to, 

blackening and calumnies; then they grew to be nothing more than 

ill-nature, then merely malicious remarks, then even this entirely 

disappeared; respect became complete, unanimous, cordial, and towards 

1821 the moment arrived when the word "Monsieur le Maire" was pronounced 

at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as "Monseigneur the Bishop" 

had been pronounced in D---- in 1815. People came from a distance of ten 

book of the natural law. It was like an epidemic of veneration, which in 

district. 

this contagion, and, whatever Father Madeleine did, remained his 

hesitate, which feels no disquiet, which does not hold its peace, 

the man-cat, and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion. 

lofty stature, clad in an iron-gray frock-coat, armed with a heavy 

his lower to his nose, a sort of significant grimace which might be 

somewhere. In any case, I am not his dupe." 

of those men who, even when only seen by a rapid glimpse, arrest the 

spectator's attention. 

was already made, and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine. 

Javert possessed this physiognomy minus the baseness. 

by the thinker, that from the oyster to the eagle, from the pig to the 

Sometimes even several of them at a time. 

them to us in order to induce us to reflect. Only since animals are mere 

shadows, God has not made them capable of education in the full sense 

and having a goal which is appropriate to them, God has bestowed on 

them intelligence; that is to say, the possibility of education. Social 

it may be, the utility which it contains. 

latent I. Having made this reservation, let us pass on. 

there is one of the animal species of creation, it will be easy for us 

to say what there was in Police Officer Javert. 

he grew up, he would devour the other little ones. 

Javert. 

of society, and he despaired of ever re-entering it. He observed that 

it and those who guard it; he had no choice except between these 

inexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians whence he was sprung. He 

inspector. 

the South. 

words, "human face," which we have just applied to Javert. 

nostrils, towards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks. One 

terrible,--his thin lips parted and revealed to view not only his teeth, 

when he laughed, he was a tiger. As for the rest, he had very little 

skull and a great deal of jaw; his hair concealed his forehead and 

up and terrible; his air that of ferocious command. 

them,--respect for authority, hatred of rebellion; and in his eyes, 

those extreme minds which attribute to human law I know not what power 

of making, or, if the reader will have it so, of authenticating, demons, 

austere; a melancholy dreamer, humble and haughty, like fanatics. His 

glance was like a gimlet, cold and piercing. His whole life hung on 

these two words: watchfulness and supervision. He had introduced a 

straight line into what is the most crooked thing in the world; 

he possessed the conscience of his usefulness, the religion of his 

the latter had escaped from the galleys, and would have denounced his 

sort of inward satisfaction which is conferred by virtue. And, withal, 

a life of privation, isolation, abnegation, chastity, with never 

a diversion. It was implacable duty; the police understood, as the 

Spartans understood Sparta, a pitiless lying in wait, a ferocious 

honesty, a marble informer, Brutus in Vidocq. 

withdraws himself from observation. The mystical school of Joseph de 

that Javert was a symbol. His brow was not visible; it disappeared 

his eyebrows: his chin was not visible, for it was plunged in his 

baleful glance, a threatening chin, enormous hands, and a monstrous 

cudgel. 

be recognized by some emphasis in his speech. 

humanity. 

sight. 

question to Javert; he neither sought nor avoided him; he bore that 

world. 

secretly investigated, with that curiosity which belongs to the race, 

know, and he sometimes said in covert words, that some one had gleaned 

think I have him!" Then he remained pensive for three days, and uttered 

not a word. It seemed that the thread which he thought he held had 

broken. 

really infallible in a human creature, and the peculiarity of instinct 

is that it can become confused, thrown off the track, and defeated. 

found to be provided with a better light than man. 

and tranquillity of M. Madeleine. 

impression on M. Madeleine. It was on the following occasion. 

M.; he heard a noise, and saw a group some distance away. He approached. 

An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallen beneath his cart, 

his horse having tumbled down. 

ex-notary and a peasant who was almost educated, had a business which 

him with jealousy, and he had done all he could, on every occasion, 

to injure Madeleine. Then bankruptcy had come; and as the old man had 

had turned carter. 

disengage him otherwise than by lifting the vehicle off of him. 

jack-screw. 

M. Madeleine arrived. People stood aside respectfully. 

farrier; but it makes no difference; it will take a good quarter of an 

hour." 

would be broken in five minutes more. 

has stout loins and heart? There are five louis d'or to be earned!" 

crushed!" 

M. Madeleine turned round, and recognized Javert. He had not noticed him 

on his arrival. 

as lift a cart like that on his back." 

that he uttered:-- 

what you ask." 

from Madeleine:-- 

rattled in the throat, and shrieked:-- 

life of this poor old man?" 

he was that convict." 

time to utter a cry, he was underneath the vehicle. 

weight, make two vain efforts to bring his knees and his elbows 

together. They shouted to him, "Father Madeleine, come out!" Old 

that I am fated to die! Leave me! You will get yourself crushed also!" 

Madeleine made no reply. 

it had become almost impossible for Madeleine to make his way from under 

the vehicle. 

saved. 

his knees and called him the good God. As for him, he bore upon 

suffering, and he fixed his tranquil eye on Javert, who was still 

staring at him. 

had him conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for his 

sisters of charity. On the following morning the old man found a 

broken, and the horse was dead. Fauchelevent recovered, but his knee 

female convent in the Rue Saint-Antoine in Paris. 

might experience on smelling a wolf in his master's clothes. From 

that time forth he avoided him as much as he possibly could. When the 

not do otherwise than meet the mayor, he addressed him with profound 

respect. 

the visible signs which we have mentioned, another symptom which was 

none the less significant for not being visible. This never deceives. 

commerce, the tax-payer resists imposts through penury, he exhausts and 

of the public misery and riches,--the cost of collecting the taxes. 

M. de Villele, then Minister of Finance. 

one remembered her. Fortunately, the door of M. Madeleine's factory was 

to the women's workroom. The trade was entirely new to Fantine; she 

could not be very skilful at it, and she therefore earned but little by 

earning her living. 

moment. To live honestly by her own labor, what mercy from heaven! The 

taste for work had really returned to her. She bought a looking-glass, 

took pleasure in surveying in it her youth, her beautiful hair, her fine 

teeth; she forgot many things; she thought only of Cosette and of the 

possible future, and was almost happy. She hired a little room and 

furnished on credit on the strength of her future work--a lingering 

trace of her improvident ways. As she was not able to say that she was 

married she took good care, as we have seen, not to mention her little 

girl. 

she only knew how to sign her name, she was obliged to write through a 

public letter-writer. 

undertone, in the women's workroom, that Fantine "wrote letters" and 

that "she had ways about her." 

not concerned in them. Why does that gentleman never come except at 

nightfall? Why does Mr. So-and-So never hang his key on its nail on 

Tuesday? Why does he always take the narrow streets? Why does Madame 

"whole stationer's shop full of it?" etc. There exist beings who, for 

no consequence whatever to them, spend more money, waste more time, 

a porter. Why? For no reason. A pure passion for seeing, knowing, 

and penetrating into things. A pure itch for talking. And often 

these secrets once known, these mysteries made public, these enigmas 

illuminated by the light of day, bring on catastrophies, duels, 

failures, the ruin of families, and broken lives, to the great joy 

matter, and by pure instinct. A sad thing. 

Their conversation, the chat of the drawing-room, gossip of the 

anteroom, is like those chimneys which consume wood rapidly; they need 

a great amount of combustibles; and their combustibles are furnished by 

their neighbors. 

teeth. 

midst of the rest, to wipe away a tear. These were the moments when she 

Monsieur, Monsieur Thenardier, inn-keeper at Montfermeil. The public 

without emptying his pocket of secrets, was made to talk in the 

child." 

A quavering voice, a whimsical mind. This old dame had once been 

monk who had fled from his cloister in a red cap, and passed from 

she was, and who had ruled over her masterfully and bent her to his 

which she bequeathed with much ostentation to a religious community. 

seen the child." 

year, when, one morning, the superintendent of the workroom handed her 

in the shop, and requested her, in the mayor's name, to leave the 

neighborhood. 

twelve francs instead of six, had just exacted fifteen francs instead of 

twelve. 

in debt for her rent and furniture. Fifty francs was not sufficient 

to cancel this debt. She stammered a few supplicating words. The 

Fantine was only a moderately good workwoman. Overcome with shame, even 

So her fault was now known to every one. 

bowed before the decision. 

never entering the women's workroom. 

the priest had provided for him, and he had full confidence in this 

full of the charity which consists in giving, but not having in the same 

M. Madeleine relied wholly on her. The best men are often obliged 

to delegate their authority. It was with this full power, and the 

conviction that she was doing right, that the superintendent had 

instituted the suit, judged, condemned, and executed Fantine. 

assistance to the workwomen, and of which she rendered no account. 

she went from house to house. No one would have her. She could not 

furniture--and what furniture!--said to her, "If you leave, I will have 

fifty francs between the landlord and the furniture-dealer, returned to 

still about fifty francs in debt. 

she began to pay the Thenardiers irregularly. 

at night, taught her the art of living in misery. Back of living on 

first is dark, the second is black. 

one's coverlet; how to save one's candle, by taking one's meals by 

and regained a little courage. 

sad, one eats less. Well, sufferings, uneasiness, a little bread on one 

hand, trouble on the other,--all this will support me." 

How could she pay them? And the journey! How pay for that? 

of indigence, was a sainted spinster named Marguerite, who was pious 

with a true piety, poor and charitable towards the poor, and even 

towards the rich, knowing how to write just sufficiently to sign herself 

Marguerite, and believing in God, which is science. 

will be in the world above. This life has a morrow. 

and soul like a north wind. 

sarcasm and the curiosity of all in small towns. In Paris, at least, no 

one knows you, and this obscurity is a garment. Oh! how she would have 

liked to betake herself to Paris! Impossible! 

me," she said. 

was conscious that she was becoming brazen-faced. 

evil-minded is black. 

her increased. She sometimes said to her neighbor, Marguerite, "Just 

feel how hot my hands are!" 

an old broken comb, and it flowed about her like floss silk, she 

experienced a moment of happy coquetry. 

but winter came again. Short days, less work. Winter: no warmth, 

twilight; the window is gray; it is impossible to see clearly at it. The 

the heart of man into a stone. Her creditors harrassed her. 

ten francs for this. She received the letter, and crushed it in her 

fell to her knees. 

petticoat made the Thenardiers furious. It was the money that they 

shiver. 

in which she was still pretty. 

Father Madeleine; yet, by dint of repeating to herself that it was he 

laugh and sing. 

said, "There's a girl who will come to a bad end." 

abandoned her as she had taken him, in disgust. 

cough did not leave her, and she had sweats on her back. 

of the neighborhood. A miliary fever, they call it. Expensive drugs are 

do not send us forty francs before the week is out, the little one will 

be dead." 

think I am to get them? These peasants are stupid, truly." 

leaping and still laughing. 

written to me. They demand forty francs of me. So much for you, you 

peasants!" 

elixirs. 

the harangue, which contained slang for the populace and jargon for 

are laughing; if you want to sell me your palettes, I will give you a 

gold napoleon apiece for them." 

two upper ones." 

they may prove of service. If your heart bids you, come this evening to 

the inn of the Tillac d'Argent; you will find me there." 

not an abominable man? How can they allow such people to go about the 

country! Pull out my two front teeth! Why, I should be horrible! My hair 

He told me that he should be at the Tillac d'Argent this evening." 

letter once more on the staircase. 

On her return, she said to Marguerite, who was at work beside her:-- 

staircase. 

direction of the Rue de Paris, where the inns are situated. 

frozen. She had not lain down. Her cap had fallen on her knees. 

Her candle had burned all night, and was almost entirely consumed. 

Marguerite halted on the threshold, petrified at this tremendous 

wastefulness, and exclaimed:-- 

hair. 

of that frightful malady, for lack of succor. I am content." 

glittering on the table. 

get those louis d'or?" 

she had a black hole in her mouth. 

not ill. 

it, next the roof; one of those attics whose extremity forms an angle 

with the floor, and knocks you on the head every instant. The poor 

occupant can reach the end of his chamber as he can the end of his 

destiny, only by bending over more and more. 

on the floor, and a seatless chair still remained. A little rosebush 

which the various levels of the water remained long marked by these 

circles of ice. She had lost her shame; she lost her coquetry. A final 

sign. She went out, with dirty caps. Whether from lack of time or from 

perpendicular wrinkles. She patched her bodice, which was old and worn 

people to whom she was indebted made "scenes" and gave her no peace. 

and she felt a steady pain in her shoulder towards the top of the 

Madeleine, but made no complaint. She sewed seventeen hours a day; but 

who had taken back nearly all his furniture, said to her incessantly, 

can one earn a hundred sous a day?" 

for a morsel of bread. Misery offers; society accepts. 

European civilization. This is a mistake. It still exists; but it weighs 

only upon the woman, and it is called prostitution. 

maternity. This is not one of the least of man's disgraces. 

is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been. 

for her. All has happened to her that will happen to her. She has 

everything, lost everything, mourned everything. She is resigned, with 

She no longer avoids anything. Let all the clouds fall upon her, and all 

is soaked. 

whatever. 

going? Why are they thus? 

a class of young men who nibble away an income of fifteen hundred 

francs with the same air with which their prototypes devour two hundred 

little folly, a little wit; who would be rustics in a drawing-room, and 

who think themselves gentlemen in the dram-shop; who say, "My fields, 

diligence, live at the cafe, dine at the inn, have a dog which eats the 

women, wear out their old boots, copy London through Paris, and Paris 

through the medium of Pont-A-Mousson, grow old as dullards, never work, 

serve no use, and do no great harm. 

Paris, would have been one of these men. 

employment. Among these unemployed there are bores, the bored, dreamers, 

a codfish tail, a double row of silver buttons set close to each other 

shade of olive, ornamented on the two seams with an indefinite, but 

on the heels, a tall hat with a narrow brim, hair worn in a tuft, an 

spurs and a mustache. At that epoch mustaches indicated the bourgeois, 

and spurs the pedestrian. 

mustaches. 

royalist, and were called morillos; liberals wore hats with wide brims, 

which were called bolivars. 

cloaks which completed the fashionable costume in cold weather, was 

amusing himself by tormenting a creature who was prowling about in a 

ball-dress, with neck uncovered and flowers in her hair, in front of 

the officers' cafe. This dandy was smoking, for he was decidedly 

Bamatabois. The woman, a melancholy, decorated spectre which went and 

came through the snow, made him no reply, did not even glance at him, 

and nevertheless continued her promenade in silence, and with a sombre 

sarcasm, like the condemned soldier who returns under the rods. The 

advantage of a moment when her back was turned, he crept up behind her 

with the gait of a wolf, and stifling his laugh, bent down, picked up a 

between her bare shoulders. The woman uttered a roar, whirled round, 

roughened by brandy, did, indeed, proceed in hideous wise from a mouth 

which lacked its two front teeth. It was Fantine. 

At the noise thus produced, the officers ran out in throngs from the 

applauding, was formed around this whirlwind composed of two beings, 

whom there was some difficulty in recognizing as a man and a woman: the 

horrible. 

seized the woman by her satin bodice, which was covered with mud, and 

said to her, "Follow me!" 

with a quiver of terror. She had recognized Javert. 

MUNICIPAL POLICE 

extremity of the square, dragging the wretched woman after him. She 

an occasion for obscenity. 

thick glass of the station-house, in their effort to see. Curiosity is a 

sort of gluttony. To see is to devour. 

crouching down like a terrified dog. 

to write. 

and deeply preoccupied. It was one of those moments when he was 

judgment. He judged and condemned. He summoned all the ideas which could 

citizen. He had seen that, he, Javert. He wrote in silence. 

sergeant of the guard, as he handed it to him, "Take three men and 

conduct this creature to jail." 

unhappy woman shuddered. 

you know that, Monsieur Inspector?" 

on her knees. 

seen. I swear to you by the good God that I was not to blame! That 

gentleman, the bourgeois, whom I do not know, put snow in my back. Has 

moment that he put the snow down my back. Monsieur Javert, good Monsieur 

Inspector! is there not some person here who saw it and can tell you 

vivacity; and then, when some one puts something cold down your 

back just when you are not expecting it! I did wrong to spoil that 

gentleman's hat. Why did he go away? I would ask his pardon. Oh, my God! 

one hundred francs, or my little girl will be sent to me. Oh, my God! 

little angel of the Holy Virgin! what will become of her, poor creature? 

people are unreasonable. They want money. Don't put me in prison! You 

see, there is a little girl who will be turned out into the street to 

bad woman at bottom. It is not cowardliness and gluttony that have made 

love it; but it benumbs the senses. When I was happy, it was only 

linen. Have pity on me, Monsieur Javert!" 

terrible ray, which transfigures the unhappy. At that moment Fantine had 

granite; but a heart of wood cannot be softened. 

do nothing more." 

more," she understood that her fate was sealed. She sank down, 

murmuring, "Mercy!" 

Fantine's despairing supplications. 

woman, who would not rise, he emerged from the shadow, and said:-- 

and, saluting him with a sort of aggrieved awkwardness:-- 

thrust aside the soldiers with both arms, walked straight up to M. 

with a bewildered air, she cried:-- 

that moment, blow upon blow and almost simultaneously, the most violent 

to believe it possible. On the other hand, at the very bottom of his 

thought, he made a hideous comparison as to what this woman was, and as 

of I know not what simple explanation of this prodigious attack. But 

of amazement; thought and word failed him equally; the sum total of 

low voice, as though talking to herself:-- 

set free? Oh, see here! I will tell you about it, and you will let me 

go. That monster of a mayor, that old blackguard of a mayor, is the 

cause of all. Just imagine, Monsieur Javert, he turned me out! all 

is not a horror, what is? To dismiss a poor girl who is doing her 

nine sous; and it is not enough to live on. Then one has to become 

forced to become a bad woman. Now you understand how it is that that 

that gentleman's hat in front of the officers' cafe; but he had spoiled 

wear. You see that I did not do wrong deliberately--truly, Monsieur 

Javert; and everywhere I behold women who are far more wicked than I, 

and who are much happier. O Monsieur Javert! it was you who gave orders 

that I am to be set free, was it not? Make inquiries, speak to my 

landlord; I am paying my rent now; they will tell you that I am 

touched the damper of the stove, and it has made it smoke." 

much did you say that you owed?" 

Javert!" 

"And yet, you see, Mr. Inspector, it is necessary to be just. I 

understand that you are just, Mr. Inspector; in fact, it is perfectly 

simple: a man amuses himself by putting snow down a woman's back, and 

you lead off the woman who is in the wrong; but on reflection, since you 

are a good man, you say that I am to be set at liberty; it is for 

supporting my child. 'Only, don't do it again, you hussy!' Oh! I won't 

now; I will not stir. But to-day, you see, I cried because it hurt me. 

feel, give me your hand; don't be afraid--it is here." 

hand on her delicate, white throat and looked smilingly at him. 

saying to the soldiers in a low voice, and with a friendly nod:-- 

I am going." 

be in the street. 

which is waiting to be put away somewhere. 

of sovereign authority, an expression all the more alarming in 

beast, atrocious in the man of no estate. 

bade you let her go?" 

uttered no word, nor dared so much as to breathe freely, but her glance 

according to which was speaking. 

It was evident that Javert must have been exasperated beyond measure 

before he would permit himself to apostrophize the sergeant as he 

liberty. Had he reached the point of forgetting the mayor's presence? 

Had he finally declared to himself that it was impossible that any 

"authority" should have given such an order, and that the mayor must 

be made great, that the police spy should transform himself into a 

society in its entirety, was personified in him, Javert? 

mayor, pale, cold, with blue lips, and a look of despair, his whole body 

agitated by an imperceptible quiver and an unprecedented occurrence, and 

say to him, with downcast eyes but a firm voice:-- 

matters to you. Here is the true state of the case: I was passing 

been arrested by properly conducted police." 

think. I can do what I please about it." 

law." 

conscience. I have heard this woman; I know what I am doing." 

months in prison." 

mayor and to say, but in a tone of voice that was still profoundly 

respectful:-- 

authority. I confine myself, since Monsieur le Maire desires it, to the 

in the world! In any case, Monsieur le Maire, this is a question of 

this woman Fantine." 

one in the town had heard hitherto:-- 

that this woman shall be set at liberty." 

1799, in regard to arbitrary detention." 

the room. 

passed. 

strange to say, that which made her shudder from head to foot was 

the fact that this angel, this liberator, was the very man whom she 

her woes, that Madeleine! And at the very moment when she had insulted 

him in so hideous a fashion, he had saved her! Had she, then, been 

mistaken? Must she change her whole soul? She did not know; she 

hatred crumble and melt within her, and something warm and ineffable, 

indescribable, which was both joy, confidence and love, dawn in her 

heart. 

weep and who finds some difficulty in speaking:-- 

here; I will pay your debts, I will send for your child, or you shall go 

to her. You shall live here, in Paris, or where you please. I undertake 

you do not like. I will give all the money you require. You shall be 

virtuous and holy in the sight of God. Oh! poor woman." 

life of infamy. To live free, rich, happy, respectable with Cosette; to 

could only give vent to two or three sobs, "Oh! Oh! Oh!" 

lips to it. 

CHAPTER I--THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE 

M. Madeleine had Fantine removed to that infirmary which he had 

in delirium and raving. At length, however, she fell asleep. 

breathing close to her bed; she drew aside the curtain and saw M. 

Madeleine standing there and looking at something over her head. His 

gaze was full of pity, anguish, and supplication. She followed its 

the wall. 

to her to be clothed in light. He was absorbed in a sort of prayer. She 

she said timidly:-- 

to awake. He took her hand, felt of her pulse, and replied:-- 

nothing." 

as though he had just heard it:-- 

details. He went on:-- 

It is not their fault they do not know how to go to work otherwise. 

heaven. It was necessary to begin there." 

two teeth were lacking. 

himself at the office of M. sur M. It was addressed to Paris, and the 

about, the post-mistress and some other persons who saw the letter 

cover, thought that he was sending in his resignation. 

them one hundred and twenty francs. He sent them three hundred francs, 

let's allow the child to go. This lark is going to turn into a milch 

hundred francs,--one for the doctor, the other for the apothecary 

who had attended and physicked Eponine and Azelma through two long 

illnesses. Cosette, as we have already said, had not been ill. It was 

only a question of a trifling substitution of names. At the foot of the 

"Make haste to bring Cosette." 

infirmary. 

the inflation of the lower lip of the wise virgins as they survey the 

one of the most profound instincts of feminine dignity; the sisters 

felt it with the double force contributed by religion. But in a few days 

beside me, it will be a sign that God has pardoned me. While I was 

that I did evil, and that is why God pardons me. I shall feel the 

her condition seemed to become more grave from week to week. That 

handful of snow applied to her bare skin between her shoulder-blades had 

which the malady which had been smouldering within her for many years 

"Has she not a child which she desires to see?" said the doctor. 

restore your health." 

by keeping my Cosette from me! Oh! she is coming. At last I behold 

happiness close beside me!" 

to take a journey in the winter. And then, there still remained some 

necessary, I will go myself." 

it:-- 

          You will deliver Cosette to this person. 

          You will be paid for all the little things. 

          I have the honor to salute you with respect. 

                                                  "FANTINE." 

In the meantime a serious incident occurred. Carve as we will the 

constantly reappears in it. 

that Police Inspector Javert was desirous of speaking with him. 

police-station, and M. Madeleine had not seen him. 

in his manner. 

to him. The mayor did not look at him, but went on annotating this 

docket. 

breaking the silence. 

made a lengthy study of this savage in the service of civilization, 

agent--if any physiognomist had known his secret and long-cherished 

Fantine, and had examined Javert at that moment, he would have said to 

with that clear, upright, sincere, honest, austere, and ferocious 

of a man who has never been gentle and who has always been patient; he 

humility and tranquil resignation, calm, serious, hat in hand, with 

eyes cast down, and an expression which was half-way between that of a 

soldier in the presence of his officer and a criminal in the presence 

to him had disappeared. That face, as impenetrable and simple as 

granite, no longer bore any trace of anything but a melancholy 

indescribable courageous despondency. 

then raised his voice with a sort of sad solemnity, which did not, 

however, preclude simplicity. 

your knowledge, as it is my duty to do." 

air and his eyes still cast down. 

dismiss me." 

my duty; I ought to be punished; I must be turned out." 

to-day, with justice." 

towards me? What have you done to me? What are your wrongs with regard 

to me? You accuse yourself; you wish to be superseded--" 

coldly and sadly:-- 

I was furious, and I informed against you." 

Javert himself, burst out laughing now:-- 

The mayor turned livid. 

of your loins; the adventure with old Fauchelevant; your skill in 

all,--absurdities! But, at all events, I took you for a certain Jean 

Valjean." 

thing! Wrath impelled me; I denounced you at the Prefecture!" 

this, resumed with an air of perfect indifference:-- 

"That I was mad." 

indescribable accent:-- 

neighborhood near Ailly-le-Haut-Clocher an old fellow who was called 

Father Champmathieu. He was a very wretched creature. No one paid any 

autumn, Father Champmathieu was arrested for the theft of some cider 

Providence intervened. 

convenient to transfer Champmathieu to Arras, where the departmental 

Champmathieu arrived than Brevet exclaims: 'Eh! Why, I know that man! 

He is a fagot![4] Take a good look at me, my good man! You are Jean 

Valjean!' 'Jean Valjean! who's Jean Valjean?' Champmathieu feigns 

understand. The case is investigated. The thing was well ventilated for 

me. This is what they discovered: This Champmathieu had been, thirty 

years ago, a pruner of trees in various localities, notably at 

a wheelwright, and to have had a daughter, who was a laundress; but that 

This Valjean's Christian name was Jean, and his mother's surname was 

Mathieu. What more natural to suppose than that, on emerging from the 

galleys, he should have taken his mother's name for the purpose of 

Chan Mathieu. Our man offers no opposition, and behold him transformed 

into Champmathieu. You follow me, do you not? Inquiries were made at 

Faverolles. The family of Jean Valjean is no longer there. It is not 

known where they have gone. You know that among those classes a family 

often disappears. Search was made, and nothing was found. When such 

who knew Jean Valjean. Inquiries were made at Toulon. Besides Brevet, 

they are Cochepaille and Chenildieu, and are sentenced for life. 

They are taken from the galleys and confronted with the pretended 

as for Brevet. The same age,--he is fifty-four,--the same height, the 

same air, the same man; in short, it is he. It was precisely at this 

the examining judge; he sends for me; Champmathieu is conducted to me--" 

Valjean. I recognized him also." 

profound conviction. 

powdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood on the 

table, and he added:-- 

could have thought otherwise. I beg your pardon, Mr. Mayor." 

station-house, and bade him "leave the room,"--Javert, that haughty man, 

other reply to his prayer than the abrupt question:-- 

branch, to purloin apples, is a mischievous trick in a child; for a 

man it is a misdemeanor; for a convict it is a crime. Robbing 

and housebreaking--it is all there. It is no longer a question of 

correctional police; it is a matter for the Court of Assizes. It is no 

longer a matter of a few days in prison; it is the galleys for life. And 

then, there is the affair with the little Savoyard, who will return, I 

kettle sings before the fire; he would not be Jean Valjean, et 

he pretends to be stupid; it is far better. Oh! the rogue is clever! But 

four persons; the old scamp will be condemned. The case has been taken 

been summoned." 

like a busy man. He turned to Javert:-- 

Javert, you will betake yourself at once to the house of the woman 

will tell her that she must enter her complaint against carter Pierre 

Chesnelong. The man is a brute, who came near crushing this woman and 

Rue Montre-de-Champigny. He complained that there is a gutter on the 

the Rue Guibourg, at Widow Doris's, and Rue du Garraud-Blanc, at Madame 

you were going to Arras on that matter in a week or ten days?" 

to be tried to-morrow, and that I am to set out by diligence to-night." 

"One day, at the most. The judgment will be pronounced to-morrow evening 

at latest. But I shall not wait for the sentence, which is certain; I 

shall return here as soon as my deposition has been taken." 

said in a tranquil voice:-- 

is an abuse. But without proofs, in a fit of rage, with the object 

of wreaking my vengeance, I have denounced you as a convict, you, a 

respectable man, a mayor, a magistrate! That is serious, very serious. I 

have insulted authority in your person, I, an agent of the authorities! 

If one of my subordinates had done what I have done, I should have 

life towards others. That is just. I have done well. Now, if I were not 

agent against the mayor, the man who is down against the man who is 

up in the world, is what I call false kindness. That is the sort of 

When I have subdued malefactors, when I have proceeded with vigor 

against rascals, I have often said to myself, 'If you flinch, if I ever 

catch you in fault, you may rest at your ease!' I have flinched, I 

have caught myself in a fault. So much the worse! Come, discharged, 

cashiered, expelled! That is well. I have arms. I will till the soil; it 

makes no difference to me. Mr. Mayor, the good of the service demands an 

example. I simply require the discharge of Inspector Javert." 

which lent indescribable grandeur to this singular, honest man. 

hand to a police spy." 

no more than a police spy." 

sure step, which died away on the pavement of the corridor. 

CHAPTER I--SISTER SIMPLICE 

M. But the small portion of them which became known left such a memory 

preserve out of respect for the truth. 

Fantine according to his wont. 

Lazariste ladies, like all sisters of charity, bore the names of Sister 

Perpetue and Sister Simplice. 

service. She was a nun as other women are cooks. This type is not 

These rustics are utilized for the rough work of devotion. The 

transition from a drover to a Carmelite is not in the least violent; 

convent only the house of the sick; for cell only a hired room; for 

chapel only their parish church; for cloister only the streets of the 

gratings only the fear of God; for veil only modesty." This ideal was 

realized in the living person of Sister Simplice: she had never been 

young, and it seemed as though she would never grow old. No one could 

what was necessary, and she possessed a tone of voice which would 

contact a continual reminder of heaven and of God. Let us emphasize 

one detail. Never to have lied, never to have said, for any interest 

truth, the sacred truth, was Sister Simplice's distinctive trait; it was 

for this imperturbable veracity. The Abbe Sicard speaks of Sister 

lie. She did not. Little lie, innocent lie--does such a thing exist? To 

lie is the absolute form of evil. To lie a little is not possible: he 

who lies, lies the whole lie. To lie is the very face of the demon. 

Satan has two names; he is called Satan and Lying. That is what she 

which we have mentioned--a whiteness which covered even her lips and her 

saint suited this soul. 

understood the book. 

feeling a latent virtue there, and she had devoted herself almost 

exclusively to her care. 

in a singular tone, which the sister recalled later on. 

le Maire is here." 

she asked him:-- 

He replied with a smile:-- 

one repeatedly not to allow the invalid to want for anything. It was 

noticed that there was a moment when his countenance became very sombre. 

But this was explained when it became known that the doctor had bent 

down to his ear and said to him, "She is losing ground fast." 

attentively examining a road map of France which hung in his study. He 

wrote a few figures on a bit of paper with a pencil. 

and cabriolets as desired." 

little-frequented street in which was situated the parsonage of the 

parish in which M. Madeleine resided. The cure was, it was said, a 

worthy, respectable, and sensible man. At the moment when M. Madeleine 

retraced his steps to the door of the parsonage, which had an iron 

he paused again and stopped short, as though in thought, and after 

the lapse of a few seconds, instead of allowing the knocker to fall 

which had not been apparent previously. 

harness over. 

a saddle-horse of him at first. Bah! He reared, he kicked, he laid 

That is what he wanted, sir; he is as gentle as a girl; he goes like the 

We must suppose that is what he said to himself." 

But here are the conditions." 

eating to prevent the stable boy of the inn from stealing his oats; for 

men than eaten by the horses." 

not to overload the horse?" 

also--not a farthing less; and the beast's food to be at Monsieur le 

Maire's expense." 

table. 

"Here is the pay for two days in advance." 

tilbury that I own." 

at half-past four o'clock." 

their shrewdness:-- 

me where he is going. Where is Monsieur le Maire going?" 

conversation, but he did not know why he had not dared to put the 

question. 

going?" 

to-morrow morning," replied M. Madeleine; and he took his departure. 

it was the mayor once more. 

the other?" 

a broad smile. 

the sum at my return. At what value do you estimate your horse and 

cabriolet?" 

time he did not return. 

hundred crowns. 

devil could Monsieur le Maire be going?" They held counsel together. 

"He is going to Paris," said the wife. "I don't believe it," said the 

husband. 

turned to his wife:-- 

eight and a half from Saint-Pol to Arras. He is going to Arras." 

to return from Master Scaufflaire's, as though the parsonage door had 

since he liked to go to bed early. Nevertheless, the portress of the 

mentioned it to the cashier when he came home, adding:-- 

and forth, as though some one were walking in the room above him. He 

a noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened, and then shut 

and staring; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of a 

lighted window reflected on the opposite wall; from the direction of the 

reflection wavered, as though it came rather from a fire which had 

been lighted than from a candle. The shadow of the window-frame was not 

shown, which indicated that the window was wide open. The fact that this 

asleep again. An hour or two later he waked again. The same step was 

still passing slowly and regularly back and forth overhead. 

still open. 

than Jean Valjean. 

now come when we must take another look into it. We do so not without 

on no other thing which is more formidable, more complicated, more 

sea; it is heaven: there is a spectacle more grand than heaven; it is 

the inmost recesses of the soul. 

be to blend all epics into one superior and definitive epic. Conscience 

of sophisms; it is the battlefield of the passions. Penetrate, at 

certain hours, past the livid face of a human being who is engaged 

in reflection, and look behind, gaze into that soul, gaze into that 

obscurity. There, beneath that external silence, battles of giants, 

hydras and swarms of phantoms, as in Milton; visionary circles, as in 

him, and which he measures with despair against the caprices of his 

brain and the actions of his life! 

us enter, nevertheless. 

than a transformation; it was a transfiguration. 

the candlesticks as a souvenir, crept from town to town, traversed 

France, came to M. sur M., conceived the idea which we have mentioned, 

half of his existence belied by the last, he lived in peace, reassured 

and to sanctify his life; to escape men and to return to God. 

they rendered him kindly and simple; they counselled him to the same 

will remember, the man whom all the country of M. sur M. called M. 

security to his virtue. Thus, in spite of all his reserve and all his 

prudence, he had preserved the Bishop's candlesticks, worn mourning for 

that his first duty was not towards himself. 

presented itself. 

when the latter entered his study. At the moment when that name, which 

eccentricity of his destiny; and through this stupor he felt that 

shudder which precedes great shocks. He bent like an oak at the approach 

go, to run and denounce himself, to take that Champmathieu out of prison 

and place himself there; this was as painful and as poignant as an 

incision in the living flesh. Then it passed away, and he said to 

himself, "We will see! We will see!" He repressed this first, generous 

instinct, and recoiled before heroism. 

only tell what there was there. He was carried away, at first, by 

the instinct of self-preservation; he rallied all his ideas in haste, 

stifled his emotions, took into consideration Javert's presence, that 

off thought as to what he had to do, and resumed his calmness as a 

warrior picks up his buckler. 

thus, and recommend her well to the sisters, in case he should be 

obliged to be absent himself. He had a vague feeling that he might be 

up his mind to this trip, he said to himself that being, as he was, 

tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event. 

inexplicable impulse of anxiety, and bolted his door. He feared 

lest something more should enter. He was barricading himself against 

possibilities. 

that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face,--his 

conscience. 

and of solitude; the bolt once drawn, he thought himself impregnable; 

the candle extinguished, he felt himself invisible. Then he took 

on his hand, and began to meditate in the dark. 

manner? Who can that Champmathieu be? So he resembles me! Is it 

brow in both hands to arrest them. 

resolution. 

table. 

precision of the reality,--not the whole situation, but some of 

the details. He began by recognizing the fact that, critical and 

its reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about 

one had said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that 

that name would not menace him, that that light would but produce 

mystery, that this earthquake would solidify his edifice, that this 

prodigious incident would have no other result, so far as he was 

concerned, if so it seemed good to him, than that of rendering his 

confrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean, the good and worthy 

citizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored, more peaceful, and 

become real things! 

understanding of his position. 

a man unknown to him, whom destiny had mistaken for him, and whom she 

man, should fall into it: he had only let things take their course. 

it; that this was inevitable and fatal; and then he said to himself, 

"that, at this moment, he had a substitute; that it appeared that a 

provided that he did not prevent men from sealing over the head of 

sepulchre, falls once, never to rise again." 

in him that indescribable movement, which no man feels more than two 

or three times in the course of his life, a sort of convulsion of the 

outburst of inward laughter. 

He hastily relighted his candle. 

there in all that for me to think about? I am safe; all is over. I had 

me, which had divined me--good God! and which followed me everywhere; 

that frightful hunting-dog, always making a point at me, is thrown 

off the scent, engaged elsewhere, absolutely turned from the trail: 

honor, people would think, to see me, that some catastrophe had happened 

to me! After all, if it does bring harm to some one, that is not my 

fault in the least: it is Providence which has done it all; it is 

because it wishes it so to be, evidently. Have I the right to disarrange 

what it has arranged? What do I ask now? Why should I meddle? It does 

may do good, that I may one day be a grand and encouraging example, that 

is evidently what he would have said to me: It is settled; let things 

take their course; let the good God do as he likes!" 

resolve is taken!" but he felt no joy. 

the sea from returning to the shore: the sailor calls it the tide; the 

gloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened, saying 

thousand years ago, "March on!" 

to one's self, exclaims to one's self without breaking the external 

they are not visible and palpable. 

"settled resolve." He confessed to himself that all that he had just 

arranged in his mind was monstrous, that "to let things take their 

allow this error of fate and of men to be carried out, not to hinder it, 

to lend himself to it through his silence, to do nothing, in short, 

bitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action. 

meant by this, "My object is attained!" He declared to himself that 

which he had always desired, which the Bishop had enjoined upon him--to 

becoming an assassin. He was murdering, morally murdering, a wretched 

to surrender himself to save that man, struck down with so melancholy 

there in appearance was to escape from it in reality. This must be 

Bishop was present all the more because he was dead, that the Bishop 

sacrifices, the most poignant of victories, the last step to take; but 

of God when he returned to infamy in the eyes of men. 

was speaking aloud. 

the fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed 

have been read, had there been any one in his chamber at the moment, 

secretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and the 

passport of which he had made use that same year when he went to the 

elections. 

into which there entered such grave thought, would have had no suspicion 

elucidate or interrogate. 

pocket, together with the pocket-book, and began his walk once more. 

changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance:-- 

visible forms, the two ideas which had, up to that time, formed 

the double rule of his soul,--the concealment of his name, the 

sanctification of his life. For the first time they appeared to him as 

from darkness. 

was getting the upper hand. 

conscience and of his destiny; that the Bishop had marked the first 

the grand crisis, the grand test. 

fortify him in his resolution. 

that he had actually been guilty of theft. 

who knows? Did he steal? Has it been proved? The name of Jean Valjean 

overwhelms him, and seems to dispense with proofs. Do not the attorneys 

for the Crown always proceed in this manner? He is supposed to be a 

thief because he is known to be a convict." 

that he must do his duty; that perhaps he should not be more unhappy 

things to take their own course, if he remained at M. sur M., his 

consideration, his good name, his good works, the deference and 

veneration paid to him, his charity, his wealth, his popularity, his 

the galleys, the post, the iron necklet, the green cap, unceasing toil, 

and pitiless shame. 

abomination within, or holiness within and infamy without. 

indifferent matters, in spite of himself. 

of the two bells; he recalled in this connection the fact that, a few 

the window. 

thoughts before midnight had struck; he finally succeeded in doing this. 

myself." 

about him were undergoing a change of aspect: he exclaimed:-- 

me to hold my tongue or to denounce myself, to conceal my person or 

infamous and venerable convict; it is I, it is always I and nothing 

but I: but, good God! all this is egotism; these are diverse forms 

of egotism, but it is egotism all the same. What if I were to think a 

let us examine the matter. The I excepted, the I effaced, the I 

the galleys; that is well--and what then? What is going on here? Ah! 

there is a smoking chimney, it is I who have placed the brand on the 

woman, who has suffered so much, who possesses so many merits in spite 

of her fall; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been! And 

dies; the child becomes what it can; that is what will take place, if 

will be if I do not denounce myself." 

answered himself calmly:-- 

of theft, for he has! I remain here; I go on: in ten years I shall have 

the prosperity of all goes on augmenting; industries are aroused and 

animated; factories and shops are multiplied; families, a hundred 

families, a thousand families, are happy; the district becomes 

populated; villages spring up where there were only farms before; 

farms rise where there was nothing; wretchedness disappears, and 

the hospital! a poor little girl must die in the street! like dogs; ah, 

this is abominable! And without the mother even having seen her child 

once more, almost without the child's having known her mother; and 

all that for the sake of an old wretch of an apple-thief who, most 

assuredly, has deserved the galleys for something else, if not for 

others, these reproaches which weigh only on myself; this evil action 

which compromises my soul alone; in that lies self-sacrifice; in that 

one of these truths, and that he now held it in his hand, and he was 

dazzled as he gazed upon it. 

let things take their course; let us no longer vacillate; let us no 

longer hang back; this is for the interest of all, not for my own; I am 

Madeleine, and Madeleine I remain. Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean! 

I am no longer he; I do not know that man; I no longer know anything; it 

much the worse for that head." 

said:-- 

there are objects which would betray me, dumb things which would bear 

witness against me; it is settled; all these things must disappear." 

covered the wall-paper; a secret receptacle opened, a sort of 

false cupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and the 

blouse, an old pair of trousers, an old knapsack, and a huge thorn 

have recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit. 

order to remind himself continually of his starting-point, but he 

had concealed all that came from the galleys, and he had allowed the 

candlesticks which came from the Bishop to be seen. 

and abrupt movement, he took the whole in his arms at once, without 

bestowing so much as a glance on the things which he had so religiously 

cudgel, knapsack, into the fire. 

henceforth unnecessary, since it was now empty, he concealed the door 

behind a heavy piece of furniture, which he pushed in front of it. 

the thorn cudgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of the 

chamber. 

piece stolen from the little Savoyard. 

step. 

vaguely on the chimney-piece, through the glow. 

must be destroyed also." 

and converted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal. 

of real comfort. "How good warmth is!" said he. 

shouting: "Jean Valjean! Jean Valjean!" 

terrible thing. 

Forget everything! Destroy this Champmathieu, do! That is right! Applaud 

yourself! So it is settled, resolved, fixed, agreed: here is an old man 

an innocent man, whose whole misfortune lies in your name, upon whom 

That is good! Be an honest man yourself; remain Monsieur le Maire; 

time, while you are here in the midst of joy and light, there will be a 

man who will wear your red blouse, who will bear your name in ignominy, 

thus. Ah, wretch!" 

voice continued:-- 

Well! listen, infamous man! All those benedictions will fall back before 

they reach heaven, and only the malediction will ascend to God." 

glanced around the room in a sort of terror. 

human eye cannot see. 

It sometimes seems, on supreme occasions, as though people moved about 

his position. 

position! 

good, so pure, so radiant, to the respect of all, to honor, to liberty. 

birds sing in the month of May; he should never more bestow alms on the 

him at that moment. Never again should he read those books; never more 

should he write on that little table of white wood; his old portress, 

necklet, the red waistcoat, the chain on his ankle, fatigue, the cell, 

the camp bed all those horrors which he knew so well! At his age, 

after having been what he was! If he were only young again! but to 

be addressed in his old age as "thou" by any one who pleased; to 

be searched by the convict-guard; to receive the galley-sergeant's 

stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of the roundsman who 

being, and become as monstrous as the human heart? 

and become a demon? Should he return to hell and become an angel?" 

unchained afresh within him. His ideas began to grow confused once 

lovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of April. 

who is permitted to toddle alone. 

the mastery of his mind. He tried to put to himself, for the last time, 

able to escape the fact; that he was entering a sepulchre on the 

agony,--the agony of his happiness, or the agony of his virtue. 

further advanced than at the beginning. 

years before this unfortunate man, the mysterious Being in whom are 

long thrust aside with his hand, while the olive-trees quivered in 

the wild wind of the infinite, the terrible cup which appeared to Him 

studded with stars. 

himself to drop into his chair. 

situation, except by its painful and heart-rending character, but it 

made an impression on him. This nightmare struck him so forcibly that he 

which he has bequeathed to us. We think that we have here reproduced the 

thing in strict accordance with the text. 

be incomplete if we were to omit it: it is the gloomy adventure of an 

ailing soul. 

had that Night." 

did not seem to me to be daylight nor yet night. 

remember. 

neighbor of ours in former days, who had always worked with her window 

felt cold because of that open window. 

and as heavy as iron. This horseman passed and said nothing to us. 

a spear of moss. Everything was dirt-colored, even the sky. After 

that my brother was no longer with me. 

Romainville. (Why Romainville?)[5] 

door of a house open, and I entered. 

this man, 'Whose house is this? Where am I?' The man replied not. 

did not answer. 

being was passing in the streets, walking through the chambers or 

at a time. These men watched me pass. 

men were earthen in hue. 

said to me:-- 

long time?' 

me." 

black night. 

sharp, harsh noise, which made him drop his eyes, resounded from the 

earth. 

said he, "there are no stars in the sky. They are on earth now." 

able to distinguish the form of this vehicle. It was a tilbury harnessed 

of the horse's hoofs on the pavement. 

in the morning?" 

"Well!" he replied, "what is it?" 

passed in front of his face. 

frightened. 

She even ventured to uplift her voice once more:-- 

were two-wheeled cabriolets, upholstered inside with fawn-colored 

leather, hung on springs, and having but two seats, one for the postboy, 

offensive axles which keep other vehicles at a distance, and which 

may still be seen on the road in Germany. The despatch box, an immense 

This coffer was painted black, and the cabriolet yellow. 

distorted and hunchbacked about them; and when one saw them passing in 

at a very rapid rate. The post-wagon which set out from Arras at one 

o'clock every night, after the mail from Paris had passed, arrived at M. 

sur M. a little before five o'clock in the morning. 

road, collided at the corner of a street, just as it was entering the 

heed and pursued his road at full gallop. 

in convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity. 

He did not know. He was driving at random, straight ahead. Whither? 

To Arras, no doubt; but he might have been going elsewhere as well. 

At times he was conscious of it, and he shuddered. He plunged into the 

in his life, into that obscure cavern of the unknown? 

He was, more than ever, as he had been at the first moment. 

Scaufflaire's cabriolet: that, whatever the result was to be, there was 

that, at any rate, when he should have seen that Champmathieu, some 

to go to the galleys in his stead; that Javert would indeed be there; 

all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu, and 

that accordingly there was no danger. 

that, after all, he held his destiny, however bad it might be, in his 

own hand; that he was master of it. He clung to this thought. 

Arras. 

an hour. 

draw back. 

behind him. He watched the horizon grow white; he stared at all the 

chilly figures of a winter's dawn as they passed before his eyes, 

to the violent state of his soul. 

there within who are sleeping!" 

produced a gentle, monotonous noise. These things are charming when one 

is joyous, and lugubrious when one is sad. 

some oats. 

Boulonnais, which has too much head, too much belly, and not enough neck 

drop of sweat on his loins. 

suddenly bent down and examined the left wheel. 

fixed on the wheel; then he rose erect and said:-- 

see here!" 

nut no longer held firm. 

He came, examined the wheel and made a grimace like a surgeon when the 

latter thinks a limb is broken. 

not be able to start before to-morrow morning." 

once." 

a pair. Two wheels cannot be put together hap-hazard." 

a poor country here." 

"Have you a cabriolet that you can let me have?" 

hired vehicle. He shrugged his shoulders. 

would not let it to you!" 

the town, who gave it to me to take care of, and who only uses it on the 

thirty-sixth of the month--never, that is to say. I might let that 

to you, for what matters it to me? But the bourgeois must not see it 

pass--and then, it is a calash; it would require two horses." 

to-morrow morning?" 

post-horses--Monsieur has his passport?" 

heavy teams are required, and horses are seized upon everywhere, from 

hours at the least at every relay. And, then, they drive at a walk. 

can surely sell me a saddle in the neighborhood." 

would have to buy it to begin with, because no one knows you. But you 

will not find one for sale nor to let, for five hundred francs, or for a 

thousand." 

set out on your journey to-morrow." 

"To-morrow will be too late." 

one coming." 

in a bad state, too." 

"Is there another wheelwright?" 

head. 

possible effort to continue the journey; he had loyally and scrupulously 

exhausted all means; he had been deterred neither by the season, nor 

himself. If he went no further, that was no fault of his. It did not 

concern him further. It was no longer his fault. It was not the act of 

his own conscience, but the act of Providence. 

lungs for the first time since Javert's visit. It seemed to him that the 

hours had just released him. 

He said himself that he had done all he could, and that now he had 

nothing to do but retrace his steps quietly. 

colloquy in the street inevitably attracts a crowd. There are always 

whom no one had paid any heed, detached himself from the group and ran 

off. 

He was accompanied by an old woman. 

cabriolet." 

traveller escaping their clutches, interfered. 

came into it; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture; it 

himself to it," etc., etc. 

travelling since morning. 

After all, he was taking this trip of his own free will. No one was 

forcing him to it. 

convulsive element resembling hope. 

odious. 

The little horse was courageous, and pulled for two; but it was the 

month of February, there had been rain; the roads were bad. And then, 

there were many ascents. 

five leagues. 

things. 

The inn-keeper's wife came to the stable. 

public room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth. 

looked at the girl with a sensation of comfort. 

slowly replaced it on the table, and did not touch it again. 

towards Tinques, which is only five leagues from Arras. 

road, vanished; this is a sort of contemplation which sometimes 

melancholy and more profound than to see a thousand objects for the 

first and the last time? To travel is to be born and to die at every 

instant; perhaps, in the vaguest region of his mind, he did make 

the things of life are perpetually fleeing before us; the dark and 

a shock; all is black; we distinguish an obscure door; the gloomy 

unknown person unharnessing amid the shadows. 

beheld this traveller enter Tinques; it is true that the days were still 

there is no way to proceed further." 

the road to Mont-Saint-Eloy which leads to Arras." 

road-mender; "shall I give you a piece of advice? your horse is tired; 

Arras to-morrow." 

horse; the stable-boy will guide you through the cross-roads." 

was seated on the shaft of the cariole. 

Night had fully come. 

cart lurched from one rut to the other; he said to the postilion:-- 

you wish to return and sleep at Tinques, we could be in Arras early 

to-morrow morning." 

gallop. 

everything that could be seen assumed attitudes of terror. How many 

things shiver beneath these vast breaths of the night! 

he vaguely recalled his other nocturnal trip in the vast plain in 

the neighborhood of D----, eight years previously, and it seemed but 

yesterday. 

leagues still to go." 

that it could not be a long affair; that the theft of the apples would 

four or five depositions, and very little for the lawyers to say; that 

he should arrive after all was over. 

Mont-Saint-Eloy behind them. 

in her sheets, murmuring the while, in a low voice, calculations 

light of earth. 

invariably, "Well. I should like to see M. Madeleine." 

the gums had receded, a leaden complexion, a bony neck, prominent 

whether the mayor had made his appearance at the infirmary, and shook 

his head. 

exactness is kindness, he was exact. 

sister?" 

turned and looked at the door. 

on her pillow. 

She said nothing, but began to plait the sheets once more. 

again. 

no complaint, she blamed no one. But she coughed in a melancholy way. 

One would have said that something dark was descending upon her. She was 

livid and her lips were blue. She smiled now and then. 

Fantine was singing:-- 

          "Lovely things we will buy 

           As we stroll the faubourgs through. 

           Roses are pink, corn-flowers are blue, 

clad, and said to me, 'Here, hide 'neath my veil the child whom you 

thread.' 

          "Lovely things we will buy 

           As we stroll the faubourgs through. 

"Dear Holy Virgin, beside my stove I have set a cradle with ribbons 

clothes for thy new-born babe.' 

          "Roses are pink and corn-flowers are blue, 

           I love my love, and corn-flowers are blue. 

"'Wash this linen.'--'Where?'--'In the stream. Make of it, soiling 

not, spoiling not, a petticoat fair with its bodice fine, which I will 

embroider and fill with flowers.'--'Madame, the child is no longer here; 

me.' 

          "Lovely things we will buy 

           As we stroll the faubourgs through, 

           Roses are pink, corn-flowers are blue, 

           I love my love, corn-flowers are blue." 

child. She sang it in so sad a voice, and to so sweet an air, that it 

she was to austerities, felt a tear spring to her eyes. 

seemed to pay attention to anything about her. 

infirmary soon. The girl returned in a few minutes. 

the portress not to expect him that night. 

to Fantine's bed, the sister interrogating, the servant conjecturing, 

unite the free movements of health with the frightful emaciation of 

curtains, and was listening. All at once she cried:-- 

he doing? Why does he not come?" 

the voice of a man; they wheeled round in affright. 

"The portress told me that he could not come to-day." 

with an accent that was both imperious and heart-rending:-- 

each other there. I want to know it." 

with the city council." 

proposed to her. 

that this was a serious matter in Fantine's present state. Her flush 

did not last long; the sister raised her calm, sad eyes to Fantine, and 

said, "Monsieur le Maire has gone away." 

sparkled; indescribable joy beamed from that melancholy face. 

her lips moved; she was praying in a low voice. 

good God is good; M. Madeleine is good; just think! he has gone to 

Montfermeil to get my little Cosette." 

her pillow, and kissed the little silver cross which she wore on her 

neck, and which Sister Simplice had given her. 

more." 

pained to feel that perspiration. 

Soon, soon? He wants to give me a surprise, you know! he made me sign a 

paid; the authorities will not allow them to keep the child since they 

sister! I am extremely happy; I am doing well; I am not ill at all any 

attached one gets to children, and then, she will be so pretty; you will 

first place, she will have very beautiful hands; she had ridiculous 

hands when she was only a year old; like this! she must be a big girl 

now; she is seven years old; she is quite a young lady; I call her 

Cosette, but her name is really Euphrasie. Stop! this morning I was 

across me, like that, that I should see Cosette again soon. Mon Dieu! 

how wrong it is not to see one's children for years! One ought to 

reflect that life is not eternal. Oh, how good M. le Maire is to go! it 

is very cold! it is true; he had on his cloak, at least? he will be 

foot once; it was very long for me, but the diligences go very quickly! 

he will be here to-morrow with Cosette: how far is it from here to 

Montfermeil?" 

I could dance if any one wished it." 

she laughed softly; the joy of a mother is almost infantile. 

talk any more." 

Simplice is right; every one here is right." 

nothing more. 

bed, will she not, sir?" 

her guess was correct: the doctor approved. 

morning to her, poor kitten, and when I cannot sleep at night, I can 

hear her asleep; her little gentle breathing will do me good." 

suddenly supervened and reanimated this poor, worn-out creature. 

gone to get that mite of a child?" 

took his departure, he said to the sister:-- 

things are such mysteries: we may be able to save her." 

DEPARTURE 

Arras; the man whom we have been following up to this moment alighted 

led the little white horse to the stable; then he opened the door of a 

and leaned his elbows on a table; he had taken fourteen hours for 

not sorry. 

vacant; he engaged it and paid for it. "Monsieur," said the clerk, 

"do not fail to be here ready to start at precisely one o'clock in the 

morning." 

walked on at random; but he seemed bent upon not asking the way of the 

passers-by. He crossed the little river Crinchon, and found himself in a 

though he feared lest some one should hear the question which he was 

the court-house, that is to say, in the direction of the hotel of the 

prefecture; for the court-house is undergoing repairs just at this 

prefecture." 

a grand hall there. It is in this grand hall that the court is held." 

generally close at six o'clock." 

building. 

there, so they are not through. The matter must have been greatly 

interest in this affair? Is it a criminal case? Are you a witness?" 

lawyers." 

the halls of justice. It is rare that charity and pity are the outcome 

of these words. Condemnations pronounced in advance are more likely 

observer so many sombre hives where buzzing spirits construct in concert 

all sorts of dark edifices. 

the episcopal palace, and served as the large hall of the palace 

of justice. A double-leaved door, which was closed at that moment, 

separated it from the large apartment where the court was sitting. 

whom he met. 

established. The matter was very simple. The woman had murdered her 

premeditation, and she was condemned for life." 

lighted?" 

I'd send him to the galleys on the strength of his face alone." 

"I really think that there is not. There is a great crowd. However, 

the hearing has been suspended. Some people have gone out, and when the 

hearing is resumed, you might make an effort." 

his heart like needles of ice and like blades of fire. When he saw that 

told whether what he felt was pain or pleasure. 

docket of the session was very heavy; the president had appointed 

in the galleys at Toulon. It was that which lent a bad aspect to 

witnesses had been completed, but the lawyer's plea, and the speech 

of the public prosecutor were still to come; it could not be 

a brilliant fellow who wrote verses. 

He inquired of this usher:-- 

hearing suspended?" 

door will not be opened again." 

President only admits public functionaries to them." 

and every moment he encountered some new phase of it. On reaching the 

from it a pencil, tore out a leaf, and upon that leaf he wrote rapidly, 

the paper, and said in an authoritative manner:-- 

a sort of celebrity. For the space of seven years his reputation for 

rendered to the chief town by resuscitating the black jet industry, 

there was not one out of the hundred and forty communes of the 

arrondissement of M. sur M. which was not indebted to him for some 

benefit. He had even at need contrived to aid and multiply the 

industries of other arrondissements. It was thus that he had, when 

occasion offered, supported with his credit and his funds the linen 

name of M. Madeleine was pronounced with veneration. Arras and Douai 

envied the happy little town of M. sur M. its mayor. 

honored. When the usher, discreetly opening the door which connected 

the council-chamber with the court-room, bent over the back of the 

President's arm-chair and handed him the paper on which was inscribed 

and returned it to the usher, saying, "Admit him." 

who had turned his back upon him but a moment previously, and who was 

he could read it. 

Madeleine." 

a strange and bitter aftertaste. 

cabinet of severe aspect, lighted by two wax candles, placed upon a 

table with a green cloth. The last words of the usher who had just 

quitted him still rang in his ears: "Monsieur, you are now in the 

chair." These words were mingled in his thoughts with a vague memory of 

to collect his faculties, but could not. It is chiefly at the moment 

realities of life, that the threads of thought snap within the brain. He 

where so many lives had been broken, which was soon to ring with his 

chamber and that it should be he. 

jolts of the cart, but he was not conscious of it. It seemed to him that 

he felt nothing. 

Any spectator who had chanced to see him at that moment, and who had 

unconsciously. He was thinking of Fantine and Cosette. 

fixed on that brass handle, then grew terrified, and little by little 

became impregnated with fear. Beads of perspiration burst forth among 

his hair and trickled down upon his temples. 

broken by steps and gratings, making all sorts of angles, lighted 

corridor through which he had approached. He breathed, he listened; not 

same silence reigned, and there was the same darkness around him. He was 

something else, too, perchance, he meditated. 

within him but one voice, which said, "Alas!" 

and as though crushed. It seemed as though some one had overtaken him in 

his flight and was leading him back. 

brass, shone like a terrible star for him. He gazed at it as a lamb 

might gaze into the eye of a tiger. 

and approached the door. 

hear. 

remained standing, contemplating what he saw. 

of silence, where all the apparatus of a criminal case, with its petty 

and mournful gravity in the midst of the throng, was in process of 

development. 

abstracted air, in threadbare robes, who were gnawing their nails or 

closing their eyelids; at the other end, a ragged crowd; lawyers in 

all sorts of attitudes; soldiers with hard but honest faces; ancient, 

spotted woodwork, a dirty ceiling, tables covered with serge that was 

yellow rather than green; doors blackened by handmarks; tap-room 

lamps which emitted more smoke than light, suspended from nails in 

the wainscot; on the tables candles in brass candlesticks; darkness, 

ugliness, sadness; and from all this there was disengaged an austere and 

august impression, for one there felt that grand human thing which is 

called the law, and that grand divine thing which is called justice. 

directed towards a single point, a wooden bench placed against a small 

door, in the stretch of wall on the President's left; on this bench, 

though they had known beforehand where that figure was. 

in face, of course, but exactly similar in attitude and aspect, with his 

bristling hair, with that wild and uneasy eye, with that blouse, just as 

it was on the day when he entered D----, full of hatred, concealing 

nineteen years in collecting on the floor of the prison. 

again?" 

indescribably coarse, stupid, and frightened about him. 

bowed to him; the attorney-general, who had seen M. Madeleine at M. 

of his thought; they were real gendarmes and real judges, a real 

monstrous aspects of his past reappear and live once more around him, 

with all that there is formidable in reality. 

recesses of his soul, "Never!" 

called that man who was being tried Jean Valjean. 

of the most horrible moment of his life, enacted by his spectre. 

the faces of the judges, of soldiers, and of spectators; all were the 

been absent when he had been judged. 

listen. 

the hall was sparely lighted. 

his plea. 

likeness. This man, as the reader already knows, was a vagabond who had 

man? an examination had been made; witnesses had been heard, and they 

were unanimous; light had abounded throughout the entire debate; the 

description, a malefactor named Jean Valjean, whom justice has long been 

for by article 383 of the Penal Code, the right to try him for which 

we reserve hereafter, when his identity shall have been judicially 

established. He has just committed a fresh theft; it is a case of a 

second offence; condemn him for the fresh deed; later on he will be 

judged for the old crime." In the face of this accusation, in the face 

more than anything else; he made signs and gestures which were meant to 

convey No, or else he stared at the ceiling: he spoke with difficulty, 

moment, and the entire crowd surveyed, with more anxiety than he did 

himself, that sentence freighted with calamity, which descended 

ever closer over his head; there was even a glimpse of a possibility 

identity were established, and the affair of Little Gervais were to end 

thereafter in condemnation. Who was this man? what was the nature of his 

obscure. 

it is suited on account of its grave sonorousness and its majestic 

a spouse; Paris, the centre of art and civilization; the king, 

the monarch; Monseigneur the Bishop, a sainted pontiff; the 

etc.; the pupils in the seminary, these tender levities; errors imputed 

to newspapers, the imposture which distills its venom through the 

Champmathieu, had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that 

branch by any one. He had been taken with that branch (which the lawyer 

found it broken off and lying on the ground, and had picked it up. 

Where was there any proof to the contrary? No doubt that branch had been 

by the alarmed marauder; there was no doubt that there had been a 

Champmathieu? One thing only. His character as an ex-convict. The 

short, four witnesses recognize Champmathieu, positively and without 

hesitation, as that convict, Jean Valjean; to these signs, to this 

testimony, the counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of his 

the convict Jean Valjean, did that prove that he was the thief of the 

it was true, and his counsel, "in good faith," was obliged to admit it, 

Little Gervais, the counsel need not discuss it; it did not enter into 

broken his ban, and not the frightful chastisement which descends upon 

the convict guilty of a second offence. 

violent and florid, as district-attorneys usually are. 

could no longer be disputed. Here, by means of a clever 

district-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romantic 

school, then dawning under the name of the Satanic school, which 

of this perverse literature the crime of Champmathieu, or rather, 

Valjean? Description of Jean Valjean: a monster spewed forth, etc. 

The model for this sort of description is contained in the tale of 

great services to judicial eloquence. The audience and the jury 

with an oratorical turn calculated to raise the enthusiasm of the 

existence, etc., etc., inured by his past life to culpable deeds, and 

wall that had been scaled, still holding in his hand the object 

everything; denies even his own identity! In addition to a hundred 

other proofs, to which we will not recur, four witnesses recognize 

of the jury, etc., etc. While the district-attorney was speaking, the 

accused listened to him open-mouthed, with a sort of amazement in which 

a man could talk like that. From time to time, at those "energetic" 

moments of the prosecutor's speech, when eloquence which cannot contain 

itself overflows in a flood of withering epithets and envelops the 

district-attorney directed the attention of the jury to this stupid 

skill, a habit of deceiving justice, and which set forth in all its 

nakedness the "profound perversity" of this man. He ended by making 

his reserves on the affair of Little Gervais and demanding a severe 

sentence. 

life. 

l'Avocat-General on his "admirable speech," then replied as best he 

could; but he weakened; the ground was evidently slipping away from 

accused stand up, and addressed to him the customary question, "Have you 

anything to add to your defence?" 

hands a terrible cap which he had. 

the audience, the gendarmes, his counsel, the jury, the court, laid 

his monstrous fist on the rim of woodwork in front of his bench, 

took another look, and all at once, fixing his glance upon the 

district-attorney, he began to speak. It was like an eruption. 

It seemed, from the manner in which the words escaped from his 

and that it was with Monsieur Baloup. It is a hard trade. In the 

under sheds when the masters are good, never in closed workshops, 

while he is still quite young in that trade. At forty a man is done for. 

as little as possible. The masters took advantage of my age--and then I 

also. It sufficed for us two. She had trouble, also; all day long up to 

it freezes, it is all the same; you must still wash. There are people 

it is enclosed, you are not so cold; but there is that hot steam, which 

who did not go to the ball, and who was very peaceable. I remember 

telling the truth; you have only to ask. Ah, yes! how stupid I am! Paris 

is a gulf. Who knows Father Champmathieu there? But M. Baloup does, I 

wanted of me." 

in a loud, rapid, hoarse voice, with a sort of irritated and savage 

not understanding why, he began to laugh himself. 

a master-wheelwright, with whom the accused stated that he had served, 

had been summoned in vain. He had become bankrupt, and was not to be 

is necessary. The gravest presumptions rest upon you, and may induce 

last time to explain yourself clearly on two points. In the first place, 

did you or did you not climb the wall of the Pierron orchard, break 

convict, Jean Valjean--yes or no?" 

thoroughly understood, and who knows what answer he is going to make. He 

opened his mouth, turned towards the President, and said:-- 

Your embarrassment condemns you. It is evident that your name is not 

under the name of Jean Mathieu, which was the name of his mother; that 

of the jury will form their own opinion." 

district-attorney had finished, and exclaimed:-- 

was walking through the country after a shower, which had made the whole 

the sand any more but the little blades of grass at the wayside. I 

have no education; I am a poor man; that is where they wrong me, because 

Boulevard de l'Hopital; my name is Champmathieu. You are very clever to 

tell me where I was born; I don't know myself: it's not everybody 

who has a house in which to come into the world; that would be too 

at Faverolles, without having been in the galleys? I tell you that I 

have not stolen, and that I am Father Champmathieu; I have been with M. 

there! Why is everybody pursuing me so furiously?" 

The district-attorney had remained standing; he addressed the 

President:-- 

denials of the prisoner, who would like to pass himself off as an idiot, 

time as to the identity of the prisoner with the convict Jean Valjean." 

Police-Inspector Javert, recalled by his duties to the capital of a 

he had made his deposition; we have accorded him permission, with the 

give the lie to the prisoner's denial. I recognize him perfectly. The 

name of this man is not Champmathieu; he is an ex-convict named Jean 

was adjutant of the galley-guard at the prison in Toulon. I repeat that 

I recognize him perfectly.'" 

on the public and on the jury. The district-attorney concluded by 

insisting, that in default of Javert, the three witnesses Brevet, 

Chenildieu, and Cochepaille should be heard once more and solemnly 

interrogated. 

the door of the witnesses' room opened. The usher, accompanied by a 

gendarme ready to lend him armed assistance, introduced the convict 

they had contained but one soul. 

business man's face, and the air of a rascal. The two sometimes go 

testimony as to his religious habits. It must not be forgotten that this 

passed under the Restoration. 

sentence, and you cannot take an oath." 

sentiment of honor and of equity. It is to this sentiment that I 

appeal at this decisive hour. If it still exists in you,--and I hope 

man, whom a word from you may ruin; on the other hand, justice, which a 

former companion in the galleys, Jean Valjean?" 

him positively." 

small man of about fifty, brisk, wrinkled, frail, yellow, brazen-faced, 

the galleys had nicknamed him I-deny-God (Je-nie Dieu, Chenildieu). 

deprived him of the right to take an oath, Chenildieu raised his 

head and looked the crowd in the face. The President invited him to 

recognition of the prisoner. 

chain for five years. So you are sulking, old fellow?" 

than the prisoner. He was one of those wretched men whom nature has 

touches as convicts in the galleys. 

him. 

Jean-the-Screw, because he was so strong." 

prisoner,--a murmur which increased and lasted longer each time that a 

fresh declaration was added to the proceeding. 

according to the accusation, his principal means of defence; at the 

third, he cried, "Famous!" 

jury; it was evident that the man was lost. 

arguments." 

was heard crying:-- 

placed among the privileged spectators who were seated behind the 

recognized him, and exclaimed in concert:-- 

his hat in his hand; there was no disorder in his clothing; his coat 

was carefully buttoned; he was very pale, and he trembled slightly; 

a momentary hesitation in the audience, the voice had been so 

not understand at first. They asked themselves whether he had indeed 

the one to give that terrible outcry. 

moment, M. Madeleine, had advanced towards the witnesses Cochepaille, 

Brevet, and Chenildieu. 

of; it is I: I am Jean Valjean." 

followed by a silence like that of the grave; those within the hall 

something grand has been done. 

and asked in accents which all understood:-- 

if there is a physician in the audience, we join the President in 

interrupted him in accents full of suavity and authority. These are the 

years ago:-- 

concealed myself under another name; I have become rich; I have become 

tell. I will not narrate the story of my life to you; you will hear it 

true that I robbed Little Gervais; they were right in telling you that 

his fault. Listen, honorable judges! a man who has been so greatly 

humbled as I have has neither any remonstrances to make to Providence, 

galleys, I was a poor peasant, with very little intelligence, a sort 

vicious: I was a block of wood; I became a firebrand. Later on, 

indulgence and kindness saved me, as severity had ruined me. But, pardon 

Madeleine has gone mad!' you do not believe me! that is distressing. Do 

wish Javert were here; he would recognize me." 

accompanied these words. 

wore in the galleys?" 

your whole right shoulder bears a deep burn, because you one day laid 

your shoulder against the chafing-dish full of coals, in order to efface 

the three letters T. F. P., which are still visible, nevertheless; 

answer, is this true?" 

the Emperor at Cannes, March 1, 1815; pull up your sleeve!" 

his bare arm. 

it. It was a smile of triumph; it was also a smile of despair. 

In that chamber there were no longer either judges, accusers, nor 

gendarmes; there was nothing but staring eyes and sympathizing hearts. 

outburst of a grand light: all felt themselves inwardly dazzled. 

that matter which had been so obscure but a moment previously, without 

any further explanation: the whole crowd, as by a sort of electric 

and magnificent history of a man who was delivering himself up so 

hesitations, little possible oppositions, were swallowed up in that vast 

and luminous fact. 

at the moment. 

can have me arrested when he likes." 

and make way for a man. He traversed the crowd slowly. It was never 

when he reached it. On arriving there he turned round and said:-- 

not? Good God! When I think of what I was on the point of doing, I 

not to have had this occur." 

one in the crowd. 

were fools, and comprehending nothing of this vision. 

CHAPTER I--IN WHAT MIRROR M. MADELEINE CONTEMPLATES HIS HAIR 

night, filled with happy visions; at daybreak she fell asleep. Sister 

over her drugs and phials, and scrutinizing things very closely, on 

objects. Suddenly she raised her head and uttered a faint shriek. M. 

Madeleine stood before her; he had just entered silently. 

not come from there. 

will not see her child. What shall we say to her?" 

face. The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it. 

perfectly white!" 

the mirror, looked at his hair, and said:-- 

something else. 

glimpse in all this. 

said the sister, hardly venturing to put the question. 

come with the child. We should not have to enact a lie." 

calm gravity:-- 

replied, lowering her eyes and her voice respectfully:-- 

which might awaken the sick woman; then he entered Fantine's chamber, 

approached the bed and drew aside the curtains. She was asleep. Her 

to death. But this painful respiration hardly troubled a sort of 

ineffable serenity which overspread her countenance, and which 

remained closed and drooping. Her whole person was trembling with an 

seen. To see her thus, one would never have dreamed that she was 

dying. 

The human body has something of this tremor when the instant arrives in 

which the mysterious fingers of Death are about to pluck the soul. 

before, on the day when he had come for the first time to see her 

was gray and his was white. 

must enjoin to silence. 

doubt, that he found not a word of reply. She continued:-- 

celestial forms." 

on my bed against the moment of my waking?" 

recall. 

He came to the aid of M. Madeleine. 

prayer in the way of violence and tenderness. 

child who is carried. 

The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm. You must be 

cured first." 

is! The idea! I want to see my child!" 

in this state I shall oppose your having your child. It is not enough 

reasonable, I will bring her to you myself." 

never have spoken as I have just done; so many misfortunes have happened 

you fear the emotion. I will wait as long as you like, but I swear to 

you that it would not have harmed me to see my daughter. I have been 

gently. That is all. Is it not quite natural that I should desire to see 

my daughter, who has been brought to me expressly from Montfermeil? I 

am not angry. I know well that I am about to be happy. All night long I 

have seen white things, and persons who smiled at me. When Monsieur le 

I am well. I am perfectly conscious that there is nothing the matter 

they will say, 'She must have her child.'" 

refrain from questioning M. Madeleine. 

diligence! Could she not be brought for just one little instant? She 

could be so if you chose!" 

that makes you cough." 

passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of 

inspiring, and she began to talk of indifferent things. 

parties in summer. Are the Thenardiers prosperous? There are not many 

travellers in their parts. That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop." 

now hesitated. The doctor, having finished his visit, retired. Sister 

Simplice remained alone with them. 

and began to listen with rapture. 

of some work-woman. It was one of those accidents which are always 

of mournful scenes. The child--a little girl--was going and coming, 

Alas! in what are the plays of children not intermingled. It was this 

little girl whom Fantine heard singing. 

listened for a while longer, then her face clouded over, and M. 

happy we are going to be! We shall have a little garden the very first 

she will take her first communion. Ah! when will she take her first 

communion?" 

have a white veil, and openwork stockings; she will look like a little 

woman. O my good sister, you do not know how foolish I become when I 

think of my daughter's first communion!" 

had become terrible. 

which had been radiant but a moment before, was ghastly, and she 

alarming at the other extremity of the room. 

she seemed to see. She removed one hand from his arm, and with the other 

made him a sign to look behind him. 

the Hall of Assizes in Arras. He regained his inn just in time to set 

first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte, then to enter the 

infirmary and see Fantine. 

and to demand, in the meantime, the condemnation of that Champmathieu, 

who was evidently the real Jean Valjean. The district-attorney's 

the real Jean Valjean, the aspect of the matter had been thoroughly 

man. Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas, not very fresh, 

unfortunately, upon judicial errors, etc., etc.; the President, in his 

the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case. 

and as he had no longer Champmathieu, he took Madeleine. 

to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M." 

This phrase, in which there was a great deal of of, is the 

report to the attorney-general. His first emotion having passed off, the 

President did not offer many objections. Justice must, after all, take 

its course. And then, when all was said, although the President was 

the Mayor of M. sur M. say the Emperor, and not Bonaparte, when alluding 

to the landing at Cannes. 

full speed, and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert. 

having given his deposition. 

order of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner. 

the liberated convict, Jean Valjean." 

the most ordinary in the world. He was cool, calm, grave, his gray 

hair was perfectly smooth upon his temples, and he had just mounted 

acquainted with him, and who had examined him attentively at the moment, 

left ear instead of at the nape of his neck. This betrayed unwonted 

agitation. 

in his uniform; methodical with malefactors, rigid with the buttons of 

his coat. 

emotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes. 

post for a corporal and four soldiers, had left the soldiers in the 

who was utterly unsuspicious, accustomed as she was to seeing armed men 

inquiring for the mayor. 

entered. 

his enormous cane, which was hidden behind him, could be seen. 

Madeleine turn round. 

without stirring, without moving from his post, without approaching him, 

became terrible. No human sentiment can be as terrible as joy. 

was in his soul to appear in his countenance. The depths having been 

stirred up, mounted to the surface. The humiliation of having, in 

moments, in an error with regard to Champmathieu, was effaced by pride 

at having so well and accurately divined in the first place, and of 

that narrow brow. All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied 

face can afford were there. 

presence and of his success, he, Javert, personified justice, light, and 

judged, the legal conscience, the public prosecution, all the stars; he 

he was standing erect in the midst of a glory. There existed in his 

was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint Michael. 

which may become hideous when wrongly directed; but which, even when 

which have one vice,--error. The honest, pitiless joy of a fanatic 

in the full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriously 

wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of the 

good. 

not endure that terrible face; she felt her life quitting her; she hid 

her face in both hands, and shrieked in her anguish:-- 

He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices:-- 

quick about it!" he said "Bequiabouit." 

it was no longer a human word: it was a roar. 

but an end. He confined himself to saying, "Be quick about it!" 

Valjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook, and with 

which he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him. 

of her bones two months previously. 

mayor was there; what had she to fear? 

To her only. She shuddered. 

that nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest 

deliriums of fever. 

to an end. 

his gums. 

collar of his coat. He said:-- 

private." 

talking aloud to me." 

voice:-- 

accompany me if you choose." 

Ah! Ah! That's good! That's really capital!" 

Madeleine! Monsieur le Maire!" 

change all that; it is high time!" 

grasp Jean Valjean's cravat, shirt and collar:-- 

Valjean! And I have him in my grasp! That's what there is!" 

at Javert, she gazed at the nun, she opened her mouth as though to 

convulsively, and fumbling about her like a drowning person; then 

suddenly fell back on her pillow. 

breast, with gaping mouth and staring, sightless eyes. 

march on instantly, or you'll get the thumb-screws!" 

dilapidated condition, an easy matter to muscles like his, grasped the 

towards the door. Jean Valjean, armed with his bar of iron, walked 

to Javert, in a voice that was barely audible:-- 

himself of that moment to effect his escape; so he remained, grasped 

removing his eyes from Jean Valjean. 

Fantine, which lay extended there. He remained thus, mute, absorbed, 

and spoke to her in a low voice. 

that woman, who was dead? What words were those? No one on earth heard 

them. Did the dead woman hear them? There are some touching illusions 

which are, perhaps, sublime realities. The point as to which there 

exists no doubt is, that Sister Simplice, the sole witness of the 

done, he closed her eyes. 

down before that hand, lifted it gently, and kissed it. 

extraordinary commotion in M. sur M. We are sorry that we cannot conceal 

heard in all quarters of the town:-- 

has been arrested." "Arrested!" "In prison, in the city prison, while 

waiting to be transferred." "Until he is transferred!" "He is to be 

transferred!" "Where is he to be taken?" "He will be tried at the 

remark, the depth of which it is impossible to fathom:-- 

the number. 

lodge, still in a thorough fright, and absorbed in sad reflections. 

street was deserted. There was no one in the house but the two nuns, 

of Fantine. 

chair, and became absorbed in thought once more. The poor, good old 

woman had done all this without being conscious of it. 

on the nail!" 

the candle which was burning there. 

shriek which she confined to her throat. 

said herself, when she related the adventure afterwards. 

to her. 

woman, no doubt." 

than he should guard himself. 

a pass-key which opened a little side-door; but he must have been 

was never explained. 

top, he left his candle on the top step of his stairs, opened his door 

feeling, then returned for his candle and re-entered his room. 

be seen from the street. 

by the fire. 

pulled out one of his old shirts, which he tore in pieces. In the 

when the authorities made an examination later on. 

however polished or cool we may be, they wring human nature from our 

that day had turned the nun into a woman once more. She had wept, and 

she was trembling. 

handed to the nun, saying, "Sister, you will give this to Monsieur le 

Cure." 

will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial, and of the 

funeral of the woman who died yesterday. The rest is for the poor." 

inarticulate sounds. She succeeded in saying, however:-- 

unhappy woman?" 

that room, and that would disturb her." 

staircase. They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps, and the old 

portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones:-- 

even left the door." 

of the wall on the right. Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed 

himself in this angle. Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table. 

eyes, of course, the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all; he 

creature who never sins; they were souls walled in from this world, 

through. 

and to venture on at least one question. 

knew it, and held her in special veneration in consequence. 

"Sister," said he, "are you alone in this room?" 

she should faint. 

hesitation, promptly, as a person does when sacrificing herself. 

your sisters, the virgins, and your brothers, the angels, in the light; 

may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise! 

The sister's affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did 

extinguished, and which was still smoking on the table. 

Valjean. It has been established by the testimony of two or three 

one. 

it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper's grave. 

among the first bones that came to hand; she was subjected to the 

promiscuousness of ashes. She was thrown into the public grave. Her 

grave resembled her bed. 

[THE END OF VOLUME I. "FANTINE"] 

BOOK FIRST.--WATERLOO 

CHAPTER I--WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES 

course towards La Hulpe. He was on foot. He was pursuing a broad paved 

succeed each other, raise the road and let it fall again, and produce 

something in the nature of enormous waves. 

the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud, which has the form of a 

reversed vase. He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence; and 

Private Cafe. 

A quarter of a league further on, he arrived at the bottom of a little 

valley, where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through 

the embankment of the road. The clump of sparsely planted but very green 

trees, which fills the valley on one side of the road, is dispersed over 

the direction of Braine-l'Alleud. 

at the door, a large bundle of hop-poles, a plough, a heap of dried 

some outside spectacle, such as a parish festival, was fluttering in 

the wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a pool in which a flotilla 

wayfarer struck into this. 

found himself before a large door of arched stone, with a rectilinear 

impost, in the sombre style of Louis XIV., flanked by two flat 

rusty knocker. 

which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. A brave 

little bird, probably a lover, was carolling in a distracted manner in a 

large tree. 

of the pier of the door. 

emerged. 

added:-- 

hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg. The bullet did not pierce 

the wood." 

trees, he perceived a sort of little elevation, and on this elevation 

something which at that distance resembled a lion. 

the first resistance, which that great wood-cutter of Europe, called 

axe. 

antiquary, Hougomont is Hugomons. This manor was built by Hugo, Sire 

Villiers. 

porch, and entered the courtyard. 

sixteenth century, which here simulates an arcade, everything else 

beside this door, a manure-hole, some pickaxes, some shovels, some 

carts, an old well, with its flagstone and its iron reel, a chicken 

bell-tower, a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the 

Napoleon's dreams. This corner of earth, could he but have seized 

scattering its dust abroad with their beaks. A growl is audible; it is a 

huge dog, who shows his teeth and replaces the English. 

there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army. 

which is nicked out. It is this angle which contains the southern 

door, guarded by this wall, which commands it only a gun's length away. 

Hougomont has two doors,--the southern door, that of the chateau; and 

the northern door, belonging to the farm. Napoleon sent his brother 

Jerome against Hougomont; the divisions of Foy, Guilleminot, and Bachelu 

hurled themselves against it; nearly the entire corps of Reille was 

taking it. 

are visible. 

the north. It is a simple door for carts, such as exist in all farms, 

that Bauduin was killed. 

visible there; the confusion of the fray was petrified there; it lives 

the drooping, quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee. 

which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles. 

other. The French, fired on from every point,--from behind the walls, 

grape-shot was a conflagration. 

dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible; the 

English guards were in ambush in these rooms; the spiral of the 

staircase, cracked from the ground floor to the very roof, appears 

cut off the lower steps. These consisted of large slabs of blue stone, 

which form a heap among the nettles. Half a score of steps still 

cling to the wall; on the first is cut the figure of a trident. These 

inaccessible steps are solid in their niches. All the rest resembles a 

one is dead; the other is wounded at its base, and is clothed with 

verdure in April. Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the 

staircase. 

its calm, is singular. The mass has not been said there since the 

carnage. Nevertheless, the altar has been left there--an altar of 

unpolished wood, placed against a background of roughhewn stone. Four 

over the door a large wooden crucifix, below the crucifix a square 

burned, the wooden Christ was not burned. The fire preyed upon his 

feet, of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen; then it 

Christ. 

Marques y Marquesa de Almagro (Habana). There are French names with 

in 1849. The nations insulted each other there. 

held an axe in its hand; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros. 

drawn there? Because it is full of skeletons. 

Kylsom. He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont, and was gardener there. 

On the 18th of June, 1815, his family fled and concealed themselves in 

the woods. 

people who had been scattered abroad, for many days and nights. There 

trees, which mark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the 

depths of the thickets. 

They tore him from his hiding-place, and the combatants forced this 

was from this well that he drew it. Many drank there their last draught. 

voices were heard calling from the well. 

This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard. Three walls, part 

the leaves of a screen, surround it on all sides. The fourth side is 

eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a heaped-up 

in a growth of nettles. 

table for all wells in Belgium. The slab has here been replaced by a 

pail, chain, or pulley; but there is still the stone basin which served 

the overflow. The rain-water collects there, and from time to time a 

off his hand with an axe. 

the cannon, and went boum! boum!" 

we were told. The orchard is terrible. 

buildings of the chateau and the farm; on the left, a hedge; on the 

right, a wall; and at the end, a wall. The wall on the right is of 

It slopes downwards, is planted with gooseberry bushes, choked with a 

stone, with balustrade with a double curve. 

globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone. Forty-three balusters can 

still be counted on their sockets; the rest lie prostrate in the grass. 

the pediment like a fractured leg. 

It was in this garden, further down than the orchard, that six 

unable to escape, hunted down and caught like bears in their dens, 

accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies, one of which was 

quarter of an hour to die. 

fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour. The wall seems ready 

irregular heights, are there still. In front of the sixth are placed two 

brigade was broken against it. Thus Waterloo began. 

buttercups and its daisies; the grass is tall there; the cart-horses 

browse there; cords of hair, on which linen is drying, traverse the 

walks over this uncultivated land, and one's foot dives into mole-holes. 

there all verdant. Major Blackmann leaned against it to die. Beneath 

a great tree in the neighborhood fell the German general, Duplat, 

had its bullet or its biscayan.[6] The skeletons of dead trees abound in 

a wood full of violets. 

rivulet formed of English blood, French blood, German blood mingled 

traveller: Monsieur, give me three francs, and if you like, I will 

explain to you the affair of Waterloo! 

place. 

of water, more or less, decided the downfall of Napoleon. All that 

Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz 

sufficed to make a world crumble. 

o'clock, and that gave Blucher time to come up. Why? Because the ground 

was wet. The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmer 

before they could manoeuvre. 

All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles. The key to his 

strategy of the hostile general like a citadel, and made a breach in it. 

He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot; he joined and dissolved 

genius. To beat in squares, to pulverize regiments, to break lines, to 

crush and disperse masses,--for him everything lay in this, to 

strike, strike, strike incessantly,--and he intrusted this task to the 

cannon-ball. A redoubtable method, and one which, united with genius, 

rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the 

space of fifteen years. 

because he had numbers on his side. Wellington had only one hundred and 

fifty-nine mouths of fire; Napoleon had two hundred and forty. 

been won and ended at two o'clock, three hours before the change of 

Did the veteran make himself disastrously felt in the leader? In a word, 

powers from himself? Did he begin to waver under the delusion of 

a breath of adventure? Had he become--a grave matter in a 

scenting out catastrophes? He who had in former days known all the 

roads to triumph, and who, from the summit of his chariot of lightning, 

pointed them out with a sovereign finger, had he now reached that 

anything more than an immense dare-devil? 

go straight to the centre of the Allies' line, to make a breach in the 

enemy, to cut them in two, to drive the British half back on Hal, 

and the Prussian half on Tongres, to make two shattered fragments of 

people would see. 

Of course, we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle of 

are relating is connected with this battle, but this history is not our 

point of view by a whole pleiad of historians.[7] 

witness, a passer-by on the plain, a seeker bending over that soil all 

have no right to oppose, in the name of science, a collection of facts 

a question of destiny, that mysterious culprit, we judge like that 

ingenious judge, the populace. 

of the A is the road to Nivelles, the right limb is the road to Genappe, 

the tie of the A is the hollow road to Ohain from Braine-l'Alleud. The 

tip is the Belle-Alliance, where Napoleon was. At the centre of this 

chord is the precise point where the final word of the battle was 

symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial Guard. 

facing Picton, Reille facing Hill. 

forest of Soignes. 

the undulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean, and there end in the 

forest. 

Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers. It is a 

cross-path encountered at the right moment, a grove, a ravine, can 

trees, and of studying deeply the slightest relief in the ground. 

a great battle. Upon this spot, and for this duel, on the 18th of June, 

Wellington had the good post, Napoleon the bad post. The English army 

was stationed above, the French army below. 

June 18, 1815. All the world has seen him before we can show him. 

regarded by others. 

and daylight have arrived. 

divine quality, that, pure light as it is, and precisely because it 

is wholly light, it often casts a shadow in places where people had 

Babylon violated lessens Alexander, Rome enchained lessens Caesar, 

still more so for the English than for the French. 

Papelotte would have been impossible. 

the habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand, like a pistol, 

been his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallop 

was thirty-five minutes past eleven. 

Hougomont. At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurling 

Papelotte. 

guards and one battalion from Brunswick. 

in fact, to overthrow the English left, to cut off the road to Brussels, 

to bar the passage against possible Prussians, to force Mont-Saint-Jean, 

on Hal; nothing easier. With the exception of a few incidents this 

attack succeeded Papelotte was taken; La Haie-Sainte was carried. 

valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry; their inexperience 

infantry had dash. This displeased Wellington. 

the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct, and participates 

with a thousand wrinkles, heavy shakos garlanded with torsades, the 

almost black infantry of Brunswick mingled with the scarlet infantry 

slopes of their shoulders for epaulets, the Hanoverian light-horse with 

of our grenadiers; pictures, not strategic lines--what Salvator Rosa 

requires, not what is suited to the needs of Gribeauval. 

obscurum, quid divinum. Each historian traces, to some extent, the 

particular feature which pleases him amid this pell-mell. Whatever may 

be the combinations of the generals, the shock of armed masses has an 

more or less spongy soils soak up more or less quickly the water which 

is poured on them. It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiers than 

line of battle waves and undulates like a thread, the trails of blood 

gush illogically, the fronts of the armies waver, the regiments 

disappeared; the open spots change place, the sombre folds advance and 

distends, and disperses these tragic multitudes. What is a fray? an 

not a day. In order to depict a battle, there is required one of those 

the biography of the regiments than to the history of the army." The 

cannot do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle, and 

battle. 

applicable to Waterloo. 

point. 

Picton was dead. At the very moment when the English had captured from 

the French the flag of the 105th of the line, the French had killed the 

combatants had been massacred in that barn. A sergeant of the English 

Guards, the foremost boxer in England, reputed invulnerable by his 

companions, had been killed there by a little French drummer-boy. Baring 

carried by a prince of the house of Deux-Ponts. The Scotch Grays no 

longer existed; Ponsonby's great dragoons had been hacked to pieces. 

the cuirassiers of Travers; out of twelve hundred horses, six 

rallying-point, the centre. That point still held firm. Wellington 

summoned Chasse, who was at Braine-l'Alleud. 

very compact, was strongly posted. It occupied the plateau of 

which marks the intersection of the roads--a pile of the sixteenth 

century, and so robust that the cannon-balls rebounded from it without 

and there, made embrasures in the hawthorn-trees, thrust the throat of 

a cannon between two branches, embattled the shrubs. There artillery was 

ambushed in the brushwood. This punic labor, incontestably authorized 

at the season when the grain is tall; on the edge of the plateau a 

battalion of Kempt's brigade, the 95th, armed with carabines, was 

concealed in the tall wheat. 

Thus assured and buttressed, the centre of the Anglo-Dutch army was well 

posted. The peril of this position lay in the forest of Soignes, 

then adjoining the field of battle, and intersected by the ponds of 

dissolving; the regiments would have broken up immediately there. 

others,--would have been a disorganized flight. 

Clinton's division. To his English, to the regiments of Halkett, to 

the brigades of Mitchell, to the guards of Maitland, he gave as 

Kielmansegg's Hanoverians, and Ompteda's Germans. This placed twenty-six 

Dragoon Guards, fourteen hundred horse strong. It was the remaining half 

remained. 

had been no time to make a palisade for it. 

an Englishman, an enthusiastic vandal, purchased later on for two 

side. Lord Hill, pointing to a shell which had burst, said to him: "My 

replied Wellington. To Clinton he said laconically, "To hold this spot 

to the last man." The day was evidently turning out ill. Wellington 

"Boys, can retreat be thought of? Think of old England!" 

was visible on the crest of the plateau except the artillery and the 

the shells and the French bullets, retreated into the bottom, now 

intersected by the back road of the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean; a 

drew back. "The beginning of retreat!" cried Napoleon. 

had been smiling ever since the morning. On the 18th of June, that 

profound soul masked by marble beamed blindly. The man who had been 

gloomy at Austerlitz was gay at Waterloo. The greatest favorites of 

destiny make mistakes. Our joys are composed of shadow. The supreme 

smile is God's alone. 

Legion. Pompey was not destined to weep on that occasion, but it is 

Frischemont to Braine-l'Alleud, it had seemed to him that fate, to 

whom he had assigned a day on the field of Waterloo, was exact to 

the appointment; he stopped his horse, and remained for some time 

motionless, gazing at the lightning and listening to the thunder; 

in accord. 

by a joy for him. He traversed the line of the principal outposts, 

the wood of Hougomont, he heard the tread of a column on the march; he 

animation which he had shown at his landing on the first of March, when 

violence; the thunder rolled while the Emperor was speaking. 

officers who had been despatched to reconnoitre announced to him that 

the enemy was not making any movement. Nothing was stirring; not a 

bivouac-fire had been extinguished; the English army was asleep. The 

silence on earth was profound; the only noise was in the heavens. 

At four o'clock, a peasant was brought in to him by the scouts; this 

village of Ohain, at the extreme left. At five o'clock, two Belgian 

them back." 

In the morning he dismounted in the mud on the slope which forms an 

chair brought to him from the farm of Rossomme, seated himself, with a 

truss of straw for a carpet, and spread out on the table the chart 

of the battle-field, saying to Soult as he did so, "A pretty 

checker-board." 

did not prevent Napoleon from exclaiming cheerfully to Ney, "We have 

ninety chances out of a hundred." At eight o'clock the Emperor's 

was fond of jesting," says Fleury de Chaboulon. "A merry humor was 

at the foundation of his character," says Gourgaud. "He abounded in 

pleasantries, which were more peculiar than witty," says Benjamin 

Constant. These gayeties of a giant are worthy of insistence. It was 

which Napoleon was concealed, and having asked the news of Napoleon 

the order of battle. 

and set in motion in five columns, had deployed--the divisions in two 

lines, the artillery between the brigades, the music at their head; as 

Magnificent!" 

A few moments after the formation of the battle-array, in the midst of 

and twenty handsome maids, General." 

pity; perceiving on his left, at a spot where there now stands a large 

themselves, he said, "It is a pity." 

his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of 

it is a rather elevated knoll, which still exists, and behind which the 

heavy artillery. Mouldy cannon-balls, old sword-blades, and shapeless 

and tried to hide behind Napoleon: "Fool, it is shameful! You'll get 

himself found, in the friable soil of this knoll, on turning over 

oxidization of six and forty years, and old fragments of iron which 

parted like elder-twigs between the fingers. 

plains, where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place, 

are no longer what they were on June 18, 1815. By taking from this 

has been taken away, and history, disconcerted, no longer finds her 

bearings there. It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifying 

exclaimed, "They have altered my field of battle!" Where the great 

which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe. 

fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference, the plateau 

had still farther increased this acclivity, the mud complicated the 

presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine. 

village; Ohain is another. These villages, both of them concealed in 

half in length, which traverses the plain along its undulating level, 

and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow, which 

a trench throughout the greater portion of its course; a hollow trench, 

sometimes a dozen feet in depth, and whose banks, being too steep, 

rains. Accidents happened here. The road was so narrow at the 

the name of the dead, Monsieur Bernard Debrye, Merchant of Brussels, 

and the date of the accident, February, 1637.[8] It was so deep on 

the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean. 

indicated, bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean, a trench at the 

that is to say, terrible. 

really admirable. 

nor powder sacks; the miring of the batteries; the fifteen unescorted 

so that the canister was turned into a splash; the uselessness of Pire's 

of two hundred; the frightful holes made in these masses by the 

cannon-balls; attacking columns disorganized; the side-battery suddenly 

unmasked on their flank; Bourgeois, Donzelot, and Durutte compromised; 

Quiot repulsed; Lieutenant Vieux, that Hercules graduated at the 

Polytechnic School, wounded at the moment when he was beating in with an 

45th captured; that black Prussian hussar stopped by runners of the 

had not overshadowed that face of imperial certainty. Napoleon was 

details, cipher by cipher; ciphers mattered little to him, provided that 

at the end; he knew how to wait, supposing himself to be out of the 

question, and he treated destiny as his equal: he seemed to say to fate, 

Thou wilt not dare. 

becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens. 

English army disappear. It was rallying, but hiding itself. The Emperor 

half rose in his stirrups. The lightning of victory flashed from his 

eyes. 

was wiping out Agincourt. 

glass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle. His 

guard, standing behind him with grounded arms, watched him from below 

declivities, scrutinized the clumps of trees, the square of rye, the 

path; he seemed to be counting each bush. He gazed with some intentness 

at the English barricades of the two highways,--two large abatis of 

where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chasse's brigade. Near this 

bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste. The guide made 

a negative sign with his head, which was probably perfidious. 

Paris to announce that the battle was won. 

Mont-Saint-Jean. 

There were six and twenty squadrons of them; and they had behind them to 

support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes's division,--the one hundred and six 

ninety-seven men, and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and 

of beaten iron, with horse-pistols in their holsters, and long 

sabre-swords. That morning the whole army had admired them, when, at 

deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont, 

so cleverly arranged by Napoleon, which, having on its extreme left 

had, so to speak, two wings of iron. 

sword and placed himself at their head. The enormous squadrons were set 

in motion. 

which is effecting a breach, the hill of La Belle Alliance, plunged into 

the terrible depths in which so many men had already fallen, disappeared 

a full trot, through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them, 

held the right, Delort's division was on the left. It seemed as though 

of the table-land. It traversed the battle like a prodigy. 

the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry; Murat was lacking here, but Ney was 

again present. It seemed as though that mass had become a monster and 

trumpets, a terrible and disciplined tumult; over all, the cuirasses 

like the scales on the hydra. 

of the centaurs, the old hippanthropes, those Titans with human 

heads and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop, horrible, 

invulnerable, sublime--gods and beasts. 

two battalions to the square, in two lines, with seven in the first 

line, six in the second, the stocks of their guns to their shoulders, 

did not see them. They listened to the rise of this flood of men. They 

symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot, the jingling of the 

cuirasses, the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage 

breathing. There ensued a most terrible silence; then, all at once, 

a long file of uplifted arms, brandishing sabres, appeared above the 

crest, and casques, trumpets, and standards, and three thousand heads 

with gray mustaches, shouting, "Vive l'Empereur!" All this cavalry 

debouched on the plateau, and it was like the appearance of an 

earthquake. 

between them and the English. It was the hollow road of Ohain. 

could only yield when filled; horses and riders rolled there pell-mell, 

this trench was full of living men, the rest marched over them and 

thousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow road 

were flung into this ravine the day after the combat. 

of the Lunenburg battalion. 

white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles 

obstacle, to the guide Lacoste. The guide had answered No. We might 

peasant's head. 

Why? Because of Wellington? Because of Blucher? No. Because of God. 

declared itself long before. 

were it to last. The moment had arrived for the incorruptible and 

supreme equity to alter its plan. Probably the principles and the 

cemeteries, mothers in tears,--these are formidable pleaders. When 

groanings of the shades, to which the abyss lends an ear. 

decided on. 

Universe. 

the English battery. 

them. They belonged to that class of men who, when diminished in number, 

increase in courage. 

an ambush, had arrived whole. 

fist,--such was the attack. 

the soldier is changed into a statue, and when all this flesh turns into 

granite. The English battalions, desperately assaulted, did not stir. 

Then it was terrible. 

ranks shot them down; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged 

of these centaurs; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably 

never been seen anywhere else. The squares, wasted by this mad cavalry, 

grape-shot, they created explosions in their assailants' midst. The form 

a tempest. Each square was a volcano attacked by a cloud; lava contended 

with lightning. 

air, was almost annihilated at the very first shock. lt was formed 

the song by killing the singer. 

was equal to ten. Nevertheless, some Hanoverian battalions yielded. 

This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake. 

themselves assailed. The English cavalry was at their back. Before 

them two squares, behind them Somerset; Somerset meant fourteen hundred 

dragoons of the guard. On the right, Somerset had Dornberg with the 

to them? They were a whirlwind. Their valor was something indescribable. 

shoulder by a ball from a biscayan,[9] is in the collection of the 

Waterloo Museum. 

instant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only eight hundred. 

Fuller, their lieutenant-colonel, fell dead. Ney rushed up with 

the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes's light-horse. The plateau 

of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured, recaptured, captured again. The 

cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry; or, to put 

without releasing the other. The squares still held firm. 

not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the hollow 

road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and decided the 

Talavera and Badajoz. Wellington, three-quarters vanquished, admired 

heroically. He said in an undertone, "Sublime!" 

to the Emperor, in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance. 

still resisting, is expending all his blood. 

is certain, that on the day after the battle, a cuirassier and his 

years old at that time. 

the slope. They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides. 

of that army was horrible. Kempt, on the left wing, demanded 

reinforcements. "There are none," replied Wellington; "he must let 

which paints the exhaustion of the two armies, Ney demanded infantry 

me to get it? Does he think I can make it?" 

round a flag marked the post of a regiment; such and such a battalion 

was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant; Alten's division, 

grenadiers, who, intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811, 

fought against Wellington; and who, in 1815, rallied to the 

English standard, fought against Napoleon. The loss in officers was 

day, had his knee shattered. If, on the French side, in that tussle 

of the cuirassiers, Delort, l'Heritier, Colbert, Dnop, Travers, and 

wounded, Barne wounded, Delancey killed, Van Meeren killed, Ompteda 

fray, and had fled to the forest of Soignes, sowing defeat all the way 

to Brussels. The transports, ammunition-wagons, the baggage-wagons, the 

mowed down by the French cavalry, cried, "Alarm!" From Vert-Coucou to 

Groentendael, for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction 

that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin, and Louis XVIII. at 

men. The Iron Duke remained calm, but his lips blanched. Vincent, the 

at the battle in the English staff, thought the Duke lost. At five 

o'clock Wellington drew out his watch, and he was heard to murmur these 

sinister words, "Blucher, or night!" 

the heights in the direction of Frischemont. 

Blucher arriving. Death instead of life. 

Helena that was seen. 

lieutenant, had advised him to debouch from the forest above 

century might, perhaps, have been different. Napoleon would have won the 

the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for 

artillery, and Bulow would not have arrived. 

lost." 

been very much delayed. He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont, and had set 

he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre; 

the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the French, so 

reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert. 

at four o'clock, and Blucher would have fallen on the battle won by 

we cannot comprehend. 

Domon's division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter. 

corps, and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before 

entering into line; but at five o'clock, perceiving Wellington's peril, 

reserve behind Napoleon. 

Lobau caught on the flank; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our 

other; the extermination; disaster in front; disaster on the flank; the 

Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all 

things. 

acclamations. 

parted, and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to 

rise at Austerlitz. 

were there. When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard, with 

tranquil, in the midst of that combat, the enemy felt a respect for 

believing themselves to be vanquished, retreated; but Wellington 

in that suicide. 

himself to all blows in that tempest. He had his fifth horse killed 

for French bullets! 

like a thaw. All yields, splits, cracks, floats, rolls, falls, jostles, 

hastens, is precipitated. The disintegration is unprecedented. Ney 

borrows a horse, leaps upon it, and without hat, cravat, or sword, 

places himself across the Brussels road, stopping both English and 

French. He strives to detain the army, he recalls it to its duty, he 

go and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between the 

break and disperse against each other, like the tremendous foam of 

the tide. In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of 

his Guard; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable 

Lobau before Bulow, Morand before Pirch, Domon and Subervic before 

them. All the mouths which in the morning had shouted, "Long live 

the Emperor!" remain gaping; they hardly recognize him. The Prussian 

cavalry, newly arrived, dashes forwards, flies, hews, slashes, kills, 

over the dead and the living. Arms are lost. A dizzy multitude fills the 

roads, the paths, the bridges, the plains, the hills, the valleys, 

the woods, encumbered by this invasion of forty thousand men. Shouts 

despair, knapsacks and guns flung among the rye, passages forced at 

its leisure. Lions converted into goats. Such was the flight. 

front, to draw up in line. Lobau rallied three hundred men. The entrance 

to the village was barricaded, but at the first volley of Prussian 

canister, all took to flight again, and Lobau was taken. That volley of 

enter Genappe. The Prussians threw themselves into Genappe, furious, no 

stupendous. Blucher ordered extermination. Roguet had set the lugubrious 

example of threatening with death any French grenadier who should bring 

of the Young Guard, hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe, 

vanquished. Let us inflict punishment, since we are history: old 

Blucher disgraced himself. This ferocity put the finishing touch to the 

Thuin, and only halted at the frontier. Alas! and who, then, was fleeing 

in that manner? The Grand Army. 

bravery which ever astounded history,--is that causeless? No. The shadow 

the terrified wrinkle of those brows; hence all those great souls 

surrendering their swords. Those who had conquered Europe have fallen 

perspective of the human race underwent a change. Waterloo is the 

necessary to the advent of the great century. Some one, a person to whom 

one replies not, took the responsibility on himself. The panic of heroes 

a cloud, there is something of the meteor. God has passed by. 

somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled, essaying once more to 

advance. 

as rocks in running water, held their own until night. Night came, 

rest, and having no bond with the army, now shattered in every part, 

abandoned, vanquished, terrible, those gloomy squares endured their 

with them. 

at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean. In that fatal valley, 

inundated by the masses of the English, under the converging fires 

of the victorious hostile cavalry, under a frightful density of 

projectiles, this square fought on. It was commanded by an obscure 

officer named Cambronne. At each discharge, the square diminished and 

replied. It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade, continually 

contracting its four walls. The fugitives pausing breathless for a 

moment in the distance, listened in the darkness to that gloomy and 

ever-decreasing thunder. 

group of survivors, there reigned among the conquerors, around those men 

dying so sublimely, a sort of sacred terror, and the English artillery, 

combatants had around them something in the nature of a swarm of 

depths of the battle, advanced upon them and gazed at them. Through the 

all lighted, like the eyes of tigers at night, formed a circle round 

cannons, and then, with emotion, holding the supreme moment suspended 

above these men, an English general, Colville according to some, 

Maitland according to others, shouted to them, "Surrender, brave 

Frenchmen!" Cambronne replied, "-----." 

in lieu of the ----- above.} 

consigning something sublime to History. 

willing to die is the same as to die; and it was not this man's fault if 

he survived after he was shot. 

flight; nor Wellington, giving way at four o'clock, in despair at five; 

was Cambronne. 

to conquer! 

rainstorm, to the treacherous wall of Hougomont, to the sunken road of 

two syllables the European coalition, to offer kings privies which 

immense! 

grandeur of AEschylus! 

bursting forth. Who conquered? Wellington? No! Had it not been for 

Blucher could not have finished. This Cambronne, this man spending his 

last hour, this unknown soldier, this infinitesimal of war, realizes 

it, he is offered this mockery,--life! How could he restrain himself? 

the Jupiter's darting thunderbolts; they have a hundred thousand 

cannon stand with yawning mouths, the match is lighted; they grind down 

just crushed Napoleon, and only Cambronne remains,--only this earthworm 

is left to protest. He will protest. Then he seeks for the appropriate 

and he does more than spit upon it. Borne down by numbers, by superior 

We repeat it,--to use that word, to do thus, to invent such an 

expression, is to be the conqueror! 

on that unknown man. Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget 

high. An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes 

supreme, and the other utters the frightful cry. 

the name of the Empire,--that would be a trifle: he hurls it at the past 

as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans. Danton seems to be 

speaking! Kleber seems to be bellowing! 

vaguely white in the light of the rising moon, rolled out, and when the 

smoke dispersed, there was no longer anything there. That formidable 

nowadays Joseph, who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles, passes 

morning. 

it as to those who lost it. For Napoleon it was a panic;[10] Blucher 

sees nothing in it but fire; Wellington understands nothing in regard 

Charras alone, though we hold another judgment than his on some points, 

seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that 

state they fumble about. It was a day of lightning brilliancy; in fact, 

kings, drew all the kingdoms after it--the fall of force, the defeat of 

war. 

amounts to nothing. 

England and Germany of anything? No. Neither that illustrious England 

nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo. Thank 

Heaven, nations are great, independently of the lugubrious feats of 

the sword. Neither England, nor Germany, nor France is contained in 

that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance. They 

are majestic because they think. The elevation of level which they 

contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them; it proceeds from 

themselves and not from an accident. The aggrandizement which they have 

gamblers, heroes and conquerors, can put in the lottery of battles. 

coldly from both sides. Let us render to chance that which is due 

to chance, and to God that which is due to God. What is Waterloo? A 

victory? No. The winning number in the lottery. 

who is fond of antitheses, make a more striking contrast, a more 

extraordinary comparison. On one side, precision, foresight, geometry, 

prudence, an assured retreat, reserves spared, with an obstinate 

coolness, an imperturbable method, strategy, which takes advantage 

of the ground, tactics, which preserve the equilibrium of battalions, 

carnage, executed according to rule, war regulated, watch in hand, 

nothing voluntarily left to chance, the ancient classic courage, 

absolute regularity; on the other, intuition, divination, military 

oddity, superhuman instinct, a flaming glance, an indescribable 

something which gazes like an eagle, and which strikes like the 

lightning, a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity, all the mysteries 

going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle; faith in 

a star mingled with strategic science, elevating but perturbing it. 

Wellington was the Bareme of war; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo; and 

some one was awaited. It was the exact calculator who succeeded. 

Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy; he did not come. Wellington expected 

Blucher; he came. 

had encountered him in Italy, and beaten him superbly. The old owl had 

without cannon, without shoes, almost without an army, with a mere 

handful of men against masses, hurled himself on Europe combined, 

fulminating convict, who almost without taking breath, and with the same 

armies of the emperor of Germany, upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi, Wurmser 

on Beaulieu, Melas on Wurmser, Mack on Melas? Who was this novice in 

rancor of the old Caesarism against the new; of the regular sword 

front of him. 

beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that? 

those utterly raw recruits, who hardly knew how to handle a musket 

are not seeking to lessen it: but the least of his foot-soldiers and of 

there be, it is to England that the trophy is due. The column of 

Waterloo would be more just, if, instead of the figure of a man, it bore 

on high the statue of a people. 

as a people, it willingly subordinates itself and takes a lord for its 

head. As a workman, it allows itself to be disdained; as a soldier, it 

allows itself to be flogged. 

grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports. 

wall of Hougomont, the hollow road of Ohain, Grouchy deaf to the cannon, 

Napoleon's guide deceiving him, Bulow's guide enlightening him,--the 

whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted. 

battle at Waterloo. 

From this denseness the carnage arose. 

Russians, thirty per cent; Austrians, forty-four per cent. At Wagram, 

thirty-seven per cent; Russians, forty-four. At Bautzen, French, 

thirteen per cent; Russians and Prussians, fourteen. At Waterloo, 

French, fifty-six per cent; the Allies, thirty-one. Total for Waterloo, 

forty-one per cent; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants; 

sixty thousand dead. 

the impassive support of man, and it resembles all plains. 

traveller strolls there, if he listens, if he watches, if he dreams 

like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi, the hallucination of the 

catastrophe takes possession of him. The frightful 18th of June lives 

air, the battle-field resumes its reality, lines of infantry undulate 

bombs, the tremendous interchange of thunders; he hears, as it were, 

longer exists, and yet it clashes together and combats still; and the 

crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in exterminating each other. 

certainly unexpected. 

Paris; it is the statu quo against the initiative; it is the 14th 

of July, 1789, attacked through the 20th of March, 1815; it is the 

rioting. The final extinction of that vast people which had been in 

Brunswicks, the Nassaus, the Romanoffs, the Hohenzollerns, the Hapsburgs 

with the Bourbons. Waterloo bears divine right on its crupper. It is 

reaction of things, was forced to be liberal, and that a constitutional 

order was the unwilling result of Waterloo, to the great regret of the 

that being providential and absolutely fatal, it is always cropping 

of man. If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is, call it 

call it To-morrow. To-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly, and it is 

already fulfilling it to-day. It always reaches its goal strangely. It 

of Father Elysee. It makes use of the gouty man as well as of the 

its march. That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty. 

which smiled in Wellington's rear; that which brought him all the 

marshals' staffs of Europe, including, it is said, the staff of a 

marshal of France; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of 

on that pedestal the date "June 18, 1815"; that which encouraged 

which murmured that infamous word "dismemberment." On arriving in Paris, 

it beheld the crater close at hand; it felt those ashes which scorched 

its feet, and it changed its mind; it returned to the stammer of a 

charter. 

liberty there is none. The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal, 

in the same manner as, by a corresponding phenomenon, Napoleon was 

Robespierre was hurled from his saddle. 

bewept by heroic eyes. If glory lies in the sword converted into a 

disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse. 

white. The exile reigned. Hartwell's pine table took its place in front 

were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding 

day, Austerlitz having become antiquated. The altar and the throne 

Where there had been an Imperial Guard, there was now a red house. The 

Arc du Carrousel, all laden with badly borne victories, thrown out 

of its element among these novelties, a little ashamed, it may be, of 

Marengo and Arcola, extricated itself from its predicament with the 

bones of Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette lay in that dust. 

month when Napoleon was crowned. Pope Pius VII., who had performed the 

a little shadow, aged four, whom it was seditious to call the King of 

Rome. And these things took place, and the kings resumed their thrones, 

1789; the right divine was masked under a charter; fictions became 

and Waterloo. "He dead!" cried the soldier; "you don't know him." 

Imagination distrusted this man, even when overthrown. The depths of 

Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo. Something enormous remained 

long empty through Napoleon's disappearance. 

it to undertake reforms. There was a Holy Alliance; Belle-Alliance, 

Beautiful Alliance, the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance. 

Emperor had rallied, made its entry. On its brow it bore the star, 

Singular fact! people were, at one and the same time, in love with 

vanquished greater. Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleon 

erect. Those who had triumphed were alarmed. England had him guarded by 

Hudson Lowe, and France had him watched by Montchenu. His folded arms 

sleeplessness." This terror was the result of the quantity of 

on the horizon. 

the Restoration. 

moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from 

one blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to 

belfry on the towers of Notre Dame. 

battle-field. 

ferocious pursuit, betrayed the traces of the fugitives, delivered 

catastrophes. 

remained deserted. 

bivouac beyond Rossomme. The Prussians, let loose on the retreating 

up his report to Lord Bathurst. 

the scene of action. Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded, Hougomont was 

burned, La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault, Papelotte was burned, 

conquerors; these names are hardly known, and Waterloo, which worked not 

presents itself, we tell the truth about it. War has frightful beauties 

always rises on naked corpses. 

are they who ply their trade in the rear of glory? Some 

is no relief corps; those who are erect pillage those who are prone 

assuredly the right, after all, to strip a corpse a bit when one is the 

shoes from a dead man. 

thieves. But let us leave the soldier, especially the contemporary 

soldier, out of the question. 

vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders; wearers of 

uniforms, who take no part in the fighting; pretended invalids; 

formidable limpers; interloping sutlers, trotting along in little carts, 

sometimes accompanied by their wives, and stealing things which they 

sell again; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers; soldiers' 

servants; marauders; armies on the march in days gone by,--we are not 

special language they are called "stragglers." No army, no nation, 

itself, in the course of the night which followed the victory of 

Cerisoles. The rascal sprang from this marauding. The detestable maxim, 

good that he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered over to fire and 

blood. The marauders in the train of an army were more or less in 

number, according as the chief was more or less severe. Hoche and 

to mention it. 

of the dead bodies having theft for his victory, and come to rifle 

he was uneasy and audacious; he walked forwards and gazed behind him. 

Who was this man? The night probably knew more of him than the day. He 

had no sack, but evidently he had large pockets under his coat. From 

see whether he were observed, bent over abruptly, disturbed something 

Norman legends call the Alleurs. 

marshes. 

at some distance a sort of little sutler's wagon with a fluted wicker 

hood, harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across 

its bit as it halted, hidden, as it were, behind the hovel which adjoins 

and packages. Perhaps there was some connection between that wagon and 

that prowler. 

fallen, upheld by their bark, swayed gently in the breeze of night. 

A breath, almost a respiration, moved the shrubbery. Quivers which 

resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass. 

of the English camp were audible. 

cordon of bivouac fires of the English, like a necklace of rubies 

with two carbuncles at the extremities, as they extended in an immense 

semicircle over the hills along the horizon. 

brave men. 

dreams, it is this: to live, to see the sun; to be in full possession 

of virile force; to possess health and joy; to laugh valiantly; to rush 

towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one; to feel in 

to have children; to have the light--and all at once, in the space of a 

shout, in less than a minute, to sink into an abyss; to fall, to 

roll, to crush, to be crushed; to see ears of wheat, flowers, leaves, 

shoes in one's rage; to stifle, to yell, to writhe; to be beneath, and 

to say to one's self, "But just a little while ago I was a living man!" 

plain, and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley. A 

pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way, at a spot 

which is still pointed out. 

to the depth of the hollow road. Towards the middle, at the point 

corpses was thinner. 

in the blood. 

the pile of dead came to an end, an open hand, illumined by the moon, 

something sparkling, which was a ring of gold. 

when he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand. 

He did not precisely rise; he remained in a stooping and frightened 

from behind. 

the skirt of his coat. 

gendarme." 

the grave. 

was a cuirassier, an officer, and even an officer of considerable rank; 

where nothing was discernible but blood. 

chance, if that word is permissible here, the dead had been vaulted 

above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed. His 

eyes were still closed. 

which he had beneath his great coat. 

possession of it. Next he searched his waistcoat, found a purse and 

pocketed it. 

to this dying man, the officer opened his eyes. 

The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him, the 

him from his lethargy. 

audible in the plain; some patrol was probably approaching. 

have had them." 

The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct. 

is taking his departure. 

out of the scrape yourself." 

mine. My name is Pontmercy." 

BOOK SECOND.--THE SHIP ORION 

CHAPTER I--NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430 

details. We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs 

events which had taken place at M. sur M. 

epoch the Gazette des Tribunaux was not yet in existence. 

25, 1823. 

Department, and who bore the name of M. Madeleine, had, thanks to the 

discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than an ex-convict who had 

broken his ban, condemned in 1796 for theft, and named Jean Valjean. 

to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of M. 

his business. No one has been able to discover where Jean Valjean has 

concealed this money since his return to prison at Toulon. 

The second article, which enters a little more into detail, is an 

extract from the Journal de Paris, of the same date. 

been unmasked and arrested, thanks to the indefatigable zeal of the 

public prosecutor. He had for his concubine a woman of the town, who 

endowed with Herculean strength, found means to escape; but three or 

little vehicles which run between the capital and the village of 

Montfermeil (Seine-et-Oise). He is said to have profited by this 

sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers. This sum has been 

Department of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with 

          ". . . Arrive from Savoy every year, 

           And who, with gentle hands, do clear 

           Those long canals choked up with soot." 

committed in complicity with others, and that Jean Valjean was a member 

and was condemned to the death penalty in consequence. This criminal 

Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at Toulon. 

commutation as a triumph of the priestly party. 

and hesitation was realized; lacking him, there actually was a soul 

lacking. After this fall, there took place at M. sur M. that egotistical 

the human community, and which history has noted only once, because it 

superintendents improvise manufacturers out of themselves. Envious 

fell to ruin, his workmen were scattered. Some of them quitted the 

on a small scale, instead of on a grand scale; for lucre instead of 

the general good. There was no longer a centre; everywhere there 

was competition and animosity. M. Madeleine had reigned over all and 

bitterness to cordiality, hatred of one another to the benevolence of 

tangled and broken, the methods were adulterated, the products were 

debased, confidence was killed; the market diminished, for lack of 

Less than four years after the judgment of the Court of Assizes 

establishing the identity of Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine, for the 

benefit of the galleys, the cost of collecting taxes had doubled in the 

fact in the rostrum, in the month of February, 1827. 

detail, a singular occurrence which took place at about the same epoch, 

in Montfermeil, and which is not lacking in coincidence with certain 

conjectures of the indictment. 

which is all the more curious and all the more precious, because 

a popular superstition in the vicinity of Paris is like an aloe in 

Siberia. We are among those who respect everything which is in the 

nature of a rare plant. Here, then, is the superstition of Montfermeil: 

it is thought that the devil, from time immemorial, has selected the 

forest as a hiding-place for his treasures. Goodwives affirm that it is 

no rarity to encounter at nightfall, in secluded nooks of the forest, 

a black man with the air of a carter or a wood-chopper, wearing wooden 

shoes, clad in trousers and a blouse of linen, and recognizable by the 

fact, that, instead of a cap or hat, he has two immense horns on his 

head. This ought, in fact, to render him recognizable. This man is 

habitually engaged in digging a hole. There are three ways of profiting 

by such an encounter. The first is to approach the man and speak to him. 

Then it is seen that the man is simply a peasant, that he appears black 

because it is nightfall; that he is not digging any hole whatever, but 

is cutting grass for his cows, and that what had been taken for horns 

is nothing but a dung-fork which he is carrying on his back, and whose 

head. The man returns home and dies within the week. The second way is 

to watch him, to wait until he has dug his hole, until he has filled it 

and has gone away; then to run with great speed to the trench, to 

open it once more and to seize the "treasure" which the black man 

at him, and to flee at the best speed of one's legs. One then dies 

within the year. 

adopted. So bold men, who are tempted by every chance, have quite 

to be but moderate. At least, if the tradition is to be believed, and in 

particular the two enigmatical lines in barbarous Latin, which an 

Bocherville, near Rouen, and toads spawn on his grave. 

sometimes a crown-piece, a stone, a skeleton, a bleeding body, sometimes 

a spectre folded in four like a sheet of paper in a portfolio, 

indiscreet and curious:-- 

           As, nummas, lapides, cadaver, simulacra, nihilque." 

bullets, sometimes an old pack of cards greasy and worn, which has 

and cards before the time of Charles VI. 

of making your gun burst in your face. 

administration employed him at reduced rates as a road-mender on the 

cross-road from Gagny to Lagny. 

of the gendarmes,--probably affiliated to robber bands, they said; 

thing in his favor was that he was a drunkard. 

the forest with his pickaxe. He was encountered towards evening in 

appearance of being in search of something, and sometimes he was digging 

thereby. These encounters seemed to cause Boulatruelle a lively 

some mystery in what he was doing. 

enough to pocket Lucifer's hoard." 

devil catch Boulatruelle?" The old women made a great many signs of the 

cross. 

resumed his regular occupation of roadmending; and people gossiped of 

something else. 

there was probably no fabulous treasure of the legends, but some 

fine windfall of a more serious and palpable sort than the devil's 

the tavern, who was everybody's friend, and had not disdained to ally 

himself with Boulatruelle. 

knows who has been there or will be there." 

the wine test," said Thenardier. 

Boulatruelle drank an enormous amount, but said very little. He combined 

with admirable art, and in masterly proportions, the thirst of a 

and the schoolmaster imagined that they had made out:-- 

a shovel and a pickaxe, concealed, as one might say. 

his steps towards the densest part of the wood. Translation by 

to reveal his name. This person carried a package--something square, 

Boulatruelle had not been able to catch up with him. Then he had 

dreamed of accosting him, because he said to himself that the other man 

he would probably knock him over the head on recognizing him, and on 

the coffer, and reclosed the hole with his shovel. Now, the coffer was 

researches. Boulatruelle had explored, sounded, searched the entire 

to have been recently turned up. In vain. 

for nothing; he was sure that the devil had come." 

Toulon beheld the entry into their port, after heavy weather, and for 

the purpose of repairing some damages, of the ship Orion, which was 

employed later at Brest as a school-ship, and which then formed a part 

of the Mediterranean squadron. 

roughly,--produced a fine effect as it entered the roads. It flew some 

colors which procured for it the regulation salute of eleven guns, which 

it returned, shot for shot; total, twenty-two. It has been calculated 

that what with salvos, royal and military politenesses, courteous 

exchanges of uproar, signals of etiquette, formalities of roadsteads and 

citadels, sunrises and sunsets, saluted every day by all fortresses and 

all ships of war, openings and closings of ports, etc., the civilized 

world, discharged all over the earth, in the course of four and twenty 

hours, one hundred and fifty thousand useless shots. At six francs the 

shot, that comes to nine hundred thousand francs a day, three hundred 

millions a year, which vanish in smoke. This is a mere detail. All this 

time the poor were dying of hunger. 

succoring and protecting the branch of Madrid, that is to say, 

performing an act devolving on the elder; an apparent return to our 

generalissimo, the Prince de Carignan, afterwards Charles Albert, 

enrolling himself in that crusade of kings against people as a 

waved abroad by a heroic handful of Frenchmen, as the white standard had 

sad fate was to recall neither the grand war nor grand politics. 

others, was a fine military action; but after all, we repeat, the 

accepting this false triumph. It seemed evident that certain Spanish 

officers charged with resistance yielded too easily; the idea of 

and not battles had been won, and the conquering soldier returned 

be read in the folds of the flag. 

regret Palafox. It is the nature of France to prefer to have Rostopchine 

rather than Ballesteros in front of her. 

to insist upon here, this war, which wounded the military spirit 

of France, enraged the democratic spirit. It was an enterprise of 

stifle it. All the revolutions of Europe since 1792 are the French 

is he who will not see! It was Bonaparte who said it. 

exception of wars of liberation, everything that armies do is by foul 

masterpiece of combination where force results from an enormous sum 

of impotence. Thus is war, made by humanity against humanity, despite 

humanity, explained. 

that they introduced the immense enfeeblement of a crime into their 

establishment as an element of strength. The spirit of the ambush 

entered into their politics. 1830 had its germ in 1823. The Spanish 

campaign became in their counsels an argument for force and for 

fell into the alarming error of taking the obedience of the soldier for 

nor in the shadow of an army. 

brought it into port at Toulon. 

loves what is great. 

genius of man with the powers of nature. 

do battle with all three. It has eleven claws of iron with which to 

seize the granite on the bottom of the sea, and more wings and more 

antennae than winged insects, to catch the wind in the clouds. Its 

breath pours out through its hundred and twenty cannons as through 

the north. In the blackest nights, its lanterns supply the place of 

against the shadows, its light; against immensity, a needle. 

the main-mast. Taking it from its root in the stocks to its tip in the 

clouds, it is sixty fathoms long, and its diameter at its base is 

hundred guns is four feet high, twenty feet in breadth, and eight 

feet in depth. And how much wood is required to make this ship? Three 

thousand cubic metres. It is a floating forest. 

the military vessel of forty years ago, of the simple sailing-vessel; 

thousand square metres of canvas and by an engine of two thousand five 

hundred horse-power. 

inexhaustible in force as is the Infinite in gales; it stores up 

billows, it floats, and it reigns. 

that majesty are engulfed in a power and majesty which are superior. 

people abound around these marvellous machines of war and of navigation, 

without being able to explain perfectly to themselves why. Every day, 

accordingly, from morning until night, the quays, sluices, and the 

at the Orion. 

keel to such a degree as to deprive it of half its speed; it had gone 

scraped off, then it had put to sea again; but this cleaning had 

in those days was not of sheet iron, the vessel had sprung a leak. 

A violent equinoctial gale had come up, which had first staved in 

a grating and a porthole on the larboard side, and damaged the 

run back to Toulon. 

of air entering the hold. 

back and forth at the end of that rope, like a stone in a sling. 

of the sailors, all fishermen of the coast, recently levied for the 

but to augment the oscillations of the foot-rope; he did not shout, for 

when a bit of rope, a pole, the branch of a tree, is life itself, and 

it is a terrible thing to see a living being detach himself from it and 

fall like a ripe fruit. 

of a tiger-cat; this man was dressed in red; he was a convict; he wore a 

green cap; he was a life convict. On arriving on a level with the top, a 

be seen: he was not a young man. 

while all the sailors were trembling and drawing back, he had asked 

the officer's permission to risk his life to save the topman; at an 

affirmative sign from the officer he had broken the chain riveted to his 

recalled. 

the breeze swayed the topman at the extremity of a thread, seemed 

eyes to heaven and advanced a step: the crowd drew a long breath. He was 

down, then he began to descend the rope, hand over hand, and then,--and 

the anguish was indescribable,--instead of one man suspended over the 

gulf, there were two. 

of his comrades. 

among them wept, and women embraced each other on the quay, and all 

man!" 

his detachment. In order to reach them the more speedily, he dropped 

convict had fallen into the sea. 

flung themselves hastily into a boat; the crowd cheered them on; 

the body. 

this man was committed under the number 9,430, and his name was Jean 

Valjean." 

CHAPTER I--THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL 

of that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne. At 

the present day it is a tolerably large town, ornamented all the year 

through with plaster villas, and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois. In 

1823 there were at Montfermeil neither so many white houses nor so 

many well-satisfied citizens: it was only a village in the forest. Some 

pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there, to be 

sure, which were recognizable by their grand air, their balconies in 

twisted iron, and their long windows, whose tiny panes cast all sorts 

of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters; but 

Montfermeil was none the less a village. Retired cloth-merchants and 

rusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet; it was a peaceful 

and charming place, which was not on the road to anywhere: there people 

lived, and cheaply, that peasant rustic life which is so bounteous and 

so easy; only, water was rare there, on account of the elevation of the 

plateau. 

which exist in the woods there. The other end, which surrounds the 

Chelles, about a quarter of an hour from Montfermeil. 

o'clock in the evening in summer, and five in winter; and night once 

water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did without it. 

probably not forgotten,--little Cosette. It will be remembered that 

pay them, and they made the child serve them. So when the mother ceased 

to pay altogether, the reason for which we have read in preceding 

it was required. So the child, who was greatly terrified at the idea of 

lacking in the house. 

nor frost up to that time. Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained 

same tolerance, had constructed their stalls on the Church Square, 

little district a noisy and joyous life. In order to play the part of 

displayed in the square, there was a menagerie, in which frightful 

clowns, clad in rags and coming no one knew whence, exhibited to 

vultures, such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845, and which 

have a tricolored cockade for an eye. I believe that naturalists call 

unique phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie. 

the public room of Thenardier's hostelry. This room resembled all 

talking politics. 

like the following, were audible amid the uproar:-- 

poorer even than these. The grapes must be gathered while green." Etc. 

fox-tail, and a host of other weeds, not to mention pebbles, which 

no fault of ours." 

landed proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to be 

performed in the spring, was saying:-- 

and very hard to cut still. It's terribly tender. It yields before the 

iron." Etc. 

playing about among the chairs. Laughter and chatter were audible in 

Azelma. 

house, rang through the noise of the dram-shop. It was a little boy 

who had been born to the Thenardiers during one of the preceding 

considering it under all its aspects. 

that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife. 

woman, ever since her first appearance,--tall, blond, red, fat, angular, 

paving-stones hanging from their hair. She did everything about the 

house,--made the beds, did the washing, the cooking, and everything 

else. Cosette was her only servant; a mouse in the service of an 

elephant. Everything trembled at the sound of her voice,--window panes, 

furniture, and people. Her big face, dotted with red blotches, 

presented the appearance of a skimmer. She had a beard. She was an ideal 

market-porter dressed in woman's clothes. She swore splendidly; she 

never have occurred to any one to say of her, "That is a woman." 

when her face was in repose. 

he smiled habitually, by way of precaution, and was almost polite to 

the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters. He greatly 

drunk. He smoked a big pipe. He wore a blouse, and under his blouse an 

There were certain names which he often pronounced to support whatever 

things he might be saying,--Voltaire, Raynal, Parny, and, singularly 

enough, Saint Augustine. He declared that he had "a system." In 

addition, he was a great swindler. A filousophe [philosophe], a 

scientific thief. The species does exist. It will be remembered that he 

with exuberance, how, being a sergeant in the 6th or the 9th light 

village that he had studied for the priesthood. 

the reader is already acquainted with that. It will be perceived that 

he exaggerated it a trifle. Ebb and flow, wandering, adventure, was 

travelling like a family man, with wife and children, in a rickety 

attaching himself to the victorious army. This campaign ended, and 

an inn there. 

not amount to a large total, and did not carry this sutler turned 

eating-house-keeper very far. 

of the cross, the seminary. He was a fine talker. He allowed it to be 

thought that he was an educated man. Nevertheless, the schoolmaster had 

noticed that he pronounced improperly.[12] 

practised eyes sometimes spied out orthographical errors in it. 

be an object coveted by all. 

into it. 

people who are continually avenging their wrongs, who accuse everything 

and the calamities of their lives,--when all this leaven was stirred up 

accustomed to screw up their eyes to gaze through marine glasses. 

Thenardier was a statesman. 

even the mistress. The husband was both master and mistress. She worked; 

an inadmissible hypothesis, by the way,--she would not have blamed 

her husband in public on any subject whatever. She would never have 

committed "before strangers" that mistake so often committed by women, 

Although their concord had only evil as its result, there was 

contemplation in Madame Thenardier's submission to her husband. That 

was an unknown quantity about Thenardier; hence the absolute empire 

of the man over that woman. At certain moments she beheld him like a 

lighted candle; at others she felt him like a claw. 

children, and who did not fear any one except her husband. She was a 

mother because she was mammiferous. But her maternity stopped short with 

but one thought,--how to enrich himself. 

lacking. Thenardier was ruining himself at Montfermeil, if ruin is 

fate has hitched him. 

restricted sense, and does not extend to an entire class. 

Thenardier was one of those men who understand best, with the most 

for his skill in shooting. He had a certain cold and tranquil laugh, 

which was particularly dangerous. 

a low voice, "is to sell to the first comer, stews, repose, light, fire, 

the child clean; to quote the window open, the window shut, the 

feather-bed, the mattress and the truss of straw; to know how much 

for the flies which his dog eats!" 

terrible team. 

of absent creditors, took no heed of yesterday nor of to-morrow, and 

lived in a fit of anger, all in a minute. 

had a different method: Cosette was overwhelmed with blows--this was the 

woman's; she went barefooted in winter--that was the man's doing. 

fluttered about, panted, moved heavy articles, and weak as she was, 

like the fly serving the spiders. 

find themselves thus, at the very dawn of life, very small and in the 

midst of men all naked! 

from time to time, "How ugly she is with her fist-blow on her eye!" 

been filled and that there was no more water in the cistern. 

establishment drank much water. Thirsty people were never lacking there; 

came a moment when the child trembled; Madame Thenardier raised the 

had raised her head and was following all the woman's movements. A thin 

stream of water trickled from the faucet, and half filled the glass. 

The child did not breathe. 

will be enough." 

the next morning. 

exclaimed, "It's as black as an oven!" or, "One must needs be a cat 

trembled. 

said in a harsh voice:-- 

spoke to him." 

know well." 

and which was hardly audible:-- 

be watered, and let that be the end of it!" 

been watered, it must be." 

table, almost under the drinkers' feet. 

The Thenardier resumed:-- 

the chimney-corner. 

in it at her ease. 

stewpan, with a wooden spoon, grumbling the while:-- 

as that. I think I should have done better to strain my onions." 

shallots. 

big loaf from the baker. Here's a fifteen-sou piece." 

without saying a word, and put it in that pocket. 

seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue. 

visible in the sky. 

Thenardiers' door, was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel, glass, 

merchant had placed on a background of white napkins, an immense doll, 

wheat-ears on her head, which had real hair and enamel eyes. All that 

sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to her child. 

Eponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it, and Cosette 

herself had ventured to cast a glance at it, on the sly, it is true. 

overcome as she was, she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to 

a sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundly 

of childhood, Cosette measured the abyss which separated her from 

the Eternal Father. 

was charged. 

"What, you silly jade! you have not gone? Wait! I'll give it to you! I 

of Cosette in her ecstasy. 

near the church, it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of 

Chelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water. 

lighted stalls illuminated the road; but soon the last light from the 

much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walked 

along. This made a noise which afforded her company. 

in the streets. However, she did encounter a woman, who turned around 

Cosette. "Well," said she, "it's the Lark!" 

streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of 

sides of her path, she proceeded with tolerable boldness. From time 

to time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a 

shutter--this was light and life; there were people there, and it 

set her bucket on the ground, thrust her hand into her hair, and 

were beasts, where there were spectres, possibly. She took a good 

more water!" And she resolutely re-entered Montfermeil. 

melancholy glance before her and behind her. What was she to do? What 

resumed her path to the spring, and began to run. She emerged from 

the village, she entered the forest at a run, no longer looking at or 

failed her; but she did not halt in her advance. She went straight 

atom. 

this manner she reached the spring. 

crimped grasses which are called Henry IV.'s frills, and paved with 

several large stones. A brook ran out of it, with a tranquil little 

noise. 

the spring. The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water. Cosette neither 

saw nor heard it fall. She drew out the bucket nearly full, and set it 

on the grass. 

have liked to set out again at once, but the effort required to fill the 

there. 

because she could not do otherwise. The agitated water in the bucket 

beside her was describing circles which resembled tin serpents. 

masses of smoke. The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely over 

the child. 

star. One would have called it a luminous wound. 

Great boughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise. Slender and 

by the breeze, flew rapidly by, and had the air of fleeing in terror 

before something which was coming after. On all sides there were 

lugubrious stretches. 

in the opposite of day feels his heart contract. When the eye sees 

black, the heart sees trouble. In an eclipse in the night, in the sooty 

opacity, there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts. No one walks 

a spectral clearness. One beholds floating, either in space or in one's 

One inhales the effluvia of the great black void. One is afraid to 

obscure dishevelments, irritated tufts, livid pools, the lugubrious 

as though one's soul were becoming amalgamated with the darkness. This 

child. 

produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault. 

seized upon by that black enormity of nature; it was no longer terror 

alone which was gaining possession of her; it was something more 

felt cold; she rose; her terror, a natural and unconquerable terror, had 

the forest, across the fields to the houses, to the windows, to the 

hands; she could hardly lift the pail. 

She walked bent forward, with drooping head, like an old woman; the 

weight of the bucket strained and stiffened her thin arms. The iron 

handle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and tiny hands; 

the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs. This 

took place in the depths of a forest, at night, in winter, far from all 

at the moment. 

this manner, and that the Thenardier would beat her. This anguish was 

arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she was acquainted, made 

a last halt, longer than the rest, in order that she might get well 

rested; then she summoned up all her strength, picked up her bucket 

creature could not refrain from crying, "O my God! my God!" 

darkness; it was a man who had come up behind her, and whose approach 

handle of the bucket which she was carrying. 

houses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau. 

that isolated quarter. 

may be called the well-bred mendicant,--extreme wretchedness combined 

old and very well brushed round hat; a coarse coat, worn perfectly 

threadbare, of an ochre yellow, a color that was not in the least 

and thick shoes with copper buckles. He would have been pronounced a 

have been taken for more than sixty years of age, from his perfectly 

him attentively. His lip contracted with a strange fold which seemed 

cudgel, cut from some hedge. This stick had been carefully trimmed, and 

a cudgel, and it seemed to be a cane. 

without any affectation. 

speed along the Boulevard de l'Hopital. 

who said, "It is two o'clock; there he is returning to the Tuileries." 

always creates a tumult; besides, the appearance and disappearance of 

Louis XVIII. produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris. It was 

in the midst of naked swords. His massive coach, all covered with 

great epaulets with bullion fringe floating over a bourgeois coat, the 

Golden Fleece, the cross of Saint Louis, the cross of the Legion of 

with white ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in high English 

When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter, 

the government." 

daily event of the Boulevard de l'Hopital. 

squadron of the body-guard all covered with silver lace, debouched 

this cross-lane. He drew up hastily behind the corner of the wall of an 

him out. 

faubourg, and as twilight was beginning to fall, the agent lost trace of 

d'Angles, Minister of State, Prefect of Police. 

d'Etain [the Pewter Platter], where the office of the coach for Lagny 

climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle. 

him pay his fare. 

to enter into conversation, but the traveller only replied in 

horses. 

did not appear to be thinking of that. Thus they passed Gournay and 

Neuilly-sur-Marne. 

drew up in front of the carters' inn installed in the ancient buildings 

of the Royal Abbey, to give his horses a breathing spell. 

encounter him in the principal street of Chelles. 

found. So he has dived through the earth." 

leading to Montfermeil, like a person who was acquainted with the 

country and had been there before. 

the ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny, he heard 

waited until the passers-by were at a distance. The precaution was 

the sky. 

return to the road to Montfermeil; he struck across the fields to the 

right, and entered the forest with long strides. 

and following a mysterious road known to himself alone. There came a 

count all the warts. 

band of zinc. 

between the tree and the heap of stones, like a person who is trying to 

assure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed. 

forest. 

of the bucket. 

bass. 

added:-- 

to see her face in the dark. 

in the sky. 

"What is your name?" said the man. 

bucket, and set out again. 

me the way." 

towards the man, with a sort of tranquillity and an indescribable 

nevertheless, she felt within her something which resembled hope and 

joy, and which mounted towards heaven. 

female Thenardier. 

say." 

them, all full of affairs. They play; they amuse themselves." 

"And you?" 

visible because of the darkness, and replied gently:-- 

myself, too." 

playthings. Ponine and Zelma will not let me play with their dolls. I 

have only a little lead sword, no longer than that." 

"Yes, sir," said the child; "it cuts salad and the heads of flies." 

streets. They passed the bakeshop, but Cosette did not think of the 

bread which she had been ordered to fetch. The man had ceased to ply her 

with questions, and now preserved a gloomy silence. 

the open-air booths, asked Cosette:-- 

"Why?" 

door. 

Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big 

doll, which was still displayed at the toy-merchant's; then she knocked. 

The door opened. The Thenardier appeared with a candle in her hand. 

"Ah! so it's you, you little wretch! good mercy, but you've taken your 

time! The hussy has been amusing herself!" 

wants a lodging." 

a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers, and eagerly sought the 

new-comer with her eyes. 

of the stranger's costume and baggage, which the Thenardier passed in 

review with one glance, caused the amiable grimace to vanish, and the 

particular attention to his frock-coat, which was absolutely threadbare, 

and to his hat, which was a little battered, and, tossing her head, 

wrinkling her nose, and screwing up her eyes, she consulted her husband, 

imperceptible movement of the forefinger, which, backed up by an 

inflation of the lips, signifies in such cases: A regular beggar. 

Thereupon, the Thenardier exclaimed:-- 

will pay as though I occupied a room." 

"why, the charge is only twenty sous!" 

"It is forty in his case," retorted the Thenardier, in the same tone. "I 

don't lodge poor folks for less." 

people in it." 

bottle of wine and a glass. The merchant who had demanded the bucket of 

kitchen table, and her knitting. 

poured out for himself, observed the child with peculiar attention. 

All she had on was hole-ridden linen, not a scrap of woollen. Her skin 

descried, which marked the places where the Thenardier woman had touched 

enough to make one weep. This child's whole person, her mien, her 

attitude, the sound of her voice, the intervals which she allowed to 

elapse between one word and the next, her glance, her silence, her 

slightest gesture, expressed and betrayed one sole idea,--fear. 

the breath that was absolutely necessary, and had become what might be 

where terror lurked. 

work again. 

though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon. 

set foot in a church. "Have I the time?" said the Thenardier. 

voice, emerged with great haste from beneath the table. 

expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear. She lied. 

"and if you are telling me a lie, I'll lead you a pretty dance. In the 

meantime, give me back my fifteen-sou piece." 

The fifteen-sou piece was not there. 

find a word to say. She was petrified. 

hoarsely, "or do you want to rob me of it?" 

cat-o'-nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner. 

shriek:-- 

attention to anything. 

of the chimney, endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude 

limbs. The Thenardier raised her arm. 

rolled aside. Perhaps this is it." 

for a moment. 

it to her advantage. She put the coin in her pocket, and confined 

remark, "Don't let this ever happen again!" 

large eyes, which were riveted on the traveller, began to take on an 

it. 

traveller. 

even pay me for his lodging? It's very lucky, all the same, that it did 

not occur to him to steal the money that was on the floor." 

warmly clad, but with so much maternal art that the thickness of the 

throne. In their toilettes, in their gayety, in the noise which they 

them in a grumbling tone which was full of adoration, "Ah! there you 

are, you children!" 

hair, tying their ribbons afresh, and then releasing them with 

exclaimed, "What frights they are!" 

and watched their play with a melancholy air. 

man; envy on the one side, disdain on the other. 

never had a doll in her life, a real doll, to make use of the expression 

which all children will understand. 

working, she was paying attention to the little ones at their play. 

I'll make you work to the tune of the whip; that I will." 

the air of being frightfully poor, would have been equivalent to an 

order. But that a man with such a hat should permit himself such a 

She retorted with acrimony:-- 

contrasted strangely with his beggarly garments and his porter's 

shoulders. 

"Stockings, if you please. Stockings for my little girls, who have none, 

so to speak, and who are absolutely barefoot just now." 

creature!" 

them?" 

"five francs! the deuce, I should think so! five balls!" 

peremptory fashion. 

"I will pay for them." 

abandoned his glass and hastened up. 

counterfeit!" 

assumed an expression of hatred. 

thanked the traveller. 

a sovereign manner. 

little lead sword from a box behind her. 

executed a very important operation; they had just got hold of the 

cat. They had thrown their doll on the ground, and Eponine, who was 

the elder, was swathing the little cat, in spite of its mewing and its 

contortions, in a quantity of clothes and red and blue scraps. While 

fast. 

she cries, she is warm. See, sister, let us play with her. She shall be 

my little girl. I will be a lady. I will come to see you, and you shall 

look at her. Gradually, you will perceive her whiskers, and that will 

surprise you. And then you will see her ears, and then you will see her 

I will say to you: 'Yes, Madame, it is my little girl. Little girls are 

made like that just at present.'" 

to laugh at it until the ceiling shook. Thenardier accompanied and 

encouraged them. 

anything which comes to hand. While Eponine and Azelma were bundling up 

laid it in her arms, and sang to it softly, to lull it to sleep. 

little, to rock, to dandle, to lull to sleep, to imagine that something 

chattering, making tiny outfits, and baby clothes, while sewing little 

young girl into a big girl, the big girl into a woman. The first child 

is the continuation of the last doll. 

impossible, as a woman without children. 

thought; "perhaps it is M. Laffitte; there are such queer rich men!" 

time, the Thenardier had addressed him only as brave homme or bonhomme. 

are generous. You see, she has nothing; she must needs work." 

her child." 

there. 

dead! my mother is dead! my mother is dead!" 

consented at last to take supper. 

table was singing hers. 

and had left on the floor a few paces from the kitchen table. 

cast her eyes slowly round the room. Madame Thenardier was whispering to 

her husband and counting over some money; Ponine and Zelma were playing 

with the cat; the travellers were eating or drinking or singing; not 

from under the table on her hands and knees, made sure once more that no 

it. An instant later she was in her place again, seated motionless, and 

contained all the violence of voluptuousness. 

meagre supper. 

that one of the doll's legs stuck out and that the fire on the hearth 

lighted it up very vividly. That pink and shining foot, projecting from 

the shadow, suddenly struck the eye of Azelma, who said to Eponine, 

"Look! sister." 

their doll! 

began to tug at her skirt. 

anything. 

is composed of the terrible mingled with the trifles of life, and which 

has caused this style of woman to be named megaeras. 

face. 

round. 

it, she clasped her hands, and, what is terrible to relate of a child 

words which she had heard Madame Thenardier utter had been able to wring 

this from her--she wept; she burst out sobbing. 

which lay at Cosette's feet. 

the children's doll!" 

with that doll?" 

frightful hands!" 

cries. 

front of Cosette, saying:-- 

doll as she might have gazed at the sun; she heard the unprecedented 

words, "It is for you"; she stared at him; she stared at the doll; then 

table in a corner of the wall. 

drinkers had paused; a solemn silence reigned through the whole room. 

is that old fellow? Is he a poor man? Is he a millionaire? Perhaps he is 

both; that is to say, a thief." 

accentuates the human countenance whenever the dominant instinct appears 

there in all its bestial force. The tavern-keeper stared alternately at 

the space of a flash of lightning. He stepped up to his wife and said to 

her in a low voice:-- 

belly before that man!" 

no transition state. 

"aren't you going to take your doll?" 

Cosette ventured to emerge from her hole. 

Thenardier, with a caressing air. "Take it; it is yours." 

still flooded with tears, but her eyes began to fill, like the sky at 

daybreak, with strange beams of joy. What she felt at that moment was 

a little like what she would have felt if she had been abruptly told, 

"Little one, you are the Queen of France." 

from it. 

Thenardier would scold and beat her. 

and murmuring timidly as she turned towards Madame Thenardier:-- 

ecstatic. 

to you." 

her tiny hand. 

her, and began to stare at the floor. We are forced to add that at that 

moment she stuck out her tongue immoderately. All at once she wheeled 

round and seized the doll in a transport. 

fresh pink muslins of the doll. 

attitude of contemplation. 

Providence was making on Cosette, was the person whom the Thenardier 

through endeavoring to copy her husband in all his actions, these 

emotions were more than she could endure. She made haste to send her 

daughters to bed, then she asked the man's permission to send Cosette 

air. Cosette went off to bed, carrying Catherine in her arms. 

her husband words which were all the more furious because she dared not 

utter them aloud. 

dolls to a jade that I would sell for forty sous, so I would! A little 

fellow?" 

for it. If the old fellow is a philanthropist, what is that to you? If 

so long as he has money?" 

which admitted of any reply. 

attitude. All the other travellers, both pedlers and carters, had 

from a distance, with a sort of respectful awe. This poorly dressed 

man, who drew "hind-wheels" from his pocket with so much ease, and 

certainly a magnificent fellow, and one to be feared. 

the drinkers had taken their departure, the drinking-shop was closed, 

the public room was deserted, the fire extinct, the stranger still 

a word since Cosette had left the room. 

the room. 

and began to read the Courrier Francais. 

Francais at least three times, from the date of the number to the 

printer's name. The stranger did not stir. 

chair. Not a movement on the man's part. "Is he asleep?" thought 

Thenardier. The man was not asleep, but nothing could arouse him. 

ventured to say:-- 

and admirable property of swelling the bill on the following day. A 

chamber where one sleeps costs twenty sous; a chamber in which one 

reposes costs twenty francs. 

with red calico. 

I occupy another. This is only entered three or four times a year." 

chimney-piece. A very good fire was flickering on the hearth. 

silver wire and orange flowers. 

"There really was a time, then, when that monster was a maiden?" 

decorated in just this manner, and had purchased the furniture and 

the English call respectability for his house. 

proposed to fleece royally the following morning. 

asleep. When she heard her husband's step she turned over and said to 

him:-- 

was extinguished. 

remained for some time buried in thought. Then he removed his shoes, 

heard a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child. He 

nothing else than the space under the steps. There, in the midst of all 

bed--if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet so full of holes 

as to display the straw, and a coverlet so tattered as to show the 

pallet. No sheets. This was placed on the floor. 

she did not undress, in order that she might not be so cold. 

convulsively in her arms. Beside her bed there was only one of her 

wooden shoes. 

They belonged to Eponine and Azelma. Behind these beds, and half hidden, 

cried all the evening lay asleep. 

always so little fire when there is any fire at all, and which are 

nevertheless. It was two tiny children's shoes, coquettish in shape 

omit this, and each of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth. 

in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece. 

when far in, in the darkest corner of the hearth, he caught sight 

frightful shoe of the coarsest description, half dilapidated and all 

discouraged, had placed her shoe on the hearth-stone also. 

touching thing. 

in Cosette's shoe. 

in hand, was making out the bill for the traveller with the yellow coat. 

him with her eyes. They exchanged not a word. On the one hand, there was 

one watches the birth and development of a marvel of the human mind. A 

Thenardier produced the following masterpiece:-- 

  Chamber  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10   " 

  Candle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5   " 

  Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4   " 

  Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1   " 

                                          ---------- 

                     Total . . . . . .    23 francs. 

mingled with some hesitation. 

of Vienna. 

the wife, who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette in the 

presence of her daughters. "It is just, but it is too much. He will not 

pay it." 

insist. 

feet among the warm ashes. 

day in the house!" 

the half-open door, visible only to his wife. 

embarrassed air, and making creases in it with her nails. Her hard 

scruples. 

wretch" seemed difficult to her. 

replied:-- 

added. 

evidently elsewhere. 

another sort of explosion. 

costing us our very eyes." 

hereabouts!" 

air of a bat than of a lark. You see, sir, we do not ask charity, and we 

The license, the imposts, the door and window tax, the hundredths! 

Monsieur is aware that the government demands a terrible deal of money. 

and in which there lingered a tremor:-- 

blessings of the good holy Virgin and of all the saints of paradise be 

upon you!" 

much is it?" 

surprise:-- 

between an exclamation and an interrogation point. 

replied, with assurance:-- 

said:-- 

for his supper. As for the child, I must discuss that matter a little 

with the gentleman. Leave us, wife." 

the room. 

assumed a singular expression of good-fellowship and simplicity. 

child." 

"What child?" 

your hundred-sou piece. I adore the child." 

tiny thing. It is true that she costs us money; it is true that she has 

her faults; it is true that we are not rich; it is true that I have paid 

But one must do something for the good God's sake. She has neither 

father nor mother. I have brought her up. I have bread enough for 

her and for myself. In truth, I think a great deal of that child. You 

of a beast, I am; I do not reason; I love that little girl; my wife is 

our own child. I want to keep her to babble about the house." 

continued:-- 

like that. I am right, am I not? Still, I don't say--you are rich; you 

and to sacrifice myself, I should like to know what becomes of her; I 

she is living, so that I could go to see her from time to time; so that 

the saying goes, to the very depths of the conscience, replied in a 

grave, firm voice:-- 

that she shall never set eyes on you again so long as she lives. I break 

the thread which binds her foot, and she departs. Does that suit you? 

Yes or no?" 

smoking, and singing coarse songs on the preceding evening, he had 

instinct, and had spied upon him as though he had been paid for so 

yellow great-coat had escaped him. Even before the stranger had so 

purpose. He had caught the old man's deep glances returning constantly 

to the child. Who was this man? Why this interest? Why this hideous 

costume, when he had so much money in his purse? Questions which he put 

her grandfather? Then why not make himself known at once? When one has 

What was it, then? Thenardier lost himself in conjectures. He caught 

in the case, that the latter had some interest in remaining in the 

so simple a way, he became conscious that he was weak. He had expected 

that the moment had arrived for proceeding straightforward, and quickly 

table. Then he placed his large thumb on the notes and said to the 

inn-keeper:-- 

twenty-franc pieces of the Restoration, on whose effigy the little 

she had stolen it. Still, she felt that it really was hers; she guessed 

beautiful things did not appear real. The doll frightened her, the 

gold piece frightened her. She trembled vaguely in the presence of this 

he reassured her. Ever since the preceding evening, amid all her 

childish mind of that man who seemed to be so poor and so sad, and who 

met that good man in the forest. Cosette, less happy than the most 

insignificant swallow of heaven, had never known what it was to take 

refuge under a mother's shadow and under a wing. For the last five 

shivered and trembled. She had always been exposed completely naked 

Formerly her soul had seemed cold, now it was warm. Cosette was no 

one there. 

it, but she spent five minutes in gazing at it, with her tongue hanging 

the bottom of her pocket. 

What was quite unprecedented, she neither struck her nor said an 

insulting word to her. 

girl of seven years. All was black. 

quickly." 

pass along the road to Paris. They were going in the direction of Livry. 

the Thenardier tavern behind her. No one had thought of bidding her 

farewell, nor had she thought of taking leave of any one. She was 

leaving that hated and hating house. 

good man. She felt something as though she were beside the good God. 

her wont. She had expected great results. When the man and Cosette had 

taken their departure, Thenardier allowed a full quarter of an hour 

to elapse; then he took her aside and showed her the fifteen hundred 

francs. 

dared to criticise one of the master's acts. 

out in all haste; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first. 

Some neighbors, of whom he made inquiries, put him on the track again; 

the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry. He 

followed these hints, walking with great strides, and talking to himself 

the while:-- 

fifteen thousand francs. But I shall overtake him." 

let mysteries out of one's hand when one has once grasped them. The 

animal," said he. 

that runs to Livry, it can be seen stretching out before one to a great 

wasted time. Some passers-by informed him that the man and child of whom 

He hastened in that direction. 

fast; and then, he was well acquainted with the country. 

his steps. 

"I ought to have taken my gun," said he to himself. 

them. It is the fate of many men to live thus half submerged. In a 

calm and even situation, Thenardier possessed all that is required to 

he had all the requisites for a blackguard. He was a shopkeeper in 

whom there was some taint of the monster. Satan must have occasionally 

have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this hideous masterpiece. 

an air of certainty, with the sagacity of a fox scenting a covey of 

partridges. 

which he had already erected so many conjectures; it was that man's hat. 

of her small size, but the head of her doll was visible. 

Cosette get somewhat rested. The inn-keeper walked round the brushwood 

search of. 

fifteen hundred francs." 

and enunciating every syllable distinctly:-- 

therein mentioned; that is clear." 

inn-keeper, saying:-- 

               You will be paid for all the little things. 

               I have the honor to salute you with respect, 

                                                  FANTINE." 

vexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for, and the 

vexation of being beaten; the man added:-- 

Thenardier retreated in tolerably good order. 

"however, let it go!" 

paid for all those little things. A great deal is owing to me." 

sleeve:-- 

February, and three hundred francs at the beginning of March. Since then 

upon, which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs. You had received 

have just given you fifteen hundred francs." 

feels himself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap. 

him once. 

do not give me a thousand crowns." 

cudgel, which was lying on the ground. 

spot. 

motionless and speechless. 

which were a little rounded, and his great fists. 

I was going hunting!" 

them at a distance. Two things were left on his hands, an irony in 

hundred francs. 

deuce!" said Thenardier, and he redoubled his pace. 

the man had reached the densest part of the thicket, he wheeled 

branches; he could not prevent the man seeing him. The man cast upon him 

retraced his steps. 

was not ironed, as we have seen. He swam under water until he reached a 

vessel at anchor, to which a boat was moored. He found means of hiding 

himself in this boat until night. At night he swam off again, and 

reached the shore a little way from Cape Brun. There, as he did not lack 

money, he procured clothing. A small country-house in the neighborhood 

of Balaguier was at that time the dressing-room of escaped convicts,--a 

lucrative specialty. Then Jean Valjean, like all the sorry fugitives 

who are seeking to evade the vigilance of the law and social fatality, 

pursued an obscure and undulating itinerary. He found his first 

refuge at Pradeaux, near Beausset. Then he directed his course towards 

Grand-Villard, near Briancon, in the Hautes-Alpes. It was a fumbling and 

uneasy flight,--a mole's track, whose branchings are untraceable. Later 

on, some trace of his passage into Ain, in the territory of Civrieux, 

was discovered; in the Pyrenees, at Accons; at the spot called 

Grange-de-Doumec, near the market of Chavailles, and in the environs of 

Perigueux at Brunies, canton of La Chapelle-Gonaguet. He reached Paris. 

We have just seen him at Montfermeil. 

for a little girl of from seven to eight years of age; then to procure 

law had gathered an inkling. 

almost at peace, as though he had really been dead. 

nightfall, with the child, by way of the Barrier Monceaux. There 

he entered a cabriolet, which took him to the esplanade of the 

Observatoire. There he got out, paid the coachman, took Cosette by 

the hand, and together they directed their steps through the 

Glaciere, towards the Boulevard de l'Hopital. 

distances on foot. She made no complaint, but she was weary, and Jean 

CHAPTER I--MASTER GORBEAU 

the Salpetriere, and who had mounted to the Barriere d'Italie by way 

city, for the streets had ruts like highways, and the grass grew in 

them; it was not a village, the houses were too lofty. What was it, 

than a cemetery. 

this Marche-aux-Chevaux; if he consented even to pass beyond the Rue du 

walls; then a field in which tan-bark mills rose like gigantic beaver 

low, utterly dilapidated wall, with a little black door in mourning, 

ran the inscription in large letters: POST NO BILLS,--this daring 

garden walls, there could be seen, at that epoch, a mean building, 

the whole of the house was hidden. Only the door and one window could be 

seen. 

have been anything but the door of a hovel, while the window, if it 

might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion. 

together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs. It 

plaster-stained, dusty steps, of the same width as itself, which 

could be seen from the street, running straight up like a ladder and 

dipped in ink, and above the scantling the same hand had daubed the 

opening. 

were suffering from various wounds, which were both concealed and 

unpasted, threatened passers-by rather than screened the occupants. 

a blind ended as a shutter. This door with an unclean, and this window 

with an honest though dilapidated air, thus beheld on the same house, 

with different miens beneath the same rags, the one having always been a 

mendicant, and the other having once been a gentleman. 

of circumstances, and rather more like stalls than cells. These chambers 

according as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door, by cold rays 

of dwelling is the enormous size of the spiders. 

height of a man from the ground, a small window which had been walled up 

as they passed by. 

neighborhood as the Gorbeau house. 

put in circulation in the galleries of the court-house, in verses that 

limped a little:-- 

          Maitre Corbeau, sur un dossier perche,[13] 

               Tenait dans son bee une saisie executoire; 

          Maitre Renard, par l'odeur alleche, 

               Lui fit a peu pres cette histoire: 

                    He! bonjour.  Etc. 

expedient of applying to the king. 

obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R, and to call himself 

Prenard; so that the second name bore almost as much resemblance as the 

first. 

He was even the author of the monumental window. 

planted with unhealthy trees, which was green or muddy according to the 

existence. 

of the philanthropist to conceal the scaffold, that miserable and 

recoiled before the death penalty, neither daring to abolish it with 

grandeur, nor to uphold it with authority. 

predestined, and which has always been horrible, probably the most 

was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive, where stood the 

building Number 50-52. 

nothing but the abattoirs, the city wall, and the fronts of a few 

erected on a line, flat constructions, long, cold rows, and the 

regular, hideous. Nothing oppresses the heart like symmetry. It is 

entrance to it. 

and starless, or when the moon and the wind are making openings in the 

clouds and losing themselves in the shadows, this boulevard suddenly 

been committed, had something terrible about it. One almost had a 

was ugly; in the evening melancholy; by night it was sinister. 

at the foot of the elm, on benches mouldy with rain. These good old 

women were fond of begging. 

it, as it does to-day. Wherever it is placed on the borders of a 

capital, a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birth of a 

rattle of these powerful machines, at the breath of these monstrous 

crumble and new ones rise. 

and just as it is true to say that in large cities the sun makes the 

life are evident. In this old provincial quarter, in the wildest nooks, 

the pavement shows itself, the sidewalks begin to crawl and to grow 

memorable morning in July, 1845,--black pots of bitumen were seen 

smoking there; on that day it might be said that civilization had 

of Saint-Marceau. 

wild birds, he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest. 

staircase, still carrying Cosette. 

which he opened another door. The chamber which he entered, and which 

he closed again instantly, was a kind of moderately spacious attic, 

furnished with a mattress laid on the floor, a table, and several 

chairs; a stove in which a fire was burning, and whose embers were 

her down there without waking her. 

on the table, and, as he had done on the previous evening, he began 

to scrutinize Cosette's face with a gaze full of ecstasy, in which the 

expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted to aberration. The 

whom she was, and continued to sleep without knowing where she was. 

Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child's hand. 

just fallen asleep. 

December sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon the 

am!" 

of sleep, extending her arms towards the corner of the wall. 

Valjean. 

"Ah! so it is true!" said the child. "Good morning, Monsieur." 

themselves by nature joy and happiness. 

Jean Valjean. Where was she? Was Paris very large? Was Madame Thenardier 

"How pretty it is here!" 

the prison he had been vicious, gloomy, chaste, ignorant, and shy. 

The heart of that ex-convict was full of virginity. His sister and his 

had finally almost completely vanished; he had made every effort to 

had ever had any, had fallen into an abyss. 

off, and delivered her, he felt his heart moved within him. 

meant; for that great and singular movement of a heart which begins to 

love is a very obscure and a very sweet thing. 

into a sort of ineffable light. 

dawn of love to rise. 

being, poor little thing! She was so little when her mother left her, 

thing to say, and we have already intimated it, that, at eight years of 

age, her heart was cold. It was not her fault; it was not the faculty 

of loving that she lacked; alas! it was the possibility. Thus, from the 

expansion. 

past a delightful garret. 

united and wedded with its irresistible power these two uprooted 

the other. Cosette's instinct sought a father, as Jean Valjean's 

instinct sought a child. To meet was to find each other. At the 

mysterious moment when their hands touched, they were welded together. 

necessary to each other, and embraced each other closely. 

Valjean was the widower, and Cosette was the orphan: this situation 

caused Jean Valjean to become Cosette's father after a celestial 

fashion. 

depths of the forest of Chelles by the hand of Jean Valjean grasping 

perfectly secure. 

the one whose window opened on the boulevard. This being the only window 

way or at the side. 

served as a wagon-house for market-gardeners, and no communication 

existed between it and the first story. It was separated by the 

have said, numerous chambers and several attics, only one of which 

was occupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean Valjean's 

housekeeping; all the rest was uninhabited. 

and in reality intrusted with the functions of portress, who had let 

gentleman of means who had been ruined by Spanish bonds, who was coming 

there to live with his little daughter. He had paid her six months in 

advance, and had commissioned the old woman to furnish the chamber and 

arrival. 

morning song as well as birds. 

cracked with chilblains, and kissed it. The poor child, who was used 

confusion. 

was no longer in rags; she was in mourning. She had emerged from misery, 

and she was entering into life. 

angels. 

was not man, and he became absorbed in revery. Good thoughts have their 

and he made her pray. 

listening to her prattle. Life, henceforth, appeared to him to be full 

with a sort of joy that she would be ugly. 

the fate of woman as summed up in Fantine, and public authority as 

triumphant; but, after all, that sacred memory was growing dim. 

Who knows whether Jean Valjean had not been on the eve of growing 

Alas! he walked with no less indecision than Cosette. He protected her, 

and she was his prop. Oh, unfathomable and divine mystery of the 

balances of destiny! 

the nearest church. When he did not take Cosette with him, she remained 

to her. 

market. 

very moderate circumstances. Jean Valjean had made no alterations in 

leading to Cosette's dressing-room replaced by a solid door. 

kind-hearted women turned back to bestow a sou on him. Jean Valjean 

accepted the sou with a deep bow. It also happened occasionally that he 

unfortunate man, put a piece of money into his hand, often a silver 

alms. 

a great deal, without his suspecting the fact. She was a little deaf, 

come from Montfermeil. One morning, this spy saw Jean Valjean, with 

crack in the door, which was directly opposite him. Jean Valjean had his 

old woman saw him fumble in his pocket and draw thence a case, scissors, 

and thread; then he began to rip the lining of one of the skirts of his 

unfolded. The old woman recognized, with terror, the fact that it was 

the government bank certainly is not open at that hour." The old 

woman went to get the bill changed, and mentioned her surmises. That 

thousand-franc note, commented on and multiplied, produced a vast 

Saint-Marcel. 

on a nail, and examined it. The lining had been sewed up again. The good 

wigs of various colors. Each pocket of this coat had the air of being in 

a manner provided against unexpected accidents. 

crouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned, and 

on whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity. He never passed this 

man without giving him a few sous. Sometimes he spoke to him. Those who 

envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police. He was an 

ex-beadle of seventy-five, who was constantly mumbling his prayers. 

with him, he saw the beggar in his usual place, beneath the lantern 

which had just been lighted. The man seemed engaged in prayer, according 

to his custom, and was much bent over. Jean Valjean stepped up to him 

and placed his customary alms in his hand. The mendicant raised his 

eyes suddenly, stared intently at Jean Valjean, then dropped his head 

quickly. This movement was like a flash of lightning. Jean Valjean was 

seized with a shudder. It seemed to him that he had just caught sight, 

by the light of the street lantern, not of the placid and beaming 

visage of the old beadle, but of a well-known and startling face. He 

experienced the same impression that one would have on finding one's 

self, all of a sudden, face to face, in the dark, with a tiger. He 

recoiled, terrified, petrified, daring neither to breathe, to speak, 

to remain, nor to flee, staring at the beggar who had dropped his head, 

which was enveloped in a rag, and no longer appeared to know that he 

was there. At this strange moment, an instinct--possibly the mysterious 

word. The beggar had the same figure, the same rags, the same appearance 

Impossible!" And he returned profoundly troubled. 

thought he had seen was the face of Javert. 

time. 

"Thanks, my good sir." It was unmistakably the ex-beadle. 

going to lose my eyesight now?" And he thought no more about it. 

when he heard the house door open and then shut again. This struck him 

as singular. The old woman, who was the only inhabitant of the house 

Jean Valjean listened. 

out his candle. 

very softly"; and as he kissed her brow, the steps paused. 

breath in the dark. 

of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall. There was 

evidently some one there, who was holding a candle in his hand and 

listening. 

not close his eyes all night. 

into the house and had listened at his door, as he passed. It was a 

neck and shoulders belonged to Javert. 

through his window opening on the boulevard, but he would have been 

obliged to open the window: he dared not. 

Who had given him that key? What was the meaning of this? 

When the old woman came to do the work, at seven o'clock in the morning, 

her. The good woman appeared as usual. 

dead of the night. 

possible. "Who was it?" 

Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning. Jean Valjean thought he perceived 

one. 

hands and rolled noisily on the floor. 

deserted. It is true that a person can conceal himself behind trees. 

CHAPTER I--THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY 

on. 

religiously in his memory, is now a Paris of days gone by. He must 

be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed. It is 

nor house will any longer exist in that locality. Readers may verify 

the facts if they care to take the trouble. For his own part, he is 

his eyes in an illusion which is precious to him. It is a delight to him 

streets are a matter of indifference to you; that those windows, 

you; that the pavements which you tread are merely stones. Later on, 

All those places which you no longer behold, which you may never 

behold again, perchance, and whose memory you have cherished, take on 

a melancholy charm, recur to your mind with the melancholy of an 

are, as they were, and you persist in this, and you will submit to no 

face of your mother. 

said, we beg the reader to take note of it, and we continue. 

streets, taking the most intricate lines which he could devise, 

followed. 

shadow in the streets. Jean Valjean could glide along close to the 

not, perhaps, take sufficiently into consideration the fact that the 

first six years of her life had instilled something passive into her 

aware of it, to the peculiarities of this good man and to the freaks of 

destiny. And then she was with him, and she felt safe. 

he was Jean Valjean. Was not he disguised? Was not he believed to be 

which he might hide until he could find one where he might dwell. 

various manners, with cunning strategy, the Rue Censier and the Rue 

had chanced to be upon his track, they would have lost it. 

the Rue de Pontoise, in front of the office of the commissary of police, 

spoken above made him turn round. At that moment he saw distinctly, 

thanks to the commissary's lantern, which betrayed them, three men 

lantern, on the dark side of the street. One of the three entered the 

Pontoise. 

and the Rue de l'Arbalete, and plunged into the Rue des Postes. 

Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve turns off. 

was inhabited by potters, and its real name is Rue des Pots. 

this illuminated space. 

appearance. There were four of them now. All were tall, dressed in long, 

pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois. 

contrary direction with considerable obstinacy. At the moment when the 

recognized Javert perfectly. 

for the men. He took advantage of their hesitation. It was time lost for 

her in his arms and carried her. There were no passers-by, and the 

of which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient 

inscription:-- 

               Venez choisir des cruches et des broos, 

               Des pots a fleurs, des tuyaux, de la brique. 

               A tout venant le Coeur vend des Carreaux. 

skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets, and reached the 

carrying a child who can walk. Pay for two." 

should be an imperceptible slipping away. 

traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart. 

wanted to walk. He set her on the ground and took her hand again. 

directed his course thither. In order to reach them, it was necessary to 

glance behind him. 

d'Austerlitz. 

on their way to the right bank. 

large illuminated space, holding Cosette by the hand. 

might escape, if he could reach the timber-yards, the marshes, the 

market-gardens, the uninhabited ground which was not built upon. 

It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent little 

street. He entered it. 

to the right, and the other to the left. 

right. 

is to say, towards deserted regions. 

Valjean's. 

shoulder of the good man and said not a word. 

nothing; the silence was profound, and he continued his march somewhat 

obscurity, something which was moving. 

once more. 

ended. 

right or to the left. 

The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible,--a lofty white 

wall. 

two hundred paces further on, ran into a street of which it was the 

affluent. On that side lay safety. 

who was barring the passage and waiting. 

improvements have transformed from top to bottom,--resulting in 

progress, as the reader sees, with its antidote. 

compounded of traditions, which persists in calling the Institut les 

Quatre-Nations, and the Opera-Comique Feydeau, the precise spot 

whither Jean Valjean had arrived was called le Petit Picpus. The 

Porcherons, la Galiote, les Celestins, les Capucins, le Mail, la Bourbe, 

l'Arbre de Cracovie, la Petite-Pologne--these are the names of old Paris 

relics of the past. 

high as the houses. 

was disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings. To-day, 

plan has preserved a trace, is indicated with sufficient clearness 

in the plan of 1727, published at Paris by Denis Thierry, Rue 

Rue Merciere, at the sign of Prudence. Petit-Picpus had, as 

we have just mentioned, a Y of streets, formed by the Rue du 

Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine, which spread out in two branches, taking on 

the left the name of Little Picpus Street, and on the right the name of 

there; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on, and ascended towards the Lenoir 

right angle, in front of him the wall of that street, and on his right a 

called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot. 

standing on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue 

was lying in wait for him. 

squad without a doubt. Javert was probably already at the commencement 

of the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood. Javert, to all 

his precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit. These 

Valjean's mournful brain. He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot; there he 

He saw that black form standing out in relief against the white 

he gazed heavenward in despair. 

grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue 

directly on the Street; it formed a deeply retreating niche, concealed 

Rue Polonceau, the other in the Rue Droit-Mur. 

Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49, and along the 

Rue Droit-Mur, where the fragment was much shorter, as far as the gloomy 

shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept constantly closed. 

mind of old inhabitants of the quarter. 

long transverse strips of iron. At one side there was a carriage gate of 

fifty years previously. 

with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau. 

He ran his eyes rapidly over it; he said to himself, that if he could 

contrive to get inside it, he might save himself. First he conceived an 

idea, then a hope. 

elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writhe over the 

fronts of old farm-houses. 

the conduit touched the pavement. Perhaps there was some way of climbing 

of this silent dwelling were grated with heavy iron bars, even the attic 

the man who was watching at the corner of the street would have seen 

house? 

along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau. 

two doors; perhaps they might be forced. The wall above which he saw the 

and spend the remainder of the night. 

it was impracticable outside and in. 

in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone 

apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a building against 

which it was placed. It was easy to tear off a plank; but then, one 

found one's self face to face with a wall. 

Javert's tall figure, advanced slowly and cautiously. They halted 

frequently; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of the 

walls and all the embrasures of the doors and alleys. 

mistake as to this surmise--and whose aid he had demanded. 

moment. A few minutes only separated Jean Valjean from that terrible 

to say, a life resembling the interior of a tomb. 

other, according to circumstances. 

stone, in the right angle of a wall, as high as the sixth story, if need 

to death, made his escape twenty years ago. 

with the gable of the large building was filled, at its lower extremity, 

preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish of those dirty 

creatures called the passers-by. This practice of filling up corners of 

the wall is much in use in Paris. 

this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen 

feet. 

The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping. 

was impossible to carry her. A man's whole strength is required to 

disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards. 

dazzle, sometimes illuminate us. 

blind alley Genrot. 

itself was protected by a metal case. 

at one bound, entered the blind alley, broke the latch of the little box 

once more. He had a rope. These gloomy inventors of expedients work 

rapidly when they are fighting against fatality. 

like the rest; and one could pass directly under it without even 

noticing that it was no longer in its place. 

patrol's approach ever more and more distinctly. 

yonder?" 

and curt precision, the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol and 

Javert might come upon him at any moment, he undid his cravat, passed it 

of the rope in his teeth, pulled off his shoes and stockings, which 

he threw over the wall, stepped upon the mass of masonry, and began 

his knees on the wall. 

Valjean's injunction, and the name of Madame Thenardier, had chilled her 

blood. 

very low tone:-- 

"Don't say a word, and don't be alarmed," went on Jean Valjean. 

only see the ground at a great depth below him. 

patrol. The thundering voice of Javert was audible:-- 

Petit-Picpus. I'll answer for it that he is in the blind alley." 

hands were a little abraded. 

with an alley of large poplars at the further end, tolerably tall forest 

be seen a very large, solitary tree, then several fruit-trees, gnarled 

glass frames sparkled in the moonlight, and an old well. Here and 

there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss. The alleys were 

taken possession of them, and a green mould covered the rest. 

anything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely through the 

gloom. 

distinguishable, one of which, much encumbered, seemed to serve as a 

shed. 

black pall. 

and darkness. Nevertheless, walls could be confusedly made out, which 

low roofs of the Rue Polonceau. 

in broad daylight. 

on again, then to step under the shed with Cosette. A man who is fleeing 

never thinks himself sufficiently hidden. The child, whose thoughts were 

as much as possible. 

spies whom he had posted, and his imprecations mingled with words which 

breath. 

been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak. 

from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden. At the moment 

angels was approaching through the gloom. 

they must kneel. 

an uninhabited house. 

felt those wings which we all have within us, unfolding. 

not have told. Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment. 

there was nothing in the garden. That which had menaced, that which had 

reassured him,--all had vanished. The breeze swayed a few dry weeds 

sound. 

had fancied that she was asleep. He bent down and looked at her. 

Cosette's eyes were wide open, and her thoughtful air pained Jean 

Valjean. 

make Cosette keep silent. 

Cosette. 

all the windows of the ground floor. 

visible. The light came from a taper which was burning in one 

its neck. 

illuminated, which adds to horror. 

night. It was alarming to suppose that that thing was perhaps dead; and 

still more alarming to think that it was perhaps alive. 

whether the thing would move. In spite of his remaining thus what seemed 

following him with great strides and waving its arms. 

was not even conscious that he was very cold, since he had taken off his 

coat to cover her. 

for some time a peculiar noise. It was like the tinkling of a bell. This 

sound proceeded from the garden. It could be heard distinctly though 

cattle at night in the pastures. 

were dragging or spreading out something on the ground. This person 

them everything is hostile and suspicious. They distrust the day 

in surprising them. A little while before he had shivered because the 

garden was deserted, and now he shivered because there was some one 

there. 

they had, no doubt, left people on the watch in the street; that if this 

arms and carried her behind a heap of old furniture, which was out of 

use, in the most remote corner of the shed. Cosette did not stir. 

followed each of this man's movements. When the man approached, the 

made any hasty gesture, a tremolo accompanied the gesture; when he 

to that man; but what could that signify? Who was this man who had a 

bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox? 

were icy cold. 

from head to foot. 

sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal. 

feet, without a movement. 

which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction. 

from the ruin. 

fire in less than a quarter of an hour. 

few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him. 

grant me shelter for this night." 

by that strange man, made Jean Valjean start back. 

a bent and lame old man, dressed almost like a peasant, who wore on his 

face, which was in the shadow, was not distinguishable. 

over:-- 

if ever you do fall, it will be from there. And what a state you are in! 

You have no cravat; you have no hat; you have no coat! Do you know, you 

would have frightened any one who did not know you? No coat! Lord God! 

Are the saints going mad nowadays? But how did you get in here?" 

with a mixture of stupefaction and naive kindliness. 

me placed. What! You don't recognize me?" 

recognized old Fauchelevent. 

held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in 

been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them. It was 

this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar movements 

observed from the shed by Jean Valjean. 

same! But how do you come here?" 

his questions. Strange to say, their roles seemed to be reversed. It was 

he, the intruder, who interrogated. 

warning. When I come, they go." 

"Well, then, this is the Petit-Picpus convent." 

admitted on his recommendation two years previously. He repeated, as 

though talking to himself:-- 

you are a saint; you are a man as well, and no man enters here." 

voice:-- 

days." 

incapable of speaking. At length he exclaimed:-- 

of the old man!" 

emit a ray of light. 

it. 

In the second, you are not to try to find out anything more." 

moreover, you it was who placed me here. That concerns you. I am at your 

service." 

his master. 

which he had flung over the wall, had been found and picked up. While 

adorned the wall. The two men were warming themselves with their elbows 

black bread, a bottle of wine, and two glasses, and the old man was 

saying to Jean Valjean, as he laid his hand on the latter's knee: 

you! You are an ingrate!" 

had come about in the simplest possible manner. 

disappears in this belly of the world, as in the belly of the sea. No 

police know it also, and it is in Paris that they seek what they 

M. Chabouillet, secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles. M. 

inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris. There 

strange for such services, honorable manners. 

in December, 1823, he read a newspaper, he who never read newspapers; 

announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead, and published the fact 

thought no more about it. 

from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in 

A little girl of seven or eight years of age, the report said, who had 

and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine, who had died in the 

hospital, it was not known where or when. 

respite of three days, for the purpose of going to fetch that creature's 

at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach for Montfermeil. 

to do in that region of Montfermeil? It could not even be surmised. 

Javert understood it now. Fantine's daughter was there. Jean Valjean was 

trip to Montfermeil. 

a great deal of obscurity. 

disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village. He 

abduction of a child. Hence the police report. But their first vexation 

having passed off, Thenardier, with his wonderful instinct, had 

very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the 

abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon 

eye of justice. The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle 

mentioned to him. He understood nothing about it; no doubt he had 

Montfermeil. The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish. 

Thenardier's history. "Who was that grandfather? and what was his name?" 

passport. I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert." 

returned to Paris. 

Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed "the mendicant who gives alms." 

This person, the story ran, was a man of means, whose name no one knew 

exactly, and who lived alone with a little girl of eight years, who 

him. He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat, which was worth many 

millions, being all wadded with bank-bills. This piqued Javert's 

curiosity in a decided manner. In order to get a close look at this 

fantastic gentleman without alarming him, he borrowed the beadle's 

the spy under cover of prayer. 

and bestow alms on him. At that moment Javert raised his head, and the 

one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean. 

the man of scruples, never laid a finger on any one's collar. 

foiled the spy by keeping silent. 

his secret, and he had kept it for three reasons: in the first place, 

next, because, to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape 

forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort, was a 

assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert, and he was afraid of 

being deprived of his convict; and lastly, because Javert, being an 

artist, had a taste for the unforeseen. He hated those well-heralded 

brushed off. He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and 

to unveil them suddenly at the last. 

to corner of the street, and had not lost sight of him for a single 

instant; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to 

be the most secure Javert's eye had been on him. Why had not Javert 

arrested Jean Valjean? Because he was still in doubt. 

denounced by the newspapers, had echoed even as far as the Chambers, and 

the prefect laid the blame on them; a mistake meant dismissal. The 

who was walking with his grandchild, aged eight, was arrested and 

conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict!" 

injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the 

prefect. He was really in doubt. 

forced to flee by night, to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette 

the child--all this, without his being aware of it, had altered Jean 

police themselves, incarnate in the person of Javert, might, and did in 

a grandfather of him, and, finally, the belief in his death in prison, 

mind. 

misdeeds, some chief of a dangerous band, who gave alms to conceal 

his other talents, which was an old dodge. He had trusty fellows, 

accomplices' retreats in case of emergencies, in which he would, no 

streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man. To 

he would not escape. 

himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage. 

Valjean. 

mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey. 

Javert gave that profound start. 

puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel. 

however, that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between his 

scent. Javert, with his powerful rectitude of instinct, went straight to 

girl?" "I made him pay two sous," replied the toll-keeper. Javert 

reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small 

illuminated spot on the other side of the water, leading Cosette by 

the hand. He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine; he 

Moreover, the principle is, that in order to get the best of a wild 

himself, Javert, in the rear, he took a pinch of snuff. 

allows the fly to flutter, and of the cat which lets the mouse run. 

Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality,--the obscure movements 

of the creature imprisoned in their pincers. What a delight this 

strangling is! 

He was sure of success; all he had to do now was to close his hand. 

however vigorous, energetic, and desperate Jean Valjean might be. 

the street like so many pockets of thieves. 

that agent, who had remained imperturbably at his post, had not seen the 

man pass. 

halt short. In a discomfiture of this sort, Artonge exclaims, "It was 

cry. 

mistakes in the war in Africa, that Cyrus was at fault in the war 

full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin. Advice is certainly 

too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on 

the trail, alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart, and so 

game of the mouse and the lion. At the same time, he reckoned himself 

ever existed. He was, in the full force of the term, what is called in 

venery a knowing dog. But what is there that is perfect? 

at Capua; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube. 

on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land. 

would probably have done so and have been lost. Javert explored these 

gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a 

needle. 

captured by a robber might have been. 

CHAPTER I--NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS 

which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion, permitted a 

a time, if one did not allow one's self to be alarmed by a daubing of 

Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows. The 

more mysterious because it was not fastened. If one opened it, one 

found one's self in a little chamber about six feet square, tiled, 

well-scrubbed, clean, cold, and hung with nankin paper with green 

flowers, at fifteen sous the roll. A white, dull light fell from a large 

neither a footstep nor a human murmur. The walls were bare, the chamber 

was not furnished; there was not even a chair. 

black, knotted, solid, which formed squares--I had almost said 

those iron bars, without being startled or thrown into confusion by 

their funereal contact. Supposing that a living being had been so 

hole, this grating would have prevented it. It did not allow the passage 

of the body, but it did allow the passage of the eyes; that is to 

re-enforced by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear, 

and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of 

exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box. A bit of tape attached 

to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening. 

hand, which made one start. 

as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other 

side of it. 

surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray. On raising the latch and 

the glass door; a regular box, with its front just of a height to lean 

upon, bearing a tablet of black wood. This box was grated, only 

the grating of it was not of gilded wood, as at the opera; it was a 

wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists. 

cellar-like half-twilight, one tried to pass the grating, but got no 

proceeding from behind these shutters, and saying:-- 

tomb. 

not look at you and never smiled at you. 

symbolical. 

and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition. At the 

you could distinguish nothing, not even phantoms. 

therefore, never described. 

Martin Verga. 

Benoit. 

Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines, 

with Salamanca for the head of the order, and Alcala as the branch 

establishment. 

countries of Europe. 

is here in question: there are attached to this order, without counting 

the obedience of Martin Verga, four congregations,--two in Italy, 

Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua; two in France, Cluny and 

Saint-Maur; and nine orders,--Vallombrosa, Granmont, the Celestins, 

in 529 that the devil, having retired to the desert of Subiaco--he 

was old--had he turned hermit?--was chased from the ancient temple of 

Apollo, where he dwelt, by Saint-Benoit, then aged seventeen. 

Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga. They are clothed in black, 

with a guimpe, which, in accordance with the express command of 

wear a rosary at their side. 

the Temple, the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve. However, the 

were numerous differences in their rule; there were some in their 

breasts, a Holy Sacrament about three inches long, in silver gilt or 

Sacrament. The Perpetual Adoration, which was common to the house of 

perfectly distinct. Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the 

Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga, just 

as there existed a similarity in the study and the glorification of 

all the mysteries relating to the infancy, the life, and death of Jesus 

established by Pierre de Berulle. The Oratory of France claimed the 

cardinal. 

peculiar to them, rise from their first sleep, from one to three o'clock 

seasons between serge sheets and on straw, make no use of the bath, 

never light a fire, scourge themselves every Friday, observe the rule of 

they suffer from fever for three or four days. Obedience, poverty, 

the rule greatly aggravates. 

only be re-elected twice, which fixes the longest possible reign of a 

prioress at nine years. 

preacher is in the chapel, they drop their veils over their faces. They 

heads bowed. One man only is allowed to enter the convent,--the 

archbishop of the diocese. 

Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive. It is the 

canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation. As at the 

voice of Christ, ut voci Christi, at a gesture, at the first sign, 

ad nutum, ad primum signum, immediately, with cheerfulness, with 

perseverance, with a certain blind obedience, prompte, hilariter, 

workman, quasi limam in manibus fabri, without power to read or to write 

expressa superioris licentia. 

is the prayer for all the sins, for all the faults, for all the 

dissensions, for all the violations, for all the iniquities, for all the 

from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock in the morning, or 

from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock in the afternoon, 

her face against the earth, with her arms outstretched in the form of a 

cross; this is her only relief. In this attitude she prays for all the 

guilty in the universe. This is great to sublimity. 

contains an idea of torture and abasement. 

directly behind her. 

soldiers on guard. This is the Perpetual Adoration. 

in the life of Jesus Christ: as Mother Nativity, Mother Conception, 

Mother Presentation, Mother Passion. But the names of saints are not 

interdicted. 

loss of one's soul. 

attach themselves to anything. They call everything our; thus: our veil, 

to something! In that case, do not enter our order!" 

The other responds, "Forever." The same ceremony when one taps at the 

other side is heard to say hastily, "Forever!" Like all practices, this 

and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar." 

whose cell is entered says, "Gratia plena." It is their way of saying 

good day, which is in fact full of grace. 

church bell of the convent. At this signal prioress, vocal mothers, 

in unison if it is five o'clock, for instance, "At five o'clock and at 

If it is eight o'clock, "At eight o'clock and at all hours!" and so on, 

according to the hour. 

formula alone varies. Thus at The Infant Jesus they say, "At this 

hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart!" The 

a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a 

depth. The effect produced is striking and tragic. 

permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they 

infraction of the rules. 

interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient 

to their community. 

prodigal in the olden days, and of which it is still prodigal in Spain 

them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them: "The prayers 

of the postulants are frightful, the prayers of the novices are still 

worse, and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse." 

aloud, in the presence of all, the faults and sins which she has 

committed during the week. The vocal mothers consult after each 

confession and inflict the penance aloud. 

flat on one's face during the office in front of the prioress until 

the latter, who is never called anything but our mother, notifies the 

culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of her stall that 

office, a false note in church, etc.; this suffices, and the coulpe 

notes do si sol; for this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a 

enormous was the fact that the chapter had laughed. 

visible. 

see only their immediate family, and that very rarely. If, by chance, 

loved in the outer world, a regular series of negotiations is required. 

always refused to men. 

These nuns are not gay, rosy, and fresh, as the daughters of other 

orders often are. They are pale and grave. Between 1825 and 1830 three 

of them went mad. 

four. It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced 

earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years. The 

order. 

of which they must never speak. 

nuns separate into two files; one file passes close to her, saying in 

plaintive accents, "Our sister is dead"; and the other file responds in 

a voice of ecstasy, "Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ!" 

to the convent--a boarding-school for young girls of noble and 

mostly wealthy families, among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle 

de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen, and an English girl bearing the 

white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their breast. 

themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of 

habit of lending them their black garments. This seemed profane, and 

the prioress forbade it. Only the novices were permitted to lend. It is 

remarkable that these performances, tolerated and encouraged, no doubt, 

in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order 

to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit, were a genuine 

a reading-desk. 

practices of the convent. There was a certain young woman who entered 

one knocked at her door, "forever!" Like the nuns, the pupils saw 

severity on that point was carried. One day a young girl received a 

years of age. The young girl wept, for she wished greatly to embrace 

her sister. Impossible. She begged that, at least, the child might be 

kiss it. This was almost indignantly refused. 

souvenirs. 

hour struck. A door swung on its hinges. The birds said, "Good; 

innocent eyes, full of merry light, all sorts of auroras, were scattered 

and knells and offices, the sound of these little girls burst forth on a 

they formed into groups, they ran about; pretty little white teeth 

distance, shades kept watch of the sunbeams, but what mattered it? Still 

they beamed and laughed. Those four lugubrious walls had their moment 

of dazzling brilliancy. They looked on, vaguely blanched with the 

girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns; the gaze of impeccability 

does not embarrass innocence. Thanks to these children, there was, 

of all their ancestresses, those of the epic as well as those of the 

fairy-tale, those of the throne as well as those of the thatched cottage 

from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand. 

here. What happiness!" 

says that I do not know it, but I do. 

question that I came across." 

paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder:-- 

like a person!" 

picked up a confession which had been written out in advance, in order 

that she might not forget it, by a sinner of seven years:-- 

"Father, I accuse myself of having been an adulteress. 

blue eyes aged four and five years:-- 

pockets. After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their 

forest; and the wolf was in the forest; and he ate the little cocks." 

in her corner:-- 

big big girls--those over ten years of age--called her Agathocles. 

received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the 

the places round about furnished their contingent of insects. 

a special and expressive name. There was Spider corner, Caterpillar 

corner, Wood-louse corner, and Cricket corner. 

meals. One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral 

visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter the 

stood near him:-- 

put in the dormitory, "Who is a virgin?" 

years, to a "big girl" of sixteen, who took the head of the procession, 

while she, the little one, remained at the rear, "You are a virgin, but 

I am not." 

to paradise, was inscribed in large black letters:-- 

angels sitting on my bed, one at the foot, two at the head, the good 

apostles are my brothers, the three virgins are my sisters. The shirt in 

on my breast. Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows, weeping 

for God, when she met M. Saint John. 'Monsieur Saint John, whence come 

nailed, a little cap of white thorns on his head.' Whoever shall say 

the last." 

a triple coating of daubing paint. At the present time it is finally 

disappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then, and 

who are old women now. 

two long parallel lines from one end to the other of the refectory. 

constitute the only variety in convents. The meals were plain, and 

was seasoned with the lives of the saints, read aloud from a little 

on the bare tables, there were large, varnished bowls in which the 

they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or spoiled fish; this was 

silence "made a cross with her tongue." Where? On the ground. She licked 

the pavement. The dust, that end of all joys, was charged with the 

chirping. 

a unique copy, and which it is forbidden to read. It is the rule of 

regulas, seu constitutiones nostras, externis communicabit. 

the fear of being caught, which caused them to close the volume 

precipitately. 

unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys. 

fruit-trees. In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of 

the punishments administered, when the wind had shaken the trees, they 

to a letter which lies before me, a letter written five and twenty 

years ago by an old pupil, now Madame la Duchesse de----one of the most 

elegant women in Paris. I quote literally: "One hides one's pear or 

closet." That was one of their greatest luxuries. 

connected with the Montmorency family, laid a wager that she would ask 

do it. When the moment came, as the archbishop was passing in front of 

prettiest little rosy face in the world. M. de Quelen smiled and said, 

had spoken. Horror of the convent, but joy of the pupil. The effect may 

be imagined. 

reader's mind. 

Madame Albertine. Nothing was known about her, save that she was mad, 

marriage. 

was some doubt about this. She glided rather than walked, she never 

livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh. To touch her 

she is one," replied the other. 

eternal curiosity of the pupils. In the chapel there was a gallery 

called L'OEil de Boeuf. It was in this gallery, which had only a 

on the level of the first story, the preacher or the officiating priest 

Besancon. It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the 

Petit-Picpus convent. Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect 

day, as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan, she half rose, and 

The whole community turned their heads in amazement, the preacher raised 

his eyes, but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility. A 

woman had become a corpse again. 

Auguste. It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very 

and that there existed between them some connection, of relationship, 

perhaps, but a very close one in any case, since she knew his "pet 

name." 

girls trembled and dropped their eyes. 

Paris. It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the 

offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus. Not one of the 

one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither. This was an 

event, and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall 

it. 

Zetulbe, come reign o'er my soul,"--and it was heard two or three 

mothers were upset by it, brains were busy, punishments descended in 

less in love with the unknown musician. Each one dreamed that she was 

Droit-Mur; and they would have given anything, compromised everything, 

were some who made their escape by a back door, and ascended to the 

her arm through the grating, and to wave her white handkerchief. Two 

his attic, in order to pass the time. 

distinct buildings,--the Great Convent, inhabited by the nuns, the 

Boarding-school, where the scholars were lodged; and lastly, what was 

called the Little Convent. It was a building with a garden, in which 

lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders, the relics of cloisters 

called, if such a coupling of words is permissible, a sort of harlequin 

convent. 

women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the 

wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines. The government paid them a small 

a visit; the result is, that all those young memories have 

Sainte-Scolastique, and Mother Jacob. 

Sainte-Aure, the only one of her order who had survived. The ancient 

exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at 

remains only a doll. 

Little Convent. Among the number were Madame Beaufort d'Hautpoul and 

Marquise Dufresne. Another was never known in the convent except by 

called her Madame Vacarmini (hubbub). 

little periodical publication called l'Intrepide, asked to be allowed 

d'Orleans recommended her. Uproar in the hive; the vocal-mothers were 

that she was the first to detest them, and then, she had reached her 

fierce stage of devotion. With the aid of God, and of the Prince, she 

reason, that there was no shade in the garden. The nuns were delighted. 

Although very old, she still played the harp, and did it very well. 

profile of her. A few years ago, there were still to be seen, pasted in 

the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her 

silverware and her jewels, these five lines in Latin, written with 

her own hand in red ink on yellow paper, and which, in her opinion, 

possessed the property of frightening away robbers:-- 

               Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis:[15] 

               Dismas et Gesmas, media est divina potestas; 

               Alta petit Dismas, infelix, infima, Gesmas; 

               Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas. 

               Hos versus dicas, ne tu furto tua perdas. 

These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the 

two thieves of Calvary were named, as is commonly believed, Dismas and 

Gestas, or Dismas and Gesmas. This orthography might have confounded the 

these verses forms an article of faith in the order of the Hospitallers. 

Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand, and 

folded in such a manner as to form, not, as in ordinary churches, a 

the right of the officiating priest; suppose this hall to be shut off by 

on the left, the school-girls on the right, the lay-sisters and the 

only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and falling. 

Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur, whose name, in religion, 

was Mother Innocente. She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur, 

"singing like a cracked pot," says the letter which we have already 

quoted; an excellent woman, moreover, and the only merry one in the 

a Benedictine nun. 

blind. 

the treasurer, Mother Sainte-Gertrude, the chief mistress of the 

convent who was malicious; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde (Mademoiselle 

Gauvain), very young and with a beautiful voice; Mother des Anges 

and in the convent du Tresor, between Gisors and Magny; Mother 

Saint-Joseph (Mademoiselle de Cogolludo), Mother Sainte-Adelaide 

Cifuentes, who could not resist austerities), Mother Compassion 

Laudiniere), Mother Presentation (Mademoiselle de Siguenza), who was 

prioress in 1847; and finally, Mother Sainte-Celigne (sister of the 

sculptor Ceracchi), who went mad; Mother Sainte-Chantal (Mademoiselle de 

Suzon), who went mad. 

and twenty, who was from the Isle de Bourbon, a descendant of the 

Chevalier Roze, whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze, and who was 

called Mother Assumption. 

nature of a reed-pipe of young girls, a sort of living Pan-pipe made of 

angels. 

her dotage, and Sister Sainte-Michel, whose long nose made them laugh. 

and addressed her, the nun never replied. 

convent, speech had been withdrawn from human creatures, and bestowed 

case of need, such or such an inhabitant of the house. Each person 

and each thing had its own peal. The prioress had one and one, the 

Madame de Genlis's signal. It was very often heard. "C'est le diable 

a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts which only turned on its 

hinges in the presence of the archbishop. 

the convent, as we have already said. The schoolgirls saw two others: 

drawing-master, M. Ansiaux, whom the letter, of which we have perused a 

to point out, in a few words, its material configuration. The reader 

already has some idea of it. 

of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue 

and a garden. The principal building, taken in its entirety, was a 

ground. The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment 

of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the Rue 

whitened with dust and ashes, where the spiders wove their webs, 

and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays, and on rare 

occasions, when the coffin of a nun left the convent. This was the 

corner of the closed lane Aumarais, was the school, which was not 

which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau, which caused 

a hillock, a fine pointed and conical fir-tree, whence ran, as from 

the peaked boss of a shield, four grand alleys, and, ranged by twos 

called the little garden. To this whole, let the reader add a courtyard, 

of the eleven thousand devils." 

are very much more ancient still. Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane; 

the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers, for God opened 

flowers before man cut stones. 

little digression, utterly foreign to this book, but characteristic and 

useful, since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures. 

a city, and that there were streets in the monastery. 

Saint-Julien, Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur 

Saint-Eusebius, Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur 

Saint-Procopius, etc., etc.; and thus I give it to you, father." And the 

school-girls would begin to laugh, not in their sleeves, but under 

frown. 

existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne. When a great 

a town in Burgundy or Champagne, the city fathers came out to harangue 

him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which they 

had poured four different sorts of wine. On the first goblet this 

dulls; and the fourth, that which brutalizes. 

rule allowed her to do, and hid herself, every time that she desired to 

contemplate it. If she heard a footstep in the corridor, she closed the 

They lost themselves in conjectures. When the poor old woman died, 

The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures. One of the 

charming little Loves is already fairly spitted. He is resisting, 

fluttering his tiny wings, and still making an effort to fly, but the 

the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea, was still in existence 

Boulevard Beaumarchais. 

said she, the parlor is too gloomy. 

in particular, which belonged, in truth, to another order, the black 

salon with a polished wood floor, whose windows were draped in white 

head of a Turk. 

chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in 

France, and which bore the reputation among the good people of the 

realm. 

holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart, in two 

Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn 

Marquise de Boucs, and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux. This outrage 

committed on "the most holy sacrament of the altar," though but 

them that it could only be extenuated by a "Perpetual Adoration" in some 

female monastery. Both of them, one in 1652, the other in 1653, made 

this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz, Abbe 

she contributed three hundred livres income, which amounts to six 

king accorded letters-patent; and all the rest, abbatial charter, and 

royal letters, was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the 

Parliament. 

Their first convent was "a new building" in the Rue Cassette, out of the 

contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux. 

the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux. It mounted back to the Abbe of 

to the general of the Lazarists. 

whose interior we have just shown. In 1657, Pope Alexander VII. had 

which, after the eighteenth century, has been disappearing like all 

favorable to it. 

latter had taken their departure. Volaverunt. 

alarms, vocations recoil before it, the order receives no recruits. In 

1845, it still obtained lay-sisters here and there. But of professed 

the circle of choice was restricted. She was not forty years old. In 

of each becomes more painful; the moment could then be seen drawing near 

when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the 

latter can say, like Julia Alpinula: "Hic jaceo. Vixi annos viginti et 

education of girls. 

which are listening to our tale, to the profit of some, perchance, of 

place in detail, but with respect, in so far, at least, as detail and 

We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre, who 

who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross. 

Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas; and even 

for those who deny superhuman incarnations, what does the crucifix 

represent? The assassinated sage. 

heart. Certain demolitions take place, and it is well that they do, but 

on condition that they are followed by reconstructions. 

This spectre, this past, is given to falsifying its own passport. Let 

and let us tear off the mask. 

them. 

CHAPTER I--THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA 

to the Orient as well as to the Occident, to antiquity as well as to 

Infinite. 

mosque, in the pagoda, in the wigwam, a hideous side which we execrate, 

and a sublime side, which we adore. What a contemplation for the mind, 

its circulation, cumbrous establishments, centres of idleness where 

to the human body. Their prosperity and their fatness mean the 

impoverishment of the country. The monastic regime, good at the 

beginning of civilization, useful in the reduction of the brutal by the 

period of purity, because it still continues to set the example. 

to man are concerned, monasteries, which were good in the tenth century, 

questionable in the fifteenth, are detestable in the nineteenth. The 

nations, Italy and Spain; the one the light, the other the splendor of 

vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone. 

presents itself on the threshold of this century, in Italy, in Austria, 

cloister, that cloister, is the point of intersection of horrors. The 

Catholic cloister, properly speaking, is wholly filled with the black 

radiance of death. 

shadow, massive altars of Babel, as high as cathedrals; there immense 

knee-pans showing their integuments, their wounds showing their flesh, 

and rubies seem wet, and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep, 

prayer; women who think themselves wives, spectres who think themselves 

seraphim. Do these women think? No. Have they any will? No. Do they 

under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration of 

ferocious places. 

all living distraction. A glance on the outer world was infidelity. The 

the drowned, there the buried. Monstrous parallel. 

facts and all gloomy questions. A matter for declamations, say the 

clever. Declamations, repeat the foolish. Jean-Jacques a declaimer; 

that Nero was a victim, and that pity is decidedly due to "that poor 

river, and on the inside, six feet above the level of the ground. Four 

of granite, too short for a person to lie down in, too low for him to 

on a level with the river's current, that box of stone closed with a lid 

of granite like a tomb, with this difference, that the dead man here 

oozing walls,--what declaimers! 

CHAPTER III--ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST 

Thibet, is a sort of phthisis for civilization. It stops life short. It 

the walled-up brains, so many unfortunate minds placed in the dungeon 

of eternal vows, the taking of the habit, the interment of living souls. 

Add individual tortures to national degradations, and, whoever you 

may be, you will shudder before the frock and the veil,--those two 

certain places, in spite of philosophy, in spite of progress, the spirit 

of the cloister persists in the midst of the nineteenth century, and 

a singular ascetic recrudescence is, at this moment, astonishing 

the civilized world. The obstinacy of antiquated institutions in 

perpetuating themselves resembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume 

should return to embrace the living. 

loved you," says the corpse. "I have civilized you," says the convent. 

to regild shrines, to patch up cloisters, to rebless reliquaries, to 

militarism, to believe in the salvation of society by the multiplication 

Still, there are theorists who hold such theories. These theorists, 

process; they apply to the past a glazing which they call social 

order, divine right, morality, family, the respect of elders, antique 

authority, sacred tradition, legitimacy, religion; and they go about 

with chalk, and said, "She is white, Bos cretatus." 

all, provided that it consents to be dead. If it insists on being alive, 

we attack it, and we try to kill it. 

their smoke, and they must be clasped close, body to body, and war must 

of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat with phantoms. It is 

difficult to seize darkness by the throat, and to hurl it to the earth. 

a college of owls facing the light. A cloister, caught in the very act 

of asceticism, in the very heart of the city of '89 and of 1830 and 

times. 

There is that which it is necessary to destroy, and there is that which 

required. 

proposition, and among all peoples, in Asia as well as in Europe, 

cloister, says marsh. Their putrescence is evident, their stagnation is 

them; their multiplication becomes a plague of Egypt. We cannot think 

vermin. 

fixedly. 

By virtue of the right of association. 

the right which every man has to open or shut his door. 

to go and come, which implies the right to remain at home. 

the world, towns, sensualities, pleasures, vanities, pride, interests. 

who was what is called noble, a gentleman and a lord, is the equal of 

the same straw, die on the same ashes. The same sack on their backs, the 

They bear only first names. All are bowed beneath the equality of 

all men. They succor the poor, they care for the sick. They elect those 

whom they obey. They call each other "my brother." 

notice of it. 

matter and shall contain only consenting parties, I shall always 

respects, a deferential gravity. 

Equality, Fraternity. Oh! how grand is liberty! And what a splendid 

republic. 

But these men, or these women who are behind these four walls. They 

other brothers, that is well; but they do something else? 

it is infinite, and because, if it lacked intelligence, it would end 

attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence? In other terms, is it 

not the absolute, of which we are only the relative? 

plural!) superposed, the one upon the other? Is not this second 

infinite, so to speak, subjacent to the first? Is it not the latter's 

it love? Does it will? If these two infinities are intelligent, each of 

them has a will principle, and there is an I in the upper infinity as 

I on high is God. 

with the infinity on high, is called praying. 

the Unknown; thought, revery, prayer. The Unknown is an ocean. What 

is conscience? It is the compass of the Unknown. Thought, revery, 

that is to say, to the light. 

exists the right of the soul. 

us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of 

belief, to remove superstitions from above religion; to clear God of 

caterpillars. 

CHAPTER VI--THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER 

sincere. Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite. 

philosophy is called blindness. 

man's self-sufficiency. 

they are atheists; it is with them only a question of definition, and in 

God. 

philosophy. 

themselves off with words. A metaphysical school of the North, 

word Will. 

Because it would come to this: the plant wills, therefore it has an I; 

the universe wills, therefore it has a God. 

nothing a priori, a will in the plant, accepted by this school, appears 

to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it. 

any other conditions than a denial of the infinite. We have demonstrated 

this. 

becomes "a mental conception." 

the existence of its interlocutor, and is not quite sure that it exists 

"a mental conception." 

lump, simply by the utterance of the word, mind. 

end in the monosyllable, No. 

is something. Nothing is nothing. 

energy; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition 

of man. Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius; in 

other words, the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man 

the human mind. It is the ideal which has the right to say: Take, this! 

It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science 

and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying, and that 

philosophy herself is promoted to religion. 

curiosity. 

forces which are their two motors: faith and love. 

CHAPTER VII--PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME 

and limpid, and offers no obscurity. 

human problem. 

of aberration but of good-will, of ignorance but of devotion, of torture 

abnegation. 

monasticism. 

The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity. 

All about it is serious, the good as well as the bad. 

understand wrath, but not malice. 

spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal; but we everywhere honor 

the thoughtful man. 

and invisible labor. 

replies to Horace. 

the law of the sage; and it is the law of the ascetic. In this respect, 

the ascetic and the sage converge. There is a material growth; we 

vivacious spirits say:-- 

What purpose do they serve? What do they do?" 

useful." 

pray at all. 

mingled with prayer. 

sublimity of prayer. 

this hour, when so many men have low brows and souls but little 

elevated, among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment, 

and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter, 

whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us. 

own. 

suffers the most, and in this exile of the cloister there is something 

of protestation,--the female convent has incontestably a certain 

majesty. 

it is not the tomb, for it is not plenitude; it is the strange place 

is the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds, illuminated 

and obscured by both at the same time, where the ray of life which has 

become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death; it is the half 

obscurity of the tomb. 

live by faith,--we have never been able to think without a sort of 

tender and religious terror, without a sort of pity, that is full of 

envy, of those devoted, trembling and trusting creatures, of these 

times, by the deep breaths of eternity. 

CHAPTER I--WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT 

it, "fallen from the sky." 

Polonceau. That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle 

caught a glimpse in the gloom, was the chapel. That phantom which he had 

gardener's bell attached to the knee of Father Fauchelevent. 

Cosette, each threw himself on a truss of straw. 

long. 

To tell the truth, neither of them slept. 

Paris. Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded 

remain there. Now, for an unfortunate man in his position, this 

it was a flagrant offence, and Jean Valjean would find but one step 

could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there, who would 

ever seek him in such a place? To dwell in an impossible place was 

safety. 

walls are not to be stepped over. How did he get there with a child? One 

in the convent, he had heard nothing of M. sur M., and he knew nothing 

of what had taken place there. Father Madeleine had an air which 

had probably become bankrupt through the hard times, and that he was 

political affair, and was in hiding; which last did not displease 

Fauchelevent, who, like many of our peasants of the North, had an 

old fund of Bonapartism about him. While in hiding, M. Madeleine had 

could see nothing clearly but this: "M. Madeleine saved my life." 

to save M. Madeleine. 

replies: "After what he did for me, would I save him if he were a thief? 

Since he is a saint, shall I save him? Just the same." 

Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical 

undertaking; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder 

than his self-devotion, his good will, and a little of that old 

enterprise, undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister, and the 

of his days, halt, infirm, with no interest left to him in the world, 

performed, flung himself upon it like a man, who at the moment when he 

had never tasted, and should swallow it with avidity. We may add, 

action of some kind absolutely necessary to him. 

He was a peasant, but he had been a notary, which added trickery to his 

cunning, and penetration to his ingenuousness. Having, through various 

thing in a village; and the other peasants said of him: "He talks almost 

pigeon-hole of the plebeian: rather rustic, rather citified; pepper and 

salt. Fauchelevent, though sorely tried and harshly used by fate, 

impulsive man, and extremely spontaneous in his actions; a precious 

malice or stupidity. 

of straw, and watching Cosette's slumbers. Fauchelevent sat up and 

said:-- 

revery. 

The two men took counsel together. 

garden and we are done for." 

auspicious moment, I mean to say a very inauspicious moment; one of 

'our cell,' and that I say 'my cabin.' The prayers for the dying are to 

for to-day; but I will not answer for to-morrow." 

wall, it is hidden by a sort of ruin, there are trees, it is not visible 

from the convent." 

interrogation point that Fauchelevent responded:-- 

uttered, a bell emitted one stroke. 

ball roll aside, to send them all hither, in spite of prohibitions, to 

hunt and rummage for it all about here. Those cherubs are devils." 

shriek: 'Oh! a man!' There is no danger to-day. There will be no 

the bell. As I told you, a stroke each minute. It is the death knell." 

how they fasten a bell to my paw as though I were a wild beast." 

would be our salvation," he murmured. 

Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart. 

to get out." 

Fauchelevent went on:-- 

enter by the door." 

sake of questioning you, but how did you get in?" 

filled with tigers, and once out of it, imagine a friendly counsel that 

collar, Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps. 

sky." 

at all fond of that visit. A doctor is a man who does not believe in 

Your little one is still asleep. What is her name?" 

my vintage basket on my back, the child is in it, I go out. Father 

will tell the child to keep very quiet. She will be under the cover. I 

will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend, a 

has a little bed. I will shout in the fruit-seller's ear, that she is a 

the little one will re-enter with you; for I will contrive to have you 

re-enter. It must be done. But how will you manage to get out?" 

Find some means of getting me out in a basket, under cover, like 

Cosette." 

left hand, a sign of serious embarrassment. 

of my gardener's duty. A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger. She is 

nail up the coffin. The undertaker's men come and get it, and whip 

nothing in it, they take it away again with something in it. That's what 

a burial is like. De profundis." 

He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent. 

good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble:-- 

going to retire. It is a shame, for it is convenient. I have a friend 

privilege, it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall. There is 

Father Madeleine--" 

knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again. 

hungry, there is wine, bread and cheese." 

melon patch. 

nuns in his road to flight, tapped gently at a door, and a gentle voice 

replied: "Forever! Forever!" that is to say: "Enter." 

The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing the 

gardener on business. This parlor adjoined the chapter hall. The 

Fauchelevent. 

that wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur, Mother Innocente, who 

was ordinarily cheerful. 

prioress, who was telling her beads, raised her eyes and said:-- 

The prioress stared at him. 

had been a success during the something more than two years which he had 

keener, and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more acute. He had 

applied himself to riddling out the significance of the different peals, 

vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent. He was a curious mute. He 

had set two men to chattering: the porter, in the convent, and he 

knew the singularities of their parlor, and the grave-digger, at 

him. Old, lame, blind to everything, probably a little deaf into the 

bargain,--what qualities! They would have found it difficult to replace 

him. 

to the reverend prioress. He talked a long time about his age, his 

a movement),--"a brother no longer young"--(a second movement on the 

part of the prioress, but one expressive of reassurance),--"that, if he 

greatly to his regret, to go away; and that his brother had a little 

daughter whom he would bring with him, who might be reared for God in 

the house, and who might, who knows, become a nun some day." 

rosary between her fingers, and said to him:-- 

were probably assembled. Fauchelevent was left alone. 

herself once more on her chair. 

report of the dialogue which then ensued, to the best of our ability. 

Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of 

Saint Bernard, while Merlonus Horstius only gives three hundred and 

sixty-seven, I do not despise Merlonus Horstius." 

not a dock-yard." 

resembled hesitation, broke it. 

"Really?" 

resumed:-- 

merely from having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer." 

church." 

fine sight it would be, to see a man enter the dead-room!" 

"More often!" 

often." 

the most Holy Sacrament of the altar," said the prioress. 

"Amen," said Fauchelevent. 

have unravelled that skein. 

then raised her voice:-- 

will perform miracles." 

not to flinch again. 

No doubt, it is not granted to every one to die, like Cardinal de 

Berulle, while saying the holy mass, and to breathe forth their souls to 

attaining to such happiness, Mother Crucifixion's death was very 

precious. She retained her consciousness to the very last moment. 

something of paradise in that death." 

his peace. 

who bear wonderful fruit." 

garden." 

Holy Father, Pius VII.--" 

not hear it. She continued:-- 

earth; this was done. Is this true?" 

gallows; this was done." 

into the sea, requested that on his tomb might be engraved the 

passers-by would spit on his tomb. This was done. The dead must be 

obeyed." 

church of the Dominicans in Limoges, although Bernard Guidonis was 

Bishop of Tuy in Spain. Can the contrary be affirmed?" 

prioress resumed:-- 

which she has slept for the last twenty years." 

"Yes." 

"Under the altar." 

She asked it of us; that is to say, commanded us." 

again, and who are now deliberating, have decided that Mother 

tombs." 

Pogonatus." 

to be buried in religion, that is to say, beneath the altar." 

volvitur orbis." 

manner from the dilemma, whenever he heard Latin. 

his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in, he 

rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away:-- 

abbot by the bishop of Chalon-sur-Saone, Guillaume de Champeaux; he had 

seven hundred novices, and founded a hundred and sixty monasteries; he 

and Henry his disciple, and another sort of erring spirits who were 

called the Apostolics; he confounded Arnauld de Brescia, darted 

lightning at the monk Raoul, the murderer of the Jews, dominated the 

Eugene III., regulated the Temple, preached the crusade, performed 

two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime, and as many 

Mont-Cassin; he was the second founder of the Saintete Claustrale, 

Saint Benoit, on the other the inspector of public ways! The state, 

the road commissioners, the public undertaker, regulations, the 

passer-by who would not be indignant to see how we are treated. We 

department is a revolutionary invention. God subordinated to the 

commissary of police; such is the age. Silence, Fauvent!" 

continued:-- 

and those in error deny it. We live in times of terrible confusion. We 

do not know that which it is necessary to know, and we know that which 

ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century. Others are so 

memory, and Voltaire one of unblessed memory. The last arch-bishop, 

the Cardinal de Perigord, did not even know that Charles de 

Gondren succeeded to Berulle, and Francois Bourgoin to Gondren, 

and Jean-Francois Senault to Bourgoin, and Father Sainte-Marthe to 

Jean-Francois Senault. The name of Father Coton is known, not because 

was the brother of Salone, Bishop of Embrun, and because both of them 

followed Mommol. What has that to do with the question? Does that 

to a beggar? They persecute the saints. They shut their eyes to the 

are blind. No one thinks of hell as a reality. Oh! how wicked people 

are! By order of the king signifies to-day, by order of the revolution. 

death is prohibited. Burial is a civil matter. This is horrible. Saint 

Leo II. wrote two special letters, one to Pierre Notaire, the other to 

of March, of the year 543? All this is incontestable. I abhor 

yet more any one who should maintain the contrary. One has only to 

read Arnoul Wion, Gabriel Bucelin, Trithemus, Maurolics, and Dom Luc 

d'Achery." 

it to the chapel. The office for the dead will then be said. Then we 

Mother Ascension and yourself." 

not." 

post should perceive your presence." 

"Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit?" 

doctor for the dead to be summoned has already been rung. But you do not 

understand any of the peals?" 

heap of old iron at the bottom of the garden." 

strong man for you. A perfect Turk!" 

"You will do it as speedily as possible." 

assistant. I limp." 

surnames, the Saint and the Lame." 

little hard of hearing. 

been completed a good quarter of an hour before that." 

orders. I am to nail up the coffin. At eleven o'clock exactly, I am to 

we will close the vault again. After which, there will be no trace 

arranged, reverend Mother?" 

"No!" 

gesture which dismisses a troublesome subject. 

basement of the church, and no one can enter there but myself, and I 

will cover the coffin with the pall." 

into the grave, will be sure to feel that there is nothing in it." 

the gardener. The vil stuck fast in his throat. 

effect of a corpse." 

the empty coffin?" 

him. Fauchelevent went towards the door. As he was on the point of 

passing out, the prioress raised her voice gently:-- 

to-morrow, after the burial, and tell him to fetch his daughter." 

AUSTIN CASTILLEJO 

You will wait for me at a lady's house. I shall come to fetch you. Obey, 

get you again!" 

door. 

permission to bring you in; but before bringing you in you must be 

got out. That's where the difficulty lies. It is easy enough with the 

"Impossible." 

earth in it. When I come to think it over, the earth instead of the 

corpse will not seem like the real thing, it won't do, it will get 

Father Madeleine, the government will notice it." 

to-morrow morning. It is to-morrow that I am to bring you in. The 

prioress expects you." 

fell among his duties to take part in their burials, that he nailed up 

who had died that morning had requested to be buried in the coffin which 

The government sends a coffin. The next day it sends a hearse and 

undertaker's men will come and lift the coffin; there will be nothing in 

it." 

his chair. 

face like a flash from heaven in the winter. 

dead.' and I add: 'and Father Madeleine is buried.'" 

"The basket will be of pine, and the cover a black cloth." 

white." 

which surrounded him, and mingle with what he called the "petty course 

of life in the convent," caused Fauchelevent as much amazement as a 

gull fishing in the gutter of the Rue Saint-Denis would inspire in a 

passer-by. 

managed? Where is this coffin?" 

"Down stairs, in what is called the dead-room. It stands on two 

trestles, under the pall." 

on the garden, which is closed on the outside by a shutter, and two 

doors; one leads into the convent, the other into the church." 

porter has the key to the door which communicates with the church." 

That is even written on the wall." 

the key." 

Vaugirard cemetery a little before nightfall. It is not very near." 

morning. And how about food? I shall be hungry." 

this. Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contract 

himself to fit the diameter of the escape. The prisoner is subject to 

An escape is a cure. What does not a man undergo for the sake of a 

of goods, to live for a long time in a box, to find air where there is 

dying--this was one of Jean Valjean's gloomy talents. 

desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication. 

in this manner. 

caught here, or accept this escape through the hearse." 

between two resolutions, at the risk of getting crushed through the 

are, and because they are cats, sometimes incur more danger than 

the audacious. Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature. But 

Jean Valjean's coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself. He 

grumbled:-- 

Fauchelevent. "If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right, I 

am sure of getting you out of the grave. The grave-digger is a drunkard, 

will arrive a little before dusk, three-quarters of an hour before the 

a chisel, and some pincers in my pocket. The hearse halts, the 

undertaker's men knot a rope around your coffin and lower you down. The 

He is my friend, I tell you. One of two things will happen, he will 

either be sober, or he will not be sober. If he is not drunk, I shall 

is open.' I carry him off, I get him drunk,--it does not take long to 

make Father Mestienne drunk, he always has the beginning of it about 

off; I will do your work for you.' Off he goes, and I drag you out of 

the hole." 

upon it with the touching effusion of a peasant. 

would be terrible." 

CHAPTER V--IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE 
IMMORTAL 

on the Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to an old-fashioned 

hearse, ornamented with skulls, cross-bones, and tears. This hearse 

contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over which spread a large 

black cross, like a huge corpse with drooping arms. A mourning-coach, in 

which could be seen a priest in his surplice, and a choir boy in his red 

cap, followed. Two undertaker's men in gray uniforms trimmed with black 

walked on the right and the left of the hearse. Behind it came an old 

man in the garments of a laborer, who limped along. The procession was 

going in the direction of the Vaugirard cemetery. 

a pair of pincers were visible, protruding from the man's pocket. 

Paris. It had its peculiar usages, just as it had its carriage 

entrance and its house door, which old people in the quarter, who clung 

tenaciously to ancient words, still called the porte cavaliere and the 

porte pietonne.[16] The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Rue Petit-Picpus 

had obtained permission, as we have already stated, to be buried there 

in a corner apart, and at night, the plot of land having formerly 

belonged to their community. The grave-diggers being thus bound to 

gates, adjoining a pavilion built by the architect Perronet, and 

swung inexorably on their hinges at the instant when the sun disappeared 

fall, pulled the rope, and the small door opened. If the man had not his 

card, he mentioned his name, the porter, who was sometimes in bed and 

his key; the grave-digger stepped out, but had to pay a fine of fifteen 

francs. 

embarrassed the symmetry of the administration. It was suppressed 

on a board, and which formed an angle, one side on the drinkers' tables, 

and the other on the tombs, with this sign: Au Bon Coing. 

The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery. It 

It is recognized as elegant. The Vaugirard cemetery was a venerable 

very tall grass. In the evening it was tragic there. There were very 

lugubrious lines about it. 

black cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery. The lame man 

who followed it was no other than Fauchelevent. 

exit of Cosette, the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room,--all 

the altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight. It 

consciences. In the cloister, what is called the "government" is only 

to God. A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle. 

all appearance. Jean Valjean's composure was one of those powerful 

tranquillities which are contagious. Fauchelevent no longer felt 

doubtful as to his success. 

he had made good Father Mestienne, a chubby-cheeked person, drunk at 

with him. He made him dance according to his whim. Mestienne's head 

adjusted itself to the cap of Fauchelevent's will. Fauchelevent's 

confidence was perfect. 

aloud, as he rubbed his big hands:-- 

a sort of laboring man, who wore a waistcoat with large pockets and 

carried a mattock under his arm. 

would make the same face that Fauchelevent made. 

die. It is true, nevertheless, that grave-diggers do die themselves. By 

strength to stammer:-- 

is Gribier." 

unsuccessful doctor who had turned grave-digger. 

but long live little Father Lenoir! Do you know who little Father Lenoir 

is? He is a jug of red wine. It is a jug of Surene, morbigou! of real 

a jolly fellow. But you are a jolly fellow, too. Are you not, comrade? 

We'll go and have a drink together presently." 

cemetery. 

from infirmity. 

who, though slender, are extremely strong. 

muttered: 

empties his glass empties his heart. You must come and have a drink with 

me. Such a thing cannot be refused." 

leading to the nuns' corner. 

I cannot drink." 

phrase well:-- 

a thicket. This indicated the immediate proximity of the place of 

rains, clogged the wheels and retarded its speed. 

literature. But he had reverses. He had losses on 'change. I was obliged 

to renounce the profession of author. But I am still a public writer." 

at this branch, feeble as it was. 

not wish to pay, troubled as he was. 

of the hand I join the labor of the arm. I have my scrivener's stall in 

love to the raw soldiers. In the morning I write love letters; in the 

evening I dig graves. Such is life, rustic." 

down from his brow. 

I must choose between the pen and the mattock. The mattock is ruining my 

hand." 

The hearse halted. 

pile of earth, beyond which an open grave was visible. 

could almost breathe. 

He, like Fauchelevent, counted on Father Mestienne. He had no doubt 

complete composure. 

Valjean's tranquillity. 

death. 

the planks; he explained it to himself as the rope which was being 

fastened round the casket in order to lower it into the cavity. 

He had just touched the bottom. 

catch them one by one:-- 

alii in approbrium, ut videant semper." 

"De profundis." 

the plank which covered him. It was probably the holy water. 

longer. The priest will take his departure. Fauchelevent will take 

alone, and I shall get out. That will be the work of a good hour." 

Jean Valjean strained his ears, and heard something like retreating 

footsteps. 

clap of thunder. 

Valjean lost consciousness. 

entered the carriage again and taken their departure, Fauchelevent, who 

had not taken his eyes from the grave-digger, saw the latter bend over 

and grasp his shovel, which was sticking upright in the heap of dirt. 

arms and said:-- 

"For the wine." 

in a voice in which the strangling sound of the death rattle began to 

mingle:-- 

continued. 

And he seized the man's arm. 

begin, then, by going for a drink." 

reflection occurred to him: "And if he drinks, will he get drunk?" 

consent. We will drink. After work, never before." 

ding dong, that's all you know how to say. Go hang yourself." 

saying. 

"When we have put the child to bed," said the grave-digger. 

if we were to plant her there without a coverlet." 

mechanically into that pocket, and there it stopped. 

that yawning pocket. 

traversed Fauchelevent's pupils. An idea had just occurred to him. 

grave-digger, who was wholly absorbed in his shovelful of earth, 

it. 

him and said:-- 

francs fine!" 

the devices. I will give you some friendly advice. One thing is clear, 

cemetery will be closed in five minutes more." 

as hollow as the devil, this grave, and to reach the gate in season to 

pass it before it is shut." 

87 Rue de Vaugirard." 

speed." 

nothing to pay. And you will bury your corpse. I'll watch it for you in 

the meantime, so that it shall not run away." 

on a run. 

grave, and said in a low tone:-- 

cold chisel and his hammer, and pried up the coffin lid. 

then fell back against the side of the grave, ready to swoon on the 

coffin. He stared at Jean Valjean. 

his clenched fists came in contact with his shoulders, he cried:-- 

often talks aloud. 

He is in the coffin. It is quite handy. All is over. Now, is there any 

of its being possible for a man like that to die like this! When I think 

man out of all the good God's good folks! And his little girl! Ah! In 

the first place, I won't go back there myself. I shall stay here. After 

if we are two old fools! But, in the first place, how did he manage to 

enter the convent? That was the beginning of it all. One should not 

Madeleine! Monsieur Madeleine! Monsieur le Maire! He does not hear me. 

Now get out of this scrape if you can!" 

the cemetery gate closing. 

recoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit. 

him. 

in recovering himself as Jean Valjean had. 

They would have put me in Bicetre. What do you suppose I should 

have done if you had been dead? And your little girl? There's that 

saints of paradise, what a tale! Ah! you are alive, that's the best of 

it!" 

they had recovered themselves, although they did not realize it, 

and there was about them something uncanny, which was the sinister 

bewilderment inspired by the place. 

provided himself. 

again. 

be apprehended. That "conscript" was at home busily engaged in looking 

for his card, and at some difficulty in finding it in his lodgings, 

back into the cemetery. 

together they buried the empty coffin. 

had stiffened himself in that coffin, and had become a little like a 

planks. He had, in a manner, to thaw out, from the tomb. 

leg, for otherwise we might step out briskly." 

more." 

the porter pulled the rope, the gate opened, and they went out. 

that was of yours, Father Madeleine!" 

passports. 

87." 

mattock and wait a couple of minutes for me." 

the dark, at the door of an attic. 

all such wretched habitations, an unfurnished and encumbered garret. 

A packing-case--a coffin, perhaps--took the place of a commode, a 

tattered fragment which had been a piece of an old carpet, a thin 

would have said that there had been an earthquake "for one." The covers 

from the jug to his wife, responsible for its loss. He wore an air of 

desperation. 

take any notice of this sad side of his success. 

He entered and said:-- 

cemetery." 

the corpse, that I have filled the grave, that I have done your work, 

to pay fifteen francs. There you have it, conscript." 

pay for the drinks." 

knocker and rapped. 

the Rue du Chemin-Vert, where Fauchelevent had deposited her on the 

preceding day. Cosette had passed these twenty-four hours trembling 

than a melancholy and unvarying gaze. Cosette had betrayed nothing of 

terrified little being: Say nothing! Fear is mute. Moreover, no one 

guards a secret like a child. 

thoughtful person who had chanced to hear that cry, would have guessed 

that it issued from an abyss. 

Fauchelevent belonged to the convent and knew the pass-words. All the 

doors opened. 

how to get in. 

bottom of the court, which faced the carriage entrance. 

preceding day, had received his orders from the prioress. 

her veil lowered, stood beside her. 

the parlor. 

examines like a downcast eye. 

"You are the brother?" 

Fauchelevent replied:-- 

Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word. 

vocal mother:-- 

corner of the parlor, then the prioress turned round and said:-- 

required now." 

and the nuns could not resist the temptation to raise the corner of 

men, Fauvent and another man, were visible as they dug side by side. An 

other: "He is an assistant gardener." 

knee-cap; henceforth he was official. His name was Ultime Fauchelevent. 

prioress's observation upon Cosette: "She will grow up ugly." 

to Cosette and gave her a place in the school as a charity pupil. 

do not easily become nuns; the vocation being voluntary in inverse 

from the pretty. Hence a lively taste for plain girls. 

thereby, but no one was aware of it. 

prioress recounted the affair to his Grace, making something of a 

made its way to Rome. We have seen a note addressed by the then reigning 

Genga; it contained these lines: "It appears that there is in a convent 

in the London Illustrated News, with this inscription: "Bull which 

carried off the prize at the Cattle Show." 

daughter. Moreover, as she knew nothing, she could say nothing, and 

then, she would not have said anything in any case. As we have just 

Jean Valjean. She speedily became accustomed to the convent. Only she 

away with me." 

same mourning suit which he had made her put on when she had quitted 

quantity of camphor and all the aromatics in which convents abound, in a 

little valise which he found means of procuring. He set this valise on 

smells so good?" 

work, since it was shared. Lastly, as he was very fond of snuff, he 

luxurious manner, seeing that M. Madeleine paid for it. 

other Fauvent. 

done outside in the behalf of the garden, it was always the elder 

Fauchelevent, the old, the infirm, the lame man, who went, and never the 

on each other, they paid no heed to this. 

stir out. Javert watched the quarter for more than a month. 

remain happy. 

Fauchelevent. This hovel, built of old rubbish, which was still in 

chambers, all of which were utterly bare and had nothing beyond the 

whereon to hang the knee-cap and the basket, a Royalist bank-note 

following is an exact facsimile:-- 

the preceding gardener, an old Chouan, who had died in the convent, and 

whose place Fauchelevent had taken. 

himself a gardener once more. It will be remembered that he knew all 

He budded them and made them produce excellent fruit. 

sisters were melancholy and he was kind, the child made comparisons and 

adored him. At the appointed hour she flew to the hut. When she entered 

rest. 

banishes winter from the human countenance. 

the windows of her dormitory. 

that virtue adjoins pride on one side. A bridge built by the devil 

the Bishop, he had regarded himself as unworthy and had remained humble; 

but for some time past he had been comparing himself to men in general, 

and pride was beginning to spring up. Who knows? He might have ended by 

returning very gradually to hatred. 

place, whose severities had always appeared to him the iniquity of 

cloister; and when he meditated how he had formed a part of the galleys, 

and that he now, so to speak, was a spectator of the cloister, he 

confronted the two in his own mind with anxiety. 

descended the endless spirals of revery. 

carter's blouse on their backs when it was very cold; they drank no 

lived nameless, designated only by numbers, and converted, after a 

manner, into ciphers themselves, with downcast eyes, with lowered 

voices, with shorn heads, beneath the cudgel and in disgrace. 

lowered voices, not in disgrace, but amid the scoffs of the world, 

among men; they no longer existed except under austere appellations. 

which gave them fever. They dwelt, not in rooms warmed only during 

rigorous cold, but in cells where no fire was ever lighted; they slept, 

with their knees on the stones. 

pavement, and arms outstretched in the form of a cross. 

murdered, assassinated. They were bandits, counterfeiters, poisoners, 

incendiaries, murderers, parricides. What had these women done? They had 

done nothing whatever. 

homicide, all sorts of sacrilege, every variety of crime; on the other, 

one thing only, innocence. 

assumption, attached to the earth by virtue, already possessing 

something of heaven through holiness. 

crimes! And what faults! 

cannon, and literally devouring its plague-stricken victims; on 

and of gleams full of radiance. 

a legal limit always in sight, and then, escape. In the second, 

faint light of liberty which men call death. 

faith. 

sarcasm against heaven. 

of beings who were so very unlike, were undergoing the same work, 

personal expiation, the expiation for one's self. But he did not 

what? What expiation? 

generosities, the expiation for others." 

impressions. 

wretch that he was, had shaken his fist at God. 

a warning whisper from Providence itself: the scaling of that wall, the 

death, the painful and difficult ascent, all those efforts even, which 

This house was a prison likewise and bore a melancholy resemblance to 

idea of anything similar. 

more around lambs. 

still more austere, more gloomy, and more pitiless than the other. 

breeze blew in the cage of these doves. 

amazement before this mystery of sublimity. 

convent through humility. 

as he knelt before the sister. 

women, that silent cloister, slowly permeated him, and little by little, 

the flowers, of simplicity like the women, of joy like the children. 

And then he reflected that these had been two houses of God which had 

received him in succession at two critical moments in his life: the 

the second, at a moment when human society had again set out in pursuit 

been for the second, into torment. 

[THE END OF VOLUME II. "COSETTE"] 

VOLUME III--MARIUS. 

CHAPTER I--PARVULUS 

sparrow; the child is called the gamin. 

leaps out from them a little being. Homuncio, Plautus would say. 

no shoes on his feet, no roof over his head; he is like the flies of 

ears, a single suspender of yellow listing; he runs, lies in wait, 

rummages about, wastes time, blackens pipes, swears like a convict, 

innocent. 

"It is my little one." 

to be dead is to eat dandelions by the root; his own occupations, 

calls making the bridge of arts, crying discourses pronounced by the 

authorities in favor of the French people, cleaning out the cracks 

This curious money, which receives the name of loques--rags--has 

children. 

the corners; the lady-bird, the death's-head plant-louse, the 

sometimes slowly, sometimes rapidly, which has no cry, but which has a 

look, and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it; he calls this 

monster "the deaf thing." The search for these "deaf things" among 

the ditches of the Champs-de-Mars. 

with a certain indescribable, unexpected joviality; he upsets the 

from high comedy to farce. 

customary for doctors to carry home their own work?" 

trinkets, turns round indignantly: "You good-for-nothing, you have 

seized my wife's waist!"--"I, sir? Search me!" 

CHAPTER III--HE IS AGREEABLE 

to procure, the homuncio enters a theatre. On crossing that magic 

keel in the air. It is in that keel that the titi huddle together. 

the name of Paradise. 

and you have the gamin. 

it with the proper amount of regret, would not constitute classic 

children was seasoned with a touch of irony. The gamin called her 

Mademoiselle Muche--"hide yourself." 

Alleluia with Matantur-lurette, chants every rhythm from the De 

ignorant of, is a Spartan to the point of thieving, is mad to wisdom, is 

in this youth. 

of stilted things, he introduces caricature into epic extravaganzas. 

him, the street Arab would say: "Hi there! The bugaboo!" 

gamin. 

connections, "grows supple" in suffering, in the presence of social 

Prejudice, Abuse, Ignorance, Oppression, Iniquity, Despotism, Injustice, 

Fanaticism, Tyranny, beware of the gaping gamin. 

amphora. 

of the sage in him. Urbis amator, like Fuscus; ruris amator, like 

Flaccus. 

beginning of the human uproar; hence an extraordinary interest. 

passing stroller with the epithet: melancholy, the apparently objectless 

promenades of the dreamer. 

of Paris, and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs. That 

close-shaven turf, those pebbly paths, that chalk, those pools, 

squarely intersecting immense, vague stretches of land inundated with 

sunshine and full of butterflies,--all this attracted him. 

all speckled with balls, Mont-Parnasse, the Fosse-aux-Loups, Aubiers on 

but fields, houses, or trees in what a stretch of country offers us, is 

with a certain piercing melancholy. Nature and humanity both appeal 

appearance. 

contiguous to our faubourgs, which may be designated as the limbos of 

Paris, has seen here and there, in the most desert spot, at the 

dusty, ragged, dishevelled, playing hide-and-seek, and crowned with 

they innocently sing their repertory of dirty songs. There they are, or 

rather, there they exist, far from every eye, in the sweet light of 

May or June, kneeling round a hole in the ground, snapping marbles with 

their thumbs, quarrelling over half-farthings, irresponsible, volatile, 

recollect that they have an industry, and that they must earn their 

living, and they offer to sell you an old woollen stocking filled 

the environs of Paris. 

their sisters?--who are almost young maidens, thin, feverish, with 

visions mingle with his dreams. 

escape from the Parisian atmosphere than fish can escape from the 

water. For them, nothing exists two leagues beyond the barriers: 

Ivry, Gentilly, Arcueil, Belleville, Aubervilliers, Menilmontant, 

Choisy-le-Roi, Billancourt, Mendon, Issy, Vanvre, Sevres, Puteaux, 

Neuilly, Gennevilliers, Colombes, Romainville, Chatou, Asnieres, 

Bougival, Nanterre, Enghien, Noisy-le-Sec, Nogent, Gournay, Drancy, 

Gonesse; the universe ends there. 

crimes of the man begin in the vagabondage of the child. 

a lost man, while nearly everywhere the child left to itself is, in 

of Paris, we insist on this point, however defaced and injured on the 

surface, is almost intact on the interior. It is a magnificent thing to 

idea which exists in the air of Paris, as salt exists in the water of 

the ocean. To breathe Paris preserves the soul. 

whom one fancies that he beholds floating the threads of a broken 

family. In the civilization of the present day, incomplete as it still 

of Paris." 

the powerful. The hatred of instruction for the children of the people 

Now, the erring child is the corollary of the ignorant child. 

that case it skimmed the streets. 

to create a fleet. The idea was a good one. But let us consider 

the means. There can be no fleet, if, beside the sailing ship, that 

plaything of the winds, and for the purpose of towing it, in case of 

Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the parliaments make 

complaisance in the matter. A man kept his hat on in the presence of a 

galleys. Grand reign; grand century. 

off, for what mysterious purpose no one knew. People whispered with 

speaks ingenuously of these things. It sometimes happened that the 

exempts of the guard, when they ran short of children, took those who 

had fathers. The fathers, in despair, attacked the exempts. In that 

case, the parliament intervened and had some one hung. Who? The exempts? 

No, the fathers. 

almost say: Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so. 

speech through the literary tongue, in 1834. It is in a little work 

entitled Claude Gueux that this word made its appearance. The horror was 

lively. The word passed into circulation. 

other are very various. We have known and associated with one who was 

greatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall from 

the top of the tower of Notre-Dame; another, because he had succeeded in 

making his way into the rear courtyard where the statues of the dome 

of the Invalides had been temporarily deposited, and had "prigged" some 

lead from them; a third, because he had seen a diligence tip over; still 

another, because he "knew" a soldier who came near putting out the eye 

of a citizen. 

epiphonema, which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending,--Dieu 

de Dieu! What ill-luck I do have! to think that I have never yet seen 

anybody tumble from a fifth-story window! (I have pronounced I'ave and 

fifth pronounced fift'.) 

wife has died of her malady; why did you not send for the doctor?" 

"What would you have, sir, we poor folks die of ourselves." But if 

the peasant's whole passivity lies in this saying, the whole of the 

free-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is, assuredly, 

talking to his black cap! Oh, the sneak!" 

strong-minded is an important item. 

Mouthful, etc., etc. In order not to lose anything of the affair, he 

scales the walls, he hoists himself to balconies, he ascends trees, he 

names. They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him. They sometimes 

bravely, uttered these words which contain a future: "I was jealous of 

and very handsome, that Bories had a romantic small beard, that Jean 

he added: "I will not fall." "I don't care if you do," retorted the 

gendarme. 

deal. One reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cut 

one's self very deeply, "to the very bone." 

when night is falling, in front of the bridges of Austerlitz and Jena, 

from the tops of coal wagons, and the washerwomen's boats, he hurls 

himself headlong into the Seine, and into all possible infractions of 

the laws of modesty and of the police. Nevertheless the police keep an 

eye on him, and the result is a highly dramatic situation which 

once gave rise to a fraternal and memorable cry; that cry which was 

celebrated about 1830, is a strategic warning from gamin to gamin; it 

scans like a verse from Homer, with a notation as inexpressible as the 

eleusiac chant of the Panathenaea, and in it one encounters again the 

ancient Evohe. Here it is: "Ohe, Titi, oheee! Here comes the bobby, here 

comes the p'lice, pick up your duds and be off, through the sewer with 

you!" 

sometimes he knows how to write; he always knows how to daub. He 

does not hesitate to acquire, by no one knows what mysterious mutual 

instruction, all the talents which can be of use to the public; from 

1815 to 1830, he imitated the cry of the turkey; from 1830 to 1848, he 

scrawled pears on the walls. One summer evening, when Louis Philippe was 

returning home on foot, he saw a little fellow, no higher than his knee, 

perspiring and climbing up to draw a gigantic pear in charcoal on one 

of the pillars of the gate of Neuilly; the King, with that good-nature 

and gave the child a louis, saying: "The pear is on that also."[19] 

replied: "There is a cure there." It was there, in fact, that the Papal 

Nuncio lived. 

that he will accept, and in that case he serves the mass civilly. There 

trousers sewed up again. 

can always put the name to the face of any one which he chances to 

of the police like an open book. He will tell you fluently and without 

traitor, malicious, great, ridiculous, have a particular meaning in his 

Desmoulins was a native of the faubourgs. Championnet, who treated 

familiarly to give orders to the phial of Saint Januarius. 

handsome eyes because he has wit. If Jehovah himself were present, he 

boxing. All beliefs are possible to him. He plays in the gutter, and 

the presence of grape-shot; he was a scapegrace, he is a hero; like the 

says "Vah!" and in a moment he has passed from the small brat to the 

giant. 

himself, because he is unhappy. 

wrinkle of the old world on his brow. 

disease which must be cured, how? By light. 

education. Make men, make men. Give them light that they may warm 

present itself with the irresistible authority of the absolute truth; 

will have to make this choice; the children of France or the gamins of 

Paris; flames in the light or will-o'-the-wisps in the gloom. 

Town-Hall, a Parthenon, Notre-Dame, a Mount Aventine, the Faubourg 

Saint-Antoine, an Asinarium, the Sorbonne, a Pantheon, the Pantheon, a 

its Transteverin is the man of the faubourgs, its hammal is the 

of Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides, the 

Therapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncoeur the 

grenadier, Damasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy among 

of l'Etoile, the sword-eater of Poecilus encountered by Apuleius is a 

sword-swallower on the Pont Neuf, the nephew of Rameau and Curculio 

the parasite make a pair, Ergasilus could get himself presented to 

Phoedromus, Diabolus, and Argyrippus, descend from Courtille in 

Labatut's posting-chaise; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front of 

the Cafe Anglais at Nomentanus the fast liver, Hermogenus is a tenor 

of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat after a lapse of two 

thousand years Thesprion's apostrophe: Quis properantem me prehendit 

Pere Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains same gleams as the 

Esquiliae, and the grave of the poor bought for five years, is certainly 

the equivalent of the slave's hived coffin. 

nothing that is not in Mesmer's tub; Ergaphilas lives again in 

Cagliostro; the Brahmin Vasaphanta become incarnate in the Comte de 

as the Mosque of Oumoumie at Damascus. 

terrified, like Delphos at the fulgurating realities of the vision; it 

if Louis XV. is worse than Claudian, Madame Dubarry is better than 

Messalina. Paris combines in an unprecedented type, which has existed 

and which we have elbowed, Grecian nudity, the Hebraic ulcer, and the 

Gascon pun. It mingles Diogenes, Job, and Jack-pudding, dresses up a 

Vibiscus is to be credited: Contra Gracchos Tiberim habemus, Bibere 

Tiberim, id est seditionem oblivisci. Paris drinks a million litres of 

general alarm and ringing the tocsin. 

it is not too particular about its Venus; its Callipyge is Hottentot; 

provided that it is made to laugh, it condones; ugliness cheers it, 

not disgust it; it is so literary that it does not hold its nose before 

is lacking in the profile of Paris. The bal Mabile is not the polymnia 

devours the lorette with her eyes, exactly as the procuress Staphyla 

lay in wait for the virgin Planesium. The Barriere du Combat is not 

looking on. The Syrian hostess has more grace than Mother Saguet, 

but, if Virgil haunted the Roman wine-shop, David d'Angers, Balzac 

makes his entry there on his ass. For Silenus read Ramponneau. 

Pantin. All civilizations are there in an abridged form, all barbarisms 

also. Paris would greatly regret it if it had not a guillotine. 

eternal festival be without this seasoning? Our laws are wisely 

sometimes derides those whom it subjugates. To please you, O Athenians! 

exclaimed Alexander. Paris makes more than the law, it makes the 

fashion; Paris sets more than the fashion, it sets the routine. Paris 

may be stupid, if it sees fit; it sometimes allows itself this luxury; 

that this grandioseness and this burlesque should be amicable neighbors, 

that all this majesty should not be thrown into disorder by all this 

joviality. Its gayety is of the thunder and its farce holds a sceptre. 

its masterpieces, its prodigies, its epics, go forth to the bounds of 

It imposes its caricatures as well as its ideal on people; the highest 

monuments of human civilization accept its ironies and lend their 

14th of July, which delivers the globe; it forces all nations to take 

the oath of tennis; its night of the 4th of August dissolves in three 

the sublime; it fills with its light Washington, Kosciusko, Bolivar, 

Bozzaris, Riego, Bem, Manin, Lopez, John Brown, Garibaldi; it is 

everywhere where the future is being lighted up, at Boston in 1779, 

the Gozzi inn on the seashore; it creates Canaris; it creates Quiroga; 

it creates Pisacane; it irradiates the great on earth; it was while 

proceeding whither its breath urge them, that Byron perished at 

the feet of Mirabeau, and a crater under the feet of Robespierre; 

its books, its theatre, its art, its science, its literature, its 

the idea of progress, the liberating dogmas which it forges are for the 

generations trusty friends, and it is with the soul of its thinkers and 

its poets that all heroes of all nations have been made since 1789; this 

does not prevent vagabondism, and that enormous genius which is called 

Paris, while transfiguring the world by its light, sketches in charcoal 

Bouginier's nose on the wall of the temple of Theseus and writes 

Credeville the thief on the Pyramids. 

laughing. 

heap of mud and stone, if you will, but, above all, a moral being. It is 

more than great, it is immense. Why? Because it is daring. 

Montesquieu should foresee it, that Diderot should preach it, that 

is necessary that Danton should dare it. 

attempt, to brave, to persist, to persevere, to be faithful to one's 

that is the example which nations need, that is the light which 

street Arab; to paint the child is to paint the city; and it is for that 

there is the pure blood; there is the true physiognomy; there this 

man. There exist there immense numbers of unknown beings, among whom 

They do not know how to read; so much the worse. Would you abandon them 

us obstinately persist therein! Light! Light! Who knows whether 

these opacities will not become transparent? Are not revolutions 

boughs from the oaks. Make a whirlwind of the idea. This crowd may 

be rendered sublime. Let us learn how to make use of that vast 

will perceive truth. Let that vile sand which you trample under foot be 

cast into the furnace, let it melt and seethe there, it will become a 

splendid crystal, and it is thanks to it that Galileo and Newton will 

discover stars. 

out above, if, with the laugh of his age on his lips, he had not had a 

love him. 

those who have father and mother, and who are orphans nevertheless. 

pavements were less hard to him than his mother's heart. 

he was free. 

escape because of their smallness. The tiniest hole saves them. 

50-52 with which the reader is acquainted--at the Gorbeau hovel. 

case in Paris, had no connection with each other. All belonged to 

sweeps up the mud, and the ragpicker who collects scraps. 

said: "Old women are never lacking." 

succession over her soul. 

cells which we have already mentioned. 

that his name was Jondrette. Some time after his moving in, which had 

had said to the woman, who, like her predecessor, was at the same time 

to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian, or even a Spaniard, 

perchance, it is I." 

and cold hearts. When he entered, he was asked: "Whence come you?" He 

"What did you come here for?" 

which spring up in cellars. It did not cause him suffering, and he 

blamed no one. He did not know exactly how a father and mother should 

be. 

was called Little Gavroche. Why was he called Little Gavroche? 

thread. 

last at the end of the corridor. The cell next to it was occupied by a 

very poor young man who was called M. Marius. 

CHAPTER I--NINETY YEARS AND THIRTY-TWO TEETH 

worthy man named M. Gillenormand, and who mention him with complaisance. 

This good man was old when they were young. This silhouette has not yet 

all the provinces of France were appended exactly as in our day, the 

capitals of Europe; a progression, by the way, in which progress is 

visible. 

those men who had become curiosities to be viewed, simply because 

resembled everybody, and now resemble nobody. He was a peculiar old man, 

clearly, drank neat, ate, slept, and snored. He had all thirty-two of 

and decidedly renounced women. He could no longer please, he said; he 

did not add: "I am too old," but: "I am too poor." He said: "If I were 

not ruined--Heee!" All he had left, in fact, was an income of about 

to have a hundred thousand livres income for mistresses. He did 

not belong, as the reader will perceive, to that puny variety of 

octogenaries who, like M. de Voltaire, have been dying all their life; 

whom he chastised severely with his tongue, when in a rage, and whom he 

had been mad and who detested him, being jealous of M. Gillenormand on 

admired his own discernment in all things, and declared that he was 

extremely sagacious; here is one of his sayings: "I have, in truth, some 

fashion, into his little chimney-corner satires: "Nature," he said, "in 

order that civilization may have a little of everything, gives it even 

specimens of its amusing barbarism. Europe possesses specimens of Asia 

transform them into oysters and swallow them. The Caribbeans leave only 

devour, we gnaw; we do not exterminate, we claw." 

on the first floor, between street and gardens, furnished to the very 

ceilings with great Gobelins and Beauvais tapestries representing 

pastoral scenes; the subjects of the ceilings and the panels were 

The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached to that 

with magnificent hangings of straw, with a pattern of flowers and 

fleurs-de-lys made on the galleys of Louis XIV. and ordered of his 

convicts by M. de Vivonne for his mistress. M. Gillenormand had 

inherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt, who had died a 

centenarian. He had had two wives. His manners were something between 

he might have been. He was gay, and caressing when he had a mind. In 

wives and never by their mistresses, because they are, at the same 

marvellous portrait of no one knows whom, painted by Jordaens, executed 

Louis XIV. nor yet that of Louis XVI.; it was that of the Incroyables 

voluminous revers, a long swallow-tail and large steel buttons. With 

of blackguards." 

sixteen like himself, obscure as a cat, and with whom he was in love. 

He abounded in memories. He was accustomed to exclaim: "How pretty she 

was--that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette, the last time I saw her 

at Longchamps, her hair curled in sustained sentiments, with her 

arrived, and her little agitation muff!" He had worn in his young 

Madame de Boufflers, having seen him by chance when he was twenty, had 

said, stifling outbursts of laughter the while. "Oh!" he said, "what 

did not restrain himself in the least before ladies. He uttered coarse 

had predicted that he would turn out a man of genius, and had bestowed 

on him these two significant names: Luc-Esprit. 

blue ribbon!" 

for the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing, for three 

in what manner he had saved himself during the Terror, and how he had 

an eulogium on the Republic in his presence, he turned purple and grew 

his ninety years, and said, "I hope that I shall not see ninety-three 

be a hundred. 

control the purse-strings. This abdication sets him free. Then his 

and that consoles her. While her husband disdains her, she has the 

when M. Gillenormand found himself a widower, there remained to him just 

sufficient to live on, by sinking nearly the whole of it in an annuity 

him. He had not hesitated on this point, not being anxious to leave 

and a female." When a servant entered his establishment, M. Gillenormand 

re-baptized him. He bestowed on the men the name of their province: 

the Magnon, of whom we shall hear more farther on). One day, a haughty 

cook, a cordon bleu, of the lofty race of porters, presented herself. 

"How much wages do you want a month?" asked M. Gillenormand. "Thirty 

and you shall be called Nicolette." 

being in despair. He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts 

of liberties. One of the facts of which his exterior relief and his 

born boy, who was yelling like the deuce, and duly wrapped in 

swaddling-clothes, which a servant-maid, dismissed six months 

previously, attributed to him. M. Gillenormand had, at that time, 

establishment. And whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade to 

believe that? What audacity! What an abominable calumny! M. Gillenormand 

bastard of his Majesty Charles IX., married a silly jade of fifteen 

when he was eighty-five; M. Virginal, Marquis d'Alluye, brother to 

eighty-three, by the maid of Madame la Presidente Jacquin, a son, a 

these things. And then, the Bible! Upon that I declare that this little 

gentleman is none of mine. Let him be taken care of. It is not his 

fault." This manner of procedure was good-tempered. The woman, whose 

Poitiers for three and thirty years, and had died at seventy-nine. 

bound to bestow alms on the poor whom he met, but he never gave them 

kindly, abrupt, charitable, and if he had been rich, his turn of mind 

and apparent manner, he uttered this solemn exclamation: "That was 

remained unmarried, and by the second another daughter, who had died 

said the old bourgeois. He took an immense amount of snuff, and had a 

back of one hand. He believed very little in God. 

was gray rather than white,--and which was always dressed in "dog's 

ears." To sum up, he was venerable in spite of all this. 

great. 

eighty. 

principal one, and that which was invariable, was to keep his door 

swerve from it. "The day is vulgar," said he, "and deserves only a 

closed shutter. Fashionable people only light up their minds when the 

zenith lights up its stars." And he barricaded himself against every 

of his day. 

into the world ten years apart. In their youth they had borne very 

one like an angel, the other like a goose. 

becomes terrestrial in our day. The younger wedded the man of her 

dreams, but she died. The elder did not marry at all. 

had ever known her first name. She was called Mademoiselle Gillenormand, 

the elder. 

her garter. 

The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels in 

proportion as the fortress is the less menaced. 

named Theodule, to embrace her without displeasure. 

demi-vice. 

to the society of the Virgin, wore a white veil on certain festivals, 

through great rays of gilded wood. 

Mademoiselle Vaubois, who was a positive blockhead, and beside whom 

Mademoiselle Gillenormand had the pleasure of being an eagle. Beyond 

the Agnus Dei and Ave Maria, Mademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge of 

single spot of intelligence. 

away the angles, and the softening which comes with time had come to 

her. She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not 

of a life that was finished, and which had never had a beginning. 

except in a severe voice, and sometimes, with uplifted cane: "Here, sir! 

you, you good-for-nothing!" etc., etc. He idolized him. 

CHAPTER I--AN ANCIENT SALON 

which was attributed to him, he was even sought out and made much of. He 

in the Royalist salons which he frequented cost his self-respect 

own against M. de Bonald, and even against M. Bengy-Puy-Vallee. 

his own neighborhood, in the Rue Ferou, with Madame la Baronne de T., 

a worthy and respectable person, whose husband had been Ambassador of 

bankrupt, during the emigration, leaving, as his entire fortune, 

volumes, bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges. Madame de T. had 

meagre income which had survived no one knew how. 

of the blue ribbon, or the Jacobinism of Louis XVIII., according as the 

the hopes which were presented by Monsieur, afterwards Charles X. 

following, addressed to "the federates":-- 

               Le bout d' chemis' qui vous pend. 

               Qu'on n' dis' pas qu' les patriotes 

               Ont arbore l' drapeau blanc? 

with innocent plays upon words which they supposed to be venomous, with 

moderate cabinet, of which MM. Decazes and Deserre were members:-- 

          Il faut changer de sol, et de serre et de case. 

a manner as to form, for example, phrases like the following: Damas. 

ira:-- 

               Les Bonapartistes a la lanterne! 

head, to-morrow that. It is only a variation. 

most deadly insult. 

occur in parties. 

through too easy relations; one must beware whom one admits; in the same 

way that there is a loss of caloric in the vicinity of those who are 

had his entry with M. le Prince de Soubise. In spite of? No, because. Du 

provided he be a god. 

as his trousers. 

quality. He had, in spite of his levity, and without its interfering in 

any way with his dignity, a certain manner about him which was imposing, 

dignified, honest, and lofty, in a bourgeois fashion; and his great 

produce around a head a venerable dishevelment. 

Ruppin, he was received by the descendant of Louis XIV. somewhat 

as though he had been the Marquis de Brandebourg, and with the most 

delicate impertinence. M. Gillenormand approved: "All kings who are 

following question was put and the following answer returned in his 

"To be suspended." "Sus is superfluous," observed M. Gillenormand.[22] 

Remarks of this nature found a situation. 

Evil One." 

eyes, who never appeared in that salon without hearing voices murmur 

around him: "How handsome he is! What a pity! Poor child!" This child 

child," because he had for a father "a brigand of the Loire." 

already been mentioned, and whom M. Gillenormand called "the disgrace of 

his family." 

this epoch, and who had happened to walk across that fine monumental 

parapet, a man about fifty years of age wearing a leather cap, and 

which had been a red ribbon, was sewn, shod with wooden sabots, tanned 

by the sun, his face nearly black and his hair nearly white, a large 

scar on his forehead which ran down upon his cheek, bowed, bent, 

in one of those compartments surrounded by walls which abut on the 

bridge, and border the left bank of the Seine like a chain of terraces, 

much larger: "these are gardens," and were they a little smaller: "these 

and the most humble of these houses about 1817. He lived there alone and 

These flowers were his occupation. 

water, he had succeeded in creating after the Creator, and he had 

forgotten by nature. He was ingenious; he had forestalled Soulange 

cultivation of rare and precious shrubs from America and China. He 

sadness, and sweetness, sometimes standing motionless and thoughtful 

for hours, listening to the song of a bird in the trees, the babble of a 

smile. He was the "brigand of the Loire." 

the Moniteur, and the bulletins of the grand army, would have been 

of Georges Pontmercy. When very young, this Georges Pontmercy had been 

fought at Spire, at Worms, at Neustadt, at Turkheim, at Alzey, at 

Mayence, where he was one of the two hundred who formed Houchard's 

rearguard. It was the twelfth to hold its ground against the corps 

rejoined the main body of the army when the enemy's cannon had opened 

of Italy, and was one of the thirty grenadiers who defended the Col 

of the grape-shot of that day at Lodi which caused Bonaparte to say: 

"Berthier has been cannoneer, cavalier, and grenadier." He beheld his 

sabre, he was shouting: "Forward!" Having been embarked with his 

company in the exigencies of the campaign, on board a pinnace which was 

a wasps'-nest of seven or eight English vessels. The Genoese commander 

Guard. The Emperor gave him the cross. Pontmercy saw Wurmser at Mantua, 

Melas, and Alexandria, Mack at Ulm, made prisoners in succession. 

commanded, and which captured Hamburg. Then he was transferred to the 

Captain Louis Hugo, the uncle of the author of this book, sustained 

army. Pontmercy was one of the three who emerged alive from that 

cemetery. He was at Friedland. Then he saw Moscow. Then La Beresina, 

then Lutzen, Bautzen, Dresden, Wachau, Leipzig, and the defiles of 

Gelenhausen; then Montmirail, Chateau-Thierry, Craon, the banks of the 

arm alone. Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had just 

exchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry. He had what was called 

a battalion as an officer. It is from this aptitude, perfected by a 

While tearing down the banner he had received a sword-cut across his 

replied: "Sire, I thank you for my widow." An hour later, he fell in the 

ravine of Ohain. Now, who was this Georges Pontmercy? He was this same 

"brigand of the Loire." 

will be remembered, had succeeded in joining the army, and had dragged 

himself from ambulance to ambulance as far as the cantonments of the 

Loire. 

of baron. He, on his side, neglected no occasion of signing himself 

"Colonel Baron Pontmercy." He had only an old blue coat, and he never 

went out without fastening to it his rosette as an officer of the Legion 

retorted with a bitter smile: "I do not know whether I no longer 

the Minister of War and the general in command of the department wrote 

to him with the following address: "A Monsieur le Commandant Pontmercy." 

of Sir Hudson Lowe addressed to General Bonaparte. Pontmercy had ended, 

may we be pardoned the expression, by having in his mouth the same 

saliva as his Emperor. 

to salute Flaminius, and who had a little of Hannibal's spirit. 

to wear my scar?" 

alone, we have just seen how. Under the Empire, between two wars, he 

had found time to marry Mademoiselle Gillenormand. The old bourgeois, 

thoroughly indignant at bottom, had given his consent with a sigh, 

Pontmercy, an admirable woman in every sense, by the way, lofty in 

sentiment and rare, and worthy of her husband, died, leaving a 

child. This child had been the colonel's joy in his solitude; but the 

yielded in the little one's interest, and had transferred his love to 

flowers. 

nor conspired. He shared his thoughts between the innocent things which 

time in expecting a pink or in recalling Austerlitz. 

It had been expressly agreed that Pontmercy should never attempt to see 

over to him disowned and disinherited. For the Gillenormands, Pontmercy 

and sacrificing no one but himself. 

This aunt, who had remained unmarried, was very rich on the maternal 

Marius, knew that he had a father, but nothing more. No one opened 

grandfather took him, whispers, innuendoes, and winks, had eventually 

were, so to speak, the air he breathed, by a sort of infiltration and 

shame and with a pain at his heart. 

old spinster. 

who was weeping like a woman, had struck the warden. That face had clung 

encountered Colonel Pontmercy on the bridge, and had recognized the man 

of the cure. And moreover, when both are sincere and good, no men so 

penetrate each other, and so amalgamate with each other, as an old 

high; that is the only difference. 

which one would have pronounced to be copied from some formula; this was 

CHAPTER III--REQUIESCANT 

opening was sombre, and more cold than warmth, more night than day, came 

and imposing personages, he gazed about him with serious amazement. 

in Madame de T.'s salon some very noble ladies named Mathan, Noe, 

Levis,--which was pronounced Levi,--Cambis, pronounced Cambyse. These 

with the Old Testament which he was learning by heart, and when they 

were all there, seated in a circle around a dying fire, sparely lighted 

white hair, their long gowns of another age, whose lugubrious colors 

were both majestic and severe, little Marius stared at them with 

frightened eyes, in the conviction that he beheld not women, but 

patriarchs and magi, not real beings, but phantoms. 

secretary to Madame de Berry, the Vicomte de Val***, who published, 

witty wife, whose very low-necked toilettes of scarlet velvet with gold 

torsades alarmed these shadows, the Marquis de C*****d'E******, the man 

Port-de-Guy, a pillar of the library of the Louvre, called the King's 

to relate that in 1793, at the age of sixteen, he had been put in the 

night. These tragic tales abounded in Madame de T.'s salon, and by 

Cornet-Dincourt. The bailiff de Ferrette, with his short breeches 

unlike Aristotle crouching under Campaspe, he had made the Guimard crawl 

Letourneur, preacher to the King, the Abbe Frayssinous, who was not, as 

cassock whose buttons were missing, and the Abbe Keravenant, Cure of 

Archbishop of Nisibi, later on Cardinal, remarkable for his long, 

saints, Postulatore dei Santi, which refers to matters of canonization, 

and signifies very nearly: Master of Requests of the section of 

de T*******, who was Minister of Marine and War. The Cardinal of 

Cl****** T******* was a merry little man, who displayed his red 

at that epoch, passed through the Rue M***** on summer evenings, where 

of the balls and the piercing voice of the Cardinal shouting to his 

for the purpose of allowing a better view of his little collar. All 

churchmen, added to the gravity of the T. salon, whose seigniorial 

the lords are the peers of France of England." Moreover, as it is 

Gillenormand reigned there. 

There is always a trace of anarchy in renown. Chateaubriand, had he 

to-day are demagogues, let us record it to their credit. 

regime itself, buried but still alive. Some of these habits, especially 

in the matter of language, seem eccentric. Persons but superficially 

antique. A woman was called Madame la Generale. Madame la Colonelle was 

not entirely disused. The charming Madame de Leon, in memory, no 

called Madame la Colonelle. 

person, and never as Your Majesty, the designation of Your Majesty 

having been "soiled by the usurper." 

each other in amazement. They communicated to each other that modicum 

Epimenides. The deaf man made the blind man acquainted with the course 

of God, in the five and twentieth year of his reign, the emigrants were, 

by rights, in the five and twentieth year of their adolescence. 

There were some young people, but they were rather dead. The liveries in 

the antechamber were antiquated. These utterly obsolete personages were 

served by domestics of the same stamp. 

resisting the sepulchre. Nearly the whole dictionary consisted of 

point. There are, in fact, aromatics in the opinions of these venerable 

masters were embalmed, the servants were stuffed with straw. 

maid, continued to say: "My people." 

explain it. 

the throne, and the mitre in the name of the attar; it is to ill-treat 

the thing which one is dragging, it is to kick over the traces; it is 

heretics; it is to reproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry; 

it is to insult through excess of respect; it is to discover that the 

Pope is not sufficiently papish, that the King is not sufficiently 

with alabaster, with snow, with the swan and the lily in the name of 

whiteness; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of becoming 

their enemy; it is to be so strongly for, as to be against. 

Restoration. 

moment; at one and the same time brilliant and gloomy, smiling and 

in that light and that shadow, a complete little new and old world, 

resembles an awakening like a return; a group which regarded France 

who smiled at being in France but wept also, delighted to behold 

nobility of the Crusades treating the nobility of the Empire, that is to 

say, the nobility of the sword, with scorn; historic races who had 

disdaining the companions of Napoleon. The swords, as we have just 

Bonaparte Scapin. This Society no longer exists. Nothing of it, we 

as the world before the Deluge. It is because it, too, as a matter of 

fact, has been engulfed in a deluge. It has disappeared beneath two 

frightful gulfs! 

when M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire. 

in Fievee. M. Agier laid down the law in them. They commentated M. 

armies, was a concession to the spirit of the age. 

create aged youth. They assumed the poses of wise men. They dreamed of 

brought back tradition, worship, religion, respect. It is faithful, 

the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of the 

glory, liberty, young ideas, young generations, the age. But this 

wanting in respect towards historic France, that is to say, towards its 

treated after the 5th of July. They were unjust to the eagle, we are 

XIV., to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV.? We scoff at M. de 

Why not love the whole of France?" 

was displeased at criticism and furious at protection. 

here to this sketch. 

the singular features of this society which is unknown to-day. But he 

it. It was the France of former days. 

emerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand, his grandfather confided 

young soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant. 

school. He was a Royalist, fanatical and severe. He did not love his 

his feelings towards his father were gloomy. 

religious, enthusiastic lad; dignified to harshness, pure to shyness. 

Gillenormand's departure from society. The old man bade farewell to 

the Faubourg Saint-Germain and to Madame de T.'s salon, and established 

Nicolette, who had succeeded to Magnon, and that short-breathed and 

pursy Basque, who have been mentioned above. 

Nothing could be more unexpected, more surprising, and, let us admit 

it, more disagreeable to him. It was forcing estrangement into 

reconciliation. It was not an affliction, but it was an unpleasant duty. 

him to others. Feeling that he was not beloved, he did not love. 

"Nothing is more simple," he said to himself. 

grandfather resumed:-- 

Take it. He says that here is haste." 

Marius might have set out that very evening and have been with his 

met for "M. Pontmercy's house." For in his own mind, he agreed with the 

Restoration, and like it, did not recognize his father's claim to the 

her hand opened the door. 

kneeling, and one lying at full length, on the floor in his shirt. The 

one on the floor was the colonel. 

prayer. 

he had a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness, he 

had written to M. Gillenormand to demand his son. The malady had grown 

servant's efforts to prevent him, crying: "My son is not coming! I shall 

floor of the antechamber. He had just expired. 

late. The son had also arrived too late. 

tear was his son's delay. 

stamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprinted 

was dead, and a chill ran over him. 

presence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out in 

death. 

lamenting in a corner, the cure was praying, and his sobs were audible, 

the doctor was wiping his eyes; the corpse itself was weeping. 

their affliction without uttering a word; he was the stranger there. 

the strength to hold it. 

father? Why should he! 

expenses of his burial. 

contained the following, in the colonel's handwriting:-- 

name was Thenardier. I think that he has recently been keeping a 

little inn, in a village in the neighborhood of Paris, at Chelles or 

Montfermeil. If my son meets him, he will do all the good he can to 

Thenardier." 

the heart of man. 

and weeds, and died. 

days the colonel was buried, and in three forgotten. 

when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice, at that same chapel of the 

Virgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad, he placed himself 

behind a pillar, being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual on 

that occasion, and knelt down, without paying any special heed, upon a 

chair of Utrecht velvet, on the back of which was inscribed this name: 

Monsieur Mabeuf, warden. Mass had hardly begun when an old man presented 

himself and said to Marius:-- 

chair. 

the old man approached him again and said:-- 

again disturbing you at this moment; you must have thought me intrusive, 

and I will explain myself." 

is better from here. Why? I will tell you. It is from this place, that 

arrangements. He came at the hour when he knew that his son would be 

there. Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father, poor innocent! 

at his child and he wept. He adored that little fellow, poor man! I 

aunt, relatives, I don't know exactly what all, who threatened to 

disinherit the child if he, the father, saw him. He sacrificed himself 

from him because of political opinions. Certainly, I approve of 

Bonaparte's colonels. He is dead, I believe. He lived at Vernon, where I 

or Montpercy. He had a fine sword-cut, on my honor." 

dearly!" 

to be absent for three days?" 

affair!" 

CHAPTER VI--THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN 

straight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files of the 

Moniteur. 

the Empire, the Memorial de Sainte-Helene, all the memoirs, all the 

under whom Georges Pontmercy had served, among others, Comte H. 

Church-warden Mabeuf, whom he went to see again, told him about the life 

of lion-lamb who had been his father. 

of the age for the girls!" Sometimes the old man added: "The deuce! 

I thought it was only an affair of gallantry, It seems that it is an 

father. 

follow these phases step by step and to indicate them all. 

Mirabeau, Vergniaud, Saint-Just, Robespierre, Camille, Desmoulins, 

recoiled, blinded by the brilliant lights. Little by little, when his 

without terror; the Revolution and the Empire presented themselves 

luminously, in perspective, before his mind's eye; he beheld each of 

Republic in the sovereignty of civil right restored to the masses, 

neglected in this, his first far too synthetic estimation, we do not 

think it necessary to point out here. It is the state of a mind on the 

with what is to follow, we continue. 

country no more than he had comprehended his father. He had not known 

he adored. 

father had still been in existence, if he had still had him, if God, in 

among the living, how he would have run, how he would have precipitated 

father died so early, before his time, before the justice, the love of 

serious, more truly grave, more sure of his thought and his faith. At 

of natural enlargement, which gave him two things that were new to 

him--his father and his country. 

rehabilitation of Napoleon. 

interests, all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon. It execrated 

mothers. Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster, and in order 

to paint him to the imagination of the people, which, as we lately 

speaking of Bonaparte, one was free to sob or to puff up with 

There was in him a headstrong little man who hated Napoleon. 

of Marius was gradually rent. He caught a glimpse of something immense, 

and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment, on 

distinctly; and he set about mounting, slowly, step by step, almost 

regretfully in the beginning, then with intoxication and as though 

attracted by an irresistible fascination, first the sombre steps, then 

of enthusiasm. 

sounds, without knowing whence they proceed; one beholds Jupiter, which 

the azure is black, the stars shine; it is formidable. 

penned on the field of battle; there, at intervals, he beheld his 

Empire presented itself to him; he felt a flood swelling and rising 

within him; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close 

a singular state; he thought that he heard drums, cannon, trumpets, 

upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless 

without himself knowing what was in him, and what impulse he was 

gazed intently into the gloom, the silence, the infinite darkness, the 

eternal immensity, and exclaimed: "Long live the Emperor!" 

sisters,--the actor who took lessons of Talma,--the poisoner of 

Jaffa,--the tiger,--Buonaparte,--all this vanished, and gave place 

the predestined constructor of the French group, succeeding the Roman 

IV., of Richelieu, of Louis XIV., and of the Committee of Public Safety, 

that is to say; but august in his faults, brilliant in his spots, 

powerful in his crime. 

France, conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped, and the world 

which will always rise upon the frontier, and which will guard the 

future. Despot but dictator; a despot resulting from a republic and 

summing up a revolution. Napoleon became for him the man-people as Jesus 

Christ is the man-God. 

for the sword took possession of him, and complicated in his mind his 

and pell-mell, he was admitting force, that is to say, that he was 

as in measuring the glory of Napoleon, he neglected the attenuating 

circumstances. 

orientation had changed. What had been his East became the West. He had 

turned squarely round. 

obtaining an inkling of the case. 

democratic and republican, he went to an engraver on the Quai des 

Pontmercy. 

father. 

porter, he put them in his pocket. 

father, to the latter's memory, and to the things for which the 

political opinions and the same ideas had been common to them both, 

Marius had met M. Gillenormand there as on a bridge. When the bridge 

fell, an abyss was formed. And then, over and above all, Marius 

from the colonel, thus depriving the father of the child, and the child 

of the father. 

alleged his studies, his lectures, the examinations, etc., as a pretext. 

I know all about it." 

Montfermeil, in order to obey the injunction which his father had 

what had become of him. Marius was away from the house for four days on 

this quest. 

who led a garrison life, outside the family and far from the domestic 

required to make what is called a fine officer. He had "a lady's waist," 

never seen him. The cousins knew each other only by name. We think 

preferred him because she did not see him. Not seeing people permits one 

to attribute to them all possible perfections. 

Marius had just asked his grandfather's permission to take a little 

trip, adding that he meant to set out that very evening. "Go!" had been 

the night out again." Mademoiselle Gillenormand had ascended to 

her chamber greatly puzzled, and on the staircase had dropped this 

mystery resembles getting the first flavor of a scandal; sainted souls 

do not detest this. There is some curiosity about scandal in the secret 

compartments of bigotry. 

her wont, she took refuge in her talents, and set about scalloping, 

Empire and the Restoration, in which there are numerous cart-wheels. 

several hours when the door opened. Mademoiselle Gillenormand raised 

salute. She uttered a cry of delight. One may be old, one may be a 

to see a lancer enter one's chamber. 

it. 

They are changing our garrison; we have been at Melun, we are being 

aunt.'" 

him. 

to ask you something." 

with a lively curiosity. 

his name on the card." 

steady lad like yourself. To think that he is to pass the night in a 

diligence!" 

struck her. If she had been a man, she would have slapped her brow. She 

apostrophized Theodule:-- 

"Then that is where Marius is going?" 

plan of travel." 

While you, at least, are called Theodule." 

the granduncle and the grandnephew. She resumed:-- 

us the tale. It will amuse his grandfather." 

sequel. He accepted the commission and said: "As you please, aunt." 

would not quit your family to go and see a creature." 

probity. 

without suspecting that he was watched. As for the watcher, the 

first thing he did was to fall asleep. His slumber was complete and 

conscientious. Argus snored all night long. 

Vernon! Travellers for Vernon!" And Lieutenant Theodule woke. 

recalled his aunt, the ten louis, and the account which he had 

him to laughing. 

as far as Pacy, with the choice of turning to the left at Evreus, or to 

write to that good old soul?" 

made its appearance at the window of the coupe. 

at the end of the vehicle, was offering flowers to the travellers. "Give 

your ladies flowers!" she cried. 

basket. 

curiosity. Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to? She 

must be a splendidly handsome woman for so fine a bouquet. I want to see 

her." 

dogs who hunt on their own account, he set out to follow Marius. 

him. 

over the good God's head." 

apse. He disappeared behind one of the angles of the apse. 

at the lass." 

had turned. 

the grave, on a little swelling which marked the head, there stood 

a cross of black wood with this name in white letters: COLONEL BARON 

PONTMERCY. Marius' sobs were audible. 

that M. Gillenormand had said: "He is sleeping out." 

unexpected encounter with a sepulchre; he experienced a singular and 

disagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing, and which 

colonel. He retreated, leaving Marius alone in the cemetery, and 

epaulets, and he almost made the military salute to him. Not knowing 

what to write to his aunt, he decided not to write at all; and it is 

probable that nothing would have resulted from the discovery made 

by Theodule as to the love affairs of Marius, if, by one of those 

mysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance, the scene at 

Vernon had not had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris. 

nights spent in the diligence, and feeling the need of repairing his 

loss of sleep by an hour at the swimming-school, he mounted rapidly to 

bath. 

out where he had been. 

ascend, and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic, Marius was no 

longer there. 

defiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon. 

Mademoiselle Gillenormand was already seated, busily embroidering her 

cart-wheels. 

neck-ribbon, and exclaimed:-- 

the portrait!" 

suspended from the ribbon. 

under his very nose. 

that will make us shudder, probably! Young men have such bad taste 

nowadays!" 

but a carefully folded paper. 

laughter. "I know what it is. A billet-doux." 

And she put on her spectacles. They unfolded the paper and read as 

follows:-- 

be worthy of it is a matter of course." 

word. 

himself:-- 

it back in its case. 

from one of the pockets of the great-coat. Mademoiselle Gillenormand 

picked it up and unfolded the blue paper. 

ribbon, the case, and the coat, flung them all on the floor in the 

middle of the room, and said:-- 

of things!" 

his own cards in his hand, and on catching sight of him, the latter 

something crushing:-- 

compliments. What is the meaning of this?" 

who was great in the greatest history that men have ever made, who 

bullets, in snow and mud by day, beneath rain at night, who captured two 

flags, who received twenty wounds, who died forgotten and abandoned, and 

ingrates, his country and myself." 

republic, he rose, or, to speak more correctly, he sprang to his feet. 

old Royalist the effect of the puffs of air from a forge upon a blazing 

purple, flame-colored. 

was! I do not wish to know! I know nothing about that, and I do not know 

See here, you are no more a baron than my slipper is! They were all 

English at Waterloo! That is what I do know! Whether Monsieur your 

the worse, your humble servant!" 

who was the bellows. Marius quivered in every limb, he did not know what 

all his sacred wafers cast to the winds, the fakir who beholds a 

trampled under foot and stamped upon in his presence, but by whom? By 

his grandfather. How was he to avenge the one without outraging the 

hand was a sacred grave, on the other hoary locks. 

with all this whirlwind dashing through his head; then he raised 

his eyes, gazed fixedly at his grandfather, and cried in a voice of 

thunder:-- 

him. 

of the room, and making the polished floor creak as though he had been a 

stone statue walking. 

bourgeois like myself cannot remain under the same roof." 

extended his arm towards Marius and shouted to him:-- 

and you will never mention his name to me." 

of thou for the next three months. 

the wrongs are not increased by them. While carrying Marius' "duds" 

had, inadvertently, let fall, probably, on the attic staircase, which 

penned by the colonel. Neither paper nor case could afterwards be found. 

Marius was convinced that "Monsieur Gillenormand"--from that day forth 

without knowing where, with thirty francs, his watch, and a few clothes 

hour, and had directed his course at hap-hazard towards the Latin 

quarter. 

CHAPTER I--A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC 

forth from the depths of '89 and '93 were in the air. Youth was on 

undergoing a transformation, almost without being conscious of it, 

through the movement of the age. The needle which moves round the 

compass also moves in souls. Each person was taking that step in advance 

which he was bound to take. The Royalists were becoming liberals, 

liberals were turning democrats. It was a flood tide complicated with 

a thousand ebb movements; the peculiarity of ebbs is to create 

were the mirages of that period. Opinions traverse phases. Voltairian 

royalism, a quaint variety, had a no less singular sequel, Bonapartist 

liberalism. 

sounded principles, they attached themselves to the right. They 

grew enthusiastic for the absolute, they caught glimpses of infinite 

underhand. A sign which was revolutionary to the highest degree. The 

second thoughts of power meet the second thoughts of the populace in 

the mine. The incubation of insurrections gives the retort to the 

premeditation of coups d'etat. 

organizations, like the German tugendbund and Italian Carbonarism; but 

here and there there were dark underminings, which were in process of 

throwing off shoots. The Cougourde was being outlined at Aix; there 

existed at Paris, among other affiliations of that nature, the society 

of the Friends of the A B C. 

Tu es Petrus et super hanc petram, etc., etc. 

and near the Pantheon in a little cafe in the Rue Saint-Michel called 

close to the workingman, the second to the students. 

room of the Cafe Musain. 

and drank, and gambled and laughed. There they conversed in very loud 

sufficient to excite the suspicion of a police agent. 

All, with the exception of Laigle, were from the South. 

of a tragic adventure. 

see why later on,--was an only son and wealthy. 

was angelically handsome. He was a savage Antinous. One would have said, 

in some previous state of existence, traversed the revolutionary 

affair. A pontifical and warlike nature, a singular thing in a youth. He 

priest of the ideal. His eyes were deep, his lids a little red, his 

great deal of brow in a face is like a great deal of horizon in a view. 

excessive youth, and was as rosy as a young girl, although subject to 

seem as though he were aware there was on earth a thing called woman. 

He had but one passion--the right; but one thought--to overthrow 

the obstacle. On Mount Aventine, he would have been Gracchus; in the 

throat of Evadne would have moved him no more than it would have moved 

Aristogeiton; he, like Harmodius, thought flowers good for nothing 

except to conceal the sword. He was severe in his enjoyments. He 

soul. Woe to the love-affair which should have risked itself beside him! 

seeing that face of a youth escaped from college, that page's mien, 

on Enjolras, an astounding and terrible glance would have promptly shown 

her the abyss, and would have taught her not to confound the mighty 

cherub of Ezekiel with the gallant Cherubino of Beaumarchais. 

Combeferre represented its philosophy. Between the logic of the 

Revolution and its philosophy there exists this difference--that its 

was more adapted for breathing with Combeferre than with Enjolras. 

to Condorcet. Combeferre lived the life of all the rest of the world 

man. Enjolras was the more virile, Combeferre the more humane. Homo and 

the word citizen, but he preferred the word man. He would gladly 

have said: Hombre, like the Spanish. He read everything, went to 

the theatres, attended the courses of public lecturers, learned the 

which Geoffrey Sainte-Hilaire explained the double function of the 

and the one which makes the brain; he kept up with what was going 

affirmed nothing, not even miracles; denied nothing, not even ghosts; 

relaxation at the elevation of the moral and intellectual level, at 

or three centuries called classic, the tyrannical dogmatism of official 

colleges into artificial oyster beds. He was learned, a purist, exact, 

thoughtful "even to chimaeras," so his friends said. He believed in 

all dreams, railroads, the suppression of suffering in chirurgical 

operations, the fixing of images in the dark chamber, the electric 

that science will eventually turn the position. Enjolras was a chief, 

to attack it by main force and explosively; but it suited him better to 

the truth, a '93, terrified him; nevertheless, stagnation was still 

cesspool, and the falls of Niagara to the lake of Montfaucon. In 

its own course; he may have been cold, but he was pure; methodical, but 

irreproachable; phlegmatic, but imperturbable. Combeferre would have 

knelt and clasped his hands to enable the future to arrive in all 

its candor, and that nothing might disturb the immense and virtuous 

evolution of the races. The good must be innocent, he repeated 

in keeping the dazzling ideal fixedly in view, and of soaring thither 

who represents the one, and Danton, who incarnates the other, that 

difference which separates the swan from the angel with the wings of an 

was Jehan, owing to that petty momentary freak which mingled with the 

powerful and profound movement whence sprang the very essential study 

of flowers, played on the flute, made verses, loved the people, pitied 

woman, wept over the child, confounded God and the future in the same 

who know how nearly goodness borders on grandeur, in the matter of 

nearly as much as with events. His mind had two attitudes, one on 

the side towards man, the other on that towards God; he studied or 

salary, capital, credit, marriage, religion, liberty of thought, 

and sharing, the enigma of this lower world which covers the human 

dressed badly, had an awkward air, blushed at a mere nothing, and was 

very timid. Yet he was intrepid. 

immense. This orphan had adopted the peoples. As his mother had 

with full knowledge of the case. In this club of young Utopians, 

these names incessantly, appropriately and inappropriately, with the 

the great violence of 1772 aroused him. There is no more sovereign 

three-sided crime, on that monstrous ambush, the prototype and pattern 

Poland. When the record of modern treasons was examined, that was the 

that crime before consummating its own. 1772 sounded the onset; 1815 

recompensed him by rendering him great. The fact is, that there is 

eternity in right. Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can be 

protest of right against the deed persists forever. The theft of a 

nation cannot be allowed by prescription. These lofty deeds of rascality 

handkerchief. 

aristocracy and the nobility was to believe in the particle. The 

particle, as every one knows, possesses no significance. But the 

Constant de Robecque, Benjamin Constant; M. de Lafayette, M. Lafayette. 

plain Courfeyrac. 

and confine ourselves to saying with regard to what remains: "For 

Courfeyrac, see Tholomyes." 

playfulness of the kitten, and all this grace ends, with the bourgeois, 

on two legs, and with the tomcat, on four paws. 

hand to hand, quasi cursores, and is almost always exactly the same; 

so that, as we have just pointed out, any one who had listened to 

Courfeyrac in 1828 would have thought he heard Tholomyes in 1817. Only, 

district attorney, and in Courfeyrac a paladin. 

of the burial of young Lallemand. 

at times eloquent, bold to the verge of effrontery; the best fellow 

it were an uprising; and nothing so much as an uprising, unless it were 

up his frock-coat,--the paletot had not yet been invented,--and took 

hygienic precautions. Of the school porter he said: "What a fine 

old man!" and of the dean, M. Delvincourt: "What a monument!" In his 

three thousand francs a year, in doing nothing. 

their son. 

reason they are intelligent." 

had habits, he had none. He sauntered. To stray is human. To saunter 

thinker than appeared to view. 

on. 

him to enter a hackney-coach on the day when he emigrated, was wont 

to relate, that in 1814, on his return to France, as the King was 

disembarking at Calais, a man handed him a petition. 

the name written thus: LESGLE. This non-Bonoparte orthography touched 

the King and he began to smile. "Sire," resumed the man with the 

petition, "I had for ancestor a keeper of the hounds surnamed 

Lesgueules. This surname furnished my name. I am called Lesgueules, by 

either intentionally or accidentally. 

called him Bossuet. 

in anything. As an offset, he laughed at everything. At five and twenty 

speculation. He had nothing left. He possessed knowledge and wit, but 

what he was building tumbled down on top of him. If he were splitting 

that he had a friend also. Some misfortune happened to him every moment, 

fate, like a person who is listening to pleasantries. He was poor, but 

the stomach; he was familiar with fatality to the point of calling it by 

its nickname: "Good day, Guignon," he said to it. 

resources. He had no money, but he found means, when it seemed good to 

boots, you five-louis jade." 

Bossuet had not much domicile, sometimes none at all. He lodged now with 

He was two years younger than Bossuet. 

foot to the north, so that, at night, the circulation of his blood 

being whom his comrades, who were prodigal of winged consonants, called 

him.[23] 

an indication of a sagacious mind. 

only be discussed seriously, held the same religion: Progress. 

the flesh had been, either royalists, doctrinaires, it matters not what; 

them at all; the pure blood of principle ran in their veins. They 

and absolute duty. 

Among all these glowing hearts and thoroughly convinced minds, there was 

anything. Moreover, he was one of the students who had learned the most 

good cakes and lasses were to be found at the Ermitage, on the Boulevard 

Barriere du Com pat. He knew the best place for everything; in 

single-stick player. He was a tremendous drinker to boot. He was 

inordinately homely: the prettiest boot-stitcher of that day, Irma 

Boissy, enraged with his homeliness, pronounced sentence on him as 

air of saying to them all: "If I only chose!" and of trying to make his 

comrades believe that he was in general demand. 

civilization, religion, progress, came very near to signifying nothing 

sneered at all devotion in all parties, the father as well as the 

gibbet which has been a success." A rover, a gambler, a libertine, 

often drunk, he displeased these young dreamers by humming incessantly: 

"J'aimons les filles, et j'aimons le bon vin." Air: Vive Henri IV. 

the most absolute. In what manner had Enjolras subjugated him? By his 

ideas? No. By his character. A phenomenon which is often observable. 

A sceptic who adheres to a believer is as simple as the law of 

light like the blind man. The dwarf adores the drum-major. The toad 

its flight. Grantaire, in whom writhed doubt, loved to watch faith 

aware of it, and without the idea of explaining it to himself having 

occurred to him. He admired his opposite by instinct. His soft, 

yielding, dislocated, sickly, shapeless ideas attached themselves 

firmness. Grantaire in the presence of Enjolras became some one once 

to all appearance, incompatible. He was ironical and cordial. His 

indifference loved. His mind could get along without belief, but his 

the obverse of Enjolras. 

alphabet. In the series O and P are inseparable. You can, at will, 

pronounce O and P or Orestes and Pylades. 

of wine. They tolerated him on account of his good humor. 

but his revery, however. He was staring at the Place Saint-Michel. 

was pondering without melancholy, over a little misadventure which 

indistinct in any case. 

two-wheeled vehicle proceeding through the place, at a foot pace and 

black letters on a card which was sewn to the stuff: MARIUS PONTMERCY. 

hurled this apostrophe at the young man in the cabriolet:-- 

"Monsieur Marius Pontmercy!" 

eyes:-- 

his grandfather's, and had before him a face which he now beheld for the 

first time. "I do not know you." 

moment. He frowned. Laigle de Meaux went on imperturbably:-- 

chance. You know, one does have such freaks sometimes. The professor was 

from the list. Sixty francs in the gulf." 

'Blondeau, my love, you will not get the very smallest sort of an 

I said to myself hastily: 'Here's a brave fellow who is going to get 

cultivates the grisette, who pays court to the fair sex, who is at 

repeated for the third time: 'Marius Pontmercy!' I replied: 'Present!' 

This is why you were not crossed off." 

nose alluded to by Boileau, skipped to the letter L. L is my letter. I 

am from Meaux, and my name is Lesgle." 

only for me. That said, he crossed me off." 

his pallor, in his coldness, and in his smell. And I say: 'Erudimini 

Nasica, the ox of discipline, bos disciplinae, the bloodhound of the 

password, the angel of the roll-call, who was upright, square exact, 

again." 

stage. Here is my erasure all ready for me. It is to you that I am 

thanks upon you. Where do you live?" 

have there a rent of nine thousand francs per annum." 

"I have paid this rent for the last two hours, and I aspire to get rid 

of it; but there is a sort of history attached to it, and I don't know 

where to go." 

the hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques side by side with Courfeyrac. 

season for prompt welding and the rapid healing of scars. Marius 

superfluous. There are young men of whom it can be said that their 

countenances chatter. One looks at them and one knows them. 

to him:-- 

to the revolution." And he led him to the hall of the Friends of the A B 

Marius did not understand: "A pupil." 

silent and grave, he was, none the less, both winged and armed. 

asides, both by habit and by taste, was a little fluttered by this covey 

of young men around him. All these various initiatives solicited his 

attention at once, and pulled him about. The tumultuous movements of 

in his trouble, they fled so far from him, that he had difficulty in 

he had supposed himself fixed; he now suspected, with uneasiness, and 

without daring to avow it to himself, that he was not. The angle 

at which he saw everything began to be displaced anew. A certain 

oscillation set all the horizons of his brains in motion. An odd 

internal upsetting. He almost suffered from it. 

embarrassed his still timid mind. 

the duck. Now, since poultry exists by the side of the bird, I do 

tragedy." 

between Enjolras and Courfeyrac. 

years ago. This consisted of Jean-Jacques and Therese. From time 

to time, little beings were born there. Therese gave birth to them, 

Jean-Jacques represented them as foundlings." 

And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly:-- 

his own children, that may be; but he adopted the people." 

Jean Prouvaire alone sometimes said Napoleon; all the others said 

"Bonaparte." Enjolras pronounced it "Buonaparte." 

mind. 

Friends of the A B C had convened that evening. The argand lamp was 

between comrades sometimes are subject to these peaceable tumults. It 

was a game and an uproar as much as a conversation. They tossed words 

quarters. 

of the cafe, who passed through it from time to time, to go to her 

washing in the "lavatory." 

and shouting:-- 

worth nothing. One breaks one's neck in living. Life is a theatre set in 

reliquary painted on one side only. Ecclesiastes says: 'All is vanity.' 

of everything with big words! a kitchen is a laboratory, a dancer is a 

is a chemist, a wigmaker is an artist, a hodman is an architect, a 

jockey is a sportsman, a wood-louse is a pterigybranche. Vanity has a 

right and a wrong side; the right side is stupid, it is the negro with 

his rags. I weep over the one and I laugh over the other. What are 

the intrinsic value of people, it is no longer respectable in the least. 

is ferocious; if the lily could speak, what a setting down it would give 

the dove! A bigoted woman prating of a devout woman is more venomous 

I have always been witty; when I was a pupil of Gros, instead of 

the rest of you, you are worth no more than I am. I scoff at your 

perfections, excellencies, and qualities. Every good quality tends 

towards a defect; economy borders on avarice, the generous man is next 

Brutus who killed Caesar was in love with the statue of a little boy. 

This statue was from the hand of the Greek sculptor Strongylion, 

who also carved that figure of an Amazon known as the Beautiful Leg, 

in love with the one, Nero with the other. All history is nothing but 

battle of Marengo copies the battle of Pydna; the Tolbiac of Clovis and 

conquer; true glory lies in convincing. But try to prove something! If 

prominent man in Greece for fifty years was that grammarian Philetas, 

admire England? Shall I admire France? France? Why? Because of Paris? 

I have just told you my opinion of Athens. England? Why? Because of 

the headquarters of wretchedness. There are a hundred deaths a year of 

as the climax, that I have seen an Englishwoman dancing in a wreath of 

roses and blue spectacles. A fig then for England! If I do not admire 

John Bull, shall I admire Brother Jonathan? I have but little taste for 

England? Take away Cotton is king, what remains of America? Germany is 

the lymph, Italy is the bile. Shall we go into ecstasies over Russia? 

beauties, among others, a stout despotism; but I pity the despots. 

strangled, with their throats cut, numerous Nicholases and Basils 

war, exhausts and sums up all the forms of ruffianism, from the 

chemise of Queen Isabella to the chamber-chair of the Dauphin. Gentlemen 

of the human race, I tell you, not a bit of it! It is at Brussels that 

most chocolate, at Amsterdam the most gin, at London the most wine, at 

all the useful notions. Paris carries the day, in short. In Paris, 

Piraeus. Learn this in addition; the wineshops of the ragpickers 

Slaughter-House. Hence, tea-gardens, goguettes, caboulots, bouibuis, 

mastroquets, bastringues, manezingues, bibines of the rag-pickers, 

caravanseries of the caliphs, I certify to you, I am a voluptuary, I eat 

day." 

the Cafe Musain. 

and Grantaire began again worse than ever:-- 

you from the task of soothing me. Moreover, I am sad. What do you wish 

me to say to you? Man is evil, man is deformed; the butterfly is a 

success, man is a failure. God made a mistake with that animal. A 

crowd offers a choice of ugliness. The first comer is a wretch, 

Femme--woman--rhymes with infame,--infamous. Yes, I have the spleen, 

death, and I am stupid! Let God go to the devil!" 

phrase of judicial slang, of which this is the conclusion:-- 

of the customs of Normandy, at Saint-Michel, and for each year, an 

freeholds, contracts of domain, mortgages--" 

being sketched out. 

at work touched each other: "Let us begin by finding names. When one has 

the names, one finds the subject." 

advantage of the uproar to talk low, was discussing a duel. An old 

to him what sort of an adversary he had to deal with. 

just parade, mathematical parries, bigre! and he is left-handed." 

and talking of love. 

who is always laughing." 

your remorse; if you see her sad, your conscience pricks you." 

quarrel!" 

side of the wind to Gex. Hence the peace." 

Mamselle--you know whom I mean?" 

tiny feet, little hands, she dresses well, and is white and dimpled, 

with the eyes of a fortune-teller. I am wild over her." 

double-milled cloth at Staub's. That will assist." 

about Olympus, whose part was taken by Jean Prouvaire, out of pure 

romanticism. 

laughing and lyric. 

their departure. Jupiter does not impress me as dead. The gods are 

dreams, you say. Well, even in nature, such as it is to-day, after the 

Such and such a mountain with the profile of a citadel, like the 

cascade of Pissevache." 

been granted was getting roughly handled. Combeferre was upholding it 

lay an unfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter. Courfeyrac had 

seized it, and was brandishing it, mingling with his arguments the 

rattling of this sheet of paper. 

but a poor expedient of civilization. To save the transition, to soften 

from the king to the people. In all such grants there is an Article 14. 

was tempting, and Courfeyrac could not resist. He crumpled the poor 

Touquet Charter in his fist, and flung it in the fire. The paper 

flashed up. Combeferre watched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII. burn 

philosophically, and contented himself with saying:-- 

and that English thing which is called humor, good and bad taste, 

merry bombardment over their heads. 

starts from a tender feeling. 

the first chance word. The spirit of each is sovereign, jest suffices 

stage-manager of such conversations. 

Bossuet, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac were confusedly fencing. 

with this date:-- 

began to gaze fixedly at the audience. 

at this period), "that number 18 is strange and strikes me. It is 

that the end treads close on the heels of the commencement." 

addressed this remark to Combeferre:-- 

greatly agitated by the abrupt evocation of Waterloo, could accept. 

finger on this compartment and said:-- 

something was on the point of occurring. 

to which he was addicted. He gave it up to listen. 

gazing at space, replied, without glancing at Marius:-- 

France. Quia nomina leo." 

being:-- 

a new comer among you, but I will confess that you amaze me. Where do we 

stand? Who are we? Who are you? Who am I? Let us come to an explanation 

Royalists. I warn you that my grandfather does better still; he 

enthusiasm? And what are you doing with it? Whom do you admire, if you 

do not admire the Emperor? And what more do you want? If you will 

have none of that great man, what great men would you like? He had 

everything. He was complete. He had in his brain the sum of human 

replied to Laplace, in the Council of State be held his own against 

Merlin, he gave a soul to the geometry of the first, and to the 

he knew everything; which did not prevent him from laughing 

good-naturedly beside the cradle of his little child; and all at once, 

of a superhuman sword was heard, as it was drawn from its sheath; they 

the grand army and the old guard, and he was the archangel of war!" 

to the wall. Marius continued with increased enthusiasm, and almost 

without pausing for breath:-- 

to march and to triumph, to have for halting-places all capitals, to 

constellations of victories to flash forth at each instant from the 

zenith of the centuries, to make the French Empire a pendant to the 

Roman Empire, to be the great nation and to give birth to the grand 

greater thing is there?" 

traversed his epic effusion like a blade of steel, and he felt it 

vanishing within him. When he raised his eyes, Combeferre was no longer 

just taken his departure, and all, with the exception of Enjolras, 

translating itself into syllogisms arrayed against Enjolras, when all of 

Combeferre, and this is what he was singing:-- 

                 La gloire et la guerre, 

               Et qu'il me fallait quitter 

                 L'amour de ma mere, 

               Je dirais au grand Cesar: 

                 Reprends ton sceptre et ton char, 

               J'aime mieux ma mere, o gue! 

                 J'aime mieux ma mere!" 

this couplet a sort of strange grandeur. Marius, thoughtfully, and 

mother?--" 

within it; it feels only the wound; the quiver of the germ and the joy 

of the fruit only arrive later. 

not as yet emerged, and another into which you have not yet entered, is 

intolerable; and twilight is pleasing only to bat-like souls. Marius 

pained him. Whatever may have been his desire to remain where he was, 

advance, to examine, to think, to march further. Whither would this lead 

him? He feared, after having taken so many steps which had brought him 

with his grandfather nor with his friends; daring in the eyes of 

the one, he was behind the times in the eyes of the others, and he 

on the side of youth. He ceased to go to the Cafe Musain. 

In the troubled state of his conscience, he no longer thought of 

certain serious sides of existence. The realities of life do not allow 

themselves to be forgotten. They soon elbowed him abruptly. 

to him:-- 

the same as alone in the world, and had no relatives. 

trousers." 

coat." 

encyclopaedia, for which you might have translated English or German 

articles. It is badly paid work, but one can live by it." 

garments. They went to the watchmaker's. He bought the watch for 

forty-five francs. 

hotel, "with my fifteen francs, that makes eighty." 

swallowing a tongue very fast, or a hundred sous very slowly." 

bottom in difficulties, had finally hunted up Marius' abode. 

from his aunt, and the sixty pistoles, that is to say, six hundred 

francs in gold, in a sealed box. 

he had three francs left. 

of that blood-drinker again!" 

run in debt there. 

CHAPTER I--MARIUS INDIGENT 

watch. He ate of that terrible, inexpressible thing that is called de la 

often the only things which one has to devour. At that moment of his 

that he was jeered at because he was badly dressed, and ridiculous 

because he was poor. At the age when youth swells the heart with 

boots, and he knew the unjust shame and the poignant blushes of 

wretchedness. Admirable and terrible trial from which the feeble emerge 

of bravery ignored and obstinate, which defend themselves step by 

step in that fatal onslaught of necessities and turpitudes. Noble and 

mysterious triumphs which no eye beholds, which are requited with no 

renown, which are saluted with no trumpet blast. Life, misfortune, 

their heroes; obscure heroes, who are, sometimes, grander than the 

heroes who win renown. 

soul and spirit; distress is the nurse of pride; unhappiness is a good 

milk for the magnanimous. 

he bought his sou's worth of Brie cheese at the fruiterer's, when he 

a loaf, which he carried off furtively to his attic as though he had 

on the corner, in the midst of the bantering cooks who elbowed him, an 

awkward young man, carrying big books under his arm, who had a timid yet 

drops of perspiration, made a profound bow to the butcher's astonished 

lived for three days. 

third he gnawed the bone. Aunt Gillenormand made repeated attempts, and 

occasion, saying that he needed nothing. 

The day came when he had no longer a coat. The trousers would go next. 

with the night. 

supposed to live in Courfeyrac's room, which was decent, and where 

a certain number of law-books backed up and completed by several 

in a letter which was cold but full of submission and respect. M. 

Gillenormand trembled as he took the letter, read it, tore it in four 

time." 

which is, however, sufficient for life. This is the mode in which the 

existence of Marius Pontmercy was arranged: 

little in front of him. By dint of toil, perseverance, courage, and 

the modest post of utility man in the literature of the publishing 

house. He drew up prospectuses, translated newspapers, annotated 

editions, compiled biographies, etc.; net product, year in and year 

explain. 

breakfast varied in cost from two to four sous, according as eggs 

Rue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau's, opposite Basset's, the 

He took a six-sou plate of meat, a half-portion of vegetables for three 

sous, and a three-sou dessert. For three sous he got as much bread as 

he wished. As for wine, he drank water. When he paid at the desk 

presided, he gave a sou to the waiter, and Madam Rousseau gave him a 

were emptied, was a calming potion rather than a restaurant. It no 

longer exists. The proprietor had a fine nickname: he was called 

Rousseau the Aquatic. 

his linen fifty francs, his washing fifty francs; the whole did not 

"simplified matters." 

the third in the washerwoman's hands. He renewed them as they wore out. 

They were always ragged, which caused him to button his coat to the 

chin. 

condition. Hard years; difficult, some of them, to traverse, others to 

it. His face wore a sort of severe flush. He was timid even to rudeness. 

The soul aids the body, and at certain moments, raises it. It is the 

steps, with the grand altar for the colonel and the lesser one for 

Thenardier, was the idea of the distress into which he knew that 

Thenardier had disappeared. Marius had beaten the whole country; he 

persisted for three years, expending in these explorations the little 

had not been able to lay their hands on him. Marius blamed himself, and 

It was the only debt left him by the colonel, and Marius made it a 

owed him nothing, and I, who owe so much to Thenardier, cannot join him 

in this shadow where he is lying in the pangs of death, and in my 

Marius' sweetest and most magnificent dream. 

he had left his grandfather. Both parties had remained on the same 

was the brass vase, while Father Gillenormand was the iron pot. 

harsh, and smiling old fellow who cursed, shouted, and stormed 

there exists no grandfather who does not adore his grandson. At bottom, 

his own fashion, with an accompaniment of snappishness and boxes on the 

ear; but, this child once gone, he felt a black void in his heart; 

this Buonapartist, this Jacobin, this terrorist, this Septembrist, would 

it?" His pride instantly answered "yes," but his aged head, which he 

He missed Marius. Old men need affection as they need the sun. It is 

warmth. Strong as his nature was, the absence of Marius had wrought some 

change in him. Nothing in the world could have induced him to take a 

but he thought of him incessantly. He lived in the Marais in a more and 

more retired manner; he was still merry and violent as of old, but 

his merriment had a convulsive harshness, and his violences always 

him!" 

came to occupy herself with him much less than with the cat or the 

paroquet which she probably had. What augmented Father Gillenormand's 

secret suffering was, that he locked it all up within his breast, and 

did not allow its existence to be divined. His sorrow was like those 

recently invented furnaces which consume their own smoke. It sometimes 

him: "What is your grandson doing?" "What has become of him?" The old 

fillip to his cuff, if he wished to appear gay: "Monsieur le Baron de 

Pontmercy is practising pettifogging in some corner or other." 

his mind on not receiving anything more from the man who had been 

unkind to his father. This was the mitigated translation of his first 

still. It was for his father's sake. The hardness of his life satisfied 

and pleased him. He said to himself with a sort of joy that--it was 

meant to imply by the words: "He will be worthy of it." Words which 

Marius continued to wear, not on his breast, since the colonel's writing 

had disappeared, but in his heart. 

he had been only a child, now he was a man. He felt it. Misery, we 

good repasts, and all the rest of it; occupations for the baser side 

of the soul, at the expense of the loftier and more delicate sides. 

The poor young man wins his bread with difficulty; he eats; when he has 

which God furnishes gratis; he gazes at the sky, space, the stars, 

flowers, children, the humanity among which he is suffering, the 

creation amid which he beams. He gazes so much on humanity that he 

in him, forgetfulness of self and pity for all. As he thinks of the 

spirit. And is he unhappy? No. The misery of a young man is never 

miserable. The first young lad who comes to hand, however poor he may 

be, with his strength, his health, his rapid walk, his brilliant eyes, 

his bread; and while his hands earn his bread, his dorsal column 

gains pride, his brain gathers ideas. His task finished, he returns to 

in the mire; his head in the light. He is firm, serene, gentle, peaceful, 

having bestowed on him those two forms of riches which many a rich 

man lacks: work, which makes him free; and thought, which makes him 

dignified. 

to give to thought; that is to say, he sometimes passed entire days 

in meditation, absorbed, engulfed, like a visionary, in the mute 

voluptuousness of ecstasy and inward radiance. He had thus propounded 

the problem of his life: to toil as little as possible at material 

labor, in order to toil as much as possible at the labor which is 

cast the rest to the infinite. As he believed that he lacked nothing, he 

one of the forms of idleness; that he was contenting himself with 

his labors too soon. 

could only be a transitory state, and that, at the first shock against 

labor, as we have explained, and which sufficed for his wants. 

regular occupation, and to give him fifteen hundred francs a year. To be 

recover the sight of one eye. He refused. 

Courfeyrac; and one old, M. Mabeuf. He inclined more to the old man. 

In the first place, he owed to him the revolution which had taken 

father. "He operated on me for a cataract," he said. 

impassive agent of Providence in this connection. He had enlightened 

which some one brings; he had been the candle and not the some one. 

incapable of comprehending it, of willing or of directing it. 

superfluous. 

political opinions," he expressed the real state of his mind. All 

for plants, and, above all, for books. Like all the rest of the world, 

books. He did not understand how men could busy themselves with 

hating each other because of silly stuff like the charter, democracy, 

and heaps of folios, and even of 32mos, which they might turn over. He 

he made Pontmercy's acquaintance, this sympathy had existed between the 

as the pears of St. Germain; it is from one of his combinations, 

apparently, that the October Mirabelle, now celebrated and no less 

chosen the career of warden. However, he had never succeeded in loving 

any woman as much as a tulip bulb, nor any man as much as an Elzevir. 

He had long passed sixty, when, one day, some one asked him: "Have you 

with an old housekeeper. He was somewhat gouty, and when he was asleep, 

Cauteretz, with colored plates, a work which enjoyed a tolerable 

by dint of patience, privations, and time, a precious collection of rare 

copies of every sort. He never went out without a book under his arm, 

cure, perfectly white hair, no teeth, either in his mouth or his mind, a 

trembling in every limb, a Picard accent, an infantile laugh, the air of 

bookseller of the Porte-Saint-Jacques, named Royal. His dream was to 

naturalize indigo in France. 

the Sixtine Chapel, had filled her heart and sufficed for the quantity 

in the piece which she bought and never had made up. She knew how to 

read. M. Mabeuf had nicknamed her Mother Plutarque. 

wind. When Marius was saturated with military glory, with gunpowder, 

sword, he went to see M. Mabeuf, and M. Mabeuf talked to him of his hero 

from the point of view of flowers. 

was all that he possessed in his brother's right and his own. The 

"Monsieur," said Mother Plutarque sadly, "it is the water-carrier." 

functions of warden, gave up Saint-Sulpice, sold not a part of his 

however, he remained but one quarter for two reasons: in the first 

which was intolerable to him. 

in a sort of thatched cottage of the village of Austerlitz, where, 

and said to her with a smile: "We have the indigo!" 

name which was, to tell the truth, extremely disagreeable to him. 

bit of wisdom, or folly, or, as it often happens, in both at once, are 

but slowly accessible to the things of actual life. Their own destiny 

philosophy. One declines, descends, trickles away, even crumbles away, 

and yet is hardly conscious of it one's self. It always ends, it is 

between our happiness and our unhappiness. We are the stake, and we look 

on at the game with indifference. 

swing of a pendulum. Once mounted on an illusion, he went for a very 

stop short at the precise moment when the key is lost. 

M. Mabeuf had his innocent pleasures. These pleasures were inexpensive 

and unexpected; the merest chance furnished them. One day, Mother 

Plutarque was reading a romance in one corner of the room. She was 

of honor as to what they are perusing. 

her. 

was a question of an officer of dragoons and a beauty:-- 

is true that there was a dragon, which, from the depths of its cave, 

Courfeyrac and sought out M. Mabeuf. Very rarely, however; twice a month 

at most. 

only a poor young man dreaming in an objectless way. 

there. He was known there only under the name of M. Marius. 

On such evenings, Marius put on his new coat. But he never went to 

with boots otherwise than like mirrors. 

drawing-room you may be soiled everywhere except on your shoes. In order 

of you; your conscience? No, your boots." 

aside his fits of wrath. He still held the same opinions. Only, they had 

that his pity was directed. Now he preferred an idea to a deed, a 

in the evening through the boulevards, and caught a glimpse through 

seemed very petty indeed to him. 

her well. 

his scaffoldings, his projects for the future. In this state of revery, 

been dazzled with the purity of that soul. In fact, had it been given to 

be able to judge a man much more surely according to what he dreams, 

even in the gigantic and the ideal, the form of our spirit. Nothing 

soul, than our unpremeditated and boundless aspirations towards 

the splendors of destiny. In these aspirations, much more than in 

Each one of us dreams of the unknown and the impossible in accordance 

with his nature. 

turned out of doors. Marius, who passed nearly the whole of his days out 

of the house, hardly knew that he had any neighbors. 

it was I." 

take Marius' place. 

a young face in the house,--these rays of dawn are sometimes sweet to 

ruin,--it was expedient to find another Marius. "Take it as a simple 

Theodule." 

one takes a lancer. 

for the question concerned her favorite:-- 

morning." 

almost always happened when he read. The "sheet" which he held, although 

Royalist, of course, announced for the following day, without any 

softening phrases, one of these little events which were of daily 

occurrence at that date in Paris: "That the students of the schools 

of the moment, the artillery of the National Guard, and a conflict 

M. Gillenormand's rage. 

the rest, to "deliberate, at midday, on the Place du Pantheon." 

clad in plain clothes as a bourgeois, which was clever of him, and 

was discreetly introduced by Mademoiselle Gillenormand. The lancer had 

pension. It is well to disguise one's self as a civilian from time to 

encounters, stammered with some timidity: "Good day, uncle,"--and made 

a salute composed of the involuntary and mechanical outline of the 

military salute finished off as a bourgeois salute. 

talking aloud, and twitching, with his irritated old fingers, at the two 

watches which he wore in his two fobs. 

we are making for the abyss. That is what the descamisados have brought 

us to! To deliberate on the citizen artillery! To go and jabber in the 

you please, imbecile!' That's what the Republicans are like." 

Why did you leave my house? To go and become a Republican! Pssst! In 

always will be; they know well that the people are only the people, 

idiot? Is it not a horrible caprice? To fall in love with Pere Duchesne, 

these young fellows, such fools are they! They are all alike. Not one 

street to lose their senses. The nineteenth century is poison. The 

first scamp that happens along lets his beard grow like a goat's, 

a Republican, he's a romantic. What does that mean, romantic? Do me the 

favor to tell me what it is. All possible follies. A year ago, they ran 

courtyard of the Louvre. Such are the rascalities of this age!" 

to do with the Venus de Medici? Oh! the young men of the present day are 

linen, trousers of coarse cloth, boots of coarse leather, and their 

has political opinions, if you please. Political opinions should be 

attic in the cellar's place and my porter in the place of the King, they 

affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of the laundresses as 

and becomes silly. I have seen chaos, I now see a mess. Students 

deliberating on the National Guard,--such a thing could not be seen 

among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches! Savages who go naked, with their 

set up for judges! Those creatures deliberate and ratiocinate! The 

terraqueous globe! A final hiccough was required, and France has emitted 

and read the newspapers under the arcades of the Odeon. That costs them 

having driven your grandfather to despair, that you may!" 

lancer added in a magisterial manner:-- 

than the Annuaire Militaire." 

of thou as citizens, in order to get themselves called, eventually, 

Monsieur le Comte. Monsieur le Comte as big as my arm, assassins of 

September. The philosopher Sieyes! I will do myself the justice to say, 

that I have never had any better opinion of the philosophies of all 

those philosophers, than of the spectacles of the grimacer of Tivoli! 

One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in mantles of 

violet velvet sown with bees, with hats a la Henri IV. They were 

hideous. One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger's court. 

economists, legists, or even were you better judges of liberty, of 

equality, and fraternity than the knife of the guillotine! And that I 

announce to you, my fine fellows!" 

stared Lancer Theodule intently in the eyes, and said to him:-- 

CHAPTER I--THE SOBRIQUET: MODE OF FORMATION OF FAMILY NAMES 

with thick and intensely black hair, a lofty and intelligent brow, 

which has made its way into the French physiognomy by way of Alsace 

and Lorraine, and that complete absence of angles which rendered 

the Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans, and which 

the whitest in the world, his smile corrected the severity of his face, 

large. 

At the period of his most abject misery, he had observed that young 

stared at him because of his grace, and that they dreamed of him. 

made him shy. He chose none of them for the excellent reason that 

he fled from all of them. He lived thus indefinitely,--stupidly, as 

Courfeyrac said. 

slip into this mode of address]. "Let me give you a piece of advice, 

fleeing and blushing, you will become brutalized." 

Monsieur l'Abbe!" 

avoided women, both young and old, more than ever for a week to come, 

and he avoided Courfeyrac to boot. 

truth, he would have been very much amazed if he had been informed 

that they were women. One was the bearded old woman who swept out his 

chamber, and caused Courfeyrac to say: "Seeing that his servant woman 

said: "He is an ex-officer." He had a kindly but unapproachable air, 

blue trousers, a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed hat, which always 

was dazzlingly white, but of coarse linen. A grisette who passed near 

white. 

of child thirteen or fourteen years of age, so thin as to be almost 

homely, awkward, insignificant, and with a possible promise of 

They had the air of being father and daughter. 

at times, he fixed on her eyes overflowing with an ineffable paternity. 

invariably found them there. 

of them, then returned to the extremity whence he had come, and began 

and the promenade was taken five or six times a week, without its 

attention on the part of the five or six students who strolled along 

the Pepiniere from time to time; the studious after their lectures, 

at them a sobriquet, like a Parthian dart. Impressed solely with 

the child's gown and the old man's hair, he had dubbed the daughter 

call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc. 

facilitate this tale. 

year. He found the man to his taste, but the girl insipid. 

reader has now reached, it chanced that this habit of the Luxembourg was 

day, at last, he returned thither once more; it was a serene summer 

fine. It seemed to him that he had in his heart all the songs of the 

caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees. 

and beautiful creature, possessed of all the most charming lines of a 

most ingenuous graces of the child; a pure and fugitive moment, which 

can be expressed only by these two words,--"fifteen years." She had 

an agitated whiteness, an exquisite mouth, whence smiles darted like 

sunbeams, and words like music, a head such as Raphael would have given 

Venus. And, in order that nothing might be lacking to this bewitching 

to say, spiritual, delicate, irregular, pure,--which drives painters to 

despair, and charms poets. 

shadow and modesty. 

eyes. 

frequent than this phenomenon. There is a moment when girls blossom out 

in the twinkling of an eye, and become roses all at once. One left 

feelings. 

young girl had received her quarterly income. 

with beauty; she was a well-dressed person, clad with a sort of rich 

exhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume. 

eyelids; her eyes were of a deep, celestial blue, but in that veiled 

beneath the sycamores, or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the 

but without even turning his eyes in her direction. 

she was beautiful than he had when she was homely. He passed very near 

the bench where she sat, because such was his habit. 

and shade, the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that 

met. 

not have told. There was nothing and there was everything. It was a 

strange flash. 

child; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened, then abruptly 

closed again. 

who chances to be there! 

of all the passion of the future. It is a sort of undecided tenderness 

hearts without either wishing or knowing it. It is a virgin looking like 

a woman. 

where it falls. All purities and all candors meet in that celestial 

coquettes, possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming, 

perfume and with poison, which is called love. 

the Luxembourg with his "every-day clothes," that is to say, with a 

hat battered near the band, coarse carter's boots, black trousers 

elbows. 

tremendous luxury, and set off for the Luxembourg. 

him. Courfeyrac, on his return home, said to his friends:-- 

stupid." 

contemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black with mould, 

keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy." Marius 

more. At last he directed his course towards "his alley," slowly, and as 

that he was doing as he always did. 

should say: "Hannibal marched on Rome." 

At that moment, he was thinking that the Manuel du Baccalaureat was 

analyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind. There was a piercing 

fast to the folds in his coat, and fixed his eyes on the young girl. It 

seemed to him that she filled the entire extremity of the alley with a 

vague blue light. 

not go as far as the end. It was only with difficulty that the young 

girl could have perceived him in the distance and noted his fine 

in case any one should be looking at him from behind. 

intervals of trees, but there he felt an indescribable impossibility of 

ears, without daring to cast a glance either to the right or to the 

She was talking tranquilly. She was very pretty. He felt it, although he 

He did not attempt to approach the bench again; he halted near the 

and his new coat. 

surrounded by an aureole. But he remained standing there, motionless. 

For the first time in fifteen months, he said to himself that that 

noticed him, and probably considered his assiduity singular. 

of M. le Blanc. 

in the sand, with the cane which he held in his hand. 

Leblanc and his daughter, and went home. 

he said: "Never mind!" and ate a bit of bread. 

great care. 

portress-principal-tenant, housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel, Ma'am 

Bougon, whose name was, in reality, Madame Burgon, as we have found 

new coat. 

day, surveying from a distance, and clearly making out, the white 

recall where he had dined that evening. 

thunderstruck. Marius went out in his new coat. "Three days in 

succession!" she exclaimed. 

She lost sight of him in two minutes, and returned breathless, 

people run like this!" 

in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk, and who 

produced on him the impression that they were making sport of him. 

and that without knowing why. Once arrived there, he did not stir. 

himself, and he began all over again on the morrow. 

criticism, that could be made, was, that the contradiction between 

her gaze, which was melancholy, and her smile, which was merry, gave 

a rather wild effect to her face, which sometimes caused this sweet 

countenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming. 

bench, as usual, holding in his hand an open book, of which he had not 

daughter had just left their seat, and the daughter had taken her 

then forced himself to read; he trembled; the aureole was coming 

time to strike an attitude." Still the white-haired man and the girl 

be very handsome, he would have liked to own the cross. He heard the 

soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps. He imagined that 

without coming as far as her, and that she was saying to him: "I am 

she had looked at him! She appeared to him more beautiful than he had 

angelic, with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing and 

on his boots. 

up and walked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman. It is possible 

him in love with her. 

him: "Come and dine with me." They went off to Rousseau's and spent 

discourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered!" 

Adrets. Marius was enormously amused. 

from the theatre, he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who was 

put that woman in my collection," almost horrified him. 

preceding evening. He was very thoughtful and very merry. One would 

have said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laugh 

uproariously. He tenderly embraced some man or other from the provinces, 

faults and omissions in Guicherat's dictionaries and grammars. Marius 

interrupted the discussion to exclaim: "But it is very agreeable, all 

the same to have the cross!" 

It was serious; in fact, Marius had reached that first violent and 

charming hour with which grand passions begin. 

more simple. A glance is a spark. 

the unknown. 

tranquil in appearance yet formidable. You pass close to them every 

dream, speak, laugh. All at once you feel yourself clutched; all is 

caught you, no matter where or how, by some portion of your thought 

You are lost. The whole of you passes into it. A chain of mysterious 

succor is possible. You go on falling from gearing to gearing, from 

by passion. 

of nature, the absence of daily and material activity, the life within 

himself, the secret conflicts of chastity, a benevolent ecstasy towards 

all creation, had prepared Marius for this possession which is called 

passion. His worship of his father had gradually become a religion, 

and, like all religions, it had retreated to the depths of his soul. 

Something was required in the foreground. Love came. 

Luxembourg. When the hour arrived, nothing could hold him back.--"He 

is on duty," said Courfeyrac. Marius lived in a state of delight. It is 

certain that the young girl did look at him. 

pass in front of it any more, in obedience to the instinct of timidity 

and to the instinct of prudence common to lovers. He considered it 

better not to attract "the attention of the father." He combined his 

stations behind the trees and the pedestals of the statues with a 

profound diplomacy, so that he might be seen as much as possible by the 

young girl and as little as possible by the old gentleman. Sometimes, he 

remained motionless by the half-hour together in the shade of a Leonidas 

or a Spartacus, holding in his hand a book, above which his eyes, gently 

raised, sought the beautiful girl, and she, on her side, turned her 

most natural and tranquil manner in the world with the white-haired man, 

she bent upon Marius all the reveries of a virginal and passionate eye. 

Ancient and time-honored manoeuvre which Eve understood from the very 

first day of the world, and which every woman understands from the very 

first day of her life! her mouth replied to one, and her glance replied 

to another. 

often, when Marius arrived, he rose and began to walk about. He had 

abandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by the 

Gladiator, near the other end of the walk, as though with the object 

of seeing whether Marius would pursue them thither. Marius did not 

understand, and committed this error. "The father" began to grow 

came alone. Then Marius did not stay. Another blunder. 

His love increased. He dreamed of it every night. And then, an 

the shadows over his eyes. One evening, at dusk, he had found, on 

the bench which "M. Leblanc and his daughter" had just quitted, a 

thing of her that he had gained possession of, adorable initials, upon 

kissed the handkerchief, drank it in, placed it on his heart, on his 

flesh, during the day, and at night, laid it beneath his lips that he 

might fall asleep on it. 

fall from his pocket. 

displayed himself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing the 

nothing of all this, and signified it to him by imperceptible signs. 

we ought to say that once, nevertheless, in spite of his ecstasies, "his 

she persuaded M. Leblanc to leave the bench and stroll along the walk. 

A brisk May breeze was blowing, which swayed the crests of the 

Marius' bench. Marius had risen to his feet behind them, and was 

of his soul. 

charged with performing the affairs of Springtime, swept down from 

the nursery, flung itself on the alley, enveloped the young girl in 

a delicious shiver, worthy of Virgil's nymphs, and the fawns of 

Isis, almost to the height of her garter. A leg of exquisite shape 

appeared. Marius saw it. He was exasperated and furious. 

alone in the alley, it is true. But there might have been some one 

there. And what if there had been some one there! Can any one comprehend 

the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens in the human 

woman he chanced to meet would have afforded him more pleasure. 

her steps with M. Leblanc, and passed in front of the bench on which 

Marius had seated himself once more, Marius darted a sullen and 

ferocious glance at her. The young girl gave way to that slight 

straightening up with a backward movement, accompanied by a raising of 

the eyelids, which signifies: "Well, what is the matter?" 

the little oval plaque of red cloth, with the crossed swords, the 

soldier's cross of Saint-Louis, and adorned, in addition, with a 

satisfied air. It even struck him that the aged cynic, as he hobbled 

relic of Mars mean by being so contented? What had passed between 

that wooden leg and the other? Marius reached a paroxysm of 

saw!"--And he felt a desire to exterminate the veteran. 

her; but this cost him a great effort; he sulked for three days. 

augmented and grew to madness. 

discovered, that She was named Ursule. 

deal; it was very little. In three or four weeks, Marius had devoured 

this bliss. He wanted another. He wanted to know where she lived. 

the Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone. He now committed a 

third, and an immense one. He followed "Ursule." 

new, three-story house, of modest appearance. 

the Luxembourg the happiness of following her home. 

name, a genuine woman's name; he knew where she lived; he wanted to know 

who she was. 

in?" 

the unfortunate, though not rich himself." 

there, on the third floor, in the Rue de l'Ouest." 

and stared intently at Marius. 

them all day in vain. 

windows of the third story. 

o'clock in the evening. 

the lover. 

Luxembourg. 

them, and his heart began to beat. 

in them. 

and no one entered the house. 

Luxembourg; he had expected this. At dusk, he went to the house. 

totally dark. 

"The gentleman on the third floor?" 

CHAPTER I--MINES AND MINERS 

There are superior mines and inferior mines. There is a top and a 

bottom in this obscure sub-soil, which sometimes gives way beneath 

foot. The Encyclopedia, in the last century, was a mine that was 

under the Caesars and to inundate the human race with light. For in the 

that is capable of flashing forth. Every form begins by being night. The 

of Rome, they were the vaults of the world. 

there are excavations of all sorts. There is the religious mine, the 

branch out in every direction. They sometimes meet, and fraternize 

goes and comes, mounts, descends, and mounts again in these obscurities, 

and which immense unknown swarming slowly transforms the top and the 

future. 

is good, up to a degree which the social philosophies are able to 

penetrable by the spirit of civilization, the limit breathable by man 

has been passed; a beginning of monsters is possible. 

where one encounters one of these workmen, sometimes divine, sometimes 

misshapen. Below John Huss, there is Luther; below Luther, there is 

there is Marat; below Marat there is Babeuf. And so it goes on. Lower 

work of the future is one of the visions of philosophy. 

the light of some contrasts with the blaze of others. The first are 

contrast, all these toilers, from the highest to the most nocturnal, 

is it: disinterestedness. Marat forgets himself like Jesus. They 

may be, has still, beneath his eyelids, the pale beam of the infinite. 

The shadowy eye is the other sign. 

who has no glance at all. The social order has its black miners. 

becomes extinct. 

progress and utopia, much further on in the earth, much lower than 

Marat, lower than Babeuf, lower, much lower, and without any connection 

with the upper levels, there lies the last mine. A formidable spot. This 

of shadows. It is the cellar of the blind. Inferi. 

one is for himself. The I in the eyes howls, seeks, fumbles, and 

gnaws. The social Ugolino is in this gulf. 

both of the idea and of the word; they take no thought for anything 

but the satisfaction of their individual desires. They are almost 

unconscious, and there exists within them a sort of terrible 

appetite. They are brutally voracious, that is to say, ferocious, not 

after the fashion of the tyrant, but after the fashion of the tiger. 

From suffering these spectres pass to crime; fatal affiliation, dizzy 

level is no longer complaint stifled by the absolute; it is the protest 

that vault Lacenaire emerges. 

excavation. There, as we have just said, all is pure, noble, dignified, 

effected, taken as a whole has a name: Progress. 

the great cavern of evil. 

a pen. Its blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness of the 

Babeuf is a speculator to Cartouche; Marat is an aristocrat to 

Schinderhannes. This cavern has for its object the destruction of 

everything. 

It not only undermines, in its hideous swarming, the actual social 

order; it undermines philosophy, it undermines human thought, it 

undermines civilization, it undermines revolution, it undermines 

It is darkness, and it desires chaos. Its vault is formed of ignorance. 

It is to this point that philosophy and progress tend, with all their 

you destroy the lair Crime. 

The only social peril is darkness. 

difference, here below, at least, in predestination. The same shadow 

blackness takes possession of the interior of a man and is there 

converted into evil. 

governed the third lower floor of Paris, from 1830 to 1835. 

waistcoat. Gueulemer, built after this sculptural fashion, might have 

subdued monsters; he had found it more expeditious to be one. A low 

harsh, short hair, cheeks like a brush, a beard like that of a wild 

boar; the reader can see the man before him. His muscles called for 

had, probably, somewhat to do with Marshal Brune, having been a porter 

at Avignon in 1815. After this stage, he had turned ruffian. 

Babet was thin and learned. He was transparent but impenetrable. 

portraits of "the head of the State." In addition to this, he extracted 

teeth. He had exhibited phenomena at fairs, and he had owned a booth 

Academies, makes physical experiments on metals and metalloids, extracts 

one tooth, one franc, fifty centimes; two teeth, two francs; three 

advantage of this opportunity meant: Have as many teeth extracted as 

possible. He had been married and had had children. He did not know what 

present me with a child like that!" 

This was his expression. 

knew. He only addressed his accomplices in the most absolute darkness, 

and with his back turned to them. Was his name Claquesous? Certainly 

he sprang from the earth. 

black hair, the brilliant light of springtime in his eyes; he had all 

vices and aspired to all crimes. 

his hat was curled up on the left side, in order to make room for a tuft 

of hair, after the style of 1829. He lived by robbery with violence. 

His coat was of the best cut, but threadbare. Montparnasse was a 

fashion-plate in misery and given to the commission of murders. The 

cause of all this youth's crimes was the desire to be well-dressed. The 

stain of darkness into his heart, and had made a Cain of this Abel. 

Finding that he was handsome, he desired to be elegant: now, the 

numerous corpses in his past. More than one passer-by lay with 

the bust of a Prussian officer, the murmur of admiration from the 

boulevard wenches surrounding him, his cravat knowingly tied, a bludgeon 

sepulchre. 

names and their traps, hiding in their own shadows, boxes with 

simplifying matters to the point of consisting of but one individual, 

sometimes multiplying themselves to such a point that Coco-Latour 

himself took them for a whole throng. 

monstrous polyp of evil, which inhabits the crypt of society. 

relations, Babet, Gueulemer, Claquesous, and Montparnasse were charged 

with the general enterprise of the ambushes of the department of 

imaginations, applied to them to have their ideas executed. They 

always in a condition to lend a force proportioned and suitable to 

all crimes which demanded a lift of the shoulder, and which were 

sufficiently lucrative. When a crime was in quest of arms, they 

at the disposition of all underground tragedies. 

their conferences. They had twelve black hours before them; they 

regulated their employment accordingly. 

Patron-Minette signifies the morning, the same as entre chien et 

Patron-Minette, was probably derived from the hour at which their work 

ended, the dawn being the vanishing moment for phantoms and for the 

questioned him concerning a misdeed which Lacenaire denied, "Who did 

it?" demanded the President. Lacenaire made this response, enigmatical 

so far as the magistrate was concerned, but clear to the police: 

"Perhaps it was Patron-Minette." 

in the same manner a band can almost be judged from the list of ruffians 

interpolating this word.] 

Poussagrive. 

these names corresponds to a variety of those misshapen fungi from the 

under side of civilization. 

among the men whom one sees passing along the streets. Fatigued by the 

Montrouge, sometimes in the sewers. They ran to earth. 

Horace speaks of them: Ambubaiarum collegia, pharmacopolae, mendici, 

identical; only, they no longer bear the same names and they are 

no longer in the same skins. The individuals extirpated, the tribe 

subsists. 

experience the quivers of a spider at the passage of a stranger or of a 

man from the country. 

habitually constitute one mass with the shadows, that they are in 

night. 

floods. Not a single bat can resist the dawn. Light up society from 

below. 

CHAPTER I--MARIUS, WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET, ENCOUNTERS A 
MAN IN A CAP 

young girl had again set foot in the Luxembourg garden. Thenceforth, 

Marius had but one thought,--to gaze once more on that sweet and 

adorable face. He sought constantly, he sought everywhere; he found 

nothing. He was no longer Marius, the enthusiastic dreamer, the firm, 

resolute, ardent man, the bold defier of fate, the brain which erected 

future on future, the young spirit encumbered with plans, with projects, 

with pride, with ideas and wishes; he was a lost dog. He fell into a 

black melancholy. All was over. Work disgusted him, walking tired him. 

Vast nature, formerly so filled with forms, lights, voices, counsels, 

perspectives, horizons, teachings, now lay empty before him. It seemed 

to him that everything had disappeared. 

took pleasure in his thoughts. To everything that they proposed to him 

in a whisper, he replied in his darkness: "What is the use?" 

Here, come to the Chaumiere." 

Of course he did not see the one he sought.--"But this is the place, 

creatures on their way home from the feast, which passed close to 

walnut-trees, along the road, in order to refresh his head. 

the trap, seeking the absent one everywhere, stupefied by love. 

Boulevard des Invalides, a man dressed like a workingman and wearing a 

cap with a long visor, which allowed a glimpse of locks of very 

scrutinized the man, who was walking slowly and as though absorbed in 

painful meditation. Strange to say, he thought that he recognized M. 

Leblanc. The hair was the same, also the profile, so far as the cap 

these workingman's clothes? What was the meaning of this? What signified 

himself, "it was probably only a resemblance." 

there. 

without, moreover, ever having spoken to either father, mother, or 

daughters. The other lodgers had moved away or had died, or had been 

turned out in default of payment. 

afternoon, but it was the 2d of February, that ancient Candlemas 

remained classic:-- 

           Qu'il luise ou qu'il luiserne, 

           L'ours rentre dans en sa caverne.[26] 

infirmities of ideal passions! 

the moment, as she uttered this memorable monologue:-- 

the trouble of the world!" 

reach the Rue Saint-Jacques. He was walking along with drooping head. 

little shorter, who were passing rapidly, all out of breath, in terror, 

had not seen him, and had jostled him as they passed. Through the 

twilight, Marius could distinguish their livid faces, their wild heads, 

their dishevelled hair, their hideous bonnets, their ragged petticoats, 

very low voice:-- 

The other answered: "I saw them. I bolted, bolted, bolted!" 

police had come near apprehending these two children, and that the 

latter had escaped. 

They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him, and there 

created, for a few minutes, in the gloom, a sort of vague white spot, 

then disappeared. 

was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers. 

went off to dine. 

candle. The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind. 

children die; it is to see them leading an evil life." 

Luxembourg. 

always appearing to me, only formerly they were angels and now they are 

ghouls." 

the address of the young girls, if it really belonged to them, and, in 

had lost it. 

the place opposite the Chamber of Deputies, No.--" 

it was probable that it could be read without impropriety. 

to the sacred cause of legitimacy, who has given with his blood, 

on the humanity which animates you and on the interest which Madame la 

vain, and their gratitude will preserve theirs charming souvenir. 

                            Madame, 

                                 Don Alvares, Spanish Captain 

                                 of Cavalry, a royalist who 

                                 has take refuge in France, 

                                 who finds himself on travells 

                                 for his country, and the 

                                 resources are lacking him to 

                                 continue his travells. 

it:-- 

 Madame la Comtesse:  It is an unhappy mother of a family of six 

 children the last of which is only eight months old.  I sick 

 since my last confinement, abandoned by my husband five months ago, 

 haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance. 

 Madame, with profound respect, 

                                        Mistress Balizard. 

Marius turned to the third letter, which was a petition like the 

preceding; he read:-- 

           Rue Saint-Denis on the corner of the Rue aux Fers. 

 of letters who has just sent a drama to the Theatre-Francais. The subject 

 the serious, the unexpected, are mingled in a variety of characters, 

 and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the intrigue 

 which proceeds misteriously, and ends, after striking altarations, 

 in the midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes. 

 animates the man of our century, that is to say, the fashion, 

 that capritious and bizarre weathervane which changes at almost 

 every new wind. 

 the egotism of priviliged authors, may obtaine my exclusion from 

 the theatre, for I am not ignorant of the mortifications with which 

 new-comers are treated. 

 of men of litters emboldens me to send you my daughter who will 

 explain our indigant situation to you, lacking bread and fire 

 to have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection, 

 in making a piesse of verse to pay you my tribute of gratitude. 

 will be sent to you before it is inserted at the beginning of the 

 drama and delivered on the stage. 

                             To Monsieur 

                                and Madame Pabourgeot, 

                                   My most respectful complements, 

                                      Genflot, man of letters. 

       P. S. Even if it is only forty sous. 

 but sad motives connected with the toilet do not permit me, 

 alas! to go out. 

Finally, Marius opened the fourth letter. The address ran: To the 

benevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-haut-Pas. It 

contained the following lines:-- 

 Benevolent Man:  If you deign to accompany my daughter, you will 

 with a sentiment of obvious benevolence, for true philosophers 

 always feel lively emotions. 

 cruel need, and that it is very painful, for the sake of obtaining 

 a little relief, to get oneself attested by the authorities as though 

 one were not free to suffer and to die of inanition while waiting 

 to have our misery relieved.  Destinies are very fatal for several 

 and too prodigal or too protecting for others. 

 have the honor to be, 

                       truly magnanimous man, 

                         your very humble 

                           and very obedient servant, 

                                        P. Fabantou, dramatic artist. 

After perusing these four letters, Marius did not find himself much 

further advanced than before. 

by the same hand. 

from the same person? 

was the same, and, although an attempt had been made to vary the 

them than the Spanish captain. 

they were making sport of him. 

down to work, when there came a soft knock at his door. 

Bougon. 

from the books and manuscripts on his table. 

roughened with brandy and liquor. 

of the garret, through which the light fell, was precisely opposite 

emaciated, slender creature; there was nothing but a chemise and a 

look of a corrupt old woman; fifty years mingled with fifteen; one of 

to shudder whom they do not cause to weep. 

was almost like the forms of the shadows which traverse dreams. 

beauty were dying away in that face of sixteen, like the pale sunlight 

whom she wanted; but who was this girl? How did she know his name? 

She was shivering. 

sealed it was still moist. The message could not have come from a 

distance. He read:-- 

 that you paid my rent six months ago.  I bless you, young man. 

 of bread for two days, four persons and my spouse ill.  If I am 

 to be propitious to me by daigning to lavish on me a slight favor. 

 benefactors of humanity,-- 

a candle in a cellar. All was suddenly illuminated. 

same odor of tobacco. 

signer. The Spanish Captain Don Alvares, the unhappy Mistress Balizard, 

as we have said, but very rare occasion to see, to even catch a glimpse 

of, his extremely mean neighbors. His mind was elsewhere, and where the 

difficulty that the one who had just entered his room had awakened in 

him, in spite of disgust and pity, a vague recollection of having met 

her elsewhere. 

wrote under feigned names to people whom he judged to be wealthy and 

compassionate, letters which his daughters delivered at their risk 

daughters; he was playing a game with fate, and he used them as the 

evening before, from their breathless condition, from their terror 

responsibility. Souls which blossomed out yesterday, and are faded 

to-day, like those flowers let fall in the streets, which are soiled 

almost to her waist. She moved the chairs about, she disarranged the 

she rummaged about to see what there was in the corners. 

frolicsome refrains which her hoarse and guttural voice rendered 

lugubrious. 

beneath this hardihood. Effrontery is a disgrace. 

is only to be seen among men. 

creature is insensible:-- 

tolerable fluency:-- 

which stands in the middle of the plain of Waterloo, with five 

battalions of his brigade." 

in our house, that we are! Waterloo was against the English." 

which lay in the middle of the table: "The bobbies are here." 

were not made--" 

saying, with an intonation which contained every form of anguish, 

stifled by every form of cynicism:-- 

"Bah!" 

       Pas de fricot.             I have no food. 

       J'ai froid, ma mere.       I am cold, mother. 

       Pas de tricot.             I have no clothes. 

       Grelotte,                  Lolotte! 

            Lolotte!                   Shiver, 

            Sanglote,                  Sob, 

            Jacquot!"                  Jacquot!" 

She had hardly finished this couplet, when she exclaimed:-- 

brother who is a friend of the artists, and who gives me tickets 

and uncomfortable there. There are rough people there sometimes; and 

people who smell bad." 

And at the same moment the same idea occurred to them both, and made 

here on the staircase, and then I often see you going to a person named 

your hair tumbled thus." 

her lips, as though on a piano where some notes are missing. 

which belongs to you, I think. Permit me to return it to you." 

she did so:-- 

"Dieu de Dieu! how my sister and I have hunted! And it was you who found 

You see, we let it fall when we were running. It was that brat of a 

jostled as we passed last night. We couldn't see. I said to my sister: 

'Is it a gentleman?' My sister said to me: 'I think it is a gentleman.'" 

benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas." 

way, this is his hour. I'll go and carry it to him. Perhaps he will give 

us something to breakfast on." 

This reminded Marius of the wretched girl's errand to himself. He 

fumbled in his waistcoat pocket, and found nothing there. 

presence. 

to myself: 'No, it's too cold.' I go out alone, whenever I choose, I 

the boulevard, I see the trees like forks, I see houses, all black and 

them out, I am bewildered, as though horses were breathing in my ears; 

don't know what all. I think people are flinging stones at me, I flee 

queer when you have had no food." 

the five francs to the young girl. 

avalanches of slang in her brain, she went on:-- 

You're a jolly thief! I'm your humble servant! Bravo for the good 

fellows! Two days' wine! and meat! and stew! we'll have a royal feast! 

and a good fill!" 

bit into it, muttering:-- 

man has seen nothing; the misery of woman is what he must see; he who 

has seen only the misery of woman has seen nothing; he must see the 

misery of the child. 

him! Work, wages, bread, fire, courage, good will, all fail him 

woman and the child, and bends them violently to ignominy. 

partitions which all open on either vice or crime. 

in sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources, which 

encounters opprobrium, and which accommodates itself to it. Fathers, 

They crouch, back to back, in a sort of hut of fate. They exchange 

woe-begone glances. Oh, the unfortunate wretches! How pale they are! How 

from the sun than ours. 

shadows. She revealed to him a hideous side of the night. 

to that day. The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement, 

better than that. What! only a wall separated him from those abandoned 

beings who lived gropingly in the dark outside the pale of the rest of 

radiances, to loves in the air, to follies; and all the while, human 

were agonizing in vain beside him! He even formed a part of their 

distress would have been perceived, and they would have been taken hold 

of and rescued! They appeared very corrupt and very depraved, no 

all the more profound, in proportion as the fall is great? 

scolded himself more than he deserved, he stared at the wall which 

the wall, either on the side of the Jondrettes or on that of Marius; the 

perceived, near the top, close to the ceiling, a triangular hole, which 

a sort of peep-hole. It is permissible to gaze at misfortune like a 

traitor in order to succor it.[27] 

Marius, "and in what condition they are." 

in cities, that which thus conceals itself is ferocious, unclean, and 

petty, that is to say, ugly; in forests, that which conceals itself is 

ferocious, savage, and grand, that is to say, beautiful. Taking one lair 

than hovels. 

poverty was noble, his garret was neat. The den upon which his eye now 

rested was abject, dirty, fetid, pestiferous, mean, sordid. The only 

crockery, and in two of the corners, two indescribable pallets; all 

from them. Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could be 

distinguished upon them. 

so it was let for forty francs a year. There was every sort of thing 

from nails, a bird-cage, ashes, and even a little fire. Two brands were 

smouldering there in a melancholy way. 

human beings, must be hiding. 

letters, was the inscription: THE DREAM. This represented a sleeping 

in a cloud, with a crown in his beak, and the woman thrusting the 

yellow capital ornamented with this inscription: 

                           AUSTERLITS 

                              IENA 

                            WAGRAMME 

                              ELOT 

the wall. It had the appearance of a picture with its face turned to 

to be rehung. 

a man about sixty years of age, small, thin, livid, haggard, with a 

cunning, cruel, and uneasy air; a hideous scoundrel. 

rendering each other mutually hideous and complementing each other; the 

pettifogger horrible. 

to be seen. Beneath this chemise, muddy trousers and boots through which 

his toes projected were visible. 

hovel, but there was still tobacco. 

read. 

romance. On the cover sprawled the following title, printed in large 

capitals: GOD; THE KING; HONOR AND THE LADIES; BY DUCRAY DUMINIL, 
1814. 

at Pere Lachaise! The great, those who are rich, are up above, in the 

acacia alley, which is paved. They can reach it in a carriage. The 

little people, the poor, the unhappy, well, what of them? they are put 

down below, where the mud is up to your knees, in the damp places. They 

are put there so that they will decay the sooner! You cannot go to see 

them without sinking into the earth." 

teeth:-- 

crouching near the fireplace on her bare heels. 

could be seen that she was of very lofty stature. She was a sort of 

giant, beside her husband. She had hideous hair, of a reddish blond 

with her enormous shining hands, with their flat nails. 

other, and probably a volume of the same romance. 

not seem to be listening or seeing or living. 

was evident that she really was fourteen. She was the child who had 

melancholy human plants. These creatures have neither childhood nor 

youth. At fifteen years of age they appear to be twelve, at sixteen they 

seem twenty. To-day a little girl, to-morrow a woman. One might say 

that they stride through life, in order to get through with it the more 

speedily. 

precedes the death agony. 

the interior of a tomb, for the human soul could be felt fluttering 

there, and life was palpitating there. The garret, the cellar, the lowly 

social edifice, is not exactly the sepulchre, but only its antechamber; 

audible. 

everybody is canaille!" 

dear. You are too good to write to all those people, husband." 

from the amount of love within her; but probably, in the daily and 

her heart was silent. 

from the species of observatory which he had improvised, when a sound 

attracted his attention and caused him to remain at his post. 

men's shoes, bespattered with mud, which had splashed even to her red 

ankles, and she was wrapped in an old mantle which hung in tatters. 

deposited it at his door, in order that she might inspire the more pity, 

then exclaimed with an expression of triumph and joy:-- 

little sister did not stir. 

"Yes." 

"How are you sure? If he is coming in a fiacre, how is it that you 

that it was the last door at the end of the corridor, on the right? If 

he only does not make a mistake! So you found him at the church? Did he 

read my letter? What did he say to you?" 

will come.' When the mass was finished, I watched him leave the church 

him the last door in the corridor, on the right." 

what made me run so." 

had on her feet:-- 

again, and that I won't, for the sake of my health, in the first place, 

time. I prefer to go barefoot." 

barefoot to the good God," he added bitterly. 

the fire." 

which stood on the chimney, and flung the water on the brands. 

passed through it. 

window, and shouted to her in a thundering voice:-- 

Break a pane of glass!" 

struck a pane with her fist. The glass broke and fell with a loud 

clatter. 

final preparation at the moment when the battle is on the point of 

beginning. 

congealed state:-- 

herself heavily on one of the pallets. 

corner in which she was cowering. She had wounded herself while breaking 

that pane for you!" 

of cloth with which he hastily swathed the little girl's bleeding wrist. 

outer mist penetrated thither and diffused itself like a whitish sheet 

the snow could be seen falling. The snow promised by the Candlemas sun 

of the preceding day had actually come. 

brands in such a manner as to entirely conceal them. 

things." 

the mud from the bottom of her mantle, with a careless air; her younger 

while:-- 

you will anger your father." 

right." 

pane all for nothing." 

makes us wait! He says to himself: 'Well! they will wait for me! 

jubilation, enthusiasm, and satisfaction I could strangle all those rich 

folks! all those rich folks! These men who pretend to be charitable, 

us, and who come for the purpose of humiliating us, and to bring us 

'clothes,' as they say! old duds that are not worth four sous! And 

bread! That's not what I want, pack of rascals that they are, it's 

be smashed, very likely, but at least, no one would have anything, 

and there would be that much gained! But what is that blockhead of 

a benevolent gentleman doing? Will he come? Perhaps the animal has 

forgotten the address! I'll bet that that old beast--" 

and opened it, exclaiming, amid profound bows and smiles of adoration:-- 

charming young lady, also." 

threshold of the attic. 

the powers of the human tongue. 

three letters of that word: She. 

luminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes. It was that 

now it reappeared. 

all that horror. 

heart troubled his sight. He felt that he was on the brink of bursting 

just found it again. 

caught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot. 

bulky parcel on the table. 

with sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet, that silk mantle, and that 

charming, happy face. 

it the effect produced on entering a cellar. The two new-comers 

advanced, therefore, with a certain hesitation, being hardly able 

garret, who were accustomed to this twilight. 

Jondrette the father:-- 

woollen stockings and blankets." 

very earth. 

visitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior, he added in 

a low and rapid voice:-- 

how was the letter to that old blockhead signed?" 

"The dramatic artist, good!" 

person who is seeking to recall a name:-- 

"philanthropist." He exclaimed with an accent which smacked at the same 

the mendicant on the highway:-- 

broken pane! And in such weather! My spouse in bed! Ill!" 

"My child wounded!" added Jondrette. 

contemplating "the young lady," and had ceased to sob. 

talent of a juggler. 

approached her hastily. 

six sous a day. It may be necessary to cut off her arm." 

than ever. 

"Alas! yes, my benefactor!" replied the father. 

once, profiting by a moment when the new-comers were questioning the 

rapid but very low tone:-- 

all torn at that! In the depths of winter! I can't go out for lack of a 

coat. If I had a coat of any sort, I would go and see Mademoiselle Mars, 

Rue de la Tour-des-Dames? Do you know, sir? We played together in the 

condition to which the arts are reduced. And do you know, my charming 

young lady, and you, my generous protector, do you know, you who breathe 

forth virtue and goodness, and who perfume that church where my daughter 

children religiously, sir. I did not want them to take to the theatre. 

Ah! the hussies! If I catch them tripping! I do not jest, that I don't! 

have got to walk straight. They are none of your unhappy wretches who 

begin by having no family, and end by espousing the public. One is 

Mamselle Nobody, and one becomes Madame Everybody. Deuce take it! None 

the street, on the boulevard, without shelter, in the rain, in the snow. 

There, sir. I owe for four quarters--a whole year! that is to say, sixty 

francs." 

and he could not owe four, because six months had not elapsed since 

Marius had paid for two. 

incurring expenses!" 

chair. 

evening,--it is this evening that you must pay, is it not?" 

vivaciously:-- 

low tone: "Take a good look at him, wife!" 

turned towards the door. 

elder Jondrette girl. 

formidable shrug of the shoulders. 

tears! Permit me to accompany you to your carriage." 

very cold." 

great-coat. And all three went out, Jondrette preceding the two 

strangers. 

her very first step in that garret. During her entire stay there, he 

star Sirius might have entered the room, and he would not have been any 

more dazzled. 

that he had caught a few words at the Luxembourg, but he was not 

to hear it, in order that he might bear away in his soul a little of 

that music. But everything was drowned in the lamentable exclamations 

and trumpet bursts of Jondrette. This added a touch of genuine wrath 

that it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst of 

beheld a humming-bird in the midst of toads. 

cling to her trace, not to quit her until he learned where she 

lived, not to lose her again, at least, after having so miraculously 

As he laid his hand on the lock of the door, and was on the point of 

escape from him again, and this time it would be final. What was he 

quitted his room. 

boulevard in time to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue du 

Petit-Banquier, on its way back to Paris. 

recognize him. At that moment, wonderful and unprecedented good luck, 

Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the boulevard. There was but 

was sure, efficacious, and free from danger. 

his forefinger gently with his thumb. 

up his horse. 

been born again, he would have emerged from the limbo and darkness, he 

would have made his escape from isolation and spleen, from his widowed 

despair. 

skilfully, so that he might follow him on that occasion; but, in his 

contemplation, it is doubtful whether he had heard this. 

aspect who have been dubbed by common consent, prowlers of the barriers; 

suggests the supposition that they work by night. 

would surely have observed, but which Marius hardly noticed. 

was talking resembled a certain Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias 

Bigrenaille, whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a very 

dangerous nocturnal roamer. This man's name the reader has learned in 

figured later on in many criminal trials, and became a notorious rascal. 

of tradition among ruffians and assassins. He was at the head of 

a school towards the end of the last reign. And in the evening, at 

discussed at La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions. One might even, in 

passes under the culvert, read his name, PANCHAUD, audaciously carved 

as yet made a serious beginning. 

was far away. Moreover, she would not have given them back. As for 

questioning her about the residence of the persons who had just been 

of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas." 

half open. 

with me?" 

could see her through the half-open door. 

vaguely, and said:-- 

were kind this morning. Be so again now. You gave me something to eat, 

now tell me what ails you. You are grieved, that is plain. I do not want 

matters, and everything comes right. Make use of me." 

one feels that one is falling? 

wish to know her." 

significant and bitter about it. 

Marius. He resumed:-- 

address, indeed!" 

door, which closed behind her. 

He dropped into a chair, with his head and both elbows on his bed, 

absorbed in thoughts which he could not grasp, and as though a prey to 

brain confusedly. 

were fraught with a strange interest for him:-- 

father of "his Ursule"? What! Did Jondrette know him? Was Marius about 

who it was that he loved, who that young girl was? Who her father 

was? Was the dense shadow which enwrapped them on the point of being 

dispelled? Was the veil about to be rent? Ah! Heavens! 

near the little peep-hole in the partition wall. 

and daughters had levied on the package and put on woollen stockings and 

jackets. Two new blankets were thrown across the two beds. 

of out of doors. His daughters were seated on the floor near the 

strides. His eyes were extraordinary. 

of her husband, turned to say:-- 

him. I knew him at once! What! Didn't it force itself on you?" 

manage it,--it is the very sound of his voice. He is better dressed, 

reply. The two girls departed. 

you." 

which he wore into his trousers. 

ears. 

straightened himself up and concluded aloud:-- 

Surprise, rage, hate, wrath, were mingled and combined in one monstrous 

somnolent woman, and from being repulsive she became terrible. 

going barefoot, and have not a gown to their backs! What! A satin 

this one is not so bad-looking! She really is not bad-looking! It can't 

be she!" 

blonde face and stared at the ceiling with a horrible expression. 

At that moment, she seemed to Marius even more to be feared than her 

husband. She was a sow with the look of a tigress. 

my daughters with an air of pity,--she is that beggar brat! Oh! I should 

like to kick her stomach in for her!" 

hair in disorder, her nostrils dilating, her mouth half open, her fists 

clenched and drawn back. Then she fell back on the bed once more. The 

a moment before:-- 

is addressing me on the point of going mad?" 

the parish of 

die-of-hunger-if-you-have-a-fire,-die-of-cold-if-you-have-bread! I have 

good God! no more farces, Eternal Father! I want to eat till I am full, 

I want to drink my fill! to gormandize! to sleep! to do nothing! I want 

a millionnaire!" 

a medical professor who is about to make a demonstration:-- 

not be overheard." 

go out." 

on the boulevard. 

This is what Marius heard:-- 

will come here this evening at six o'clock. To bring sixty francs, the 

Isn't he a fool! So he will come at six o'clock! That's the hour when 

the city. There's not a soul in the house. The neighbor never comes home 

us. He will give in." 

and sweet, and provoked a shudder. 

away as short a time as possible, it's a fine stroke of business, do you 

look after the house." 

for a moment in thought, then exclaimed:-- 

saved us! my romantic beard! my pretty little romantic beard!" 

gray of the sky. 

devilish good thing in leaving it for me, the old scoundrel! If it 

have gone wrong! What small points things hang on, anyway!" 

appearance once more in the opening. 

charcoal ready." 

"philanthropist" had left with him. 

dinner." 

descend the staircase rapidly. 

nature. His habits of solitary meditation, while they had developed in 

him sympathy and compassion, had, perhaps, diminished the faculty for 

irritation, but had left intact the power of waxing indignant; he had 

the kindliness of a brahmin, and the severity of a judge; he took pity 

upon a toad, but he crushed a viper. Now, it was into a hole of vipers 

that his glance had just been directed, it was a nest of monsters that 

he had beneath his eyes. 

elucidated; on the contrary, all of them had been rendered more dense, 

if anything; he knew nothing more about the beautiful maiden of the 

Luxembourg and the man whom he called M. Leblanc, except that Jondrette 

was acquainted with them. Athwart the mysterious words which had been 

uttered, the only thing of which he caught a distinct glimpse was the 

fact that an ambush was in course of preparation, a dark but terrible 

trap; that both of them were incurring great danger, she probably, her 

father certainly; that they must be saved; that the hideous plots of the 

Jondrettes must be thwarted, and the web of these spiders broken. 

of iron. 

a sort of joy at the idea that it might be granted to him perhaps to 

render a service to the one whom he loved. 

and had then plunged back again into the immense depths of Paris. Should 

the man whom Marius was anxious to save would be lost. One o'clock had 

before him. 

took his hat, and went out, without making any more noise than if he had 

been treading on moss with bare feet. 

deserted, there was not a soul in it, it was broad daylight, and yet he 

distinctly heard voices. 

the wall, talking together in subdued tones. 

hair. 

man. "Father What's-his-name's team will be already harnessed." 

preceding evening at the Gaite Theatre. 

hidden behind that wall, and crouching in the snow, could not but bear 

some relation to Jondrette's abominable projects. That must be the 

affair. 

foreseeing that he should not dine. 

not given his five francs to the Jondrette girl in the morning, he 

his daughter with him, no doubt. 

and inquired for the commissary of police. 

inspector who takes his place. Would you like to speak to him? Are you 

in haste?" 

tall man behind a grating, leaning against a stove, and holding up with 

both hands the tails of a vast topcoat, with three collars. His face 

was square, with a thin, firm mouth, thick, gray, and very ferocious 

whiskers, and a look that was enough to turn your pockets inside out. 

Of that glance it might have been well said, not that it penetrated, but 

that it searched. 

Jondrette's; the dog is, at times, no less terrible to meet than the 

wolf. 

sight, was to be inveigled into a trap that very evening; that, as he 

occupied the room adjoining the den, he, Marius Pontmercy, a lawyer, 

had heard the whole plot through the partition; that the wretch who 

had planned the trap was a certain Jondrette; that there would be 

certain Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille; that Jondrette's 

daughters were to lie in wait; that there was no way of warning the 

all this was to be carried out at six o'clock that evening, at the most 

deserted point of the Boulevard de l'Hopital, in house No. 50-52. 

coldly:-- 

that house?" 

the heel of his boot at the door of the stove:-- 

much as his cravat:-- 

man and the bearded man in the snow behind the wall of the Rue du 

Petit-Banquier. 

alias Deux-Milliards." 

Number 50-52. Former property of Gorbeau." 

Plantes?" 

employees. It is not surprising that you did not see him." 

it without the artists seeing us, and then they will get off simply 

by countermanding the vaudeville. They are so modest! An audience 

and make them dance." 

him intently the while:-- 

that this police agent had not yet said "monsieur" to him. 

sententious solemnity:-- 

not fear crime, and honesty does not fear authority." 

one." 

inspector and added:-- 

bestowed on a provincial academician who had suggested a rhyme to him; 

with one movement he plunged his hands, which were enormous, into the 

two immense pockets of his top-coat, and pulled out two small steel 

Marius, saying rapidly, in a curt tone:-- 

the ceiling, the air, no matter where. Above all things, not too soon. 

Wait until they begin to put their project into execution; you are a 

in the side pocket of his coat. 

your trousers pocket." 

the inspector called to him:-- 

come or send here. You will ask for Inspector Javert." 

passing along the Rue Mouffetard in company with Bossuet. The snow had 

Courfeyrac:-- 

plague of white butterflies in heaven." All at once, Bossuet caught 

air. 

in the street. There's not a woman round." 

distinguished, although they only saw his back, was walking along about 

twenty paces in advance of Marius. 

large for him, and in a frightful pair of trousers all hanging in rags 

and black with mud. 

"Who is that man?" 

France." 

is going, let's follow them, hey?" 

brute. Follow a man who is following another man, indeed!" 

and was spying on his proceedings. 

held by a glance. 

of an hour, then returned to the Rue Mouffetard. He halted at 

an ironmonger's shop, which then stood at the corner of the Rue 

Pierre-Lombard, and a few minutes later Marius saw him emerge from the 

which he concealed beneath his great-coat. At the top of the Rue 

and did not follow Jondrette into it. It was lucky that he did so, 

long-haired man and the bearded man conversing, Jondrette turned round, 

across the wall and disappeared. 

kept a few old single-seated berlins under his sheds. 

make haste. 

sun, and that was the moon. 

It was rising in a ruddy glow behind the low dome of Salpetriere. 

wall of the corridor to his chamber. This corridor, as the reader will 

window. 

succeeded in reaching his chamber without being seen and without making 

any noise. It was high time. A moment later he heard Ma'am Bougon take 

her departure, locking the door of the house behind her. 

o'clock. Only half an hour separated him from what was about to happen. 

He heard the beating of his arteries as one hears the ticking of a watch 

in the dark. He thought of the double march which was going on at that 

moment in the dark,--crime advancing on one side, justice coming up on 

the other. He was not afraid, but he could not think without a shudder 

of what was about to take place. As is the case with all those who are 

suddenly assailed by an unforeseen adventure, the entire day produced 

upon him the effect of a dream, and in order to persuade himself that he 

was not the prey of a nightmare, he had to feel the cold barrels of the 

steel pistols in his trousers pockets. 

clearly from the mist, and its light, mingled with the white reflection 

of the snow which had fallen, communicated to the chamber a sort of 

twilight aspect. 

shining with a reddish glow which seemed bloody to him. 

there was not a sound in the Jondrette quarters, not a soul was moving 

there, not a soul speaking, not a breath; the silence was glacial and 

himself next door to a sepulchre. 

latch of the hovel was noisily lifted; it was Jondrette returning. 

the absence of the wolf. 

confidence." 

"Rest easy." 

which he had purchased. 

took advantage of the fire to cook them." 

Tenth; all is going well!" 

you, do you listen here." 

dinner hour." 

he is there. Here, my girl, take the candle and go there." 

crack of his door. 

in her hand. She was as she had been in the morning, only still more 

moment of anxiety; but near the bed there was a mirror nailed to the 

herself on tiptoe and looked at herself in it. In the neighboring room, 

the sound of iron articles being moved was audible. 

mirror, humming with her cracked and sepulchral voice:-- 

          Mais que du bonheur les instants sont courts! 

          S'adorer huit jours, c' etait bien la peine! 

          Le temps des amours devait durer toujours! 

          Devrait durer toujours! devrait durer toujours! 

should not hear his breathing. 

had. 

scrutinizing herself full-face and three-quarters face in turn. 

to arrange her hair; "there's no one here." 

time about it!" 

hovel!" 

          Mon triste coeur suivra partout. 

She cast a parting glance in the mirror and went out, shutting the door 

behind her. 

feet in the corridor, and Jondrette's voice shouting to them:-- 

the instant! as hard as you can go! You have a key to get in." 

father. 

door as it banged to announced that they were outside. 

probably, also, the mysterious persons of whom Marius had caught a 

glimpse in the twilight, behind the door of the unused attic. 

post at his observatory. In a twinkling, and with the agility of his 

age, he had reached the hole in the partition. 

A candle was burning in a candlestick covered with verdigris, but 

illuminated, as it were, by the reflection from a rather large 

charcoal, the brazier prepared by the Jondrette woman that morning. The 

in this light, had rather the air of a demon than of a smith. 

the chimney-piece. 

brands, sent its vapors up the chimney, and gave out no odor. 

thought of heaven mingled with the misshapen reveries of earth. 

brazier. 

and sombre deed, and as the envelope for a crime. It was the most 

retired chamber in the most isolated house on the most deserted 

existed, they would have been invented there. 

have dressed up. You have done well. You must inspire confidence!" 

large for him, and which M. Leblanc had given him, and his costume 

continued to present that contrast of coat and trousers which 

constituted the ideal of a poet in Courfeyrac's eyes. 

dismiss the fiacre." 

answer from Jondrette. 

into the corridor. 

his bed, and conceal himself beneath it. 

There is moonlight." 

with horror. 

door fall heavily to behind her. 

"Here are the two chairs." 

chisel in the brazier, set in front of the fireplace an old screen which 

of rope, and bent down as though to examine something. Marius then 

recognized the fact, that what he had taken for a shapeless mass was a 

very well-made rope-ladder, with wooden rungs and two hooks with which 

to attach it. 

in the afternoon, during Marius' absence. 

recognized in what he took for the engines of an edge-tool maker, 

which will cut or slice, the two families of tools which burglars call 

by the candle; the smallest bit of crockery on the table or on the 

chimney-piece cast a large shadow. There was something indescribably 

existed in it the anticipation of something terrible. 

drawer rapidly towards him, took out a long kitchen knife which was 

he put the knife back in the drawer and shut it. 

and cocked it. 

said:-- 

"What a fool I am! It's the partition cracking!" 

panes. Six o'clock was striking from Saint-Medard. 

had struck, he snuffed the candle with his fingers. 

walked on again, then listened once more. 

chair. 

illuminated from below. 

pressing necessities. We will attend to the rest hereafter." 

ear:-- 

that the arrival of the fiacre had not been audible, and they did not 

now hear its departure. 

darkness; in that building, in the midst of those solitudes, in the 

pistol in hand. 

clasped the stock of the pistol firmly and felt reassured. "I shall be 

able to stop that wretch whenever I please," he thought. 

the signal agreed upon and ready to stretch out their arm. 

interested in learning. 

pallets, which were empty. 

immediately." 

at him in an attitude of menace and almost of combat. 

much courage, that woman has! She's not a woman, she's an ox." 

affected airs of a flattered monster. 

"Fabantou, alias Jondrette!" replied the husband hurriedly. "An artistic 

sobriquet!" 

voice:-- 

no work! I don't know how the government arranges that, but, on my word 

of honor, sir, I am not Jacobin, sir, I am not a bousingot.[30] I don't 

things would be different. Here, for instance, I wanted to have my 

my benefactor! What a degradation, when one has been what we have been! 

only, a picture, of which I think a great deal, but which I am willing 

to part with, for I must live! Item, one must live!" 

the room a person whom he had not seen before. A man had just entered, 

bed, and, as he was behind Jondrette, he could only be indistinctly 

seen. 

Leblanc to turn round almost at the same moment as Marius. He could not 

but it fits me!" 

attention to him." 

of chemical products abound in the Faubourg Saint-Marceau. Many of the 

workmen might have black faces. Besides this, M. Leblanc's whole person 

was expressive of candid and intrepid confidence. 

you, that I have a picture to sell." 

seated himself on the bed, behind Jondrette. 

lampblack. 

able to prevent M. Leblanc catching sight of him. 

picture. But stop, sir, take a look at it." 

which the candle illuminated, somewhat. Marius could make nothing out of 

of foreign canvasses and screen paintings. 

to me! But I have told you, and I will not take it back, that I am so 

wretched that I will part with it." 

M. Leblanc's glance returned to the bottom of the room as he examined 

the picture. 

closed eyes, and it might have been supposed that he was asleep. He 

other wore his hair long. None of them had on shoes; those who did not 

wear socks were barefooted. 

worth?" 

and is worth about three francs." 

thousand crowns." 

the window, and the Jondrette woman and the four men on his right, on 

to be looking on. 

supposed that what he had before him was a man who had simply gone mad 

shall be left without resources; there will be nothing left for me but 

glasses from falling off is required, then a special stove is needed, a 

the paste, according as it is to be used for wood, paper, or stuff, a 

nail the steels, pincers, how the devil do I know what all? And all that 

day! And each box passes through the workwoman's hands thirteen times! 

And you can't wet the paper! And you mustn't spot anything! And you must 

suppose a man is to live?" 

three steps at the side of the bridge of Austerlitz the other day for 

man drew himself up and became terrible, took a step toward M. Leblanc 

and cried in a voice of thunder: "That has nothing to do with the 

question! Do you know me?" 

paper. The first was thin, and had a long, iron-tipped cudgel; the 

second, who was a sort of colossus, carried, by the middle of the 

prison. 

cudgel, the thin one. 

"Is there a carriage at the door?" 

on his neck with an astonished and attentive slowness, but there 

was nothing in his air which resembled fear. He had improvised 

an intrenchment out of the table; and the man, who but an instant 

back of his chair, with a formidable and surprising gesture. 

with a hammer, and had placed themselves across the entrance without 

opened his eyes. The Jondrette woman had seated herself beside him. 

direction of the corridor, in readiness to discharge his pistol. 

turned once more to M. Leblanc, and repeated his question, accompanying 

him:-- 

bite, he exclaimed:-- 

Thenardier. I am the inn-keeper of Montfermeil! Do you understand? 

Thenardier! Now do you know me?" 

with his accustomed placidity:-- 

through the darkness would have perceived that he was haggard, 

stupid, thunder-struck. At the moment when Jondrette said: "My name is 

the wall, as though he felt the cold of a steel blade through his heart. 

but he had quite upset Marius. That name of Thenardier, with which M. 

recall what that name meant to him! That name he had worn on his heart, 

inscribed in his father's testament! He bore it at the bottom of his 

was one of the pieties of his soul; he mingled it with the name of 

his father in his worship. What! This man was that Thenardier, that 

inn-keeper of Montfermeil whom he had so long and so vainly sought! He 

That man, to whose service Marius was burning to devote himself, was 

a monster! That liberator of Colonel Pontmercy was on the point 

of committing a crime whose scope Marius did not, as yet, clearly 

comprehend, but which resembled an assassination! And against whom, 

great God! what a fatality! What a bitter mockery of fate! His father 

had commanded him from the depths of his coffin to do all the good in 

act of crime by justice, destiny cried to him: "This is Thenardier!" 

He could at last repay this man for his father's life, saved amid a 

hail-storm of grape-shot on the heroic field of Waterloo, and repay it 

and now he actually had found him, but it was only to deliver him over 

he had entrusted that man by his will! And what a mockery to have so 

unforeseen blow. 

if he did not fire, M. Leblanc would be sacrificed, and, who knows? 

to fall? Remorse awaited him in either case. 

mad. His knees gave way beneath him. And he had not even the time for 

had thought himself the master, and which was now sweeping him away. He 

was on the verge of swooning. 

and wild triumph. 

tallow bespattered the wall. 

words:-- 

you'll find out presently, that it isn't all roses to thrust yourself 

bring a coat that is too large, and two miserable hospital blankets, you 

old blackguard, you child-stealer!" 

then, as though he were concluding aloud the things which he had been 

shouted:-- 

row, and where, like a fool, I ate up my last farthing! Oh! I wish all 

the wine folks drank in my house had been poison to those who drank it! 

Fabantou, that I had played comedy with Mamselle Mars, with Mamselle 

Muche, that my landlord insisted on being paid tomorrow, the 4th of 

And the four miserable Philippes which he has brought me! Scoundrel! 

he swallowed my platitudes! That did amuse me. I said to myself: 

gnaw your heart this evening!'" 

feeble, cruel, and cowardly creature, which finds that it can, at last, 

joy of a jackal which is beginning to rend a sick bull, so nearly dead 

that he can no longer defend himself, but sufficiently alive to suffer 

still. 

mistaking me for some other person." 

pleasantry, do you! You're floundering, my old buck! Ah! You don't 

remember! You don't see who I am?" 

a villain!" 

susceptibility of their own, that monsters are ticklish! At this word 

stir!" he shouted to his wife; and, turning to M. Leblanc:-- 

it's true that I became bankrupt, that I am in hiding, that I have no 

bread, that I have not a single sou, that I am a villain! It's three 

warm your feet, you have Sakoski boots, you have wadded great-coats, 

in the month of January, and green peas, you gorge yourselves, and when 

you! But we'll devour you, poor little things! Just see here, Mister 

that you are not!" 

added with a shudder:-- 

"When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a 

cobbler!" 

caught was Merci [thanks]. I'd rather have had his name than his thanks. 

it represents? It represents me. David wished to immortalize that 

less, I saved his life at the risk of my own, and I have the certificate 

of the fact in my pocket! I am a soldier of Waterloo, by all the furies! 

And now that I have had the goodness to tell you all this, let's have an 

of so fatally justifying. His perplexity was redoubled. 

was, in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything, in that 

and folly, in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments, in 

of violence, in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul, in that 

which was as hideous as evil, and as heart-rending as the truth. 

that M. Leblanc should purchase, was nothing else, as the reader has 

Montfermeil. 

this thing, and in the daub, he actually did recognize a battle, a 

background of smoke, and a man carrying another man. It was the group 

composed of Pontmercy and Thenardier; the sergeant the rescuer, the 

the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him. 

on M. Leblanc, and said to him in a low, curt voice:-- 

sarcasm from the corridor:-- 

but fangs. 

"Why have you taken off your mask?" cried Thenardier in a rage. 

Thenardier counted for but one man. 

to M. Leblanc. 

the table with his fist, and with one bound, with prodigious agility, 

only. He was half out when six robust fists seized him and dragged 

him back energetically into the hovel. These were the three 

"chimney-builders," who had flung themselves upon him. At the same time 

the Thenardier woman had wound her hands in his hair. 

corridor. The old man on the bed, who seemed under the influence 

stone-breaker's hammer in his hand. 

the candle, and in whom Marius recognized, in spite of his daubing, 

Panchaud, alias Printanier, alias Bigrenaille, lifted above M. Leblanc's 

bar of iron. 

me!" 

shouted:-- 

had calmed him. There existed in him two men, the ferocious man and 

presence of the prey which had been brought down, and which did not 

a while longer. 

from the horrible alternative of allowing Ursule's father to perish, or 

of destroying the colonel's saviour? 

room, then with two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown two 

two "chimney-builders" on the floor. 

beneath a howling pile of dogs and hounds. 

clutch on his hair. 

tear your shawl." 

growl. 

francs, and his handkerchief. 

voice of a ventriloquist, "he's a tough old fellow." 

and threw them at the men. 

room by the blow from M. Leblanc's fist, and who made no movement, he 

added:-- 

near the heap of old iron with their feet. 

did you bring so many; they were not needed." 

be in it. This is a bad season. There's no business going on." 

on the ground at the head of the bed, the end which was most remote from 

the window, and nearest to the fireplace. 

himself almost facing M. Leblanc. 

sweetness. 

moment before; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarming 

converted into a lawyer. 

M. Leblanc:-- 

have broken your leg. Now, if you will permit me, we will converse 

quietly. In the first place, I must communicate to you an observation 

Marius in his agitation. M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words, 

ruffians near the window he had preserved the most profound and singular 

silence. 

You might have done that, and no one would have troubled you on that 

that in its favor. You might fire off a mortar and it would produce 

drunken man. Here a cannon would make a boum, and the thunder would make 

a pouf. It's a handy lodging. But, in short, you did not shout, and 

it is better so. I present you my compliments, and I will tell you the 

the courts come in any more than we do. It is because,--I have long 

we have the same interest. So we can come to an understanding." 

language, which was stamped with a sort of moderated, subdued insolence 

and crafty insolence, was reserved and almost choice, and in that 

now felt "the man who had studied for the priesthood." 

carried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life, that 

a cry, all this, it must be confessed, now that his attention had 

been called to it, troubled Marius, and affected him with painful 

the dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular person on whom 

Courfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc. 

extent of a degree with every moment that passed, in the presence 

of Thenardier's wrath, as in the presence of his sweetness, this man 

remained impassive; and Marius could not refrain from admiring at such a 

moment the superbly melancholy visage. 

did not know the meaning of despair. Here was one of those men who 

command amazement in desperate circumstances. Extreme as was the crisis, 

tiny scarlet stars. 

I don't know what I was thinking of, I went a great deal too far, I said 

ridiculous. Why, I'm taking things into consideration and making a 

sacrifice on my side. I only want two hundred thousand francs." 

don't know the state of your fortune, but I do know that you don't stick 

take all the trouble I have to-day and organized this affair this 

gentlemen, merely to wind up by asking you for enough to go and drink 

what I am about to dictate to you." 

casting a smile in the direction of the brazier:-- 

a pen, and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open, and 

in which gleamed the long blade of the knife. 

order. 

ink and presented it to him. 

shall be really grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeable 

as to write." 

dictate:-- 

deliver this note to thee is instructed to conduct thee to me. I am 

waiting for thee. Come with confidence." 

everything was not as it should be, and that distrust is possible." 

you so." 

from his accomplices. To mention the name was to deliver the whole 

any need of their knowing. 

and drew out the handkerchief which had been seized on M. Leblanc. He 

looked for the mark on it, and held it close to the candle. 

fold it." 

you understand your situation. As you have not lied about your name, you 

will not lie about your address. Write it yourself." 

wrote:-- 

No. 17." 

the door. Set out at once, and return ditto." 

will get up behind the fiacre. You know where you left the team?" 

and shouted into the corridor:-- 

hundred thousand francs with you!" 

heard, which rapidly retreated and died away. 

his muddy boots to the brazier. 

prisoner. 

perpetrated a crime like a bit of work, tranquilly, without either wrath 

like brutes, and remained silent. 

succeeded to the wild uproar which had filled the garret but a few 

moments before. 

light in the immense hovel, the brazier had grown dull, and all those 

monstrous heads cast misshapen shadows on the walls and ceiling. 

who was fast asleep. 

The enigma was more impenetrable than ever. 

were explained; they meant Urbain Fabre; and Ursule was no longer named 

Ursule. This was what Marius perceived most clearly of all. 

he was observing and commanding this whole scene. There he stood, 

his thoughts and did not know upon what course to decide. 

I will give my life and my blood if necessary, but I will deliver her! 

Nothing shall stop me." 

faint, dull noise in the direction of the prisoner. 

strained his ears. 

up with your letter. I told my wife to dress herself in the way she did, 

They will both enter the carriage with my comrade behind. Somewhere, 

Your young lady will be taken to it. She will alight from the fiacre. 

back here to tell us: 'It's done.' As for the young lady, no harm will 

hundred thousand francs, she will be returned to you. If you have me 

all." 

continued:-- 

you so that you may be prepared." 

resumed:-- 

that our intentions are not evil." 

they were abducting was not to be brought back? One of those monsters 

Lark." 

love, it was by the peril of the one he loved, that he felt himself 

restrained. 

was changing its aspect every moment. 

most heart-breaking conjectures, seeking hope and finding none. 

den. 

was heard to open and shut again. 

picked up his axe again. 

Monsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique! And after all that racing 

and fee to the coachman and all! I spoke to both the porter and the 

portress, a fine, stout woman, and they know nothing about him!" 

the table. 

only attached to the bed now by one leg. 

brazier, and had then straightened himself up again, and now Thenardier, 

chisel, which emitted a threatening glow. 

eventually gave rise, established the fact that a large sou piece, cut 

of industry, which are engendered by the patience of the galleys in 

the shadows and for the shadows, marvels which are nothing else than 

in language. The unhappy wretch who aspires to deliverance finds means 

together and unscrewed at will; it is a box. In this box he hides a 

merely a sou; not at all, he possesses liberty. It was a large sou of 

which would fit the sou. 

moment when the ruffians searched him, that he contrived to conceal 

it in his hand, and that afterward, having his right hand free, he 

which would explain the faint noise and almost imperceptible movements 

which Marius had observed. 

had not cut the bonds of his left leg. 

and he can't get away. I'll answer for that. I tied that paw for him." 

In the meanwhile, the prisoner had begun to speak:-- 

When you think that you can make me speak, that you can make me write 

choose to say--" 

to chambers of torture filled the hovel. 

sank into the smoking wound, impassive and almost august, he fixed on 

suffering vanished in serene majesty. 

the captain to show himself. 

the night, whirling as it flew, and fell far away on the snow. 

man with the ventriloquist's voice took up his station in front of him, 

ready to smash his skull at the slightest movement. 

but so near that he could not see who was speaking, this colloquy 

conducted in a low tone:-- 

"That's it." 

took out the knife. Marius fretted with the handle of his pistol. 

moment he had cherished a vague hope that he should find some means 

of reconciling these two duties, but nothing within the limits of 

possibility had presented itself. 

the prisoner. 

despair. All at once a shudder ran through him. 

letters, by the eldest of the Thenardier girls:-- 

"THE BOBBIES ARE HERE." 

torturing him, of sparing the assassin and saving the victim. 

the den. 

scruples, and was advancing on the prisoner. 

to her husband. 

Through the window, of course." 

"I saw it pass," said Bigrenaille. 

that side." 

three times rapidly without uttering a word. 

board ship. 

solidly fastened to the sill by the two iron hooks. 

seemed to be dreaming or praying. 

roughly by the collar. 

on our heels." 

first." 

written names! Thrown into a hat!--" 

for the pistol-shot. 

abandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight. In less than a 

second, these seven men, horrible to behold, had grouped themselves in 

her daughters as an ottoman. 

are fifteen of us. Don't let's fall to collaring each other like men of 

Auvergne." 

blouse, and put it in Thenardier's hand, whispering in the latter's 

ear:-- 

contented himself with saying:-- 

be denied tobacco while I am in confinement." 

"Come in now!" 

with shadows. 

no one would ever have said: "It is a woman's voice." 

window, and it was she who had just given vent to this roar. 

was crouching behind her, was almost hidden under the discarded 

shawl, and she was shielding him with her body, as she elevated the 

of hurling a rock. 

the middle of the garret. 

themselves to be pinioned, and muttered in hoarse and guttural 

accents:-- 

was devouring with her eyes. 

mother, but I have claws like a woman." 

huge piece of plastering, and, rebounding from angle to angle across the 

hovel, now luckily almost empty, rested at Javert's feet. 

big hands descended on the woman's shoulder; the other on the husband's 

head. 

had been executed. 

weeping:-- 

behind the door, and were shaking him:-- 

spectral mien; all three besmeared with black, all three masked. 

parade, he said to the three "chimney-builders":-- 

meat-axe:-- 

his head down. 

"Untie the gentleman!" said Javert, "and let no one go out!" 

where the candle and the writing-materials still remained, drew a 

stamped paper from his pocket, and began to prepare his report. 

he raised his eyes:-- 

Ursule or the Lark, had disappeared. 

dash out of the window. 

The rope ladder was still shaking. 

most valuable of the lot." 

the right in the direction of the Barriere de Fontainebleau. 

of February, and was singing at the top of his voice. 

child jostled her as he passed, then recoiled, exclaiming:-- 

enormous, ENORMOUS dog." 

where I would have planted my foot on you." 

The boy was already far away. 

and the red gleam of the lantern fully lighted up her livid face, all 

of her mouth. 

would have pronounced her a mask of Decrepitude carved out by a light 

from the night. 

me." 

               S'en allait a la chasse, 

               A la chasse aux corbeaux--" 

No. 50-52, and finding the door fastened, he began to assault it with 

resounding and heroic kicks, which betrayed rather the man's shoes that 

he was wearing than the child's feet which he owned. 

clamorous cries and indulging in lavish and exaggerated gestures. 

knocking the house down." 

come to see my ancestors." 

The old woman retorted with a composite grimace, and a wonderful 

improvisation of hatred taking advantage of feebleness and ugliness, 

which was, unfortunately, wasted in the dark:-- 

said:-- 

who had remained on the door-step, heard him singing in his clear, young 

               S'en allait a la chasse, 

               A la chasse aux corbeaux, 

               Monte sur deux echasses. 

               Quand on passait dessous, 

               On lui payait deux sous." 

[THE END OF VOLUME III. "MARIUS"] 

THE IDYL IN THE RUE PLUMET AND THE EPIC IN THE RUE SAINT-DENIS 

CHAPTER I--WELL CUT 

which precede and those which follow them. They have a revolutionary 

the very assizes of civilization, the solid group of superposed and 

adhering interests, the century-old profiles of the ancient French 

and disappearances have been designated as movement and resistance. 

At intervals, truth, that daylight of the human soul, can be descried 

shining there. 

be sufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal 

lines even at the present day. 

and which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a 

halting-place. 

events, great hazards, great adventures, great men, thank God, we 

have seen enough, we have them heaped higher than our heads. We would 

change with Mirabeau, the second with Robespierre, the third with 

Bonaparte; we are worn out. Each one demands a bed. 

what? A shelter. They have it. They take possession of peace, of 

tranquillity, of leisure; behold, they are content. But, at the same 

are, they exist, they have the right to install themselves in society, 

and they do install themselves therein; and most of the time, facts 

is what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire. 

Princes "grant" them, but in reality, it is the force of things which 

did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a 

glimpse of in 1814. 

the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed, and 

that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII. was 

felt, from the displeasure created by the gift, that it did not come 

from it. 

This house was churlish to the nineteenth century. It put on an 

trivial word, that is to say, of a popular and a true word, it looked 

glum. The people saw this. 

away before it like a theatrical stage-setting. It did not perceive that 

it had, itself, been brought in in the same fashion. It did not perceive 

that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon. 

throne. 

Bourbons; she had done without them for two and twenty years; there 

on high. 

what it termed our encroachments were our rights. 

itself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country, that is 

plan of action, and risked its stroke. One morning it drew itself up 

before the face of France, and, elevating its voice, it contested the 

collective title and the individual right of the nation to sovereignty, 

of the citizen to liberty. In other words, it denied to the nation 

citizen. 

ordinances of July. The Restoration fell. 

alongside. 

Under the Restoration, the nation had grown accustomed to calm 

discussion, which had been lacking under the Republic, and to grandeur 

in peace, which had been wanting under the Empire. France free and 

strong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples of 

Europe. The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre; the cannon 

had had the word under Bonaparte; it was under Louis XVIII. and Charles 

X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word. The wind 

ceased, the torch was lighted once more. On the lofty heights, the 

law, liberty of conscience, liberty of speech, liberty of the press, the 

accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions. Thus it proceeded until 

hands of Providence. 

solemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history; it 

Napoleon. They departed, that is all. They laid down the crown, and 

etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy. This diminution saddened 

weapons, by a sort of royal insurrection, felt itself in the possession 

of so much force that it did not go into a rage. It defended itself, 

law, the Bourbons to exile, alas! and then halted! It took the old king 

Charles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV. and 

Vair after the day of the Barricades:-- 

great, and to spring, like a bird from bough to bough, from an afflicted 

fortune to a flourishing one, to show themselves harsh towards their 

especially of my afflicted Kings, will always be venerable to me." 

in the horizon. 

comprehended, a wrath which can be pardoned. This strange revolution had 

collaboration of some one who is working above man. 

thing which is full of splendor. 

violent. 

fact, even when most necessary to all appearances, even when most 

if it contain only too little of right, or none at all, is infallibly 

let him look at Machiavelli. Machiavelli is not an evil genius, nor a 

And he is not only the Italian fact; he is the European fact, the 

presence of the moral idea of the nineteenth. 

and the fact into right, that is the task of sages. 

The Revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt. 

prepare the shipwreck. 

Statesmen; so that this word, statesmen, has ended by becoming somewhat 

of a slang word. It must be borne in mind, in fact, that wherever 

there is nothing but skill, there is necessarily pettiness. To say "the 

skilful" amounts to saying "the mediocre." 

"traitors." If, then, we are to believe the skilful, revolutions like 

the Revolution of July are severed arteries; a prompt ligature is 

indispensable. The right, too grandly proclaimed, is shaken. Also, right 

attention must be directed to power. 

begin to be distrustful. Power, very good. But, in the first place, what 

hear the murmured objection, and they continue their manoeuvres. 

of necessity on profitable fictions, the first requirement of a people 

after a revolution, when this people forms part of a monarchical 

continent, is to procure for itself a dynasty. In this way, say they, 

peace, that is to say, time to dress our wounds, and to repair 

the house, can be had after a revolution. The dynasty conceals the 

procure a dynasty. 

king. You have, in the first case, Napoleon; in the second, Iturbide. 

dynasty. There is necessarily required a certain modicum of antiquity in 

a race, and the wrinkle of the centuries cannot be improvised. 

for him to be a revolutionary; that is to say, a participant in his own 

he should have touched the axe or wielded the sword in it. 

be composed of future and be sympathetic. 

finding a man, Cromwell or Napoleon; and why the second absolutely 

Orleans. 

bending over to the earth, takes root and becomes a fig-tree itself. 

bend down to the people. 

the curve of the transition to the point of retarding progress, to dull 

the giant-people in flannel, and to put it to bed very speedily, to 

of a convalescent, to dilute the event with the expedient, to offer to 

spirits thirsting for the ideal that nectar thinned out with a potion, 

revolution with a shade. 

candle. 

Yesterday it was appetite, to-day it is plenitude, to-morrow it will be 

satiety. 

Charles X. 

is not a caste. 

one of the divisions of the social order. 

the halt. 

to say, repose. 

alert; it is the accomplished fact which posts sentinels and holds 

itself on its guard. 

to-morrow. 

should express this word Halt. An Although-Because. A composite 

individuality, signifying revolution and signifying stability, in other 

past with the future. 

place of the Cathedral of Rheims. 

1830." 

right. Absolute right cried: "I protest!" then, terrible to say, it 

retired into the darkness. 

choose well. Even incomplete, even debased and abused and reduced to the 

state of a junior revolution like the Revolution of 1830, they nearly 

always retain sufficient providential lucidity to prevent them from 

falling amiss. Their eclipse is never an abdication. 

deceived, and grave errors have been seen. 

rare man. 

of his health, of his fortune, of his person, of his affairs, knowing 

the conjugal bed to the bourgeois, an ostentation of the regular 

them; an admirable representative of the "middle class," but 

sense, while appreciating the blood from which he had sprung, counting 

the first Prince of the Blood Royal while he was still only a Serene 

Highness, but a frank bourgeois from the day he became king; diffuse in 

fancy or duty; lettered, but not very sensitive to letters; a gentleman, 

put in the wrong those mysterious unanimities which mutter dully under 

countenances, in masks; making France fear Europe and Europe France! 

more domination than authority and more authority than dignity, a 

disposition which has this unfortunate property, that as it turns 

everything to success, it admits of ruse and does not absolutely 

politics from violent shocks, the state from fractures, and society 

for the beautiful and the ideal, to daring generosity, to Utopia, to 

chimeras, to wrath, to vanity, to fear; possessing all the forms 

of personal intrepidity; a general at Valmy; a soldier at Jemappes; 

attacked eight times by regicides and always smiling. Brave as a 

grenadier, courageous as a thinker; uneasy only in the face of the 

his will in influence, in order that he might be obeyed as an 

souls, in a word, all that can be designated as the invisible currents 

of consciences; accepted by the surface, but little in accord with 

of the pettiness of realities an obstacle to the immensity of ideas; 

founder and lawyer of a dynasty; having something of Charlemagne and 

something of an attorney; in short, a lofty and original figure, a 

will be classed among the eminent men of his century, and would be 

ranked among the most illustrious governors of history had he loved 

glory but a little, and if he had had the sentiment of what is great to 

the same degree as the feeling for what is useful. 

was transition reigning; he had preserved the ancient pronunciation 

modern; he loved Poland and Hungary, but he wrote les Polonois, and he 

Charles X., and the ribbon of the Legion of Honor, like Napoleon. 

his aureole. He was a bit of a mason, a bit of a gardener, something 

first who had ever shed blood with the object of healing. 

that which accuses the King; three columns which all give different 

totals. Democratic right confiscated, progress becomes a matter of 

secondary interest, the protests of the street violently repressed, 

Rue Transnonain, the counsels of war, the absorption of the real 

doing of the King. 

charge is decreased. 

Whence arises this fault? 

of a family with the object of founding a dynasty is afraid of 

civil and Austerlitz in their military tradition. 

first of all, that deep tenderness of Louis Philippe towards his 

such as are rarely seen, and princes such as are never seen." 

the truth about Louis Philippe. 

sold an old horse in order to obtain bread. At Reichenau, he gave 

sewed. These souvenirs connected with a king rendered the bourgeoisie 

the trial of Louis XVI., so well named that poor tyrant. The blind 

crushing of the idea, the vast storm of the Assembly-Tribunal, the 

public wrath interrogating, Capet not knowing what to reply, the 

breath, the relative innocence of all in that catastrophe, of those 

who condemned as well as of the man condemned,--he had looked on those 

appear before the bar of the Assembly-Convention; he had beheld, behind 

rectified from memory the whole of the letter A in the alphabetical list 

of the Constituent Assembly. 

light. History will do justice to him for this loyalty. 

is to-day put on his trial by the human conscience. His case is, as yet, 

only in the lower court. 

has himself recently softened his first verdict; Louis Philippe was 

first place, the right of the people in the second, all is usurpation; 

reserves is, that to sum up the whole, and in whatever manner he is 

history, one of the best princes who ever sat on a throne. 

souvenirs, after a day of conflict with the whole diplomacy of the 

him to abandon these miserable, condemned heads. One day, he said to 

night." During the early years of his reign, the death penalty was 

as good as abolished, and the erection of a scaffold was a violence 

of the Barriere-Saint-Jacques; "practical men" felt the necessity of 

a quasi-legitimate guillotine; and this was one of the victories of 

annotated Beccaria with his own hand. After the Fieschi machine, he 

his ministry, he wrote in connection with a political criminal, who is 

IX. and as kindly as Henri IV. 

history; this deposition, whatever else it may be, is evidently and 

be feared that it will ever be said of two tombs in exile: "This one 

flattered the other." 

offer some explanation with regard to this king. 

without violence, without any direct action on his part, by virtue of a 

revolutionary change, evidently quite distinct from the real aim of the 

of terror discharged by the social conflicts weighs neither on the 

elements. The ocean defends the water, the hurricane defends the 

republic; society bleeds in this conflict, but that which constitutes 

it is indivisible, and all on one side; but those who are in error are 

ruffian. Let us, then, impute to the fatality of things alone these 

human irresponsibility is mingled with them. 

was obliged to fight to-day. 

of traction on the apparatus of July so recently laid, and so lacking in 

solidity. 

preceding evening. From month to month the hostility increased, and from 

being concealed it became patent. 

said. 

God delivers over to men his visible will in events, an obscure text 

translations hasty, incorrect, full of errors, of gaps, and of nonsense. 

Very few minds comprehend the divine language. The most sagacious, the 

light. 

the old parties. 

that revolutions, having sprung from the right to revolt, one has the 

who revolts is not the people; it is the king. Revolution is precisely 

the contrary of revolt. Every revolution, being a normal outcome, 

contains within itself its legitimacy, which false revolutionists 

sometimes dishonor, but which remains even when soiled, which survives 

even when stained with blood. 

revolution is a return from the fictitious to the real. It is because it 

must be that it is. 

make excellent projectiles. They strike it cleverly in its vulnerable 

spot, in default of a cuirass, in its lack of logic; they attacked this 

revolution in its royalty. They shouted to it: "Revolution, why this 

king?" Factions are blind men who aim correctly. 

The enraged democracy reproached it with this. 

establishment of July struggled. It represented the minute at 

hand with eternal right. 

in Europe. After having been towed, it undertook to tow. 

capital, the rights of labor,--all these questions were multiplied above 

society, a terrible slope. 

quite as much. 

traversed by revolutionary currents, trembled under them with 

questions in a pacific but profound manner; impassive miners, who 

tranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths of a volcano, hardly 

glimpses. 

This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of this agitated 

epoch. 

occupied themselves with the question of happiness. 

society. 

of commerce, almost to the dignity of a religion. In civilization, such 

the agency of man, interests combine, unite, and amalgamate in a 

patiently studied by economists, those geologists of politics. These men 

designated by the generic title of socialists, endeavored to pierce that 

rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters of human felicity. 

principal problems. 

be understood. 

great. 

rest, that is to say, for the people; privilege, exception, monopoly, 

feudalism, born from toil itself. A false and dangerous situation, which 

in the sufferings of the individual. A badly constituted grandeur in 

element enters. 

They are mistaken. Their division kills production. Equal partition 

by the butcher, which kills that which it divides. It is therefore 

not the same thing as dividing it. 

two problems must be combined and made but one. 

be England. You will have, like Venice, an artificial power, or, like 

will fall. And the world will allow to die and fall all that is merely 

virtue or an idea. 

designate not the peoples, but social structures; the oligarchies 

superposed on nations, and not the nations themselves. The nations 

immortal. That said, we continue. 

the strong, put a bridle on the iniquitous jealousy of the man who 

compulsory education with the growth of childhood, and make of science 

so that every citizen, without exception, may be a proprietor, an easier 

out in minds. 

vague acceptance of a superior definitive right, his desire to remain of 

his race, his domestic spirit, his sincere respect for the people, his 

moments when strong and courageous as he was, he was overwhelmed by the 

difficulties of being a king. 

nearer, extended little by little over men, over things, over ideas; 

a shade which came from wraths and systems. Everything which had been 

the honest man resumed its breathing, so great was the discomfort 

as to the quantity of thunder contained by the cloud. 

behind us the demons of the South, Ferdinand in Spain, Miguel in 

behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law, the fleurs-de-lys 

erased from the King's carriage, the cross torn from Notre Dame, 

Lafayette lessened, Laffitte ruined, Benjamin Constant dead in 

kingdom, the one in the city of thought, the other in the city of toil; 

at Paris civil war, at Lyons servile war; in the two cities, the same 

glare of the furnace; a crater-like crimson on the brow of the people; 

of tumult of events to the sombre roar of ideas. 

fermentation entered the boiling state. Ever since 1830, petty partial 

revolts had been going on here and there, which were quickly suppressed, 

but ever bursting forth afresh, the sign of a vast underlying 

conflagration. Something terrible was in preparation. Glimpses could be 

caught of the features still indistinct and imperfectly lighted, of a 

possible revolution. France kept an eye on Paris; Paris kept an eye on 

the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. 

ebullition. 

the two epithets seems singular when applied to wine-shops, grave and 

stormy. 

people publicly discussed the question of fighting or of keeping quiet. 

There were back shops where workingmen were made to swear that they 

would hasten into the street at the first cry of alarm, and "that they 

would fight without counting the number of the enemy." This engagement 

once entered into, a man seated in the corner of the wine-shop "assumed 

a sonorous tone," and said, "You understand! You have sworn!" 

initiated take oaths to render service to himself as well as to the 

fathers of families. That was the formula. 

government with contempt, says a secret report of that time. 

until two hours beforehand." One workman said: "There are three hundred 

of us, let each contribute ten sous, that will make one hundred and 

fifty francs with which to procure powder and shot." 

at night, because I make cartridges all night." From time to time, 

men "of bourgeois appearance, and in good coats" came and "caused 

embarrassment," and with the air of "command," shook hands with the most 

important, and then went away. They never stayed more than ten minutes. 

the same. In others, any one entered who wished, and the room was 

so full that they were forced to stand. Some went thither through 

these wine-shops who embraced new-comers. 

"Wine-merchant, the revolution will pay what is due to you." 

Charonne. The balloting was carried on in their caps. 

the Rue de Cotte. There there was a trophy of arms formed of wooden 

on me, because I am looked upon as a machine." Later on, that machine 

became Quenisset. 

making cartridges." In the open street, proclamation could be seen 

addressed to the National Guard in the departments. One of these 

proclamations was signed: Burtot, wine-merchant. 

Lenoir, and read aloud a singular document, which seemed to emanate from 

an occult power. Groups formed around him, and applauded. 

which has recently taken place in cottons has converted to us many 

mediums."--"The future of nations is being worked out in our obscure 

inertia or in immobility. For the people against the people, that is the 

daylight. 

Rue Sainte-Marguerite and shouted: "I am a Babouvist!" But beneath 

Babeuf, the people scented Gisquet. 

treacherous. When it wants to be on the right side, it preaches 

revolution, it is democratic in order to escape being beaten, and 

with feathers. Distrust the republicans, citizens of the laboring 

classes." 

am an agent of the committee. You are suspected of not being quite 

faithful. You know that if you reveal anything, there is an eye fixed on 

you." Then he shook hands with the workingman and went away, saying: "We 

shall meet again soon." 

only in the wine-shops, but in the street. 

evident Jacquerie:-- 

bad sense. The Jacques were the poor. 

passed by: "We have a good plan of attack." 

more." 

aid for tailors, Rue Mondetour, had the reputation of serving as 

intermediary central between the leaders and the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. 

reports, rumors, hearsay. Other indications cropped up. 

legible the following lines:-- 

for the different societies. 

And, as a postscript:-- 

We have learned that there are guns in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonniere, 

gunsmith in that court. The section owns no arms. 

paper, torn like the first, and still more significant, of which we 

these strange documents:-- 

 | Q | C | D | E | Learn this list by heart.  After so doing 

 | | | | | | you will tear it up.  The men admitted 

 | | | | | | will do the same when you have transmitted 

 | | | | | | their orders to them. 

 | | | | | | Health and Fraternity, 

 | | | | | | u og a fe L. | 

 +------------------------------------------------------------+ 

find at the time, learned the significance of those four capital 

safe man.--C. Boubiere. 1 pistol, 40 cartridges.--D. Rollet. 1 foil, 

1 pistol, 1 pound of powder.--E. Tessier. 1 sword, 1 cartridge-box. 

Exact.--Terreur. 8 guns. Brave, etc. 

enigmatical list:-- 

          Barra.  Soize.  Salle-au-Comte. 

          Kosciusko. Aubry the Butcher? 

          J. J. R. 

          Caius Gracchus. 

          Right of revision.  Dufond.  Four. 

          Fall of the Girondists.  Derbac.  Maubuee. 

          Washington.  Pinson.  1 pistol, 86 cartridges. 

          Marseillaise. 

          Sovereignty of the people. Michel. Quincampoix. Sword. 

          Hoche. 

          Marceau.  Plato.  Arbre-Sec. 

          Warsaw.  Tilly, crier of the Populaire. 

The honest bourgeois into whose hands this list fell knew its 

the sections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of the Rights 

when this paper was found. Perhaps this was only a rough draft. 

notes, material facts begin to make their appearance. 

were seized seven sheets of gray paper, all folded alike lengthwise 

and in four; these sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same 

written the following:-- 

           Sulphur   . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces. 

           Charcoal  . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces and a half. 

           Water     . . . . . . . . . . .   2 ounces. 

of powder. 

and a tin box full of cartridges. 

warm he was; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat. 

discovered beneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood, a 

bag containing a bullet-mould, a wooden punch for the preparation of 

and a little cast-iron pot whose interior presented evident traces of 

o'clock in the morning, into the dwelling of a certain Pardon, who 

preparing. 

de Siam."[33] One drew a pistol from beneath his blouse and handed it to 

of his chest had made the powder damp. He primed the pistol and added 

more powder to what was already in the pan. Then the two men parted. 

twenty-four flints. 

thousand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg. On 

the following week thirty thousand cartridges were distributed. The 

single one. 

"How is your wife?" 

going to make the attack?" 

in France was exempt from it. The artery was beating everywhere. Like 

those membranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in the 

human body, the network of secret societies began to spread all over the 

of the Court of Assizes which pronounced its dissolution, and which 

following:-- 

     Tocsin. 

     Signal cannon. 

     Phrygian cap. 

     January 21. 

     The beggars. 

     The vagabonds. 

     Forward march. 

     Robespierre. 

     Level. 

     Ca Ira. 

were impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead. Other 

associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mother 

societies. The members of sections complained that they were torn 

for individual liberty, for the instruction of the people against 

into three fractions, the levellers, the communists, the reformers. 

Then the Army of the Bastilles, a sort of cohort organized on a military 

a sub-lieutenant, forty by a lieutenant; there were never more than 

five men who knew each other. Creation where precaution is combined with 

audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius of Venice. 

of Action, and the Army of the Bastilles. 

there. 

Nantes, Lille, Marseilles, and each had its Society of the Rights of 

which was called the Cougourde. We have already mentioned this word. 

Faubourg Saint-Antoine, and the schools were no less moved than the 

faubourgs. A cafe in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the 

points for the students. The Society of the Friends of the A B C 

met, as we have seen, in the Cafe Musain. These same young men assembled 

Mondetour which was called Corinthe. These meetings were secret. Others 

from these fragments of an interrogatory undergone in one of the 

"Only one." "Which?" "The Manuel section." "Who was its leader?" 

attacking the government. Where did your instructions come from?" "From 

the central committee." 

in the southern towns they planted the liberty tree; that is to say, a 

pole surmounted by a red cap. 

as we stated in the beginning, accentuated this situation and made 

it felt. That was the sore point. This old faubourg, peopled like 

the regular work. It is impossible to convey an idea of this lively yet 

sombre physiognomy. In this faubourg exists poignant distress hidden 

under attic roofs; there also exist rare and ardent minds. It is 

particularly in the matter of distress and intelligence that it is 

dangerous to have extremes meet. 

slack seasons, all inherent to great political disturbances. In times 

by the wind of events, it is impossible not to think of the Faubourg 

gates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas. 

Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating with 

the profound and sacred breath; taverns where the tables were almost 

of the blind cyclops, Ingens. 

bands. 

an uproar, what did they want? They wanted an end to oppression, an 

bread for all, the idea for all, the Edenizing of the world. Progress; 

wise, driven to extremities as they were, half naked, club in fist, 

civilization. 

fear and trembling, to force the human race to paradise. They seemed 

night. 

and the preservation of the past, of the Middle Ages, of divine right, 

of fanaticism, of innocence, of slavery, of the death penalty, of war, 

the scaffold. For our part, if we were forced to make a choice between 

should choose the barbarians. 

fall is necessary, in front any more than in the rear. 

less steep. 

catastrophe, instituted a kind of mysterious census. 

significant metaphors:-- 

chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than when there 

Let us mistrust the unexpected. Let us not be caught unprepared. We must 

has promised me to go to Picpus. There is a perfect swarm and an 

excellent one there. Bahorel will visit the Estrapade. Prouvaire, the 

little turn in the court and talk with the young law licentiates. I will 

take charge of the Cougourde myself." 

resumed:-- 

but liable to cool off. I don't know what has been the matter with 

with firmness. They meet at Richefeu's. They are to be found there 

the Barriere du Maine. I have no one." 

in the name of principle!" 

absinthe." 

across the boulevard, of following the Chaussee du Maine, of passing 

capable of that." 

sovereignty of the people, sapristi! I am even a bit of a Hebertist. I 

hand." 

has taken a resolution. 

Barriere du Maine." 

Robespierre waistcoat. 

the waistcoat across his breast. 

deserted. All the friends of the A B C were gone, each in his own 

direction, each to his own task. Enjolras, who had reserved the 

Cougourde of Aix for himself, was the last to leave. 

that side of Paris. 

the slightest complication stops and entangles them. A phenomenon whence 

arises ruin and new births. Enjolras descried a luminous uplifting 

beneath the gloomy skirts of the future. Who knows? Perhaps the moment 

was at hand. The people were again taking possession of right, and 

in his own mind, with Combeferre's philosophical and penetrating 

eloquence, Feuilly's cosmopolitan enthusiasm, Courfeyrac's dash, 

This was well. This made him think of Grantaire. 

a look at what Grantaire is about, and see how he is getting on." 

reached the Richefeu smoking-room. 

men, and smoke. 

voice. It was Grantaire holding a dialogue with an adversary. 

table, strewn with grains of bran and dotted with dominos. He was 

beginning, the whole play would have been changed." 

"One." 

CHAPTER I--THE LARK'S MEADOW 

glided out of the house. It was only nine o'clock in the evening. Marius 

epoch, insurrection liked to install itself. Marius said to Courfeyrac: 

bed, which was furnished with two, spread it out on the floor, and said: 

"There." 

paid the quarter's rent which he owed to Ma'am Bougon, had his books, 

his bed, his table, his commode, and his two chairs loaded on a 

Bougon, who answered: "Moved away!" 

Ma'am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accomplice 

man like that, who had the air of a girl!" 

rich man, the wicked poor man. The second was, that he did not wish 

brought in to testify against Thenardier. 

of the ambush; he made some efforts to find him, however, but without 

success. 

courts, that Thenardier was in close confinement. Every Monday, 

Thenardier. 

who lent and to Thenardier who received them. "To whom can they go?" 

thought Courfeyrac. "Whence can this come to me?" Thenardier asked 

himself. 

very moment when he thought himself on the point of grasping them, a 

truth had been emitted even in the most terrible of collisions. No 

conjecture was possible. He no longer knew even the name that he thought 

the police? The white-haired workman whom Marius had encountered in the 

that that workingman and M. Leblanc were one and the same person. So he 

thought that he recognized? Thenardier might have been mistaken. These 

formed so many insoluble problems. All this, it is true, detracted 

over his eyes. He was thrust onward, he was drawn, and he could not 

stir. All had vanished, save love. Of love itself he had lost the 

But Marius no longer even heard these mute counsels of passion. He never 

to try such and such a thing?" The girl whom he could no longer call 

Ursule was evidently somewhere; nothing warned Marius in what direction 

he should seek her. His whole life was now summed up in two words; 

he still aspired to this, but he no longer expected it. 

him, on his heels. In the midst of his torments, and long before 

to get rid of, and difficult to take up again. 

It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor, which are sometimes 

binds together and rounds off the angles of the ideas. But too much 

dreaming sinks and drowns. Woe to the brain-worker who allows himself to 

with equal ease, and he tells himself that, after all, it is the same 

thing. Error! 

replace thought with revery is to confound a poison with a food. 

supervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimaeras 

This is a law. Man, in a state of revery, is generally prodigal and 

slack; the unstrung mind cannot hold life within close bounds. 

are exhausted, needs crop up. 

the most feeble and most vicious are drawn, and which ends in one of two 

holds, suicide or crime. 

throw one's self in the water. 

Excess of revery breeds men like Escousse and Lebras. 

the star of the inner night. She--that was Marius' whole thought. He 

meditated of nothing else; he was confusedly conscious that his old coat 

once again before I die!" 

glance had told him so, that she did not know his name, but that she did 

such as are experienced by every heart that loves, though he had no 

added: "Perhaps my thoughts reach her also." 

"writing to her." 

contrary. He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly 

on high. 

has seen nothing and knows nothing of the true. 

he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss. 

the Rue de la Sante, then the Glaciere, and, a little while before 

arriving at the little river of the Gobelins, you come to a sort of 

boulevards of Paris, where Ruysdeel would be tempted to sit down. 

time of Louis XIII., with its great roof oddly pierced with dormer 

windows, dilapidated palisades, a little water amid poplar-trees, 

women, voices, laughter; on the horizon the Pantheon, the pole of 

towers of Notre Dame. 

or wagoner passes in a quarter of an hour. 

It chanced that Marius' solitary strolls led him to this plot of 

evoke, do occur. The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an 

idea, and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else. 

where she lives now." 

CHAPTER II--EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF 
PRISONS 

so. 

had not taken the prisoner prisoner. The assassinated man who flees 

is more suspicious than the assassin, and it is probable that this 

personage, who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians, would be 

no less fine a prize for the authorities. 

waited for. Montparnasse had, in fact, encountered Eponine as she stood 

on the watch under the trees of the boulevard, and had led her off, 

preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes 

with the father. It was well that he did so. He was free. As for 

Eponine, Javert had caused her to be seized; a mediocre consolation. 

Eponine had joined Azelma at Les Madelonettes. 

principal prisoners, Claquesous, had been lost. It was not known how 

this had been effected, the police agents and the sergeants "could 

the carriage, the fiacre was cracked, and he had fled; all that they 

were able to say was, that on arriving at the prison, there was no 

been unavowed connivance of the police agents? Did this man belong 

to the double enigma of order and disorder? Was he concentric with 

perhaps, although they were his subordinates in the secrets of the 

a very good agent. It is an excellent thing for ruffianism and an 

be, Claquesous had gone astray and was not found again. Javert appeared 

to be more irritated than amazed at this. 

frightened, and whose name Javert had forgotten, Javert attached very 

time. But was he a lawyer after all? 

the band of Patron Minette in close confinement, in the hope that he 

would chatter. This man was Brujon, the long-haired man of the Rue du 

the eyes of the watchers were fixed on him. 

scales and leprosy, which rose on the left to a level with the roofs, 

there could still be seen, twelve years ago, a sort of fortress roughly 

carved in the stone with a nail, and beneath it this signature:-- 

The Brujon of 1811 was the father of the Brujon of 1832. 

house, was a very cunning and very adroit young spark, with a bewildered 

and plaintive air. It was in consequence of this plaintive air that the 

magistrate had released him, thinking him more useful in the Charlemagne 

of justice. They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle as 

that. To be in prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning on 

who toil, none the less, on a new work in their studios. 

standing by the hour together in front of the sutler's window in the 

Charlemagne yard, staring like an idiot at the sordid list of prices 

which began with: garlic, 62 centimes, and ended with: cigar, 5 

centimes. Or he passed his time in trembling, chattering his teeth, 

twenty beds in the fever ward was vacant. 

Brujon, that somnolent fellow, had had three different commissions 

executed by the errand-men of the establishment, not under his own name, 

fifty sous, an exorbitant outlay which attracted the attention of the 

prison corporal. 

posted in the convict's parlor, it was learned that the fifty sous could 

Grenelle, twenty-five sous. This last was the dearest of the whole 

prowlers of the barriers, Kruideniers, alias Bizarre, Glorieux, an 

of Patron Minette; two of those leaders, Babet and Gueulemer, had been 

captured. It was supposed that the messages, which had been addressed, 

the three prowlers, and supposed that they had circumvented some one or 

other of Brujon's machinations. 

superintendent of the watch, who had been inspecting the lower dormitory 

was the means adopted to make sure that the watchmen performed their 

five-story building which separated the two court-yards. 

moulded, which is sent into Ireland, that is to say, over the roofs of a 

land to another; into Ireland. This little pellet falls in the yard. The 

forwards the note to its destination; if it is a keeper, or one of the 

Minette. 

were written:-- 

woman of her acquaintance, a certain Magnon, who was strongly suspected 

by the police, though not yet arrested. This Magnon, whose name the 

serve as a bridge between the Salpetriere and Les Madelonettes. 

daughters, Eponine and Azelma were released. When Eponine came out, 

Magnon, who was watching the gate of the Madelonettes, handed her 

Brujon's note to Babet, charging her to look into the matter. 

Magnon, who delivers in the Rue Clocheperce, a biscuit, which Magnon 

shady symbolism of prisons, signifies: Nothing to be done. 

on his way from it:-- 

Brujon in La Force miscarry. 

another. 

Father Mabeuf by chance. 

side. 

love shade and dampness. Nevertheless, he did not become discouraged. He 

way to the Jardin des Plantes, the old man and the young man passed 

that there comes a moment when misery looses bonds! Two men who have 

pleasure, and hope had assumed for him. This sufficed him for his 

that epoch, M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years of age. 

had found on the kitchen table, and had seated himself on an overturned 

stone post, which took the place of a bench in his garden. 

of large chest, of beams and planks, much dilapidated, a rabbit-hutch on 

the ground floor, a fruit-closet on the first. There was nothing in the 

a serious thing at his age, he was interested. His natural timidity 

Delancre, De l'inconstance des Demons; the other was a quarto by Mutor 

de la Rubaudiere, Sur les Diables de Vauvert et les Gobelins de la 

the rhododendron was particularly sad. Father Mabeuf was one of those 

his indigo plot, he was worn out with fatigue, but he rose, laid 

glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded with stars. 

be as arid as the day had been. 

drop of water!" 

breast. 

blossomed forth from the twilight. 

being, whose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness, had 

watering-pot, and the goodman beheld this apparition, which had bare 

feet and a tattered petticoat, running about among the flower-beds 

distributing life around her. The sound of the watering-pot on the 

the rhododendron was happy now. 

watered the whole garden. 

her fichu all in rags, that resembled a bat. 

eyes, and laid his hand on her brow. 

the flowers." 

response:-- 

for you!" 

vanished. 

longer lives,--ah well, I don't know." 

continued:-- 

Go there. It is not hard to meet him." 

there; the girl had disappeared. 

that she was a spirit." 

which changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea, little by 

to himself in a bewildered way:-- 

goblins. Could it have been a goblin?" 

morning,--it was on a Monday, the day when Marius borrowed the 

hundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thenardier--Marius had put this 

coin in his pocket, and before carrying it to the clerk's office, he 

had gone "to take a little stroll," in the hope that this would make him 

French a celebrated quarrel between Germans, the Gans and Savigny 

from his chair, saying: "I shall go out. That will put me in spirits." 

Gans. 

were broken in his brain; then he said to himself: "I will not go out 

to-morrow. It prevents my working." And he went out every day. 

the Rue Croulebarbe. 

the freshly unfolded and luminous leaves. 

even saw the sun. 

was not even a monologue, so feeble had action become in him, and he 

had no longer the force to care to despair, athwart this melancholy 

beneath him, on both banks of the river, the laundresses of the Gobelins 

beating their linen, and above his head, the birds chattering and 

were two cheerful sounds. 

voice saying:-- 

"Come! Here he is!" 

him one morning, the elder of the Thenardier daughters, Eponine; he knew 

her name now. Strange to say, she had grown poorer and prettier, 

were larger, the tatters more sordid. It was the same harsh voice, 

the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan, the same free, wild, and 

prison adds to wretchedness. 

having gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet's madness, but because she 

had slept in the loft of some stable. 

youth! 

in her livid countenance, and something which resembled a smile. 

disagreeable. You cleared out. Come now! Why do you wear old hats like 

this! A young man like you ought to have fine clothes. Do you know, 

Monsieur Marius, Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius, I don't know 

sun, and they read the Quotidienne for a sou. I once carried a letter to 

live now?" 

you." 

of inward conflict. At last she appeared to come to a decision. 

to be pleased. Only promise me that you will smile. I want to see you 

know? You promised me that you would give me anything I like--" 

"I have the address." 

her hand distractedly. 

is it?" 

well, I will take you to it." 

intoxicated and ecstatic state:-- 

this address to your father!" 

to you, swear to me that you will not tell your father this address that 

you know!" 

confinement. Besides, what do I care for my father!" 

Yes! Yes! I promise that! I swear that to you! What is that to me? I 

will not tell my father the address. There! Is that right? Is that it?" 

"Immediately." 

must not be seen with a woman like me." 

by that child. 

them in Eponine's hand. 

him with a gloomy air. 

CHAPTER I--THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET 

the grand seignors displayed their mistresses, and the bourgeois 

concealed them, had "a little house" built in the Faubourg 

Saint-Germain, in the deserted Rue Blomet, which is now called Rue 

Plumet, not far from the spot which was then designated as Combat des 

Animaux. 

an acre and a half in extent. This was all that could be seen by 

passers-by; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard, and 

in case of need. This building communicated in the rear by a masked 

Babylone. 

justice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere, and 

they had a party wall before their eyes, and did not even suspect the 

their orchards. Only the birds beheld this curiosity. It is probable 

about the chief justice. 

and magistracy. 

nation made him bankrupt. So that it was the house which demolished the 

through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow and illegible 

bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since 1819. 

short curtains, a sign that there was a woman about. 

himself and had hired the house just as it stood, including, of course, 

the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone. He 

with the justice's old fitting; the new tenant had ordered some 

paving-stones in the yard, bricks in the floors, steps in the stairs, 

missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows, 

gossip about him, for the reason that there were no neighbors. 

The servant was a woman named Toussaint, whom Jean Valjean had saved 

from the hospital and from wretchedness, and who was elderly, a 

Jean Valjean to take her with him. He had hired the house under the name 

of M. Fauchelevent, independent gentleman. In all that has been 

Thenardier to recognize Jean Valjean. 

happened? 

he brooded over the soul of that child, he said to himself that she 

was his, that nothing could take her from him, that this would last 

gently incited every day, that thus the convent was henceforth the 

he should die there; that, in short, delightful hope, no separation 

was possible. On reflecting upon this, he fell into perplexity. He 

interrogated himself. He asked himself if all that happiness were 

really his, if it were not composed of the happiness of another, of 

stealing; if that were not theft? He said to himself, that this child 

had a right to know life before renouncing it, that to deprive her in 

the pretext of saving her from all trials, to take advantage of her 

ignorance of her isolation, in order to make an artificial vocation 

to God. And who knows if, when she came to be aware of all this some 

but which was intolerable to him. He resolved to quit the convent. 

necessary. As for objections, there were none. Five years' sojourn 

He had grown old, and all had undergone a change. Who would recognize 

and taking his precautions. 

in presenting itself. Old Fauchelevent died. 

have received her education gratuitously, he humbly begged the Reverend 

for the five years which Cosette had spent there, the sum of five 

thousand francs. 

Adoration. 

proceeded from it. 

and called this valise his inseparable, saying: "I am jealous of it." 

profound anxiety. 

Fauchelevent. 

he might not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had 

so miraculously escaped from Javert. These two apartments were very 

l'Homme Arme. 

He had himself served by the porters, and gave himself out as a 

in Paris for the sake of escaping from the police. 

arranged his existence there in the following fashion:-- 

fillets, the justice's drawing-room furnished with tapestries and vast 

arm-chairs; she had the garden. Jean Valjean had a canopied bed of 

graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to young girls, an etagere, 

paper, a work-table incrusted with mother of pearl, a silver-gilt 

dressing-case, a toilet service in Japanese porcelain. Long damask 

bed, hung at the windows of the first floor. On the ground floor, the 

lodge which was situated at the end of the back courtyard, with a 

loaf of black bread on the table for his own use. 

to mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas, because that was a long way off. 

poor people surrounded him in church, which had drawn down upon him 

Thenardier's epistle: "To the benevolent gentleman of the church of 

a grotto; for at the epoch of follies and "Little Houses" no love was 

without a grotto. 

the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters, the 

entire usefulness of that box, formerly the go-between of a love 

the tax-collector's notices, and the summons of the guard. For M. 

Fauchelevent, independent gentleman, belonged to the national guard; 

he had not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of 

whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise, and, consequently, 

worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the townhall. 

guard; he did this willingly, however; it was a correct disguise which 

just attained his sixtieth birthday, the age of legal exemption; but he 

his sergeant-major nor to quibble with Comte de Lobau; he possessed 

no civil status, he was concealing his name, he was concealing his 

man had for his ideal, within, the angel, without, the bourgeois. 

he was always dressed in a workingman's trousers and blouse, and wore 

hardly noticed her father's peculiarities. As for Toussaint, she 

venerated Jean Valjean, and thought everything he did right. 

her: "That's a queer fish." She replied: "He's a saint." 

except by the door on the Rue de Babylone. Unless seen through the 

garden gate it would have been difficult to guess that they lived in 

garden uncultivated, in order not to attract attention. 

gaze at it, without a suspicion of the secrets which it hid in its fresh 

and verdant depths. More than one dreamer of that epoch often allowed 

that ancient, padlocked gate, twisted, tottering, fastened to two 

green and moss-covered pillars, and oddly crowned with a pediment of 

undecipherable arabesque. 

several lattices which had lost their nails with time, were rotting on 

everywhere. Gardening had taken its departure, and nature had returned. 

Weeds abounded, which was a great piece of luck for a poor corner of 

land. The festival of gilliflowers was something splendid. Nothing 

venerable growth reigned there among them. The trees had bent over 

towards the nettles, the plant had sprung upward, the branch had 

inclined, that which crawls on the earth had gone in search of that 

clusters, tendrils, shoots, spines, thorns, had mingled, crossed, 

married, confounded themselves in each other; vegetation in a deep 

and close embrace, had celebrated and accomplished there, under the 

quivering like a nest, sombre like a cathedral, fragrant like a bouquet, 

solitary as a tomb, living as a throng. 

cosmic love, and which feels the sap of April rising and boiling in 

its veins, and shakes to the wind its enormous wonderful green locks, 

flowers like stars, dew like pearls, fecundity, beauty, life, joy, 

twittering forgot to say the humming completed. In the evening, a dreamy 

the wagtails were audible as they dozed among the branches; one felt the 

and dew in the flowers, the long silvery tracks of the snails were 

visible on the cold, thick carpet of yellow leaves; but in any fashion, 

tiny enclosure breathed forth melancholy, contemplation, solitude, 

had the air of saying: "This garden belongs to me." 

not far off; the carriages of the Rue de Bourgogne and of the Rue 

did the yellow, brown, white, and red omnibuses cross each other's 

this privileged spot ferns, mulleins, hemlock, yarrow, tall weeds, great 

uneasy and rapid insects; to cause to spring forth from the depths 

of the earth and to reappear between those four walls a certain 

where she diffuses herself at all, in the ant as well as in the eagle, 

and majesty as in a virgin forest of the New World. 

and penetrating influence of nature knows this. Although no absolute 

satisfaction is given to philosophy, either to circumscribe the cause 

Everything toils at everything. 

determined by the fall of grains of sand? Who knows the reciprocal 

ebb and flow of the infinitely great and the infinitely little, the 

of creation? The tiniest worm is of importance; the great is little, the 

little is great; everything is balanced in necessity; alarming vision 

doing; the night distributes stellar essences to the sleeping flowers. 

birth of an earthworm and the advent of Socrates. Where the telescope 

of vision? Choose. A bit of mould is a pleiad of flowers; a nebula is an 

ant-hill of stars. The same promiscuousness, and yet more unprecedented, 

exists between the things of the intelligence and the facts of 

brought eventually to the same clearness. The phenomenon is perpetually 

thought an element, disseminated and invisible, dissolving all, 

knows? Were it only by the identity of the law, the evolution of the 

of water. A machine made of mind. Enormous gearing, the prime motor of 

which is the gnat, and whose final wheel is the zodiac. 

mysteries, had been transformed and become fitted to shelter chaste 

falling like a veil over all. Paphos had been made over into Eden. It is 

coquettish garden, formerly decidedly compromised, had returned to 

thought that he was a continuation of Lamoignon, and another goodman who 

a soul made of sweetness, of faith, of candor, of hope, of aspiration, 

and of illusion. 

religion, and even and above all, devotion; then "history," that is to 

say the thing that bears that name in convents, geography, grammar, 

the participles, the kings of France, a little music, a little drawing, 

etc.; but in all other respects she was utterly ignorant, which is a 

are formed there, as in a dark chamber. She should be gently and 

discreetly enlightened, rather with the reflection of realities than 

with their harsh and direct light. A useful and graciously austere 

the memories of the virgin and the experience of the woman, which knows 

how this half-light is to be created and of what it should consist. 

soul. 

he was only an old man and he knew nothing at all. 

which is called innocence! 

overflow, and grows deep, since it cannot expand. Hence visions, 

suppositions, conjectures, outlines of romances, a desire for 

obscurity of the mind, sombre and secret abodes where the passions 

human heart, should last during the whole life. 

more dangerous than the house in the Rue Plumet. It was the continuation 

of solitude with the beginning of liberty; a garden that was closed, but 

that opened on the street. 

for the insects that she found beneath her feet amid the grass, while 

through the boughs above her head. 

all her soul, with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman 

the secret riches and the eloquence of a true and humble mind which has 

season his kindness; his mind was rough and his heart was soft. During 

everything, drawing on what he had read, and also on what he had 

He kissed her brow. 

Valjean was, there happiness was. Jean Valjean lived neither in the 

courtyard, than in the enclosure filled with flowers, and in his little 

go to your own quarters! Leave me alone a little!" 

when they come from a daughter to her father. 

and a stove?" 

not even a roof over their heads." 

have a fire." 

"Father, why do you eat horrible bread like that?" 

white bread. 

morning and evening for her mother whom she had never known. The 

Thenardiers had remained with her as two hideous figures in a dream. She 

passed into that good man and had come to dwell near her. 

mother." 

ignorance of a girl brought up in a convent,--maternity being also 

the smile ended in a tear. 

this name to the hazards of another memory than his own? 

for him to do so. It seemed to him that he no longer dared. Was it 

because of Cosette? Was it because of Fantine? He felt a certain 

religious horror at letting that shadow enter Cosette's thought; and of 

and felt himself overwhelmed with silence. 

to have its finger on its lips. Had all the modesty which had been 

in Fantine, and which had violently quitted her during her lifetime, 

grave? Was Jean Valjean unconsciously submitting to the pressure? We 

mysterious explanation. 

Fantine. 

My mother must have been almost a saint during her life." 

with angelic joy; he declared to himself ecstatically that this would 

last all their lives; he told himself that he really had not suffered 

sufficiently to merit so radiant a bliss, and he thanked God, in the 

depths of his soul, for having permitted him to be loved thus, he, a 

to herself: "Really!" It seemed to her almost that she was pretty. This 

in that belief with the easy resignation of childhood. And here, all 

indeed!" That night, she did not sleep. "What if I were pretty!" she 

of her companions whose beauty had produced a sensation in the convent, 

she; "no, I am ugly." She had not slept well, that was all, her eyes 

were sunken and she was pale. She had not felt very joyous on the 

very sad not to be able to believe in it any longer. She did not look at 

herself again, and for more than a fortnight she tried to dress her hair 

with her back turned to the mirror. 

quite uneasy by the manner in which her father was gazing at her. 

woman! but badly dressed." "Bah!" she thought, "he does not mean me. 

merino gown. 

herself. 

and her mirror. Her figure was formed, her skin had grown white, her 

hair was lustrous, an unaccustomed splendor had been lighted in her blue 

the trees, flowers in the thickets, distracted, wild, in inexpressible 

delight. 

at heart. 

face. The dawn that was smiling for all was gloomy for him. 

aware of it herself. But, from the very first day, that unexpected light 

in a happy life, a life so happy that he did not dare to move for fear 

of disarranging something. This man, who had passed through all manner 

of distresses, who was still all bleeding from the bruises of fate, who 

had been almost wicked and who had become almost a saint, who, after 

released from its grasp and who could be seized at any moment and 

of the world, one thing, that Cosette might love him! 

by it." 

made him shudder like the beginning of something new. He had never 

known very distinctly himself what the beauty of a woman means; but he 

understood instinctively, that it was something terrible. 

triumphant and superb beside him, beneath his very eyes, on the innocent 

his old age, of his misery, of his reprobation. 

gazed upon with joy. 

"Decidedly I am beautiful!" Cosette began to pay attention to her 

toilet. She recalled the remark of that passer-by: "Pretty, but badly 

destined, later on, to fill the whole life of woman, coquetry. Love is 

the other. 

stuff which is in fashion, the color which is becoming, that science 

which makes of the Parisian woman something so charming, so deep, and so 

dangerous. The words heady woman were invented for the Parisienne. 

Babylone, was not only one of the prettiest, but one of the "best 

dressed" women in Paris, which means a great deal more. 

bonnet from Gerard and one from Herbaut in the most marvellous way. 

sprouting on Cosette. 

proprieties, certain special conventionalities, were not observed by 

does not dress in damask. 

of an envious man: "Charming!" He was the same as usual during their 

walk. On their return home, he asked Cosette:-- 

mean?" 

wardrobe where her cast-off schoolgirl's clothes were hanging. 

Oh no, the idea! I shall never put on those horrors again. With that 

display them? 

never set foot in the garden. He kept to his back yard, like a dog. 

is ineffable, and nothing is so adorable as a dazzling and innocent 

she gained in pensive and serious charm. Her whole person, permeated 

splendid melancholy. 

once more at the Luxembourg. 

these two beings, all charged and all languishing with the stormy 

and mingle in a look like the clouds in a flash of fire. 

people do fall in love, nevertheless, and the only way. The rest is 

great shocks which two souls convey to each other by the exchange of 

that spark. 

which troubled Marius, Marius had no suspicion that he had also launched 

a look which disturbed Cosette. 

was nothing to her. 

to be poor, yet his air was fine. 

the Rue de l'Ouest, where Jean Valjean, according to his custom, had 

come to spend six weeks. The next morning, on waking, she thought of 

pay attention to her, and it did not appear to her that this attention 

somewhat incensed at this handsome and disdainful individual. A 

her a wholly childish joy, that she was going to take her revenge at 

last. 

terrors. He remained on his bench and did not approach. This vexed 

she went to him. In such cases, all women resemble Mahomet. And then, 

strange to say, the first symptom of true love in a young man is 

timidity; in a young girl it is boldness. This is surprising, and yet 

other and assuming, each the other's qualities. 

uneasy. From that day forth, they adored each other. 

melts in love, which is its sun. 

of one's malady? 

did not know whether it was a good thing or a bad thing, useful or 

a matter in which I have no power and of which I know nothing?" 

the state of her soul. It was a sort of admiration at a distance, a mute 

youth to youth, the dream of nights become a reality yet remaining 

defect; in a word, the distant lover who lingered in the ideal, a 

chimaera with a form. Any nearer and more palpable meeting would have 

the process of slow evaporation from her person, and made everything 

something charming, luminous, and impossible. 

all frankness. 

when she said to Jean Valjean:-- 

beautiful and loving, with a consciousness of her beauty, and in 

warned Jean Valjean in a dim way of the presence of Marius. Jean Valjean 

exhibited ambiguous prudence and awkward daring. He no longer came quite 

that he did not have his hair curled, his eyes were very queer, he wore 

gloves; in short, Jean Valjean cordially detested this young man. 

that it must be concealed. 

said to her: "What a very pedantic air that young man has!" 

replied: "Why, no, he is charming." Ten years later, with the love 

of Marius in her heart, she would have answered: "A pedant, and 

insufferable to the sight! You are right!"--At the moment in life 

replying, with supreme calmness: "That young man!" 

I who have pointed him out to her." 

those vivacious conflicts between a first love and the first obstacles, 

whatever, and that the young man falls into every one. Jean Valjean 

had instituted an undeclared war against Marius, which Marius, with 

his bench, he forgot his handkerchief, he came alone to the Luxembourg; 

Marius dashed headlong into all these snares; and to all the 

interrogation marks planted by Jean Valjean in his pathway, he 

ingenuously answered "yes." But Cosette remained immured in her apparent 

Cosette, but Cosette does not even know that he exists." 

when Cosette would love might strike at any moment. Does not everything 

begin with indifference? 

seat to depart, after a stay of three hours, and she said: "What, 

already?" 

did not wish to do anything out of the way, and as, above all things, 

the world but an adored and radiant face, Jean Valjean was fixing on 

Marius flashing and terrible eyes. He, who had finally come to believe 

himself incapable of a malevolent feeling, experienced moments when 

against that young man. It almost seemed to him that unknown craters 

were forming in his bosom. 

adventure! What does he want? A love affair! A love affair! And I? What! 

everything that man can suffer, I have grown old without having been 

young, I have lived without a family, without relatives, without 

friends, without life, without children, I have left my blood on every 

stone, on every bramble, on every mile-post, along every wall, I have 

been gentle, though others have been hard to me, and kind, although 

others have been malicious, I have become an honest man once more, in 

spite of everything, I have repented of the evil that I have done and 

when I receive my recompense, at the moment when it is all over, at the 

moment when I am just touching the goal, at the moment when I have what 

I desire, it is well, it is good, I have paid, I have earned it, all 

and I shall lose my life, my joy, my soul, because it has pleased a 

great booby to come and lounge at the Luxembourg." 

surveying an enemy. It was a dog scanning a thief. 

"Monsieur, who is that curious young man who is asking for you?" On the 

morrow Jean Valjean bestowed on Marius that glance which Marius at last 

or in the Rue de l'Ouest. He returned to the Rue Plumet. 

are charming and the only ones with which he was not acquainted; the 

Cosette's silence. 

side and on hers, inexperience had joined issue. 

there. Marius was not there. 

gentleness. 

thinking of the things that she might be thinking about. 

cloister, that chaste peak, that abode of angels, that inaccessible 

Eden forever closed against him, whence he had voluntarily and madly 

have I done?" 

no harshness. His face was always serene and kind. Jean Valjean's 

manners were more tender and more paternal than ever. If anything could 

have betrayed his lack of joy, it was his increased suavity. 

that if this proved to be a matter of indifference to her, her father 

would take her thither once more. But days, weeks, months, elapsed. Jean 

Valjean had tacitly accepted Cosette's tacit consent. She regretted it. 

which she returned to the Luxembourg, Marius was no longer there. What 

her heart, which nothing relieved, and which augmented every day; she no 

longer knew whether it was winter or summer, whether it was raining or 

dahlias or daisies, whether the Luxembourg was more charming than 

the Tuileries, whether the linen which the laundress brought home 

was starched too much or not enough, whether Toussaint had done "her 

night at a black and fathomless spot where an apparition has vanished. 

except her pallor. 

Sometimes he asked her:-- 

She replied: "There is nothing the matter with me." 

add:-- 

touching an affection, and who had lived so long for each other 

now suffered side by side, each on the other's account; without 

with a smile. 

sorrows, always possesses its own peculiar radiance. 

had an unconquerable conviction that Cosette was escaping from him. He 

commandant of Paris. He envied that gilded man; what happiness it 

for Cosette, and would dispel her idea of looking at young men. 

to a stroll by night, with the cheerfulness of nature added. The streets 

set out before daybreak, and these trips were so many small delights for 

Cosette. These innocent eccentricities please young people. 

frequented spots, to solitary nooks, to forgotten places. There then 

existed, in the vicinity of the barriers of Paris, a sort of poor 

meadows, which were almost confounded with the city, where grew in 

gathered, presented the appearance, not of having been reaped, but 

strolls. 

the autumn of 1831, they set out, and found themselves at break of 

deep, pale azure, the earth all black, the heavens all white, a quiver 

lark, which seemed mingled with the stars, was carolling at a prodigious 

clear horizon with the sharpness of steel; Venus dazzlingly brilliant 

from a gloomy edifice. 

their work along the side-paths. 

gate of a timber-yard. His face was turned towards the highway, his back 

mind becomes concentrated, which imprison even the eye, and which are 

vertical; when one is at the bottom of them, time is required to return 

between him and her, of the light with which she filled his life, a 

his revery. Cosette, who was standing beside him, was gazing at the 

clouds as they turned rosy. 

coming yonder." Jean Valjean raised his eyes. 

noise which it was difficult to account for at that hour, and a sort of 

confused pile made its appearance. Some shapeless thing which was coming 

from the boulevard was turning into the road. 

boulevard into the highway, and which was directing its course towards 

followed, then a third, then a fourth; seven chariots made their 

into a terrible thing such as emerges from the cave of dreams. 

with the pallid hue of an apparition; the mass grew white; the day, 

into the faces of corpses, and this is what it proved to be:-- 

extremities. Each dray, or rather let us say, each ladder, was attached 

the manner in which these men were travelling, and behind their backs 

they had something which clanked, and which was a chain, and on their 

necks something which shone, and which was an iron collar. Each man had 

In the back and front of each vehicle, two men armed with muskets 

necklets were square. The seventh vehicle, a huge rack-sided baggage 

sonorous pile of iron boilers, cast-iron pots, braziers, and chains, 

among which were mingled several men who were pinioned and stretched at 

full length, and who seemed to be ill. This wagon, all lattice-work, 

each side marched a double hedge of guards of infamous aspect, wearing 

hanging in rags, with red epaulets, yellow shoulder belts, short sabres, 

muskets, and cudgels; they were a species of soldier-blackguards. 

These myrmidons seemed composed of the abjectness of the beggar and the 

increased. At the head and in the rear of the convoy rode mounted 

gendarmes, serious and with sword in fist. 

is frequently the case in Paris, pressed forward from both sides of 

up to gaze were audible. 

trousers, and their bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes. The rest 

many wore women's headgear, others had baskets on their heads; hairy 

in his hand and raised to his mouth something which had the appearance 

in chains did not utter a syllable; from time to time the sound of 

skulls; some of these men were yawning; their rags were terrible; 

together, their fetters clanked, their eyes glared ferociously, their 

fists clenched or fell open inertly like the hands of corpses; in the 

rear of the convoy ran a band of children screaming with laughter. 

chain would continue to bind them by the neck, that their legs would 

of these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the cold clouds of 

of the air, like trees and stones. 

and who appeared to have been tossed there like sacks filled with 

misery. 

blew vermin over the crowd, picking out the women; the dawn accentuated 

was not one of these creatures who was not deformed by reason of 

wretchedness; and the whole was so monstrous that one would have 

lightning. The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up a song, 

shivered mournfully; in the cross-lanes, countenances of bourgeois 

listened in an idiotic delight to these coarse strains droned by 

spectres. 

be found the facial angles of every sort of beast, old men, youths, 

in all probability, and who could make a comparison of his chains. The 

unclean procession had not classified them. These beings had been 

of hell on the march. The march of the damned to their tortures, 

cart. 

pretence from time to time, of stirring up this mass of human filth. 

old, and said to him: "Rascal, let that be a warning to you!" 

captain of the escort cracked his whip, and at that signal a fearful 

seven dray-loads; many roared and foamed at the mouth; which redoubled 

on these wounds. 

glance in the case of certain wretched men, which seem unconscious 

of reality, and in which flames the reflection of terrors and of 

athwart confused and inexpressible anguish, what this sepulchral 

persecution signified, and whence had come that pandemonium which was 

habitual to those whose memory suddenly returns; he remembered that this 

himself passed through that barrier. 

Cosette was no less terrified, but in a different way. She did not 

understand; what she beheld did not seem to her to be possible; at 

length she cried:-- 

glances like chained wolves. 

of sparing the royal personage a sight of it. 

shocks, and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thorough 

shaking up. 

questions on the subject of what they had just seen; perhaps he was 

to bed, he heard her say in a low voice, and as though talking to 

hand." 

Paris, a review in the Champ de Mars, jousts on the Seine, theatrical 

uniforms perfectly natural; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a 

himself to shelter. However, this trip seemed to attain its object. 

Cosette, who made it her law to please her father, and to whom, 

moreover, all spectacles were a novelty, accepted this diversion 

with the light and easy good grace of youth, and did not pout too 

disdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public fete; so that 

trace of that hideous vision remained. 

they were both on the steps leading to the garden, another infraction of 

the rules which Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself, and 

to the custom of remaining in her chamber which melancholy had caused 

to pieces. Cosette did not know the delightful legend, I love a little, 

to pluck a daisy apart is to do the same by a heart. If there were a 

tiny fingers on that flower, and forgetful of everything in the radiance 

emitted by that child. A red-breast was warbling in the thicket, on one 

have said that they had just been set at liberty. Cosette went on 

attentively tearing the leaves from her flower; she seemed to be 

thinking about something; but whatever it was, it must be something 

the galleys like?" 

CHAPTER I--A WOUND WITHOUT, HEALING WITHIN 

them, which was to carry bread to those who were hungry, and clothing 

to those who were cold. Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on these 

visits to the poor, on which they recovered some remnants of their 

former free intercourse; and sometimes, when the day had been a good 

one, and they had assisted many in distress, and cheered and warmed many 

little children, Cosette was rather merry in the evening. It was at this 

epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette den. 

pavilion in the morning, calm as was his wont, but with a large wound on 

his left arm which was much inflamed, and very angry, which resembled a 

burn, and which he explained in some way or other. This wound resulted 

in his being detained in the house for a month with fever. He would not 

call in a doctor. When Cosette urged him, "Call the dog-doctor," said 

he. 

Cosette dressed the wound morning and evening with so divine an air and 

She passed nearly all her days beside Jean Valjean and read to him 

an old fool." 

Thenardiers made in the Jondrette hovel, unexpected as it was, had, 

he thought, "but what a lamentable family in distress!" 

in the wounded man's humble abode, she warbled melancholy songs which 

delighted Jean Valjean. 

that Jean Valjean said to Cosette:-- 

there. 

convalescing, and that he appeared to be happy, she experienced a 

as dawn always is, gay like every childhood; a little inclined to weep 

at times like the new-born being that it is. In that month, nature 

meadows and the flowers into the heart of man. 

In spring, sad souls grow light, as light falls into cellars at midday. 

account for it to herself. In the morning, about ten o'clock, after 

for a quarter of an hour, and when she was pacing up and down in the 

not perceive that she laughed every moment and that she was happy. 

adventure. 

PHENOMENON 

tiresome. He resolved to make an effort to secure some supper. He 

strolled out beyond the Salpetriere into deserted regions; that is 

where windfalls are to be found; where there is no one, one always 

village of Austerlitz. 

haunted by an old man and an old woman, and in that garden, a passable 

garden was separated from it by a hedge. 

recognized the apple-tree, he verified the fruit-house, he examined the 

the operation of scaling the hedge, then suddenly paused. Some one was 

been made, there was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench, and 

was standing in front of him. The old woman was grumbling. Gavroche, who 

was not very discreet, listened. 

repeated:-- 

to answer:-- 

conversation:-- 

wood." 

meat." 

thought. Gavroche became thoughtful also. It was almost dark. 

at the foot of the thicket. 

could hear the octogenarian breathe. 

Then, by way of dinner, he tried to sleep. 

the watch. 

livid line between two rows of dark bushes. 

One was in front, the other some distance in the rear. 

thoughtful, dressed more than plainly, and who was walking slowly 

because of his age, and strolling about in the open evening air. 

of the first; but in the voluntary slowness of its gait, suppleness 

and agility were discernible. This figure had also something fierce and 

an elegant; the hat was of good shape, the coat black, well cut, 

was Montparnasse. 

respectable old man. 

bedroom had turned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment. 

something threatening. Gavroche felt his gamin's heart moved with 

compassion for the old man. 

ruffian eighteen years of age. 

spider on the fly. Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose, bounded 

upon the old man, seized him by the collar, grasped and clung to him, 

expected. The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse; the one who 

Gavroche. 

a terrible fashion, that in a twinkling, the assailant and the assailed 

had exchanged roles. 

were, each by the other, as their breath mingled in the struggle. 

this aside: "Can he be dead!" 

his feet, and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse:-- 

been caught by a sheep. 

with his ears. He was enjoying himself immensely. 

from the darkness an indescribably tragic accent. The goodman 

questioned, Montparnasse replied. 

be?" 

stood motionless, and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse. 

escape. 

hand, with the sovereign indifference of absolute force. 

darkness where they stood, a solemn harangue, of which Gavroche did not 

lose a single syllable:-- 

laborious of lives. Ah! You declare yourself to be an idler! prepare to 

toil. There is a certain formidable machine, have you seen it? It is 

the rolling-mill. You must be on your guard against it, it is crafty 

and ferocious; if it catches hold of the skirt of your coat, you will be 

and save yourself! Otherwise, it is all over with you; in a short time 

have a task, to fulfil a duty! It bores you to be like other men? Well! 

You will be different. Labor is the law; he who rejects it will find 

ennui his torment. You do not wish to be a workingman, you will be a 

slave. Toil lets go of you on one side only to grasp you again on the 

other. You do not desire to be its friend, you shall be its negro slave. 

Ah! You would have none of the honest weariness of men, you shall have 

throat. You will see afar off, from below, other men at work; it will 

seem to you that they are resting. The laborer, the harvester, the 

sailor, the blacksmith, will appear to you in glory like the blessed 

plough, to bind the sheaves, is joy. The bark at liberty in the wind, 

what delight! Do you, lazy idler, delve, drag on, roll, march! Drag your 

to breathe, will be just so many terrible labors. Your lungs will 

produce on you the effect of weighing a hundred pounds. Whether you 

there he is in the open air. If you wish to go out, you will be obliged 

by little you will make of them a rope, then you will climb out of your 

window, and you will suspend yourself by that thread over an abyss, and 

it will be night, amid storm, rain, and the hurricane, and if the rope 

drop hap-hazard into the gulf, from an unknown height, on what? On what 

terrible work of art; you will take a large sou, you will cut it in 

the overseers it will be only a sou; to you it will be a box. What will 

as a pin, and concealed in a sou, you will cut the bolt of the lock, you 

idleness and pleasure! Do you know that to do nothing is a melancholy 

resolution? To live in idleness on the property of society! to be 

useless, that is to say, pernicious! This leads straight to the depth 

one thought, to drink well, to eat well, to sleep well. You will drink 

your limbs. You will break those fetters, you will flee. That is well. 

which dogs would not touch, eating beans that the worms have eaten 

before you. You will be a wood-louse in a cellar. Ah! Have pity on 

conjure you, listen to me, I entreat you. You desire fine black cloth, 

rosy, fresh, with brilliant eyes, and all your white teeth, and your 

handsome, youthful hair; you will come out broken, bent, wrinkled, 

an idle man. It is not comfortable to become a rascal. It is less 

precaution as though he had stolen it. 

tranquilly resumed his stroll. 

This contemplation was fatal to him. 

he slipped away like an adder through the shadows. Montparnasse, who 

hedge, and fled as fast as his legs would carry him. 

change; in the other lay six napoleons. 

CHAPTER I--SOLITUDE AND THE BARRACKS COMBINED 

upon its convalescence. Nature, spring, youth, love for her father, 

felt the painful and burning spot any longer. 

think of him." 

sword under his arm, waxed mustaches, and a glazed schapka, passing the 

garden, behind that malicious rococo fence, a very pretty creature, 

who was almost always there when the handsome lieutenant,--who is not 

unknown to the reader, and whose name was Theodule Gillenormand,--passed 

by. 

making eyes at you, look." 

look at me?" 

towards agony, and was saying: "If I could but see her before I 

he would have expired with grief. 

sorrow and emerge from it again. 

are made in very high circles, real misalliance is that of souls; and as 

many an unknown young man, without name, without birth, without fortune, 

is a marble column which bears up a temple of grand sentiments and grand 

post of a drinking-shop. 

lower down. The image of the handsome officer was reflected in 

the surface. Did a souvenir linger in the depths?--Quite at the 

bottom?--Possibly. Cosette did not know. 

CHAPTER II--COSETTE'S APPREHENSIONS 

departures, she had accompanied him in a hackney-coach as far as a 

little blind-alley at the corner of which she read: Impasse de la 

Rue de Babylone. It was usually when money was lacking in the house that 

Jean Valjean took these little trips. 

accompanying herself the while, the chorus from Euryanthe: "Hunters 

the sphere of music. When she had finished, she remained wrapped in 

thought. 

the garden. 

laid her ear against it. 

very softly. 

the full. Everything could be seen as plainly as by day. 

visible was that the street was deserted as usual. 

huntsmen of whom one catches a glimpse through the twilight. 

There was a foundation of wildness and bravery in her. 

to that of the preceding evening, as though some one were walking 

paid no heed to it. Besides, she could see nothing. 

regain the steps. 

front of her upon this lawn, as she came out from the shrubbery. 

had a round hat. 

the clump of shrubbery, a few paces in the rear of Cosette. 

stir, or turn her head. 

the gate, and found nothing. 

hallucination? What! Two days in succession! One hallucination might 

the shadow had assuredly not been a phantom. Phantoms do not wear round 

hats. 

thought she had heard and seen. She wanted to be reassured and to see 

"It cannot be anything," said he. 

him examining the gate with great attention. 

She ran to her little wicket and opened it. In point of fact, there 

father. She returned to her bed, saying to herself: "He is very uneasy!" 

garden. Cosette saw him through the hole in her shutter. 

of laughter and her father's voice calling her:-- 

window. 

there is your shadow with the round hat." 

which did indeed, bear considerable resemblance to the spectre of a man 

wearing a round hat. It was the shadow produced by a chimney-pipe of 

sheet iron, with a hood, which rose above a neighboring roof. 

chimney-pots. 

not pay much attention to the question whether the chimney-pot was 

had seen, and whether the moon had been in the same spot in the sky. 

possibly be any one walking in the garden during the evening or at 

outside, past the trees and the gate. 

blowing briskly in the trees, Cosette was meditating; an objectless 

sadness was taking possession of her little by little, that invincible 

sadness evoked by the evening, and which arises, perhaps, who knows, 

from the mystery of the tomb which is ajar at that hour. 

melancholy somnambulism in which she was plunged: "Really, one needs 

wooden shoes for the garden at this hour. One takes cold." 

which she had quitted, a tolerably large stone which had, evidently, not 

been there a moment before. 

not touch it, fled without glancing behind her, took refuge in the 

notation of an infirmity is repugnant to us.] 

returned quite late at night. 

and to put the little iron things in the little rings that close them?" 

fact, but she could not refrain from adding:-- 

not the dying so much; you die, for one must die, and that's all right; 

possibly, also, by the recollection of the apparitions of the past week, 

house from garret to cellar, locked herself up in her own chamber, 

of caverns. 

I been thinking of? It is like the footsteps that I thought I heard a 

chimney-pot! Am I becoming a coward?" The sun, which was glowing through 

reassured her to such an extent that everything vanished from her 

thoughts, even the stone. 

hat in the garden; I dreamed about the stone, as I did all the rest." 

broke out in a cold perspiration. The stone was there. 

curiosity by day. 

Yet the envelope, though unsealed, was not empty. Papers could be seen 

inside. 

it was a beginning of anxiety. 

rather pretty handwriting, as Cosette thought. 

From whom did it come? An irresistible fascination took possession 

all bathed in light, the pigeons fluttering over a neighboring roof, 

herself that she must know what it contained. 

single being even to God, that is love. 

Love is the salutation of the angels to the stars. 

How sad is the soul, when it is sad through love! 

all evidently made creation for the soul, and the soul for love. 

is sufficient to cause the soul to enter into the palace of dreams. 

God is behind everything, but everything hides God. Things are 

transparent. 

Certain thoughts are prayers. There are moments when, whatever the 

attitude of the body may be, the soul is on its knees. 

birds, the perfume of the flowers, the smiles of children, the light of 

the sun, the sighings of the breeze, the rays of stars, all creation. 

And why not? All the works of God are made to serve love. Love is 

sufficiently potent to charge all nature with its messages. 

is the only thing that can occupy and fill eternity. In the infinite, 

the inexhaustible is requisite. 

Love participates of the soul itself. It is of the same nature. Like 

it, it is the divine spark; like it, it is incorruptible, indivisible, 

imperishable. It is a point of fire that exists within us, which is 

we see it beaming in the very depths of heaven. 

Oh Love! Adorations! voluptuousness of two minds which understand each 

strolls by twos in the solitudes! Blessed and radiant days! I have 

sometimes dreamed that from time to time hours detached themselves from 

the lives of the angels and came here below to traverse the destinies of 

men. 

them endless duration. After a life of love, an eternity of love is, in 

felicity which love bestows on the soul even in this world, is 

plenitude of man. 

mystery, woman. 

air and we stifle. Then we die. To die for lack of love is horrible. 

Suffocation of the soul. 

When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic 

unity, the secret of life has been discovered so far as they are 

same spirit. Love, soar. 

On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as she 

What love commences can be finished by God alone. 

True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a 

hopes. It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely 

little. 

plant; if you are a man, be love. 

possess paradise, we desire heaven. 

than heaven, it has voluptuousness. 

to dwell?" 

of him! 

is a being who carried off my sky when she went away. 

Oh! would that we were lying side by side in the same grave, hand 

in hand, and from time to time, in the darkness, gently caressing a 

finger,--that would suffice for my eternity! 

Ye who suffer because ye love, love yet more. To die of love, is to live 

in it. 

There is ecstasy in agony. 

Oh joy of the birds! It is because they have nests that they sing. 

Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise. 

trial, an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny. This 

the infinite; the definitive permits itself to be seen only by the dead. 

deprive him of all. Try to love souls, you will find them again. 

through his shoes, and the stars through his soul. 

What a grand thing it is to be loved! What a far grander thing it is 

that is not elevated and great. An unworthy thought can no more 

germinate in it, than a nettle on a glacier. The serene and lofty soul, 

inaccessible to vulgar passions and emotions, dominating the clouds 

and the shades of this world, its follies, its lies, its hatreds, its 

vanities, its miseries, inhabits the blue of heaven, and no longer feels 

of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake. 

when she raised her eyes from the last line of the note-book, the 

hour; Cosette thought him hideous. 

charming of chirography, thought Cosette; in the same hand, but with 

added to the inkstand, and consequently on different days. It was, 

then, a mind which had unfolded itself there, sigh by sigh, irregularly, 

half-open sanctuary. Each one of these mysterious lines shone before 

of love, very much as one might talk of the firebrand and not of the 

to her all of love, sorrow, destiny, life, eternity, the beginning, 

the end. It was as if a hand had opened and suddenly flung upon her 

a handful of rays of light. In these few lines she felt a passionate, 

absent love, his lady, the secret of fate, the key of life, love. This 

be called drops of soul. 

While she was forgetful of him, he had found her again! But had she 

forgotten him? No, never! She was foolish to have thought so for a 

single moment. She had always loved him, always adored him. The fire had 

now; it had but made headway, and now it had burst forth afresh, and 

yes!" said she, "how perfectly I recognize all that! That is what I had 

already read in his eyes." As she was finishing it for the third time, 

insipid, silly, stupid, useless, foppish, displeasing, impertinent, and 

extremely ugly. The officer thought it his duty to smile at her. 

thrown something at his head. 

peruse the manuscript once more, to learn it by heart, and to dream. 

bosom. 

abyss of Eden had yawned once more. 

she could not manage to conjecture anything, she hoped through a tremor, 

what? vague things. She dared make herself no promises, and she did 

herself: "Is this reality?" Then she felt of the dear paper within her 

would have shuddered in the presence of that luminous and unknown joy, 

is certainly he! This comes from him, and is for me!" 

chance, had given him back to her. 

intervention of the angels, was a pellet of bread tossed by one thief to 

the roofs of La Force. 

arranged her hair in the most becoming manner, and she put on a dress 

was, as young girls say, "a trifle indecent." It was not in the least 

without knowing why she did so. 

which opened on the back yard. 

from time to time with her hand, because there were some which hung very 

low. 

undergoes when there is some one standing behind one, even when she does 

not see the person. 

clothes were hardly discernible. The twilight threw a wan light on 

his fine brow, and covered his eyes in shadows. Beneath a veil of 

incomparable sweetness, he had something about him that suggested death 

by the thought of a soul that is taking flight. 

for she felt herself attracted. He did not stir. By virtue of something 

eyes which she could not see. 

it not been for this tree, she would have fallen. 

barely rising above the rustle of the leaves, and murmuring:-- 

remember the day, since you looked at me at the Luxembourg, near the 

you; have I displeased you?" 

without knowing what he was doing. He supported her, though he was 

tottering himself. It was as though his brain were full of smoke; 

lightnings darted between his lips; his ideas vanished; it seemed to him 

love. 

stammered:-- 

barely audible breath:-- 

intoxicated young man. 

the rose unfolds, that May expands, that the dawn grows white behind the 

black trees on the shivering crest of the hills? 

were full of thoughts. They had clasped hands unconsciously. 

and how he had made his way into the garden. It seemed so simple to her 

that he should be there! 

shivered. 

like a drop of dew on a flower. 

Little by little they began to talk to each other. Effusion followed 

These two beings, pure as spirits, told each other everything, their 

weaknesses, how they had adored each other from afar, how they had 

could augment, their most secret and most mysterious thoughts. They 

related to each other, with candid faith in their illusions, all that 

girl who had the young man's soul. Each became permeated with the other, 

they were enchanted with each other, they dazzled each other. 

laid her head on his shoulder and asked him:-- 

CHAPTER I--THE MALICIOUS PLAYFULNESS OF THE WIND 

and was being gradually engulfed, not in the abyss of a bankruptcy, but 

children; both males. That made five; two girls and three boys. 

young and very small, with remarkable luck. 

woman. A phenomenon, by the way, of which there is more than one example 

extant. Like the Marechale de La Mothe-Houdancourt, the Thenardier was 

a mother to her daughters only. There her maternity ended. Her hatred of 

cursed the other two. Why? Because. The most terrible of motives, the 

squalling brats," said this mother. 

last two children; and even in drawing profit from the operation. 

same one who had succeeded in making old Gillenormand support the two 

of the Seine in Paris thirty-five years ago, and of which science took 

her boys, who were still very young, one in the morning, the other 

in the evening of the same day. This was a blow. These children were 

collector of his rents, M. Barge, a retired tip-staff, in the Rue du 

mutual aid. Magnon needed two children; the Thenardiers had two. 

Magnon quitted the Quai des Celestins and went to live in the Rue 

month, which Magnon promised to pay, and which she actually did pay. 

It is unnecessary to add that M. Gillenormand continued to perform 

perceive the change. "Monsieur," Magnon said to him, "how much they 

resemble you!" 

Jondrette. His two daughters and Gavroche had hardly had time to 

discover that they had two little brothers. When a certain degree 

of misery is reached, one is overpowered with a sort of spectral 

Your nearest relations are often no more for you than vague shadowy 

confounded again with the invisible. 

Thenardier had felt, or had appeared to feel, a scruple. She said to her 

Rousseau did even better!" From scruples, the mother proceeded to 

Thenardier, is what we have done permissible?" Thenardier replied: 

it. Besides, no one has any interest in looking closely after children 

who have not a sou." 

thief. This English woman, who had become a naturalized Parisienne, 

medals in the Library and Mademoiselle Mar's diamonds, became celebrated 

later on in judicial accounts. She was called Mamselle Miss. 

cared for, as is everything from which profit is derived; they were 

neither badly clothed, nor badly fed; they were treated almost like 

"little gentlemen,"--better by their false mother than by their real 

one. Magnon played the lady, and talked no thieves' slang in their 

presence. 

day, he chanced to say to Magnon as she handed him his monthly stipend 

of ten francs: "The father must give them some education." 

protected tolerably well, even by their evil fate, were abruptly hurled 

into life and forced to begin it for themselves. 

is a veritable disaster for that hideous and occult counter-society 

Thenardier catastrophe involved the catastrophe of Magnon. 

One day, a short time after Magnon had handed to Eponine the note 

Rue Clocheperce; Magnon was seized, as was also Mamselle Miss; and all 

proprietor of the stall said to them: "You cannot live here any longer. 

Go there. It is near by. The first street on the left. Ask your way from 

this paper." 

hand the paper which was to guide them. It was cold, and his benumbed 

little fingers could not close very firmly, and they did not keep a very 

to find it again. 

do not precisely chill but freeze one; these north winds which sadden 

the most beautiful days produce exactly the effect of those puffs of 

cold air which enter a warm room through the cracks of a badly fitting 

door or window. It seems as though the gloomy door of winter had 

remained ajar, and as though the wind were pouring through it. In the 

spring of 1832, the epoch when the first great epidemic of this century 

broke out in Europe, these north gales were more harsh and piercing 

than ever. It was a door even more glacial than that of winter which 

was ajar. It was the door of the sepulchre. In these winds one felt the 

breath of the cholera. 

peculiarity, that they did not preclude a strong electric tension. 

Frequent storms, accompanied by thunder and lightning, burst forth at 

this epoch. 

January seemed to have returned and that the bourgeois had resumed their 

cloaks, Little Gavroche, who was always shivering gayly under his rags, 

was standing as though in ecstasy before a wig-maker's shop in the 

vicinity of the Orme-Saint-Gervais. He was adorned with a woman's 

woollen shawl, picked up no one knows where, and which he had converted 

admiration of a wax bride, in a low-necked dress, and crowned with 

often managed to breakfast off of such a roll. He called his species of 

work, for which he possessed special aptitude, "shaving barbers." 

it was Tuesday. Yes, it was Tuesday." 

occasion on which he had dined, three days before, for it was now 

Friday. 

a customer and casting a glance from time to time at the enemy, that 

pockets, but whose mind was evidently unsheathed. 

something or other, alms possibly, in a plaintive murmur which resembled 

his door, saying: "The idea of coming in and freezing everybody for 

nothing!" 

had risen; it had begun to rain. 

bawling about that. They must be greenies!" 

bantering, an accent of tender authority and gentle patronage:-- 

"Come along with me, young 'uns!" 

archbishop. They had stopped crying. 

Bastille. 

barber's shop. 

Englishman." 

wanting in respect towards the group. 

added:-- 

Barber, I'll go and fetch a locksmith, and I'll have a bell hung to your 

tail." 

he apostrophized a bearded portress who was worthy to meet Faust on the 

Brocken, and who had a broom in her hand. 

complaints." 

beggar-girl, thirteen or fourteen years old, and clad in so short a 

gown that her knees were visible, lying thoroughly chilled under a 

moment when nudity becomes indecent. 

this." 

the scarf became a shawl once more. 

silence. When a certain stage of distress has been reached in his 

thanks for good. 

Martin, for the latter retained one-half of his cloak. 

furious. The wicked skies punish good deeds. 

re-raining! Good Heavens, if it goes on like this, I shall stop my 

subscription." 

she coiled up under the shawl, "she's got a famous peel." 

round:-- 

morning." 

they are." 

nothing." 

off like that. Come now! we must have a snooze all the same." 

should have no dwelling place! 

prompt heedlessness of childhood, uttered this exclamation:-- 

blessed spray on Palm Sunday." 

"Tanflute!" retorted Gavroche. 

but which was triumphant, in reality. 

crying:-- 

taken down a black loaf, he thrust his finger far up his nose with 

apostrophe full in the baker's face:-- 

savage cries which the Yoways and the Botocudos hurl at each other from 

perfectly, and replied:-- 

standing treat." 

surveyed them in a compassionate way which shocked Gavroche. 

that for?" 

Gavroche said to the two children:-- 

his conversation, deserved some special encouragement and ought to be 

relieved from all hesitation to satisfy his appetite, he added, as be 

handed him the largest share:-- 

"Ram that into your muzzle." 

who, now that they had paid their money, looked angrily at them. 

his neck by a cord. 

that." 

Gavroche. 

linseed plaster, and blue specs like a doctor. You're putting on style, 

'pon my word!" 

hand. 

from the rain and from all eyes:-- 

escape, by turning to the left instead of to the right in "the police 

office." 

Gavroche expressed his admiration for this skill. 

dagger made its appearance. 

along your gendarme disguised as a bourgeois." 

bobbies?" 

always a good thing to have a pin about one." 

"Things." 

later, I feel in my pocket. There's nothing there." 

"Where's your house?" 

restrain an exclamation. 

every one speaks. 

that?] 

Gavroche's lodging. 

draughts, as there are under the bridges." 

legs. The bobbies haven't seen it." 

This gave him a different nose. 

ought to keep them on all the time." 

had become unrecognizable. 

near at this name, and stared at Montparnasse with dawning joy and 

admiration. 

me, I wouldn't refuse to work, but this isn't Shrove Tuesday." 

but immediately suppressed it, and shaking Montparnasse's hand:-- 

brats. Supposing that you should need me some night, you can come and 

hunt me up there. I lodge on the entresol. There is no porter. You will 

inquire for Monsieur Gavroche." 

dragged along by his brother who was dragged by Gavroche, turned his 

head back several times to watch "Porrichinelle" as he went. 

of the presence of the policeman, contained no other talisman than 

syllable, dig, uttered alone or artistically mingled with the words of 

besides, in Montparnasse's sentence, a literary beauty which was 

lost upon Gavroche, that is mon dogue, ma dague et ma digue, a slang 

greatly in vogue among clowns and the red-tails in the great century 

when Moliere wrote and Callot drew. 

the Place de la Bastille, near the basin of the canal, excavated in the 

to leave some trace, for it was the idea of a "member of the Institute, 

the General-in-chief of the army of Egypt." 

itself, a marvellous sketch, the grandiose skeleton of an idea of 

masonry, bearing on its back a tower which resembled a house, formerly 

painted green by some dauber, and now painted black by heaven, the wind, 

broad brow of the colossus, his trunk, his tusks, his tower, his 

the invisible spectre of the Bastille. 

falling into ruins; every season the plaster which detached itself 

from its sides formed hideous wounds upon it. "The aediles," as the 

expression ran in elegant dialect, had forgotten it ever since 1814. 

by a rotten palisade, soiled continually by drunken coachmen; cracks 

meandered athwart its belly, a lath projected from its tail, tall grass 

flourished between its legs; and, as the level of the place had been 

rising all around it for a space of thirty years, by that slow and 

of everything that is dark. As soon as twilight descended, the old 

elephant became transfigured; he assumed a tranquil and redoubtable 

majestic monument, stamped with a sort of magnificent and savage 

gravity, has disappeared, and left to reign in peace, a sort of gigantic 

have already begun to understand that, if there can be force in a 

boiler, there can be no force except in the brain; in other words, 

horse for the rider. 

bronze. 

the column of July, this monument of a revolution that miscarried, 

was still enveloped in 1832, in an immense shirt of woodwork, which we 

task of isolating the elephant. 

of a distant street lamp, that the gamin guided his two "brats." 

and mutilation of a public monument, a child who had been caught asleep 

in this very elephant of the Bastille. This fact noted, we proceed. 

effect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitely small, 

and said:-- 

and helped the young ones to clamber through the breach. The two 

children, somewhat frightened, followed Gavroche without uttering a 

word, and confided themselves to this little Providence in rags which 

remarkable vigor, and placed it against one of the elephant's forelegs. 

of the colossus could be distinguished. 

them:-- 

here! Come up, you!" he said to the elder, "I'll lend you a hand." 

huge beast, felt greatly inclined to cry, but he did not dare. 

Gavroche, in the meanwhile, encouraging him with exclamations like a 

fencing-master to his pupils, or a muleteer to his mules. 

your hand here!--Boldly!" 

vigorously by the arm, and pulled him towards him. 

fairly in the middle of the ladder, then he began to climb up behind 

him, shouting to the elder:-- 

thrust, stuffed into the hole, before he had time to recover himself, 

of giants! This huge monument, which had embodied an idea of the 

Emperor's, had become the box of a street urchin. The brat had been 

"What's the good of that?" It served to save from the cold, the frost, 

from slumber in the mud which produces fever, and from slumber in the 

society repulsed. It served to diminish public crime. It was a lair 

warts, with mould, and ulcers, tottering, worm-eaten, abandoned, 

for. This idea of Napoleon, disdained by men, had been taken back by 

God. That which had been merely illustrious, had become august. In order 

iron, gold, marble; the old collection of planks, beams and plaster 

had lodged a child there. 

The hole through which Gavroche had entered was a breach which was 

homeless children who could pass through it. 

home." 

aperture. 

match was not yet in existence; at that epoch the Fumade steel 

represented progress. 

of those bits of cord dipped in resin which are called cellar rats. The 

of the elephant confusedly visible. 

appeared enveloping them. Above, a long brown beam, whence started at 

changed places rapidly with an abrupt and frightened movement. 

filled up the cavity, so that it was possible to walk upon it as on a 

floor. 

him:-- 

two brats rendered some shock necessary. 

you scoffing at me? Are you turning up your noses? Do you want the 

the regiment of simpletons. Ah, come now, are you brats from the Pope's 

establishment?" 

A little roughness is good in cases of fear. It is reassuring. The two 

children drew close to Gavroche. 

gentle, and addressing the smaller:-- 

intonation, "it's outside that it is black. Outside it's raining, here 

it does not rain; outside it's cold, here there's not an atom of wind; 

ain't even the moon, here there's my candle, confound it!" 

Gavroche allowed them no more time for contemplation. 

end of the room. 

blanket, and an alcove with curtains. 

consisted of:-- 

which formed the floor, that is to say, the belly of the elephant, two 

by fastenings of iron wire, so that it enveloped all three holes. A row 

bed stood as in a cage, behind this net. The whole resembled an 

Esquimaux tent. 

in after them, pulled the stones together, and closed the opening 

hermetically again. 

rat in his hand. 

netting, "what's that for?" 

benefit of these young creatures, and he continued:-- 

over a wall, crawl through a window, and pass through a door. You can 

get as much as you want." 

blanket, and the little one murmured:-- 

the monkeys." 

thick and admirably made mat, he added:-- 

trouble them. I told them: 'It's for the elephant.'" 

So there now!" 

intrepid and ingenious being, a vagabond like themselves, isolated 

and all-powerful about him, who seemed supernatural to them, and whose 

physiognomy was composed of all the grimaces of an old mountebank, 

mingled with the most ingenuous and charming smiles. 

blanket round him as a mother might have done, and heightened the mat 

child. Then he turned to the elder:-- 

a saved angel. 

warm once more. 

fellow like you crying! It's idiotic; you looked like a calf." 

"Gracious," replied the child, "we have no lodging." 

I'll take care of you. You shall see what fun we'll have. In summer, 

we'll go to the Glaciere with Navet, one of my pals, we'll bathe in 

the Gare, we'll run stark naked in front of the rafts on the bridge at 

man-skeleton. And then I'll take you to the play. I'll take you to see 

Frederick Lemaitre. I have tickets, I know some of the actors, I even 

played in a piece once. There were a lot of us fellers, and we ran 

theatre. We'll go to see the savages. They ain't real, those savages 

They're called dishclouts. And then we'll go to see the guillotine work. 

to the realities of life. 

spend more than a sou a month on my lighting. When a body goes to bed, 

he must sleep. We haven't the time to read M. Paul de Kock's 

porte-cochere, and all the bobbies need to do is to see it." 

must look out and not burn the house down." 

'blaze the crib.'" 

said Gavroche. "It amuses me to hear the decanter run down the legs of 

its labor, it can't wet us, and that makes it kick up a row, old 

followed by a broad flash of lightning, so dazzling that a hint of it 

advantage of the clap of thunder to burst into a laugh. 

first-class thunder; all right. That's no slouch of a streak of 

it is at the Ambigu." 

out at full length, and exclaimed:-- 

babes, now, my young humans, you must shut your peepers. It's very bad 

not to sleep. It'll make you swallow the strainer, or, as they say, in 

hide! I'm going to put out the light. Are you ready?" 

my head." 

repeated, for the third time, his injunction in the hieratical tongue:-- 

to affect the netting under which the three children lay. 

accompanied by all sorts of little piercing cries. 

a very low tone, and with bated breath:-- 

it had been lighted; but as soon as the cavern, which was the same 

as their city, had returned to darkness, scenting what the good 

"They are mice." 

lifted up his voice once more. 

her." 

fellow began to tremble again. 

"The cat." 

cats, pursued:-- 

hold of my hand. Hold your tongue and shut your peepers!" 

Courage and strength have these mysterious ways of communicating 

voices had frightened off the rats; at the expiration of a few minutes, 

they came raging back, but in vain, the three little fellows were fast 

asleep and heard nothing more. 

and in their search for nocturnal vagabonds they passed in silence 

deed; and sheltered from heaven and from men the three poor sleeping 

children. 

the elephant could neither be seen nor heard by the sentinel. 

man turned from the Rue Saint-Antoine at a run, made the circuit of the 

that man, it might have been divined from the thorough manner in which 

he was soaked that he had passed the night in the rain. Arrived beneath 

the elephant, he uttered a peculiar cry, which did not belong to any 

idea:-- 

of the elephant:-- 

briskly near the man. It was Gavroche. The man was Montparnasse. 

meant, when he said:-- 

"alcove," pushing apart the netting a little, and carefully drawing it 

together again, then he had opened the trap, and descended. 

Montparnasse confined himself to the remark:-- 

"We need you. Come, lend us a hand." 

Montparnasse had emerged, winding rapidly through the long file of 

market-gardeners' carts which descend towards the markets at that hour. 

pedestrians. 

Thenardier, although Thenardier was in close confinement. Babet had 

has seen from Montparnasse's account to Gavroche. Montparnasse was to 

help them from outside. 

time, in the first place, to weave a rope, in the second, to mature a 

little light penetrates towards mid-day. The inconvenient point about 

allow the persons who should be at work to think. 

is to say, crime; a nail, that is to say, liberty. Brujon, of whom it 

polished, intelligent sprig, and a thief, who had a caressing glance, 

and an atrocious smile. His glance resulted from his will, and his 

smile from his nature. His first studies in his art had been directed 

called double pickings. 

from the Charlemagne and the Saint-Louis courts. Up above there were 

direction of liberty. 

the prisoners in their beds. In spite of this antiquity, the authorities 

committed the error of confining in the New Building the most 

prison parlance. 

top story which was called the Bel-Air (Fine Air). A large chimney-flue, 

from the groundfloor, traversed all four stories, cut the dormitories, 

where it figured as a flattened pillar, into two portions, and finally 

pierced the roof. 

their beds should rest against the chimney. 

in wooden boxes, at the extremity of which spreads out a little white 

dream of Jean Jacques. 

black, hideous, bare wall by which it was backed up. 

This wall, beside that rotunda, was Milton viewed through Berquin. 

windows of the Fine-Air. 

dormitories. 

one's right, facing the windows, at regular intervals, four square, 

tolerably vast cages, separated by narrow passages, built of masonry 

bars. 

bottle of wine, invented, so it is said, by Desrues, with which 

a narcotic is mixed, and which the band of the Endormeurs, or 

Sleep-compellers, rendered famous. 

There are, in many prisons, treacherous employees, half-jailers, 

half-thieves, who assist in escapes, who sell to the police an 

unfaithful service, and who turn a penny whenever they can. 

children, Brujon and Guelemer, who knew that Babet, who had escaped that 

bed, so that they were not heard. Showers mingled with thunder shook 

the doors on their hinges, and created in the prison a terrible and 

was adroit; Guelemer was vigorous. Before any sound had reached the 

dormitory, the wall had, been pierced, the chimney scaled, the iron 

redoubtable ruffians were on the roof. The wind and rain redoubled, the 

roof was slippery. 

astride of it, let themselves slip, one after the other, along the rope, 

the dark, nail in hand, and their project in their heads. 

prowling about the neighborhood. 

remained attached to the chimney on the roof. They had sustained no 

their hands. 

how, and was not asleep. 

the dormer-window which was opposite his cage. One halted at the window, 

under the charge of organizing a nocturnal ambush, with armed force, was 

fifty pounds. Every day, at four o'clock in the afternoon, a jailer, 

escorted by two dogs,--this was still in vogue at that time,--entered 

pounds, a jug of water, a bowl filled with rather thin bouillon, in 

which swam a few Mayagan beans, inspected his irons and tapped the bars. 

This man and his dogs made two visits during the night. 

it from the rats," as he said. As Thenardier was kept in sight, 

no objection had been made to this spike. Still, it was remembered 

afterwards, that one of the jailers had said: "It would be better to let 

him have only a wooden spike." 

the dogs paid his visit, and went off without noticing anything, except, 

conscript, he was found asleep on the floor, lying like a log near 

a hole in the ceiling of his cage, and, above it, another hole in the 

disappeared. 

New Building, but that he was still in great danger. 

chimney, but, as this broken fragment was much too short, he had not 

one almost immediately encounters a repulsive ruin. There stood on 

Force. 

which, a few years ago, was fastened only by a latch. 

a little after one o'clock in the morning. 

or understand. The lightning must, at the same time, have hindered 

slaters to get from roof to roof, from enclosure to enclosure, from 

compartment to compartment, to the buildings of the Charlemagne court, 

Fine-Air to the outer wall, and crawled flat, on his belly on the coping 

But the outer wall of La Force formed a crenellated and unequal line; 

even of the same height on the Hotel Lamoignon as on the Rue Pavee; 

changes precipices into ditches, iron bars into wattles of osier, a 

instinct, instinct into intelligence, and intelligence into genius, had 

Thenardier invented a third mode? No one has ever found out. 

of the lightning in the mysterious gleam of flight; the effort towards 

wall?" in the same way that one says of Corneille: "Where did he find 

the means of dying?" 

language, call the edge of the wall of the ruin, there he had stretched 

himself out at full length, and there his strength had failed him. A 

hour when the sentinel was relieved and when the latter would be found 

the street since he had been there. Nearly the whole of the descent of 

the market-gardeners from Montreuil, from Charonne, from Vincennes, 

and from Bercy to the markets was accomplished through the Rue 

Saint-Antoine. 

up in the rain, went and came along the roofs. At the same time, 

lighting up the edge of the sky in doleful wise. 

rains, with two gulfs to right and left, unable to stir, subject to the 

giddiness of a possible fall, and to the horror of a certain arrest, 

ideas to the other: "Dead if I fall, caught if I stay." In the midst of 

man was joined by a second, who walked with the same caution, then by 

lifted the latch of the gate in the fence, and all four entered 

the enclosure in which the shanty stood. They halted directly under 

must be added, that the rain kept this sentinel blocked in his box. 

eyes,--these men conversed in slang. 

devil's fire. And the bobbies will be along instanter. There's a soldier 

on guard yonder. We shall get nabbed here." 

belong, the first to the slang of the barriers, the second to the slang 

he knew Babet, who, among his other trades, had been an old-clothes 

broker at the Temple. 

its purity. Had it not been for the icicaille, Thenardier would not have 

recognized him, for he had entirely changed his voice. 

stand in need of us?" 

slangs and to speak none of them. 

him. Thenardier did not hesitate. It was Guelemer. 

work the business." 

language of Andre Chenier:-- 

by a bobby, perhaps even by a sheep who played it on him as his pal. 

Listen, Montparnasse, do you hear those shouts in the prison? You have 

seen all those lights. He's recaptured, there! He'll get off with twenty 

years. I ain't afraid, I ain't a coward, but there ain't anything more 

let's go drink a bottle of old wine together." 

off. Every minute I think a bobby has got me in his fist." 

top of some wall. But the night, which was really growing too fine,--for 

hours which had elapsed, the patrol which they had encountered, the 

his pocket the end of Brujon's rope, which he had detached from the 

fence. 

Brujon?" 

a brat." 

him, and set off at a run in the direction of the Bastille. 

opened once more, and Montparnasse appeared, breathless, and followed by 

Gavroche. The rain still rendered the street completely deserted. 

ruffians with a tranquil air. The water was dripping from his hair. 

that indescribable and disdainful noise with his lips which signifies:-- 

unprecedented one to him. 

whose worm-eaten planks bent beneath the urchin's weight, and handed 

him the rope which Brujon had knotted together during Montparnasse's 

moment when he was on the point of ascending, Thenardier, who saw life 

and safety approaching, bent over the edge of the wall; the first light 

Gavroche recognized him. 

window. 

strange and ferocious mind awoke once more, and stood erect and free, 

ready to march onward. 

remark, which signifies both to kill, to assassinate, and to plunder. To 

eat, true sense: to devour. 

"Let's get well into a corner," said Brujon. "Let's settle it in three 

a garden, and lone women." 

made there." 

then he put on his shoes again, and said:-- 

scrape. I'm off. I must go and get my brats out of bed." 

The five men emerged, one after another, from the enclosure. 

Babet took Thenardier aside. 

CHAPTER I--ORIGIN 

la pegrenne, for which read hunger. 

it is theft in its two kinds; people and language. 

thief who talked argot, there arose amazement and clamor.--"What! How! 

Argot! Why, argot is horrible! It is the language of prisons, galleys, 

convicts, of everything that is most abominable in society!" etc., etc. 

We have never understood this sort of objections. 

makes one shudder!" 

matter depending on the sounding-line, and not on the leadsman. 

where terra firma comes to an end and where mud begins, to rummage in 

those vague, murky waves, to follow up, to seize and to fling, still 

word of which seems an unclean ring from a monster of the mire and the 

shadows. Nothing is more lugubrious than the contemplation thus in 

slang. It seems, in fact, to be a sort of horrible beast made for the 

a frightful, living, and bristling thicket which quivers, rustles, 

wavers, returns to shadow, threatens and glares. One word resembles a 

seems to move like the claw of a crab. All this is alive with 

the hideous vitality of things which have been organized out of 

disorganization. 

thinker who should turn aside from slang would resemble a surgeon 

a philologist refusing to examine a fact in language, a philosopher 

to those who are ignorant of the case, that argot is both a literary 

the language of wretchedness. 

it may be added, all the accidents of the social hierarchy and all 

fruits of that estate during the hereditary seizure of the real estate 

"Phenomenal triplicity," the huntsman who says: "Voileci allais, 

cavalry-man who says: "My turkey-cock," the fencing-master who says: 

Strictly speaking, if one absolutely insists on the point, all the 

different fashions of saying the right and the left, the sailor's port 

and a very pretty woman of the Restoration: "You will find in this 

gossip a fultitude of reasons why I should libertize."[40] Diplomatic 

Modena, speaks slang. The physicians of the Middle Ages who, for 

carrot, radish, and turnip, said Opoponach, perfroschinum, 

reptitalmus, dracatholicum, angelorum, postmegorum, talked slang. The 

burnt,"--this honest manufacturer talks slang. A certain school of 

criticism twenty years ago, which used to say: "Half of the works of 

a horse, "a courser," the white or tricolored cockade, "the rose of 

slang. The tongue which is employed on board ship, that wonderful 

language of the sea, which is so complete and so picturesque, which was 

spoken by Jean Bart, Duquesne, Suffren, and Duperre, which mingles with 

shock of the boarding-irons, the roll of the sea, the wind, the gale, 

the cannon, is wholly a heroic and dazzling slang, which is to the 

fierce slang of the thieves what the lion is to the jackal. 

No doubt. But say what we will, this manner of understanding the word 

we reserve to the word its ancient and precise, circumscribed and 

coupled thus, the slang immemorial which was a kingdom, is nothing 

misery which revolts and makes up its mind to enter into conflict 

conflict, where, now cunning, now violent, unhealthy and ferocious 

through vice, and with club-blows through crime. To meet the needs of 

slang. 

it but a fragment of some language which man has spoken and which would, 

otherwise, be lost, that is to say, one of the elements, good or bad, of 

the records of social observation; is to serve civilization itself. This 

Levantine, quite right! Even dialect, let that pass! They are tongues 

nation or a province has spoken is worthy of interest, the language 

study. 

human misery. 

The latter has the surface of civilization, the conflicts of crowns, the 

the other historian has the interior, the depths, the people who toil, 

between man and man, obscure ferocities, prejudices, plotted 

die-of-hunger, the counter-blows of the law, the secret evolution of 

the unhappy, and the infamous, all the forms which roam through the 

blow, those who weep and those who curse, those who fast and those 

historians of hearts and souls duties at all inferior to the historians 

of external facts? Does any one think that Alighieri has any fewer 

sombre? Do we really know the mountain well when we are not acquainted 

with the cavern? 

of historians which does not exist in our mind. No one is a good 

historian of the patent, visible, striking, and public life of peoples, 

if he is not, at the same time, in a certain measure, the historian 

of events, and this is true reciprocally. They constitute two different 

orders of facts which correspond to each other, which are always 

interlaced, and which often bring forth results. All the lineaments 

produce ebullitions on the surface. True history being a mixture of all 

things, the true historian mingles in everything. 

focus. Facts form one of these, and ideas the other. 

bad action to perform, disguises itself. There it clothes itself in 

word-masks, in metaphor-rags. In this guise it becomes horrible. 

evil. It no longer walks, it hobbles; it limps on the crutch of the 

vagrancy; every sort of spectre, its dressers, have painted its face, it 

crawls and rears, the double gait of the reptile. Henceforth, it is apt 

at all roles, it is made suspicious by the counterfeiter, covered with 

murderer applies its rouge. 

one overhears the dialogues of those who are on the outside. 

One distinguishes questions and replies. One perceives, without 

understanding it, a hideous murmur, sounding almost like human accents, 

The words are misshapen and stamped with an indescribable and fantastic 

bestiality. One thinks one hears hydras talking. 

the gloom with mystery. It is black in misfortune, it is blacker still 

in crime; these two blacknesses amalgamated, compose slang. Obscurity 

toad-like tongue which goes and comes, leaps, crawls, slobbers, and 

and night, of hunger, of vice, of falsehood, of injustice, of nudity, of 

suffocation, and of winter, the high noonday of the miserable. 

you very sure that we have done nothing before we were born? The earth 

recaptured offender against divine justice? Look closely at life. It is 

so made, that everywhere we feel the sense of punishment. 

day has its own great grief or its little care. Yesterday you were 

trembling for a health that is dear to you, to-day you fear for your 

the diatribe of a slanderer, the day after that, the misfortune of some 

there are no fortunate. 

the number of the shady, to augment the number of the luminous,--that 

means to light the fire; every syllable spelled out sparkles. 

without ceasing to fly,--therein lies the marvel of genius. 

The day is born in tears. The luminous weep, if only over those in 

darkness. 

CHAPTER II--ROOTS 

Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these substantives which are 

feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter. 

public admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry. It is a 

language. Yes, by the deformity of certain terms, we recognize the 

metonymies, we feel that Villon spoke it. 

          But where are the snows of years gone by? 

signified the past year, and by extension, formerly. Thirty-five years 

be read in one of the cells at Bicetre, this maxim engraved with a 

that king, anointment meant the galleys. 

a gallop, is attributed to Villon, and it is worthy of him. This word, 

which strikes fire with all four of its feet, sums up in a masterly 

onomatopoeia the whole of La Fontaine's admirable verse:-- 

          Six stout horses drew a coach. 

From a purely literary point of view, few studies would prove more 

within a language, a sort of sickly excrescence, an unhealthy graft 

old Gallic trunk, and whose sinister foliage crawls all over one side of 

alluvial deposit. According as one digs a longer or shorter distance 

English and German, the Romance language in its three varieties, French, 

Italian, and Romance Romance, Latin, and finally Basque and Celtic. A 

profound and unique formation. A subterranean edifice erected in common 

life and have vanished into eternity, linger there almost entirely 

visible still beneath the form of some monstrous word. 

comes from gato; acite, oil, which comes from aceyte. Do you want 

comes from bishop; raille, spy, which comes from rascal, rascalion; 

pilche, a case, which comes from pilcher, a sheath. Do you want German? 

later le meg, that is to say, God. Would you like Basque? Here is 

gahisto, the devil, which comes from gaiztoa, evil; sorgabon, good 

night, which comes from gabon, good evening. Do you want Celtic? Here is 

a woman (in a bad sense), which comes from meinec, full of stones; 

blacksmith; guedouze, death, which comes from guenn-du, black-white. 

Finally, would you like history? Slang calls crowns les malteses, a 

souvenir of the coin in circulation on the galleys of Malta. 

mind of man itself. 

mystery of tongues. To paint with words, which contains figures 

one knows not how or why, is the primitive foundation of all human 

languages, what may be called their granite. 

sometimes hideous words, which at times possess a singular power of 

expression and which live. The executioner, le taule; the forest, 

le sabri; fear, flight, taf; the lackey, le larbin; the mineral, 

stranger than these words which both mask and reveal. Some, le rabouin, 

you the effect of a cyclopean grimace. 

desirous of saying all yet concealing all is that it is rich in figures. 

Metaphor is an enigma, wherein the thief who is plotting a stroke, 

the neck; tortiller (to wriggle), to eat; etre gerbe, to be tried; a 

rat, a bread thief; il lansquine, it rains, a striking, ancient figure 

lines of rain, with the dense and slanting pikes of the lancers, and 

the metaphorical sense. The devil ceases to be le rabouin, and becomes 

le boulanger (the baker), who puts the bread into the oven. This is 

metaphorical character resemble phantasmagories. Les sorgueuers vont 

solliciter des gails a la lune--the prowlers are going to steal horses 

knows not what one sees. 

it in accordance with its fancy, it dips into it hap-hazard, and it 

often confines itself, when occasion arises, to alter it in a gross and 

summary fashion. Occasionally, with the ordinary words thus deformed and 

roulotte de Pantin trime dans le sabri, the dog is barking, I suspect 

sinve, la dabuge est merloussiere, la fee est bative, the bourgeois is 

to throw listeners off the track, slang confines itself to adding to 

trouvaille bonorgue ce gigotmuche? Do you think that leg of mutton 

whether the sum offered for his escape suited him. 

itself. Besides this, as it is always seeking concealment, as soon as 

it feels that it is understood, it changes its form. Contrary to what 

happens with every other vegetation, every ray of light which falls 

decomposition and recomposition; an obscure and rapid work which never 

centuries. Thus le larton (bread) becomes le lartif; le gail (horse) 

becomes le gaye; la fertanche (straw) becomes la fertille; le momignard 

(brat), le momacque; les fiques (duds), frusques; la chique (the 

church), l'egrugeoir; le colabre (neck), le colas. The devil is at 

first, gahisto, then le rabouin, then the baker; the priest is a 

ratichon, then the boar (le sanglier); the dagger is le vingt-deux 

(twenty-two), then le surin, then le lingre; the police are railles, 

then roussins, then rousses, then marchands de lacets (dealers in 

then Charlot, l'atigeur, then le becquillard. In the seventeenth 

century, to fight was "to give each other snuff"; in the nineteenth 

phrases between these two extremes. Cartouche's talk would have been 

engaged in flight like the men who utter them. 

headquarters where it maintains its sway. The Temple preserved the slang 

slang of Thunes. There one could hear the termination in anche of 

movement remains its law, nevertheless. 

to feign; one beats a malady; ruse is their strength. 

darkness. The night is called la sorgue; man, l'orgue. Man is a 

derivative of the night. 

their liberty as one would speak of his health. A man under arrest is a 

sick man; one who is condemned is a dead man. 

he is buried, is a sort of glacial chastity, and he calls the dungeon 

the castus. In that funereal place, life outside always presents itself 

think, perhaps, that his thought is that it is with the feet that one 

when he has succeeded in severing his fetters, his first idea is that 

now he can dance, and he calls the saw the bastringue (public-house 

death; he calls the head which counsels him in crime la sorbonne, 

and the head which expiates it la tronche.--When a man has no longer 

blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations, he is ripe for crime; 

he is like a well-whetted knife; he has two cutting edges, his 

evolved from that word. 

galleys, those refrains called in the special vocabulary lirlonfa, have 

had their birth? 

cellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine. It had neither 

there, air could not. This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone, and 

a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavation from side 

feet long, and at the end of these chains there were rings for the 

neck. In this vault, men who had been condemned to the galleys were 

darkness and waiting for him. 

caught the unhappy wretches by the throat. They were rivetted and 

or their vault overhead, mud even to mid-leg, filth flowing to their 

eat, they pushed the bread, which was flung to them in the mud, along 

their leg with their heel until it reached their hand. 

Men were put there for stealing a hare from the king. In this 

sepulchre-hell, what did they do? What man can do in a sepulchre, they 

kept me up." Uselessness of poetry. What is the good of rhyme? 

It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Chatelet of Paris that comes 

the melancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley: "Timaloumisaine, 

timaloumison." The majority of these: 

       Du petit dardant.               Of the little archer (Cupid). 

of man, love. 

tear from each member of this fierce community something of his own 

called: "to eat the bit." As though the informer drew to himself a 

one's flesh. 

replies: "It is to see thirty-six candles." 

that incalculable, trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the 

to write: "Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred camouflets." 

intersection of regular society with society which is accursed. 

whoever passes by; le pantre. (Pan, everybody.) 

can be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality, 

sufficient to create consternation. 

Is it her destiny there to await forever the mind, the liberator, the 

the dawn who shall descend from the azure between two wings, the radiant 

the lance of light of the ideal? Is she condemned to hear the fearful 

head, that maw streaked with foam, and that writhing undulation of 

of light, without hope, given over to that terrible approach, vaguely 

amid the shadows! 

years ago, like the slang of to-day, is permeated with that sombre, 

vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packs of 

a sort of fantastic personification of the forest. At the foot of this 

emerged the head of a dog. Nothing can be more melancholy than these 

reprisals in painting, by a pack of cards, in the presence of stakes 

counterfeiters. The diverse forms assumed by thought in the realm 

evoking tears. The pegre is always the poor pegre, and he is always 

the hare in hiding, the fugitive mouse, the flying bird. He hardly 

himself small before the low, and frail in the presence of society; 

compassion; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt. 

refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a phosphorescent 

gleam, and which seems to have been flung into the forest by a 

will-o'-the-wisp playing the fife:-- 

                    Mirliton ribonribette 

                    Surlababi mirlababo 

                    Mirliton ribonribo. 

man's throat. 

meg and the grand dab. Given Louis XV. they call the King of France "le 

Marquis de Pantin." And behold, they are almost gay. A sort of gleam 

proceeds from these miserable wretches, as though their consciences were 

heedless audacity of mind. A sign that they are losing the sense of 

arise. 

four sacred legions. Humanity's immense advance towards the light is due 

to them. They are the four vanguards of the human race, marching towards 

in the virgin forest. While the executioner was burning the great 

books of the liberators of the century on the grand staircase of the 

eagerly read by the unfortunate. Some of these publications, odd to 

Library. These facts, significant but unknown, were imperceptible on the 

It is obscure because it is underhand. Of all these writers, the one 

who probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was 

Restif de La Bretonne. 

Germany than anywhere else. In Germany, during a given period, summed up 

honest masses, unknown even to the imprudent chemists who had prepared 

of this sort presents itself, the case is grave. Suffering engenders 

which is the same thing as shutting one's eyes, the hatred of the 

unfortunate classes lights its torch at some aggrieved or ill-made 

spirit which dreams in a corner, and sets itself to the scrutiny of 

society. The scrutiny of hatred is a terrible thing. 

the conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor, but the revolt of 

discomfort against comfort. Then everything crumbles. 

short. 

door of ill and opened the door of good. 

rendered the century healthy, crowned the populace. 

second soul, the right. 

Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie. 

terrible swarms within made irruptions, when one heard beneath his feet 

soil cracked open, where the roofs of caverns yawned, and where one 

suddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the earth. 

developed, develops the sentiment of duty. The law of all is 

Robespierre's admirable definition. Since '89, the whole people has 

within him the honesty of France; the dignity of the citizen is an 

is such, that on a day of deliverance, a 14th of July, a 10th of August, 

diamonds, surmounted by the carbuncle of royalty, by the Regent diamond, 

old fear has produced its last effects in that quarter; and henceforth 

red spectre is broken. Every one knows it now. The scare-crow scares 

alight upon it, the bourgeois laugh at it. 

will no longer rush to its head. But let society take heed to the manner 

in which it breathes. Apoplexy is no longer to be feared, but phthisis 

is there. Social phthisis is called misery. 

lightning. 

that this is the first of fraternal obligations, and selfish hearts must 

understand that the first of political necessities consists in thinking 

first of all of the disinherited and sorrowing throngs, in solacing, 

airing, enlightening, loving them, in enlarging their horizon to a 

offering them the example of labor, never the example of idleness, 

universal aim, in setting a limit to poverty without setting a limit 

to wealth, in creating vast fields of public and popular activity, in 

and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence, in augmenting 

this: labor cannot be a law without being a right. 

that. 

and wisdom grows thin. Let us enter equal complaint against stomachs and 

a body perishing for lack of bread, it is a soul which is dying from 

hunger for the light. 

shall be amazed. As the human race mounts upward, the deep layers emerge 

naturally from the zone of distress. The obliteration of misery will be 

accomplished by a simple elevation of level. 

This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising. Behold, it is walking and 

side. Let us sell the field on which Hannibal is encamped. 

a return of a river on its course. 

they say "no" to progress, it is not the future but themselves that 

To-morrow, and that is to die. 

never,--this is what we desire. 

will be solved. 

divinely fatal phenomenon. 

within a given time to a logical state, that is to say, to a state of 

of miracles; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it than 

by these contradictions in the attitude of problems, which seem 

impossibilities to the vulgar herd. It is no less skilful at causing a 

solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas, than a lesson 

wrath by the study of antagonisms. It examines, it scrutinizes, it 

analyzes; then it puts together once more, it proceeds by means of 

reduction, discarding all hatred. 

nations and empires; manners, customs, laws, religions,--and some fine 

away. The civilizations of India, of Chaldea, of Persia, of Syria, of 

Egypt, have disappeared one after the other. Why? We know not. What are 

Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations. They sprung a leak, then they 

those colossal waves, at the shipwreck of those immense vessels, 

Babylon, Nineveh, Tarsus, Thebes, Rome, beneath the fearful gusts which 

civilizations, we do not know the infirmities of our own. Everywhere 

lay bare its defects. Where it is ill, we probe; and the sickness once 

Our civilization, the work of twenty centuries, is its law and its 

prodigy; it is worth the trouble of saving. It will be saved. It is 

civilization. 

persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages, an 

these wounds, craters, eruptions, sulphur pits, here and there, nor 

not kill man. 

hours of weakness. 

this question, when we behold so much terrible darkness. Melancholy 

face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched. On the part of 

the selfish, the prejudices, shadows of costly education, appetite 

a fear of suffering which, in some, goes as far as an aversion for the 

suffering, an implacable satisfaction, the I so swollen that it bars the 

its desires, hearts full of mist, sadness, need, fatality, impure and 

simple ignorance. 

which we distinguish there one of those which vanish? The ideal 

is frightful to behold, thus lost in the depths, small, isolated, 

maw of the clouds. 

CHAPTER I--FULL LIGHT 

through the gate, the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had 

sent her, had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet, 

than for Romeo; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall, Marius had only 

to use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which 

vacillated in its rusty recess, after the fashion of old people's teeth. 

Marius was slender and readily passed through. 

the garden except at night, he ran no risk of being seen. 

two souls, Marius was there every evening. If, at that period of 

her existence, Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least 

generous natures which yield themselves, and Cosette was one of them. 

by love. Love is life, if it is not death. Cradle; also coffin. The same 

God has made, the human heart is the one which sheds the most light, 

alas! and the most darkness. 

save. 

there, in every night, in that poor, neglected garden, beneath that 

composed of all chastity, all innocence, overflowing with all the 

meeting on the Jungfrau. 

beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy, Marius, the pure and seraphic 

Marius, would rather have gone to a woman of the town than have raised 

Cosette's robe to the height of her ankle. Once, in the moonlight, 

turned away his eyes. 

other. 

to trembling. 

trouble and to touch all nature round about. Magic power which we 

conversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smoke 

lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and which accompanies 

say: "What! is that all!" eh! yes, childish prattle, repetitions, 

laughter at nothing, nonsense, everything that is deepest and most 

saying and hearing! 

absurdities, these paltry remarks, is an imbecile and a malicious 

fellow. Cosette said to Marius:-- 

each other thou.] 

name--Euphrasie?" 

Cosette." 

and exclaimed:-- 

you defiance with this word: I love you!" 

him:-- 

be well, because, in the first place, if you were not well, I should be 

very unhappy. What should I do then?" 

and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright. 

accommodating bar of the chief-justice's gate, to sit elbow to elbow 

on that bench, to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of the 

on-coming night, to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the 

ample fall of Cosette's gown, to caress her thumb-nail, to call her 

thou, to smell of the same flower, one after the other, forever, 

of the clouds of heaven. 

To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of 

is something like a kiss through a veil. Voluptuousness mingles there 

with its sweet tiny point, while it hides itself. The heart draws back 

they fly up yonder, in the direction of the angels, must hear such 

the bower, a prelude to what will be said in the chamber; a lyrical 

effusion, strophe and sonnet intermingled, pleasing hyperboles of 

exhaling a celestial perfume, an ineffable twitter of heart to heart. 

your shoe peeps from beneath, upsets me. And then, what an enchanted 

gleam when you open your thought even but a little! You talk 

astonishingly good sense. It seems to me at times that you are a 

this morning." 

always turn on their peg. 

auroral light in the form of a woman. 

talked with exquisite penetration and uttered, at times, all sorts of 

a mistake about anything, and she saw things justly. The woman feels and 

speaks with the tender instinct of the heart, which is infallible. 

woman; in them lies the whole of heaven. 

melancholy, seemed to ask nothing better than to weep. The most 

unbearable. 

air of two boys. 

they laugh, they make little grimaces with the tips of their lips, they 

prevent eternity. 

murmur, they whisper, and in the meantime, immense librations of the 

planets fill the infinite universe. 

orphan, that his name was Marius Pontmercy, that he was a lawyer, that 

he lived by writing things for publishers, that his father had been a 

bad terms with his grandfather who was rich. He had also hinted at being 

a baron, but this had produced no effect on Cosette. She did not 

know the meaning of the word. Marius was Marius. On her side, she 

had confided to him that she had been brought up at the Petit-Picpus 

everything though he denied her nothing. 

had been in the habit of seeing Cosette, the past, even the most recent 

past, had become so confused and distant to him, that what Cosette told 

him satisfied him completely. It did not even occur to him to tell her 

about the nocturnal adventure in the hovel, about Thenardier, about the 

burn, and about the strange attitude and singular flight of her father. 

even know that there had been a morning, what he had done, where he had 

lovers. 

afterwards? 

forgetfulness of all the rest. Then ask logic of passion if you will. 

and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette. The universe 

around them had fallen into a hole. They lived in a golden minute. There 

that Cosette had a father. His brain was dazzled and obliterated. Of 

what did these lovers talk then? We have seen, of the flowers, and 

The everything of lovers is nothing. But the father, the realities, that 

lair, the ruffians, that adventure, to what purpose? And was he very 

adored each other, and beyond that there was nothing. Nothing else 

any? Have we trembled? Have we suffered? We no longer know. A rosy cloud 

hangs over it. 

improbability which is in nature; neither at the nadir nor at the 

humanity to disappear in the blue, suspended like atoms which are 

floating, soaring; at times so light that they could take their flight 

out into the infinite; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity. 

real overwhelmed by the ideal. 

man's part to wish that love should lead to something. 

sufficed for Jean Valjean's happiness. The thoughts which Cosette 

blindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the 

glass door on the veranda. Of course, no one ever met Marius in the 

daytime. Jean Valjean never even dreamed any longer that Marius was in 

transport, had pushed Cosette against the wall. 

be seen nor heard from the street, and there they sat, frequently 

contenting themselves, by way of conversation, with pressing each 

trees. At such times, a thunderbolt might have fallen thirty paces from 

the one absorbed and sunk in the revery of the other. 

is a recollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove. 

gate in such a manner that no displacement was visible. 

lodgings. Courfeyrac said to Bahorel:-- 

morning." 

Marius:-- 

habit of concealed passions; it made him impatient, and now and then he 

called upon Marius to come back to reality. 

the moon, the realm of dreams, the province of illusions, capital, 

soap-bubble. Come, be a good boy, what's her name?" 

nails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffable 

name, Cosette, was composed. True love is as luminous as the dawn and as 

taciturnity was of the beaming order. 

the libretto counts for almost nothing. 

de Babylone; 

in the grass; 

Boulevard des Invalides. He habitually walked with drooping head. As he 

one quite close to him say:-- 

man to a state of perfection; it simply leads him, as we have noted, to 

a state of oblivion. In this situation, man forgets to be bad, but 

he also forgets to be good. Gratitude, duty, matters essential and 

important to be remembered, vanish. At any other time, Marius would have 

even clearly put it to himself that this Eponine was named Eponine 

you to Eponine. 

resumed:-- 

went. 

boulevard, changed his course and went to the Rue Plumet through the Rue 

Monsieur. 

to address him. 

displace the bar and slip into the garden. 

readily recognized the one which Marius had moved. 

which Eponine was entirely concealed. 

breathing, a prey to her thoughts. 

passed through the Rue Plumet, an old, belated bourgeois who was making 

heard a dull and threatening voice saying:-- 

the black niche, and was greatly alarmed. He redoubled his pace. 

six men, who were marching separately and at some distance from each 

entered the Rue Plumet. 

others; a second later, all six were reunited. 

eat." 

ventriloquist. 

under the saw, and it won't be hard to cut." 

succession, and shaking them cautiously. 

fell upon his arm; he felt himself vigorously thrust aside by a push 

loudly:-- 

bristled up in hideous wise; nothing is so formidable to behold as 

ferocious beasts who are uneasy; their terrified air evokes terror. 

Claquesous, Guelemer, Babet, Brujon, and Montparnasse had noiselessly 

sinister slowness peculiar to these men of the night. 

Some indescribable but hideous tools were visible in their hands. 

fanchons. 

speak low; "what have you come here to hinder our work for?" 

long time since I've seen you! So you're out?" 

grumbled:-- 

away with you." 

me about mamma." 

time to kiss you." 

     "Nous n' sommes pas le jour de l'an, 

                              "This isn't New Year's day 

     A becoter papa, maman." 

                               To peck at pa and ma." 

Monsieur Claquesous. Don't you know me, Monsieur Guelemer? How goes it, 

Montparnasse?" 

evening, sheer off! leave us alone!" 

this matter." 

had become impossible to her since she had known Marius. 

there is nothing in this house." 

Toussaint, who had stayed up to spread out some linen to dry. 

isn't a sou." 

down and put the cellar at the top and the attic below, we'll tell 

you what there is inside, and whether it's francs or sous or 

half-farthings." 

And he pushed her aside with the intention of entering. 

are a good fellow, don't enter." 

said:-- 

and said in a firm, low voice:-- 

the first place, if you enter this garden, if you lay a hand on this 

gate, I'll scream, I'll beat on the door, I'll rouse everybody, I'll 

have the whole six of you seized, I'll call the police." 

ventriloquist. 

a dog, since I'm the daughter of a wolf. There are six of you, what 

me. I tell you that you shan't enter this house, because it doesn't suit 

me. If you approach, I'll bark. I told you, I'm the dog, and I don't 

care a straw for you. Go your way, you bore me! Go where you please, but 

it's all the same to me, come on!" 

laughing:-- 

cold this winter. Aren't they ridiculous, these ninnies of men, to think 

they can scare a girl! What! Scare? Oh, yes, much! Because you have 

finical poppets of mistresses who hide under the bed when you put on a 

big voice, forsooth! I ain't afraid of anything, that I ain't!" 

the ruffians in turn:-- 

the midst of rotten old corks and drowned dogs?" 

from her weak and narrow chest like the death-rattle. 

There are six of you; I represent the whole world." 

same. Have you no longer any kind feeling for your father?" 

hummed:-- 

        Ma jambe bien faite           My leg well formed, 

        Et le temps perdu."           And time wasted." 

She had set her elbow on her knee and her chin in her hand, and she 

a view of her thin shoulder-blades. The neighboring street lantern 

surprising could be seen. 

furious and humiliated shrugs. 

one." 

job. I'll stay here with the girl, and if she fails us--" 

the lantern. 

pleased. 

"put up the job," had not as yet spoken. He seemed thoughtful. He had 

verses and songs, which gave him great authority. 

various ways, and finally concluded to speak:-- 

quit." 

enigmatical dialogue in a low tone:-- 

boulevard. 

where they appeared to melt away. 

the heaths, the branches rudely interlaced, the tall grass, exist in 

a sombre manner; the savage swarming there catches glimpses of sudden 

living beings are ignorant there meet face to face in the night. Nature, 

bristling and wild, takes alarm at certain approaches in which she 

fear what they cannot grasp. Blood-drinking bestiality, voracious 

appetites, hunger in search of prey, the armed instincts of nails 

a dead and terrible life. These brutalities, which are only matter, 

condensed into an unknown being. A black figure barring the way stops 

sinister; wolves recoil when they encounter a ghoul. 

gate, and while the six ruffians were yielding to a girl, Marius was by 

Cosette's side. 

trees more trembling, the odor of the grass more penetrating; never had 

the birds fallen asleep among the leaves with a sweeter noise; never had 

all the harmonies of universal serenity responded more thoroughly to the 

inward music of love; never had Marius been more captivated, more happy, 

more ecstatic. 

red. 

tremblingly took his place beside her, she had continued:-- 

has business, and we may go away from here." 

is at the beginning of it, to go away means to die. 

the case of first love, the soul is taken long before the body; later 

sweetness of her skin when he touched her hand, the charming mark which 

she had on her neck, all her thoughts. Therefore, he possessed all 

Cosette's dreams. 

himself that there was not one of those short hairs which did not belong 

knot of ribbon, her gloves, her sleeves, her shoes, her cuffs, as sacred 

himself, in confused and suppressed stammerings of voluptuousness which 

not his. Beside Cosette he felt himself beside his own property, his 

so intermingled their souls, that it would have been impossible to tell 

"No, it is mine." "I assure you that you are mistaken. This is my 

property." "What you are taking as your own is myself."--Marius was 

to possess Cosette, this, to him, was not to be distinguished from 

breathing. It was in the midst of this faith, of this intoxication, of 

harshly. 

cold. She said to him in her turn: "What is the matter?" 

hold myself in readiness, that he would give me his linen to put in a 

go to England." 

Tiberius, or of Henry VIII., could have equalled this in atrocity, 

England because he had business there. 

"And when shall you return?" 

and replied in a sort of bewilderment:-- 

She turned so pale that her face shone white through the gloom. She 

stammered:-- 

"Nothing." 

woman whom one loves possesses a visible radiance, even at night. 

wherever I am." 

much, more than ten louis to Courfeyrac, one of my friends with whom you 

I have a coat which lacks buttons in front, my shirt is all ragged, my 

elbows are torn, my boots let in the water; for the last six weeks I 

pay for a passport!" 

stood motionless, on the point of falling, like the statue of despair. 

noise, which was sweet yet sad. 

meditated. 

took the tip of her foot which peeped out from beneath her robe, and 

kissed it. 

charming than amid tears:-- 

"Do you love me?" said she. 

word of honor terrifies me. I feel that my father is by my side. Well, I 

her cease weeping. 

one except in the evening." 

to be on a level with him, and tried to read his hope in his eyes. 

he wrote on the plaster of the wall:-- 

tell me, so that I may pass a pleasant night." 

Wait; expect me the day after to-morrow." 

and come! How happy men are! I shall remain entirely alone! Oh! How sad 

me." 

music from Euryanthe that you love, and that you came one evening to 

early. I shall expect you at dusk, at nine o'clock precisely, I warn 

nine, do you understand, I shall be in the garden." 

the stars. 

when Eponine was following the ruffians to the boulevard. 

senseless and impossible. He had come to a desperate decision. 

birthday. He still lived with Mademoiselle Gillenormand in the Rue des 

Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the old house which he owned. He was, as 

the reader will remember, one of those antique old men who await death 

perfectly erect, whom age bears down without bending, and whom even 

sorrow cannot curve. 

sinking." He no longer boxed the maids' ears; he no longer thumped 

the landing-place so vigorously with his cane when Basque was slow in 

opening the door. The Revolution of July had exasperated him for the 

space of barely six months. He had viewed, almost tranquilly, that 

coupling of words, in the Moniteur: M. Humblot-Conte, peer of France. 

The fact is, that the old man was deeply dejected. He did not bend, he 

did not yield; this was no more a characteristic of his physical than 

of his moral nature, but he felt himself giving way internally. For four 

years he had been waiting for Marius, with his foot firmly planted, that 

is the exact word, in the conviction that that good-for-nothing young 

scamp would ring at his door some day or other; now he had reached 

the point, where, at certain gloomy hours, he said to himself, that 

if Marius made him wait much longer--It was not death that was 

insupportable to him; it was the idea that perhaps he should never see 

Marius again. The idea of never seeing Marius again had never entered 

the son. 

would die rather," he said to himself. He did not consider himself 

as the least to blame; but he thought of Marius only with profound 

about to vanish in the dark. 

would have rendered him furious and ashamed, had never loved a mistress 

as he loved Marius. 

it should be the first thing on which his eyes fell on waking, an 

old portrait of his other daughter, who was dead, Madame Pontmercy, 

a portrait which had been taken when she was eighteen. He gazed 

upon it:-- 

"I think the likeness is strong." 

table, and exclaimed in his most irritated and vibrating tone:-- 

scoundrel, a vain little ingrate, a heartless, soulless, haughty, and 

wicked man!" 

And he turned away so that his daughter might not see the tear that 

stood in his eye. 

to his daughter point-blank:-- 

to me." 

diagnosis: "My father never cared very much for my sister after her 

folly. It is clear that he detests Marius." 

success. M. Gillenormand had not accepted the quid pro quo. A vacancy 

side, though he scented the inheritance, was disgusted at the task 

of pleasing. The goodman bored the lancer; and the lancer shocked the 

goodman. Lieutenant Theodule was gay, no doubt, but a chatter-box, 

love affairs that he had in the vicinity of the barracks in the Rue 

de Babylone. And then, Lieutenant Gillenormand sometimes came in his 

uniform, with the tricolored cockade. This rendered him downright 

slashers to fellows that drag their swords. The clash of blades in 

battle is less dismal, after all, than the clank of the scabbard on 

the pavement. And then, throwing out your chest like a bully and 

lacing yourself like a girl, with stays under your cuirass, is doubly 

ridiculous. When one is a veritable man, one holds equally aloof 

from swagger and from affected airs. He is neither a blusterer nor a 

finnicky-hearted man. Keep your Theodule for yourself." 

grandnephew, nevertheless,"--it turned out that M. Gillenormand, who 

was a grandfather to the very finger-tips, was not in the least a 

grand-uncle. 

had only served to make him regret Marius all the more. 

his chamber, amid its pastoral scenes, with his feet propped on the 

his hand a book which he was not reading. He was dressed, according 

wadded cloak, which concealed his attire. At home, he never wore a 

age," said he. 

as usual, bitterness predominated. His tenderness once soured always 

where a man tries to make up his mind and to accept that which rends his 

revolted; his aged paternity would not consent to this. "Well!" said 

he,--this was his doleful refrain,--"he will not return!" His bald head 

upon the ashes on his hearth. 

inquired:-- 

heart. He stammered:-- 

me: 'There's a young man here; say that it is M. Marius.'" 

fixed on the door. It opened once more. A young man entered. It was 

Marius. 

face. 

presence of an apparition. He was on the point of swooning; he saw 

Marius. 

felt a desire to open his arms, to call him, to fling himself forward; 

his nature, what came forth was harshness. He said abruptly:-- 

unendurable and irritating anxiety to feel so tender and forlorn 

interrupted Marius in a peevish tone:-- 

at his grandfather, whose pallor gave him a face of marble. 

required of him; he dropped his eyes and replied:-- 

poignant and full of wrath, "what do you want of me?" 

trembling voice:-- 

"Sir, have pity on me." 

ninety-one! You are entering into life, I am leaving it; you go to the 

play, to balls, to the cafe, to the billiard-hall; you have wit, you 

please the women, you are a handsome fellow; as for me, I spit on my 

are really such, I possess all the poverty of age; infirmity, isolation! 

appetite, health, gayety, a forest of black hair; I have no longer even 

the Rue Charlot, the Rue du Chaume, and the Rue Saint-Claude, that 

into the night; you are in love, that is a matter of course, I am 

Moliere forgot that. If that is the way you jest at the courthouse, 

immediately." 

his heart:-- 

harshness. He would have liked to have Marius understand, and Marius did 

not understand, which made the goodman furious. 

to me!" 

a gesture which with him was peculiarly imperious, and apostrophized 

Marius bitterly:-- 

say? Well, what? What is it? Speak!" 

over a precipice, "I have come to ask your permission to marry." 

did not enter, but showed herself; Marius was standing, mute, with 

pendant arms and the face of a criminal; M. Gillenormand was pacing back 

and forth in the room. He turned to his daughter and said to her:-- 

marry. That's all. Go away." 

appeared to recognize him, did not allow a gesture or a syllable to 

straw before the hurricane. 

against the chimney-piece once more. 

upper hand. You must have been delighted. Are you not a Republican since 

you are a Baron? You can make that agree. The Republic makes a good 

sauce for the barony. Are you one of those decorated by July? Have you 

the wall of the third story of a house with this inscription: 'July 

those friends of yours do pretty things. By the way, aren't they 

So you want to marry? Whom? Can one inquire without indiscretion?" 

at your trade of lawyer?" 

almost fierce. 

livres that I allow you?" 

to himself:-- 

hundred livres a year, Madame la Baronne de Pontmercy will go and 

purchase a couple of sous' worth of parsley from the fruiterer." 

vanishing, "I entreat you! I conjure you in the name of Heaven, with 

coughing and laughing at the same time. 

blockhead, that absurd numskull! What a shame that I'm not twenty-five! 

to see me, you old idiot, I want to marry, I desire to wed Mamselle 

No-matter-whom, daughter of Monsieur No-matter-what, I have no shoes, 

future, my youth, my life to the dogs; I wish to take a plunge into 

wretchedness with a woman around my neck, that's an idea, and you must 

consent to it!" and the old fossil will consent.' Go, my lad, do as 

you like, attach your paving-stone, marry your Pousselevent, your 

Coupelevent--Never, sir, never!" 

more like a dying man than like one merely taking his departure. M. 

Gillenormand followed him with his eyes, and at the moment when the 

room, flung him into an armchair and said to him:-- 

no longer expressive of anything but rough and ineffable good-nature. 

The grandsire had given way before the grandfather. 

everything! Sapristi! how stupid young folks are!" 

amazement. 

penny then? You are dressed like a pickpocket." 

"Here are a hundred louis, buy yourself a hat." 

and tell him all about the affair. I should go mad first, I should die, 

I should fall ill, I should throw myself into the water. I absolutely 

of the Invalides." 

beside Marius. As he listened to him and drank in the sound of his 

voice, he enjoyed at the same time a protracted pinch of snuff. At 

remainder of his snuff to fall upon his knees. 

not barracks in that vicinity?--Why, yes, that's it. Your cousin 

heard of that little girl of the iron railing in the Rue Plumet. In a 

creature. Between ourselves, I think that simpleton of a lancer has been 

the right thing at your age. I like you better as a lover than as a 

Jacobin. I like you better in love with a petticoat, sapristi! with 

myself the justice to say, that in the line of sans-culottes, I have 

never loved any one but women. Pretty girls are pretty girls, the deuce! 

There's no objection to that. As for the little one, she receives you 

without her father's knowledge. That's in the established order of 

Do you know what is done then? One does not take the matter ferociously; 

behaves like a fellow of spirit. One shows good sense. Slip along, 

in an old drawer; you say to him: 'See here, grandfather.' And the 

affair should be treated. You don't marry, but that does no harm. You 

understand me?" 

his head that he did not. 

the knee, stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beaming air, 

and said to him, with the tenderest of shrugs of the shoulder:-- 

all that could bear any reference to Cosette, who was a lily. The good 

young man like a sword. 

his grandfather, raised his head erect again, and said:-- 

wife. I ask nothing more of you, sir. Farewell." 

once more, and Marius had disappeared. 

opened it, and cried:-- 

he will not come back!" 

and Nicolette held him behind, and shouted:-- 

the corner of the Rue Saint-Louis. 

with an expression of anguish, recoiled tottering, and fell back into an 

any longer in his heart except a gloomy and profound something which 

resembled night. 

CHAPTER I--JEAN VALJEAN 

sitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in the 

rarely went out with Cosette. He had on his workman's waistcoat, 

and trousers of gray linen; and his long-visored cap concealed his 

countenance. 

on the boulevard, he had caught sight of Thenardier; thanks to his 

Valjean had seen him repeatedly, and he was now certain that Thenardier 

was prowling about in their neighborhood. 

very readily discover a man like Jean Valjean. 

over to England. 

and the difficulty of procuring a passport. 

state of alarm. 

stirring, while strolling in the garden before Cosette's shutters 

engraved, probably with a nail:-- 

white, a tuft of nettles at the foot of the wall was powdered with the 

fine, fresh plaster. 

strangers had made their way into it. 

wall, for fear of alarming her. 

behind him. 

upon his knees as though a hand had dropped it over his head. 

characters, with a pencil:-- 

he gazed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a 

child, not so large as a man, clad in a gray blouse and trousers of 

dust-colored cotton velvet, who was jumping over the parapet and who 

slipped into the moat of the Champde-Mars. 

with very little hope, and quitted it with immense despair. 

had left no trace in his mind. Not the slightest. The dramatic poet 

point-blank by the grandfather to the grandson. But what the drama would 

gain thereby, truth would lose. Marius was at an age when one believes 

has none of them. That which overwhelmed Othello glides innocuous over 

sooner have committed. 

He thought of nothing, so far as he could afterwards remember. At two 

himself, without undressing, on his mattress. The sun was shining 

brightly when he sank into that frightful leaden slumber which permits 

on and all ready to go out. 

took them with him. 

penny roll at a baker's, put it in his pocket and forgot it. It appears 

moments when a man has a furnace within his skull. Marius was passing 

said: "Is there fighting on hand?" 

he was in the Rue Plumet. When he approached the grating he forgot 

at the moment when they are passing they fill the heart completely. 

tour of the garden, the garden was deserted. Then he returned to 

the house, and, rendered senseless by love, intoxicated, terrified, 

an evil hour, he tapped on the shutters. He knocked and knocked again, 

at the risk of seeing the window open, and her father's gloomy face 

make its appearance, and demand: "What do you want?" This was nothing in 

comparison with what he dimly caught a glimpse of. When he had rapped, 

he lifted up his voice and called Cosette.--"Cosette!" he cried; 

one in the garden; no one in the house. 

for him was to die. 

and which was calling to him through the trees:-- 

the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie." 

movable bar, passed his head through the aperture, and saw some one who 

appeared to him to be a young man, disappearing at a run into the gloom. 

venerable, infantile austerity, had not accepted the gift of the stars; 

had not divined that what had fallen from heaven had come from Gavroche. 

it, and that it did not succor M. Mabeuf. 

his housekeeper's wages; now, as we have seen, he owed three quarters 

expiration of thirteen months. Some coppersmith had made stewpans of 

them. His copper plates gone, and being unable to complete even the 

disposed of the text, at a miserable price, as waste paper, to a 

this wretched resource was becoming exhausted, he gave up his garden 

given up his two eggs and the morsel of beef which he ate from time 

furniture, then all duplicates of his bedding, his clothing and his 

Jean de La Haye, with a dedication to the Queen of Navarre; the book de 

la Charge et Dignite de l'Ambassadeur, by the Sieur de Villiers 

those of the two manuscripts of Venice, 393 and 394, consulted with 

in his chamber, and went to bed at sundown, in order not to consume 

all distresses, the coldest. Still, Father Mabeuf had not entirely lost 

on his books, and he smiled when he gazed at the Diogenes Laertius, 

which was a unique copy. His bookcase with glass doors was the 

only piece of furniture which he had kept beyond what was strictly 

upon them before making a choice, then seized one hastily, put it 

in under his arm and went out. He returned two hours later, without 

never more lifted, descend over the old man's candid face. 

had to be done again. 

of him for twenty sous that for which he had paid twenty francs, 

sometimes at those very shops. Volume by volume, the whole library 

however, he had a pleasure. He had gone out with a Robert Estienne, 

he had no dinner. 

there. The president of the society came to see him, promised to 

speak to the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce about him, and did 

savant! a botanist! an inoffensive man! Something must be done for him!" 

his waxed shoes astonished the ushers. No one spoke to him, not even the 

for a word, he heard the Minister's wife, a beautiful woman in a 

low-necked gown whom he had not ventured to approach, inquire: "Who is 

thither. 

enjoy the peculiarities of the text which he owned. He had now no other 

apothecary's. One evening, the doctor had ordered a very expensive 

potion. And the malady was growing worse; a nurse was required. M. 

Mabeuf opened his bookcase; there was nothing there. The last volume had 

pieces on the old serving-woman's nightstand, and returned to his 

chamber without saying a word. 

old man did not seem to perceive the fact. 

resembled shots and the clamors of a multitude. 

inquired:-- 

CHAPTER I--THE SURFACE OF THE QUESTION 

electricity disengaged, little by little, of a flame suddenly darting 

heads which speak, brains which dream, souls which suffer, passions 

which burn, wretchedness which howls, and bears them away. 

insolence of others. 

been exalted, generous blindness; curiosity, the taste for change, 

the thirst for the unexpected, the sentiment which causes one to 

take pleasure in reading the posters for the new play, and love, 

the prompter's whistle, at the theatre; the vague hatreds, rancors, 

disappointments, every vanity which thinks that destiny has bankrupted 

vagabonds of the cross-roads, those who sleep at night in a desert of 

each day, demand their bread from chance and not from toil, the unknown 

whatever on the part of the state, of life or of fate, is ripe for riot, 

feel himself borne away with the whirlwind. 

the other. 

extraordinary power. It fills the first-comer with the force of events; 

rough stone, and a general of a porter. 

revolt is desirable from the point of view of power. System: revolt 

strengthens those governments which it does not overthrow. It puts 

the army to the test; it consecrates the bourgeoisie, it draws out 

the muscles of the police; it demonstrates the force of the social 

is in better health after a revolt, as a man is after a good rubbing 

down. 

surface, which dissects effects without going back to first causes, 

square. 

of 1830 deprived that great event of a portion of its purity. The 

by blue sky. They made the cloudy sky reappear. They caused that 

riots, one was conscious of a catastrophe. 

calculated that the first day of a riot costs France twenty millions, 

the second day forty, the third sixty, a three days' uprising costs 

one hundred and twenty millions, that is to say, if only the financial 

result be taken into consideration, it is equivalent to a disaster, a 

ships of the line. 

thickets: in the one there is the soul of forests, in the other the 

age of twenty for their ideas, at forty for their families. The 

of the bourgeois. 

add the future darkness, progress compromised, uneasiness among the 

wounds dealt to revolution by its own hand, the vanquished of 1830 

disastrous." 

that approximation to the people, so willingly contents itself. 

consequently as too convenient. We make a distinction between one 

popular movement and another popular movement. We do not inquire whether 

an uprising costs as much as a battle. Why a battle, in the first place? 

uprising being given, we examine it by itself. In all that is said by 

anything but effect, we seek the cause. 

collective sovereignty, the war of the whole against the fraction is 

insurrection; the attack of the fraction against the whole is revolt; 

according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention, they 

the Swiss defend the false, Bonaparte defends the true. That which 

universal suffrage has effected in its liberty and in its sovereignty 

cannot be undone by the street. It is the same in things pertaining 

purely to civilization; the instinct of the masses, clear-sighted 

to-day, may be troubled to-morrow. The same fury legitimate when 

rails, the demolition of docks, the false routes of multitudes, the 

students, Rousseau driven out of Switzerland and stoned,--that is 

revolt. Israel against Moses, Athens against Phocian, Rome against 

Cicero,--that is an uprising; Paris against the Bastille,--that is 

Christopher Columbus,--this is the same revolt; impious revolt; 

why? Because Alexander is doing for Asia with the sword that which 

Christopher Columbus is doing for America with the compass; Alexander 

like Columbus, is finding a world. These gifts of a world to 

itself. The masses are traitors to the people. Is there, for example, 

anything stranger than that long and bloody protest of dealers in 

contraband salt, a legitimate chronic revolt, which, at the decisive 

ignorance! The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets, and 

with a rope's end round his neck, mounts the white cockade. "Death to 

the salt duties," brings forth, "Long live the King!" The assassins of 

Avignon, the assassins of Coligny, the assassins of Madam Lamballe, the 

Jehu, the chevaliers of Brassard,--behold an uprising. La Vendee is 

a grand, catholic uprising. The sound of right in movement is 

give out the sound of bronze. The brawl of passions and ignorances 

is quite another thing from the shock of progress. Show me in what 

direction you are going. Rise, if you will, but let it be that you may 

other sort of rising is bad; every violent step towards the rear is a 

race. Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth; the pavements 

which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right. These 

XIV. is insurrection; Hebert against Danton is revolt. 

fatal of crimes. 

often a volcano, revolt is often only a fire of straw. 

modern fact, and all history anterior to this fact being, for the space 

of four thousand years, filled with violated right, and the suffering of 

Juvenal. 

The facit indignatio replaces the Gracchi. 

ideal world, who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on 

Rome-Nineveh, on Rome-Babylon, on Rome-Sodom, the flaming reflection of 

the Annales is of the Latin race, let us rather say he is a Roman. 

into the channel a concentrated prose which bites. 

and there congeals into bronze. The compression of history produces 

might. 

as with lightning. 

are two successive phenomena, a meeting between whom seems to be 

of Africa and Spain, the pirates of Sicily destroyed, civilization 

covers the Rubicon. There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine 

justice, hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the 

circumstances to genius. 

the shame; and those who make examples, Tacitus as well as Juvenal, 

presence of all humanity. 

repulsiveness of the tyrant. The villainy of slaves is a direct product 

of the despot; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein 

the master is reflected; public powers are unclean; hearts are small; 

thus it is under Commodus, thus it is under Heliogabalus, while, from 

the Roman Senate, under Caesar, there comes nothing but the odor of the 

dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles. 

it is in the hour for evidence, that the demonstrator makes his 

appearance. 

is sometimes right and sometimes wrong. 

insurrection is always a moral phenomenon. Riot is Masaniello; 

insurrection, Spartacus. Insurrection borders on mind, riot on the 

stomach; Gaster grows irritated; but Gaster, assuredly, is not always in 

walked like a blind elephant; it left behind it the corpses of old 

innocent persons without knowing why. The nourishment of the people is a 

good object; to massacre them is a bad means. 

the right gets set free, there is foam and tumult. In the beginning, the 

insurrection is a riot, just as a river is a torrent. Ordinarily it ends 

mountains which dominate the moral horizon, justice, wisdom, reason, 

right, formed of the pure snow of the ideal, after a long fall from 

increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph, 

swamp. 

has this admirable property, that it dissolves riot in its inception, 

and, by giving the vote to insurrection, it deprives it of its arms. 

The disappearance of wars, of street wars as well as of wars on the 

To-morrow will be peace. 

shades. In his mind, all is sedition, rebellion pure and simple, the 

gloom face to face with the lion. 

so far as history is concerned? Is it a revolt? Is it an insurrection? 

and always preserving the distinction between revolt, the form, and 

insurrection, the foundation. 

is like a relic of 1830. Excited imaginations, say they, are not to be 

calmed in a day. A revolution cannot be cut off short. It must needs 

Parisians calls "the epoch of the riots," is certainly a characteristic 

on the recital. 

and space. There, nevertheless, we insist upon it, is life, palpitation, 

to speak, the foliage of great events, and are lost in the distance of 

history. The epoch, surnamed "of the riots," abounds in details of 

which have not heretofore been known, about facts over which have passed 

shall be able to say: "We have seen this." We alter a few names, for 

which we are now writing, we shall show only one side and one episode, 

the real form of this frightful public adventure. 

artillery; when it is loaded, it suffices for a spark to fall, and the 

Lamarque. 

under the Empire and under the Restoration, the sorts of bravery 

requisite for the two epochs, the bravery of the battle-field and the 

upholding the command, he upheld liberty; he sat between the left and 

of the future, beloved of the populace because he had served the 

Emperor well; he was, in company with Comtes Gerard and Drouet, one 

pleased the multitude; and, for seventeen years, he majestically 

intervening events. In his death agony, at his last hour, he clasped to 

the Hundred Days. Napoleon had died uttering the word army, Lamarque 

everything that is bitter, affliction may turn to revolt. This is what 

took place. 

procession was to touch at, assumed a formidable aspect. This tumultuous 

they might. Joiners carried off door-weights of their establishment 

"to break down doors." One of them had made himself a dagger of a 

stocking-weaver's hook by breaking off the hook and sharpening the 

stump. Another, who was in a fever "to attack," slept wholly dressed 

for three days. A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade, who asked him: 

worth of wine and said: "Have you work?" "No." "Go to Filspierre, 

Barriere du Trone, at Capel's, near the Petit-Chapeau, the drinkers 

together. Among them was observed a certain Mavot, who never remained 

more than a week in one shop, as the masters always discharged him 

"because they were obliged to dispute with him every day." Mavot was 

killed on the following day at the barricade of the Rue Menilmontant. 

Workmen assembled at the corner of the Rue de Bercy, waited for a 

Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly. 

pomp, somewhat augmented through precaution. Two battalions, with draped 

drums and reversed arms, ten thousand National Guards, with their swords 

branches. Then came an innumerable, strange, agitated multitude, the 

School, refugees of all nationalities, and Spanish, Italian, German, 

and Polish flags, tricolored horizontal banners, every possible sort of 

banner, children waving green boughs, stone-cutters and carpenters who 

and yet with a single soul, now a tumultuous rout, again a column. 

was passing, and a terrified throng looked on. 

dragoons; at the Greve half of the 12th Light Infantry, the other 

half being at the Bastille; the 6th Dragoons at the Celestins; and the 

in the banlieue. 

were hinted at; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt, whom God had marked 

him for the Empire. One personage, whose name has remained unknown, 

announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been won over, 

which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of those 

marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water. A phenomenon to 

which "well drilled" policemen are no strangers. 

deceased, by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille. It rained 

from time to time; the rain mattered nothing to that throng. Many 

a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin, 

at home, the shouts of: "Long live the Polytechnique! Long live the 

Republic!" marked the passage of the funeral train. At the Bastille, 

long files of curious and formidable people who descended from the 

certain terrible seething began to agitate the throng. 

One man was heard to say to another: "Do you see that fellow with a 

red beard, he's the one who will give the word when we are to fire." It 

affair, entrusted with this same function. 

the esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz. There it halted. The crowd, 

aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail spread 

the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin. A circle was traced 

bade Lamarque farewell. This was a touching and august instant, all 

heads uncovered, all hearts beat high. 

in the middle of the group with a red flag, others say, with a pike 

surmounted with a red liberty-cap. Lafayette turned aside his head. 

Exelmans quitted the procession. 

which resemble billows stirred the multitude. Two prodigious shouts went 

men, amid the declamations of the throng, harnessed themselves and 

Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland. 

that a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder, who died a centenarian 

Trenton under Washington, and at Brandywine under Lafayette. 

emerged from the Celestins and deployed along the Quai Morland. The men 

who were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner 

of the quay and shouted: "The dragoons!" The dragoons advanced at a 

walk, in silence, with their pistols in their holsters, their swords in 

of gloomy expectation. 

which sat Lafayette advanced to them, their ranks opened and allowed it 

together. Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding the charge was 

which had remained in the barracks up to this time, was seen to debouch 

at a gallop with bared swords, through the Rue Bassompierre and the 

Boulevard Bourdon, sweeping all before them. 

swords, the crowd disperses in all directions, a rumor of war flies to 

flee, resist. Wrath spreads abroad the riot as wind spreads a fire. 

prepared? No. Whence comes it? From the pavements. Whence falls it? From 

of an improvisation. The first comer seizes a current of the throng 

and leads it whither he wills. A beginning full of terror, in which is 

"There's going to be a row!" 

at twenty different spots in Paris at once. 

with long hair, entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later, carrying 

with a pike. 

black flag, on which could be read in white letters this inscription: 

"Republic or Death!" In the Rue des Jeuneurs, Rue du Cadran, Rue 

Montorgueil, Rue Mandar, groups appeared waving flags on which could be 

white between. 

gun, the other the bayonet. 

of them had a flint-lock. They rang, entered, and set about making 

were; it was my husband who told me." 

Haudriettes, and seized yataghans and Turkish arms. 

la Perle. 

men, artisans, students, members of sections read proclamations and 

shouted: "To arms!" broke street lanterns, unharnessed carriages, 

rummaged cellars, rolled out hogsheads, heaped up paving-stones, rough 

slabs, furniture and planks, and made barricades. 

dwellings of women, they forced them to hand over the swords and guns 

officers. In the Rue du Cimitiere-Saint-Nicholas, an officer of the 

took refuge with difficulty in a house, whence he was only able to 

emerge at nightfall and in disguise. 

There, in front of the door, young men mounted on the stone 

and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc, where they destroyed the barricade with 

their own hands. At a single point the insurgents yielded; they 

a detachment of the National Guard, and fled through the Rue de la 

Corderie. The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag, a 

points of their bayonets. 

was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions, and which, 

by a barricade of the Rue Maubuee, commanded three streets, the Rue 

it faced. The barricades at right angles fell back, the one of the 

Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie, the other of the Rue 

Geoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye. Without reckoning innumerable 

Mont-Sainte-Genevieve; one in the Rue Menilmontant, where was visible 

a porte cochere torn from its hinges; another near the little bridge of 

the Hotel-Dieu made with an "ecossais," which had been unharnessed and 

overthrown, three hundred paces from the Prefecture of Police. 

a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to be 

the commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll of 

silver. "Here," said he, "this is to pay expenses, wine, et caetera." 

barricade, carrying pass-words. Another, with a naked sword, a blue 

police cap on his head, placed sentinels. In the interior, beyond the 

barricades, the wine-shops and porters' lodges were converted into 

military tactics. The narrow, uneven, sinuous streets, full of angles 

and turns, were admirably chosen; the neighborhood of the Halles, in 

particular, a network of streets more intricate than a forest. The 

the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a plan of Paris. 

sort of strange impetuosity which was in the air. The insurrection 

powder magazine of the Deux-Moulins, and all the barriers. At five 

o'clock in the evening, they were masters of the Bastille, of the 

Lingerie, of the Blancs-Manteaux; their scouts had reached the Place 

Post-Office. A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters. 

invaded, was, that the combat which had begun with the throwing of 

stones was continued with gun-shots. 

of battle. The uprising was at one end, the troops were at the other. 

They fired from one gate to the other. An observer, a dreamer, the 

half an hour. 

young men who broke his instrument, and took away his sword. Another was 

being wounded, in the Rue des Lombards, retreated. 

Was this a revolution, in fact? 

tortuous, colossal citadel. 

lay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet. 

fearful uncertainty of the crisis. They recalled the popular ovation 

Two intrepid men, tried in great wars, the Marshal Lobau and General 

Bugeaud, were in command, Bugeaud under Lobau. Enormous patrols, 

of office, went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion. The insurgents, 

the night was almost upon them, and the Saint-Merry tocsin began to make 

seen Austerlitz, regarded this with a gloomy air. 

wrath. 

had taken up their position on the Carrousel; cannons were descending 

from Vincennes. 

serene. 

the physiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of 

the rebellious quarters. Paris very speedily accustoms herself to 

shop-keeper hears the drum, the call to arms, the general alarm, he 

contents himself with the remark:-- 

firing by platoons becomes audible, the shopkeeper says:-- 

"It's getting hot! Hullo, it's getting hot!" 

his merchandise in safety and risks his own person. 

streets. A few streets away, the shock of billiard-balls can be heard in 

the cafes. 

and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with 

going on. 

things are requisite, the size of Paris and its gayety. The city of 

Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary. 

great city felt something which was, perhaps, stronger than itself. It 

was afraid. 

Many streets were empty at four o'clock in the morning. 

they were masters of the Bank;--that there were six hundred of them 

in the Rue Aubry le Boucher; that Lobau and Bugeaud were putting their 

also, the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to the Champ-de-Mars; 

serious. 

old lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom. 

arrested. By nine o'clock, more than eight hundred persons had been 

arrested, the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them, so was the 

Conciergerie, so was La Force. 

on top of each other. 

with Paris. 

heard. 

tumult, the dull and indistinct sounds, to the things that were 

said: "It is cavalry," or: "Those are the caissons galloping," to the 

trumpets, the drums, the firing, and, above all, to that lamentable 

alarm peal from Saint-Merry. 

the streets and disappeared, shouting: "Go home!" And people made haste 

a more mournful hue from the formidable flaming of the revolt. 

CHAPTER I--SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF 
GAVROCHE'S POETRY. THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS 
POETRY 

populace and the military in front of the Arsenal, started a movement 

in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following the 

hearse and which, through the whole length of the boulevards, weighed, 

so to speak, on the head of the procession, there arose a frightful ebb. 

The rout was shaken, their ranks were broken, all ran, fled, made their 

escape, some with shouts of attack, others with the pallor of flight. 

The great river which covered the boulevards divided in a twinkling, 

overflowed to right and left, and spread in torrents over two hundred 

streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken loose. 

Menilmontant, holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which 

he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville, caught sight of an old 

holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-a-brac merchant's shop. 

through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse, encountered the lad 

brandishing his pistol and singing:-- 

               Le jour on voit tres bien, 

               D'un ecrit apocrypha 

               Le bourgeois s'ebouriffe, 

               Pratiquez la vertu, 

               Tutu, chapeau pointu![44] 

It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars. 

know not. Who does know? Himself, perhaps. However, Gavroche was well 

own chirpings. An observing urchin and a rogue, he made a potpourri of 

thieves, a tribe contiguous to his own. He had, it appears, been 

commission for M. Baour-Lormian, one of the Forty. Gavroche was a gamin 

of letters. 

the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously 

extracted from it the two brats, had shared with them some sort of 

breakfast which he had invented, and had then gone away, confiding 

entirely. On leaving them, he had appointed to meet them at the same 

spot in the evening, and had left them this discourse by way of a 

they say at the court, I file off. If you don't find papa and mamma, 

young 'uns, come back here this evening. I'll scramble you up some 

some policeman and placed in the refuge, or stolen by some mountebank, 

did not return. The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of 

of his head and said: "Where the devil are my two children?" 

Pont-aux-Choux. He noticed that there was but one shop open in that 

shop. This presented a providential occasion to eat another 

his fob, turned his pocket inside out, found nothing, not even a sou, 

and began to shout: "Help!" 

persons, who seemed to be landed proprietors, he shrugged his shoulders 

and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as 

they passed: 

dinners. Ask 'em what they do with their money. They don't know. They 

eat it, that's what they do! As much as their bellies will hold." 

open street, is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his 

which he was singing, he shouted:-- 

couplets. What are the police spies? Dogs. And I'd just like to have 

friends. It's getting hot there, it's getting into a little boil, it's 

live joy! Let's fight, crebleu! I've had enough of despotism." 

Armuyr. The croak would be almost identical. 

with her basket on her back. 

which are decrepitude, decay, ruin, and sadness. 

by the corner for refuse, which is fat or lean, according to the will of 

may be kindness in the broom. 

smile! on the three portresses. Things of this nature were said:-- 

the dogs who complain." 

"But the fleas from a cat don't go after people." 

when there were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in the 

the King of Rome?" 

horror--one can't afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays." 

anything away any more. They eat everything." 

boasting which lies at the bottom of man, added:-- 

stuff in my commode, the old papers in the corner of the window, 

the things that are good to eat in my bowl, the bits of glass in my 

authorities." 

Gavroche disdainfully contented himself, by way of reprisal, with 

in horror. 

he had a gun on his arm. Mame Bacheux says, that last week there was a 

revolution at--at--at--where's the calf!--at Pontoise. And then, there 

do with good-for-nothings who don't know how to do anything but contrive 

ways of upsetting the world, when we had just begun to get a little 

poor queen whom I saw pass in the tumbril! And all this is going to 

beheaded on the guillotine, the wretch!" 

to his mind, and he indulged in this soliloquy:-- 

have more good things to eat in your basket." 

who had followed him, and who was shaking her fist at him in the 

distance and crying:-- 

appeal:-- 

an air of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it:-- 

poodle came along at the moment. Gavroche felt compassion for him. 

all the hoops are visible." 

fellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the 

elephant was at that moment in his shop engaged in shaving an old 

soldier of the legion who had served under the Empire. They were 

riot, then of General Lamarque, and from Lamarque they had passed to 

the Emperor. Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and 

soldier which Prudhomme, had he been present, would have enriched with 

arabesques, and which he would have entitled: "Dialogue between the 

razor and the sword." 

articulated knees, prominent ribs, oblique shoulders and a powerful 

crupper. A little more than fifteen hands in height." 

"It was His Majesty's beast." 

had been there:-- 

day. He was as neat as a new sou." 

arm at Austerlitz, another in the left hip at Jena. At Friedland, 

a thrust from a bayonet, there,--at the Moskowa seven or eight 

the thigh, that's all." 

belly!" 

show-window had suddenly been fractured. 

pebble. 

at the full speed, towards the Marche Saint-Jean. As he passed the 

has any one done to that gamin?" 

a fashion. Bahorel and Jean Prouvaire had found them and swelled the 

group. Enjolras had a double-barrelled hunting-gun, Combeferre the gun 

unsheathed sword-cane. Feuilly, with a naked sword in his hand, marched 

at their head shouting: "Long live Poland!" 

by the rain, with lightning in their eyes. Gavroche accosted them 

calmly:-- 

in water in a riot. He wore a scarlet waistcoat, and indulged in 

passer-by, who cried in bewilderment:-- 

fear of the red to horned cattle." 

most peaceable sheet of paper in the world, a permission to eat eggs, a 

instant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel. 

fire out of the ranks with the soul any more than with a gun." 

Hercle! 'twas only to whet my appetite." 

inquired of him:-- 

who was watching them as they passed, probably a Friend of the A B C. He 

shouted to him:-- 

their trousers. 

behind, although he had a thoughtful air. 

public storehouses, at the moment when the dragoons had made their 

charge. Enjolras, Courfeyrac, and Combeferre were among those who had 

very time. Courfeyrac had recognized Father Mabeuf. He knew him through 

having many times accompanied Marius as far as his door. As he was 

acquainted with the peaceful and more than timid habits of the old 

the midst of a fusillade, hatless in the rain, and strolling about among 

exchanged between the rioter of fire and the octogenarian:-- 

"That's well." 

is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping. 

regicide. The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie. 

        Quand irons-nous dans la foret? 

        Demandait Charlot a Charlotte. 

             Pour Chatou. 

        Je n'ai qu'un Dieu, qu'un roi, qu'un liard, et qu'une botte. 

         La rosee a meme le thym, 

         Deux moineaux etaient en ribotte. 

             Pour Passy. 

        Je n'ai qu'un Dieu, qu'un roi, qu'un liard, et qu'une botte. 

        Comme deux grives estaient souls; 

        Une tigre en riait dans sa grotte. 

             Pour Meudon. 

        Je n'ai qu'un Dieu, qu'un roi, qu'un liard, et qu'une botte. 

        Quand irons nous dans la foret? 

        Demandait Charlot a Charlotte. 

             Pour Pantin. 

         Je n'ai qu'un Dieu, qu'un roi, qu'un liard, et qu'une botte."[46] 

mien was remarked by Courfeyrac, Enjolras, and Combeferre, but whom 

whistling, humming, running on ahead and pounding on the shutters of the 

shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol; paid no attention to this 

man. 

Courfeyrac's door. 

and I have lost my hat." 

an old hat and his purse. 

valise, which was concealed under his soiled linen. 

Veuvain." 

Mother de Veuvain. Now speak, what's the matter? What do you want?" 

portress. 

was not the least in the world like a woman's voice:-- 

"Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you?" 

belong to every one." 

rejoined them, he gave the coffer to one of them to carry. It was only 

a quarter of an hour after this that he saw the young man, who had 

actually followed them. 

themselves, without precisely knowing how, in the Rue Saint-Denis. 

CHAPTER I--HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION 

the Great with this inscription:-- 

                    WHOLLY OF WILLOW, 

hardly thirty years ago. 

effected at this point, and eclipsed, by the way, by the barricade 

Saint-Merry. It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la 

shed a little light. 

to the simple means which we have already employed in the case of 

where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau, have only to 

with its base, and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue de la 

Grande-Truanderie, and the Rue de la Chanvrerie, and whose transverse 

so that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to 

Saint-Denis on the one hand, and between the Rue du Cygne and the Rue 

like the blocks of stone in a dock, by narrow crannies. 

de la Petite-Truanderie, the fronts were shored up with beams running 

little stalls resembling cellars, big posts encircled with iron hoops, 

gratings. The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that. 

whole set of streets. A little further on, they are found still better 

expressed by the Rue Pirouette, which ran into the Rue Mondetour. 

which he could make his escape. This was the Rue Mondetour, which on 

du Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie. At the bottom of this sort of 

cul-de-sac, at the angle of the cutting on the right, there was to be 

of cape in the street. It is in this house, of two stories only, that 

Theophilus described in the following couplet:-- 

               D'un pauvre amant qui se pendit.[47] 

from father to son. 

is more natural to drunken men than ellipses. The ellipsis is the 

The last proprietor of the dynasty, Father Hucheloup, no longer 

acquainted even with the tradition, had the post painted blue. 

floor containing a billiard-table, a wooden spiral staircase piercing 

daylight,--this was the style of this cabaret. A staircase with a 

roof, in two mansard attics, were the nests for the servants. The 

kitchen shared the ground-floor with the tap-room. 

which he called carpes au gras. These were eaten by the light of a 

paint, and as he was an orthographer on his own account, as well as 

a cook after his own fashion, he had improvised on his wall this 

remarkable inscription:-- 

One winter, the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to 

the third; this is what remained:-- 

Time and rain assisting, a humble gastronomical announcement had become 

a profound piece of advice. 

Hucheloup understood Latin, that he had evoked philosophy from his 

Horace. And the striking thing about it was, that that also meant: 

"Enter my wine-shop." 

disembowelled and widely opened in 1847, and probably no longer exists 

at the present moment. The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe have 

disappeared beneath the pavement of the Rue Rambuteau. 

paid badly, they did not pay at all, but they were always welcome. 

Father Hucheloup was a jovial host. 

with them than of serving them with soup. And yet, we insist upon 

customers to his shop, and brought him young men, who said to each 

other: "Come hear Father Hucheloup growl." He had been a fencing-master. 

All of a sudden, he would burst out laughing. A big voice, a good 

She had a way of her own of saying things, which spiced her 

reminiscences of the village and of her springtime. It had formerly been 

the hawthorn-trees. 

square hole like the hatchway of a ship. 

Hucheloup:-- 

          Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux; 

          On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche 

This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall. 

night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity. Two 

serving-maids, named Matelote and Gibelotte,[49] and who had never been 

known by any other names, helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables 

vague and sleepy smile. 

following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac:-- 

elsewhere. He had a lodging, as a bird has one on a branch. The 

two friends lived together, ate together, slept together. They had 

the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called, bini. On the 

share. Laigle's coat was threadbare, but Joly was well dressed. 

Corinthe. 

hatchway of the staircase, and a voice said:-- 

cheese. I enter." It was Grantaire. 

table. 

Grantaire. 

astonished a man." 

bottle was rapidly gulped down. 

together, my coat and I. It has acquired all my folds, it does not bind 

are just like old friends." 

is an old abi" (ami, friend). 

Paris was turned upside down? How plainly it is to be seen that in 

was no end of them." 

to scratch one's self." 

possession of me again. The oysters are spoiled, the servants are ugly. 

of the big public library. That pile of oyster-shells which is called 

that man was a featherless biped?[51] And then, I met a pretty girl of 

Floreal, and who is delighted, enraptured, as happy as the angels, 

because a wretch yesterday, a frightful banker all spotted with 

adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets, what do 

you call it? She sewed, she had a camp bed, she dwelt beside a pot 

of flowers, she was contented. Now here she is a bankeress. This 

high spirits. The hideous point about it is, that the jade is as pretty 

Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women, that the traces 

left upon them by caterpillars are visible. Ah! there is no morality on 

earth. I call to witness the myrtle, the symbol of love, the laurel, 

the symbol of air, the olive, that ninny, the symbol of peace, the 

apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips, and the 

right is? The Gauls covet Clusium, Rome protects Clusium, and demands 

what wrong Clusium has done to them. Brennus answers: 'The wrong that 

Eques, the Volsci, and the Sabines have done to you. They were your 

shall not take Clusium.' Brennus took Rome. Then he cried: 'Vae victis!' 

That is what right is. Ah! what beasts of prey there are in this world! 

What eagles! It makes my flesh creep." 

not even himself, had taken any notice:-- 

in favor of the fat cock, like the Canton of Glaris, it matters little, 

with that cart-grease. If I were in his place, I'd be perfectly simple 

human race in a straightforward way, I'd weave matters mesh by mesh, 

I would have no extraordinary repertory. What the rest of you call 

progress advances by means of two motors, men and events. But, sad to 

required, among events revolutions. Great accidents are the law; the 

God placards a meteor on the wall of the firmament. Some queer star 

with unexpected flashes! Boum! Boum! extraordinary show! Raise your 

eyes, boobies. Everything is in disorder, the star as well as the drama. 

Good God, it is too much and not enough. These resources, gathered from 

to Jehovah's fortune; and when I see so much distress in heaven and on 

hundred thousand livres of income, when I see human destiny, which is 

paste, when I see humanity ripped apart and events patched up, and so 

many spots on the sun and so many holes in the moon, when I see so 

exists, it is true, but I feel that he is hard up. He gives a revolution 

as a tradesman whose money-box is empty gives a ball. God must not be 

judged from appearances. Beneath the gilding of heaven I perceive 

discontented. Here it is the 4th of June, it is almost night; ever since 

and I bet that it won't come all day. This is the inexactness of an 

ill-paid clerk. Yes, everything is badly arranged, nothing fits anything 

who want them have none, and those who don't want them have them. Total: 

However, I criticise, but I do not insult. The universe is what it is. 

intended to be a Parisian, that is to say, to rebound forever, like a 

houris all day long, executing those exquisite Egyptian dances, as 

sensuous as the dream of a chaste man, or a Beauceron peasant, or a 

Venetian gentleman surrounded by gentlewomen, or a petty German prince, 

say, his frontier. Those are the positions for which I was born! Yes, I 

can habitually take Turks in bad part; Mohammed had his good points; 

each other in the heart of summer, in the month of June, when they might 

new-mown hay in the meadows! Really, people do commit altogether 

other out, prostitute themselves, kill each other, and get used to it!" 

was well earned. 

Barius is in lub." 

poets. He who says poet, says fool, madman, Tymbraeus Apollo. Marius and 

a queer pair of lovers. I know just what it is like. Ecstasies in which 

possessed of senses. They lie among the stars." 

harangue, when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the 

drenched with rain, and wearing a contented air. 

himself to Laigle de Meaux. 

me: "A B C".' It's a joke that they're playing on you, isn't it. He gave 

me ten sous." 

"Joly, lend me ten sous," said Laigle; and, turning to Grantaire: 

"Grantaire, lend me ten sous." 

Polignac!'" 

most respectful of all possible salutes, he took his departure. 

gamin is called a scullion, the baker's gamin is called a mitron, 

is called the dauphin, the god gamin is called the bambino." 

a warning." 

through water. I don't wand to ged a gold." 

Besides, we might miss the funeral without missing the riot." 

fact, it does hurt the people along the seams." 

execrate this Government. It is the crown tempered by the cotton 

night-cap. It is a sceptre ending in an umbrella. In fact, I think 

against the people, and open the umbrella end against heaven." 

having gone off "to watch events." 

before your face. Gibelotte, fetch a light." 

Bossuet to wine; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards 

cheerfulness. 

popularity with serious drinkers. There is, in fact, in the matter 

him. He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass. The 

most terrible of lethargies. It is of these three vapors, beer, brandy, 

and absinthe, that the lead of the soul is composed. They are three 

there in a membranous smoke, vaguely condensed into the wing of the bat, 

slumbering Psyche. 

a peculiarity of gesture; he rested his left fist on his knee with 

astride a stool, his full glass in his right hand, he hurled solemn 

words at the big maid-servant Matelote:-- 

of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup. 

Let us drink." 

thee!" 

francs and ninety-five centibes." 

them on the table in the guise of candles?" 

falling rain, and gazing at his two friends. 

"To arms!" He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis, at the end 

Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss, Combeferre with his gun, Bahorel 

with his gun, and the whole armed and stormy rabble which was following 

them. 

improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his 

mouth, and shouted:-- 

crossed a "Where are you going?" 

de la Chanvrerie. 

widened out, the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket 

from the Rue Saint-Denis, that is to say, in front, and in full sight. 

Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal. 

flash of lightning, in the rear, to right and left, shops, stables, 

area-doors, windows, blinds, attic skylights, shutters of every 

description were closed, from the ground floor to the roof. A terrified 

for drying linen, in order to deaden the effect of musketry. The 

mob had rushed into it.--"Ah my God! Ah my God!" sighed Mame Hucheloup. 

gold." 

of paving-stones: Enjolras raised the cellar trap, and all the widow 

with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of fans, had 

no one knows where. The beams which served as props were torn from 

the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks. When Bossuet and 

Courfeyrac turned round, half the street was already barred with 

a rampart higher than a man. There is nothing like the hand of the 

populace for building everything that is built by demolishing. 

came loaded with rubbish. Her lassitude helped on the barricade. She 

bridle. 

Corinthum." 

completed the bar across the street. 

in a low tone. Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from her 

throat. 

neck as an infinitely delicate thing." 

waist, and gave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window. 

Matelote is a chimaera. This is the secret of her birth: a Gothic 

give it life, and this produced Matelote. Look at her, citizens! She has 

girl. I guarantee that she will fight well. Every good girl contains 

a hero. As for Mother Hucheloup, she's an old warrior. Look at her 

moustaches! She inherited them from her husband. A hussar indeed! She 

will fight too. These two alone will strike terror to the heart of the 

father always detested me because I could not understand mathematics. 

result is that I have never lacked it; but, if I had been rich, there 

would do! Matelote, embrace me! You are voluptuous and timid! You have 

of a lover." 

have perished at Thermopylae with Leonidas, and burned at Drogheda with 

Cromwell. 

Don't disgrace the barricade!" 

seemed to be rendered suddenly sober. 

Enjolras with indescribable gentleness, and said to him:-- 

replied:-- 

living, and of dying." 

on the table, and, as is the usual effect of the second period of 

instant later he had fallen asleep. 

console the widowed proprietress. 

shook a counterpane out of your window?" 

to put that table of mine in your horror, too? And it was for the 

window into the street, that the government collected a fine of a 

hundred francs. If that isn't an abomination, what is!" 

you are satisfied. Go tell your husband that he boxed my daughter's 

ears, and that I have accordingly boxed his wife's." 

their blouses a barrel of powder, a basket containing bottles of 

vitriol, two or three carnival torches, and a basket filled with 

fire-pots, "left over from the King's festival." This festival was very 

munitions came from a grocer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine named Pepin. 

They smashed the only street lantern in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, 

the lantern corresponding to one in the Rue Saint-Denis, and all 

the lanterns in the surrounding streets, de Mondetour, du Cygne, des 

Precheurs, and de la Grande and de la Petite-Truanderie. 

de la Chanvrerie, the other closed the Rue Mondetour, on the side of 

the Rue de Cygne. This last barricade, which was very narrow, was 

effected a wholesale loan from an armorer's shop. 

and was armed with a saddler's awl. There was one who was shouting: 

legions, few hats, no cravats, many bare arms, some pikes. Add to 

discussed the possible chances. That they would receive succor about 

bullets, pewter mugs, spoons, forks, and all the brass table-ware of 

the establishment. In the midst of it all, they drank. Caps and 

modified by terror, which had stupefied one, rendered another 

with the fingers of seamstresses and who made them tremble. 

observed at the moment when he joined the mob at the corner of the 

young man who had been waiting for Courfeyrac at his lodgings, and who 

had inquired for M. Marius, he had disappeared at about the time when 

the omnibus had been overturned. 

everything in readiness. He went, came, mounted, descended, re-mounted, 

visible, he was incessantly audible. He filled the air, as he was 

was possible with him. The enormous barricade felt him on its haunches. 

he grew impatient over the thoughtful, he inspired gayety in some, 

hovered over the tumult, and the effort, sprang from one party to 

another, murmuring and humming, and harassed the whole company; a fly on 

the immense revolutionary coach. 

little lungs. 

is very small. It must be carried up. Put everything on it, fling 

Mother Gibou's tea. Hullo, here's a glass door." 

thing in a barricade. It does not prevent an attack, but it prevents the 

thing. Well, you haven't a very wildly lively imagination, comrades." 

another, demanding: "A gun, I want a gun! Why don't you give me a gun?" 

dispute with Charles X." 

created a diversion! Gavroche shouted to him:-- 

country of ours?" 

structure, of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie, as they call 

it, reached to the level of the first floor, were mistaken. The fact is, 

that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet. It was 

point. The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with 

ropes, and a red flag, fastened to this pole, floated over the 

barricade. 

Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other 

fragment of the Rue Mondetour which opens through the Rue des Precheurs 

an issue into the Halles, wishing, no doubt, to preserve a possible 

Precheurs. 

Rue de la Chanvrerie, the interior of the barricade, where the wine-shop 

formed a salient angle, presented an irregular square, closed on all 

sides. There existed an interval of twenty paces between the grand 

inhabited, but closed from top to bottom. 

ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a 

redoubled their pace. 

tremor ran through the bravest, and a momentary silence ensued. 

Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile. 

reserve. 

near, with melancholy undulations. 

streets through which no one passed any longer, surrounded by those 

dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated, 

in the midst of that silence through which something could be felt 

advancing, and which had about it something tragic and terrifying, 

isolated, armed, determined, and tranquil. 

CHAPTER VI--WAITING 

Bossuet, Joly, Bahorel, and some others, sought each other out and 

united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their 

student life, and, in one corner of this wine-shop which had been 

against the backs of their chairs, these fine young fellows, so close to 

a supreme hour, began to recite love verses. 

                 Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux, 

               Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie 

                 Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux, 

               Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age, 

                 Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans, 

               Et que, dans notre humble et petit menage, 

                 Tout, meme l'hiver, nous etait printemps? 

                 Paris s'asseyait a de saints banquets, 

               Foy lancait la foudre, et votre corsage 

                 Avait une epingle ou je me piquais. 

                 Quand je vous menais au Prado diner, 

               Vous etiez jolie au point que les roses 

                 Me faisaient l'effet de se retourner. 

                 Comme elle sent bon!  Quels cheveux a flots! 

               Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile, 

                 Son bonnet charmant est a peine eclos. 

                 Les passants crovaient que l'amour charme 

               Avait marie, dans notre heureux couple, 

                 Le doux mois d'avril au beau mois de mai. 

                 Devorant l'amour, bon fruit defendu, 

               Ma bouche n'avait pas dit une chose 

                 Que deja ton coeur avait repondu. 

                 Ou je t'adorais du soir au matin. 

               C'est ainsi qu'une ame amoureuse applique 

                 La carte du Tendre au pays Latin. 

                 Quand, dans le taudis frais et printanier, 

               Tu tirais ton bas sur ton jambe fine, 

                 Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier. 

                 Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais, 

               Tu me demontrais la bonte celeste 

                 Avec une fleur que tu me donnais. 

                 O grenier dore! te lacer! te voir 

               Aller et venir des l'aube en chemise, 

                 Mirant ton jeune front a ton vieux miroir. 

               De rubans, de fleurs, de gaze et de moire, 

                 Ou l'amour begaye un argot charmant? 

                 Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon; 

               Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe, 

                 Et je te donnais le tasse en japon. 

                 Ton manchon brule, ton boa perdu! 

               Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare 

                 Qu'un soir pour souper nons avons vendu! 

                 Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds. 

               Dante in folio nous servait de table 

                 Pour manger gaiment un cent de marrons. 

                 Je pris un baiser a ton levre en feu, 

               Quand tu t'en allais decoiffee et rouge, 

                 Je restai tout pale et je crus en Dieu! 

                 Et tous ces fichus changes en chiffons? 

                 Se sont envoles dans les cieux profonds![53] 

The hour, the spot, these souvenirs of youth recalled, a few stars 

preparation, gave a pathetic charm to these verses murmured in a low 

poet. 

Shrove-Tuesday in front of vehicles loaded with masks, on their way 

Faubourg Saint-Antoine. 

that all the light fell on the flag. The street and the barricade 

formidably illuminated as by an enormous dark-lantern. 

terrible purple. 

forces. These fifty men were waiting for sixty thousand. 

light in the upper stories. 

his cartridges. The man of the Rue des Billettes had just entered 

by a hundred "amusing" things, had not even seen this man. 

admiring his gun; then, all at once, when the man was seated, the street 

The gamin approached this pensive personage, and began to step around 

gay and so heart-breaking, passed all those grimaces of an old man which 

be? no, it is not! but yes! why, no! etc. Gavroche balanced on his 

bird, expended in a gigantic pout all the sagacity of his lower lip. He 

mien of the chief of the eunuchs in the slave mart, discovering a 

Venus among the blowsy females, and the air of an amateur recognizing 

that a great event had happened in Gavroche's life. 

accosted him. 

barricade, slip along close to the houses, skirmish about a bit in the 

streets, and come back and tell me what is going on." 

Gavroche raised himself on his haunches. 

go! In the meanwhile, trust to the little fellows, and distrust the big 

fellow there?" 

Royal, where I was taking the air, by my ear." 

low tone to a longshoreman from the winedocks who chanced to be at hand. 

The man left the room, and returned almost immediately, accompanied by 

Enjolras' clear eyes and appeared to grasp the latter's meaning. He 

gravity:-- 

and searched. 

glass, and bearing on one side the arms of France, engraved, and with 

Prefect of Police of that day, M. Gisquet. 

at the bottom of his fob, they felt and seized a paper in an envelope, 

in the very hand of the Prefect of Police:-- 

will make sure, by special supervision, whether it is true that the 

near the Jena bridge." 

room which had formerly given the wine-shop its name. 

said to him:-- 

up. 

the man who has never lied. 

barricade is taken." 

Then he called Gavroche:-- 

musician, but I want the clarionet." 

in the large barricade. 

reader would not see those grand moments of social birth-pangs in a 

revolutionary birth, which contain convulsion mingled with effort, 

in their exact and real relief, were we to omit, in the sketch here 

outlined, an incident full of epic and savage horror which occurred 

almost immediately after Gavroche's departure. 

roll along, a throng of tumultuous men. These men do not ask each other 

whence they come. Among the passers-by who had joined the rabble led by 

Enjolras, Combeferre, and Courfeyrac, there had been a person wearing 

the jacket of a street porter, which was very threadbare on the 

shoulders, who gesticulated and vociferated, and who had the look of a 

drunken savage. This man, whose name or nickname was Le Cabuc, and who 

was, moreover, an utter stranger to those who pretended to know him, 

was very drunk, or assumed the appearance of being so, and had seated 

himself with several others at a table which they had dragged outside 

of the wine-shop. This Cabuc, while making those who vied with him drunk 

seemed to be examining with a thoughtful air the large house at the 

extremity of the barricade, whose five stories commanded the whole 

street and faced the Rue Saint-Denis. All at once he exclaimed:-- 

into the street!" 

stroke. The same silence. 

prison postern. The blows from the butt end of the gun made the house 

tremble, but did not shake the door. 

this aperture appeared the reverend and terrified face of a gray-haired 

old man, who was the porter, and who held a candle. 

as it was very dark, the porter did not see him. 

jugular vein. 

floated off towards the roof. 

pavement. 

shoulder with the weight of an eagle's talon, and he heard a voice 

saying to him:-- 

hand. 

in the mire. 

superhuman hand. 

face, had about him at that moment something of the antique Themis. 

as the ancient world viewed the matter, befit Justice. 

at a distance, feeling that it was impossible to utter a word in the 

presence of the thing which they were about to behold. 

limb. 

"Collect yourself," said he. "Think or pray. You have one minute." 

few inarticulate oaths. 

adventures, turned aside their heads. 

downwards. 

around him. Then he spurned the corpse with his foot and said:-- 

and flung it over the little barricade into the Rue Mondetour. 

voice. 

done is horrible. He killed, therefore I killed him. I had to do it, 

because insurrection must have its discipline. Assassination is even 

more of a crime here than elsewhere; we are under the eyes of the 

shall disappear before the angels, and that Fatality shall vanish before 

do pronounce it. And I glorify it. Love, the future is thine. Death, I 

make use of thee, but I hate thee. Citizens, in the future there will 

citizens, when all will be concord, harmony, light, joy and life; it 

will come, and it is in order that it may come that we are about to 

die." 

staring eye caused those about him to speak in low tones. 

of rock. 

report on this subject made to the Prefect of Police in 1832. 

disappearance; he would seem to have amalgamated himself with the 

invisible. His life had been all shadows, his end was night. 

of that tragic case which had been so quickly tried and so quickly 

young man who had inquired of him that morning for Marius. 

insurgents. 

CHAPTER I--FROM THE RUE PLUMET TO THE QUARTIER SAINT-DENIS 

will go." 

make a speedy end of all. 

had Javert's pistols with him. 

there, the gas was burning under the arcades, women were making their 

purchases in the stalls, people were eating ices in the Cafe Laiter, 

posting-chaises were setting out at a gallop from the Hotel des Princes 

and the Hotel Meurice. 

half-open doors, people were walking about, the street lanterns were 

lighted, beginning with the first floor, all the windows were lighted as 

usual. There was cavalry on the Place du Palais-Royal. 

passers-by now amounted to a crowd. No one could be seen to speak in 

this throng, and yet there arose from it a dull, deep murmur. 

and gloomy groups which were to those who went and came as stones in the 

blouses, caps, and bristling and cadaverous heads. This multitude 

shed upon the pavement a shadow which had the form of a huge spider. 

began. 

summoned, he must go. He found a means to traverse the throng and to 

sentinels. He made a circuit, reached the Rue de Bethisy, and directed 

one. Entering a street was like entering a cellar. 

man? Or a woman? Were there many of them? he could not have told. It had 

passed and vanished. 

scattered and piled up. A barricade had been begun there and abandoned. 

harnessed by Bossuet in the morning, who had been straying at random all 

understands the actions of Providence. 

seemed to him to be the Rue du Contrat-Social, a shot coming no one 

pillars of the market. 

nothing more. 

thousand lanes cross, and of which the insurgents had made their 

windows, there all radiance, all life, all sound, all movement ceased. 

dusk, every window where a candle was burning received a shot. The light 

and the vague reflections which are cast back by the wet and muddy 

pavements, were visible. An eye cast upward at that mass of shadows 

which, in motionless and melancholy outlines, rose the tower of 

grand edifices of which man makes giants and the night makes phantoms. 

few street lanterns still burned, the aerial observer might have 

of artillery, and the swarming of silent battalions whose ranks were 

drawing in and around the insurrection. 

darkness. 

into which it was alarming to penetrate, and in which it was terrible to 

where those who waited shuddered before those who were coming. Invisible 

seized with resolution, and the most daring with terror. 

flight. 

emerging. Here only one sound was audible, a sound as heart-rending 

as the death rattle, as menacing as a malediction, the tocsin of 

that wild and desperate bell, wailing amid the shadows. 

immense winding-sheet were being outspread over this immense tomb. 

while youth, the secret associations, the schools, in the name of 

principles, and the middle classes, in the name of interests, were 

decisive hour of the crisis, far away and quite outside of this fatal 

utterance to a dull roar. 

on high like the voice of the thunder. 

of the sepulchre had sprung forth from the earth and had spread over the 

heavens. 

that red light. It had drawn him to the Marche-aux-Poirees, and he 

it. The insurgents' sentinel, who was guarding the other end, did not 

remember, the only communication which Enjolras had preserved with the 

outside world. At the corner of the last house, on his left, he thrust 

his head forward, and looked into the fragment of the Rue Mondetour. 

cast a broad curtain of shadow, in which he was himself engulfed, 

crouching down with guns on their knees. All this was ten fathoms 

distant from him. It was the interior of the barricade. 

the wine-shop, the large barricade, and the flag from him. 

and fell to thinking about his father. 

had touched the frontier of Asia under Napoleon, who had beheld Genoa, 

had left on all the victorious battle-fields of Europe drops of that 

same blood, which he, Marius, had in his veins, who had grown gray 

blackened with powder, his brow furrowed with his helmet, in barracks, 

everything for France and nothing against her. 

brave, intrepid, bold, to run to meet the bullets, to offer his breast 

and that the field of battle upon which he was to descend was the 

was about to fall. Then he shuddered. 

him, and to depart in wrath into the gloom; that if it had thus fled, it 

that it had had a presentiment of this rebellion, the war of the 

blows given and received in the rear; it was because, coming from 

Marengo and Friedland, it did not wish to go to the Rue de la 

did not wish to do this for the son! He told himself that if that sword 

were there, if after taking possession of it at his father's pillow, 

should, to-day, wound the side of his country. 

word of honor that he would die? She had gone knowing that; this meant 

having approached it? should he slip away after having come and peeped 

into the barricade? slip away, all in a tremble, saying: "After all, I 

have had enough of it as it is. I have seen it, that suffices, this is 

handful against an army! Should he be untrue at once to his love, to 

poltroon!" 

head. 

is peculiar to the vicinity of the grave; it makes one see clearly to 

be near death. The vision of the action into which he felt that he 

was, perhaps, on the point of entering, appeared to him no more 

as lamentable, but as superb. The war of the street was suddenly 

transfigured by some unfathomable inward working of his soul, before the 

them unanswered. 

to begin? It is no longer Montmirail nor Champaubert; it is something 

quite different. The question is no longer one of sacred territory,--but 

smiles; and in the presence of liberty's smile, France forgets her 

wound. And then if we look at things from a still more lofty point of 

There is no such thing as foreign or civil war; there is only just and 

unjust war. Until that day when the grand human agreement is concluded, 

war, that at least which is the effort of the future, which is hastening 

What have we to reproach that war with? War does not become a disgrace, 

the sword does not become a disgrace, except when it is used for 

assassinating the right, progress, reason, civilization, truth. Then 

war, whether foreign or civil, is iniquitous; it is called crime. 

Outside the pale of that holy thing, justice, by what right does 

one form of man despise another? By what right should the sword of 

Washington disown the pike of Camille Desmoulins? Leonidas against the 

to arms within a city's limits without taking the object into a 

consideration? Then note the infamy of Brutus, Marcel, Arnould von 

Blankenheim, Coligny, Hedgerow war? War of the streets? Why not? That 

was the war of Ambiorix, of Artevelde, of Marnix, of Pelagius. But 

There comes an hour when protestation no longer suffices; after 

philosophy, action is required; live force finishes what the idea 

has sketched out; Prometheus chained begins, Arostogeiton ends; the 

encyclopedia enlightens souls, the 10th of August electrifies them. 

a tendency to accept the master. Their mass bears witness to apathy. 

with audacity, and shake up that sad humanity which is covered 

with gloom by the right divine, Caesarian glory, force, fanaticism, 

of the night. Down with the tyrant! Of whom are you speaking? Do you 

are not to be parcelled out, the logic of the true is rectilinear, the 

peculiarity of truth is that it lacks complaisance; no concessions, 

then; all encroachments on man should be repressed. There is a divine 

consequently, what war is greater, than that which re-establishes 

social truth, restores her throne to liberty, restores the people to the 

superstitions, lies, exactions, abuses, violences, iniquities, and 

darkness still stands erect in this world, with its towers of hatred. 

It must be cast down. This monstrous mass must be made to crumble. To 

conquer at Austerlitz is grand; to take the Bastille is immense. 

extremities, and it often happens that heartbroken passion and profound 

of the syllogism floats, without breaking, in the mournful storm of 

thought. This was the situation of Marius' mind. 

were here conversing in a low voice, without moving, and there 

was perceptible that quasi-silence which marks the last stage of 

descried a sort of spectator who appeared to him to be singularly 

face, with its bristling hair, its eyes fixed and staring, and its 

would have said that the man who was dead was surveying those who were 

floor, where it stopped. 

CHAPTER I--THE FLAG: ACT FIRST 

Enjolras and Combeferre had gone and seated themselves, carbines in 

distant sound of marching. 

which seemed to come from the Rue Saint-Denis, rose and began to sing 

distinctly, to the old popular air of "By the Light of the Moon," this 

bit of poetry, terminated by a cry like the crow of a cock:-- 

               Mon ami Bugeaud, 

               Prete moi tes gendarmes 

               Pour leur dire un mot. 

                  La poule au shako, 

                  Voici la banlieue! 

They pressed each other's hands. 

agile than a clown climb over the omnibus, and Gavroche bounded into the 

barricade, all breathless, saying:-- 

hands seeking their guns became audible. 

approaching from the direction of the bridges and Halles. 

visible in the reflection of the light projected on the flag, offered 

smoke. 

the large barricade, with their heads on a level with the crest of the 

by Feuilly, had installed themselves, with their guns levelled at their 

shoulders, at the windows of the two stories of Corinthe. 

This sound, faint at first, then precise, then heavy and sonorous, 

combined silence and sound, of the statue of the commander, but this 

stony step had something indescribably enormous and multiple about it 

onward. This tread drew near; it drew still nearer, and stopped. It 

seemed as though the breathing of many men could be heard at the end of 

threads, as fine as needles and almost imperceptible, which moved about 

like those indescribable phosphoric networks which one sees beneath 

one's closed eyelids, in the first mists of slumber at the moment 

confusedly illuminated by the distant reflection of the torch. 

shouted:-- 

was heard. 

furnace had been flung open, and hastily closed again. 

staff, that is to say, the very tip of the omnibus pole. 

the barricade and wounded several men. 

least. 

wait until they are in the street before replying." 

troops were re-loading their arms. 

Enjolras went on:-- 

barricade again?" 

without any doubt, it was again the object of their aim, was simply 

himself felt a thrill. He repeated:-- 

wine-shop and had seated himself behind the counter. There he had, so to 

Courfeyrac and others had accosted him two or three times, warning him 

of his peril, beseeching him to withdraw, but he did not hear them. 

When they were not speaking to him, his mouth moved as though he were 

not seem as though his mind were in the barricade. When each had gone 

sword, watching over Javert, and himself, Mabeuf. At the moment of the 

and at the instant when Enjolras repeated his appeal: "Does no one 

volunteer?" the old man was seen to make his appearance on the threshold 

of the wine-shop. His presence produced a sort of commotion in the 

representative of the people!" 

with a religious fear; he tore the flag from Enjolras, who recoiled in 

old man of eighty, with shaking head but firm foot, began slowly to 

white locks, his decrepit face, his lofty, bald, and wrinkled brow, 

his amazed and open mouth, his aged arm upholding the red banner, rose 

from the earth, with the flag of terror in his hand. 

invisible guns, drew himself up in the face of death and as though 

he were more powerful than it, the whole barricade assumed amid the 

darkness, a supernatural and colossal form. 

and shouted:-- 

and Death!" 

commissary of police who was making the legal summons at the other end 

of the street. 

shouted:-- 

aberration, raised the flag above his head and repeated:-- 

barricade. 

The old man fell on his knees, then rose again, dropped the flag 

outstretched arms. 

seemed to be gazing at the sky. 

the body with respectful awe. 

was a brave blockhead. Just look at his head." 

that each one of us may defend this old man dead as he would his 

impregnable!" 

kissed him on the brow, then, throwing wide his arms, and handling this 

dead man with tender precaution, as though he feared to hurt it, he 

removed his coat, showed the bloody holes in it to all, and said:-- 

Six men made a litter of their guns; on this they laid the body, and 

bore it, with bared heads, with solemn slowness, to the large table in 

the tap-room. 

were engaged, thought no more of the perilous situation in which they 

stood. 

said to the spy:-- 

post, but had remained on guard, thought he espied some men stealthily 

approaching the barricade. All at once he shouted:-- 

Bossuet, and all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop. It was 

almost too late. They saw a glistening density of bayonets undulating 

thrusting before them the urchin, who retreated, but did not flee. 

the barricade would have been taken. 

Bahorel with a blow from his bayonet. Another had already overthrown 

guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the child. 

soldier's grasp, a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the 

centre of the forehead, and he fell over on his back. A second bullet 

laid him low on the pavement. 

"Follow me!" of that child threatened, of his friends to succor or to 

conflict, his two pistols in hand. With his first shot he had saved 

Gavroche, and with the second delivered Courfeyrac. 

the assailants had climbed the entrenchment, on whose summit Municipal 

now be seen, gun in hand, rearing themselves to more than half the 

height of their bodies. 

trap. They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into a lion's 

den. The light of the torch illuminated only their bayonets, their 

powder in the tap-room, near the door. 

him. At the moment when the soldier was sighting Marius, a hand was laid 

who had darted forward,--the young workman in velvet trousers. The shot 

but the ball did not strike Marius. All this, which was rather to be 

apprehended than seen through the smoke, Marius, who was entering the 

had heard the discharge. But in moments like this, the things which one 

shouted: "Wait! Don't fire at random!" In the first confusion, they 

might, in fact, wound each other. The majority of them had ascended 

commanded the assailants. 

guards who crowned the barricade. 

All this was accomplished without haste, with that strange and 

threatening gravity which precedes engagements. They took aim, point 

without raising their voices. 

smoke. 

dull groans. When the smoke cleared away, the combatants on both sides 

could be seen to be thinned out, but still in the same positions, 

reloading in silence. All at once, a thundering voice was heard, 

shouting:-- 

which filled the entrenched enclosure, to glide along the barricade as 

it from the torch, to replace it by the barrel of powder, to thrust the 

necessary to stoop and rise again; and now all, National Guards, 

vent to that startling cry:-- 

young revolution after the apparition of the old. 

abandoning their dead and wounded, flowed back pell-mell and in disorder 

night. It was a headlong flight. 

again. 

Gavroche. 

whirlwind. This whirlwind which was within him, produced on him the 

for the Republic, himself the leader of the insurgents,--all these 

things appeared to him like a tremendous nightmare. He was obliged to 

drama as a piece which one does not understand. 

who, bound to his post, had not so much as moved his head during the 

a judge. Marius had not even seen him. 

this impregnable redoubt. The insurgents had posted sentinels, and some 

the two tables reserved for lint and cartridges, and of the one on 

which lay Father Mabeuf; they had added them to the barricade, and had 

widow Hucheloup and her servants. On these mattresses they had laid the 

wounded. As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe, no one 

in the cellar. 

was sought among the wounded, he was not there. He was sought among the 

Enjolras:-- 

that spy?" 

Prouvaire." 

theirs." 

barricades is almost always made from the front, and that the assailants 

generally abstain from turning the position, either because they 

Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne were profoundly calm. 

name pronounced feebly in the darkness. 

hours before through the gate in the Rue Plumet. 

barricade lay. 

and saw nothing. 

towards him. 

and which was saying to him:-- 

dressed in men's clothes. 

out with a start:-- 

hither?" 

a black hole. 

not die of a pierced hand." 

for me better than any surgeon. Sit down near me on this stone." 

him, she said:-- 

suffer." 

effort, and looked at Marius. 

existed in her mind, she resumed with a heartrending smile:-- 

And yet, when I saw them taking aim at you, I put my hand on the muzzle 

you. When I received that bullet, I dragged myself here, no one saw 

well. Do you remember the day I entered your chamber and when I 

boulevard near the washerwomen? How the birds sang! That was a long time 

not cold. Do you remember, Monsieur Marius? Oh! How happy I am! Every 

one is going to die." 

her bare throat. 

was another hole, and whence there spurted from moment to moment a 

stream of blood, like a jet of wine from an open bung-hole. 

Marius gazed at this unfortunate creature with profound compassion. 

pavement. 

resounded through the barricade. 

song then so popular:-- 

   "En voyant Lafayette,             "On beholding Lafayette, 

    Le gendarme repete:--             The gendarme repeats:-- 

    Sauvons nous! sauvons nous!       Let us flee! let us flee! 

          sauvons nous!"                     let us flee! 

Eponine raised herself and listened; then she murmured:-- 

"My brother is here. He must not see me. He would scold me." 

his father had bequeathed to him; "who is your brother?" 

hiccoughs. 

that of Marius as possible. She added with a strange expression:-- 

for you. I was told to put it in the post. I kept it. I did not want to 

of her blouse. There, in fact, Marius felt a paper. 

thought the poor soul had departed. Eponine remained motionless. All 

and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already to proceed from 

another world:-- 

love with you." 

icy perspiration stood in beads. 

to an unhappy soul. 

unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of 

unfolding this paper. 

he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body. 

and sealed with a woman's elegant care. The address was in a woman's 

hand and ran:-- 

Verrerie, No. 16." 

 We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme, No. 7. 

 In a week we shall be in England.  COSETTE.  June 4th." 

with Cosette's handwriting. 

Cosette. She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she came 

across who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman, while Eponine 

disguised herself like a man. It was she who had conveyed to Jean 

Valjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning: "Leave your house." 

"We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l'Homme Arme with 

Toussaint. Next week, we shall be in London." Cosette, utterly 

overwhelmed by this unexpected blow, had hastily penned a couple of 

who now prowled incessantly around the garden. Cosette had called to 

Plumet, had there awaited Marius, and had sent him, in the name of his 

and who say: "No one shall have him!" 

moment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now. Then 

is changed in our fates." Dreamers like Marius are subject to supreme 

that he had still two duties to fulfil: to inform Cosette of his 

and Thenardier's son. 

Cosette. He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil:-- 

thou wilt smile." 

folding the paper in four, and added the address:-- 

l'Homme Arme, No. 7." 

four lines on the first page:-- 

Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the Marais." 

and devoted air. 

should have been done for." 

7." 

not be there." 

appearances, and will not be taken before to-morrow noon." 

increase of rage. 

to-morrow?" 

once." 

scratching his ear sadly. 

which were common with him. 

but he had not mentioned it for fear that Marius might offer some 

objection to it. 

go and deliver the letter at once, and I shall get back in time." 

CHAPTER I--A DRINKER IS A BABBLER 

gulf had opened again within him. He also was trembling, like Paris, 

on the brink of an obscure and formidable revolution. A few hours 

day?" 

accompanied by Cosette and Toussaint had installed himself in the Rue de 

l'Homme Arme. A change awaited him there. 

resistance. For the first time since they had lived side by side, 

alarmed him to the extent of rendering him peremptory. He thought that 

and without uttering a word, each being absorbed in his own personal 

sadness, Cosette so sad that she did not notice Jean Valjean's 

uneasiness. 

done in his previous absences. He perceived the possibility of not 

trustworthy. Treachery between master and servant begins in curiosity. 

Now Toussaint, as though she had been destined to be Jean Valjean's 

door on the Rue de Babylone, and they had taken their departure. 

a little linen and clothes and a few toilet articles. Cosette had taken 

only her portfolio and her blotting-book. 

They had arrived in the Rue de l'Homme Arme after night had fully 

fallen. 

dining-room was an antechamber as well, and separated the two bedrooms. 

The apartment was provided with all necessary utensils. 

are soothing spots which act in some sort mechanically on the mind. 

indescribable contagion of tranquillity in that alley of ancient Paris, 

beam placed on two posts, which is deaf and dumb in the midst of the 

How could he be found there? 

arm-chair, and several plain chairs which were encumbered with 

a National Guard was visible through a rent. 

did not make her appearance until evening. 

had regained possession of his sense of security. 

noticed in a confused way, Toussaint's stammering words as she said 

growing ever more serene. 

girl's fit of sulks, the cloud of a moment, there would be nothing left 

habit, he thought of it with pleasure. After all, he saw no obstacle to 

midst of one of these good hours. They generally succeed the bad 

ones, as day follows night, by virtue of that law of succession and 

of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature, and which 

for some time past. This very fact, that he had seen many shadows, made 

Plumet without complications or incidents was one good step already 

with all sorts of felicitous devices, his departure for England with 

in the perspective of his revery. 

encountered something strange. 

the four lines which follow:-- 

shall be in England. COSETTE. June 4th." 

printed off on the blotter. 

that the writing, reversed on the blotter, was righted in the mirror and 

a flash of lightning. It was a hallucination, it was impossible. It was 

not so. 

sense in it. Then he said to himself: "But this signifies nothing; there 

relief. Who has not experienced those foolish joys in horrible instants? 

illusions. 

almost ready to laugh at the hallucination of which he had been the 

dupe. All at once his eyes fell upon the mirror again, and again he 

reality; it was palpable, it was the writing restored in the mirror. He 

understood. 

utter bewilderment. He told himself that it was plain, that the light of 

to some one. Then he heard his soul, which had become terrible once 

more, give vent to a dull roar in the gloom. Try then the effect of 

taking from the lion the dog which he has in his cage! 

been vanquished by trial. He had been subjected to fearful proofs; no 

He felt the mysterious stirring of all his latent sensibilities. He felt 

the plucking at the strange chord. Alas! the supreme trial, let us say 

rather, the only trial, is the loss of the beloved being. 

love or a wife, as nature is a creditor who accepts no protest, that 

celestial, angelic, divine; less like a sentiment than like an instinct, 

less like an instinct than like an imperceptible and invisible but real 

virgin. 

indicated. No marriage was possible between them; not even that of 

souls; and yet, it is certain that their destinies were wedded. With the 

exception of Cosette, that is to say, with the exception of a childhood, 

that which may be loved. The passions and loves which succeed each other 

than once, all this interior fusion, all this whole, of which the sum 

total was a lofty virtue, ended in rendering Jean Valjean a father to 

country, his paradise. 

crushing proof: "another is the goal of her heart, another is the wish 

of her life; there is a dearest one, I am no longer anything but her 

reawakening of egotism, and the I in this man's abyss howled. 

flight of all the forces of the conscience. These are fatal crises. Few 

crumbling away. 

man's calmness reaches the coldness of the statue. 

the bottom of it. 

fallen without perceiving it. All the light of his life had departed, 

while he still fancied that he beheld the sun. 

and he said to himself: "It is he." 

background of the implacable conjuration of his memories, the unknown 

idler of romance, that idiot, that coward, for it is cowardly to come 

and make eyes at young girls who have beside them a father who loves 

them. 

quarter, he, Jean Valjean, the regenerated man, the man who had so 

breast and there beheld a spectre, Hate. 

existence. The man into whom they enter feels something within him 

they are sinister. Alas, if despair is a fearful thing when the blood is 

hot, when the hair is black, when the head is erect on the body like 

the flame on the torch, when the roll of destiny still retains its full 

thickness, when the heart, full of desirable love, still possesses beats 

begins to behold the stars of the tomb? 

her:-- 

"What is it, sir?" 

is fighting going on?" 

Saint-Merry." 

the most profound depths of our thought. It was, no doubt, under 

street. 

seemed to be listening. 

meditation? Did he straighten up? Did he remain bowed? Had he been 

bent to breaking? Could he still rise and regain his footing in his 

conscience upon something solid? He probably would not have been able to 

tell himself. 

would not have appeared like a living man to any one who had examined 

a vague and stormy uproar were audible. In the midst of all these 

hour is God. The passage of the hour produced no effect on Jean Valjean; 

burst forth in the direction of the Halles, a second yet more violent 

heard steps near him. He looked, and by the light of the lanterns, in 

perceived a young, livid, and beaming face. 

saw Jean Valjean perfectly well but he took no notice of him. 

shoulders, and took himself to task in these terms:-- 

he added: "Little fellow yourself." 

had caught sight of the lantern. 

for me." 

opposite house cried: "There is 'Ninety-three' come again." 

become black. 

night-cap." 

And turning to Jean Valjean:-- 

of the street? It's the Archives, isn't it? I must crumble up those big 

stupids of pillars a bit and make a nice barricade out of them." 

hungry." 

him; he was delighted to see one close to. He said:-- 

"Have you a mother?" asked Jean Valjean. 

addressing him had no hat, and this inspired him with confidence. 

his nails energetically into his hair and contented himself with 

replying:-- 

gleams. He said to the lad:-- 

deliver the letter. Give it here." 

paper folded in four. 

Government." 

camels." 

And he handed the paper to Jean Valjean. 

waiting." 

la Chanvrerie, and I'm going back there. Good evening, citizen." 

made a hole in it, with the rigid rapidity of a projectile; the alley of 

l'Homme Arme became silent and solitary once more; in a twinkling, that 

strange child, who had about him something of the shadow and of the 

after his disappearance, a startling shiver of glass, and had not the 

abruptly awakened the indignant bourgeois. It was Gavroche upon his way 

through the Rue du Chaume. 

Cosette and Toussaint were asleep, and plunged three or four matches 

greatly did his hand tremble. What he had just done smacked of theft. At 

the paper, and read. 

crushes it, one digs into it the nails of one's wrath, or of one's joy; 

fever heat; it takes up in the gross, as it were, the essential points; 

it seizes on one point, and the rest disappears. In Marius' note to 

Cosette, Jean Valjean saw only these words:-- 

for a moment, crushed, as it were, by the change of emotion which 

of a hated individual. 

of his own accord, freely, willingly. This man was going to his death, 

no fault of his. Perhaps, even, he is already dead. Here his fever 

entered into calculations. No, he is not dead yet. The letter had 

after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o'clock and 

midnight, nothing more has taken place; the barricade will not be 

his pocket. Cosette would never know what had become of that man. All 

This man cannot escape. If he is not already dead, it is certain that he 

is about to die. What good fortune! 

gun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges. 

terrified houses these incendiary couplets:-- 

               Et pretend qu'hier Atala 

               Avec un Russe s'en alla. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               Parce que l'autre jour Mila 

               Cogna sa vitre et m'appela, 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               Leur poison qui m'ensorcela 

               Griserait Monsieur Orfila. 

                         Lon la. 

               J'aime Agnes, j'aime Pamela, 

               Lisa en m'allumant se brula. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               De Suzette et de Zeila, 

               Mon ame aleurs plis se mela, 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

                Tu coiffes de roses Lola, 

               Je me damnerais pour cela. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               Mon coeur un beau jour s'envola. 

               Je crois que c'est Jeanne qui l'a. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               "Le soir, en sortant des quadrilles, 

               Je montre aux etoiles Stella, 

               Et je leur dis: 'Regardez-la.' 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la."[56] 

occur. 

a thing; the thing was a hand-cart, the person was a man from Auvergene 

who was sleeping therein. 

this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground. 

a drunken man. He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and 

was sleeping too much. 

for. We'll take the cart for the Republic, and leave the Auvergnat for 

the Monarchy." 

from the front, that is to say, by the feet, and at the expiration of 

pavement. 

it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter. 

hard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar. 

Guards of the suburbs. The squad began to wake up, and heads were raised 

streets, which desire to go to sleep at sunset, and which put the 

that boy had been creating an uproar in that peaceable arrondissement, 

the uproar of a fly in a bottle. The sergeant of the banlieue lent an 

ear. He waited. He was a prudent man. 

of waiting, and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance. 

it was stalking abroad through the quarter. 

do you insult me?" 

yield you five hundred francs." 

that they give you suck." 

who is in labor." 

at a glance. It was the cart which had told against him, it was the 

cart's place to protect him. 

his gun went off in the air. 

the shot brought on a general random discharge, after which they 

reloaded their weapons and began again. 

killed several panes of glass. 

stone post which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges. 

fusillade was raging, lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and 

has already lasted half a century. 

roundabout way. If I only reach the barricade in season!" 

this is what died away in the gloom:-- 

               Et je vais mettre le hola 

               Dans l'orde public que voila. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               Tout l'ancien monde s'ecroula 

               Quand la grosse boule roula. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               Cassons ce Louvre ou s'etala 

               La monarchie en falbala. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la. 

               Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour la, 

               Tenait mal et se decolla. 

                    Ou vont les belles filles, 

                         Lon la."[57] 

pound, the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils 

of war as an accomplice. The public ministry of the day proved its 

indefatigable zeal in the defence of society, in this instance. 

of the Temple, is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly 

nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment." 

[THE END OF VOLUME IV. "SAINT DENIS"] 

BOOK FIRST.--THE WAR BETWEEN FOUR WALLS 

CHAPTER I--THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE 
SCYLLA OF THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE 

can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work 

is laid. These two barricades, both of them symbols, under two different 

aspects, of a redoubtable situation, sprang from the earth at the time 

of the fatal insurrection of June, 1848, the greatest war of the streets 

that history has ever beheld. 

liberty, equality, and fraternity, even contrary to the universal vote, 

even contrary to the government, by all for all, from the depths of its 

anguish, of its discouragements and its destitutions, of its fevers, of 

its distresses, of its miasmas, of its ignorances, of its darkness, that 

great and despairing body, the rabble, protests against, and that the 

which are intended to be insults--beggars, canaille, ochlocracy, 

fault of the disinherited. 

without respect, for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they 

saved Rome more than once; and the rabble followed Jesus Christ. 

of the lower classes. 

people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs, when he uttered this 

mysterious saying: "Fex urbis, lex orbis,"--the dregs of the city, the 

law of the earth. 

life, its masterful deeds against the right, are its popular coups 

and out of his very love for this crowd, he combats it. But how 

excusable he feels it even while holding out against it! How he 

which disconcerts one, and which would dissuade one from proceeding 

further; one persists, it is necessary, but conscience, though 

pain at the heart. 

impossible of classification, in the philosophy of history. All the 

words which we have just uttered, must be discarded, when it becomes 

at bottom? A revolt of the people against itself. 

two absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which 

characterized this insurrection. 

defended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple; those before whom these 

brilliant blue sky of June, will never forget them. 

that is to say, three streets, from angle to angle; ravined, jagged, 

powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the 

faubourg, it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the 

were ranged, one behind the other, in the depths of the streets 

behind this principal barricade. At the very sight of it, one felt the 

agonizing suffering in the immense faubourg, which had reached that 

point of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe. Of what was 

the improvisation of the ebullition. Hold! take this door! this grating! 

pot! Give all! cast away all! Push this roll, dig, dismantle, overturn, 

malediction. It was grand and it was petty. It was the abyss parodied 

ruined wall and the broken bowl,--threatening fraternization of 

potsherd. Terrible, in short. It was the acropolis of the barefooted. 

scar on that tumultuous facade; an omnibus hoisted gayly, by main force, 

horses of the air. This gigantic heap, the alluvium of the revolt, 

the 9th of Thermidor on the 10th of August, the 18th of Brumaire on the 

shapeless mass. What flood? The crowd. One thought one beheld hubbub 

petrified. One thought one heard humming above this barricade as though 

Was it a thicket? Was it a bacchanalia? Was it a fortress? Vertigo 

seemed to have constructed it with blows of its wings. There was 

something of the cess-pool in that redoubt and something Olympian in 

that confusion. One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair, the 

window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins awaiting 

the cannon, wrecks of chimneys, cupboards, tables, benches, howling 

topsyturveydom, and those thousand poverty-stricken things, the very 

refuse of the mendicant, which contain at the same time fury and 

Antoine had thrust it there at its door, with a colossal flourish of the 

blocks, dislocated chains, pieces of woodwork with brackets having 

the form of gibbets, horizontal wheels projecting from the rubbish, 

everything into a weapon; everything that civil war could throw at the 

the carbines which defended this redoubt, among which there were some 

casters from night-stands, dangerous projectiles on account of 

the brass. This barricade was furious; it hurled to the clouds an 

was covered with throngs and tempest; a tumultuous crowd of flaming 

sabres, of cudgels, of axes, of pikes and of bayonets; a vast red flag 

drums, the sobs of women and bursts of gloomy laughter from the starving 

filth and it was Sinai. 

disorder, terror, misunderstanding, the unknown--had facing it the 

the Marseillaise. 

the strategy of the African generals dashed itself. Its caverns, its 

grinned beneath the smoke. The mitraille vanished in shapelessness; the 

what was the use of cannonading chaos? and the regiments, accustomed to 

enormous size. 

though the street had folded back on itself its loftiest wall in order 

to close itself abruptly. This wall was built of paving-stones. It was 

straight, correct, cold, perpendicular, levelled with the square, laid 

loopholes which resembled black threads. These loopholes were separated 

not a cry, not a sound, not a breath. A sepulchre. 

impossible, even for the boldest, not to become thoughtful before 

this mysterious apparition. It was adjusted, jointed, imbricated, 

felt that the chief of this barricade was a geometrician or a spectre. 

One looked at it and spoke low. 

shutter, in the interstice between two blocks of stone, or in the 

one end with tow and fire-clay. There was no waste of useless powder. 

blood on the pavement. I remember a white butterfly which went and came 

in the street. Summer does not abdicate. 

encumbered with wounded. 

their faces as far as the crest of the curve of the bridge, taking care 

that their shakos did not project beyond it. 

paving-stone projects beyond its neighbor. It is made of porcelain."--At 

that moment, a bullet broke the cross on his breast, and he fell. 

They dare not! They are hiding!" 

thought of flight, all were killed there with the exception of the 

leader, Barthelemy, of whom we shall speak presently. 

of the Temple was silence. The difference between these two redoubts 

maw; the other a mask. 

dragon, and behind the second the sphinx. 

Cournet, the other, Barthelemy. Cournet made the Saint-Antoine 

barricade; Barthelemy the barricade of the Temple. Each was the image of 

the man who had built it. 

a crushing fist, a bold heart, a loyal soul, a sincere and terrible eye. 

Intrepid, energetic, irascible, stormy; the most cordial of men, the 

he breathed and put him in a good humor. He had been an officer in the 

from the ocean, and that he came from the tempest; he carried the 

there was in Danton something of Hercules. 

out and made this barricade. 

the gearing of one of those mysterious adventures in which passion 

circumstances, and in which English justice sees only death, Barthelemy 

in France with the galleys, and ended in England with the gallows. 

Barthelemy, on occasion, flew but one flag, the black flag. 

June, 1848, knew a great deal more about it than June, 1832. So the 

barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie was only an outline, and an embryo 

compared to the two colossal barricades which we have just sketched; but 

it was formidable for that epoch. 

after anything, had made good use of the night. The barricade had been 

not only repaired, but augmented. They had raised it two feet. Bars 

of iron planted in the pavement resembled lances in rest. All sorts of 

rubbish brought and added from all directions complicated the external 

confusion. The redoubt had been cleverly made over, into a wall on the 

inside and a thicket on the outside. 

wall of a citadel had been reconstructed. 

kitchen appropriated for the ambulance, the dressing of the wounded 

completed, the powder scattered on the ground and on the tables had been 

gathered up, bullets run, cartridges manufactured, lint scraped, the 

fallen weapons re-distributed, the interior of the redoubt cleaned, the 

rubbish swept up, corpses removed. 

Among the dead there were four National Guardsmen of the suburbs. 

Enjolras had their uniforms laid aside. 

command. Still, only three or four took advantage of it. 

wall which faced the tavern:-- 

still read on the wall in 1848. 

definitely; which allowed the insurgents to breathe more freely. 

been converted into an ambulance, there were five men gravely wounded, 

two of whom were municipal guardsmen. The municipal guardsmen were 

Javert bound to his post. 

vast, vague cross resulted from Javert erect and Mabeuf lying prone. 

still sufficiently upright to admit of their fastening the flag to it. 

he said, attached to this staff the bullet-ridden and bloody coat of the 

the first hours of that Spartan day of the 6th of June when, in the 

barricade Saint-Merry, Jeanne, surrounded by the insurgents who demanded 

interdicted wine, and portioned out the brandy. 

Enjolras and Combeferre examined them. Combeferre when he came up again 

a grocer."--"It must be real wine," observed Bossuet. "It's lucky that 

Grantaire is asleep. If he were on foot, there would be a good deal of 

difficulty in saving those bottles."--Enjolras, in spite of all murmurs, 

placed his veto on the fifteen bottles, and, in order that no one might 

touch them, he had them placed under the table on which Father Mabeuf 

was lying. 

were still thirty-seven of them. 

was bathed in shadows, and resembled, athwart the vague, twilight 

and came, moved about there like black forms. Above that terrible 

nesting-place of gloom the stories of the mute houses were lividly 

the dead man at the third-story window. 

cowards; it gives a bad light because it trembles." 

it. 

the cat, is the proof of creation revised and corrected." 

of Enjolras' sad severity. He said:-- 

even in the case of a civic murder, even in a murder for liberation, if 

joy of having served the human race." 

later, by a transition brought about through Jean Prouvaire's verses, 

Combeferre was comparing the translators of the Georgics, Raux with 

by Malfilatre, particularly the prodigies of Caesar's death; and at that 

word, Caesar, the conversation reverted to Brutus. 

Cicero are two different persons. Cicero is an arbiter in thought, just 

as Brutus is an arbiter by the sword. For my own part, I blame that last 

justice, the blade; but, antiquity admitted it. Caesar, the violator 

which emanated from the people, not rising at the entrance of the 

pene tyrannica. He was a great man; so much the worse, or so much the 

through the greater outrage." 

of paving-stones, exclaimed, rifle in hand:-- 

AEantides! Oh! Who will grant me to pronounce the verses of Homer like a 

Greek of Laurium or of Edapteon?" 

through Mondetour lane, gliding along close to the houses. 

a smile. They had no more doubt as to their success than as to their 

cause. Moreover, succor was, evidently, on the way to them. They 

morning a regiment "which had been labored with," would turn; at noon, 

the insurrection of all Paris; at sunset, revolution. 

an instant since the night before; a proof that the other barricade, the 

great one, Jeanne's, still held out. 

bees. 

the dawn, he said: 

Guard in addition. I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of the 

it is not stirring. There is nothing to expect; nothing to hope for. 

Neither from a faubourg nor from a regiment. You are abandoned." 

moment of indescribable silence ensued, in which death might have been 

heard flitting by. 

let us all remain in it. Citizens, let us offer the protests of corpses. 

do not abandon the people." 

great anonymous, always mingled in human crises and in social geneses 

in a lightning flash, the people and God. 

matter of history and which has been consigned to the documents in the 

us get ourselves killed here, to the very last man." 

in communication with each other. 

in tone: 

sacrifice forty?" 

to depart, that duty should be fulfilled like any other." 

omnipotent power which emanates from the absolute. Still, great as was 

Enjolras, seeing that they murmured, insisted. He resumed haughtily: 

about leaving. The barricade is hemmed in." 

free, and through the Rue des Precheurs one can reach the Marche des 

Innocents." 

Shot." 

the two entered the tap-room. 

carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos. 

of its pavement, the four uniforms. 

word. 

question is here? It is a question of women. See here. Are there 

nurse's breast raise his hand. Ah! you want to get yourselves killed, so 

of women wreathing their arms around me. Die, if you will, but 

don't make others die. Suicides like that which is on the brink of 

the mother of some one of you. Well, let that man go, and make haste, to 

by one's toil, one has not the right to sacrifice one's self. That 

is not with your shadowy hands, shuddering around them, that you 

will prevent them from entering it! Think of the street, think of the 

pavement covered with passers-by, think of the shops past which women 

go and come with necks all bare, and through the mire. These women, 

Misery, prostitution, the police, Saint-Lazare--that is what those 

beautiful, delicate girls, those fragile marvels of modesty, gentleness 

Ah! you have got yourselves killed! You are no longer on hand! That 

thought on them. We trust to the women not having received a man's 

education, we prevent their reading, we prevent their thinking, we 

Let us see, those who have families must be tractable, and shake hands 

this affair. I know well that courage is required to leave, that it is 

do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned? I have seen one, 

people had taken him in out of charity, but they had bread only for 

was hoarse, his face livid, his limbs flaccid, his belly prominent. He 

taken to the Necker Hospital, where I saw him. I was house-surgeon in 

happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child's tiny hand in 

young girls, it concerns little children. Who is talking to you of 

yourselves? We know well what you are; we know well that you are all 

the glory of giving your life for the great cause; we know well that you 

You must not be egoists." 

Combeferre, who spoke thus, was not an orphan. He recalled the mothers 

was "an egoist." 

precedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted. 

from without; as we have said, things which passed before him seemed far 

the bottom of an abyss. 

one else. 

I join them, and you must make haste. Combeferre has said convincing 

things to you. There are some among you who have families, mothers, 

sisters, wives, children. Let such leave the ranks." 

repeated Marius. 

barricade, but Marius was its savior. 

two sisters whom you maintain."--And an unprecedented controversy broke 

placed at the door of the tomb. 

too late." 

suffrage reigns. Do you yourselves designate those who are to go." 

have neither father nor mother, and what is to become of your three 

little brothers?"--"You are the father of five children."--"You have a 

right to live, you are only seventeen, it is too early for you to die." 

become any paler. 

hovering over Thermopylae, cried to him: 

his glance dropped to the four uniforms. 

four. 

"Probably it is a reinforcement, in any case it is a prisoner." The 

moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoning his duty and 

his post of observation. 

coat and flung it on the pile with the rest. 

to don his uniform. 

result and culminating point Enjolras' supreme melancholy. 

incomplete, however, so far as the absolute can be so; he had too much 

of Saint-Just about him, and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots; still, 

his mind, in the society of the Friends of the A B C, had ended by 

undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre's ideas; for some time 

past, he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form of dogma, and 

had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence of progress, 

and he had come to accept, as a definitive and magnificent evolution, 

the transformation of the great French Republic, into the immense 

human republic. As far as the immediate means were concerned, a violent 

situation being given, he wished to be violent; on that point, he never 

varied; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is 

summed up in the words: "Eighty-three." Enjolras was standing erect on 

the staircase of paving-stones, one elbow resting on the stock of 

his gun. He was engaged in thought; he quivered, as at the passage of 

prophetic breaths; places where death is have these effects of tripods. 

A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes, which were filled with an 

inward look. All at once he threw back his head, his blond locks fell 

back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of stars, they 

were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo, and 

sisters, men just, old men blessing children, the past loving the 

present, thinkers entirely at liberty, believers on terms of full 

conquer matter is the first step; to realize the ideal is the second. 

Reflect on what progress has already accomplished. Formerly, the 

nevertheless, spread his snares, consecrated by intelligence, and 

finally conquered these monsters. We have vanquished the hydra, and 

it is called the locomotive; we are on the point of vanquishing the 

griffin, we already grasp it, and it is called the balloon. On the day 

when this Promethean task shall be accomplished, and when man shall have 

no more parasites. The real governed by the true, that is the goal. 

Civilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe, and, 

intelligence. Something similar has already been seen. The amphictyons 

you, Feuilly, valiant artisan, man of the people. I revere you. Yes, you 

nor mother, Feuilly; you adopted humanity for your mother and right 

Citizens, whatever happens to-day, through our defeat as well as 

through our victory, it is a revolution that we are about to create. 

whole human race. And what is the revolution that we shall cause? I have 

just told you, the Revolution of the True. From a political point of 

view, there is but a single principle; the sovereignty of man over 

This quantity is the same for all of us. This identity of concession 

else than the protection of all beaming on the right of each. This 

protection of all over each is called Fraternity. The point of 

surface vegetation, a society of great blades of grass and tiny oaks; a 

speaking, it is all aptitudes possessed of the same opportunity; 

politically, it is all votes possessed of the same weight; religiously, 

it is all consciences possessed of the same right. Equality has an 

that is where the beginning must be made. The primary school imposed 

identical school, an identical society will spring. Yes, instruction! 

light! light! everything comes from light, and to it everything returns. 

will be happy. Then, there will be nothing more like the history of old, 

of the failure of a dynasty, a combat of two religions meeting face 

to face, like two bucks in the dark, on the bridge of the infinite; we 

The human race will accomplish its law, as the terrestrial globe 

of love, if not from the heights of sacrifice? Oh my brothers, this is 

barricade is not made of paving-stones, nor of joists, nor of bits of 

iron; it is made of two heaps, a heap of ideas, and a heap of woes. Here 

of all desolations faith leaps forth. Sufferings bring hither their 

with the dawn." 

breath, the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves. 

with the eyes of one dead. 

there to do? Marius did not address all these questions to himself. 

Besides, since our despair has this peculiarity, that it envelops others 

come thither to die. 

say: "I know him." 

comforting, and, if such a word can be used for such impressions, 

Marius' timid and reserved nature. 

remained. 

thought of the man who had been condemned to death. 

meditation. 

but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man." 

end of the room, on which they had been running bullets and making 

cartridges. All the cartridges having been made, and all the powder 

used, this table was free. 

slender but stout whip-cord, as is done to men on the point of mounting 

they laid him down, closely bound about the middle of the body. 

the hands, after passing between the legs. 

to the remark: "It is perfectly simple." 

la Chanvrerie, opposite the barricade, had been evacuated by the 

passers-by with a sinister tranquillity. The Rue Saint-Denis was as 

there was something to be heard. A mysterious movement was going on at 

a certain distance. It was evident that the critical moment was 

this time all had come. 

Since the departure of the five, they had increased its height still 

further. 

Halles, Enjolras, for fear of a surprise in the rear, came to a serious 

decision. He had the small gut of the Mondetour lane, which had been 

the barricade, walled on three streets, in front on the Rue de 

la Chanvrerie, to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la Petite 

impregnable; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there. It 

had three fronts, but no exit.--"A fortress but a rat hole too," said 

Courfeyrac with a laugh. 

Bossuet, piled up near the door of the wine-shop. 

needs come, that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle. 

and crowd each other. There are some who make stalls of paving-stones. 

Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way, it is removed; here 

an insurgent who was a formidable marksman, and who was firing from the 

his use; a charge of grape-shot found him out there. 

holding aloof; everything in their spirits converges in, and changes 

into, a waiting for the assailants. A barricade before the arrival of 

danger is chaos; in danger, it is discipline itself. Peril produces 

order. 

guns. 

victory; Virgil has said so. Supreme resources spring from extreme 

shipwreck; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety. 

visible. 

quarter, but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack. A 

the horrible rumble of the wheels of war. 

became ferocious. 

smoke of the burning lint-stock. 

smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men; after a few seconds, the 

cloud dispersed, and the cannon and men re-appeared; the gun-crew had 

just finished rolling it slowly, correctly, without haste, into position 

facing the barricade. Not one of them had been struck. Then the captain 

astride of the gutter, the piece was ready for action. A formidable pair 

of jaws yawned on the barricade. 

it. After the fillip on the nose, the blow from the fist. The army is 

reaching out its big paw to us. The barricade is going to be severely 

shaken up. The fusillade tries, the cannon takes." 

pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin 

tender. Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers when 

looked at from the vent hole. In order to obviate this danger, and 

to render it possible to force the charge, it may become necessary 

cannon." 

diminishes the accuracy of the firing. In firing at short range, 

the trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired, the parabola is 

exaggerated, the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently 

rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects, which is, 

This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled 

small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic 

necessities, such, for instance, as the preservation of the 

it desires; force is a great weakness. A cannon-ball only travels 

second. Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon." 

against it. 

the Rue de la Petite Truanderie. 

cannon-ball. 

omnibus wheel broken, and the old Anceau cart was demolished. On seeing 

this, the barricade burst into a laugh. 

drew him aside with a shudder. 

larger with the proud light within them. 

In his haste to return to the barricade, he had got rid of it rather 

than delivered it. He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had 

confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had not been 

able to make out. It is true that the man was bareheaded, but that was 

not sufficient. In short, he had been administering to himself little 

inward remonstrances and he feared Marius' reproaches. In order to 

extricate himself from the predicament, he took the simplest course; he 

lied abominably. 

"Citizen, I delivered the letter to the porter. The lady was asleep. She 

will have the letter when she wakes up." 

half of his desire. 

Fauchelevent to Gavroche. 

at night. 

Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican. Hence his very natural 

presence in this combat. 

barricade: "My gun!" 

Courfeyrac had it returned to him. 

municipal guard occupied the Rue des Precheurs. The bulk of the army was 

facing them in front. 

embrasure. 

repeated it. 

barricade. In the angle at the left of this epaulement, there was 

which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the 

himself and lowered it to the vent. 

knees along the barricade!" 

who had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche's arrival, rushed 

of grape-shot. This is what it was, in fact. 

and three wounded. 

grape-shot made its way in. 

"Let us prevent the second discharge," said Enjolras. 

that moment, was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying 

and definitely fixing its pointing. 

young, blond, with a very gentle face, and the intelligent air peculiar 

itself in horror, must end in killing war. 

man. 

are! Come, when there are no more kings, there will be no more war. 

he has a father, a mother, a family; he is probably in love; he is not 

more than five and twenty at the most; he might be your brother." 

"Let me alone. It must be done." 

front of him, his head uplifted, as though for breath, then he fell with 

ball had traversed his breast from side to side. He was dead. 

thus gained, in fact. 

INFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 
1796 

about to begin again. Against that grape-shot, they could not hold out 

a quarter of an hour longer. It was absolutely necessary to deaden the 

blows. 

tavern, with his gun between his knees, had, up to that moment, taken 

no part in anything that was going on. He did not appear to hear the 

combatants saying around him: "Here is a gun that is doing nothing." 

de la Chanvrerie, an old woman, foreseeing the bullets, had placed her 

mattress in front of her window. This window, an attic window, was on 

the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade. 

distance, looked like two threads, and which were attached to two nails 

hairs, against the sky. 

into the street. 

besiegers and besieged. Now, the death of the sergeant of artillery 

they had erected, and, in order to supply the forced silence of 

the piece, which was quiet while its service was in course of 

fusillade broke against the barricade; but the street, which it filled, 

was terrible. 

and returned to the barricade. 

it. 

The barricade was saved. 

mind, glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon!" 

facing the East on the back court-yard of the house. 

there on the preceding evening, and she had already retired to her 

chamber when Toussaint had said: 

awoke with the sun in her eyes, which, at first, produced on her the 

effect of being a continuation of her dream. Her first thought on 

emerging from this dream was a smiling one. Cosette felt herself 

thoroughly reassured. Like Jean Valjean, she had, a few hours 

he was so clever that he would find means of reaching her.--And that 

of the good God. Now, this cruel teasing from on high had been gone 

through with. Marius was about to arrive, and he would bring good news. 

of an unknown quantity, which is itself. It is natural to it to be 

happy. It seems as though its respiration were made of hope. 

the subject of this absence which was to last only one day, and what 

nimbleness a coin which one has dropped on the ground rolls away and 

hides, and with what art it renders itself undiscoverable. There are 

our brain; that is the end of them; they are lost; it is impossible to 

body, her prayers and her toilet. 

prose must not. 

in the dark, it is the private cell of a closed lily, which must not be 

gazed upon by man so long as the sun has not gazed upon it. Woman in the 

which is afraid of itself, that white foot which takes refuge in a 

slipper, that throat which veils itself before a mirror as though 

a mirror were an eye, that chemise which makes haste to rise up and 

conceal the shoulder for a creaking bit of furniture or a passing 

vehicle, those cords tied, those clasps fastened, those laces drawn, 

those tremors, those shivers of cold and modesty, that exquisite 

is no cause for alarm, the successive phases of dressing, as charming as 

the clouds of dawn,--it is not fitting that all this should be narrated, 

and it is too much to have even called attention to it. 

young girl than in the presence of the rising of a star. The possibility 

only the flash of a dream, and is not yet a statue. Her bed-chamber is 

Cosette's rising. 

Adam looked upon her when she was unfolding, and she was ashamed and 

in every direction, hoping to descry some bit of the street, an angle of 

time in her life, she found flowers ugly. The smallest scrap of the 

gaze at the sky, as though she thought that Marius might come from that 

air, in fact. She told herself that she was not sure of anything, that 

mournful. 

and a sort of unconscious smile, which yet indicated trust in God. 

had not risen, and Cosette, naturally, thought that her father was 

asleep. She must have suffered much, and she must have still been 

suffering greatly, for she said to herself, that her father had been 

unkind; but she counted on Marius. The eclipse of such a light was 

decidedly impossible. Now and then, she heard sharp shocks in the 

shutting their carriage gates so early." They were the reports of the 

cannon battering the barricade. 

cornice of the wall, there was a martin's nest; the curve of this nest 

was possible to look into this little paradise. The mother was there, 

spreading her wings like a fan over her brood; the father fluttered 

there smiling and august, and that sweet mystery unfolded in the 

glory of the morning. Cosette, with her hair in the sunlight, her 

without, bent over mechanically, and almost without daring to avow to 

virgin. 

slowly losing their shape. The combatants who had been posted there had 

of barricades; to fire for a long while, in order to exhaust the 

is perceived, from the slackening of their fire, that they have no more 

trap; the barricade did not reply. 

tongue, a sign of supreme disdain. 

produced, and said to the cannon: 

of knowing what was going on behind that impassable wall which received 

blows without retorting. The insurgents suddenly perceived a helmet 

glance fell directly down into the barricade. 

soldier's. The officer did not persist, and retired speedily. This time 

the warning was understood. No one made his appearance thereafter on 

know that the National Guard from the suburbs was valiant against 

June, 1832. A certain good dram-shop keeper of Pantin des Vertus or 

the counting-house; and they defended the shop, that immense diminutive 

of the fatherland, with Lacedaemonian enthusiasm. 

awaiting the day when they should enter into equilibrium. 

combination with lack of discipline. 

such a Colonel of the National Guard; such and such a captain went into 

action through inspiration; such and such National Guardsmen fought, 

"for an idea," and on their own account. At critical moments, on "days" 

they took counsel less of their leaders than of their instincts. There 

existed in the army of order, veritable guerilleros, some of the sword, 

like Fannicot, others of the pen, like Henri Fonfrede. 

itself, in peril; it set up the cry of alarm; each, constituting himself 

and the first comer took it upon himself to save society. 

monarchy in Europe. This Lynch law was complicated with mistakes. On one 

day of rioting, a young poet, named Paul Aime Garnier, was pursued 

had under his arm a volume of the memoirs of the Duc de Saint-Simon. 

A National Guard had read the words Saint-Simon on the book, and had 

shouted: "Death!" 

suburbs, commanded by the Captain Fannicot, above mentioned, had itself 

pleasure. This fact, singular though it may seem, was proved at the 

judicial investigation opened in consequence of the insurrection of 

1832. Captain Fannicot, a bold and impatient bourgeois, a sort of 

a fanatical and intractable governmentalist, could not resist the 

temptation to fire prematurely, and the ambition of capturing the 

barricade alone and unaided, that is to say, with his company. 

insurrection to fry in its own fat," to use the celebrated expression 

which is ripe ought to fall, he made the attempt. 

the first of the battalion posted at the angle of the street. At the 

moment when they were least expecting it, the captain launched his men 

thirds of the street it was received by a general discharge from the 

courageous throng of National Guards, very brave men but lacking in 

military tenacity, were forced to fall back, after some hesitation, 

destructive discharge struck the company before it could regain the 

corner of the street, its shelter. A moment more, and it was caught 

Enjolras.--"The fools!" said he. "They are getting their own men killed 

and they are using up our ammunition for nothing." 

was. Insurrection and repression do not fight with equal weapons. 

men, and as many arsenals as the barricade has cartridge-boxes. Thus 

crushing the barricade; unless the revolution, uprising suddenly, 

forth, a 10th of August is in the air, a 29th of July is in the air, a 

army, that lion, sees before it, erect and tranquil, that prophet, 

France. 

is a little of everything; there is bravery, there is youth, honor, 

all, intermittences of hope. 

it was least expected. 

to me that Paris is waking up." 

broke out afresh for an hour or two, to a certain extent. The obstinacy 

of the alarm peal of Saint-Merry reanimated some fancies. Barricades 

commander of the squadron, and turned away, saying: "There's another who 

will do us no more harm." 

was arrested in the Rue de la Cossonerie, with his pockets full of 

cartridges. Many posts were attacked. At the entrance to the Rue 

a regiment of cuirrassiers, at whose head marched Marshal General 

bad sign; and when this matter was reported to Marshal Soult, Napoleon's 

old lieutenant grew thoughtful, as he recalled Suchet's saying at 

Saragossa: "We are lost when the old women empty their pots de chambre 

on our heads." 

stamp out these beginnings of conflagration. 

might have to deal with the barricades only and be able to finish 

now slowly and cautiously, now at full charge. The troops broke in 

repression was not effected without some commotion, and without that 

tumultuous uproar peculiar to collisions between the army and the 

people. This was what Enjolras had caught in the intervals of the 

cannonade and the musketry. Moreover, he had seen wounded men passing 

the end of the street in litters, and he said to Courfeyrac:--"Those 

wounded do not come from us." 

than half an hour, what was in the air vanished, it was a flash of 

and deserted men, fall over them once more. 

which still remained standing. 

anything to eat?" 

of the street. 

assailed it with a burst of irony. 

you are wasting your row. That's not thunder, it's a cough." 

like Madame Scarron, replaced nourishment with pleasantry, and, as wine 

was lacking, they poured out gayety to all. 

fight like a lion. That is one way of taking our revenge for the capers 

Angelique; all our heroism comes from our women. A man without a woman 

is a pistol without a trigger; it is the woman that sets the man off. 

and as bold as fire." 

that person would have heard him mutter in a low voice: "Patria." 

piece of ordnance. 

this second piece in line with the first. 

soldiers from the suburbs sustained the artillery. 

the two guns were furiously attacking the redoubt from the Rue de la 

Chanvrerie, two other cannons, trained one from the Rue Saint-Denis, 

barricade. The four cannons echoed each other mournfully. 

de la Chanvrerie was firing grape-shot, the other balls. 

mingled with bursts of grape-shot. 

interior, that is to say, this announced the assault. 

the preceding evening, and, who knows? take it by surprise. 

artillery-men!" 

severe tranquillity, but the fire had slackened. 

cartridges left in the barricade." 

barricade, outside in the street, amid the bullets. 

cartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on the 

slope of the redoubt, into his basket. 

meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade. 

has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments can 

imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows of 

short as it was. 

to Gavroche. 

another, and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a 

was quite near, for fear of attracting attention to him. 

other something moving through the smoke. 

a stone door-post, of his cartridges, a bullet struck the body. 

overturned his basket. 

firing, and sang: 

       C'est la faute a Voltaire;     'Tis the  fault of Voltaire; 

       Et bete a Palaiseau,           And dull at Palaiseau, 

       C'est la faute a Rousseau."    'Tis the fault of Rousseau." 

from it, without missing a single one, and, advancing towards the 

bullet missed him, again. Gavroche sang: 

        C'est la faute a Voltaire;    'Tis the fault of Voltaire; 

        Je suis un petit oiseau,      I'm a little bird, 

        C'est la faute a Rousseau."   'Tis the fault of Rousseau." 

        C'est la faute a Voltaire;    'Tis the fault of Voltaire; 

        Misere est mon trousseau,     Misery is my trousseau, 

        C'est la faute a Rousseau."   'Tis the fault of Rousseau." 

Thus it went on for some time. 

teasing the fusillade. He had the air of being greatly diverted. It was 

with a couplet. They aimed at him constantly, and always missed him. The 

National Guardsmen and the soldiers laughed as they took aim at him. He 

pillaging the cartouches, emptying the cartridge-boxes, and filling his 

a man; he was a strange gamin-fairy. He might have been called the 

invulnerable dwarf of the fray. The bullets flew after him, he was more 

every time that the flat-nosed face of the spectre approached, the 

urchin administered to it a fillip. 

finally struck the will-o'-the-wisp of a child. Gavroche was seen to 

Gavroche had fallen only to rise again; he remained in a sitting 

to sing: 

      "Je suis tombe par terre,     "I have fallen to the earth, 

       C'est la faute a Voltaire;    'Tis the fault of Voltaire; 

       Le nez dans le ruisseau,      With my nose in the gutter, 

       C'est la faute a . . . "      'Tis the fault of . . . " 

He did not finish. A second bullet from the same marksman stopped him 

short. This time he fell face downward on the pavement, and moved no 

more. This grand little soul had taken its flight. 

the drama must be everywhere present,--two children were holding each 

The rain having soaked them, they were walking along the paths on 

very hungry." 

brother with his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick. 

combat. 

neighboring carrefour, dominated by the pediment on which could be read: 

Invenerunt parvulum pannis involutum, some mountebank's booth from which 

astray and to seem free is to be lost. These poor little creatures were, 

in fact, lost. 

leased out to Magnon, attributed to M. Gillenormand, and now leaves 

which had served her as a prospectus with M. Gillenormand, had been 

converted into rags. 

on the pavements of Paris. 

little things do not enter public gardens; still, people should reflect 

that, as children, they have a right to flowers. 

seen the two delinquents. 

the solstice, the light of full noonday is, so to speak, poignant. It 

takes everything. It applies itself to the earth, and superposes itself 

is but a glass of water; a rainstorm is instantly drunk up. In the 

morning everything was dripping, in the afternoon everything is powdered 

over. 

perfuming-pans of incense, and smoke with all their odors at 

once. Everything smiles, sings and offers itself. One feels gently 

to have patience. 

pitilessly satisfied. Strange to say, the infinite suffices them. That 

The finite which admits of progress and sublime toil, they do not 

forever. Their life lies in surrendering their personality in 

of busying oneself over that detail, man? Man suffers, that is quite 

petty. Horace was one of them; so was Goethe. La Fontaine perhaps; 

do not behold Nero if the weather be fair, for whom the sun conceals the 

search for an effect of light, who hear neither the cry nor the sob, nor 

the death rattle, nor the alarm peal, for whom everything is well, since 

the birds are exhausted. 

on his brow. 

philosophy. That may be; but in this superiority there is some 

infirmity. One may be immortal and yet limp: witness Vulcan. One may 

be more than man and less than man. There is incomplete immensity in 

nature. Who knows whether the sun is not a blind man? 

not at all? Is not this a desperate state of things? No. But what is 

Luxembourg, solitary and depopulated, was charming. The quincunxes and 

triumphed, woodpeckers climbed along the chestnut trees, administering 

little pecks on the bark. The flower-beds accepted the legitimate 

royalty of the lilies; the most august of perfumes is that which 

emanates from whiteness. The peppery odor of the carnations was 

life smelled good; all nature exhaled candor, help, assistance, 

paternity, caress, dawn. The thoughts which fell from heaven were as 

sweet as the tiny hand of a baby when one kisses it. 

raise little insurrections of dust here and there. A few yellow leaves, 

playing tricks on each other. 

love, in this interchange of reverberations and reflections, in this 

millionaire of stars. 

from the earth in the form of flowers, was irreproachable. This 

garden. A celestial silence that is compatible with a thousand sorts of 

fraternized with the rear-guard of the white butterflies of May. The 

undulations in the magnificent enormity of the chestnut-trees. It 

uniform." 

on earth; the sun lighted it all up brilliantly. God was serving 

ring-dove found his hemp-seed, the chaffinch found his millet, the 

good; but not a beast of them all had an empty stomach. 

grand fountain, and, rather bewildered by all this light, they tried to 

the roofs in the direction of the Halles. A bell, which had the air of 

an appeal, was ringing in the distance. 

repeated from time to time: "I am hungry." 

and his son. The little man of six had a big brioche. 

enjoyed the use when the gates were shut, a privilege which was 

no doubt. 

hid themselves a little more thoroughly. 

He resembled them in this sense, that he walked like them. 

talent, and they were superb. 

The father was saying to his son: 

leave that false splendor to badly organized souls." 

burst out with fresh force of bell and uproar. 

green swan-hutch. 

suddenly burst out crying. 

that is no reason for giving it away. 

prey. They had seen neither the bourgeois nor the brioche. 

which finally attracted the attention of the swans. 

stupid majesty which befits white creatures. 

delighted to make a jest. 

moment brought clearly defined drum-beats, clamors, platoon firing, and 

black cloud which suddenly veiled the sun. 

Tuileries." 

separates Royalty from the peerage; that is not far. Shots will soon 

rain down." 

is joining in; the younger branch is condemned. Let us return home 

quickly." 

"I should like to see the swans eat the brioche," said the child. 

until a corner of the quincunxes concealed it from him. 

clinging to it with his left hand, and leaning over the water, on the 

verge of falling in, he stretched out his right hand with his stick 

swans, seized the cake, and sprang to his feet. The cake was wet; 

but they were hungry and thirsty. The elder broke the cake into two 

gave the large one to his brother, and said to him: 

cartridges; Marius bore the child. 

alive; he was bringing back the child dead." 

like the child, was inundated with blood. 

his head; he had not noticed it. 

and the child. 

brought in. 

When Combeferre offered him his fifteen cartridges, he shook his head. 

"He finds a way of not fighting in this barricade." 

the whirlwind of this sort of war can form no idea of the singular 

moments of tranquillity mingled with these convulsions. Men go and 

come, they talk, they jest, they lounge. Some one whom we know heard a 

repeat, seemed very calm within. All mutations and all phases had been, 

menacing, and, from menacing, was probably about to become desperate. In 

sombre genius, Epidotas. 

Feuilly were making cartridges with the powder-flask picked up by 

arranging on some paving-stones which he had reserved for himself near 

Enjolras, a complete arsenal, his sword-cane, his gun, two holster 

pistols, and a cudgel, with the care of a young girl setting a small 

head with a string, "for fear of sun-stroke," as he said. The young 

men from the Cougourde d'Aix were chatting merrily among themselves, 

regard to what his father was about to say to him. 

Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets 

should be omitted. 

none the less, a vision. 

dream. 

more and less than life. On emerging from a barricade, one no longer 

knows what one has seen there. One has been terrible, but one knows 

it not. One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which had human 

faces; one's head has been in the light of the future. There were 

colossal and seemed hours of eternity. One has lived in death. Shadows 

have passed by. What were they? 

shouted, and other open mouths which held their peace; one was in the 

finger nails. One no longer remembers anything. 

striking the hour became audible. 

roofs with them. Half the men to their guns, the other half to the 

paving-stones. There is not a minute to be lost." 

appearance in battle array at the end of the street. 

They were, evidently, on the brink of that moment which M. 

Clermont-Tonnerre, in 1822, called "the tug of war." 

these stones, artistically set one upon the other, walled up the 

height. A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly, the principal 

grape-shot had ceased. The two cannons were now discharging ball 

against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there, and, if 

possible, a breach for the assault. 

had the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay, 

carried to the first floor. 

was the dungeon. With the stones which remained they stopped up the 

outlet. 

their ammunition, and as the assailants know this, the assailants 

reality, and take their ease. The preparations for attack are always 

strikes. 

death ought to be a masterpiece. 

inside. Do you remain outside and observe." 

reader will remember, nailed up. 

"No splashing of the wounded," he said. 

tranquil tone; Feuilly listened and replied in the name of all. 

Have you them?" 

many guns are there?" 

fire on the assailants through the loop-holes in the stones. Let not a 

well pinioned. He shall be taken thither and put to death." 

it was Javert. Here Jean Valjean made his appearance. 

said to Enjolras: 

Pontmercy and yourself." 

movement, and said: 

about him: 

"Take the spy." 

announced that he had cocked it. 

him, and gazing intently at the insurgents, he said to them: 

which was under the table. After this he made him a sign to rise. 

enchained authority is condensed. 

take only very short steps. 

backs turned to these two. 

barricade, saw them pass. This group of victim and executioner was 

illuminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul. 

a single instant, made Javert, pinioned as he was, scale the little 

woman. It was Eponine. The corner of the houses hid them from the 

insurgents. The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a 

terrible pile a few paces distant. 

tone: 

which it required no words to interpret: "Javert, it is I." 

feet; and, straightening himself up, he said to him: 

he was, he could not repress a start. He remained open-mouthed and 

motionless. 

Arme, No. 7." 

mouth, and he muttered between his teeth: 

"Thou saidst Fauchelevent, Rue de l'Homme Arme?" 

Jean Valjean followed him with his eyes: 

as "thou." 

des Precheurs. 

of the tap-room. 

face, but his name as well. 

himself: 

Javert?" 

extremity of the barricade: 

A gloomy chill traversed Marius' heart. 

thousand mysterious crashes in the air, the breath of armed masses set 

in movement in the streets which were not visible, the intermittent 

gallop of cavalry, the heavy shock of artillery on the march, the firing 

by squads, and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth 

of Paris, the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs, 

indescribable and vaguely terrible cries, lightnings of menace 

everywhere, the tocsin of Saint-Merry, which now had the accents of a 

sob, the mildness of the weather, the splendor of the sky filled with 

sun and clouds, the beauty of the day, and the alarming silence of the 

houses. 

de la Chanvrerie had become two walls; ferocious walls, doors closed, 

windows closed, shutters closed. 

was come, when the people wished to put an end to a situation, which had 

lasted too long, with a charter granted or with a legal country, when 

universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere, when the city consented 

to the tearing up of the pavements, when insurrection made the 

inhabitant, thoroughly penetrated with the revolt, so to speak, was 

the auxiliary of the combatant, and the house fraternized with the 

disowned the movement, all was over with the combatants, the city was 

take the barricade. 

let itself go at random. Then it abandons the insurrection to itself. 

sees and will not. It might open and save you. No. This wall is a judge. 

there; there they eat and drink; they are afraid, a terrible thing! Fear 

excuses this fearful lack of hospitality; terror is mixed with it, an 

extenuating circumstance. Sometimes, even, and this has been actually 

smoke.--"What do these people want? What have they come there to do? 

Let them get out of the scrape. So much the worse for them. It is their 

fault. They are only getting what they deserve. It does not concern 

us. Here is our poor street all riddled with balls. They are a pack of 

come; there stand walls which might protect him, there are men who might 

of stone. 

from Minerva turns to Pallas. 

it; it almost always comes too soon. Then it becomes resigned, and 

stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph. It serves those who 

is called Progress, the collective stride of the human race is called 

journey towards the celestial and the divine; it has its halting 

places where it rallies the laggard troop, it has its stations where it 

meditates, in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled 

on its horizon, it has its nights when it sleeps; and it is one of the 

human soul, and that he gropes in darkness without being able to awaken 

that slumbering Progress. 

these lines, confounding progress with God, and taking the interruption 

of movement for the death of Being. 

troubles, we recognize the fact that ground has been gained. Until 

halting-places. 

of the peoples. 

resistance to the eternal life of the human race. 

interests, and can, without forfeiture, stipulate for his interest, and 

life has its rights, and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to 

is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations, its equal, 

after all, who will have their turn later on.--"I exist," murmurs that 

some one whose name is All. "I am young and in love, I am old and I 

wish to repose, I am the father of a family, I toil, I prosper, I am 

successful in business, I have houses to lease, I have money in the 

this, I desire to live, leave me in peace."--Hence, at certain hours, a 

profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race. 

from the lie of yesterday. It, the future, behaves like the past. It, 

a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer; a 

it is fatally punished. The Utopia, insurrection, fights with the old 

military code in its fist; it shoots spies, it executes traitors; it 

suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness. It makes 

any faith in radiance, its irresistible and incorruptible force. It 

edges; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other. 

they miscarry, they are worthy of veneration; and it is, perhaps, in 

vanquished. 

fail. 

ulterior motive is feared, their conscience denounced. They are 

social state, a mass of miseries, of griefs, of iniquities, of wrongs, 

"That is because our barricade is made of good intentions." 

to save itself, it is to its own good will that we make our appeal. 

existence, then to cure it. It is to this that we invite it. 

striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal, 

are august; they give their life a free offering to progress; they 

appointed hour, with as much disinterestedness as an actor who answers 

to his cue, in obedience to the divine stage-manager, they enter the 

in order to bring about the supreme and universal consequences, the 

1789; these soldiers are priests. The French revolution is an act of 

God. 

revolutions, which are called riots. 

examination before the people. If the people lets fall a black ball, the 

idea is dried fruit; the insurrection is a mere skirmish. 

the temperament of heroes and martyrs. 

themselves. An insurrection is an enthusiasm. Enthusiasm may wax wroth; 

hence the appeal to arms. But every insurrection, which aims at a 

government or a regime, aims higher. Thus, for instance, and we 

insist upon it, what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832, and, in 

the manner in which they reasoned. Their aim was distant no doubt, 

vague perhaps, and it retreated in the face of their efforts; but it was 

great. 

almost always illusions for the sacrificed, but illusions with which, 

is possible, justice and truth, and in case of need, we die like the 

And we march straight before us, and once pledged, we do not draw 

back, and we rush onwards with head held low, cherishing as our hope an 

unprecedented victory, revolution completed, progress set free again, 

event of the worst, Thermopylae. 

adventure in the ideal. 

stomach paralyzes the heart. 

She is a seeker. 

the torch of Europe, that is to say of civilization, was first borne by 

illuminating nations of scouts! Vitaelampada tradunt. 

artistic. In the matter of civilization, he must not refine, but he must 

the ideal. 

through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets, 

the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance. The 

vehicle; Alexander on the elephant. 

horizon by lowering its level, and deprives it of that intelligence, 

at once both human and divine of the universal goal, which makes 

Athens and Rome have and keep, throughout all the nocturnal darkness of 

the centuries, halos of civilization. 

she is good. She gives herself. Oftener than is the case with other 

great peril for those who run when she desires only to walk, or who walk 

freaks of pettiness. That is all. 

right to an eclipse. And all is well, provided that the light 

with the persistence of the I. 

exile, is an acceptable occasion for devotion. The real name of 

of a return to reason. 

its rights, we admit, but permanent life has its rights also. Alas! the 

the ideal, then it bites the mire, and finds it good; and if it be asked 

"Because I love statesmen." 

is one of the fatal phases, at once act and entr'acte of that drama 

whose pivot is a social condemnation, and whose veritable title is 

Progress. 

contains having still more than one trial to undergo, it is, perhaps, 

permitted to us, if not to lift the veil from it, to at least allow its 

light to shine through. 

one end to the other, as a whole and in detail, whatever may be its 

intermittences, exceptions and faults, the march from evil to good, from 

Point of departure: matter; point of arrival: the soul. The hydra at the 

beginning, the angel at the end. 

the barricade had been approached silently, as by a boa. Now, in broad 

rude force had, moreover, been unmasked, the cannon had begun the 

A powerful detachment of infantry of the line, broken at regular 

intervals, by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot, 

and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen, 

debauched into the street at a run, with drums beating, trumpets 

braying, bayonets levelled, the sappers at their head, and, 

with the weight of a brazen beam against a wall. 

it was inundated with assailants; but it shook off the soldiers as the 

the cliff is covered with foam, to re-appear, a moment later, beetling, 

black and formidable. 

the reader picture to himself this bouquet, no longer vertical but 

horizontal, bearing a bullet, buck-shot or a biscaien at the tip of each 

from its clusters of lightning. The barricade was underneath it. 

which began by the sacrifice of self. 

The troop wished to make an end of it, insurrection was desirous of 

in the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy. In this fray, each 

one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour. The street was 

strewn with corpses. 

and sheltered himself; three soldiers fell, one after the other, under 

his embrasure, without having even seen him; Marius fought unprotected. 

was as in a dream. One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in 

firing a gun. 

this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood, they laughed. 

he cited names, well-known names, even celebrated names, some belonging 

who abandon us!" 

stars, from a great distance." 

one would have said that there had been a snowstorm. 

the soldiers tripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in 

the escarpment. This barricade, constructed as it was and admirably 

recruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets, drew inexorably 

nearer, and now, little by little, step by step, but surely, the army 

closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press. 

increasing. 

exhausted men, who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours, who 

in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges, nearly all 

of whom were wounded, with head or arm bandaged with black and 

became Titans. The barricade was ten times attacked, approached, 

assailed, scaled, and never captured. 

fire set to a throng of terrible courages, and then to gaze at the 

conflagration. It was not a combat, it was the interior of a furnace; 

there mouths breathed the flame; there countenances were extraordinary. 

The human form seemed impossible there, the combatants flamed forth 

there, and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that red 

glow of those salamanders of the fray. 

renounce all attempts at depicting. The epic alone has the right to fill 

twelve thousand verses with a battle. 

Swords. 

windows of the wine-shop, from the cellar windows, whither some had 

crawled. They were one against sixty. 

but a shapeless hole, tumultuously blocked with paving-stones. 

the moment when he was lifting up a wounded soldier, had only time to 

cast a glance to heaven when he expired. 

head, that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood, and one would 

have said that his face was covered with a red kerchief. 

or other into his fist. All he had left was the stumps of four swords; 

one more than Francois I. at Marignan. Homer says: "Diomedes cuts 

Euryalus, son of Mecistaeus, exterminates Dresos and Opheltios, 

Esepius, and that Pedasus whom the naiad Abarbarea bore to the blameless 

Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus' pike. Agamemnon, king 

of the heroes, flings to earth Elatos, born in the rocky city which 

Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler's 

frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon, armed, 

emblazoned and crested in war-like guise, on horseback and approaching 

to have in the fist, like Esplandian, a living flame, or, like Phyles, 

mail, a present from the king of men, Euphetes; it suffices to give 

one's life for a conviction or a loyalty. This ingenuous little 

one fight for his flag, and the other for his ideal, and let both of 

them imagine that they are fighting for their country; the struggle will 

be colossal; and the shadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones 

in conflict will produce in that grand epic field where humanity 

the gods. 

summit of the wall had disappeared before the balls, and had crumbled 

exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the attack. 

irresistible force, and the serried front of battle of the attacking 

column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the 

were defending the centre retreated in confusion. 

finding themselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns, did not 

emits howls, when the beast re-appears in men. They were hemmed in by 

open and shut, the space of a flash of lightning was sufficient for 

there were streets, possible flight, space. They set to knocking at that 

on the third floor, the head of the dead man gazed down upon them. 

the officer. He was now in the little inner court of the redoubt, with 

his back planted against the Corinthe building, a sword in one hand, 

precipitated themselves thither. Enjolras, executing with his rifle, 

them out. The door was slammed with such violence, that, as it fell back 

shot." 

wine-shop, had the same idea. But they had reached a moment when each 

chain, while those outside were battering furiously at it, the soldiers 

with the butts of their muskets, the sappers with their axes. The 

now beginning. 

more melancholy circumstance. During the few hours which had preceded 

mutilating their prisoners, and that there was the headless body of 

a soldier in the wine-shop. This sort of fatal rumor is the usual 

accompaniment of civil wars, and it was a false report of this kind 

sheet and hung near the floor. It was that of the old man. 

his brow on the preceding evening. 

his life. 

dogged. No quarter. No flag of truce possible. Men are willing to die, 

provided their opponent will kill them. 

the cellar, nor the fury of attack, nor, finally, when the door yielded, 

a terrific fire burst forth. It was the last of their cartridges. When 

held the scaling party in check with these frightfully fragile clubs. 

They were bottles of aquafortis. 

is a thing of terror, and there is no choice in it. The musketry of the 

upwards, was deadly. The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedily 

surrounded by heads of the slain, whence dripped long, red and smoking 

with colossi. It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer. Demons 

attacked, spectres resisted. 

one who offered resistance, a score of assailants, soldiers, National 

Guardsmen, municipal guardsmen, in utter confusion, the majority 

on the first floor. There they found only one man still on his feet, 

empty space around him. A cry arose: 

on the spot." 

offered his breast. 

folded his arms and accepted his end, the din of strife ceased in 

the room, and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral 

solemnity. The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless, 

appeared to oppress this tumult, and this young man, haughty, bloody, 

and charming, who alone had not a wound, who was as indifferent as an 

constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully. His beauty, at 

that moment augmented by his pride, was resplendent, and he was fresh 

as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded. It was of him, 

possibly, that a witness spoke afterwards, before the council of 

war: "There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo." A National 

seems to me that I am about to shoot a flower." 

silently made ready their guns. 

and leaning on the table. 

he had been left in possession of it. He was still in the same posture, 

effect upon it, neither the fusillade, nor the cannon-balls, nor the 

the cannonade, now and then, by a snore. He seemed to be waiting there 

for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of waking. Many corpses 

distinguish him from those profound sleepers of death. 

crumbling of all things was his lullaby. The sort of halt which the 

slumber. It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed, which 

suddenly comes to a dead stop. The persons dozing within it wake up. 

his eyes, stared, yawned, and understood. 

away. One beholds, at a single glance and as a whole, all that it has 

who has known nothing of what has been taking place during the last 

twenty-four hours, has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly 

informed. Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity; the obliteration 

of intoxication, a sort of steam which has obscured the brain, is 

of realities. 

beside them: 

glance of the transfigured drunken man. 

stride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras. 

roof. They flung bodies, some of them still alive, out through the 

flung down from it, with a bayonet wound in the abdomen, and breathed 

his last on the ground. A soldier and an insurgent slipped together 

other, they fell, clasped in a ferocious embrace. A similar conflict 

went on in the cellar. Shouts, shots, a fierce trampling. Then silence. 

The barricade was captured. 

fugitives. 

Valjean. 

of agony, would have thought of the wounded. Thanks to him, everywhere 

had meditated on coming to this sepulchre, to that spot, he had 

not succeeded. But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide, an 

irreligious act. 

a tiger, fell upon him as on his prey, and bore him off. 

concentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop, that 

no one saw Jean Valjean sustaining the fainting Marius in his arms, 

traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind the 

angle of the Corinthe building. 

street; it afforded shelter from the bullets, the grape-shot, and all 

of shoals, a tranquil nook. It was in this sort of fold in the interior 

trapezium of the barricade, that Eponine had breathed her last. 

back against the wall, and cast his eyes about him. 

then, to-day it was impossible. He had before him that deaf and 

line of bayonets was visible. The troops of the line were posted on the 

should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of 

field of battle. Death lurked round the corner of that wall. 

to come to some decision. Fighting was going on a few paces away; 

fortunately, all were raging around a single point, the door of the 

wine-shop; but if it should occur to one soldier, to one single soldier, 

over. 

a hole there with his eyes. 

perceived, at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and 

torn up, and it was, as it were, unfastened. 

forward. His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination. 

To thrust aside the stones, to raise the grating, to lift Marius, who 

sort of well, fortunately not very deep, to let the heavy trap, upon 

few minutes. 

sort of long, subterranean corridor. 

wall into the convent recurred to him. Only, what he was carrying to-day 

tumult in the wine-shop, taken by assault, like a vague murmur overhead. 

CHAPTER I--THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA 

metaphor. How, and in what manner? Day and night. With what object? With 

no object. With what intention? With no intention. Why? For no 

intestine? The sewer. 

valuations of special science have set upon it. 

fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure. 

The Chinese, let us confess it to our shame, knew it before us. Not 

in fertility with the detritus of a capital. A great city is the most 

mighty of dung-makers. Certain success would attend the experiment 

manure, on the other hand, is gold. 

of opulence which we have on hand, we send to the sea. All the human and 

being cast into the water, would suffice to nourish the world. 

jolt through the street by night, those terrible casks of the street 

department, those fetid drippings of subterranean mire, which the 

pavements hide from you,--do you know what they are? They are the meadow 

they are cattle, they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in the 

health, they are joy, they are life. This is the will of that mysterious 

it. The nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men. 

prefers to get rid of these five hundred millions in the gutter. It is 

the very substance of the people that is carried off, here drop by 

rivers, and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean. Every 

from the furrow, and disease from the stream. 

poisoning London. 

transport the mouths of the sewers down stream, below the last bridge. 

our cities, and to send back to the fields the rich water of the cities, 

things. 

restoring what it takes, shall have replaced the sewer, which is a 

simple impoverishing washing, then, this being combined with the data 

tenfold, and the problem of misery will be singularly lightened. Add the 

suppression of parasitism, and it will be solved. 

by exhaustion. 

twenty-fifth of the total population of France, and Parisian guano being 

the richest of all, we understate the truth when we value the loss on 

the part of Paris at twenty-five millions in the half milliard which 

France annually rejects. These twenty-five millions, employed in 

assistance and enjoyment, would double the splendor of Paris. The 

city spends them in sewers. So that we may say that Paris's great 

prodigality, its wonderful festival, its Beaujon folly, its orgy, its 

fortune. 

capitals, of which every nation strives to possess a copy, that 

metropolis of the ideal, that august country of the initiative, of 

impulse and of effort, that centre and that dwelling of minds, that 

Babylon and Corinth, would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug his 

shoulders, from the point of view which we have just indicated. 

is itself an imitator. 

When the Campagna of Rome was ruined by the Roman sewer, Rome exhausted 

This cess-pool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe. Urbi 

et orbi. Eternal city, unfathomable sewer. 

intelligent towns. 

of sewers; which has its streets, its cross-roads, its squares, its 

blind-alleys, its arteries, and its circulation, which is of mire and 

minus the human form. 

if Paris contains Athens, the city of light, Tyre, the city of might, 

Sparta, the city of virtue, Nineveh, the city of marvels, it also 

contains Lutetia, the city of mud. 

by some men like Macchiavelli, Bacon and Mirabeau, grandiose vileness. 

partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six 

thread. 

which Paris has given birth. 

form the branches, and those without exit the twigs. 

being very rare in vegetation. 

misshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparent confusion, 

Empire and in the Orient of old. The masses regarded these beds of 

was from the cess-pool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme, Mokanna, the 

Crime, intelligence, social protest, liberty of conscience, thought, 

that hole; the maillotins in the fourteenth century, the tire-laine of 

the seventeenth, the chauffeurs [brigands] in the eighteenth. A 

pickpocket in danger slipped thither; the forest had its cave, Paris had 

fierce and sly, through the Maubuee outlet, as into a bed-chamber. 

[Empty-Pocket] or the Rue Coupe-Gorge [Cut-Throat], for the scene of 

their daily labor, should have for their domicile by night the culvert 

souvenirs. All sorts of phantoms haunt these long, solitary 

corridors; everywhere is putrescence and miasma; here and there are 

of all attempts. Political economy therein spies a detritus, social 

least, its definitive form. The mass of filth has this in its favor, 

of Basil is to be found there, but one beholds its cardboard and its 

uncleannesses of civilization, once past their use, fall into this 

trench of truth, where the immense social sliding ends. They are 

confession. There, no more false appearances, no plastering over is 

all illusions and mirages, there is nothing more except what really 

tells a tale of domesticity; there the core of an apple which has 

spittle meets Falstaff's puking, the louis-d'or which comes from 

suicide. A livid foetus rolls along, enveloped in the spangles which 

danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday, a cap which has pronounced 

judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly 

to addressing each other as thou. All which was formerly rouged, is 

washed free. The last veil is torn away. A sewer is a cynic. It tells 

everything. 

which reasons of state, the oath, political sagacity, human justice, 

professional probity, the austerities of situation, incorruptible robes 

befits it. 

passes through the sewer. The Saint-Barthelemys filter through there, 

of civilization, and thrust their corpses there. For the eye of the 

Richelieu is there with Louis XIII., Louvois is there, Letellier is 

desires to flee from it, but nothing escapes it. Tergiversation is 

not permit it to escape into nothingness. In the obliteration of things 

scrap of her dress. From the cess-pool, it re-constitutes the city; from 

from the Jewry of the Ghetto. It re-discovers in what remains that 

which has been, good, evil, the true, the blood-stain of the palace, 

the ink-blot of the cavern, the drop of sweat from the brothel, trials 

undergone, temptations welcomed, orgies cast forth, the turn which 

in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable, and on the 

vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina's elbowing. 

ago, the cess-pool, Mercier attests the fact, was abandoned to itself, 

and fared as best it might. 

and to gropings. It was tolerably stupid for a long time. Later on, '89 

showed how understanding comes to cities. But in the good, old times, 

the capital had not much head. It did not know how to manage its own 

affairs either morally or materially, and could not sweep out filth 

every itinerary. One could no more find one's bearings in the sewer 

than one could understand one's position in the city; above the 

there reigned the confusion of caverns; Daedalus backed up Babel. 

the throat of the city, and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth. 

return. Drive it out better. 

the age of eighty. The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des 

Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees, 

the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer, the Rue 

South, through the vent of the Seine, performing its functions in 

the Rue des Marais, where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and 

nine metres, a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had 

King. It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre, where 

it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the 

way, that she had under her a terrible cavern. People talked of it as 

feet in length, and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub. 

de Crequi, discharged their loads directly into the sewer. As for 

encumbered rather than swept away. Rome left some poetry to her sewer, 

was developed under the fetid covering of the Mouffetard sewer; the 

with points simulating a row of teeth, it was like a dragon's maw 

in that fatal street, breathing forth hell upon men. The popular 

would have dared? It was alarming. Nevertheless, some one did present 

blocked with heroes; men from the Rhine, from the Escaut, from the 

of Hoche, of Kleber; the aerostiers of Fleurus, the grenadiers of 

Mayence, the pontoon-builders of Genoa, hussars whom the Pyramids had 

others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua, others had 

was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengo behind it and 

Austerlitz before it.--"Sire," said the Minister of the Interior to 

Napoleon, "yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in your Empire."--"What 

man is that?" said the Emperor brusquely, "and what has he done?"--"He 

Paris." 

of discovery. One of the survivors of this expedition, an intelligent 

to omit in his report to the prefect of police, as unworthy of official 

style. The processes of disinfection were, at that epoch, extremely 

to determine the arrangements with regard to the level of each 

water-entrance, either of the bottom of the arch, or on the soil of the 

street. They advanced with toil. The lanterns pined away in the foul 

atmosphere. From time to time, a fainting sewerman was carried out. 

pavement had crumbled, the sewer had changed into a bottomless well; 

lighted large cages filled with tow steeped in resin, from time to time, 

wall was covered with misshapen fungi,--one would have said tumors; the 

very stone seemed diseased within this unbreathable atmosphere. 

separation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur, he deciphered 

upon a projecting stone the date of 1550; this stone indicated the 

the sixteenth century on the sewer; Bruneseau found the handiwork of 

Vielle-du-Temple, vaulted between 1600 and 1650; and the handiwork of 

of 1740, were more cracked and decrepit than the masonry of the belt 

Jardin des Plantes in 1800, a disappearance probably connected with 

the famous and indisputable apparition of the devil in the Rue des 

had ended by drowning himself in the sewer. 

connoisseurs. Everywhere, the mire, which the sewermen came to handle 

with intrepidity, abounded in precious objects, jewels of gold and 

silver, precious stones, coins. If a giant had filtered this cesspool, 

he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair. At the point 

where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye 

with a tiara on his head. 

held his lantern close to this rag and examined it. It was of very fine 

batiste, and in one of the corners, less frayed than the rest, they 

LAVBESP. The crown was the coronet of a Marquis, and the seven letters 

before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat. Marat in his 

youth had had amorous intrigues. This was when he was a member of the 

Stables. From these love affairs, historically proved, with a great 

lady, he had retained this sheet. As a waif or a souvenir. At his death, 

they buried him in it. Some old women had shrouded him for the tomb in 

voluptuousness. Bruneseau passed on. They left that rag where it hung; 

they did not put the finishing touch to it. Did this arise from scorn 

or from respect? Marat deserved both. And then, destiny was there 

had rotted in it; it had traversed the Pantheon to end with the rats 

gaze of Dante. 

seven years, from 1805 to 1812. As he proceeded, Bruneseau drew, 

of the Ponceau, and, everywhere creating new lines, he pushed the 

the Innocents; in 1810, under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the 

son-in-law Nargaud. 

was that much clean, at all events. 

jolted by eccentric elbows, mounting and descending illogically, fetid, 

and scars on its walls, terrible,--such was, retrospectively viewed, the 

blind alleys, vaults lined with saltpetre, pestiferous pools, scabby 

sweats, on the walls, drops dripping from the ceilings, darkness; 

apparatus of Babylon, a cavern, ditch, gulf pierced with streets, a 

titanic mole-burrow, where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind 

mole, the past, prowling through the shadows, in the filth which has 

been splendor. 

CHAPTER V--PRESENT PROGRESS 

as though it came out of a bandbox. It resembles a tradesman who has 

taken refuge in architecture, seems mingled with all the stones of 

line is in place anywhere, it is certainly in the drainage trench of 

called a gut is now called a gallery; what used to be called a hole is 

now called a surveying orifice. Villon would no longer meet with his 

the window of the sewer and surveys the Parisians; but even these vermin 

cesspool no longer retains anything of its primitive ferocity. The rain, 

not trust yourself too much to it. Miasmas still inhabit it. It is 

processes of disinfection, it exhales, a vague, suspicious odor like 

Tartuffe after confession. 

Tartuffe's conscience is a progress over the Augean stables, it is 

certain that the sewers of Paris have been improved. 

and the present sewer there is a revolution. What has effected this 

revolution? 

Bruneseau. 

CHAPTER VI--FUTURE PROGRESS 

ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a 

sewer, in fact, receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris. 

thousand antennae, which expands below as the city expands above. Every 

old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundred 

metres of sewers; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the 

shortly speak, the work was usefully and energetically resumed and 

hundred and four metres; Louis XVIII., five thousand seven hundred 

and nine; Charles X., ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six; 

Louis-Philippe, eighty-nine thousand and twenty; the Republic of 

1848, twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one; the present 

two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres; 

sixty leagues of sewers; the enormous entrails of Paris. An obscure 

ramification ever at work; a construction which is immense and ignored. 

have been required to bring this cess-pool to the point of relative 

perfection in which it now is. It was with great difficulty that the 

perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 1806. 

of Paris. Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to 

clay, and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells, the 

contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans. Sometimes a rivulet suddenly 

or a layer of marl is laid bare, and rolls down with the fury of a 

cataract, breaking the stoutest supporting beams like glass. Quite 

suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel, which was beyond 

up. Elsewhere near the Seine, and even at a considerable distance 

and sudden crumbling of the earth. Add the typhus, with which the 

workmen become slowly impregnated. In our own day, after having 

excavated the gallery of Clichy, with a banquette to receive the 

order to provide an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in 

subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec, without a trench, six 

of the branch of the Arbalete, after having built the Saint-Georges 

the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault timber in the 

nevertheless, than the brutal slaughter of the field of battle. 

Bruneseau had given the impulse, but the cholera was required to 

to the sky, in the Rue des Gourdes. It was only in 1821 that the city 

has been made over anew, and, as we have said, it has been extended more 

than tenfold within the last quarter of a century. 

June, it was still, in many localities, nearly the same ancient sewer. 

A very great number of streets which are now convex were then sunken 

causeways. At the end of a slope, where the tributaries of a street or 

the expressive name of Cassis.[60] 

Saint-Louis, the Rue du Temple, the Rue Vielle-duTemple, the Rue 

Notre-Dame de Nazareth, the Rue Folie-Mericourt, the Quai aux Fleurs, 

the Rue du Petit-Muse, the Rue du Normandie, the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches, 

the Rue des Marais, the Faubourg Saint-Martin, the Rue Notre Dame 

Champs-Elysees, the Rue Jacob, the Rue de Tournon, the ancient gothic 

sewer still cynically displayed its maw. It consisted of enormous 

monumental effrontery. 

of January, 1832, it had forty thousand three hundred metres. Between 

1806 and 1831, there had been built, on an average, seven hundred and 

hydraulic mortar which hardens under water, on a cement foundation. At 

present day represent forty-eight millions. 

immense question: the sewers of Paris. 

Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle. The sheet of water 

is healthy, it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the 

this bad breath. The air taken from above a dung-heap, as has been 

as light increases, the sheet of water will be employed to purify the 

earth; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields. 

Louvre, taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel. 

popular instinct has never been deceived in it. The occupation of 

cleaner hesitated to plunge into it; it was said, in proverbial form: 

"to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave;" and all sorts of 

hideous legends, as we have said, covered this colossal sink with 

Marat. 

CHAPTER I--THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES 

the diver may disappear there. 

in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it, he had passed 

the Rue Polonceau, from the most extreme peril to the most absolute 

of Paris; to quit that street where death was on every side, for that 

goodness had, in a manner, captured him by treachery. Adorable 

ambuscades of providence! 

dead corpse. 

He no longer heard anything. The frantic storm of murder which had been 

otherwise than faintly and indistinctly, and like a rumbling, in the 

depths. He felt that the ground was solid under his feet; that was all; 

forward one foot, fearing a hole, a sink, some gulf; he discovered that 

which he stood. 

fell through the man-hole through which he had descended, and his eyes 

became accustomed to this cavern. He began to distinguish something. The 

another wall, a wall like night. The light of the air-hole died out ten 

entrance into it appeared like an engulfment. A man could, however, 

out. He plunged resolutely into the gloom. 

the lightning-charged whirlwind of the combat, the cavern of miasmas and 

of hell into another. 

presented itself. The passage terminated in another gut which he 

encountered across his path. There two ways presented themselves. Which 

slope. To follow to the slope is to arrive at the river. 

emerge from the earth at their feet. Arrival of the police, a call to 

they had even got out. It would be better to plunge into that labyrinth, 

for the outcome. 

and he became blind again. Nevertheless, he advanced as rapidly as 

feet dragged behind him. He held both these arms with one hand, and 

clung there, bleeding. He felt a warm stream which came from Marius 

trickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes. But a 

humid warmth near his ear, which the mouth of the wounded man touched, 

preceding day had not, as yet, entirely run off, and it created a little 

in order not to have his feet in the water. 

emitted a little wavering light in this opaque gloom, or whether his 

eyes had become accustomed to the obscurity, some vague vision returned 

which he touched, now of the vault beneath which he was passing. The 

by finding God there. 

that epoch, placed end to end, would have given a length of eleven 

leagues. We have said above, that the actual net-work, thanks to the 

special activity of the last thirty years, was no less than sixty 

leagues in extent. 

Sewer, with but a single elbow, on the right, on the elevation of the 

never communicated with the sewer of the Rue Saint-Denis; it ended 

at the Montmartre sewer, and it was in this that Jean Valjean was 

sewer is one of the most labyrinthine of the ancient network. 

whose geometrical plan presents the appearance of a multitude of 

than one embarrassing encounter and more than one street corner--for 

they are streets--presenting itself in the gloom like an interrogation 

point; first, on his left, the vast sewer of the Platriere, a sort of 

Chinese puzzle, thrusting out and entangling its chaos of Ts and Zs 

as the Seine, where it terminates in a Y; secondly, on his right, the 

curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran with its three teeth, which 

are also blind courts; thirdly, on his left, the branch of the 

safe. 

even in the sewer, with pavement and string courses of granite and 

his hand contemporary cheapness, economical expedients, porous stone 

francs the metre, and the bourgeoise masonry known as a petits 

materiaux--small stuff; but of all this he knew nothing. 

nothing, buried in chance, that is to say, engulfed in providence. 

aqueduct of the sewer is formidable; it interlaces in a dizzy fashion. 

and the impassable? would Marius die there of hemorrhage and he of 

was no longer ascending; the water of the rivulet was beating against 

his heels, instead of meeting him at his toes. The sewer was now 

descending. Why? Was he about to arrive suddenly at the Seine? This 

danger was a great one, but the peril of retreating was still greater. 

He continued to advance. 

ridge which determines the division of the waters describes a very 

capricious line. The culminating point, which is the point of 

belt sewer; he was on the right path. But he did not know it. 

passage in which he was, he did not enter but continued his route, 

the darkness by the four labyrinths which we have just enumerated. 

but continuous. It was the rumbling of vehicles. 

calculation which he made in his own mind, and he had not yet thought of 

rest; he had merely changed the hand with which he was holding Marius. 

him. 

flooring vault underfoot, and the vault overhead, and gilded to his 

right and to his left the two viscous walls of the passage. Stupefied, 

he turned round. 

obscurity, flamed a sort of horrible star which had the air of surveying 

him. 

confused way, black, upright, indistinct, horrible. 

Bugeaud swept public Paris; a double and connected operation which 

right bank, the second on the left bank, the third in the city. The 

agents of police were armed with carabines, with bludgeons, swords and 

poignards. 

of the patrol of the right bank. 

encountered on his path the entrance to the gallery, had perceived 

thither. He had passed on. The police, on emerging from the gallery 

direction of the belt sewer. They were, in fact, the steps of Jean 

not understand what it was that was moving behind him. The lack of sleep 

it? He did not comprehend. 

nothing. They held a consultation. 

These bull-dogs' heads approached each other closely and whispered 

together. 

entangled in the belt sewer, that it would only be a waste of time, 

but that they ought to hasten towards Saint-Merry; that if there 

quarter. 

bousingot formed the interim between the word jacobin, which had become 

obsolete, and the word demagogue which has since rendered such excellent 

service. 

the Seine. 

both directions, Jean Valjean would have been captured. All hung on 

that thread. It is probable that the instructions of the prefecture, 

foreseeing a possibility of combat and insurgents in force, had 

forbidden the patrol to part company. The patrol resumed its march, 

leaving Jean Valjean behind it. Of all this movement, Jean Valjean 

wheeled round. 

warned him that the ball had struck the arch over his head. 

of black forms vanished, a glimmer of light oscillated and floated, 

communicating to the vault a reddish glow which grew fainter, then 

disappeared; the silence became profound once more, the obscurity became 

complete, blindness and deafness resumed possession of the shadows; 

pupils, watching the disappearance of that phantom patrol. 

himself to be distracted by insurrection and barricades. 

shore, a little beyond the Pont des Invalides. 

changed. 

overtake the other. 

pace. 

on its guard. 

mien and not an impressive appearance; the one who was seeking to seize 

him was rude of aspect, and must have been rude to encounter. 

hostility of flight, and all the menace that fear contains. 

a lighter-man was in the skiffs which were moored here and there. 

to any person who had scrutinized them at that distance, the man who was 

being, who was uneasy and trembling beneath a ragged blouse, and the 

other like a classic and official personage, wearing the frock-coat of 

them closer at hand. 

question lies in the color. To be dressed in blue is glorious; to be 

dressed in red is disagreeable. 

the first man is desirous of shirking. 

was, judging from all appearances, in the hope of seeing him lead up to 

some significant meeting-place and to some group worth catching. This 

delicate operation is called "spinning." 

personage who was in advance. 

parapet. 

emergency." 

of thirst, but the eye is gratified. 

this inclined plane, with a view to making his escape into the 

Champs-Elysees, a place ornamented with trees, but, in return, much 

infested with policemen, and where the other could easily exercise 

violence. 

Paris from Moret in 1824, by Colonel Brack, and designated as "the house 

of Francois I." A guard house is situated close at hand. 

along the quay on the shore. 

marked by the bend in the Seine towards the Pont de Jena, where the 

bank, growing constantly narrower, ended in a slender tongue, and 

in front of him, and the authorities on his heels. 

that heap of rubbish, which one need but skirt? The expedient would 

round it, so that he ceased to be seen by the other. 

few moments, he had reached the rubbish heap and passed round it. There 

he halted in sheer amazement. The man whom he had been pursuing was no 

longer there. 

long, then it plunged into the water which beat against the wall of the 

being seen by the man who was following him. What had become of him? 

under it. This stream discharged into the Seine. 

with an air of reproach. 

it, it resisted solidly. It is probable that it had just been opened, 

although no sound had been heard, a singular circumstance in so rusty a 

grating; but it is certain that it had been closed again. This indicated 

that the man before whom that door had just opened had not a hook but a 

key. 

move the grating, and evoked from him this indignant ejaculation: 

ironically: "Come! Come! Come! Come!" 

see the man emerge or other men enter, he posted himself on the watch 

pursued their way, to take a momentary glance at these two motionless 

varies; the average height is about five feet, six inches, and has been 

over, in order not to strike Marius against the vault; at every step 

he had to bend, then to rise, and to feel incessantly of the wall. The 

so wan that the full sunlight seemed like the light of the moon; all 

the rest was mist, miasma, opaqueness, blackness. Jean Valjean was both 

prodigious, as the reader knows, and which had been but little decreased 

by age, thanks to his chaste and sober life, began to give way, 

nevertheless. Fatigue began to gain on him; and as his strength 

perhaps, dead, weighed him down as inert bodies weigh. Jean Valjean 

respiration could proceed as well as possible. Between his legs he felt 

the rapid gliding of the rats. One of them was frightened to such a 

him. 

belt-sewer. 

Grand Sewer is, in fact, eight feet wide and seven feet high. 

would have remained undecided. Jean Valjean selected the broadest, that 

he descend or ascend? He thought that the situation required haste, and 

descend. He turned to the left. 

belt-sewer has two outlets, the one in the direction of Bercy, the other 

must be remembered, nothing else than the old brook of Menilmontant, 

terminates, if one ascends it, in a blind sack, that is to say, at its 

knoll of Menilmontant. There is no direct communication with the 

above the ancient Isle Louviers. This branch, which completes the 

upstream and downstream. If Jean Valjean had ascended the gallery he 

have been lost. 

have attained the outlet on the Seine near the Arsenal. But in order 

madrepore of the sewer in all its ramifications and in all its openings. 

which he was traversing; and had any one asked him in what he was, he 

would have answered: "In the night." 

long, bifurcated corridor of the Chaussee d'Antin. 

the man-hole in the Rue d'Anjou, furnished a light that was almost 

vivid. Jean Valjean, with the gentleness of movement which a brother 

would exercise towards his wounded brother, deposited Marius on the 

painter's brushes dried in red wash; his hands hung limp and dead. A 

thrust itself into his wounds, the cloth of his coat was chafing the 

garments with the tips of his fingers, laid his hand upon Marius' 

breast; his heart was still beating. Jean Valjean tore up his shirt, 

bandaged the young man's wounds as well as he was able and stopped the 

inexpressible hatred. 

pockets, the roll which had been forgotten there on the preceding 

evening, and Marius' pocketbook. He ate the roll and opened the 

The reader will recall them: 

Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, No. 6, in the Marais." 

remained for a moment as though absorbed in thought, repeating in a low 

had returned to him; he took Marius up once more upon his back, placed 

descent of the sewer. 

Menilmontant, is about two leagues long. It is paved throughout a 

notable portion of its extent. 

illuminating for the reader Jean Valjean's subterranean march, Jean 

intermittent instead of continuous, then having almost ceased, he 

concluded that he was no longer under central Paris, and that he 

was approaching some solitary region, in the vicinity of the outer 

dark. 

pavement under his feet, but only mud. 

man, either a traveller or a fisherman, while walking at low tide on the 

beach far from shore, suddenly notices that for several minutes past, 

he has been walking with some difficulty. The beach under foot is 

like pitch; his soles stick fast to it; it is no longer sand, it is 

bird-lime. The strand is perfectly dry, but at every step that he takes, 

as soon as the foot is raised, the print is filled with water. The 

eye, however, has perceived no change; the immense beach is smooth and 

tranquil, all the sand has the same aspect, nothing distinguishes the 

soil that is solid from that which is not solid; the joyous little 

cloud of sand-lice continues to leap tumultuously under the feet of the 

passer-by. 

to approach the shore. He is not uneasy. Uneasy about what? Only he is 

conscious that the heaviness of his feet seems to be increasing at every 

step that he takes. All at once he sinks in. He sinks in two or three 

inches. Decidedly, he is not on the right road; he halts to get his 

bearings. Suddenly he glances at his feet; his feet have disappeared. 

The sand has covered them. He draws his feet out of the sand, he tries 

before. The sand is up to his ankles, he tears himself free from it 

and flings himself to the left, the sand reaches to mid-leg, he flings 

himself to the right, the sand comes up to his knees. Then, with 

indescribable terror, he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a 

quicksand, and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in which 

have one, he lightens himself, like a ship in distress; it is too late, 

the sand is above his knees. 

gains on him; if the beach is deserted, if the land is too far away, if 

terrible interment, long, infallible, implacable, which it is impossible 

every shout that you utter, draws you a little lower, which has the air 

the plain, the sails of the ships on the sea, the birds which fly 

to his belly, the sand reaches to his breast, he is only a bust now. 

beach, tries to cling fast to that ashes, supports himself on his elbows 

in order to raise himself from that soft sheath, and sobs frantically; 

the sand mounts higher. The sand has reached his shoulders, the sand 

aloud, the sand fills it; silence. His eyes still gaze forth, the sand 

disappears. Sinister obliteration of a man. 

swallowed up with his cart; all founders in that strand. It is shipwreck 

guise of a plain, and it yawns like a wave. The abyss is subject to 

these treacheries. 

possible, thirty years ago, in the sewers of Paris. 

particularly friable; the foot-way, which was of flag-stones, as in 

sort means a crack, means crumbling. The framework crumbled away for a 

certain length. This crevice, the hiatus of a gulf of mire, was called a 

fontis, in the special tongue. What is a fontis? It is the quicksands of 

state of fusion, as it were; all its molecules are in suspension in soft 

great. Nothing can be more formidable than such an encounter. If the 

predominates, death is slow. 

earth is terrible on the seashore, what is it in a cess-pool? Instead of 

in the distance, of that hope under all sorts of forms, of probable 

of all this, deafness, blindness, a black vault, the inside of a tomb 

by filth, a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire and 

slime instead of the strand, sulfuretted hydrogen in place of the 

teeth, and to writhe, and to struggle, and to agonize, with that 

enormous city which knows nothing of it all, over one's head! 

his atrocity by a certain terrible dignity. On the funeral pile, in 

But not here. Death is filthy. It is humiliating to expire. The supreme 

floating visions are abject. Mud is synonymous with shame. It is 

petty, ugly, infamous. To die in a butt of Malvoisie, like Clarence, is 

To struggle therein is hideous; at the same time that one is going 

the dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a spectre 

or a frog. 

density, according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil. 

sometimes the bottom was unfathomable. Here the mire was almost solid, 

safety is to get rid of every sort of load. Every sewerman who felt the 

or his back-basket, or his hod. 

some landslip at a depth beyond the reach of man; the violent summer 

rains; the incessant flooding of winter; long, drizzling showers. 

Sometimes the weight of the surrounding houses on a marly or sandy soil 

hill. When a sewer was broken in under the pressure of the houses, the 

like the teeth of a saw, between the paving-stones; this crevice was 

promptly applied. It also frequently happened, that the interior ravages 

were not revealed by any external scar, and in that case, woe to the 

sewermen. When they entered without precaution into the sewer, they were 

liable to be lost. Ancient registers make mention of several scavengers 

who were buried in fontis in this manner. They give many names; among 

the epoch when that cemetery expired. 

delivered the assault in silk stockings, with violins at their head. 

D'Escoubleau, surprised one night at his cousin's, the Duchess de 

body of Leander. Thisbe stops her nose in the presence of Pyramus and 

says: "Phew!" 

excessive fluidity. This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of the 

sands of the Quartier Saint-Georges, which could only be conquered by 

sewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honore, in which we now see Jean 

Valjean, was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it, the 

Seine, presented such an obstacle, that the operation lasted nearly 

six months, to the great clamor of the dwellers on the riverside, 

particularly those who had hotels and carriages. The work was more than 

half of rain, and three floods of the Seine. 

sand, had given way and had produced a stoppage of the water. 

night. 

Moreover, the pit seemed, for the first few steps, not to be very deep. 

the slime up to his calves and water above his knees. He walked on, 

now reached to his knees, and the water to his waist. He could no longer 

uphold two. Marius and Jean Valjean would have stood a chance of 

extricating themselves singly. Jean Valjean continued to advance, 

supporting the dying man, who was, perhaps, a corpse. 

only with difficulty that he could move in the depth of ooze which 

he had now reached. The density, which was his support, was also 

seen him in that gloom would have thought that what he beheld was a 

mask floating on the shadows; he caught a faint glimpse above him of the 

support. It was high time. 

first step in a staircase leading back to life. 

moment, was the beginning of the other water-shed of the pavement, which 

and possess this sort of firmness. This fragment of the vaulting, partly 

the other side of the quagmire. 

and his soul filled with a strange light. 

to have left his strength behind him there. That supreme effort had 

exhausted him. His lassitude was now such that he was obliged to pause 

for breath every three or four steps, and lean against the wall. Once 

he was forced to seat himself on the banquette in order to alter Marius' 

position, and he thought that he should have to remain there. But if his 

vigor was dead, his energy was not. He rose again. 

paces, almost without drawing breath, and suddenly came in contact with 

the wall. He had reached an elbow of the sewer, and, arriving at the 

turn with head bent down, he had struck the wall. He raised his eyes, 

and at the extremity of the vault, far, very far away in front of him, 

he perceived a light. This time it was not that terrible light; it was 

good, white light. It was daylight. Jean Valjean saw the outlet. 

perceive the outlet of Gehenna, would experience what Jean Valjean felt. 

It would fly wildly with the stumps of its burned wings towards that 

rather than walked. As he approached, the outlet became more and more 

the vault grew lower. The tunnel ended like the interior of a funnel; 

a faulty construction, imitated from the wickets of penitentiaries, 

corrected. 

prison locks which old Paris was so fond of lavishing. 

of the most solitary points in Paris; the shore which faces the 

grating. 

declining. 

grating did not stir. Jean Valjean seized the bars one after the other, 

a bar stirred. The teeth of a tiger are not more firmly fixed in their 

sockets. No lever; no prying possible. The obstacle was invincible. 

There was no means of opening the gate. 

quagmire whence he had only extricated himself as by a miracle? And 

after the quagmire, was there not the police patrol, which assuredly 

could not be twice avoided? And then, whither was he to go? What 

in that manner. Chance had unsealed the grating through which he had 

He had only succeeded in escaping into a prison. 

Exhaustion had ended in failure. 

who still made no movement, and with his head bent between his knees. 

This was the last drop of anguish. 

himself nor of Marius. He was thinking of Cosette. 

low voice said to him: 

despair. Jean Valjean thought that he was dreaming. He had heard no 

footsteps. Was it possible? He raised his eyes. 

Valjean, without allowing his steps to be heard. 

encounter, this man was known to him. The man was Thenardier. 

to alarms, and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptly 

parried, instantly regained possession of his presence of mind. 

could add nothing to this blackness of this night. 

A momentary pause ensued. 

to recognize another man. He did not succeed. Jean Valjean, as we have 

so disfigured, so bemired, so bleeding that he would have been 

unrecognizable in full noonday. On the contrary, illuminated by the 

light from the grating, a cellar light, it is true, livid, yet precise 

in its lividness, Thenardier, as the energetic popular metaphor 

expresses it, immediately "leaped into" Jean Valjean's eyes. This 

between the two situations and the two men. The encounter took place 

between Jean Valjean veiled and Thenardier unmasked. 

him. 

taking each other's measure. Thenardier was the first to break the 

silence. 

out of this." 

he had in his pockets. Give me my half. I'll open the door for you." 

springing from the earth in the form of Thenardier. 

blouse, drew out a rope and offered it to Jean Valjean. 

heap of rubbish." 

stone and a rope, otherwise it would float on the water." 

accept in this mechanical way. 

to him. 

yonder? I haven't dared to risk myself in it. Phew! you don't smell 

good." 

who you are and what you want. I twig. You've broken up that gentleman 

hider of folly, is what you want. I'll get you out of your scrape. 

Helping a good fellow in a pinch is what suits me to a hair." 

to force him to talk. He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch a 

tone: 

a serious man: 

pick up the scent and reach you. Some one has passed through the sewer. 

find is a rarity, it attracts attention, very few people make use of 

in the nets at Saint-Cloud. Well, what does one care for that? It's 

have done well." 

amicable. 

simple; he had not the air of being wholly at his ease; while affecting 

was no one there except themselves. Jean Valjean thought that other 

ruffians might possibly be concealed in some nook, not very far off, and 

that Thenardier did not care to share with them. 

money about him. The mournful life of expedients to which he had been 

condemned imposed this as a law upon him. On this occasion, however, 

he had been caught unprepared. When donning his uniform of a National 

as he was, to take his pocket-book. He had only some small change in his 

five or six large sous. 

neck. 

his back to the light, let him have his way. 

concealed under his blouse, probably thinking that this morsel of 

assassin. However, he found no more than the thirty francs. 

them also, muttering: 

That done, he once more drew the big key from under his blouse. 

you go out. You have paid, now clear out." 

some other man than himself emerge from that portal, the pure and 

doubt this. 

in the habit of opening more frequently than was supposed. This 

paws of a tiger. 

invisibility. 

living, joyous air that was easy to breathe inundated him. Everywhere 

around him reigned silence, but that charming silence when the sun has 

set in an unclouded azure sky. Twilight had descended; night was drawing 

on, the great deliverer, the friend of all those who need a mantle of 

darkness that they may escape from an anguish. The sky presented itself 

in all directions like an enormous calm. The river flowed to his feet 

with the sound of a kiss. The aerial dialogue of the nests bidding each 

other good night in the elms of the Champs-Elysees was audible. A few 

stars, daintily piercing the pale blue of the zenith, and visible to 

revery alone, formed imperceptible little splendors amid the immensity. 

Evening was unfolding over the head of Jean Valjean all the sweetness of 

the infinite. 

Night was already sufficiently advanced to render it possible to lose 

oneself at a little distance and yet there was sufficient daylight to 

permit of recognition at close quarters. 

august and caressing serenity; such moments of oblivion do come to men; 

dipping up water in the hollow of his hand, he gently sprinkled a 

few drops on the latter's face. Marius' eyelids did not open; but his 

half-open mouth still breathed. 

such as a person feels when there is some one behind him whom he does 

not see. 

familiar. 

before. 

A man of lofty stature, enveloped in a long coat, with folded arms, 

and bearing in his right fist a bludgeon of which the leaden head was 

was crouching over Marius. 

ordinary man would have been alarmed because of the twilight, a 

thoughtful man on account of the bludgeon. Jean Valjean recognized 

Javert. 

had betaken himself to the prefecture of police, had rendered a 

which had, for some time past, aroused the attention of the police. 

There he had caught sight of Thenardier and had followed him. The reader 

knows the rest. 

upon has a scent which never deceives him; it was necessary to fling 

Valjean outside in his stead, provided a prey for the police, forced 

them to relinquish his scent, made them forget him in a bigger 

was concerned, on escaping with the aid of this diversion. 

upon Javert, was a rude shock. 

calm voice: 

terrible. 

submitting to the claws of a lynx. 

Only grant me one favor." 

again firmly, and, as though in a dream, he murmured rather than uttered 

this question: 

as you see fit; but first help me to carry him home. That is all that I 

ask of you." 

"no." 

he moistened in the water and with which he then wiped Marius' 

blood-stained brow. 

speaking to himself. "He is the one they called Marius." 

leaning on the first step of the sepulchre, had taken notes. 

"He is a dead man," said Javert. 

even notice Jean Valjean's silence after his question. 

grandfather. I do not recollect his name." 

Javert possessed in his eye the feline phosphorescence of night 

"Gillenormand, Rue des Filles-du Calvaire, No. 6." 

need. 

quays in the direction of the Bastille. 

in the carriage. Marius, motionless, with his body resting in the 

interior, every time that it passed in front of a street lantern, 

appeared to be turned lividly wan, as by an intermittent flash of 

lightning, chance had united and seemed to be bringing face to face 

statue. 

hair. 

Filles-du-Calvaire. 

iron, embellished in the old style, with a male goat and a satyr 

confronting each other, he gave a violent peal. The gate opened a little 

way and Javert gave it a push. The porter half made his appearance 

yawning, vaguely awake, and with a candle in his hand. 

Marais, especially on days when there is a revolt. This good, old 

quarter, terrified at the Revolution, takes refuge in slumber, as 

under their coverlet. 

coachman under the knees. 

himself that his heart was still beating. It was even beating a little 

certain fresh access of life. 

presence of the porter of a factious person. 

head that this was not so. 

Valjean's sign. 

"He went to the barricade, and here he is." 

quantities; in the street, uproar, revolt, carnival, and funeral. 

Nicolette roused great-aunt Gillenormand. 

hear about the matter early enough in any case. 

stairs, having behind him the step of Javert who was following him. 

arrival, in terrified somnolence. 

with me." 

the collar of his great-coat, then he lowered the glass and front: 

Cosette, to tell her where Marius was, to give her, possibly, some other 

useful information, to take, if he could, certain final measures. As 

been seized by Javert and had not resisted; any other man than himself 

first cell that he should enter; but, let us impress it upon the 

himself. 

Valjean. 

Valjean alighted. 

Utrecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of the 

understood it. He added that an indemnity was due him. At the same time, 

have the goodness to write him "a bit of an attestation." 

said: 

was perfectly new. Eighty francs, Mr. Inspector." 

both of which are close at hand. 

Valjean. They reached No. 7. Jean Valjean knocked. The door opened. 

effort in speaking in this manner: 

"I will wait for you here." 

from his couch: "It is I!" and ascended the stairs. 

have their stations. The window on the landing-place, which was a 

effected some economy in illumination. 

thrust his head out of this window. He leaned out over the street. It 

overwhelmed with amazement; there was no longer any one there. 

thither. Aunt Gillenormand had risen. 

a pillow, with his head on the same level as his body, and even a 

trifle lower, and with his bust bare in order to facilitate respiration. 

Mademoiselle Gillenormand, on perceiving that they were undressing 

Marius, withdrew. She set herself to telling her beads in her own 

chamber. 

symptom was that they had caused a swoon, and that people do not always 

recover from such swoons. Moreover, the wounded man had been exhausted 

by hemorrhage. From the waist down, the barricade had protected the 

lower part of the body from injury. 

in hand, lighted them. 

he had inwardly addressed to himself. 

with himself. 

engrossed the mind of M. Gillenormand. He had not been able to sleep 

sheer fatigue. 

the noise had awakened him. Surprised at the rift of light which he 

thither. 

half-open door, with his head bent a little forward and quivering, 

who is gazing into a tomb. 

and brilliantly lighted up. 

limbs can tremble, his eyes, whose corneae were yellow on account of 

his great age, were veiled in a sort of vitreous glitter, his whole 

pendent, as though a spring had broken, and his amazement was betrayed 

all over, his knees formed an angle in front, allowing, through 

the opening in his dressing-gown, a view of his poor bare legs, all 

bristling with white hairs, and he murmured: 

barricade, and . . ." 

centenarian as erect as a young man. 

is dead!" 

night: 

his portrait taken when he was a little child! He knew well that he had 

I remained by my fireside, with my hands on my knees, not knowing what 

house, and that I should have obeyed you, and that you could have done 

whatever you pleased with your old numskull of a grandfather! you knew 

that well, and you said: 

"No, he is a Royalist, I will not go! And you went to the barricades, 

and you got yourself killed out of malice! To revenge yourself for what 

then and sleep tranquilly! he is dead, and this is my awakening." 

Marius for a moment, went to M. Gillenormand, and took his arm. 

The grandfather turned round, gazed at him with eyes which seemed 

exaggerated in size and bloodshot, and said to him calmly: 

scamp! Doctor, you live in this quarter, I believe? Oh! I know you well. 

garden with his little shovel and his little chair, and in order that 

the earth with his shovel, with my cane. One day he exclaimed: Down with 

of the Loire, but children are innocent of their fathers' crimes. 

I remember when he was no higher than that. He could not manage 

to pronounce his Ds. He had a way of talking that was so sweet and 

indistinct that you would have thought it was a bird chirping. I 

circle to admire him and marvel at him, he was so handsome, was that 

This cannot be allowed to pass in this fashion." 

the physician had returned, and began once more to wring his hands. The 

agony: 

should come to the light, the sequence of words returned, but the 

side of an abyss: 

to think that there is not a hussy in Paris who would not have been 

delighted to make this wretch happy! A scamp who, instead of amusing 

funerals under the same carriage gate. So you have got yourself arranged 

oneself killed for a dead man! If that isn't enough to drive any one 

in your corner, owl! Well, after all, so much the better, that is what 

I was hoping for, this will kill me on the spot. I am too old, I am 

is over, what happiness! What is the good of making him inhale ammonia 

a doctor! Come, he's dead, completely dead. I know all about it, I 

your systems, of your masters, of your oracles, of your doctors, of your 

scape-graces of writers, of your rascally philosophers, and of all the 

revolutions which, for the last sixty years, have been frightening 

the flocks of crows in the Tuileries! But you were pitiless in getting 

yourself killed like this, I shall not even grieve over your death, do 

you understand, you assassin?" 

dimmed by lethargic wonder, rested on M. Gillenormand. 

thanks!" 

CHAPTER I--JAVERT 

likewise, for the first time in his life, with his hands behind his 

back. 

back--had been unknown to him. Now, a change had taken place; his whole 

person, slow and sombre, was stamped with anxiety. 

Seine forms a sort of square lake, traversed by a rapid. 

Men who fall in there never re-appear; the best of swimmers are drowned 

there. 

his whiskers, he meditated. 

depths of his being; and he had something upon which to examine himself. 

that brain, so limpid in its blindness, had lost its transparency; that 

dog who finds his master again. 

excluded the other. Which of the two was the true one? 

be, in spite of himself, on a level with a fugitive from justice, and to 

repay his service with another service; to allow it to be said to him, 

"Go," and to say to the latter in his turn: "Be free"; to sacrifice to 

accumulate upon him,--this was what overwhelmed him. 

done Jean Valjean a favor. 

Where did he stand? He sought to comprehend his position, and could no 

longer find his bearings. 

Valjean at liberty was bad. In the first case, the man of authority fell 

the law, and set his foot upon it. In both cases, dishonor for him, 

Destiny has some extremities which rise perpendicularly from the 

Javert had reached one of those extremities. 

something to which he was unused, and which was peculiarly painful. 

and it irritated him to have that within him. 

such shocks, and render to himself an account of himself. 

decide, contrary to all the regulations of the police, contrary to the 

for the affairs of the public; was not this unjustifiable? Every time 

he had committed, he trembled from head to foot. Upon what should he 

that that was what he ought to do. He could not. 

was overwhelmed. 

And that the deed of Javert! 

of them had set themselves above the law? What then! such enormities 

the subject of that insurgent who had been taken to the Rue des 

man, and, legally, death puts an end to pursuit. 

as lies and folly, now recurred to him as realities. M. Madeleine 

a convict. Respect for a galley-slave--is that a possible thing? He 

shuddered at it, yet could not escape from it. In vain did he struggle, 

wretch. This was odious. 

to himself that this monster existed. 

resistance to that monster, to that infamous angel, to that hideous 

hero, who enraged almost as much as he amazed him. Twenty times, as he 

sat in that carriage face to face with Jean Valjean, the legal tiger had 

upon Jean Valjean, to seize him and devour him, that is to say, to 

to summon the gendarmes and say to them: "This man is yours!" then to 

a strange voice crying to him:--"It is well. Deliver up your savior. 

glorified he beheld himself, Javert, degraded. 

the right to be killed in that barricade. He should have asserted that 

succor against Jean Valjean, to get himself shot by force. 

uprooted. The code was no longer anything more than a stump in his hand. 

He had to deal with scruples of an unknown species. There had taken 

had cropped up and subjugated him. A whole new world was dawning on 

his soul: kindness accepted and repaid, devotion, mercy, indulgence, 

in the eye of the law, no one knows what justice according to God, 

and dazzled him. An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle. 

that authority might be put out of countenance, that the rule might 

be inadequate in the presence of a fact, that everything could not 

obedience, that the virtue of a convict might set a snare for the virtue 

against a surprise. 

been good. And he himself, unprecedented circumstance, had just been 

good also. So he was becoming depraved. 

to be irreproachable. 

all that he could do, he could not contrive to explain it to himself. 

hand had relaxed and had let him go free. 

questions to himself, and made replies to himself, and his replies 

had me under his foot, and who could have avenged himself, and who 

owed it both to his rancor and to his safety, in leaving me my life, in 

showing mercy upon me? His duty? No. Something more. And I in showing 

mercy upon him in my turn--what have I done? My duty? No. Something 

more. So there is something beyond duty?" Here he took fright; his 

in the world what is called Voltairian or a philosopher, or incredulous, 

embarrassed by him. This unforeseen presence threw him off his bearings; 

not disobey, nor find fault, nor discuss, and that, in the presence of a 

than that of handing in his resignation. 

shut his eyes on an escaped convict who had broken his ban. He had just 

belonged to them. That was what he had done. He no longer understood 

a conscience abruptly operated on for the cataract. He saw that which 

dead within him. He had no longer any reason for existing. 

piece in the mould of the law, and suddenly to become aware of the fact 

that one cherishes beneath one's breast of bronze something absurd 

that that good is evil! to be the watch-dog, and to lick the intruder's 

to suddenly feel one's fingers opening! to relax one's grip,--what a 

terrible thing! 

infallible, there may exist error in the dogma, all has not been said 

when a code speaks, society is not perfect, authority is complicated 

the immense blue pane of the firmament! 

conscience, the derailment of a soul, the crushing of a probity which 

against God. It certainly was singular that the stoker of order, that 

the direct, the correct, the geometrical, the passive, the perfect, 

could bend! that there should exist for the locomotive a road to 

Damascus! 

false; a prohibition to the spark to die out; an order to the ray to 

absolute when confronted with the fictitious absolute, humanity 

which cannot be lost; the human heart indestructible; that splendid 

phenomenon, the finest, perhaps, of all our interior marvels, did Javert 

to himself? Evidently he did not. But beneath the pressure of that 

incontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain bursting. 

not accustomed to having something unknown hanging over his head. 

smooth, limpid and simple surface; there was nothing incomprehensible, 

for; authority was a plane surface; there was no fall in it, no 

chaos, the possible slip over a precipice--this was the work of the 

himself back, and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedented 

apparition: a gulf on high. 

absolutely! In what could one trust! That which had been agreed upon was 

the orders given by the State to the functionary! There might be 

blind alleys in duty! What,--all this was real! was it true that an 

that was the state of the case! and Javert saw it! and Javert had 

reach such deformity. If facts did their duty, they would confine 

Was anarchy, then, on the point of now descending from on high? 

of consternation, all that might have corrected and restrained this 

impression was effaced, and society, and the human race, and the 

to legislation, the decrees of the sovereign courts, the magistracy, 

infallibility, the principle of authority, all the dogmas on which rest 

political and civil security, sovereignty, justice, public truth, all 

of order, incorruptibility in the service of the police, the bull-dog 

come; this was the fearful vision which he bore within his soul. 

to his cell the convict from the galleys. The other . . . 

himself, with a firm tread, towards the station-house indicated by a 

lantern at one of the corners of the Place du Chatelet. 

which a candle was burning. On a table lay a pen, a leaden inkstand and 

night patrols. This table, still completed by its straw-seated chair, 

is an institution; it exists in all police stations; it is invariably 

ornamented with a box-wood saucer filled with sawdust and a wafer box 

of cardboard filled with red wafers, and it forms the lowest stage of 

official style. It is there that the literature of the State has its 

beginning. 

he wrote: 

 "In the first place:  I beg Monsieur le Prefet to cast his eyes 

 on this. 

 their shoes and stand barefoot on the flagstones while they are 

 being searched.  Many of them cough on their return to prison. 

 it is requisite that at least two agents should never lose sight 

 of each other, so that, in case one agent should, for any cause, 

 grow weak in his service, the other may supervise him and take 

 his place. 

 of the Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair, 

 even by paying for it. 

 so that the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand. 

 prisoners to the parlor, force the prisoner to pay them two sous 

 to call his name distinctly.  This is a theft. 

 weaving shop; this is an abuse of the contractor, since the cloth 

 is none the worse for it. 

 obliged to traverse the boys' court in order to reach the parlor 

 relating in the court-yard of the prefecture the interrogations put 

 by the magistrates to prisoners.  For a gendarme, who should be 

 sworn to secrecy, to repeat what he has heard in the examination 

 room is a grave disorder. 

 but it is bad to have a woman keep the wicket to the mouse-trap 

 of the secret cells.  This is unworthy of the Conciergerie of a 

 great civilization." 

 not omitting a single comma, and making the paper screech under his pen. 

 Below the last line he signed: 

                                    "Inspector of the 1st class. 

       "The Post of the Place du Chatelet. 

                 "June 7th, 1832, about one o'clock in the morning." 

Javert dried the fresh ink on the paper, folded it like a letter, sealed 

it, wrote on the back: Note for the administration, left it on the 

parapet. He did not appear to have stirred. 

midnight. A ceiling of clouds concealed the stars. Not a single light 

of the Court-House seemed features of the night. A street lantern 

reddened the margin of the quay. The outlines of the bridges lay 

river. 

like an endless screw. 

What lay below was not water, it was a gulf. The wall of the quay, 

to be seen, but the hostile chill of the water and the stale odor of 

flood in the river, divined rather than perceived, the tragic whispering 

horror. 

of shadow; he considered the invisible with a fixity that resembled 

a belated passer-by in the distance might have taken for a phantom, 

appeared erect upon the parapet of the quay, bent over towards the 

Seine, then drew itself up again, and fell straight down into the 

shadows; a dull splash followed; and the shadow alone was in the secret 

the water. 

CHAPTER I--IN WHICH THE TREE WITH THE ZINC PLASTER APPEARS AGAIN 

Boulatruelle experienced a lively emotion. 

has already seen in the gloomy parts of this book. 

was occupied with divers and troublesome matters. He broke stones and 

damaged travellers on the highway. 

lived to search the pockets of passers-by. 

garret in company with the other ruffians. Utility of a vice: his 

drunkenness had been his salvation. The authorities had never been able 

authenticated state of intoxication on the evening of the ambush, had 

none the less tenderly to the wine which had recently saved him. 

his return to his road-mender's turf-thatched cot, here it is: 

distance and in the early dusk, was not entirely unfamiliar to him. 

with legal order. 

resembled some one of whom his memory preserved a confused trace. 

he in these woods? why was he there at such an hour? what had he come 

there for? 

that he might well be this very individual. 

reason, and I'll know it. People can't have secrets in my forest if I 

don't have a finger in the pie." 

man." 

set out across the thickets. 

When he had compassed a hundred strides, the day, which was already 

sand, weeds trodden down here and there, heather crushed, young branches 

in the brushwood bent and in the act of straightening themselves up 

woods and came to a sort of eminence. An early huntsman who was passing 

in the distance along a path, whistling the air of Guillery, suggested 

stood close at hand a beech-tree of great size, worthy of Tityrus and of 

caught sight of his man. 

considerable distance, masked by large trees, but with which 

ago, is doubtless still there. Nothing equals a heap of stones in 

What a reason for lasting! 

beast. That famous treasure of his dreams was probably there. 

He believed in the straight line; a respectable optical illusion which 

best road. 

guilty of the fault of going straight. 

traverse. 

sweating, soaked, breathless, scratched, and ferocious. 

stones. It was in its place. It had not been carried off. 

Where? in what direction? into what thicket? Impossible to guess. 

the tree with the sheet of zinc, was freshly turned earth, a pick-axe, 

abandoned or forgotten, and a hole. 

lay in a fever accompanied by delirium, and by tolerably grave cerebral 

symptoms, caused more by the shocks of the wounds on the head than by 

the wounds themselves. 

of fever, and with the sombre obstinacy of agony. The extent of some of 

the lesions presented a serious danger, the suppuration of large wounds 

being always liable to become re-absorbed, and consequently, to kill 

the sick man, under certain atmospheric conditions; at every change of 

weather, at the slightest storm, the physician was uneasy. 

emotion." The dressing of the wounds was complicated and difficult, 

the fixation of apparatus and bandages by cerecloths not having been 

invented as yet, at that epoch. Nicolette used up a sheet "as big as the 

ceiling," as she put it, for lint. It was not without difficulty 

that the chloruretted lotions and the nitrate of silver overcame the 

gangrene. As long as there was any danger, M. Gillenormand, seated in 

despair at his grandson's pillow, was, like Marius, neither alive nor 

dead. 

dressings. 

the great annoyance of the sick person. 

state of society, are so much the fault of every one, that they are 

followed by a certain necessity of shutting the eyes. 

to lodge information against the wounded, having outraged public 

councils of war did not dare to trouble any one. So Marius was left in 

peace. 

passing every night beside the wounded man; he had his big arm-chair 

carried to Marius' bedside; he required his daughter to take the 

finest linen in the house for compresses and bandages. Mademoiselle 

preparation of lint batiste is not nearly so good as coarse linen, 

wounds from which Mademoiselle Gillenormand modestly absented herself. 

offer the wounded man a cup of his cooling-draught. He overwhelmed the 

over and over again. 

following song: 

       Vrai nid d'une bergere;       Car c'est dans sa prunelle 

           Fripon.                       Narquois! 

                 Plus que Diane meme, 

                 Jeanne et ses durs tetons 

                     Bretons."[61] 

"Love, thou dwellest in her; For 'tis in her eyes that thou placest thy 

quiver, sly scamp! 

her firm Breton breasts." 

Then he knelt upon a chair, and Basque, who was watching him through the 

half-open door, made sure that he was praying. 

pronounced, the grandfather raved. He executed a multitude of mechanical 

knowing why. A pretty female neighbor was amazed one morning at 

"Long live the Republic!" 

He gazed upon Marius with the eyes of a grandmother. He brooded over him 

abdication in his joy, he was the grandson of his grandson. 

he stepped behind him to smile. He was content, joyous, delighted, 

radiance of his visage. When grace is mingled with wrinkles, it is 

adorable. There is an indescribable aurora in beaming old age. 

he had but one fixed idea: Cosette. 

her. He held his peace, precisely because his soul was there. 

Rue de la Chanvrerie was like a cloud in his memory; shadows that were 

by whom he had been saved, and no one of those around him knew this; all 

but in that fog there was one immovable point, one clear and precise 

outline, something made of granite, a resolution, a will; to find 

grandfather, from fate, from hell,--the restitution of his vanished 

Eden. 

softened by all the solicitude and tenderness of his grandfather. In 

the first place, he was not in the secret; then, in his reveries of 

an invalid, which were still feverish, possibly, he distrusted this 

it became a question of Cosette, he would find another face, and that 

be an unpleasant scene; a recrudescence of family questions, a 

poverty, a stone about his neck, the future. Violent resistance; 

conclusion: a refusal. Marius stiffened himself in advance. 

memory opened once more, he reflected again on the past, Colonel 

Pontmercy placed himself once more between M. Gillenormand and him, 

Marius, he told himself that he had no true kindness to expect from 

a person who had been so unjust and so hard to his father. And 

with health, there returned to him a sort of harshness towards his 

the latter had been brought back to him and had regained consciousness, 

had not once called him father. It is true that he did not say 

crisis was approaching. 

battle, by way of proving himself. This is called "feeling the ground." 

the Convention, apropos of a newspaper which had fallen into his 

hands, and gave vent to a Royalist harangue on Danton, Saint-Juste and 

The old man held his peace, and uttered not a sound during the remainder 

of that day. 

for the fray in the inmost recesses of his mind. 

war. He would have Cosette or die. 

phials and cups on the marble of the commode, bent over Marius and said 

to him in his tenderest accents: "Look here, my little Marius, if I were 

in your place, I would eat meat now in preference to fish. A fried sole 

is excellent to begin a convalescence with, but a good cutlet is needed 

to put a sick man on his feet." 

face, assumed a terrible air, and said: 

every limb. 

since you were wounded, she has passed her time in weeping and making 

yourself:--'I'm going to signify this squarely to my grandfather, to 

to that Dorante turned Geronte; he has indulged in his frivolities also, 

the discourse which you meant to bestow upon me, Mr. Lawyer, and that's 

vexatious. Well, so much the worse, rage away. I'll do whatever 

you wish, and that cuts you short, imbecile! Listen. I have made my 

inquiries, I'm cunning too; she is charming, she is discreet, it is not 

young wounded men who interest them. It is not done. What would your 

all right, let us say no more about it, all's said, all's done, it's all 

settled, take her. Such is my ferocity. You see, I perceived that you 

to shout no, and to lift his cane at all that aurora. Not a bit of it. 

Cosette, so be it; love, so be it; I ask nothing better. Pray take the 

trouble of getting married, sir. Be happy, my well-beloved child." 

happiness. 

her." 

times, and it is worth it. I will attend to it. She shall be brought 

hither. Agreed, I tell you. It has already been put into verse. This is 

Chenier whose throat was cut by the ras . . . by the giants of '93." 

and who was thinking far more of Cosette than of 1793. 

Chenier, resumed precipitately: 

who were heroes, pardi! found that Andre Chenier embarrassed them 

somewhat, and they had him guillot . . . that is to say, those great 

public safety, to be so good as to go . . ." 

proceed. Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it, while his 

daughter arranged the pillow behind Marius, who was overwhelmed with so 

many emotions, the old man rushed headlong, with as much rapidity as 

purple, choking and foaming at the mouth, his eyes starting from his 

one must not attempt to depict; the sun is one of them. 

Marius' chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it. 

his nose; he stopped short, holding his nose in his handkerchief, and 

gazing over it at Cosette. 

by a glory. 

thoroughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness. She stammered all 

pale, yet flushed, she wanted to fling herself into Marius' arms, and 

dared not. Ashamed of loving in the presence of all these people. People 

who was grave yet smiling, though with a vague and heartrending smile. 

It was "Monsieur Fauchelevent"; it was Jean Valjean. 

perfectly new garments, and with a white cravat. 

bourgeois, in this probable notary, the fear-inspiring bearer of the 

don't know why it is, but I can't help fancying that I've seen that face 

before." 

had under his arm, a package which bore considerable resemblance to an 

hue, and appeared to be mouldy. 

tone of Nicolette. 

tone, "he's a learned man. What then? Is that his fault? Monsieur 

Boulard, one of my acquaintances, never walked out without a book under 

his arm either, and he always had some old volume hugged to his heart 

like that." 

proper names was an aristocratic habit of his. 

grandson, Baron Marius Pontmercy, for the hand of Mademoiselle." 

he cried: 

Cosette, "I see you once again! it is thou! it is you! The idea of going 

and fighting like that! But why? It is horrible. I have been dead for 

I done to you? I pardon you, but you will never do it again. A little 

while ago, when they came to tell us to come to you, I still thought 

that I was about to die, but it was from joy. I was so sad! I have not 

the scissors. That is frightful. I have cried till I have no eyes left. 

It is queer that a person can suffer like that. Your grandfather has a 

look, it is your fault, I have a callous on my fingers." 

Angel is the only word in the language which cannot be worn out. No 

other word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it. 

contenting themselves with softly touching each other's hands. 

their ease." 

voice: 

envious glance of an owl at two turtle-doves, it was the stupid eye of a 

poor innocent seven and fifty years of age; it was a life which had been 

a failure gazing at that triumph, love. 

off nicely with me, you are happy; if I were not fifteen years too old, 

I am in love with you, mademoiselle. It's perfectly simple. It is your 

is better. It was built by the Jesuits. It is more coquettish. It is 

architecture is at Namur. It is called Saint-Loup. You must go there 

after you are married. It is worth the journey. Mademoiselle, I am quite 

see uncoiffed.[62] It's a fine thing to remain a spinster, but it is 

and that they fall back on the Society of the Virgin; but, sapristi, a 

candle at vespers, and chanting Turris eburnea!" 

began to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more: 

            Alcippe, il est donc vrai, dans peu tu te maries."[63] 

"By the way!" 

"That is good." 

hands in his aged and wrinkled hands: 

She is a very little girl and a very great lady. She will only be a 

Baroness, which is a come down for her; she was born a Marquise. What 

eyelashes she has! Get it well fixed in your noddles, my children, that 

suddenly becoming gloomy, "what a misfortune! It has just occurred to 

long as I live, it will not matter, but after my death, a score of years 

him by the tail."[64] 

francs." 

he was there, and he had remained standing erect and motionless, behind 

all these happy people. 

startled grandfather. 

Valjean. 

mistaken for a book. 

In all, five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs. 

the nest of a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams! Just trust 

to the love affairs of young folks now, will you! Students find 

studentesses with six hundred thousand francs. Cherubino works better 

than Rothschild." 

well say six hundred thousand!" 

going on; they hardly heeded this detail. 

explanation, that Jean Valjean, after the Champmathieu affair, had been 

able, thanks to his first escape of a few days' duration, to come to 

Paris and to withdraw in season, from the hands of Laffitte, the 

sum earned by him, under the name of Monsieur Madeleine, at 

Montreuil-sur-Mer; and that fearing that he might be recaptured,--which 

eventually happened--he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest 

of Montfermeil, in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom. The sum, 

six hundred and thirty thousand francs, all in bank-bills, was not very 

bulky, and was contained in a box; only, in order to preserve the 

box from dampness, he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut 

shavings. In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures, the 

Bishop's candlesticks. It will be remembered that he had carried off 

the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer. The man 

seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle, was Jean Valjean. 

Later on, every time that Jean Valjean needed money, he went to get it 

in the Blaru-bottom. Hence the absences which we have mentioned. He had 

a pickaxe somewhere in the heather, in a hiding-place known to himself 

alone. When he beheld Marius convalescent, feeling that the hour was at 

hand, when that money might prove of service, he had gone to get it; 

it was he again, whom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods, but on 

this occasion, in the morning instead of in the evening. Boulatreulle 

inherited his pickaxe. 

shall see hereafter," he thought. 

only five thousand francs. 

glittered to the great admiration of Toussaint. 

the Moniteur, how a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned 

under a boat belonging to some laundresses, between the Pont au Change 

and the Pont-Neuf, and that a writing left by this man, otherwise 

of mental aberration and a suicide.--"In fact," thought Jean Valjean, 

"since he left me at liberty, once having got me in his power, he must 

have been already mad." 

consulted, declared that it might take place in February. It was then 

December. A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed. 

quarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette. 

good an air! she is, without exception, the most charming girl that I 

have ever seen in my life. Later on, she'll have virtues with an odor of 

violets. How graceful! one cannot live otherwise than nobly with such 

a creature. Marius, my boy, you are a Baron, you are rich, don't go to 

pettifogging, I beg of you." 

The transition had not been softened, and they would have been stunned, 

had they not been dazzled by it. 

for us." 

everything, made everything easy. He hastened towards Cosette's 

happiness with as much ardor, and, apparently with as much joy, as 

Cosette herself. 

civil status. If he were to announce her origin bluntly, it might 

prevent the marriage, who knows? He extricated Cosette from all 

the other Fauchelevent. Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners to 

understood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was the 

daughter. They said what was wanted and they said it with zeal. An 

Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent. She was declared an orphan, both 

father and mother being dead. Jean Valjean so arranged it that he was 

M. Gillenormand as supervising guardian over him. 

remain unknown. The original legacy had consisted of five hundred and 

ninety-four thousand francs; but ten thousand francs had been expended 

amount having been paid to the convent. This legacy, deposited in 

it is true, but they were not noticed; one of the interested parties 

francs. 

But at the ineffable moment which she was then passing through, it cast 

man was effaced; such is life. 

around her; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is always 

prepared for certain renunciations. 

It is true that he overwhelmed her with gallant compliments and 

which had descended to him from his own grandmother. 

childhood." 

their paunches." He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all 

his wives, of all his mistresses and of all his grandmothers. Pekins, 

damasks, lampas, painted moires, robes of shot gros de Tours, India 

right or wrong side, in the piece, Genoa and Alencon point lace, 

parures in antique goldsmith's work, ivory bon-bon boxes ornamented 

gratitude towards M. Gillenormand, dreamed of a happiness without limit 

clothed in satin and velvet. Her wedding basket seemed to her to be 

of Mechlin lace. 

went on in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire. 

Cosette. All possible knickknacks glittered around her. 

bliss, said, apropos of I know not what incident: 

an antique memory." 

precisely the idea of which I was in search." 

antique was added to Cosette's wedding presents. 

necessary. Season that enormously with the superfluous for me. A 

thousand francs income. Open for me a bucolic perspective as far as you 

useless, the extravagant, excess, that which serves no purpose. I 

gave you the moon and the stars, the earth and the sea, birds and 

on the trumpet to boot. Without reckoning delicious chimes which it 

and I prefer it to the cuckoo clock from the Black Forest." 

dithyrambs. 

century is weak. It lacks excess. It ignores the rich, it ignores the 

noble. In everything it is clean-shaven. Your third estate is insipid, 

set up, as they express it: a pretty boudoir freshly decorated, violet, 

ebony and calico. Make way! Make way! the Sieur Curmudgeon is marrying 

Mademoiselle Clutch-penny. Sumptuousness and splendor. A louis d'or has 

was lost, from the day when I beheld the Duc de Rohan, Prince de Leon, 

Duc de Chabot, Duc de Montbazon, Marquis de Sonbise, Vicomte de Thouars, 

win money, they are stingy. People take care of their surfaces and 

washed, soaped, scraped, shaved, combed, waked, smoothed, rubbed, 

discreet, neat, and at the same time, death of my life, in the depths of 

me permission to speak; I say no evil of the people as you see, I am 

of a slap to the bourgeoisie. I belong to it. He who loves well lashes 

they no longer know how to marry. Ah! it is true, I regret the grace 

which every one possessed, music forming part of the wedding, a symphony 

ribbon. I regret the bride's garter. The bride's garter is cousin to the 

parbleu! Why did they fight, why did Diomed the divine break over 

good contract, and then they had a good carouse. As soon as Cujas had 

the large laughing mouths, and how gay we were in those days! youth was 

People thought much of looking well. They embroidered and tinted 

sides. The humming-bird has beak and claws. That was the day of the 

was magnificent; and by the green cabbages! people amused themselves. 

Graces as being too low in the neck. Alas! beauty is concealed as 

cravats. The ideal of an urchin of twenty when he marries, is to 

resemble M. Royer-Collard. And do you know what one arrives at with 

that majesty? at being petty. Learn this: joy is not only joyous; it is 

with fever and giddiness, and tumult, and the uproar of happiness! Be 

sarpejou! you must make a dream whirl around the bride. A marriage 

should be royal and chimerical; it should promenade its ceremony from 

at least. Be one of the gods. Ah! people might be sylphs. Games and 

minute in life to soar away to the empyrean with the swans and the 

eagles, even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into the 

them of their splendors; don't scrimp on the day when you beam. The 

my programme: sky-blue and silver. I would mingle with the festival 

chariot drawn by marine monsters. 

      Des sons si ravissants qu'il ravissait quiconque!"[65] 

nothing of such matters, deuce take it!" 

himself, Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at 

each other. 

of emotions. Marius returned, Marius brought back bleeding, Marius 

brought back from a barricade, Marius dead, then living, Marius 

was being whispered in the other, and she beheld Marius and Cosette in a 

vague way, like two shadows. The shadow was herself. 

a cold in the head. You smell nothing of life. Neither any bad, nor any 

good odor. 

have left him poor. "So much the worse for my nephew! he is wedding a 

were concerned. One owes some consideration to six hundred thousand 

her fortune to these young people, since they did not need it. 

chamber." 

blossoms.--"It was with that stuff," said he, "that the bed of the 

Duchesse d'Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped."--On the chimney-piece, 

nude stomach. 

the order. 

Fauchelevent.--"This is reversing things," said Mademoiselle 

established, and the arm-chairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire, 

not address each other. It seemed as though this had been agreed upon. 

Every girl needs a chaperon. Cosette could not have come without 

attached to Cosette. He accepted it. By dint of discussing political 

general amelioration of the fate of all men, they came to say a little 

more than "yes" and "no." Once, on the subject of education, which 

Marius wished to have free and obligatory, multiplied under all forms 

for the entire population, they were in unison, and they almost 

conversed. M. Fauchelevent talked well, and even with a certain 

loftiness of language--still he lacked something indescribable. M. 

Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more, than a 

man of the world. 

spot, an abyss excavated by four months of agony.--Many things had been 

man, in the barricade. 

us. The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that have 

vanished contains neither thought nor love. At times, Marius clasped his 

face between his hands, and the vague and tumultuous past traversed the 

heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot, he felt beneath his lips the 

Bossuet, Grantaire, all his friends rose erect before him, then 

dispersed into thin air. Were all those dear, sorrowful, valiant, 

great dreams. He questioned himself; he felt himself; all these vanished 

curtain of a theatre. There are curtains like this which drop in life. 

past, returned and present, formed a circle around him, and overshadowed 

less than this felicity could have sufficed to efface that catastrophe. 

beside Cosette. The first was, probably, one of those nightmares 

occasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium. However, 

the natures of both men were rigid, no question from Marius to M. 

Fauchelevent was possible. Such an idea had not even occurred to him. We 

have already indicated this characteristic detail. 

commonly supposed. 

the most natural manner in the world. 

street itself, appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really 

was. 

a hallucination. It was some one who resembled him. M. Fauchelevent was 

not there."' 

other pre-occupations. 

made. 

account, he owed it on his own. 

Marius, back to M. Gillenormand. 

be happy, and to forget them, and fearing that, were these debts of 

promised so brightly for the future. 

him, and he wished, before entering joyously into the future, to obtain 

a quittance from the past. 

was not aware of the peculiar detail, that his father, so far as 

to the latter for his life, without being indebted to him for any 

gratitude. 

any trace of Thenardier. Obliteration appeared to be complete in 

Thenardier and his daughter Azelma, the only two remaining of that 

and that the plummet may be dropped. 

case, Claquesous having disappeared, the principal persons accused 

Gorbeau house had come to nothing. 

obliged to content themselves with two subordinates. Panchaud, alias 

the case, to ten years in the galleys. Hard labor for life had been the 

sentence pronounced against the escaped and contumacious accomplices. 

condemned to death. 

bier. 

of the shadows which enveloped this man. 

6th of June. 

commands of a police-agent, he had stood from three o'clock in the 

another man, who seemed to be dead; that the agent, who was on the watch 

those folks" into his carriage; that they had first driven to the Rue 

des Filles-du-Calvaire; that they had there deposited the dead man; that 

the dead man was Monsieur Marius, and that he, the coachman, recognized 

paces from the gate of the Archives, they had called to him to halt; 

the night had been very dark. 

had been seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when he 

far as he was concerned. 

that, having fallen in the Rue de la Chanvrerie, he had been picked 

Champs-Elysees. And how? Through the sewer. Unheard-of devotion! 

indication. 

They had no knowledge of any arrest having been made on the 6th of June 

at the mouth of the Grand Sewer. 

was regarded at the prefecture as a fable. The invention of this fable 

was attributed to the coachman. 

the unconscious Marius, and whom the police-agent on the watch had 

the agent himself? 

less tremendous than his devotion. Why had not that man appeared again? 

Perhaps he was above compensation, but no one is above gratitude. Was he 

dead? Who was the man? What sort of a face had he? No one could tell him 

this. 

all in a flutter, had looked only at their young master all covered with 

blood. 

description that he gave: 

prove of service in his researches. 

singular way. A piece was missing. 

Valjean of the whole of that singular adventure, of the innumerable 

The cold countenance of "Monsieur Fauchelevent" angered him. 

into the midst of the battle, have stolen me away, have opened the 

sewer, have dragged me into it and have carried me through it! He 

And that corpse I was. He said to himself: 'There may still be a 

glimpse of life there, perchance; I will risk my own existence for that 

this? And he had no recompense to expect. What was I? An insurgent. 

francs were mine . . ." 

more." 

CHAPTER I--THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY, 1833 

Marius and Cosette. 

placed over a door; but it had been sweet and smiling. 

one's wife, of fleeing, on coming out of church, of hiding oneself with 

shame from one's happiness, and of combining the ways of a bankrupt with 

the delights of the Song of Songs. People had not yet grasped to the 

in a posting-chaise, of breaking up their mystery with clic-clacs, of 

the souvenirs of life mingled pell-mell with the tete-a-tete of the 

conductor of the diligence and the maid-servant of the inn. 

a plaque like a vantbrace, knee-breeches of green leather, oaths to the 

Norman horses with their tails knotted up, false galloons, varnished 

not yet carry elegance to the length of doing like the English nobility, 

of slippers trodden down at heel and of worn-out shoes, in memory of 

Churchill, afterwards Marlborough, or Malbrouck, who was assailed on 

his wedding-day by the wrath of an aunt which brought him good luck. 

Old shoes and slippers do not, as yet, form a part of our nuptial 

come to that. 

a private and social festival, that a patriarchal banquet does not 

a family is destined to spring, should begin at home, and that the 

superannuated fashion, at M. Gillenormand's house. 

February. 

particularly on the part of Aunt Gillenormand. 

is a proverb: 

                  N'aura point enfants ingrats.'[66] 

"No, certainly not!" replied the lover. 

when the rest of creation is under an umbrella. 

property, the papers had been simple. 

her and promoted her to the rank of lady's maid. 

persuaded him to promise that he would come and occupy it. 

about it, nor to dress it, nor even to see his hurt, not even Cosette. 

and to carry his arm in a sling, and had prevented his signing. M. 

supplied his place. 

accustomed to turn one's back on the drama as soon as it puts a wedding 

nosegay in its buttonhole. We will confine ourselves to noting an 

incident which, though unnoticed by the wedding party, marked the 

transit from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire to the church of Saint-Paul. 

process of repaving. It was barred off, beginning with the Rue du 

way was to turn through the boulevard. One of the invited guests 

observed that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that there would be a jam 

of vehicles.--"Why?" asked M. Gillenormand--"Because of the 

serious part of life. This will prepare them for seeing a bit of the 

masquerade." 

and Aunt Gillenormand, M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean. Marius, still 

the second. The nuptial train, on emerging from the Rue des 

In spite of the fact that it was raining at intervals, Merry-Andrew, 

Paris had disguised itself as Venice. Such Shrove Tuesdays are no 

Carnival, there is no longer any Carnival. 

curious spectators. The terraces which crown the peristyles of the 

at that procession--peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as to Longchamps,--of 

vehicles of every description, citadines, tapissieres, carioles, 

cabriolets marching in order, rigorously riveted to each other by the 

police regulations, and locked into rails, as it were. Any one in 

parallel files, moving in contrary directions, and saw to it that 

nothing interfered with that double current, those two brooks of 

carriages, flowing, the one down stream, the other up stream, the 

one towards the Chaussee d'Antin, the other towards the Faubourg 

Ambassadors, emblazoned with coats of arms, held the middle of the way, 

that of the Boeuf Gras, had the same privilege. In this gayety of Paris, 

England cracked her whip; Lord Seymour's post-chaise, harassed by a 

nickname from the populace, passed with great noise. 

sheep-dogs, honest family coaches, loaded down with great-aunts and 

grandmothers, displayed at their doors fresh groups of children in 

little creatures, who felt that they formed an official part of the 

and who possessed the gravity of functionaries. 

vehicles; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot 

line. Then they set out again on the march. 

and skirting the right side of the Boulevard. At the top of the 

Pont-aux-Choux, there was a stoppage. Nearly at the same moment, the 

that point of the file there was a carriage-load of maskers. 

Tuesday, or at the Mid-Lent, it would be taken in bad part, and people 

would say: "There's something behind that. Probably the ministry 

Columbines, jolted along high above the passers-by, all possible 

Marquises, fishwives who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears just 

shamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers; this is what 

that institution was like. 

the hackney-coach of Vade. 

the soaked rags of the North, has finally come to be called the 

Jack-pudding. 

days of the monarchy. The accounts of Louis XI. allot to the bailiff of 

the palace "twenty sous, Tournois, for three coaches of mascarades 

in the cross-roads." In our day, these noisy heaps of creatures are 

accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancient cuckoo carriage, 

in a carriage intended for six. They cling to the seats, to the rumble, 

on the cheeks of the hood, on the shafts. They even bestride the 

reigns in front, tumult behind. People vociferate, shout, howl, there 

forth, joviality is flaunted like a red flag; two jades there drag farce 

Carnival to the Parisians. 

women. 

crowd loves to behold that monstrous living pile of tinsel rags, half 

dung, half light, roll by on four wheels howling and laughing, that they 

insulted and pardoned by the laughter of the public. The laughter of all 

disaggregate the people and convert them into the populace. And 

occasion that it is a great sublime city. There the Carnival forms 

part of politics. Paris,--let us confess it--willingly allows infamy to 

furnish it with comedy. She only demands of her masters--when she has 

masters--one thing: "Paint me the mud." Rome was of the same mind. She 

loved Nero. Nero was a titanic lighterman. 

clusters of masked men and women, dragged about on a vast calash, should 

containing the bridal party opposite them on the other side of the 

boulevard. 

verbal attacks of the populace. A frightful exchange of metaphors took 

place between the maskers and the crowd. 

with an enormous nose, an elderly air, and huge black moustache, and a 

gaunt fishwife, who was quite a young girl, masked with a loup,[67] had 

also noticed the wedding, and while their companions and the passers-by 

were exchanging insults, they had held a dialogue in a low voice. 

I never said either you, thou, or I, in my life, if I don't know that 

Parisian." [pantinois.] 

know, and that I'm positive." 

trot, my girl, your legs are young." 

arrest me. You know that well enough." 

that I'm here. But to-morrow, there will be no more maskers. It's Ash 

hole. But you are free." 

"It's free. Wedding-parties are at liberty." 

me what that wedding is, who that old cove belongs to, and where that 

wedding pair lives." 

wedding-party that passed through the street on a Shrove Tuesday, a week 

afterwards. A pin in a hay-mow! It ain't possible!" 

opposite directions, and the carriage of the maskers lost sight of the 

"trap" of the bride. 

elections for this in heaven; we are all candidates, unknown to 

ourselves; the angels vote. Cosette and Marius had been elected. 

touching. Toussaint, assisted by Nicolette, had dressed her. 

of orange flowers; all this was white, and, from the midst of that 

whiteness she beamed forth. It was an exquisite candor expanding and 

becoming transfigured in the light. One would have pronounced her a 

virgin on the point of turning into a goddess. 

the thick curls, pale lines--the scars of the barricade--were visible. 

account of his arm being still in a sling, could not give his hand to 

the bride. 

hell, otherwise, known as the Devil's Tuileries. Good, here I am 

any political opinions; let all me be rich, that is to say, mirthful, 

and I confine myself to that." 

before the mayor and before the priest all possible "yesses," after 

after having exchanged their rings, after having knelt side by side 

preceded by the suisse, with the epaulets of a colonel, tapping the 

ready to enter their carriage again, and all being finished, Cosette 

still could not believe that it was real. She looked at Marius, she 

looked at the crowd, she looked at the sky: it seemed as though she 

feared that she should wake up from her dream. Her amazed and uneasy air 

and Jean Valjean sat opposite them; Aunt Gillenormand had withdrawn one 

degree, and was in the second vehicle. 

and Madame la Baronne, with an income of thirty thousand livres." 

whisper: "So it is true. My name is Marius. I am Madame Thou." 

all joy. They realized the verses of Jean Prouvaire; they were forty 

two apotheoses mingling, in the background, one knows not how, behind a 

cloud for Cosette, in a flash for Marius, there was the ideal thing, the 

All the torments through which they had passed came back to them in 

intoxication. It seemed to them that their sorrows, their sleepless 

nights, their tears, their anguish, their terrors, their despair, 

The long agony of their love was terminating in an ascension. 

Plumet." The folds of Cosette's gown lay across Marius. 

emotion on that day, of being at mid-day and of dreaming of midnight 

crowd, and inspired the passers-by with cheerfulness. 

Cosette's head. 

up which he had been borne in a dying condition. The poor, who had 

like a ceiling of stars; above their heads they beheld the light of a 

through the lace of her bodice, and Cosette, intercepting Marius' 

glance, blushed to her very hair. 

saluting her as Madame la Baronne. 

wedding of his cousin Pontmercy. Cosette did not recognize him. 

woman. 

Father Gillenormand, to himself. 

with Father Gillenormand; while he erected joy into aphorisms and 

the world should be happy. 

with her smile. 

sun, one must be made. 

and glittering table, was a Venetian lustre with flat plates, with all 

sorts of colored birds, blue, violet, red, and green, perched amid the 

porcelain, faience, pottery, gold and silversmith's work, all was 

in with bouquets, so that where there was not a light, there was a 

flower. 

by Haydn. 

roguish glance, she asked him: 

table. 

took his seat. The other arm-chair remained empty. 

somewhat, and that he could not dine with Monsieur le Baron and Madame 

He has just taken his departure." 

moment. But, if M. Fauchelevent was absent, M. Gillenormand was present, 

done well to retire early, if he were suffering, but that it was only a 

corner in such a submersion of joy? Cosette and Marius were passing 

through one of those egotistical and blessed moments when no other 

faculty is left to a person than that of receiving happiness. And then, 

right to you. This armchair is for you. That is legal and delightful. 

Fortunatus beside Fortunata."--Applause from the whole table. Marius 

ended by being satisfied with it. From the moment when Marius took his 

foot. 

nothing was lacking. 

was laughing with all the animation of forgetfulness. 

pair. 

had one from the cure, this evening you shall have one from your 

grandfather. Listen to me; I will give you a bit of advice: Adore each 

other. I do not make a pack of gyrations, I go straight to the mark, 

say: 'Moderate your joys.' I say: 'Give rein to your joys.' Be as 

much smitten with each other as fiends. Be in a rage about it. The 

philosophers talk stuff and nonsense. I should like to stuff their 

too many open rose-buds, too many nightingales singing, too many green 

much, charm each other too much? Can one be too much alive, too happy? 

Moderate your joys. Ah, indeed! Down with the philosophers! Wisdom 

diamond called the Sancy because it belonged to Harley de Sancy, or 

woman. Ah! ah! behold omnipotence--women. Ask that demagogue of a Marius 

if he is not the slave of that little tyrant of a Cosette. And of his 

royalty. What is Adam? The kingdom of Eve. No '89 for Eve. There has 

and forefinger, ha'penny straws; it is done with, it is broken, it lies 

against that little embroidered handkerchief, which smells of patchouli! 

I should like to see you do it. Try. Why is it so solid? Because it is a 

gewgaw. Ah! you are the nineteenth century? Well, what then? And we 

That is well. Yes, Marius, yes, Cosette, you are in the right. Exist 

felicity that exist on earth, and arrange yourselves a nest for life. 

devil, who is cunning, took to hating man; man, who is still more 

cunning, took to loving woman. In this way he does more good than 

the devil does him harm. This craft was discovered in the days of 

the terrestrial paradise. The invention is old, my friends, but it is 

become Philemon and Baucis. Manage so that, when you are with each 

prize, guard it well, keep it under lock and key, do not squander it, 

say to you. It is good sense. And good sense cannot lie. Be a religion 

the best way to adore God is to love one's wife. I love thee! that's 

I don't belong to the religion of that oath. Woman is forgotten in it. 

I am old, they say; it's astonishing how much I feel in the mood to 

to idolize, to coo, to preen ourselves, to be dove-like, to be dainty, 

one's little wife, to be proud, to be triumphant, to plume oneself; that 

each other. If people did not love each other, I really do not see what 

blessing." 

good humor gave the key-note to the whole feast, and each person 

regulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality. They danced 

the person of Father Gillenormand. 

with his finger on his lips. 

sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radiance to 

the ravished virgin is terrified. Something of that joy ascends to God. 

Where true marriage is, that is to say, where there is love, the ideal 

visions of the upper life, it is probable that we should behold the 

bend down, a throng of sombre heads, around the luminous house, 

wife gently alarmed, sweetly terrified, and bearing the reflection of 

That dark little chamber has all heaven for its ceiling. When two 

that there should not be, above that ineffable kiss, a quivering 

joys. Love is the only ecstasy. All the rest weeps. 

is no other pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life. To love is a 

fulfilment. 

no one was paying any heed to him, Jean Valjean had risen and had gained 

the antechamber unperceived. This was the very room which, eight months 

charged Basque to explain his absence, and went away. 

the violins, the clatter of the plates, the bursts of laughter, and 

joyous voice. 

l'Homme Arme. 

he had become accustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue de 

obstructions and the mud in the Rue Vielle-du-Temple. 

possibility of any other itinerary. 

cupboards stood open. He penetrated to Cosette's bedroom. There were no 

whose covering was visible, and on which no one was ever to sleep again. 

made up, and seemed to be waiting some one, and this was Jean Valjean's 

bed. 

went and came from one room to another. 

though it did not hurt him. 

de l'Homme Arme, on the 4th of June, he had deposited it on a round 

vivacity, took a key from his pocket, and opened the valise. 

him. 

and if any one had passed up the stairs at that moment, he would have 

heard frightful sobs. 

many phases, began once more. 

and struggling desperately against it! 

the ground crumbles away underfoot. How many times had that conscience, 

mad for the good, clasped and overthrown him! How many times had the 

to earth by the light, had he begged for mercy! How many times had 

dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind! How many times 

secret wounds which he alone felt bleed! What excoriations in his 

lamentable existence! How many times he had risen bleeding, bruised, 

broken, enlightened, despair in his heart, serenity in his soul! 

"Now, go in peace!" 

alas! 

his final combat. 

avenue before the predestined man; they have blind courts, impassable 

ways. Jean Valjean had halted at that moment at the most perilous of 

these crossroads. 

before him, the one tempting, the other alarming. 

smiling ambush. 

incurable destiny! 

own breast. 

riches. And this was his doing. 

it existed, now that it was there? Should he force himself on this 

Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his, which dragged behind them 

on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still more dense? Should he 

destiny beside these two happy beings? 

to us in all their horrible nakedness. Good or evil stands behind 

sphinx. 

sphinx. 

garments and his hair, he was saved, he should live. 

he fought; he kicked furiously internally, now against his will, now 

against his conviction. 

him. The past surged up before him facing the present; he compared 

them and sobbed. The silence of tears once opened, the despairing man 

writhed. 

resistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear! 

your choice, Cato. It is fathomless, since it is God. One flings into 

that well the labor of one's whole life, one flings in one's fortune, 

one flings in one's riches, one flings in one's success, one flings in 

one's liberty or fatherland, one flings in one's well-being, one flings 

vase! tip the urn! One must finish by flinging in one's heart. 

have any right? Are not chains which are endless above human strength? 

Who would blame Sisyphus and Jean Valjean for saying: "It is enough!" 

self-sacrifice be exacted? 

to entrance into the void? 

step, how black art thou! 

iron, one accepts the globe of red hot iron, one takes the sceptre of 

comes there not a moment when the miserable flesh revolts and when one 

abdicates from suffering? 

balance of light and darkness. 

he consummate his irremediable engulfment by himself? On one side lay 

the sacrifice of Cosette, on the other that of himself. 

Among all the unfathomable precipices which surrounded him, which was 

nod his head? 

alas! with clenched fists, with arms outspread at right angles, like a 

wallowed on the earth and soared, now like the hydra, now like the 

eagle. Any one to behold him thus motionless would have pronounced him 

Cosette's garments, kissed them; then it could be seen that he was 

alive. 

CHAPTER I--THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN 

no ring, which was discreet on such a day. Basque opened the door, and 

after the joys of the preceding evening. 

with them; they are what a philosopher would call, bespattered with the 

title, and that flatters them. Marius, be it said in passing, a militant 

small revolution had taken place in the family in connection with 

detached himself from it. But Colonel Pontmercy had written: "My son 

was beginning to dawn, was delighted to be a Baroness. 

him that M. Fauchelevent is here." 

speak to him in private, and mention no name." 

explanation of the first. 

the wedding. On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which 

had fallen from garlands and head-dresses. The wax candles, burned 

to stumps, added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the 

chandeliers. Not a single piece of furniture was in its place. In the 

corners, three or four arm-chairs, drawn close together in a circle, 

cheerful. A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast. It has been 

beneath those extinct lights, people have thought of joy. The sun 

had succeeded to the chandelier, and made its way gayly into the 

drawing-room. 

Basque had left him. He was very pale. His eyes were hollow, and so 

their orbits. His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that 

has been up all night. The elbows were whitened with the down which the 

feet by the sun. 

not slept either. 

early. It is only half past twelve. Cosette is asleep." 

wall, a coldness and a constraint between them; ice which must be broken 

was lowered, when the ice dissolved, and when M. Fauchelevent was to 

him, as to Cosette, a father. 

paroxysms of joy. 

pursued: 

must not forget that you have a chamber here, We want nothing more to 

could you go to live in a street like that, which is sickly, which is 

yourself here. And this very day. Or you will have to deal with Cosette. 

have it. You will have its nest on your left and ours on your right. By 

that there is a little valise to which you are attached, I have fixed 

upon a corner of honor for that. You have conquered my grandfather, you 

your arm, you know, as you used to, in the Luxembourg. We are absolutely 

do you hear, father? Come, will you breakfast with us to-day?" 

ex-convict." 

the case of the mind as in that of the ear. These words: "I am an 

mouth wide open. 

observed the other man's terrible pallor. 

unrolled the linen from around his hand, bared his thumb and showed it 

to Marius. 

galleys." 

galleys. For theft. Then, I was condemned for life for theft, for a 

second offence. At the present moment, I have broken my ban." 

always happens in such cases, he understood too much. An inward shudder 

of hideous enlightenment flashed through him; an idea which made him 

himself in the future. 

horror. 

seemed to grow even to the ceiling. 

to others may not be received in law . . ." 

he added, articulating slowly, and emphasizing the syllables: 

Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy, I am a peasant of Faverolles. I earned my 

I am not related to Cosette. Reassure yourself." 

be felt in that chill of the tomb. 

continued: 

oneself a grandfather towards all little children. You may, it seems to 

me, suppose that I have something which resembles a heart. She was an 

Cosette. I do not think that so slight a thing can be called a good 

action; but if it be a good action, well, say that I have done it. 

Madame Pontmercy. Her providence has changed. And Cosette gains by the 

How did that deposit come into my hands? What does that matter? I 

restore the deposit. Nothing more can be demanded of me. I complete 

reason for desiring that you should know who I am." 

of destiny produce these billows in our souls. 

is dispersed; we say the first things that occur to us, which are 

not always precisely those which should be said. There are sudden 

angry with him for this avowal. 

do so? You could have kept your secret to yourself. You are neither 

denounced, nor tracked nor pursued. You have a reason for wantonly 

Well, yes! the motive is strange. It is out of honesty. Stay, the 

fast. It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly 

solid. All life falls in ruin around one; one resists. Had I been able 

to tear out that thread, to break it, to undo the knot or to cut it, to 

to break that thread, I have jerked at it, it would not break, I tore my 

heart with it. Then I said: 'I cannot live anywhere else than here.' I 

must stay. Well, yes, you are right, I am a fool, why not simply 

remain here? You offer me a chamber in this house, Madame Pontmercy is 

that is everything. We shall live as one family. One family!" 

of the sort for me. I am an unlucky wretch; I am left outside. Did I 

was well, I said to myself: 'Enter thou not.' I could have lied, it is 

true, have deceived you all, and remained Monsieur Fauchelevent. So long 

as it was for her, I could lie; but now it would be for myself, and I 

must not. It was sufficient for me to hold my peace, it is true, and all 

it; well, yes, I have passed the night in alleging reasons to myself, 

that holds me fixed, riveted and sealed here by the heart, or in 

nearly everything. It is useless to tell you that which concerns only 

I struggled all night long. Ah! you think that I did not tell myself 

doing no one any injury, that the name of Fauchelevent had been given to 

be content. Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent, thus 

should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside, I should 

I was, you would drive me from it, I should have allowed myself to 

be served by domestics who, had they known, would have said: 'How 

horrible!' I should have touched you with my elbow, which you have a 

when we four were together, your grandfather, you two and myself, a 

upon you who are living beings. I should have condemned her to myself 

of men; I should have been the most monstrous of men. And I should have 

committed that crime every day! And I should have had that face of night 

upon my visage every day! every day! And I should have communicated to 

peace? is it a simple matter to keep silence? No, it is not simple. 

There is a silence which lies. And my lie, and my fraud and my 

indignity, and my cowardice and my treason and my crime, I should have 

again, I should have finished at midnight and have begun again at 

midday, and my 'good morning' would have lied, and my 'good night' would 

have lied, and I should have slept on it, I should have eaten it, with 

soul, and I should have been an abominable villain! Why should I do 

happy? I stand outside of life, Sir." 

more, but it was no longer a dull voice--it was a sinister voice. 

oneself, one is firmly held." 

extending it towards Marius: 

that collar in such a wise as not to release it? Well! conscience 

is another grasp! If one desires to be happy, sir, one must never 

understand duty; for, as soon as one has comprehended it, it is 

implacable. One would say that it punished you for comprehending it; 

but no, it rewards you; for it places you in a hell, where you feel God 

peace with himself." 

I have entered into engagements with myself; I keep them. There are 

You see, Monsieur Pontmercy, various things have happened to me in the 

course of my life." 

though his words had a bitter after-taste, and then he went on: 

right to slyly encumber with one's misery the happiness of others. It is 

with one's ulcer. In spite of the fact that Fauchelevent lent me his 

have read a little, although I am a peasant; and you see that I 

is dishonest. Letters of the alphabet can be filched, like a purse or a 

watch. To be a false signature in flesh and blood, to be a living false 

more to look straightforward, to forever eye askance, to be infamous 

within the I, no! no! no! no! no! It is better to suffer, to bleed, to 

weep, to tear one's skin from the flesh with one's nails, to pass nights 

just told you all this. Wantonly, as you say." 

order to live, I will not steal a name." 

live?" 

his head several times in succession. 

he gazed at the mirror, which he did not see: 

drawing-room. At the moment when he turned round, he perceived that 

Marius was watching his walk. Then he said, with an inexpressible 

intonation: 

in the evening all three of us go to the play, I accompany Madame 

this name: 'Jean Valjean!' and behold, that terrible hand, the police, 

darts from the darkness, and abruptly tears off my mask!" 

Valjean resumed: 

in heaven, be the angel of an angel, exist in the sun, be content 

you have before you, sir, a wretched man." 

Valjean, he offered the latter his hand. 

offered, Jean Valjean let him have his own way, and it seemed to Marius 

that he pressed a hand of marble. 

that suffices. The dead are not subjected to surveillance. They are 

inexorable dignity: 

and I need but one pardon, that of my conscience." 

gently half way, and in the opening Cosette's head appeared. They saw 

its head out of its nest, glanced first at her husband, then at Jean 

smile at the heart of a rose: 

of being with me!" 

duty . . .' That is politics, indeed it is. I will not have it. People 

should not talk politics the very next day. It is not right." 

are discussing the best investment of your six hundred thousand 

francs . . ." 

body want me here?" 

She was dressed in a voluminous white dressing-gown, with a thousand 

folds and large sleeves which, starting from the neck, fell to her feet. 

charming sacks fit to clothe the angels. 

exclaimed, in an outburst of ineffable ecstasy: 

"There," said she, "I am going to install myself near you in an 

like, I know well that men must talk, and I will be very good." 

pierrots has arrived in the garden,--Birds, not maskers. To-day is 

Ash-Wednesday; but not for the birds." 

dandified, monseigneur. No, it will not bore me." 

together--that is all that I desire. I shall remain with you, bah!" 

at mass, that the chimney in my father Fauchelevent's room smokes, that 

you two." 

you mean by not saying anything instead of taking my part? who gave me 

unhappy. My husband beats me. Come, embrace me instantly." 

Jean Valjean approached. 

gleam. 

nothing. I am very pretty this morning. Look at me, Marius." 

exquisite pout, she glanced at Marius. 

And they fell irresistibly into each other's arms. 

triumphant little grimace, "I shall stay." 

something." 

have not upheld me. Monsieur my father, monsieur my husband, you are 

tyrants. I shall go and tell grandpapa. If you think that I am going to 

wait for you now. You shall see, that it is you who are going to be 

bored without me. I am going, it is well." 

was again thrust between the two leaves, and she cried to them: 

"I am very angry indeed." 

night, without itself being conscious of it. 

bewildered eye. 

one thing, but not for another. Sir, I conjure you, I entreat now, sir, 

without being forced to it, I could have told it to the universe, to the 

it is, it would terrify her. What, a convict! we should be obliged to 

dropped into an arm-chair and hid his face in his hands. 

was evident that he was weeping. Silent tears, terrible tears. 

voice seemed to issue from fathomless depths: 

alone." And, less touched, perhaps, than he ought to have been, but 

forced, for the last hour, to familiarize himself with something 

as unexpected as it was dreadful, gradually beholding the convict 

superposed before his very eyes, upon M. Fauchelevent, overcome, 

little by little, by that lugubrious reality, and led, by the natural 

placed between that man and himself, Marius added: 

to set it very high." 

"I thank you, sir," replied Jean Valjean, gently. 

fore-finger across his thumb-nail, then he lifted up his voice: 

voice, without breath, he stammered rather than said: 

ought not to see Cosette any more?" 

steps towards the door. 

a second, then closed the door again and turned to Marius. 

strange composure. 

assure you that I desire it greatly. If I had not cared to see Cosette, 

is, and to continue to see her, I had to tell you about it honestly. You 

in that hut on the boulevard, then in the convent, then near the 

Luxembourg. That was where you saw her for the first time. You remember 

there was a railing on a garden, the Rue Plumet. I lived in a little 

back court-yard, whence I could hear her piano. That was my life. We 

was like her own father, and she was my child. I do not know whether 

you understand, Monsieur Pontmercy, but to go away now, never to see her 

be hard. If you do not disapprove of it, I will come to see Cosette from 

time to time. I will not come often. I will not remain long. You shall 

give orders that I am to be received in the little waiting-room. On the 

to enter by the usual door. Truly, sir, I should like to see a little 

more of Cosette. As rarely as you please. Put yourself in my place, 

no longer come at all, it would produce a bad effect, it would be 

considered singular. What I can do, by the way, is to come in the 

afternoon, when night is beginning to fall." 

waiting for you." 

these two men parted. 

whom he had seen Cosette, was now explained to him. There was something 

Fauchelevent was the convict Jean Valjean. 

the discovery of a scorpion in a nest of turtledoves. 

neighborhood? Was this an accomplished fact? Did the acceptance of that 

man form a part of the marriage now consummated? Was there nothing to be 

done? 

been wanting in divination? Had he been wanting in prudence? Had he 

in regard to ourselves, that life amends us, little by little,--he 

admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature, a sort of 

more than a conscience bathed in a mist. We have more than once 

indicated this characteristic element of Marius' individuality. 

during those six or seven ecstatic weeks, he had not even spoke to 

silence of that time. Nevertheless, he could account for it. He recalled 

his benumbed state, his intoxication with Cosette, love absorbing 

also, like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled with this 

contact with which he dreaded, in which he did not wish to play any 

neither narrator nor witness without being an accuser. 

no time for anything except love. 

examined everything, whatever might have been the consequences if he had 

Jean Valjean was a convict, would that have changed him, Marius? Would 

that have changed her, Cosette? Would he have drawn back? Would he have 

Then there was nothing to regret, nothing with which he need reproach 

his eyes, in order to lead him whither? To paradise. 

accompaniment. 

who had turned into Jean Valjean, was at present mingled with horror. 

In this horror, let us state, there was some pity, and even a certain 

surprise. 

deposit. And what a deposit! Six hundred thousand francs. 

he had restored it all. 

avowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation, there 

was acceptance of peril. For a condemned man, a mask is not a mask, it 

is a shelter. A false name is security, and he had rejected that false 

Through a conscientious scruple. He himself explained this with the 

irresistible accents of truth. In short, whatever this Jean Valjean 

might be, he was, undoubtedly, a conscience which was awakening. There 

Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar 

natures. An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul. 

said. 

confidence. 

struck, he admitted the active principle, he admitted the passive 

principle, and he tried to reach a balance. 

black once more. 

man taken to flight on the arrival of the police, instead of entering a 

complaint? 

justice, who had broken his ban. 

up and replied: "Javert." 

behind the corner of the little Rue Mondetour that frightful pistol 

shot. Obviously, there was hatred between that police spy and the 

He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there. The Corsican vendetta 

Javert. At least, that seemed to be evident. 

Jean Valjean's existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a 

period? 

demon? So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in the mysterious 

is called human destiny, can two brows pass side by side, the one 

ingenuous, the other formidable, the one all bathed in the divine 

whiteness of dawn, the other forever blemished by the flash of an 

off? In what manner, in consequence of what prodigy, had any community 

of life been established between this celestial little creature and that 

old criminal? 

the lamb, for the fierce creature adored the feeble one, for, during 

her virginal growth towards life and light, had been sheltered by 

that hideous devotion. Here questions exfoliated, so to speak, into 

innumerable enigmas, abysses yawned at the bottoms of abysses, and 

Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without becoming dizzy. 

exists, and until a broader day shall effect a change in it, there will 

guarding her, dignifying her, and enveloping her, impure as he was 

himself, with purity? 

and from every cloud? 

sort, reassured him as to the other. God was as visible in this affair 

which he wills. He is not responsible to men. Do we know how God sets 

about the work? Jean Valjean had labored over Cosette. He had, to some 

extent, made that soul. That was incontestable. Well, what then? The 

workman was horrible; but the work was admirable. God produces his 

the rose? 

he need? Cosette was a light. Does light require enlightenment? He had 

Valjean's personal affairs did not concern him. 

convulsively, to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch: "I 

am nothing to Cosette. Ten years ago I did not know that she was in 

existence." 

passed. Whatever he was, his part was finished. 

lover, her husband, her celestial male. Cosette, as she took her flight, 

empty chrysalis, Jean Valjean. 

deprive a man. 

which is written by man and that which is written by God, between law 

and right. He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes to 

as the process of civilization, social damnation. He still stood at this 

good, and, at bottom, wholly formed of latent progress. 

repulsive. He was a man reproved, he was the convict. That word was 

had been to turn away his head. Vade retro. 

decisive questions. 

not seem like a man who would draw back, and who knows whether Marius, 

back? 

to these exhibitions of cowardice. It is not wise to question sinister 

situations to the last point, particularly when the indissoluble side of 

our life is fatally intermingled with them. What a terrible light might 

have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean, and who 

lingered behind it on the brow of that angel? The spattering of a 

lightning-flash is of the thunder also. Fatality has points of juncture 

reflections which give color. The purest figures may forever preserve 

the reflection of a horrible association. Rightly or wrongly, Marius 

rather than to gain further light. 

Valjean. 

dare to seek the bottom of it? It is a terrible thing to interrogate 

the shadow. Who knows what its reply will be? The dawn may be blackened 

forever by it. 

Marius. 

and definitive decision might have sprung. He felt that he was too good, 

had been in the wrong. He ought to have simply and purely rejected 

Jean Valjean. Jean Valjean played the part of fire, and that is what he 

should have done, and have freed his house from that man. 

which had deafened, blinded, and carried him away. He was displeased 

with himself. 

man want? Here, he became dismayed, he did not wish to dig down, he did 

not wish to penetrate deeply; he did not wish to sound himself. He 

above all to a convict. Still, his first duty was to Cosette. In short, 

he was carried away by the repugnance which dominated him. 

trouble. 

talent, and Marius succeeded in doing it. 

childhood and her youth, and he became more and more convinced that that 

lily. 

CHAPTER I--THE LOWER CHAMBER 

was in the courtyard at the appointed hour, as though he had received 

watch for Mr. So and So, when he arrives." 

him: 

go upstairs or to remain below?" 

waiting-room and said: 

window. 

fine web, which spread far and wide, and was very black and ornamented 

with dead flies, formed a wheel on one of the window-panes. The room, 

which was small and low-ceiled, was furnished with a heap of empty 

bottles piled up in one corner. 

Valjean's reply: "I will remain below," had been foreseen. 

than wool, had been spread by way of a carpet. 

falling through the window. 

perceived neither Basque nor the candle. 

beside him. 

was contemplating with that profound gaze was not her beauty but her 

soul. 

wish me to receive you here." 

for you. Let us begin at the beginning. Embrace me, father." 

I pardon you. Jesus Christ said: Offer the other cheek. Here it is." 

the pavement. 

us." 

are made to reprimand fathers. Come. Go upstairs with me to the 

drawing-room. Immediately." 

questioning. 

this?" 

occasionally had recourse: 

And you won't have my chamber! What have I done to you? Has anything 

happened?" 

have freaks, but one does not cause one's little Cosette grief. That is 

wrong. You have no right to be wicked, you who are so good." 

chin, which is a gesture of profound tenderness. 

here,--there are birds here as there are in the Rue Plumet,--living with 

to guess, being like all the rest of the world, dining with us, 

breakfasting with us, being my father." 

things like that, which are not common sense!" 

be the first to agree that it is true that I have always had ways of my 

it is, to wish to be Monsieur Jean! I will not have you say 'you' to me. 

of furniture in the Rue Saint Louis. It was at a cabinet-maker's. If I 

think. It is inlaid. The mirror is quite large. There are drawers. It is 

pretty." 

blew at Jean Valjean. She was a Grace copying a cat. 

defend me against Marius. Marius will not uphold me against you. I am 

all alone. I arrange a chamber prettily. If I could have put the good 

God there I would have done it. My chamber is left on my hands. My 

lodger sends me into bankruptcy. I order a nice little dinner of 

him in a frightful, old, ugly cellar, where the walls have beards, and 

where the crystal consists of empty bottles, and the curtains are of 

your abominable Rue de l'Homme Arme. I was very desperate indeed there, 

that I was. What have you against me? You cause me a great deal of 

grief. Fi!" 

added: 

which was simple for Cosette, was profound for Jean Valjean. Cosette had 

meant to scratch, and she lacerated. 

intonation, and speaking to himself, he murmured: 

Cosette, thou art happy; my day is over." 

"Ah, you have said thou to me!" exclaimed Cosette. 

almost seemed to him as though he were taking her back. 

Valjean. He gently removed Cosette's arms, and took his hat. 

again. Pardon me." 

enigmatical farewell. 

sadness had been possible to her. 

in which the beloved man says what he pleases, explains nothing, and 

very far beyond their own love. 

bottles, and Nicolette the spiders. 

the hours when Jean Valjean came. The house grew accustomed to the novel 

acquired. M. Fauchelevent, M. Tranchelevent, Father Gillenormand 

fantastic appearances that people affect." 

which crawls on the bottom. 

them, a despair which inhabits their night. Such a man resembles 

other men, he goes and comes. No one knows that he bears within him a 

unhappy man, and of which he is dying. No one knows that this man is a 

and bursts. It is the breathing of the unknown beast. 

taking their leave, keeping in the background when other people 

designated as the wall-colored mantle, seeking the solitary walk, 

having one's key in one's pocket, and one's candle at the porter's 

the private staircase,--all these insignificant singularities, fugitive 

of Cosette: the relations which marriage creates, visits, the care 

costly, they consisted in one thing: being with Marius. The great 

the whole world, both of them completely alone. 

Gillenormand peacefully led that life aside which sufficed for her, 

beside the new household. Jean Valjean came every day. 

himself taken to detach her from him was succeeding. She became more and 

and he felt it. 

were Monsieur Fauchelevent, you are Jean. Who are you then? I don't 

like all this. If I did not know how good you are, I should be afraid of 

you." 

away. 

illuminated Jean Valjean's melancholy old countenance. He caught her 

up: "Say Jean."--"Ah! truly," she replied with a burst of laughter, 

extinction ensued. No more familiarity, no more good-morning with a 

her again in detail. 

short, it sufficed for him to have an apparition of Cosette every day. 

His whole life was concentrated in that one hour. 

to her of years gone by, of her childhood, of the convent, of her little 

friends of those bygone days. 

surrounded the windows of Marius and Cosette felt the emotion of waking, 

the hawthorn was on the point of budding, a jewelled garniture of 

the crevices of the stones, amid the grass there was a charming 

beginning of daisies, and buttercups, the white butterflies of the 

away they flitted, like two swallows towards the spring. This garden of 

to Cosette. They went to that garden and that house. There they 

found themselves again, there they forgot themselves. That 

evening, at the usual hour, Jean Valjean came to the Rue des 

Filles-du-Calvaire.--"Madame went out with Monsieur and has not yet 

an hour. Cosette did not return. He departed with drooping head. 

joyous at having "lived a whole day in her past," that she talked of 

Jean Valjean. 

that word had its absolute meaning for Jean Valjean. He hazarded a 

query: 

cost you five hundred francs a month. You are rich." 

replaced her. Why?" 

box at the theatre. There is nothing too fine for you. Why not profit by 

your riches? Wealth adds to happiness." 

heart which is slipping, one does not halt on the downward slope. 

forgetfulness of the hour, he sang the praises of Marius; he pronounced 

Jean Valjean contrived to remain a long time. 

wounds. It frequently happened that Basque came twice to announce: 

"M. Gillenormand sends me to remind Madame la Baronne that dinner is 

served." 

fire."--And he furnished the explanation for himself.--"It is perfectly 

simple. It is April. The cold weather has ceased." 

"Heavens! how cold it is here!" exclaimed Cosette when she entered. 

cellar." 

meaning of this?" thought Jean Valjean. 

near the hearth. 

leave, Cosette said to him: 

"My husband said a queer thing to me yesterday." 

replied: 'I wanted to know.'" 

Rue de l'Homme Arme; he was so deeply absorbed that he mistook the 

dwelling. It was only after having ascended nearly two stories that he 

perceived his error and went down again. 

perhaps, discovered that the money came from him, Jean Valjean, that he 

rather than that they should be rich with wealth that was not clean. 

Moreover, Jean Valjean began vaguely to surmise that he was being shown 

the door. 

single chair of any sort. 

are the arm-chairs?" 

"Why?" 

How odd you are!" 

"Adieu, Madame." 

the evening. 

being immediately diverted by a kiss from Marius. 

would come soon. As soon as he was able. Moreover, he was on the point 

were not to think of him. 

words. That Madame had sent her to inquire why M. Jean bad not come on 

Jean Valjean gently. 

Cosette. 

the rare passersby in the Marais, the petty shopkeepers, the loungers on 

of the Blancs Manteaux, gained the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine, and, 

Rue Saint-Louis. 

seemed to be a star to him, which never varied, and which was no 

approached the corner of the street the more his eye lighted up; a sort 

he were talking to some one whom he did not see, he smiled vaguely and 

of reaching his destination, he feared the moment when he should be 

close at hand. When only a few houses remained between him and that 

street which appeared to attract him his pace slackened, to such a 

advancing at all. The vacillation of his head and the fixity of his 

several minutes as though made of stone, then he returned by the same 

glance died out. 

sometimes a little further off, sometimes a little nearer. 

something, and retraced his steps. 

the Rue Pavee, shook his head and turned back; then he went no 

Blancs-Manteaux. One would have said that he was a pendulum which was 

ceasing altogether. 

same trip, but he no longer completed it, and, perhaps without 

collected in the corner of his eye-lid; that thoughtful eye was dry. The 

it. 

followed him and laughed. 

CHAPTER I--PITY FOR THE UNHAPPY, BUT INDULGENCE FOR THE HAPPY 

all-sufficient one finds it! How, being in possession of the false 

object of life, happiness, one forgets the true object, duty! 

Marius. 

Jean Valjean. He had regretted the promise into which he had allowed 

himself to be drawn. He had often said to himself that he had done 

effacement, it was an eclipse. 

without weakness. 

mysterious information, without seeking it, which he had not been 

able, it is true, to probe, out of respect for the secret which he had 

position. He believed at that moment that he had a grave duty to 

perform: the restitution of the six hundred thousand francs to some 

abstained from touching that money. 

but it would be harsh to condemn her also. 

Jean," she conformed to it. Her husband had not been obliged to say 

anything to her; she yielded to the vague but clear pressure of his 

consisted in not remembering what Marius forgot. She was not obliged to 

mind became overcast in hers. 

man whom she had so long called her father; but she loved her husband 

her heart, which leaned to one side only. 

Rue de l'Homme Arme whether M. Jean had returned from his journey. Jean 

Valjean caused the answer "no" to be given. 

father's grave. 

as it is supposed. It is the ingratitude of nature. Nature, as we have 

those who are arriving and those who are departing. Those who are 

departing are turned towards the shadows, those who are arriving towards 

the light. Hence a gulf which is fatal on the part of the old, and 

involuntary on the part of the young. This breach, at first insensible, 

increases slowly, like all separations of branches. The boughs, without 

theirs. Youth goes where there is joy, festivals, vivid lights, love. 

off of life; old people, that of the tomb. Let us not blame these poor 

children. 

bed. 

potatoes with bacon, glanced at the brown earthenware plate and 

exclaimed: 

eaten." 

is called fever." 

ladyfinger potatoes were so good!" 

houses. 

his bed. That gibbet is always good to look at. 

upstairs yonder does not get up, he no longer eats, he will not last 

head that his daughter has made a bad marriage." 

without. If he has no doctor he will die." 

pavement, with an old knife, and, as she tore out the blades, she 

grumbled: 

some person who is dear to him. People die of that." 

elbow; he felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse; his breath 

was short and halted at times; he recognized the fact that he was weaker 

than he had ever been before. Then, no doubt under the pressure of some 

supreme preoccupation, he made an effort, drew himself up into a sitting 

posture and dressed himself. He put on his old workingman's clothes. As 

he no longer went out, he had returned to them and preferred them. He 

was obliged to pause many times while dressing himself; merely putting 

his arms through his waistcoat made the perspiration trickle from his 

forehead. 

order to inhabit that deserted apartment as little as possible. 

took from a drawer two wax candles and put them in the candlesticks. 

Then, although it was still broad daylight,--it was summer,--he lighted 

them. In the same way candles are to be seen lighted in broad daylight 

in chambers where there is a corpse. 

exhausted him, and he was obliged to sit down. It was not ordinary 

that mirror, so fatal for him, so providential for Marius, in which 

taken for fifty; that year had counted for thirty. What he bore on his 

death. The hollowing of that pitiless nail could be felt there. His 

lead one to think that it already had earth upon it; the corners of his 

mouth drooped as in the mask which the ancients sculptured on tombs. He 

one. 

the soul like a clot of despair. 

was thirsty. As he could not lift the jug, he tipped it over painfully 

towards his mouth, and swallowed a draught. 

without pausing and sitting down two or three times, and he was 

to time. 

the few following lines: 

my darling child well. Cosette, this paper will be found; this is what 

I wish to say to thee, thou wilt see the figures, if I have the strength 

to recall them, listen well, this money is really thine. Here is the 

whole matter: White jet comes from Norway, black jet comes from England, 

made with resin and lampblack, and cost four livres the pound. I 

a violet glass which is stuck fast, by means of this wax, to a little 

and black for gold jewellery. Spain buys a great deal of it. It is the 

country of jet . . ." 

the poor man clasped his head in both hands, and meditated. 

alone], "all is over. I shall never see her more. She is a smile which 

nothing to die, what is frightful is to die without seeing her. She 

would smile on me, she would say a word to me, would that do any harm to 

the door. 

CHAPTER IV--A BOTTLE OF INK WHICH ONLY SUCCEEDED IN WHITENING 

wrote the letter is in the antechamber." 

paper, coarsely folded--the very sight of certain missives is 

displeasing. 

said that amazement has its lightning flashes. 

whole world within him. This was certainly the paper, the fashion 

of folding, the dull tint of ink; it was certainly the well-known 

handwriting, especially was it the same tobacco. 

come and presented itself to him of its own accord. 

 "Monsieur le Baron:--If the Supreme Being had given me the talents, 

 I might have been baron Thenard, member of the Institute [academy 

 this memory recommends me to the eccellence of your kindnesses. 

 I am in possession of a secret concerning an individual. 

 This individual concerns you.  I hold the secret at your disposal 

 desiring to have the honor to be huseful to you.  I will furnish 

 you with the simple means of driving from your honorabel family 

 that individual who has no right there, madame la baronne being 

 of lofty birth.  The sanctuary of virtue cannot cohabit longer 

 with crime without abdicating. 

The letter was signed "Thenard." 

The certificate of origin was complete. 

was in search, the man who had saved him, Marius, there would be nothing 

left for him to desire. 

Basque half opened the door. 

to him. 

eyes, and his hair was plastered and flattened down on his brow on 

the profundity of his bow. 

for him. 

This costumer was called "the Changer"; the pickpockets of Paris 

had given him this name and knew him by no other. He had a tolerably 

probable. He had specialties and categories; on each nail of his 

shop hung a social status, threadbare and worn; here the suit of a 

magistrate, there the outfit of a Cure, beyond the outfit of a banker, 

in one corner the costume of a retired military man, elsewhere 

the habiliments of a man of letters, and further on the dress of a 

statesman. 

deposited his thirty sous and selected, according to the part which 

he wished to play, the costume which suited him, and on descending the 

clothes were faithfully returned, and the Changer, who trusted the 

thieves with everything, was never robbed. There was one inconvenience 

costumes. It was necessary that one should not be either too fat or 

themselves as best they might. So much the worse for the exceptions! 

in the Changer's catalogue; we copy: 

and linen." On the margin there stood: ex-ambassador, and a note 

All this belonged to the statesman, the ex-ambassador. This whole 

costume was, if we may so express ourselves, debilitated; the seams were 

upon his heart, its function was to conceal the absent button. 

would instantly have recognized upon the back of the visitor whom 

Basque had just shown in, the statesman's suit borrowed from the 

pick-me-down-that shop of the Changer. 

expected to see turned to the newcomer's disadvantage. 

bows, and demanded in a curt tone: 

crocodile will furnish some idea: 

of seeing Monsieur le Baron in society. I think I actually did meet 

monsieur personally, several years ago, at the house of Madame la 

Princesse Bagration and in the drawing-rooms of his Lordship the Vicomte 

Dambray, peer of France." 

on his accent and gesture, but his disappointment increased; the 

he had expected. 

set foot in the house of either of them in my life." 

any cost, insisted. 

know Chateaubriand very well. He is very affable. He sometimes says to 

me: 'Thenard, my friend . . . won't you drink a glass of wine with me?'" 

Let us cut it short. What do you want?" 

district near Panama, a village called la Joya. That village is composed 

of a single house, a large, square house of three stories, built of 

chambers, ladders; in the evening the traps are closed, the ladders 

are withdrawn carbines and blunderbusses trained from the loopholes; 

there? because the country is marvellous; gold is found there." 

disappointment to impatience. 

peasant woman, who toils by the day, turns round when the diligence 

passes by, the peasant proprietress, who toils in her field, does not 

turn round. The dog of the poor man barks at the rich man, the dog 

of the rich man barks at the poor man. Each one for himself. 

Self-interest--that's the object of men. Gold, that's the loadstone." 

journey is long and costly. I need a little money." 

characteristic of the vulture, and replied with an augmented smile. 

start had been given him. He had noted that detail: "my spouse and my 

young lady." 

not have done the look better. He almost lay in wait for him. 

turn, with the green gaze of his spectacles. 

to you." 

interesting." 

I speak of recent deeds, of actual facts as still unknown to justice 

confidence, and almost into your family under a false name. I am about 

to tell you his real name. And to tell it to you for nothing." 

"I am going to tell you, equally for nothing, who he is." 

in the stranger. He launched a furious glance on the sly at Marius, 

nothing; try putting a pane of glass over hell! 

first offer of it. Cheap. Twenty thousand francs." 

what you wish to say to me." 

francs." 

just as I know your name." 

you and to tell it to you. Thenard." 

guard forms in a square; this man burst into laughter. 

fillip. 

poet, Don Alvares the Spaniard, and Mistress Balizard." 

a low voice: "An honest rustler."[69] 

quills of which mention was recently made, and which the reader has also 

takes off his hat. 

man of prey reappeared. 

nasal twang had disappeared, "I am Thenardier." 

accepted it; but he was none the less bewildered. 

his disguise, this Baron Pontmercy recognized him, and recognized 

Thenardier, but he seemed well posted as to Jean Valjean. Who was this 

almost beardless young man, who was so glacial and so generous, who knew 

Thenardier, the reader will remember, although he had been Marius' 

neighbor, had never seen him, which is not unusual in Paris; he had 

man named Marius who lived in the house. He had written to him, without 

knowing him, the letter with which the reader is acquainted. 

in his mind. 

an expression of thanks. 

depths of his own gloom, he had contrived to grasp more than one 

by dint of induction, he had guessed who the man was whom he had 

encountered on a certain day in the Grand Sewer. From the man he had 

easily reached the name. He knew that Madame la Baronne Pontmercy was 

Cosette. But he meant to be discreet in that quarter. 

he were to come and make to the Baron Pontmercy this revelation--and 

without proof: "Your wife is a bastard," the only result would be to 

essential had been compromised as yet, and he had five hundred francs 

himself strong. For men of Thenardier's nature, every dialogue is 

situation? He did not know to whom he was speaking, but he did know of 

what he was speaking, he made this rapid review of his inner forces, and 

after having said: "I am Thenardier," he waited. 

That man whom he had so greatly desired to find was before him. He could 

honor Colonel Pontmercy's recommendation. 

having been saved by such a rascal. In any case, he was content. He 

was another--to elucidate, if possible, the source of Cosette's fortune. 

something. It might prove useful to see the bottom of this man. 

was gazing at Marius with a gentleness that was almost tender. 

about. An assassin, because he assassinated police-agent Javert." 

"I will make myself intelligible. In a certain arrondissement of the Pas 

and who, under the name of M. Madeleine, had regained his status and 

of the term. In a trade, the manufacture of black glass goods, he 

hospitals, opened schools, visited the sick, dowered young girls, 

convict knew the secret of a penalty incurred by this man in former 

convict who robbed M. Madeleine was Jean Valjean. As for the other fact, 

you have nothing to tell me about it either. Jean Valjean killed the 

to you, was present." 

expressive whirl. 

me renders it my duty to tell him so. Truth and justice before all 

Jean Valjean did not rob M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean did not kill 

Javert." 

Valjean himself who was M. Madeleine." 

person who killed Javert was Javert." 

Alexandrine measure: 

"Police-agent-Ja-vert-was-found-drowned-un-der-a-boat-of-the-Pont-au-Change." 

seemed to contain sheets folded in different sizes. 

same man, and I say that Javert had no other assassin than Javert. If 

suspicious, handwriting is complaisant,--but printed proofs." 

much older than the other. 

newspapers, unfolded, to Marius. 

number of the Drapeau Blanc of the 25th of July, 1823, the text of 

Madeleine and Jean Valjean. 

of Javert, adding that it appeared from a verbal report of Javert to the 

who, holding him under his pistol, had fired into the air, instead of 

blowing out his brains. 

up Thenardier's statements; the note printed in the Moniteur had been an 

not doubt. 

been deceived. 

Marius could not repress a cry of joy. 

is a saint!" 

assassin and a robber." 

some authority: 

but he is a thief. He did not kill Javert, but he is a murderer." 

life of repentance, of self-abnegation and of virtue?" 

it the source of the fortune so skilfully presented to Madame la Baronne 

by Jean Valjean. I say skilfully, because, by a gift of that nature it 

would not be so very unskilful to slip into an honorable house whose 

crime, and to enjoy one's theft, to bury one's name and to create for 

oneself a family." 

do not you apply to Jean Valjean?' For a very simple reason; I know 

show me his empty hands, and, since I am in need of some money for 

nothing. I am a little fatigued, permit me to take a chair." 

newspapers, thrust them back into their envelope, and murmured as he 

trouble to get this one." 

and the Pont de Jena." 

a key to it. It was, I repeat, on the 6th of June; it might have been 

eight o'clock in the evening. The man hears a noise in the sewer. 

of footsteps, some one was walking in the dark, and coming in his 

himself. The grating of the outlet from the sewer was not far off. 

A little light which fell through it permitted him to recognize the 

newcomer, and to see that the man was carrying something on his back. 

He was walking in a bent attitude. The man who was walking in a bent 

river. One fact is to be noticed, that before reaching the exit 

though he might have left the body, but the sewermen would have found 

and that did not suit the assassin's plans. He had preferred to 

traverse that quagmire with his burden, and his exertions must have been 

terrible, for it is impossible to risk one's life more completely; I 

don't understand how he could have come out of that alive." 

to draw a long breath. He went on: 

everything there, even room. When two men are there, they must meet. 

That is what happened. The man domiciled there and the passer-by were 

forced to bid each other good-day, greatly to the regret of both. The 

man who had the key parleyed, simply to gain time. He examined the dead 

dressed, with the air of being rich, and all disfigured with blood. 

the assassin perceiving it, a bit of the assassinated man's coat. A 

of things and of bringing home the crime to the criminal. He put 

grating, made the man go out with his embarrassment on his back, closed 

the grating again, and ran off, not caring to be mixed up with the 

comprehend. The man who was carrying the corpse was Jean Valjean; the 

one who had the key is speaking to you at this moment; and the piece of 

the coat . . ." 

forefingers, a strip of torn black cloth, all covered with dark spots. 

with his eyes riveted on the fragment of black cloth, and, without 

uttering a word, without taking his eyes from that fragment, he 

a key which was in the lock of a cupboard near the chimney. 

looking, and without his frightened gaze quitting the rag which 

Thenardier still held outspread. 

the assassinated young man was an opulent stranger lured into a trap by 

Jean Valjean, and the bearer of an enormous sum of money." 

flung upon the floor an old black coat all covered with blood. 

for five hundred and a thousand francs. 

thousand francs, bully that you are!" 

Waterloo protects you." 

with the thousand. 

for a general. And you come here to commit infamies! I tell you that 

them. You will depart to-morrow, for America, with your daughter; 

departure, you ruffian, and at that moment I will count out to you 

twenty thousand francs. Go get yourself hung elsewhere!" 

"eternal gratitude." And Thenardier left the room, understanding 

nothing, stupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacks 

bank-bills. 

have been greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off such 

lightning as that. 

Let us finish with this man at once. 

daughter Azelma, furnished with a draft on New York for twenty thousand 

francs. 

Thenardier set up as a slave-dealer. 

where Cosette was still walking. 

not lose a minute! Put on your shawl." 

throbbing. He paced back and forth with huge strides, he embraced 

Cosette: 

"Ah! Cosette! I am an unhappy wretch!" said he. 

supreme and sweet, humble in its immensity, appeared to him. The convict 

was transfigured into Christ. 

beheld, but it was grand. 

not dare to speak to you of that. We are going to see M. Jean." 

could know nothing of my own adventure. We are going to bring him back, 

us again. If only he is at home! Provided only that we can find him, 

I will pass the rest of my life in venerating him. Yes, that is how it 

to him. All is explained. You understand." 

haggard, livid, gloomy, an immense joy in his eyes. 

And, pressed close in Cosette's arms, he exclaimed: 

took a step forward and murmured between lips convulsively contracted to 

repress his sobs: 

locks with an adorable movement, and kissed his brow. 

caresses, as though she desired to pay Marius' debt. 

Imagine, Monsieur Pontmercy, at the very moment when you entered, I 

was saying to myself: 'All is over. Here is her little gown, I am a 

at the very moment when you were mounting the stairs. Was not I an 

God. The good God says: 

sees one's little Cosette once more! Ah! I was very unhappy." 

gave myself reasons: 'They do not want you, keep in your own course, 

one has not the right to cling eternally.' Ah! God be praised, I see her 

once more! Dost thou know, Cosette, thy husband is very handsome? Ah! 

what a pretty embroidered collar thou hast on, luckily. I am fond of 

thou shouldst have some cashmere shawls. Let me call her thou, Monsieur 

Pontmercy. It will not be for long." 

long have you been back? Why did you not let us know? Do you know that 

Valjean. 

swelling Marius' heart found vent. 

has done more--he has given you to me. And after having saved me, and 

little. That barricade, that sewer, that furnace, that cesspool,--all 

Cosette, that man is an angel!" 

did you not tell it to me? It is your own fault, too. You save people's 

unmasking yourself, you calumniate yourself. It is frightful." 

so?" 

forced to hold my peace. If I had spoken, it would have caused 

good heavens! when I reflect that it was by an accident that I have 

learned all this. You form a part of ourselves. You are her father, 

imagine that you will be here to-morrow." 

with you." 

us. We shall not loose our hold of you." 

door. I shall run away with you. If necessary, I shall employ force." 

shells. You shall eat my strawberries. I water them myself. And no 

to kill the cat. But now nobody cries any more. Everybody laughs, 

everybody is happy. You are going to come with us. How delighted 

obey me prettily." 

Their trees are full of birds. I would walk with Cosette. It is sweet to 

strawberries. I would make her gather my roses. That would be charming. 

Only . . ." 

smile. 

ill? Do you suffer?" 

is dead? Speak, so that I may hear thy voice." 

your living, do you hear?" 

I was born again." 

of you once more. There are two of us here who will henceforth have no 

other thought than your happiness." 

you shall not die." 

that make me other than I am? No, God has thought like you and myself, 

a good arrangement. God knows better than we what we need. May you be 

happy, may Monsieur Pontmercy have Cosette, may youth wed the morning, 

that all this is right. Come, be reasonable, nothing is possible now, I 

am fully conscious that all is over. And then, last night, I drank that 

whole jug of water. How good thy husband is, Cosette! Thou art much 

better off with him than with me." 

children." 

complete question. 

reason for being unjust towards God." 

wished to retain her features for eternity. 

was still possible to him when gazing at Cosette. The reflection of that 

sweet face lighted up his pale visage. 

Marius. 

ceasing to gaze at Cosette. 

perfect health, and said in a loud voice, as he laid the crucifix on the 

table: 

the tomb were seizing hold upon him. 

His hands, which rested on his knees, began to press their nails into 

the stuff of his trousers. 

but could not. 

tears, they distinguished words like the following: 

lose you again?" 

of dying. 

once more. 

bracelets, I invented a way of substituting for slides of soldered sheet 

iron, slides of iron laid together. It is prettier, better and less 

costly. You will understand how much money can be made in that way. So 

Cosette's fortune is really hers. I give you these details, in order 

that your mind may be set at rest." 

The doctor dismissed her. 

man before she disappeared: "Would you like a priest?" 

one would have said that he saw some one. 

agony. 

Jean Valjean resumed: 

hundred very well cut grains, only costs three francs." 

hold him back. 

before him. 

to the gloomy horizon. 

movement, and in proportion as the wretchedness of limb and feebleness 

else. 

wings could be felt. 

of the last hour had, evidently, arrived. 

them and him. 

is to die like this! And thou lovest me also, my Cosette. I knew well 

of thee to place that pillow under my loins! Thou wilt weep for me a 

griefs. You must enjoy yourselves a great deal, my children. I forgot 

to tell you that the profit was greater still on the buckles without 

and sold for sixty. It really was a good business. So there is no 

occasion for surprise at the six hundred thousand francs, Monsieur 

handsome ball dresses, my Cosette, and then, thou must give good dinners 

to thy friends, and be very happy. I was writing to Cosette a while ago. 

wax-tapers. I do not know whether the person who gave them to me is 

is my wish. No name on the stone. If Cosette cares to come for a little 

while now and then, it will give me pleasure. And you too, Monsieur 

pardon for that. Now she and you form but one for me. I feel very 

knew, Monsieur Pontmercy, her pretty rosy cheeks were my delight; when I 

a bank-bill for five hundred francs. I have not touched it. It is for 

going very far, I shall see you from there, you will only have to 

was the first time that I touched thy poor, little hand. It was so cold! 

regrettedest not having taken her to the convent! How thou didst make 

didst play. Thou didst put cherries in thy ears. Those are things of 

trees under which one has strolled, the convents where one has concealed 

Thenardiers were wicked. Thou must forgive them. Cosette, the moment 

Remember that name--Fantine. Kneel whenever thou utterest it. She 

suffered much. She loved thee dearly. She had as much unhappiness as 

thee all this time, it cut me to the heart; I went as far as the corner 

of the street, I must have produced a queer effect on the people who 

longer see clearly, my children, I had still other things to say, but 

them." 

longer moved. 

cover his hands with kisses. 

immense angel stood erect with wings outspread, awaiting that soul. 

far from the elegant quarter of that city of sepulchres, far from all 

from the defilement of the birds. The water turns it green, the air 

blackens it. It is not near any path, and people are not fond of 

walking in that direction, because the grass is high and their feet 

are immediately wet. When there is a little sunshine, the lizards 

linnets warble in the trees. 

stone long enough and narrow enough to cover a man. 

which have become gradually illegible beneath the rain and the dust, and 

which are, to-day, probably effaced: 

           Il vivait. Il mourut quand il n'eut plus son ange. 

           La chose simplement d'elle-meme arriva, 

           Comme la nuit se fait lorsque le jour s'en va.[70] 

You are right, sir, when you tell me that Les Miserables is written for 

all nations. I do not know whether it will be read by all, but I wrote 

it for all. It is addressed to England as well as to Spain, to Italy as 

the book which should instruct him and of the hearth which should warm 

me, I come for you." 

climes, and he is groaning in all languages. 

admirable Italy has all miseries on the face of it. Does not banditism, 

more deeply eaten by that ulcer of convents which I have endeavored to 

Assuredly, the sun of Italy is splendid, but, alas, azure in the sky 

does not prevent rags on man. 

the present nor of the future without a flavor of the past being mingled 

thing as to understand the Gospel badly. 

whose two scales, pauperism and parasitism, so mournfully preserve their 

is your army of schoolmasters, the only army which civilization 

acknowledges? 

war-budget and a paltry budget of education? Have not you also that 

passive obedience which is so easily converted into soldierly obedience? 

firing upon Garibaldi; that is to say, upon the living honor of Italy? 

two feeble creatures are surrounded that the degree of civilization 

Paris? What is the amount of truth that springs from your laws, and what 

prosecution, legal infamy, prison, the scaffold, the executioner, the 

death penalty? Italians, with you as with us, Beccaria is dead and 

Farinace is alive. And then, let us scrutinize your state reasons. 

Have you a government which comprehends the identity of morality and 

politics? You have reached the point where you grant amnesty to heroes! 

Something very similar has been done in France. Stay, let us pass 

as we. Have you not, like ourselves, two condemnations, religious 

condemnation pronounced by the priest, and social condemnation decreed 

by the judge? Oh, great nation of Italy, thou resemblest the great 

nation of France! Alas! our brothers, you are, like ourselves, 

Miserables. 

Certain men, certain castes, rise in revolt against this book,--I 

does not prevent them from being of use. 

Italian, German, Spanish, or English, and become European, I say more, 

and language, which must grow broader like all the rest. 

should be glad if this eulogium were merited. 

suffering, and I try to assuage it, I possess only the puny forces of a 

man, and I cry to all: "Help me!" 

for your country. If I have insisted so strongly, it is because of one 

phrase in your letter. You write:-- 

read it as a history, we read it as a romance.'"--Alas! I repeat, 

has been the garment of the human race; the moment has at length arrived 

of the dawn. 

in dissipating some prejudices, you are at liberty to publish it, 

sentiments. 

***** 

[Footnote 1: Patois of the French Alps: chat de maraude, rascally 

marauder.] 

the space of a morning (or jade).] 

Thiers.] 

                    CY A ETE ECRASE 

                       PAR MALHEUR 

                    SOUS UN CHARIOT, 

                    MONSIEUR BERNARD 

                    DE BRYE MARCHAND 

               A BRUXELLE LE [Illegible] 

                      FEVRIER 1637.] 

moment of panic, terror."--Napoleon, Dictees de Sainte Helene.] 

one of them where neither exists.] 

nearly as follows, etc.] 

          Come choose your jugs and crocks, 

          Flower-pots, pipes, bricks. 

          The Heart sells Diamonds to every comer.] 

and Gesmas, between is the divine power. Dismas seeks the heights, 

Gesmas, unhappy man, the lowest regions; the highest power will preserve 

us and our effects. If you repeat this verse, you will not lose your 

things by theft.] 

poultry.] 

as having a pear-shaped head.] 

out. Let it not be said that patriots have hoisted the white flag.] 

its base, soil (Des solles), greenhouse and house (Decazes) must be 

changed.] 

sceptre and thy chariot; I prefer the love of my mother."] 

allusion.] 

worth the while! The time of love should last forever.] 

everywhere.] 

stilts. When one passed beneath them, one paid him two sous.] 

the Court and allotted the lodgings.] 

smaller than the other, so that it does not roll straight, but describes 

a curve on the ground.] 

white with powder.] 

raisons pour que je me libertise."] 

son.] 

sans etre agite lui-meme.] 

tutu, pointed hat!] 

[Footnote 45: Chien, dog, trigger.] 

one God, one King, one half-farthing, and one boot. And these two poor 

little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme 

very early in the morning. And these two poor little things were as 

asked Charlotte.] 

hung himself.] 

mouth.] 

Gibelotte: stewed rabbits.] 

[Footnote 52: Municipal officer of Toulouse.] 

young, and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well 

dressed and in love? When, by adding your age to my age, we could 

not count forty years between us, and when, in our humble and tiny 

household, everything was spring to us even in winter. Fair days! 

Manuel was proud and wise, Paris sat at sacred banquets, Foy launched 

bonnet is hardly unfolded. I wandered with thee, pressing thy supple 

arm. The passers-by thought that love bewitched had wedded, in our happy 

concealed, content, with closed doors, devouring love, that sweet 

forbidden fruit. My mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart had 

the Tender to the Latin country. O Place Maubert! O Place Dauphine! 

delicate leg, I saw a star in the depths of the garret. I have read 

a great deal of Plato, but nothing of it remains by me; better than 

Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst demonstrate to me celestial 

didst submit to me; oh gilded garret! to lace thee! to behold thee going 

and coming from dawn in thy chemise, gazing at thy young brow in thine 

snatched a kiss from thy fiery lip, when thou wentest forth, dishevelled 

what sighs from our hearts full of gloom fluttered forth to the heavenly 

depths!] 

gendarmes that I may say a word to them. With a blue capote and a 

chicken in his shako, here's the banlieue, co-cocorico.] 

               "The bird slanders in the elms, 

                And pretends that yesterday, Atala 

                Went off with a Russian, 

                    Where fair maids go. 

                         Lon la. 

forth. I think that it is Jeanne who has it. At night, when I come from 

the quadrilles, I show Stella to the stars, and I say to them: "Behold 

her." Where fair maids go, lon la.] 

[Footnote 57: But some prisons still remain, and I am going to put 

a stop to this sort of public order. Does any one wish to play at 

skittles? The whole ancient world fell in ruin, when the big ball 

that day, King Charles X. did not stick well and came unglued.] 

[Footnote 58: Steps on the Aventine Hill, leading to the Tiber, to which 

the Tiber.] 

adore her petticoat, the rogue."] 

"to remain unmarried."] 

is true that thou wilt wed ere long."] 

mouth."] 

sounds so ravishing that he delighted everyone!"] 

children."] 

[Footnote 67: A short mask.] 

bank-bill, derived from its rustling noise.] 

of itself, as the night comes when day is gone.] 

