Macrolife

A Mobile Utopia

George Zebrowski

Praise for MACROLIFE

“It’s been years since I was so impressed. Macrolife manages an extraordinary
balance between the personal and cosmic elements. Altogether a worthy
successor to Olaf Stapledon’s Star Maker….

“I’m confident that George’s book is so good it doesn’t need any
recommendation from me. You can quote that!

“One of the few books I intend to read again.”
—Arthur C. Clarke

“A work of sweeping imagination, exploring the fascinating implications of
humanity’s breakout to the era of space colonies. Zebrowski addresses the
deepest of questions: what is the human destiny? I read this book with great
enjoyment.”
—Gerard K. O’Neill

“The first writer since Stapledon to get the Stapledonian flavor-vistas,
perspectives, a kind of distant, serene motion. I think it’s a book that will last, if
only for its first statement of an emerging, probably inevitable vision. The novel
oscillates nicely between long view and close focus, capturing a mood and
feeling that few even attempt in this field, and at the conclusion there is a
genuine vast perspective evoked. The prose is very good—smooth, evocative,
adroit—a solid work that will have a following of the best sort.”
—Gregory Benford

“Macrolife has acquired a cult following.”
—Stephen Baxter, Vector

“It is a very impressive book, not only because it is so well written but, most
especially, because of its imaginative scope. It takes courage, confidence, and
real ability to tackle these magnificent Stapledonian expanses of space and time,
to confront the Universe in all its ever-changing majesty, and to dream of the
infinite variety in which it can challenge man and change him (or make him
change himself).

“That, of course, is the challenge of the science fiction field, and at a time when
too much SF is trying to reduce the vastness and wonders among which we and
our world live to mere backdrops for teenage suspense plots, it is refreshing and
encouraging to have someone tackle the greater scheme and do it so splendidly. I
hope there will be more books where Macrolife came from.”
—Reginald Bretnor

“Macrolife is the sort of novel that is not often seen in science fiction. It is
thoughtful and deeply textured, somewhat reminiscent of Le Guin but on a much
larger canvas; its scope alone should fascinate many readers, though its
underlying philosophy is equally attractive.”
—Chelsea Quinn Yarbro

“With the publication of Macrolife, George Zebrowski takes his place next to H.
G. Wells, Olaf Stapledon, and Arthur C. Clarke as a novelist of ideas on a
cosmic scale. It is one of the most intellectually adventurous science fiction
novels of all time.

“I am especially moved by Zebrowski’s success in striking a balance between
the demands of thought and art…a splendidly wrought novel…much more than
a book about space colonies, it presents a comprehensive vision of human
destiny. Macrolife is magnificent.”
—W. Warren Wagar

“Macrolife is a thoughtful and detailed extrapolation of a staggering concept: the
survival of our species in extraplanetary habitats. In rich, meticulous prose
Zebrowski examines the emotional and philosophical ramifications of this
concept, and in the novel’s powerful finale—the section entitled ‘The Dream of
Time’—he creates a farsighted and poetic coda that is absolutely lovely. An
important book.”
—Michael Bishop

“The first writer since Stapledon to get the Stapledonian flavor-vistas,
perspectives, a kind of distant, serene motion. I think it’s a book that will last, if
only for its first statement of an emerging, probably inevitable vision. The novel
oscillates nicely between long view and close focus, capturing a mood and
feeling that few even attempt in this field, and at the conclusion there is a
genuine vast perspective evoked. The prose is very good—smooth, evocative,

adroit—a solid work that will have a following of the best sort.”
—Gregory Benford

“What Zebrowski has tried in Macrolife is beyond the abilities of most writers in
the field. He has shown the sweep of time, and the future evolution of mankind.
Indeed, he has shown the future of all living things, from microbes to sun
systems. And this on a canvas which stretches from now to Forever.”
—Howard Waldrop

“George Zebrowski’s ambitious novel Macrolife is constructed on a scale
completely different from that of most science fiction being written today, so
much of which is too conservative in its outlook. Macrolife—with its graphs,
charts, illustrations, and interludes of theory—is as striking in form as it is
imaginative in content. The book is in the best Utopian tradition of Wells and
Stapledon.”
—Curtis C. Smith

“Impressive…Macrolife theme beautifully and convincingly developed: all
based on credible cosmic technology. A history of eternity, done with grace and
optimism. The last section, ‘The Dream of Time,’ with its serial universes and
macrolives, has melodies and cadences reminiscent of Elizabethan sonnets. For
contrapuntal contrast, the destruction of Earth is the best I ever read. It should
satisfy even John, writing on Patmos. This, we agree, is the Way of Last
Things.”
—Charles L. Harness

“Its sheer sweep, its grandeur of concept, its daring, integrity, and rational
intelligence put to shame those science fictioneers who can only fill up the next
hundred billion years with space wars and other high jinks orchestrated by
heroes who are only giant dwarfs, fantasy projections of our as-yet rather
primitive selves.

“Integrity, yes, and honesty. Here is a piece of fiction which may well be more
than fiction, which demanded to be written, and to be written in its own terms.
Macrolife is a work of grandeur and intelligence. With it, George Zebrowski’s
career as mature prophetic writer really commenced….”
—Ian Watson

“The Utimate Utopia. There’s a lot of wonder in this book.’
—Richard E. Geis, Science Fiction Review

“A truly sui generis book…a massive intellectual achievement, a work that will
be discussed and debated for years.”
—Thomas N. Scortia

“No higher praise could be offered than to say that Macrolife is almost
Stapledonian in its approach to the subject of man in the galaxy.”
—Brian W. Aldiss, Trillion Year Spree

“A very plausible cosmology…Zebrowski has plotted and executed a fascinating
story…superlative ‘hard science fiction.’…”
—United Press International

“An intellectual tour de force of great imagination and reverence for mankind’s
potential.”
—Dean Ing

“Reminiscent of Stapledon’s future history in its breathtaking scope, and Blish’s
Cities in Flight tetralogy in its grand theme.”
—Publishers Weekly

“…the gradual evolution of human society in the artificial worlds develops
richly. The novel will probably be remembered rather longer than swifter, more
superficial works.”
—Science Fiction & Fantasy Book Review

To Pam

for the beginning,
for the years after,
for the friendship and love,
      these words

INTRODUCTION TO THE NEW EDITION

by what George Zebrowski has referred to as “print television”: by books
conceived and written as if they are TV films rather than works that challenge
and enhance the emotions and the intellect of the reader, examples of “the
precious life-blood of a master spirit, embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a
life beyond life.”

George Zebrowski’s Macrolife is the latter kind of book, and that definition

of a good book is almost three hundred and fifty years old. It comes from the pen
of the poet John Milton, in his long political pamphlet Areopagitca, which is also
one of the masterpieces of English prose. Subtitled A Speech for the Liberty of
Unlicensed Printing, this pamphlet of the year 1644 attacked state censorship,
which was implemented by requiring official approval for the products of a
printing press.

Nowadays works of science fiction—a literature of such potential to liberate

the imagination and the mind—are censored commercially by a virtual
conspiracy of publishers, editors, voters for prestigious awards, and, alas, by
authors themselves. In many respects the pressures of commercial censorship are
far worse than anything against which the author of Paradise Lost protested,
because today’s pressures train readers to think and to respond shallowly, to
consume the intellectual equivalent of fast food while convinced that they are
feasting on fine cuisine. Which average reader nowadays—the audience for
Milton’s polemic in his day—would get far beyond the title of that eloquent,
finely wrought pamphlet? Even the title seems a bit of a mouthful.

George Zebrowski’s Macrolife certainly isn’t fast food.
“Print television” doesn’t simply refer to the flood of zippy, slick adventure

fiction on the book racks, clones of previous SF, clones of Star Wars, clones of
clones. The phenomenon is more insidious than that. For adventure fiction
merely represents the low-level consensus of escapist entertainment. There also
exists a high-level consensus consisting of literary work that is finely crafted,
replete with a care for words and narrative tone and interactive dialogue that is
both snappy yet unvulgar, populated with properly rounded characters, equipped
with significant themes, laced with emotional concern, and with tasteful daring,
and with a banner-waving show of insight and responsibility. Much of this work
is also a sham, a confection. Too many budding writers write in order to see a
well-wrought book in print with their name upon it, rather than to affect the

consciousness of readers and even to change their lives in some minor or even
major way (which, to me at least, is a principal reason for writing). Pretty soon
those writers who do succeed become authorities on writing SF.

pill until the pill is buried deep, lost in a cyst of saccharine. Endless workshops-
—which are commercial as much as literary since they are guiding the evolution
of new authors toward survival and success in the consensus marketplace—and
“How to Do It” articles by professional authors who have adapted to this
ecological niche advise the young hopefuls how to cast narrative hooks like an
angler fooling the fish and the best way to slip exposition of ideas painlessly into
a tale without clunky chunks of facts or ideas interrupting the smooth
momentum of the story. A major crime is to let one’s grasp on the reader slip for
a moment or to hold up the onward rush of events. Thou shalt not discomfort the
readers by making them slow down in the reading and actually think. They must
simply experience the cunning, superficial semblance of deep feeling and
intellection. Thus readers are conditioned not to think, so that ultimately they
will not be readers of fiction but viewers. Thus writers are trained to think
carefully about avoiding the appearance of rigorous thought.

George Zebrowski is an author who will make the reader think; and the

ideas, the experience of his work, will not, therefore, slip away afterward like
some phantom of thought, some illusion that the “viewing” of some subsequent
book will presently eclipse.

This is why Arthur C. Clarke described Macrolife as “one of the few books I

intend to read again,” adding that “it’s been years since I was so impressed.
Macrolife manages an extraordinary balance between the personal and the
cosmic elements. Altogether a worthy successor to Olaf Stapledon’s Star
Maker.”

Spurred on by peer fame in the form of Nebula and Hugo nominations and

inclusion in “Best of the Year” anthologies as well as by inflated advances for
“long awaited” first novels or sequels to previous, much-loved confections, the
concept of the award-worthy piece of fiction—one which possesses the magic
ingredients of balance, artistry, characterization, significance, et cetera—exists
as a kind of abstract idol that now tends to condition, even if unconsciously, the
kind of stories and novels that authors will write and how they will go about
writing these. This system trains writers not to attempt other things or even to
believe that those other ways could be valid. And editors punish deviancy as
being “uncommercial,” which is tragic for authors, for readers, and for science
fiction itself insofar as American science fiction commercially dominates world
markets. To many people in America, consensus science fiction seems the only

conceivable kind.

Thank God, then, for George Zebrowski.
Or should we, perversely, thank that madman Hitler? For Zebrowski, child

of displaced Polish slave-workers, only came to America courtesy of the Nazi
cataclysm, bringing with him a European tradition of literature, philosophy, and
science that distinguishes him from most of his peers. He himself has
commented that “Platonic dialogue, the symphonies of Mahler, Utopian fiction
and Wellsian prophecy…these are the personal and technical sources of
Macrolife.” Brian Stableford, reviewing Macrolife on its first appearance, was
moved to wonder what possible future there could be in the science fiction field
for a writer like Zebrowski. Macrolife was far more worthy “than a dozen sickly
novels of the species that currently dominate the American SF scene,” yet the
book seemed to Stableford to be a literary mule, something that just ought not to
have been a novel. How deeply the divide has grown between fiction and
nonfiction—even though historically this schism is of fairly recent origin and
was irrelevant, as Stableford points out, to “the most ambitious works of the
seventeenth century.”

rooted in an older tradition of passionate thought, its own ambitions aren’t those
of the past at all. They are of the future, of the furthest futures conceivable.

where so many lcontemporary “masterpieces” are like doughnuts, fresh sugary
hot sellers today, stale and discarded by tomorrow. The first edition of Macrolife
nonplussed several reviewers, but favorable opinion has prevailed, for instance,
in most major critical reference works and in Library Journal’s must-read list.
Macrolife is one of Easton Press’s Masterpieces of Science Fiction.

In Stableford’s view there is simply no way that a vision such as

Zebrowski’s can be presented using the narrative techniques of the novel, since
—to take a couple of examples—these compel Zebrowski to have his characters
lecture one another or require the protagonist to read a book of commentary “in
order that we can read it over his shoulder.” For the novel has become
preoccupied with character and narrative whereas Zebrowski is concerned with
future sociology.

Isn’t it curious that one of the great classics of the twentieth century was

George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four in which O’Brien lectures Winston Smith
at length and in which Smith reads page after page of The Theory and Practice
of Oligarchical Collectivism, quotations from which occupy almost exactly one-
tenth of the whole novel?

Yet Stableford’s criticism is correct, if reformulated to express precisely

what is wrong with much American SF, namely, its betrayal of its own content in
favor of novelistic tricks. Time and again, philosophical problems—of sociology,
cosmology, the nature of existence, all of which are of the essence of science
fiction—are presented but then hastily sublimated into mere story. One opens so
many SF novels with such high hopes only to find that the science—in the
broadest sense, of knowledge—is the merest pretext for a fictional adventure.

Zebrowski, for his part, has diagnosed a fundamental anti-intellectualism in

American SF. In his view too many of its authors believe that they are sages, full
of wise opinions, whereas the truth is that they have never thought rigorously
enough as part of their basic existence.

On the contrary, they have schooled themselves to conjure up a mirage, an

illusion of intellectual rigor. Zebrowski himself studied philosophy at the State
University of New York and might have become an academic philosopher. The
best teacher in that college (in his opinion), one Robert Neidorf, was a
philosopher of science, but also a science fiction reader. The two strands could
combine. “There should be more people,” Zebrowski has stated, “who are
moved by the ideals and examples of science, and who understand its sociology
and history, its importance to human aspirations and survival. Most workaday
scientists rarely think about these things either.”

Its importance to survival. To a life beyond life, to quote Milton again.

Survival, the triumph over powerlessness, and life beyond life are indeed the
themes of Macrolife. Just as the writings of its character Richard Bulero are
harked back to by subsequent characters, as rational visions of the future of life
in the cosmos, so, too, may this novel of Zebrowski’s be harked back to aboard
some space habitation out among the stars in the year 3000 as one of the
founding texts, when other SF authors of today are as much remembered as
medieval French court poets. If the future does follow a certain path, away from
planetary surfaces into free space—as Zebrowski argues with a fierce conviction
that it must—then he may well be regarded as a true literary seer. Few other
writers are in the running for this sort of reputation.

Macrolife is a major vision of social intelligence transforming the cosmos. It

is in three sections. The first focuses upon events in the year 2021 when the
disintegration of the “miracle” all-purpose building material Bulerite destroys
civilization on Earth. The events that are set in motion propel the first kernel of
macrolife free of the solar system. The second and longest section deals with
more mature macrolife of the year 3000. The star-faring habitat visits a degraded
dirtworld to obtain raw materials with which to reproduce itself, then it returns
with its new twin to Earthspace, where the first contact with alien macrolife
occurs. The human race is accepted into the cosmic circle because people have

learned how to link with artificial intelligence, thus overcoming—or at least
taming—the instinctive passions inherited from dirtworld evolution. The final
section begins a hundred billion years later when macrolife has filled the
universe but the universe is beginning to wind down back toward the point of
final collapse.

The Bulerite calamity renders the Earth dramatically uninhabitable. Earth’s

very crust is cracked, recriminations trigger an all-out nuclear war, and to trump
the doom the Earth and Moon are engulfed in a bizarre, other-dimensional
bubble. At first glance this may seem a rather histrionic and arbitrary plot device
to compel macrolife to set out on its journey of growth; almost a deus ex
machina at the very outset of the novel. If it requires such a far-out set of
circumstances to launch macrolife, then macrolife cannot be such an inevitable
future, can it? Could it be, also, that Zebrowski deliberately lays on the
apocalyptic action with a trowel so as to refresh the reader after some rather
lengthy and serious philosophical conversations in Platonic dialogue mode?

A problem of substance? And a problem of style?
Zebrowski’s concern with rebirth from out of cataclysm reflects his own

background as a member of a mutilated nation. “I feel the force of memory that
pushes out from my parents,” he has written; “it’s always there, a shadow cast by
a world gone insane.” His past was “brutal, cruel, and stupid…created by
people…who didn’t want me to be born.” Dirtworlds are also brutal, cruel, and
stupid as environments; and the escape to a space habitat, which is free from the
shocks to which planetary flesh is heir, may be emotionally patterned upon
Zebrowski’s own escape as a child from war-torn Europe to America. This, plus
a subsequent pattern, which segued with his discovery of science fiction. For
though he was an adoptive New Yorker, a temporary move to Florida from the
gang-haunted, refugee-packed, decaying South Bronx presented him with
warmth, cleanliness, light, and a white marble public library, “a place out of
Clarke’s Against the Fall of Night” (or something in the meadows of a
macroworld) where he discovered endless shelves of early hardback volumes
from Fantasy Press, Gnome Press, Shasta, and Doubleday.

Thus there is an emotional pattern in Zebrowski, of salvation from

apocalypse—not for everyone but only for the fortunate ones. There is an
intellectual argument, too. The Bulerite disaster is appropriate because it is an
example (this particular one mixing natural calamity with human folly) of a
whole range of disasters that can very easily overtake natural planetary life when
all the eggs are in one basket. The very escape route from ravaged Earth—
aboard the hollowed asteroid, Asterome—is a reminder of another possible
disaster that was narrowly averted. Until diverted and moored at a libration point

in the Earth-Moon system, this same asteroid had once been on a collision
course with Earth. Nothing in our present day prevents a similar asteroid or
comet from impacting with our planet at any time, as has happened repeatedly
during geological history. Such an impact, releasing the equivalent power of
thousands of hydrogen bombs, would destroy civilization and probably cause a
mass extinction of species, our own included. A planet-bound culture is also
threatened by any instability in its sun, by the climate flipping into a new ice
age, and it is challenged by its own success in the form of chemical and thermal
pollution, as witnessed by the ozone holes and global warming.

At the moment we only have one single planetary egg with only a finite

amount of nourishing yolk in the shape of resources, and only a finite ability to
tolerate the stresses of the growing chicken of civilization within itself before it
cracks wide open, killing the chicken because nowhere else is available. The
crack in the Earth’s crust is a telling symbol. Likewise is Bulerite, that super-
strong substance that allows lattice-cities to be built and the Empire State
Building to disappear underneath layers of new New York.

Bulerite seems to strengthen the frail shell of the egg. But this proves untrue.

Bulerite is unstable and highly destructive when it releases its locked-up
energies. Its exploitation by eager capitalism, which neglects to pursue the
fundamental research work of its discoverer, is a complacent strategy, and
complacent strategies are potentially lethal ones.

Bulerite will find its rightful uses later on, in connection with other scientific

advances that permit space-warp travel. Thereby it is further integrated into this
well-designed, cleanly dovetailed book, not only as an instance of the false
buttressing of the frail shell that is the Earth, but also as an appropriate example
of future science—in this case, exotic states of matter and their applications.

Zebrowski does not allow his free-enterprise Bulero family simply to build

higher and higher until they reach the stars. What sets macrolife on course is the
failure by those exploiters of the wonder substance fully to investigate it, in other
words their treachery. Through the trauma of their “crime” the Buleros are able
to liberate themselves and a segment of the human race, leaving the solar system
behind. A realist ever, Zebrowski acknowledges that even a millennium later the
Buleros would be viewed by many people as renegades. The dramatic argument
is a complex one, with no simple black versus white.

Nor are there easy black/white solutions to the possible sociological

problems of space habitations. In various permutations Zebrowski explores not
only the inevitable conflicts of interest between planetary and nonplanetary
dwellers but also the unavoidable conflicts within a macroworld itself, which
must somehow be channeled so that internal rebellion expresses itself as

reproduction by consent. This was all some way removed from the rose-tinted
optimism of many advocates of space colonies with their vision of geriatric
joggers happily trotting around the bent meadows of the profitable paradise in
the sky, at L-5, where everyone is blissfully of accord.

And a problem of style?
Zebrowski has remarked that Macrolife is a meditative book and should be

read meditatively. Space stations may explode, cities may collapse, the Earth
itself may convulse; however, the prose is meditative, just as the long-lived
inhabitants of a future macroworld would be. “Their minds are still, waiting for
every ripple of space-time to register,” Zebrowski has commented. We are
mayflies now, but they are not. Despite scenes of action and even violence, and
notwithstanding limpidly beautiful descriptions, this is a book of thought, its
pages turning with a measured sureness. For Zebrowski, the ideal reader is a
“performer,” not a “slave.” Himself a child of slaves whose Nazi masters wished
to stamp their ideology upon the face of Europe, Zebrowski perhaps detects an
analogy with those addicts of junk SF who expect an author to insert a cassette
of thrills into their heads. For the performing reader, by contrast, “the novel is a
series of opportunities for thought, understanding, and empathy.”

Macrolife is an excellent novel to perform with.
Stylistically, much of the time a solemn, neutral mode of speech prevails.

People don’t swear or crack jokes or use slang. This isn’t so much because a lot
of the conversation is expository as simply that this is the chosen tone (with
emphatics provided by occasional, italicized internal dialogue). Reviewers
criticized the novelist Morris West for his neutral-sounding dialogue, to which
West replied in an interview with a British newspaper some years ago: “Listen,
love, it is all deliberate. My dialogue is sedulously designed, not as real speech
but as a cerebral vehicle for ideas in the novel. I want dialogue to be understood
at once in every Anglo-Saxon country and to translate easily into the major
European languages…. I elected this style.”

Likewise with Zebrowski. Yet there is a further reason beyond the aspiration

to an international (and even interstellar) style. This crops up in miniature early
on when three of the characters discuss macrolife over a Chinese meal and a
bottle of brandy. One of them, Sam, fades out of the discussion. Afterward: “‘…I
hope you followed some of what we said.’ ‘I really did, Orton. Inside I’m sober,
really.’ How can frail beings like us think of doing the things Richard and Orton
described?” Certainly somebody can drift off into a brandy haze, yet in most
novels they would become tipsily involved in the discussion. Sam does end up
knocking over the brandy bottle, yet he never knocks over the conversation. The
point is that our irrational heritage from the evolutionary jungle of rape and

murder—“nature’s agriculture of death”—must be opposed by rational
intelligence if we are to survive and transcend ourselves. The style of Macrolife
reflects its firm adherence to reason and to the power of rational persuasion.

It isn’t the case that it would be vulgar to have the characters joking,

swearing, and “slanging” each other. Rather, the mood of the dialogue is the
mood of the book’s deepest beliefs, beliefs that are sincerely held rather than
merely being adopted as a pretext to write a momentarily vivid but forgettable
yarn.

Much trivia occurs in novels, a lot of it concerned with so-called character-

building. Zebrowski’s characters aren’t flat; they are complex and imperfect,
especially John Bulero in Part 2, no superhero but a study in failure who
manages in the end to transcend his somewhat self-indulgent angst. Yet trivia as
such are absent. Perhaps this reflects Zebrowski’s relations as a child with his
own parents. The Nazi war, and the sufferings of his parents and his people,
“cast its shadow over everything,” he confesses, “preventing my problems from
just being my own. I had no right to have lesser problems.” Personal trivia were
as nothing.

being among a space-faring community of genetically enhanced specimens of
humanity-plus—who link with the presiding artificial intelligence and are now
part way toward the larger mind-fusion to come. John’s compulsive, if shy,
adventuring upon the dirt-world Lea, which becomes increasingly bound up with
his own erotic mesmerism by the planet-born young woman Anulka, comes to
grief finally through failure of forethought on his part followed by a failure of
rationality. Being ruled by the old drives—such as plain savage revenge and the
habit of pulling the wool over one’s eyes—John may seem in some respects a
more “real” character than others who are genetically akin to him in the
“Sunspace: 2021” section. Yet he is, in fact, exactly as they were. It is only by
comparison with the transhu-mans now surrounding him that he seems more
familiar to us. This is actually an illusion, a product of our mesmerism by the old
emotional drives and of our consequent expectations as to how “real” characters
ought to behave, namely, to fly into rages, to sulk, to fight, to agonize, to act
irrationally. Just as the personal must eventually be superseded and integrated, so
“personalities” should not be valued too grossly.

At the same time, John’s errors—and the errors represented by the dirtworld

—forcefully illustrate an important fact about evolution in any species, namely,
that individuals and species alike must not aspire to a wholly perfect state where
they can no longer make errors from which to learn.

Macrolife first appeared in 1979. Just over a decade earlier another believer

in the transmutation of humanity, Alexei Panshin, won a

Nebula Award for his novel Rite of Passage, detailing the twenty-seven-

thousand-strong society of another macroworld, an asteroid starship commuting
around the dirtworlds that were seeded before nuclear cataclysm destroyed the
Earth due to overpressure in the egg. Zebrowski’s “factual” sources for
Macrolife were such as J. D. Bernal and Dandridge Cole, but it’s illuminating to
examine the fictional evolution of the idea between Rite of Passage and the later
book.

Panshin’s society, like that of Zebrowski’s original Asterome, is a two-tiered

democracy with an executive council and the option of universal plebiscites.
However, Panshin’s macroworlders are quite rigidly conservative and opposed to
change, and a power ethic prevails. In Macrolife, when the UN commander
Nakamura attempts a coup to seize control and force Asterome to remain in the
solar system to aid in reconstruction, we witness the misuse of conservative
power. The moral is that conscious life must be willing to take giant risks, to
engage in acts of wild faith such as the departure of Asterome and the
consequent birth of macrolife.

Zebrowski adds spacious shells to the argument, just as Asterome itself

builds shell upon shell of additional space. Panshin’s macroworld remains a rock
with the hard ideology of a rock. Thus its own population must be culled in
Darwinian fashion by the rites of passage of the title: the dumping of well-
prepared youngsters upon dirtworlds to see whether they can survive the
experience. Many do not survive, to a large extent on account of the hatred and
contempt of the “mudeaters,” locked up on their hardship worlds, for the
privileged star-commuters who control the void-spanning hives of human
knowledge, wealth, and skill. Heroine Mia is helped to survive by an old radical
of a mudeater who opens her eyes somewhat, though it is to a fellow
macroworlder that she opens her legs on the planet, by contrast with John
Bulero’s sexual infatuation for a native. In the end the whole world of Tintera is
destroyed by the peeved macroworlders, who have lost more juniors than desired
during the rite of passage there.

Zebrowski’s macrolifers do hate the past and what a dirtworld stands for—a

chain upon the human spirit—but they are by no means so dogmatic, and John’s
voluntary rite of passage upon the surface is at once more lightly undertaken and
more ambiguous in its lessons. The macrolifers wish to be neither philanthropists
nor destroyers of worlds. The attitude they aspire to is one of empathy without
overt altruism. Life must remain open-ended, all possibilities available. The
macrolifers aspire to immortality—to life beyond life—whereas Panshin’s elite
merely live longer lives than ours, and basically their society and their mind-set

are closed. Certainly Zebrowski’s macrolifers do not inhabit a perfect Utopia.
Boredom and suicide are rather too common for comfort. However, there is
enough challenge to shake them up and spur them to continue on the royal road
toward multivalent, cosmic intelligence.

In the third section of Zebrowski’s novel, “The Dream of Time,” macrolife

must reconjugate the unmodified John Bulero from out of the collective higher
mentality of which he has become part, because by this late date only such as he
can decide on the error-liable risk of trying to survive the collapse of the
universe through into the next cycle. Like the original founders of macrolife, he
can make a blind decision of transcendent potential.

Bound up with this essential feature of the importance of error and of the

capacity for error is the strange fact that the universe is both capable of being
known yet eludes being known in its entirety. The universe possesses a built-in
incompleteness. Were it wholly knowable, thought and life would become static.
Consequently, those macrolifers who survive the collapse of the cosmos at last
meet earlier, wiser macrolifers from a previous cycle of creation who suspect, for
their part, that even higher, earlier entities exist. There are shells beyond shells.

If this is the case, surely macrolife must already exist in our universe. Surely

the universe today must be teeming with macrolife. Why, then, is there no sign
of it? When human macrolife first encounters alien macrolife in Part 2 of the
novel, that more mature civilization is already a million years old, adept at
concealment until it chooses to reveal itself. In cosmic terms, even a million-
year-old civilization is almost contemporary with us. As human and alien
macrolife fuse and evolve, so do the old suns burn out and so are new stars
formed, with new planets where new life-forms can arise and in their turn
develop intelligence, master space, and give rise to new macrolife. Our universe
is very large, and time is long. Successive hierarchies, shells, are possible. This
may equally be true of the succession of universes themselves.

This final, remarkable section—with its dialogue between the reconjugated

ancient man and metalife falling apart under stress, with its triumph over time—
is the most moving, sustained, and poetic sequence in the novel (always with a
lucid poetry). It opens up whole cycles of possibility, just as the hundred-billion-
year “gap” in the book’s chronology leaves riches yet to be explored in
subsequent, varied macrolife novels that Zebrowski plans.

Cave of Stars appeared in 1999, a fascinating and deeply thoughtful account

of a giant habitat’s fatal encounter with a dirtworld. Actually, to say “giant”
belies the reality, since a habitat a hundred kilometres long, constructed of
concentric shells around an original asteroid core, contains more internal space
than the entire surface of a planet, space enough for numerous alternative worlds

such as an entire sea-world especially tailored for adapted humans with gills who
have opted for an aquatic existence.

Other citizens exercise their freedom of choice by entering virtual realities;

or they may need to enter these temporarily for medical reasons. Whichever the
case, VR tends to become addictive, posing a subtle threat to such a habitat,
namely, that not enough citizens may remain in the real world to continue
guiding its destiny and make vital choices. Lotus-eating and virtual adventures
may occupy all their attention. Indeed, certain philosophers aboard this particular
habitat speculate that it in itself may be a virtual reality, a sophistical argument
soon refuted by events—with all the brusqueness of Dr. Johnson kicking a big
stone to refute by demonstration Bishop Berkeley’s notion of the nonexistence of
matter. Overconfidence in superior technology makes this habitat vulnerable to
destruction by one bigoted dirtworlder, who also holds keys of power, for he is
the pope of a conservative Catholic Church which has survived upon that world,
determined to prevent progress.

Arthur Clarke has variously observed that religion is a form of

psychopathology—a neurological disorder—that within a few centuries from
now all the old religions will accordingly have been discredited, and that
civilization and religion are incompatible. In this sense a disciple of Clarke,
Zebrowski destroys the last redoubt of Catholicism in spectacular fashion in
Cave of Stars, although not before the last pope has committed an ultimate
atrocity.

organism comprised of human and human-derived intelligences. It’s an organism
because it reproduces, with its human and other elements, moves and reacts on
the scale of the Galaxy.” It is larger inside “than the surface of a planet. And
larger still within its minds.”

Macrolife itself, the feature-length pilot novel (naughtily to adopt a TV

category), already spans the whole of time from the present to the end of the
universe and beyond. Its sheer sweep, its grandeur of concept, its daring,
integrity, and rational intelligence put to shame those science fictioneers who can
only fill up the next hundred billion years with space wars and other high jinks
orchestrated by heroes who are only giant dwarfs, fantasy projections of our as-
yet rather primitive selves.

Integrity, yes, and honesty. Here is a piece of fiction that may well be more

than fiction, which demanded to be written, and to be written in its own terms.
Macrolife is a work of grandeur and intelligence. With it, George Zebrowski’s
career as a mature prophetic writer really commenced, just as the real career of
the human race may be only now commencing, just as we are still in the early

youth of the universe itself. In times that sometimes seem trashy, yet are
pregnant with glory, a book like Macrolife keeps our vision bright.

—Ian Watson

SEQUENCE

I. 

SUNSPACE 2021

1. Lives

2. The Funeral

3. Undercity

4. The Shatterer

5. Doomwatch

6. A Mobile Utopid
7. The Cage of Life

8. The World Swallower

9. The Minor System

10. The Struggle

11. Shares of Glory

II. 

MACROLIFE 3000
12. Transhumanity

13. Exemplar
14. Discontent

15. Wayside World

16. The City
17. Relations

18. Macrogenesis
19. The Village

20. Home

21. The Jump
22. Earth Again

23. Cities of the Sun

24. The Alien
25. Crossroads

III. 

THE DREAM OF TIME

Chapter i
Chapter ii
Chapter iii

Chapter iv
Chapter v
Chapter vi

I. SUNSPACE: 2021

calls “multiorganismic life” serves as a convenient shorthand whereby the
whole collection of social, political, and biological problems facing the future
space colonist may be represented with two-word symbols. It also communicates
quickly an appreciation for the similar problems which are rapidly descending
on the whole human race. Macro Life can be defined as “life squared per cell.”
Taking man as representative of multicelled life we can say that man is the mean
proportional between Macro Life and the cell, or Macro Life is to man as man is
to the cell. Macro Life is a new life form of gigantic size which has for its cells,
individual human beings, plants, animals, and machines.

…society can be said to be pregnant with a mutant creature which will be at

the same time an extraterrestrial colony of human beings and a new large scale
life form.

—DANDRIDGE COLE,

“The Ultimate Human Society,” 1961

One day there will arise an experimental community that works much more

efficiently than the polyglot, rubbery, hand-patched society we are living in. A
viable alternative will then be before us.

—CARL SAGAN,

The Cosmic Connection, 1973

Among the first forms of macro life were earth’s latticework tier cities of the

late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. They were preceded by the
historical city-state, and followed by small organized communities on the moon,
Mars, the various space bases, and by Asterome, the hollowed-out asteroid that
became the core of the first macroworld….

The tier cities were made possible by the application of advanced structural

materials. The building of these cities led to the radical reorganization of urban
earth society, the stabilization of population at 12 billion, and a decrease in the
frequency of disorderly political change (this last change was helped by the
influx of psychosocially trained designers and engineers into politics and
planning). The planet was partially macroformed, and the grosser industrial
processes, among them solar and fusion power systems, were moved into
space….

The start of the century saw the sustained widening of the world’s industrial

base through the exploitation of the solar system’s huge reserves of energy (the
sun), raw materials (the asteroids, moon, and planets), and off-planet
manufacturing conditions (where pollution could never be a problem); earth’s
isolation was over, the finitude of its resources no longer a liability. The new
economic-industrial base not only created nearly full employment; it gave earth
its first chance at creating a Type II civilization.

—RICHARD BULERO,

The History of Macrolife, vol. 1, Asterome,

Sigma Draconis Star System, 2041

From the vantage point of several decades in the future, I believe that our

children will judge the most important benefits of space colonization to have
been not physical or economic, but the opening of new human options, the
possibility of a new degree of freedom, not only for the human body, but much
more important, for the human spirit and sense of aspiration.

—GERARD K. O’NEILL,

The High Frontier, 1976

We are in the teen-age period of explosive growth and acquisition of

knowledge. We are achieving control over our environment and our destinies,
and even the power and responsibility for determining the time of our own
deaths. We have secured weapons with which we can kill ourselves if we choose,
and we have now achieved the first sign of biological maturity—we can
reproduce. We can send out colonies to other parts of the universe which can
take root, grow, and establish themselves as new civilizations….

The next step in evolution is from man—as the most highly organized

example of multicellular life—to Macrolife.

…we should not be surprised if the race on earth ceases to proliferate its

“cells,” achieves maturity, reproduces, continues its growth in other
“individuals” (space colonies), and the “individual” remaining behind on
Earth, ages through hundreds of thousands of years and finally dies.

—DANDRIDGE COLE,
Beyond Tomorrow, 1965

Each of our cells contains dozens of tiny factories called mitochondria that

combine our food with molecular oxygen to extract energy in convenient form.
Recent evidence suggests that billions of years ago, the mitochondria were free-

living organisms that have slowly evolved into a mutually dependent relationship
with the cell. When many-celled organisms arose, the arrangement was retained.
In a very real sense, then, we are not a single organism but an array of about ten
trillion beings and not all of the same kind.

—CARL SAGAN, 1978

1. Lives

The earth pulled him down, tugging at him like a burdensome friend.

Richard Bulero felt trapped as he looked up at the stars, cut off from the
openness of space. Earth’s turbulent ocean of air was the cloudy lens of a giant
eye, sun-blinded by day, astigmatic by night. Even here in the desert, the stars
lacked the brilliance he had come to know on the moon.

The planet was nervously alive around him, enveloping his body in an aura

of sounds, smells, and dust, pushing against his skin, trying to make him fit in
again. The physical adjustments of coming home were a nuisance; his adaptation
to Luna’s gentle pull conflicted with his muscle-memory of earth’s stronger
attraction, even though he had kept in shape through exercise.

He missed the moon’s stillness. A year at Plato University had made him a

stranger on the home world, and at home.

He had not come back to New Mexico just to attend this evening’s party for

his father and Bulero Enterprises. Margot had been first in his plans, and he was
anxious to get away from the celebration as soon as possible. He had not seen
her for over six months, ever since she had completed her field work on the
moon and had returned to Princeton to continue her studies in biology.

He was looking forward to personal talks with his uncle Sam and with Orton

Blackfriar; they would at least notice his progress. Sam’s courses in philosophy
had been the brightest part of his first two years at Princeton, opening his mind
to problems beyond those of family and self-concern. Sam and Orton would be
in New York during the next two weeks, and he had a dinner date with them. He
would stay with Margot until then, and return to the moon by the first of May.

He was impatient for the party to be over. Richard turned away from the

terrace railing and hesitated. There was no point in going back inside; his parents
were monopolizing Sam and Orton, and he had lost his taste for starting
pointless conversations with strangers. He was tired of playing the promising son
of a man who had not spoken to him for most of the evening and whose presence
seemed to destroy the possibility of genuine conversation.

Richard took a deep breath of the night air. He stretched, feeling a pleasant

ache as his muscles adjusted to the earth’s pull. It was like coming back to life.
Nevertheless, the dry, starry silence of the walled lunar plain at Plato made
possible a clarity of thought which was missing here. There he could look out
into the vast cave of stars with a measured emotion, with a sense of the future,
while here on earth his thoughts longed for sunlight and warm water, and

lovemaking. There the lunar shadows were sharp, eliciting clear distinctions in
his mind, cutting away the jungle growth of his emotions; here his feelings grew
in a jumble, obscuring his goals, weakening him.

well as the cooperativeness of the lunar colonists; it was the same, he had been
told, among the L-5 colonists of Asterome, and on Mars and Ganymede. The
colonies were a new branch of humanity, joined to their environment through a
problem-solving struggle which demanded of them the resolve to work through
disagreements to the best possible conclusion, whatever that might turn out to
be; the openness of free space was matched by the openness of inquiring minds.
Failure in maintaining this attitude could result in costly disasters and loss of
life.

Those who lived permanently on the moon, Mars, or Ganymede, could never

return to the high gravity of earth without powered external support harnesses or
wheelchairs; much of this growing population had no desire ever to visit earth.
Asterome maintained an earthlike gravity, but even so the colonists had more in
common with sunspace humanity than with earth. He wondered if he and Margot
could cut themselves off from earth, begin a new life elsewhere in the solar
system’s growing family of environments; he wondered if he could ever cut
himself off from the fact of his family name.

terrace door. He stopped again, startled by the thought that he did not know what
his parents were like within themselves. He knew their faces, the gaze of their
eyes, their manner of speech and dress; but he did not know them as he knew
Margot. He had never known anyone as he knew Margot. He knew Sam; Orton
was easy to understand.

free to grow in her own way, without having to measure herself by it constantly.
The past was not conspiring to enlist her in its service; his was waiting to
swallow him with its complexities of money and responsibility. He knew that he
might never be able to accomplish anything to match the wealth of his family or
its corporate power. His intellectual and scientific achievements would be
respected only if they resulted in practical consequences; a treatise, or a theory,
would not be enough. Even his mother, who missed him genuinely, took little
notice of his work in philosophy and science.

get above their lives in discussion; they could stand off, independent and all
knowing, from the family’s affairs, and talk about the dangers to personal
happiness and achievement posed by the past. Sam Bulero had taken the most

painful path, selling his shares in the company after setting up an annuity. His
brother, Jack, made constant fun of him for this, even though the annuity
provided Sam with less than what Princeton paid him. Sam’s work, however,
was real, and a source of enduring fame. Jack Bulero was an elaborate fake, but
known as such only to family and close associates. My father, Richard thought.
Not an evil man, just someone who’s not what he claims to be.

How long before 1 put my hand in to take a share? In time Richard Bulero

would become a device for the servicing and preservation of Bulero Enterprises;
his needs and desires would be met in return. He would be able to help Margot,
show her the world, and much more; he would like that, he admitted, hating
himself. If his work in physics and the philosophy of science came to nothing, he
would have no choice but to try and accomplish something within the company;
and if he failed at that, he thought bitterly, the cushion would be there to catch
him again, for the last time.

What else could there be for him? He envied the space colonists; they had

real work to do. On Asterome they were looking forward to a society that would
be free of planets. Somewhere there had to be something for him to give himself
to—an enterprise that would combine his love of knowing with flesh-and-blood
concerns, with issues and human needs that would put as much love and caring
into his life as he felt toward Margot.

His family was pulling him down more strongly than the earth, and he

wondered if he could ever break free for long. I’ve got to get moving. I’m twenty
years old and just beginning to wake up. I’ve got to escape, permanently, into my
own kind of world. He looked up at the Bulero Orbital Factory as it passed
overhead. Three hundred miles out, with a period of two hours, it was the
brightest object in the sky. As he watched its familiar, lazy passage, the sudden
feeling came over him that he was too late, that all the forces necessary to crush
his hopes were already in motion, advancing toward him out of a distant past,
and that he had somehow missed the moment that would have resolved his
problems.

He took another deep breath, set his face into a mask, and went inside.

the thickening flux; russet masses constrained within a contorted internal space;
swelling densities struggling to escape through narrowing fissures in the earth. It
was cold in the dream. She struggled to open her eyes….

A glow spread through the cumulus, revealing for a moment the titanic

shoulders and limbs of something fighting to be born.

She saw dashes of light—measured electrical activity in the deepest layers of

her brain—dreams seen from outside….

She opened her eyes. The sun burned in an abyss, waiting for her to fall

in….

A misshapen finger of lightning pierced the ground. The sky darkened and a

giant moon cast its indifferent white light through a cancerous opening in the
clouds, only to be covered by a black shape gliding toward the dawn, where the
sun crouched below the storm, a beast ready to lash out at the world with a
scorching tongue.

The rain whispered and fell in a rush of crystalline droplets which still held

starlight in their structures. The fissures drank the flood, and dead things floated
to the surface. The flapping sound of a large bird came up behind her; sharp
talons entered her neck and a ragged beak dipped to drink her blood….

The universe collapsed into a throbbing point inside her head.
A hammer blow struck stone. She cried out….
Pieces of the dream echoed within her as she stood on the stone terrace. The

sky was strewn with searingly bright stars, the ones she had come to love as a
girl. Here in New Mexico, she had escaped the cotton fog of cities; the clouds
had broken to reveal these stars—a universe coming into being, a new
immensity for her thoughts; in twenty-five years, she had not tired of its
sanctuary.

She reached out across the cathedral of space-time to those hopelessly

distant candle-furnaces, where all the material elements had been forged again
and again inside the generation of suns, where alien sun-spaces were certain to
contain other humanities, however different, and she wondered if someone there
might be her friend.

The cold air made her shiver, as if in reply, and she turned to go back into

the house. The door slid open and she stepped inside.

I’m alone, Janet Bulero thought. She stepped forward and grasped the

bulerite railing that circled the pit of the sunken living room, where the aftermath
of the party was still alive.

Her only child was a man now. Richard was sitting alone on the sofa in the

center of the room. She had watched him grow, become graceful and serious, a
quieter version of his father. Sometimes she had worried that his loyalty would
go to Jack, but Richard had always been too independent for that to happen; Jack
had not tried to win him over, and Richard had not seemed to care.

Behind the huge felt sofa, a slightly drunk Jack Bulero stood with a drink in

his left hand. His brother Sam nodded lazily as Jack waved his free hand. Janet
recognized the old arguments and self-justifications, wishing that Sam would

learn not to be baited into a discussion.

There was still a considerable pride in Jack’s six-foot frame, more than he

needed or deserved. His tan and his loose-fitting blue suit were hiding
overweight and bad posture. His eyes looked up at the ceiling as he spoke, as if
he were struggling to look up into his head; his lips tightened and relaxed as he
stooped to hear his brother. Janet felt a moment of superiority.

Samuel Bulero’s tan reflected a genuine vitality, she told herself, examining

him as if he were a stranger. Why had she encouraged this stocky and muscular
man, she wondered as she looked at his streaked brown hair and bushy
eyebrows. Was it just another way to hang on to Jack?

At her left, halfway around the raised level, Orton Blackfriar sat puffing on a

Cuban cigar as he listened to the Beethoven quartet floating out of the high-
backed chair’s hidden speakers. As she observed his large, familiar shape, the
entire mood of coming in from the clear, quiet night was shattered. She looked at
Jack. Their formal marriage contract had expired five years before, bringing the
informal option into effect; that last link would expire today. As her one-time
lawyer, Orton knew the significance of the evening, but had made no comment
yet.

For a wild instant this morning, she had dreamed that Jack would send her a

confidential record of his declaration as a surprise. She turned from the rail and
walked toward Orton.

“I’m thinking of all the work on my desk,” he said, shifting as she came

near. He’s trying to avoid the subject. She sat down on the cushion at his right
and listened to the music.

Orton was too good to be governor, she thought. He had not assumed the job

from any of the usual motives, but he did it well. He had taken all the wretched
cases during his law practice, finding it difficult to blame anyone but the
powerful for social problems; as governor he tried to use the public trust of
wealth and power to make a difference in individual lives. There were limits to
that, he had found.

“You didn’t have to do this,” Orton said.
She looked up at him. “I’m not really disappointed.”
“He did come, after all.”
“To reinforce his own view of himself,” she said. “To have it reported that he

was present at the anniversary celebration of Carlos Bulero’s gift to the world.”

She had once toyed with the idea of writing down the truth about Jack,

especially after she had learned how little could be proved about the Buleros.
The documentary broadcast viewed by the guests earlier tonight had been at least
one-third fiction. She had found it difficult to remind herself of the truth after the

telecast. That’s because I’m part of the lie.

It was Carlos Bulero, son of a country doctor from a small village in

Ecuador, who had made the family rich through his discovery of bulerite—the
family element, she thought, common to us all. Carlos had been a major
physicist; his son, Jack, had only dabbled in physics, a businessman taking credit
for the work of his employed scientists. It was not known outside the family that
Jack had altered his father’s records to give himself a large share in the discovery
of bulerite and all the credit for the structural applications of the building
material. Since all the records were in computer storage, even that much could
not be proved, unless Jack produced the written records, but he denied their
existence; only Sam had claimed, privately, to know what was in them. Carlos
had not cared much for publishing his results.

In recent years, control of the Bulero multinational had begun to slip away

from Jack, but he did not seem to care as long as he was not deprived of his
wealth, fame, and influence. She looked at Jack’s face, noticing the sudden loss
of confidence, as if Sam had said something cutting. Gone was the smugness
that she had seen at the financial meeting, where she had given her annual report
as internal-program auditor. He looked up, noticed her scrutiny, and turned his
back as he answered Sam, producing a dead spot in her feelings. To reveal the
truth about Jack would make no difference, except as a matter of curiosity; the
Bulero stock might dip a point, Jack would issue a denial, and the incident would
be forgotten.

safe. No one would object if she chose to do nothing for the rest of her life; with
new interests coming into the company, she doubted if she would be missed. She
was good at her job, but others were just as good. As Jack was fond of saying,
the Buleros had done their bit for the world and should be permitted to live as
they pleased.

She had never thought of it in overly dramatic terms, but in a very real sense

the skeleton and much of the sinew of the present world had been born in a
Bulero brain; that much of the documentary had been true. In the final years of
the last century, amid famine and ecocrises, the world had been rebuilt; not
perfectly, not completely, but well enough for a new start. The richer nations had
divided themselves into ecologically manageable provinces and had built new
cities—upward. The open towers, cubes, and pyramids were shelf like
latticeworks, into which the remains of the old cities had been moved, preserving
the best of the older architectures. She liked to think that there was something of
ancient Inca strength in bulerite. Among the superstitious rich, the dream
substance had long ago replaced copper and bronze as a material for bracelets

and chains.

Every major human settlement in sunspace—-on earth, on the moon, Mars,

the satellites of Jupiter and Saturn—was built up with the virtually indestructible
material, which could be prefabricated into parts of any shape and size, and
fitted together permanently on contact.

Abandoning the two-dimensional spread of twentieth-century cities,

arcologies housed up to a million people comfortably on a thousand-acre base, in
varied structures rising more than a mile into the sky, leaving the countryside to
renew itself. Waste was removed through giant vertical chutes, letting the
passive action of gravity do the work of carrying it to underground processing
plants; these were now fusion torches, vaporizing everything into atoms of pure
elements, the ultimate in the recycling of nonrenewable raw materials, while
providing clean energy at the same time. Planet-scarring activities such as strip
mining, forestry, coal mining, and oil drilling had been cut down to sane
proportions. Every decade saw the building of fusion-powered arcologies in the
world’s needy areas. Janet knew the whole success story; no one in Bulero
Enterprises was ever permitted to forget it.

But still, the world belonged to North America, EuroSov, and Japan. They

continued to keep AfroAsia and South America down to mid-twentieth-century
levels, as much as that was possible. Properly developed, this other world could
easily become their equal. The documentary had avoided this point, ignoring the
inevitable, even desirable, conclusion as to the world’s direction. The lines had
been drawn and redrawn throughout her life, always to include more of the
world in the center of influence, always modifying the dominant cultural styles.
As the world’s wealth had increased, the inducements to be destructively greedy
had grown weaker. The old middle was now the bottom; the old top was now the
middle; and the top might one day, with luck, be the whole future. Only power
was still hoarded, subtly, with a few traces of wisdom, she thought.

Nevertheless, she could not help feeling pride. It was the peace of the West

that had made the world stable, the culture of the West that had led to science
and the ideals of democracy (though not yet to democracy itself); it was the West
that had given out its riches, however reluctantly, and was now drawing the
world into an economic involvement which would lead to an energy-rich
sunspace by the end of the century. Perhaps by then the national pride she felt
would be harmless, and power without accomplishment meaningless.

Mike Basil, the research chief of Bulero Enterprises, entered the room

below. He went up to Jack and whispered something in his ear. Jack waved him
away impatiently. Basil walked around the sofa and sat down next to Richard.

Her son would have been a prince in another time, she thought, noting the

look of deference in Mike’s face as he tried to make conversation.

There was a grim expression on Sam’s face, the look of a university

professor who had failed to convey his view of things to a student. Sam was
usually content with personal rewards, the satisfactions of his theoretical work,
with seeing those he had taught go on to success in the world. She felt the strain
between the two brothers, who had been talking for two hours behind the sofa
and for an hour before in the kitchen. They rarely met outside of family
occasions. Sam had never visited the company headquarters, and Jack avoided
meeting Sam at Princeton. They’re each other’s judges, she thought, and they
accept it.

She could no longer feel what Jack was like inside. The last time she had

been able to do so had been at Christmas twelve years ago; and before that when
he had been a young man. The thought turned into fear, and then into a quiet
panic. She wanted him to run up the stairs to her and say anything to show that
he was still the person she had known. “It’s still me inside, Janet” she imagined
him saying. “Don’t you know me?”

But Jack was opaque, vague, a scarecrow making fragmented gestures. She

stared at him carefully now, almost with an astonished good humor, and still he
would not look up. For a moment she believed that he could make all his
pretenses real, simulate anything, appear in any way he wished; there was no
safe way to expose him.

Wealth held the family together and freed them all from one another. It was

easy to be polite and cheerful at a distance. Suddenly looking back, she trembled
on the edge of hatred; the world was a dungeon around her, with walls of family
and fear.

She looked up at the haze of blue smoke hanging over Orton. The circulating

air was slowly whipping the top of the cloud away as the Beethoven quartet
rushed toward a frenzied finale.

I’ve read about dozens of theories for its properties—all published by outsiders.
Carlos died a curious man, Jack, and you’ve done nothing to carry on his basic
research.”

Sam had not called him by his first name in a long time. “The theory is good

enough to work—we’re doing fine.”

“But the work is unfinished,” Sam said. “The whole scientific community

agrees that the theory is inadequate, and it’s not just the difficulty of the problem

that is stopping you. What worries me is that a working-results approach will
quickly use up Bulero’s store of knowledge and leave the company with
nowhere to go. It’s an approach that belongs to the chaotic growth of the last
century.”

“The working-results approach,” Jack said, “also produced solutions to the

problems created by chaotic growth. It’s never penetrated to you that we needed
the twentieth century’s chaos, its urgent momentum.”

“But the work Carlos left unfinished….”
“Look—you want me to say it: I’m not the physicist our father was.”
“Maybe you could have been.”
“It’s irrelevant. My interest was in doing what Carlos didn’t do. Bulero

Enterprises helped reshape the earth. We linked all the human outposts
throughout sunspace with fast space haulers made of bulerite. We organized the
magnetic-boost train system for the entire hemisphere, as well as making heavy
investments in the zero-g manufacturing plants out in space, so we could feed
industry with bulerite and basic products. What use would the moon and asteroid
resources have been without those factories? Even laser fusion reactors need
bulerite casings. At the moment we cannot create the conditions needed to
experiment with bulerite. It’s not a research toy any more. Do you know what it
would cost?”

“No.”
“We would need a whole community of scientists far out in space, where the

work would pose no danger. To study bulerite’s properties requires the control of
extreme states of matter, and that takes vast amounts of energy. It’s all we can do
just to make the stuff.”

Twenty years out of my life, he thought. The present world would have been

delayed by decades if he had not decided to apply bulerite on an industrial scale.
He deserved the power and privacy of his life, and he resented his younger
brother for provoking these self-justifications. Sam was a withdrawn university
type, despite his fame in philosophy—a powerless man who knew nothing of
industry and business. He can’t intimidate me, Jack thought.

“The technology of bulerite,” Sam said, “hasn’t been around long enough. It

makes me uneasy to see the ignorance in which we run our world.”

“You’re so damn sure of yourself—sorry we can’t tidy up all the books for

you.”

“It’s easy to see that you’re whistling in the dark.”
“You want perfect theories and comprehensive explanations—.”
“Come off it, Jack. Sure, we can’t be omniscient overnight, but we can do

more basic research, worry more about the dangers in our technologies,

distinguish more between what we can do without understanding and what we
can do with understanding.”

“What dangers? We’ve cleaned up our technology, or haven’t you heard?”
“How many industrial deaths in Bulero last year?”
There was a sudden quiet between them.
Jack laughed. “Sam—reading about the problems of the last century has

scared the crap out of you. Maybe the world is safer because we’re doing fewer
new things, because we’re developing a long-considered technology. You’re the
one who wants new things.”

for a better understanding in the one area of application where it is obviously
lacking.”

“Only one?”
“The greater the complexity of our technology, the more pervasive our

applications without a sound theory, the greater will be the collapse if something
goes wrong. Just consider the air and water processing plants we needed, the
cost of dismantling the fission plants….

“They patched us through until we got fusion and solar sources,” Jack said.

“Take the cry over the finiteness of earth’s resources—we blew that problem
away when we moved out into space and changed over to an energy currency.
Earth will now get more than it needs in energy. Everyone will get a chance at a
decent life, and the point of world affluence comes long before the moment
when we’ll be putting too much generated heat into the biosphere. You’re not
going to throw that old bone at me?”

Jack felt the void between them, the years of unexpressed disdain and false

goodwill. Sam and Janet seemed to share a snide solidarity against him. He felt
his own hatred of them, seeing its shabbiness at the same time; it was a
trembling thing inside him, and he was afraid of it.

“Are you feeling well?” Sam was looking at him. Jack stood up straighter.

He was not going to show weakness in front of the bastard.

around the room. He peered up at Janet, but she did not notice him as she looked
down at her son. She doesn’t even remember that today is the end.

Jack leaned over and tapped Mike Basil on the shoulder. The executive

turned and gazed up at him earnestly.

“Good-bye, Sam,” Jack said. He sought out Janet again, but she was not

looking at him.

Richard was saying good-bye to him distantly. Jack turned unsteadily and

walked out into the kitchen and out the back door. Basil was behind him, rushing

to keep up.

The night air was cool and dry. The hovercraft was a huge insect waiting for

him on the lawn, menacing him with its lights. He almost expected it to rear up
and tear him to pieces like some huge mantis.

followed him, sitting down on the facing seat as the door slid shut.

Jack closed his eyes and leaned back. In the morning he would be on his

yacht, far away from the family he had outgrown.

his cigar and let the smoke out. Richard was alone on the sofa. Sam was finally
mixing himself a drink at the bar by the far wall. Jack had been too much for
him. Janet sat on the cushion next to him, her thoughts painfully evident.

Richard got up. His expression was one of contained exasperation as he

turned and went out through the side door.

Sam turned, toasted the air, and gulped down half his drink. Janet rose and

leaned over the railing. “He panicked this time,” she shouted.

“May he enjoy the company of his flunkies,” Sam said, and finished his

drink.

Janet still managed to fill her jumpsuit quite well, Orton noted. At another

time he might have loved her, but no one could ever replace Evelyn. “There are
concerns more important than personal ones,” she had often said. He felt closer
to her when actively following her advice.

There were a number of worthy dreams searching for workers. The

interstellar group had contacted him more than once. Despite the disappearance
of the Centauri sublight starship more than twelve years ago, the dream of
exploring beyond sunspace had not died. The optimists still believed that the
expedition was merely late. His reputation as a state governor had attracted the
group’s interest, but they had been delighted to discover that he was a gifted
administrator and lawyer who shared their dreams. He would not be at a loss
when his last term ran out.

He wondered for a moment why Janet was so cautious with Sam, why they

did not live together openly. She was cautious, perhaps, for no reason other than
that Sam was Jack’s brother. Suddenly he inhaled some smoke and started
coughing.

“Silly,” Janet said as she turned around and looked at him with her large

brown eyes. She took the cigar from him and dropped it in the floor slot. “Orton,
have you replaced that old heart yet?”

“Works well enough for a loveless man.”
Her smile turned to a look of concern. “I’m serious—retire that tin lizzie.”
The idea of growing a clone of his heart made him uneasy. The collagen

enzyme treatments that cleaned out his aging, hard-boiled proteins were not so
bad, but the replacement of his organs by using cells from embryonic twins
disturbed him at times. Material drawn from his embryonic clone would be
injected into him, slowly replacing him, until a complete cell change of his body
was finished, continuing a process that stops in the body after a certain age; the
unborn clone, of course, would die. He might double his life span, as many were
already doing. The procedure was as objectionable as abortion had been in the
last century, and for that reason he would be happier when individual organs
could be grown without embryos; still, the process had eliminated the heartbreak
of waiting for suitable donors, as well as the problem of tissue rejection. One
day, the risks of cloning from existing body cells would be eliminated. The DNA
code for an individual would be read directly, and the cells made fresh out of raw
materials, for use in growing replacement parts or for growing a whole
individual as an alternate method of reproduction.

frame and eating habits. I’d wear the poor critter out, just like the last one. This
old atomic will do well enough, even though it’s not as subtle as the organic one
—it goes a shade too fast when I get excited, and too slow at times, and it makes
my face red when I look at you. Besides, I’m waiting for better techniques.”

She laughed and leaned back against the rail. “You’ve lost weight.”
“I’d better get back to my desk,” he said, rising. “One more year of office is

still a lot of work.”

She stepped toward him, stood up on her toes, and kissed him. He almost

started to hold her. In a moment she would reduce him to a schoolboy, startled
by his good luck.

“My cane—I don’t know where I left it,” he said, trying to blot out the

sudden vision of Evelyn in the automated car as it stopped without warning,
throwing her forward to break her neck. The route input had sent a garbled
signal, killing a dozen people that week….

“Take care,” Sam shouted. “We’ll see you.”
Janet got his cane from behind the chair. He turned away from her and

confronted the terrace door. It slid open to release him, but she hurried ahead
into the night and kissed him again when he stopped at the top of the steps
leading down to the front of the house.

down on the edge of the bed, and punched Margot’s number. She appeared on
the small screen.

“Hello,” he said. “I should be at the old family house in Princeton by

morning. Can you meet me?”

“What is it?”
“I just can’t take it here any more. I’ve been away too long to be blind. The

party is almost over; I’ll slip out when they watch the news.”

He looked at her, admiring the slight tilt of her almond eyes as she smiled up

at him from the screen.

“You like to make me…nervous,” she said.
“Is that what you call it when you’re excited?”
“I miss you,” she said shyly.
“I miss you, too. How’s school?”
“They were glad to have me back,” she said, “but I miss the people at Plato.”
“I’d better get going,” he said. She broke the connection.
He picked up his bag, went out into the hall, and walked toward the door that

opened under the terrace. It seemed to take an eternity to reach it, but finally it
slid open and he slipped out into the shadows.

He stopped and waited as a car pulled away, then walked quickly across the

driveway toward his own vehicle.

The door opened and he climbed inside. He looked back through the clear

bubble, expecting to see dark shapes watching him from the terrace; but there
was no one and he felt relieved.

He touched the keys for Santa Fe, attached his seat belt, and sat back. The

car moved down the long driveway toward the semiautomated road. In the rear-
view mirror, the house slipped behind dark trees, its light a fire in the night.

the mile to the freeway. Jack didn’t even say good-bye, he thought, and he said
only two words to me all evening. Everyone had behaved differently in his
father’s presence. The son of a bitch doesn’t care about anyone.

as the surge shot him across the starry desert toward the airport.

disappointed. There was no point in thinking about Jack, he told himself. His
brother’s attitudes got him through the only kind of life he knew; the time for
choices was long past. There was no way that he could tell Jack about his

disappointment. Jack’s neglect of bulerite was also his neglect of himself. Sam
hated him for what he had done to Richard and Janet; he hated him for
continuing the coldness that stood between them. This evening had been mild
compared to others of the last twenty years.

He tried to think of hopeful things. His position at Princeton was secure.

Although he was without wife, daughter, or son, he was not without family, love,
or achievement. Janet cheered him, but he wondered about the slowness of their
relationship. Was he afraid of taking his brother’s ex-wife?

He tried to think of things outside himself. AfroAsia and South America,

especially Brazil, were rising influences, their economies fueled by pollution-
free hydrogen, made from sea water, stored in bulerite tanks, and piped as
natural gas had been in the last century. The older powers were using more
advanced energy systems, but the world’s regions were moving toward economic
equality, if not one of cultural-scientific influence and military power; even the
smallest nation could now obtain enough energy for a better life.

earth. The countryside and atmosphere were still in traction; the sunsets were
blood red from all the dirt. People felt freer, no longer living as if catastrophe
was inevitable. An indefinite peace prevailed in the garden. His personal
discontents were minor; it was good to be alive, he told himself, wondering if he
was a happy idiot.

Janet came into the room, sat down, and put her head on his shoulder. He put

his arm around her and hugged her, afraid that she might fade from reality at any
moment. She kissed him lightly on the lips.

He reached around, took her small hands, and compared them to his rougher,

hairy ones. “How about Jack?” he asked. “How did he seem to you?”

“Nothing. It was dead a long time ago. I think he was bored with all of us. I

don’t want to talk about it, Sam. I’m really fine—let’s forget it.” She tried to kiss
him passionately, but he held back and she broke away. “Don’t treat me like a
small girl, Sam.”

“What’s the matter?”
She sighed, “Old—don’t you feel it?” She poked him in the ribs.
He stretched his arms out on the back of the sofa. “My doctor’s team says

I’m good for a hundred or more, and he’s not joking—but I’m an old man with
my students. I’ll be forgotten when I go.”

“I’m counting on it.”
“On what?”
“On a whole lot of time left for us.” She turned away from him. “I want

enough time to forget everything. It would be another lifetime, Sam—like the

ones from one to twenty-five and to forty—the longest and best….”

He reached for her. “Janet, dear Janet, come here.” She turned around,

tucked her legs under her, and buried her face in his shoulder. “A long time,” he
whispered, holding her.

The lights in the room dimmed.
“It’s the one AM news,” she said. “Someone preset it.”
The holo appeared in the air above them, revealing a three-dimensional long

shot of the earth-moon in space, then pulling back to show the sun. Sam
remembered the old CBS colophon, earthrise on Mars, which had been retired at
the turn of the century. The current logo was closer to the full-earth-above-the-
moonscape scene of the 1960s. The Martian settlers had been right to look upon
earthrise over Mars as a symbol of earth’s supremacy; every Martian schoolchild
knew that earth was the green star in their sky—sometimes it was blue-green,
but never the size shown on the media link.

“Let’s watch,” Janet said. “I feel like news.”
The standing figure of a newscaster whirled in like a propeller blade from a

background of stars, growing larger until the figure stopped upright and lifesize.
The brown-haired man was dressed in the artificial one-piece tweed, gray with
tunic collar, popular in the great cities.

“Good morning. This is Frank Eiseley.” Suddenly he was floating against the

red globe of Mars. “The cargo hauler Poseidon has blown up during its approach
to the Deimos docks around Mars.” The figure of the reporter whirled toward the
potato-shaped Martian moon. “Mars City officials report that very little debris
has been observed by the rescue tugs. All one hundred and three crew members
are believed dead.” A model of the slug like vessel appeared against the stars,
with the reporter projected to appear as if he were standing on the hull.
“Poseidon was the second-largest interplanetary hauler, next to Scorpio, which is
nearly a kilometer in length. Both vessels were built almost twelve years ago,
completing the bulerite fleet of fifteen ships.” The reporter seemed to be walking
on the polished hull. “The UN Sun-space Commerce Commission and the
government of the North Americas Region will conduct an investigation.”

convey a sense of the ship’s size. “Informed sources are speculating that the
vessel may have had hidden defects in its nuclear propulsion units. As a
precaution, the third-largest hauler, Atlas, has been ordered to moor at the
nearest port for inspection.”

An image of the sun flashed on and off, and was replaced by the reporter’s

head hanging in space. “A bulletin: Atlas has also been destroyed, while
delivering supplies to the Solar Science City on Mercury.”

“My God,” Janet said.
The view switched to a sun-blasted plain covered with debris and small

crushed hulls. “Apparently,” the voice said, “a few tugs which had attached
themselves to the ship as it came in to moor at the orbital station were also
brought down.” The tugs lay like dead gnats under the stars, but there was no
sign of the big ship.

A vertical view appeared, showing a huge black hole in the plain below. The

shadows were sharply painted by the low angle of light from the big sun off
screen. The shadow darkness inside the blast crater was a black mirror turned to
the stars.

2. The Funeral

Blue daylight filled the hoveryacht’s decktop suite; sunlight flooded in

through the skylight, its brilliance made bearable by the tinted dome. Jack turned
his head on the bed and looked out over the sea-green Gulf. Sea birds cried as
they dived for their lunch; green islands floated on the water near the horizon.

Erica had gone to her cabin to prepare for his day, leaving him to dodge his

thoughts. He reached back, grasped the large bed’s bulerite posts, and stretched.
Straining, he tried to touch the toes of the Promethean figures at the top of each
post, but it was too far; he let his arms fall and relaxed.

He could almost hear what went on in Sam’s mind. No real dedication to

science…all surface, nothing like his father. Carlos was a scientist, technologist,
administrator, and teacher. Jack is not even one of those things…flashy
intelligence, more concerned with being somebody. He’ll endow a Bulero
Prize….

He was surprised at how many remarks he remembered. They stuck in his

brain, irritating and painful because they had been made by someone close to
him.

He thought of Orton Blackfriar. A lame-duck politician and bleeding-heart

lawyer, seeking to be near the mighty; he had been doing that all his life, under
the guise of noble ideals. Janet must have invited him to the party.

He hated them all. They were all pushing their fingers into the Bulero brain,

greedy for the wealth and power which was not theirs.

Jack closed his eyes and tried to enjoy the sunlight on his face and unclad

body….

He sat up suddenly, wakened by a flash of light in the sunny field of his

closed eyelids. A strange dream, he told himself, remembering when years
before he had heard a girl screaming faintly in the center of his head….

He stood by the bed and stretched, thinking of the warm waters around him.

The yacht would be here until noon, before heading back to his island in the
Bahamas. He would have enough time to swim and forget everything.

He sat down on the bed, thinking of the great bulerite rod sunk deep in the

earth’s hot core, an indestructible tap drawing enough heat to light a continent.
He had made it possible, just as he had sought out the market for all bulerite’s
applications. No one could take that away from him. Others were welcome to
play with Carlos’s theories later.

He stood up and wandered over to the open window, remembering the blue

bikini that Janet had worn at Cocoa Beach when they had first met. He had been
grateful for the encouragement of her hello. The sky, sand, and sea had been so
much more impressive than the callow boy on vacation from college.

He had been full of admiration for his father, filling her with talk of a career

in physics. History had been coiled up inside him; but even then he had known
that he would somehow disappoint her. She was still punishing him for not being
like Carlos.

Jack took a deep breath of the salty air. The warm breeze touching his face

made him feel secure. Then he was shaking suddenly, shivering throughout his
whole body. It was the exposure to the sea air, he told himself, releasing the
tension he had built up at the party.

had been over a long time ago. His family was a strangely backward group of
strangers, unable to see him in any way other than the personal. Janet was clever
enough to be useful to the company; Sam was supported by institutional fools
who understood only credentials; Richard, like all young people, had too many
legal rights—he ignored his mother, but listened to Sam. Was Sam a father
figure, or was Richard really interested in Sam’s philosophical work?

I don’t need any of them. By evening he would be well over the irritation of

the party.

For a moment he remembered Janet’s youthful, shy embrace, her softness,

the delicacy of her arms and shoulders, her black hair in his face. He wondered
what she would be like now under her expensive clothes. However beautiful
Erica was, he realized, she could never be Janet. Erica was timid, not as
intelligent, easily made happy, or so it seemed; he had no doubt that she loved
him. He was careful never to show her that he did not love her; it would be
unbearable to be without her. Janet was free now, and he would never ask for her
again, even if Sam were not part of it. Why is it, he wondered, that so much
happiness is lost when we break with those who started in life with us? What
kind of special imprinting leads us to live as if they were watching? Why are we
so dependent, forever compelled to desire their approval, their envy, even their
hatred? It was all nonsense, he told himself, feeling his calm returning.

He looked out over the sunny water and his eye caught the white underwing

of a bird as it wheeled crying across the sky. The explosion tore through him
from behind, throwing him out onto the sun deck, where he lay breathing heavily
and holding his arms around his torso in a futile act of containment. His right eye
stared into the blazing sun; his left eye was blind. His pained consciousness
flickered through his body, appalled at the ruin. “Janet,” he whispered as the next
explosion hurled him—

other funeral hovercraft floating slowly ahead of the one he shared with Janet
and Sam. Sunlight yellowed the grassy aisle between the trees; wind fluttered the
oak leaves. The day seemed to reveal itself to him, hiding nothing.

Six fliers, resembling old-style black limousines with curtained windows and

leather seats, carried friends and relatives to the family plot in the park just south
of Princeton. His father’s coffin rode in the first hovercraft, alone except for the
chauffeur. The casket was a bulerite capsule which Jack had ordered for himself
twelve years before.

The fliers were spaced one hundred feet apart as they continued their stately

drift. At his right, Janet sat with her hands folded in her lap; Sam was staring
down at his feet. The only sound was the soft whisper of the lift fan from below
the floor. The wind was rushing through the trees in the afternoon outside, but
Richard could not hear it; the sun moved slowly behind the crowns, slanting its
shafts to strike the lens of the window at his left.

“I remember how happy he was when he built the yacht,” Janet said.
Richard turned his head and looked at her, as if at a stranger. She was

dressed in a plain black skirt which came to below her knees, a white long-
sleeved blouse with ruffles, and a black vest. She seemed calm, but her hand was
cold when he touched it. All this has not really happened, her eyes seemed to
say.

“I wish I’d talked to him more that night,” she said.
“Don’t think like that,” Sam said.
Sixty feet of water. Seven bodies brought up by the divers. Margot and he had

just come in from the pool when the fax screen flashed the news. She had not
wanted to attend the funeral, so he had left her alone at the Princeton house.

The police were still checking on Erica’s friends, hoping to find a motive for

murder; but the explosion had been too big for any kind of bomb.

“I’m all right,” Janet said, biting her lip to stifle the signs of crying.
Jack would have liked the funeral, Richard thought. Elaborate, it would seem

worthy to the public that had known him as a Nobel Peace Prize recipient.

Richard saw the lead hovercraft rise and wobble, as if the wind were going

to flip it over. A strange light shone from the rear windows. The rest of the fliers
slowed and sat down on the grass. The lead vehicle continued forward
erratically.

Five hundred yards ahead, the hovercraft burst into white brilliance and

settled, withering the grass.

Richard opened his door and jumped out. The distant hovercraft was now a

yellow mass inside the white, pulsating radiance. Warm air pushed against his
face. The chauffeurs and some of the mourners were getting out to watch. The
pulsations quickened and the mass brightened into a painful glare.

The explosion threw him on his back.
A strong wind passed over him; the trees strained at their roots and the

leaves rustled like insects. Even with his eyes closed, the afterimage was vivid.

In a moment the air was still. He got up and looked around. The others were

getting up; no one seemed hurt.

Richard climbed back inside the cab and closed the door. Janet’s face was a

pale mask, her eyes full of fear. He took a deep breath and sat back, grateful for
the quiet inside the cab.

“That was not a bomb,” Sam said.
The flier lifted from the grass and turned around; the others were also lifting

and turning to leave the park. The grassy aisle started to rush by as the hovercraft
accelerated. Richard thought of blackbirds scattering from a shotgun blast.

Princeton’s faculty housing complex. The picture window provided a southerly
view over the central park of the campus. The greenery was bright in the late
afternoon sun. He did not want to tell her his suspicions, not when it was
obvious that she was struggling to get past what had happened. There was a
normal life for her, for both of them, up ahead somewhere, where Jack’s death
would be a remote thing; yet he knew that she had once loved Jack and that
something of that love still lived, buried deep within her, bound up horribly with
guilt and pain.

“Who will run Bulero?” he asked to change the subject.
“Mike will. It’s in Jack’s papers, and Mike is on the board. Sam, what kind

of explosion could blow out a bulerite hull, and what could destroy a bulerite
coffin, turn it into ashes?”

“I don’t know,” he said.
She said nothing for a while.
“You can stay here as long as you like,” he said, feeling that he was going to

lose her forever.

“I’m going home, Sam, for a long time. I’ve got to sort myself out, and

you’ve got a semester to finish.”

They both stood up. She put her arms around him wearily. “Call Richard at

the old house and tell him. He wants the place to himself with Margot.” She
kissed him and he held her for a long time.

The light of afternoon was fading. He could see dark patches in the trees

below. “Later, Sam,” she said. “Come to me later.” And he held her as she
withdrew into herself.

3. Undercity

The sky over old Manhattan was made of concrete-gray bulerite, a ceiling

studded with electric stars and huge, sunlike fluorescent disks. Sam often
imagined that he was seeing an overcast sky through circles of glass; it was his
way, he knew, of wishing away the city that pressed down on Old New York.
The great ventilators could never eliminate the dusty smell of the old streets. He
thought of the tomb blackness of Harlem, farther uptown in the basement city,
buried now for almost forty years beneath a mile of New City.

But much of the Old City had endured, as had London and Paris, Tokyo,

Rome, and major areas of Moscow and Peking—subterranean haunts tucked
away in the world’s memory like dear, unwanted relations.

The indoor climate of the upper levels was perfect, and the tiers gave an

open view of land, ocean, and sky, but it would be a long time before the New
City acquired the sense of tradition belonging to the original ground level.

The elevators from the skyport had grown more utilitarian as he had neared

the undercity, until he had emerged from the shaft that stood in the square on
East Broadway, Old Chinatown.

It was almost ten in the evening as he walked across the empty square and

down the street toward the restaurant. As long as there were people willing to
live or do business down here, the Old Cities would continue, links to the past
that would live as long as the earth endured.

The door was made of wood and glass. Sam paused as three electrical

maintenance workers came out. He nodded to them and went inside, saying hello
to the owner who sat behind the desk register. A young Chinese waiter showed
him to a large table set for two.

Sam sat down, noticing himself in the wall of mirrors at his right. They made

the room look larger. His one-piece black evening suit was a bit out of style, and
his gray turtleneck was slightly soiled. His hair was getting long around the
edges. For a moment he thought he saw something of his youthful self peering at
him. He looked up at the Chinese lantern hanging from the ceiling. The waiter
brought him a glass of tea. Sam put some sugar in it, took a sip, and looked
around at the unoccupied linen-covered tables, speculating about their age. He
heard voices behind the Oriental screen in front of the kitchen door and
wondered at the efficiency of people who could produce almost two hundred
dishes in such small quarters. He thought of the levels above him, open to the
sky; the undercity would never see sunlight again, unless the very bedrock of

Manhattan were split open. He thought of the magnetic boost-train tunnels,
airless arteries as black as interstellar space, running to the terminals in the rock
below him.

fact for a whole day.

Orton Blackfriar came in and dropped his cane into the rack. He was

wearing an old-fashioned tweed blazer, gold sports shirt, slacks from another era,
and silver glasses which made mirrors of his eyes, giving him the appearance of
a well-to-do panda. He walked into the dining area, stooping gracelessly to avoid
hitting his head on the partition.

The wooden chair creaked as he sat down opposite Sam. He took off his

glasses and put them in his jacket pocket. “How is Janet?” he asked quietly.

“I haven’t seen her since the funeral.” Sam paused. “They got some ashes

from the coffin and buried them as Jack’s remains. The chauffeur’s family and
the hearse company are suing Bulero.”

“I asked Richard to join us,” Orton said. “He should be here in a moment.

Any more news?”

Sam shrugged. “The investigations are going on as quietly as possible.

Bulero is making its own investigation. Things don’t look promising for the
company. Space shipping is at a standstill. They still haven’t found out what
went wrong with the haulers.”

“Can the losses be absorbed?”
“If nothing else goes wrong,” Sam said.
Richard came in and sat down in the chair facing the mirror.
“Go on,” he said. “Don’t let me stop you.”
“Janet is doing a good job with the company,” Sam said. “She took care of

the transition period after the will was read. Everybody looks to her, even Mike
Basil. She knows now that she’s needed and that Jack did not keep her on out of
charity. I think she feels closer to him now than when he was alive.”

“I’ve been taking care of things on the East Coast,” Richard said. “It’s eating

into my time. I don’t know when I’ll get back to my studies.”

told that her diagnostic programs are very clever, very useful to the regional
directors.”

“Do you resent having to involve yourself in the company, Richard?” Orton

asked.

The waiter interrupted them.
Sam ordered first. Wonton soup, sweet and sour pork—all of it made from

meat and vegetable culture stock, an industry which was finally competing with

animal husbandry and plant farming. Orton spoke Chinese to the waiter, ordering
wonton and beef lo mein for Richard and himself.

“I do resent it,” Richard said when the waiter left. “I’d rather be back on the

moon, finishing my work. Margot and I would prefer to live on Asterome, where
we can have access to facilities for our work. The bio-isolation labs are really
fine out there.”

Sam noted Richard’s nervousness.

asked, “Have you decided what to do after your term is over, Orton?”

Orton took a sip of tea. “I think I’ll take the offer to help run Asterome.

There’s room to grow out there. I’ve been reading a lot, talking to people,
dreaming.”

“In dreams begin new responsibilities. Watch out.”
“You wouldn’t believe the dreams that were shelved by the research priority

boards of the last century.”

“Tell me about it,” Sam said, hoping to take some of the lethargy out of

himself through stimulating conversation.

“The food will get here before I can finish.”
“Go ahead, Orton,” Richard said. “You know I’m convinced.”
“I can still take an interest in things outside my personal troubles,” Sam said.

“So what have you two been talking about?”

The waiter arrived with a large tray. They traded portions of one another’s

dishes. Sam savored the crisp, factory-grown vegetables. The tea was strong and
aromatic. He remembered when Richard had been his student at Princeton,
studying philosophy and getting excited about creativity in the sciences; it had
been inevitable, looking back, that he would go into physics. Sam sensed that
still newer concerns were developing in Richard, and that Orton was somehow
involved.

After the meal was finished, Orton took out a cigar, prepared it with a small

century-old penknife, lit it with a gold lighter, and took a few puffs.

“It took thousands of dollars to make this great bulk of mine,” he said as he

sat back, “which supports a dreaming brain. So I’ll dream as well as I possibly
can.” The chair creaked as he leaned back. “Of course, any reality made from a
dream will sober up a bit….”

“What are you talking about?” Sam asked.
“Let him tell it his way,” Richard said.
Sam watched the cloud of blue smoke forming around Orton, making him

look like a demon sitting in mists. “I don’t think that planets are the best places
for a civilization. They’re not necessarily the best we can do at all.”

“You suggest that we all pack up and leave?” Sam said.
“Not at all. I want to sketch a long-term development leading to another way

of life, one that will institutionalize the pursuit of ambitious goals for
humankind. Part of human life is the need to reassure ourselves about the future
that we may never live to see, rather than fool ourselves, as many did in the last
century, that there won’t be any future and they might as well lie down and die.”
The waiter stopped by the table and Orton told him to bring a small bottle of
brandy.

“The earth is a biological crib,” Blackfriar continued, “rocked back and forth

by the sun—but we’ve got to grow up, start walking around, or rot. What I want
to tell you about is a new kind of human society, one that may become a
permanent form of culture.” He was puffing heavily on his cigar. “Picture this: a
mobile space colony, supporting more than a million people. No, not a colony,
but an organism which can move and grow as long as it can obtain resources and
maintain a food supply within its ecology. It’s a living organism because it can
respond to stimuli through its optical and sensory nervous system. It thinks with
the intellects of its human and cybernetic intelligences. And it can reproduce,
which is what we expect from a living organism. Its reproduction would be
asexual, in part. The mobile world would undergo mitosis, the result of
construction by human-directed machines of a complete new mobile container,
and duplication of the human, animal, and plant cells by the usual means. If, for
example, fifty years is the period for doubling the life of the mobile, then a new
vehicle would be built during that time.”

“The new social container,” Richard said, “could be built as an outer shell,

only slightly larger than the original, and when completed it would be removed
from around the original and its interior work finished. Or the original could
expand in size, shell after shell, to the limit of practicality. I suppose it could
grow to be as large as a planet.”

“But we’re already out in sunspace,” Sam said, “and developing it quite

well, as far as I see. Asterome is pretty much the kind of colony you describe.”

Orton flicked a long ash into his ashtray and leaned back, creaking the chair

dangerously. “That’s not the kind of thoroughgoing development I’m talking
about, just as travel within the solar system is not real space travel. Interstellar
travel is real space travel. The solar system is our backyard, our Wild West. I’m
talking about using the resources of sunspace to create a new kind of social
system, free of planets, free of the accidents of nature.”

“The asteroid hollow of Asterome has a completely controlled

environment,” Sam said.

“It’s only a start,” Richard said. “The organism we’re talking about would be

a continuation of biosocial evolution on a large scale. It would possess the sum
total of human culture and knowledge in its memory banks, much as the cell
carries DNA information. Its capacity for expanding human perception, range of
experience, and creativity would be limited only by the most basic natural
limits.”

“I take it,” Sam said, “that Asterome’s interstellar group has something to do

with this?”

“Yes,” Orton said. “They’ve been looking into this prospect for many years.

Now, given time, the number of these societal containers would increase. A
dozen could be in sun orbit within fifty years. You wouldn’t believe the amount
of basic research going on now on Asterome into communications, gravity and
experimental relativity, methods of achieving near light speeds, and maybe even
trans-light speeds. The reason for such research is that it would make it possible
to send a mobile world out into the galaxy, to reproduce itself over and over
again, growing step by step as population increased.”

reach fruition until Asterome becomes mobile and reproduces. To really take full
advantage of the possibilities, the only instance of macro-life must stop behaving
like an extension of a planetary civilization.”

“It would be just as well,” Blackfriar said, “to send a few macro-worlds out

of sunspace as to have them circle the sun.”

“It seems to me,” Sam said, “that the vicinity of the sun has room for…

millions of such worlds. There’s more space here than we could ever use.”

“That’s right,” Richard said. “You see the potential. But macrolife is a form

of life, and macroworlds are highly complex seeds which we could scatter into
the spiral arms of the galaxy, ensuring the survival of human culture—a
permanent, open-ended, mature culture. It’s something we’ve never done in our
history, a really novel development.”

“All the components exist,” Orton said. “We can use solar and fusion power

sources efficiently, and we know how to build powerful nuclear propulsion
systems. There’s no end to the number of nickel-iron asteroids that we can heat
and blow up into hollow containers.”

“It would take a great upheaval to drive us out to the stars on the scale you

both suggest,” Sam said.

“I’m talking about a few hundred thousand men and women,” Orton said,

“only those who want to participate. I’m talking about branching humanity,
something like what’s happening to people on the moon and Mars. The humanity

I have in mind would remake itself after leaving the solar system, by creating a
second nature, maybe even a new kind of human being to live in it.”

“Look at it this way,” Richard said. “Eventually we’ll have to open the

bigger sky or perish.”

“Not soon,” Sam said. “Maybe millions of years from now.”
Richard shook his head. “Not true. Sun studies on Mercury have shown for

some time now that the sun is not the stable star we thought it was. Have you
forgotten how close we came to being struck by a large asteroid in the 1980s?
Macrolife would be an independent society, retaining its basic, social-container-
like form while permitting mobility and a great variety of social systems. With
no limits to growth, it would permit a better development of man’s freedom and
inner resources. A planetbound culture repeatedly reaches a volatile point and
attempts to organize itself after the point of greatest danger and difficulty. We’re
still such a culture.”

“We don’t seem to be doing badly at last,” Sam said.
Blackfriar grunted. “True—but consider how much of our success is made

possible by that portion of humanity that lives and works off the planet. We may
be coming out of industrial adolescence, but I still don’t feel safe about human
survival. The earth is too fluid, too vulnerable in the perspective of geology,
ultimately too limiting. In time it will become completely dependent on off
world industries, countryside to the urban space habitats, providing nothing they
need except maybe nostalgia.”

“We need a nature of our devising,” Richard said, “one where the natural

realm is only a garden. The man-nature alliance on a planet leads to an
anesthetic equilibrium, since planets are physically limiting.”

“You mean the small-is-beautiful movements of the last century,” Sam said,

“the zero-growth ideas. But we won’t have the static society you’re afraid of,
since we’ve left the planet.”

“But twelve billion people still live in a halfway house between nature and

the nature we can make for ourselves. We could slide back.”

reproduction. Macrolife will be our viable offspring. Any number of social
experiments can be made within its framework—we’ve never experimented with
social forms on a large scale in our history—and each one will have enough
mobility never to come into conflict with anyone. Here on earth, cultures have
tended to exclude each other. Macrolife is a class which can include all others,
all subcultures.”

“Consider,” Richard said, “that organismic life grows out of a tiny speck into

an organism such as man. So macrolife will grow outward from earth and its

sunspace, using the units of previous biological and social structures to form
larger multiorganismic units. These will grow into the universe, achieving a
scale of existence to match the scale of the universe.”

way?” Sam smiled. “I think, Orton, that you have it in you to be a founding
father, and it’s rubbing off on Richard.”

“What idiot would dream small if he was going to dream at all,” Orton

asked, “or be content only with dreams? These things we’ve been talking about
involve basic reexaminations of life and living.”

“That’s a big subject.”
“The point of life,” Richard said suddenly, “is to do more than repeat things.

On the other hand, novelty for its own sake is chaotic. What are needed are
unifying procedures that will allow novelty to be linked with past achievements.
The retained past would become the basis for the emergence of significant
innovations. Carried out on a reliable basis, this would be real progress, Sam.”

“Go on, it sounds interesting.”
“Progress is a tension between the notion of perfection and the notion that

striving, not finding, is important. Macrolife embodies both ideas, but eliminates
the tyranny of striving after material security, destroying that ancient activity’s
conflict with the search for personal satisfactions. The universe is very rich, so
we should not be poor.”

“Poverty prevents us from thinking on the true scale of reality,” Orton added.
“You think we’re poor?” Sam asked.
“A trillion-dollar GNP for North America was poor for 1975, and ten times

that is poor now, because it is not enough to undertake what is really possible.
It’s a relative matter.”

and personal growth has led to the disruption of civil order by revolutionaries.”

“Tell me,” Sam said, “how would you deal with the boredom of the well-to-

do?”

that kind of creative disruption coming into conflict with the economic container.
Malcontents could always found their own macro-world. Natural worlds might
also draw a fair number of disaffected.”

“I’ll grant the constructive nature of the idea of progress,” Sam said, “but it

seems to me that the overall pattern or direction of progress for macrolife would
remain unfathomable.”

“True,” Richard said, “but the human life span winks on and off too quickly

to detect any pattern. All of recorded history is too little.”

“Both human and social life spans must increase,” Orton said.
“Perhaps,” Sam said, enjoying the novelty of the conversation, the way in

which their egos were taking a back seat to issues, “but what also worries me is
individuality. You seem to be suggesting a mass organism.” In a philosophy
department seminar, the rivalries would all be just under the surface, driving the
nature of the argument.

“Macrolife is the individual’s needs written large,” Richard said. “I think it

was a commentator on Stapledon who said that the most advanced communities
place as high a value upon individual personality as upon the group.”

group, determining its overall character. Individuals are sources.”

“Symbiotic links develop,” Richard continued, “between individuals and

between the community and the world. The community moves toward pan-
sentience of self and world.”

“In a sense,” Orton said, “we do belong to a collective mind, since we share

physical origin and structure, and in language we share a mental space. Our
individual abilities belong at once to the society which recognizes them. We can
only be individuals in distinction from others. Individuality is only a problem in
societies which value a certain type of individuality above others. I think this is
long beyond dispute.”

picked up his glass and sipped.

“Rudimentary forms of macrolife exist today,” Orton said. “Besides

Asterome, there are the mining settlements in the asteroids, various observatories
and research stations, the settlements on Mars and Ganymede—anyplace where
human beings live in highly structured man-made ecological systems. It was
easy to see such systems working in a small spaceship, but on earth we couldn’t
see the walls for a long time, and some of us can’t see beyond them.”

Sam poured himself another drink.
What Orton and Richard were envisioning, he thought, was a historical birth

—it would have to be called that—with the earth and sun as parents. One had to
think in terms of centuries to see the point, in terms of creative social
engineering, a humanity to replace the halfhearted technological humanity of the
last two centuries, a humankind that would consolidate its place in reality, to
create the first civilization that would have any chance of standing against the
eventual certainty of species extinction. Macrolife would be a permanent
civilization. “I like the idea of an uncoercive, open-ended culture,” Sam said.

“Think,” Orton said. “A civilization which might see its millionth birthday.”
“Of course, most of humanity can’t see any of this,” Sam said. “How large is

the group you’ll be working with, Orton?”

“There’s Japan, hundreds of private fortunes, some heavy-industry backing

—including Bulero, I found out. The macrolife group has been gathering all the
other space colonization groups to itself during the last decade. Asterome is the
prime mover for all this.”

They were silent for a few moments, sipping their brandy.
“Just think of how much there would be to work for,” Richard said. “There

would be little that macrolife could not undertake in time. With its exploratory
mobility and access to special research conditions, its presence on the galactic
stage would place it in a position to contact other intelligent life, perhaps
hybridize its culture. The citizens of a macroworld would achieve life for as long
as they wanted it—practical immortality would be theirs in the same way that
the ancient city-states offered their citizens various cultural benefits. Death is the
ultimate insecurity to a conscious being, the break that takes away all
productivity and vitality, the meaning of all further growth. Even if there will be
those who choose to end their lives after a long period, they will know that
macrolife will be virtually immortal.”

“I tend to think,” Orton said, “that we will want to live longer if our vitality

continues. It’s possible that in time a kind of natural selection will see only the
most intense and creative types choosing the long-range life, one that might even
last into the old age of the universe…. I wonder what that kind of consciousness
would be like.”

The City of God, Sam thought, only half listening now. The brandy had made

him sleepy. How many attempts had there been to raise humanity up to the level
of its better self? He thought of Jack, the stuff of his body strewn by
incomprehensible forces, the pattern of his consciousness dispersed, dissolving
the compact of matter and physical laws, and whatever else, never to be
repeated. Death was an infinite cruelty. Where Orton’s and Richard’s words
opposed death, the sorrow of it seemed to recede. Regret mingled with his
lifelong disappointment in Jack. There was nothing to be done about it. Except to
take his wife and be a father to his son, who no longer needs a father. Replace
him, finish his life for him….

“Macrolife,” Orton was saying, “was first described, using that term, by

Dandridge Cole, who died in 1965. The word is a shorthand for the whole range
of humanity’s social and biological problems. Our spaceborne peoples have
already faced them in the industrialization of sunspace. Macrolife is life squared
per cell. Man the multicelled organism stands between macrolife and the cell.
Macrolife is to man as man is to the cell. Macrolife, Cole wrote, is a new life-
form of gigantic size which has fot its cells individual human beings, plants,

animals, and machines. Civilizations have had this same structure, except that
macrolife is mobile, and it can reproduce…. Sam?”

“The brandy…”
“Sam, do you want to help?” Richard asked, looking at him with Jack’s

brown eyes.

“What could I do?”
Blackfriar looked at his watch. “It’s twelve-thirty, Sam. Want to come up top

for some air? It’ll clear your head. You look like a lazy rhino.”

Richard stood up. “I’ve got to get back. Sam, I’ll see you in Santa Fe next

month. Orton, thanks for helping with the legal side of those firings at the
Chicago complex. I’ll call you—there’s more I can use you for.” Sam felt his
nephew’s hand on his shoulder. He looked up sleepily, but Richard was already
on his way out.

“It’s elevators all the way up, Sam,” Blackfriar said. Sam watched him rise,

walk over to the old man at the register, and pay the bill. The terminal chimed as
it recorded Orton’s credit.

Sam got up and knocked over the brandy bottle.

can make it now,” Sam said.

“You never needed much. Puts you away like milk. I hope you followed

something of what we said.”

“I really did, Orton. Inside I’m sober, really.” How can frail beings like us

think of doing the things Richard and Orton described?

They walked across the square to the elevator shaft and stepped into the

empty lift.

Two minutes later they got off on the first tier of the New City; from there

they took the elevator to tier two, one thousand feet above the Old Empire State
Building, which stood like an arthritic giant supported by the braces of the New
City. A shiny new elevator shot them up to one of the six observation decks
rising from the partially complete third tier.

Sam followed Blackfriar up a rampwalk, through the large open portal, onto

the huge flat area. Orton was moving quickly toward the transparent barrier at
the edge.

Sam came up next to him, and they stood looking down at the lighted

canyons which cut through the layers of the city. There were sections still under
construction directly below, lit by flashing work lights. New City was a
diamond-studded latticework, a leviathan standing on the base of Manhattan,

Bronx, Brooklyn, and Queens. New York harbor was under the great structure,
together with the East River, part of the Hudson, the rebuilt Statue of Liberty,
lighted entirely by artificial sources, hidden from sun and stars, open only to the
ocean.

breeze; the stars twinkled. For a moment the spell of Richard’s and Orton’s ideas
took hold of him and he wished that Janet were here to feel what he felt.

His head began to clear in the night air.
“In the Amazon,” Orton said, “there are places where they’ve never heard of

a spaceship, or oceangoing cities, or that men make a life for themselves on a
moon of Jupiter.”

pasts.”

Orton was peering at the glowing dial of his watch. “Can you get home

without me? I’ve got to be in Santa Fe by morning to sign some things.”

“I’ll stay a while,” Sam said.
He shook hands with the big man and watched him disappear into the lighted

mouth of the exit ramp, which seemed for a moment to become the fiery maw of
some huge beast crouched under the stars. Then he turned to look out again over
the billion lights scattered at his feet.

How did Janet really regard him? Was he just a brother-in-law, a friendly

benevolence? Suddenly it seemed absurd that he should be her lover, that she
should have any interest in him at all. Orton was perhaps more her type. Orton
was passionate about life and seemed to be preparing for some new effort which
would redirect his life.

Orton and Richard had stirred something in him tonight, a sense of possible

renewal.

The wind grew stronger and colder. He imagined the dawn moving across

the continent to strike the windows of Janet’s bedroom, lighting up the desert
and brightening the snow into blinding whiteness atop the mountains that held
up the sky.

A part of him was dead, he realized, the piece of him that had been joined to

his brother.

4. The Shatterer

stars. Sam leaned back and stared up at the moonless June night. The green light
glowed on the panel near the bottom of his vision, signaling that the manual
controls were locked until Santa Fe Central released him from the road. Only the
sudden passing of a sign or cactus reminded him that he was moving at two
hundred miles an hour, but that was slow compared to the boost train that had
brought him across the continent in less that five hours; the fractional-orbit
shuttle would have delivered him in an hour, but like Orton, he liked to think
about where he was going before he got there.

Night was an iron bell containing all space-time, the vault of an empty

cathedral whose bright lights had been left burning. He imagined the unseen
center of the galaxy, the distant altar, where, it was said, lay a massive black
hole, a dark exit from the known universe. There suns and dusty clouds circled
the eye of the galactic maelstrom, radiating lost energy as they were drawn in.

He thought of his own death, the death of all those he knew, the passing of

humanity through historical time. What are we? he thought. What is left?
Everything is hidden from us, as if deliberately.

The car slowed, and two other cars whipped by him in the far right lane. It

pulled off at exit 99 and came to a stop at the end of a luminous yellow line.

The seat came up with him as he sat up. He pulled the steering wheel out,

locked it, and eased the car forward.

He drove two miles down the old paved road and turned off onto the

driveway. As he came along the gravel way between the planted trees, he
remembered that long ago he had thought of the house as Jack’s, later as Janet’s;
he would never feel that it was his own.

He halted in front of the terrace, turned off the power, got out, and walked

over to the night entrance under the terrace. He pressed his palm on the key
surface; it glowed and the door opened.

He stepped into the hallway and went through into the night-lit living room

as the door slid shut behind him. At the bar he took a small container of orange
juice from the cooler, tore off the top, and drank the juice down.

He resisted the impulse to waken Janet. Everything seemed at once to be

balanced on a brink, their lives frail, pitiable things, poised in the morning
stillness.

He waited in the stillness, thinking of Janet, admitting that he wanted her,

without question. There would be a life for them, quiet, personal; he would write
new books, revise the old ones, make them definitive. Richard would go his own
way, like a son.

Poor Orton, Sam thought. He has no one….
“Sam,” Janet was saying from far away. “You crept in and didn’t wake me.’
He opened his eyes. Daylight flooded the guest room and Janet was sitting

on the edge of the bed in a red robe. He found himself ignoring the lines in her
face, the slightly crushed look of sleep. “I must have fallen asleep,” he said,
wondering how he looked to her.

“Sam…” He rose up and embraced her. They fell back and he kissed her for

a long time.

She sat up again. “I look a mess. Who would want to kiss me like this?”
“An old fool like me.” He began to tug at her arm.
“I don’t care how old you are,” she said.
“I’m fifty-six.”
“Don’t be old-fashioned. Fifty-six is what forty was half a century ago.”
“Anything new from the investigations?”
“Richard may know something when he gets here.”
“How’s the company doing?”
“Well enough,” she said with a shrug. “Mike has got things in hand, with

help from Richard and Orton, and myself. Bulero goes on without Jack. Richard
coming in has helped keep the shares stable, but I know he resents the
interruption of his life. I’m sure that’s why I haven’t met Margot yet—I don’t
think she likes me.”

“I’d like to know why Jack died.”
“There are stories,” she said, “about something in the yacht’s power plant,

and that the coffin was Jack’s own kind of crazy joke, to cremate himself in
public, but we know that Jack wanted to be put in suspension, if there was
anything left to freeze. There’s more to this than we know.” She seemed to
brighten, but with some effort. “Come on, we’ll get some breakfast.”

facing him. Her black hair was piled on top of her head, and she was wearing
white slacks with a sleeveless turtleneck. The silvery bulerite medallion which
Jack had given out for the family to wear many years ago hung around her neck.

Sam admired the deep tan and silky texture of her bare arms. She sat secure in
his gaze, her long legs set out casually in front of her.

Richard came into the study and stopped with a nervous, catlike grace. He

appeared taller to Sam and his light brown hair seemed darker.

and side-creased slacks were covered with dust, Sam noticed.

“We’ve got to get out of this house,” Richard said.
“What is it?” Janet asked.
“I’ll explain later. We’ve got to go.”
“I want to know now—tell us,” Janet demanded.
Richard ran a hand through his hair. “The Bulero Complex outside Chicago

is falling apart. All three tiers are—well, glowing strangely, as if burning inside.”

“The whole three-thousand-foot pyramid?” Sam asked, trying to imagine the

event.

“Yes. There are a lot of electromagnetic phenomena. There’s smoke.

Everyone has been evacuated.” Richard took an unsteady step forward.

“It must be on the evening news,” Sam said, looking around for the remote

control.

two ore haulers were destroyed in space…we found the same kind of ash in
Jack’s yacht and around his disintegrated coffin. When they refloated what was
left of the yacht, the bulerite statuettes of Prometheus were gone, together with
all the bulerite on the vessel.”

Sam saw fear in Richard’s tired eyes, as if something of Jack had taken

possession of him.

Jack killed himself, Sam thought, feeling a guilty satisfaction.
“Earth-moon,” Richard said softly, “it’s all built up with bulerite. All our

major cities and hundreds of lesser ones, sea-bed communities, the magma and
geothermal taps—patients walking around with bulerite hearts and bones.” He
looked at Sam with despair. “Even if we could take it all apart by tearing it loose
at the adherence joints, which we don’t know how to do easily, what could we do
with the stuff? It would take years to ferry it off-planet.”

“You’re here to warn us about the bulerite in the house,” Janet said. She

sounded composed, resigned, but Sam saw the frightened look on her face.

“We’ve got to leave,” Richard said. “This house is old enough to be in

danger. Don’t stop to take anything.”

He turned and went through the living room out into the bright desert night.

Sam and Janet followed. Halfway across the driveway, Richard looked back and
pointed at Janet. “Your medallion—you’d better get rid of it.”

Janet took off the bulerite jewelry and threw it toward the house.
Sam got into the driver’s seat of Richard’s large rented car. Richard and

Janet got in next to him. They sat still suddenly, looking at the house.

he expected it to strike out at any moment.

He pulled the wheel out from the panel. The car started and he drove away,

glancing back nervously every few seconds. When he reached the road, Sam
stopped the car, and they all gazed at the house among its trees, lights blazing in
the darkness.

“Get us out of here,” Richard said.
Sam accelerated.
There was a bright flash of light somewhere overhead.
“The orbital factory,” Richard said.
The brightness faded. Sam peered up through the windshield at the band of

stars arching across the sky and down behind the snowy peaks on the horizon.
Where the bright, man-made star should have been moving toward the
mountains, there was nothing now.

“Did they get away?” Janet asked.
“I don’t know,” Richard answered. “The evacuation had started.”
Sam regarded Janet. She sat next to him, looking down, her hands together

in her lap.

He drove until he reached the automated highway, and then he braked.
Again they turned to look at the house. It was completely hidden by trees

now, but its lights shone through like ghosts congregating on high ground.

“It will happen,” Richard said.
“I don’t want to see it,” Janet said.
Sam put the car on automatic and let the road take it.
As the vehicle shot across the desert, Sam sat back and tried to think. Where

could they go?

“What’s the worst that can happen?” Sam asked.
“Only the worst can happen,” Richard said. “The world’s urban areas will go

from any of the variations of bulerite’s instability. The oldest bulerite structures
will go first—all the city mayors have known that since last week. But that will
be nothing compared to the magma tap that transmits heat energy to the
Caribbean power stations. When that goes, there may be earthquakes and
volcanic activity, and a steam cloud that might affect the world’s weather. The
survivors will have decades of ruination to look forward to, until the last piece of
bulerite is gone.”

Sam tried to imagine the political strife during that time.

“Let’s hope that this is all bulerite can do,” Richard added, “and that there

won’t be any more surprises.”

“One thing is sure,” Janet said.
“What’s that?” Sam asked.
“Buleros are not going to be liked very much.”
“We may be in danger,” Richard said. “I think it might be prudent for us to

get off the earth, maybe to the moon, where some of the cities are not built up
with bulerite. Besides, a lot of the stuff there is younger and may take longer to
fall apart. Maybe Blackfriar and I can arrange for us to stay on Asterome.”

“As long as only a few people know the truth,” Janet said, “things can still

be arranged.”

wondered about Mars, Ganymede City, the outposts. Would life be any better
there?

“I think we might be safe at the old house in Ecuador,” Richard said. “It’s

outside the earthquake zone.”

“What kind of heart does Orton have?” Janet asked suddenly.
Sam looked at her. “Why, I don’t know. It might be bulerite, or older. We’ll

call him.”

“The phone in this car is out of order,” Richard said. “We’ll have to stop at

the first booth we see.”

Janet began to check the roadmap screen for the nearest drive-in phone. She

pushed a few buttons, programming the car to pull off the road when the time
came.

Could we have foreseen all this? Sam asked himself. Jack could have done

more. There was nothing to be done now except help himself, and those close to
him, to survive. He looked up and saw two falling stars whisper across the sky
and fade. He noticed an earthwatch satellite, which circled the earth every ninety
minutes, climbing toward the zenith. It was also made of bulerite, growing heavy
with the forces that would soon tear it apart.

either side of them, floating backward and forward as Central adjusted the road
flow.

“Richard,” Sam asked, “can any of this be an exaggeration?”
“The longer we ran the computer simulations, the worse things looked.”

5. Doomwatch

The house sat among sparse trees, high in the stony foothills above the

valley; behind it the mountains reached skyward, their summits lost in a haze of
blue-white clouds. Sam turned and leaned over the stone wall of the terrace,
remembering when he and Jack had last gazed out at the green Andean valley; it
had been summer, more than thirty years before, but the view was unchanged.
He took a deep breath of the thin, cool air, marveling at the clarity of the
morning view.

In the sturdy houses of the village below, men and women who did not

belong to the twenty-first century were already up and readying to start their
farm work on the slopes. Many of them did not belong to the twentieth century,
much less the twenty-first; a few had been born in the late eighteen hundreds.
The longevity of Vilcabamba’s people was a gift of heredity, diet, and way of
life. The outside world’s achievement of extended life through other means,
however, had come too late to save the exiles, Sam’s grandfather, Juan Bulero,
and Carlos. Even now, Sam knew, he was not as strong as men his own age
living here.

A hundred yards below the house, the copter sat on its landing block, a giant

dragonfly with knife-blade wings; it was an obsolete model, with a simple-
minded landing and takeoff program, but its manual controls were good.

The morning sun grew hotter on Sam’s face. He thought of Juan standing

here before going down among the villagers to practice his folk medicine,
together with the remedies of the northern doctors he had outlived. He saw Juan
returning to the lights of the house, where Isabel Samuels, the impatient
American woman who loved him, was planning to make Juan leave the valley.
Sam and Jack had visited their grandfather Juan long after he had come back
here. He had looked like Carlos, except bald and bearded, standing perfectly
straight until he died—five years after his son’s private jet slammed into a
Canadian glacier. Juan had taken the news quietly, accepting a new companion
into his life, expressing grief to no one; that would have been a defeat, a betrayal
of Carlos, Juan had thought. Sam remembered his stern face at the funeral.

Sam closed his eyes and tried to see his mother, a large-boned woman with

large black eyes, whom he had seen twice in his childhood. Carlos had told his
sons the whole truth as soon as they were old enough to understand. Sam
remembered his father’s nervousness that summer, here by the wall, as he had
explained his life. “I came back and married Ricardina to please Juan, mostly. I

stayed for two years, doing theoretical work while you were born, my sons, but I
was anxious to return to my experimental work in physics. My youth was
slipping away. I took both of you with me, because I did not want you to grow
up buried here in the valley. Ricardina refused to come along, sensing that I
would be ashamed of her. It became easier to keep you with me when I became
wealthy and forgot the past. By the time I returned to do something for Ricardina
here, she had died of pneumonia. I could not really have given her anything from
the outside anyway….”

Carlos had cried in front of them. “I visited her only two or three times in ten

years, and always she refused to come to Chicago with me.”

Sam wondered if he and Jack might have been happier here, living a simpler

life with their mother; certainly the world would have been better off if Carlos
had stayed home with his bride….

It was a sturdy stone house with a wooden floor. The handmade furniture

would last forever. Sam had turned on the generator and stocked the kitchen for
two months. The hydrogen tanks would provide heat and electricity for six
months, with care.

Orton and Richard would arrive by noon, bringing Margot with them.

Richard had insisted on taking her under the family’s protection, and Janet had
not objected. It was not my place to offer an opinion, Sam thought. A vertical
lander would drop them in the village, and Janet would pick them up with the
copter. It was an hour’s walk up from the village otherwise.

Looking across the valley, Sam tried to fill the great space under the sky and

fell back into himself, content with having tried to encompass it. The sun was
more than an hour past sunrise. He turned and went back up into the house.

The fire was almost out. He crossed the large room and opened the bedroom

door. Sunlight spilled over the textures of the floor and bed, brightening the
colorful quilt covering Janet. He went to the window and opened the other
shutter, flooding the rest of the room with light. Then he knelt by the large
wooden bed, reached under the quilt, and stroked Janet’s stomach. She smiled
and took a deep breath. He remembered the chilly night of their arrival and how
they had huddled together in the old bed.

“Can’t be safe in my own bed.” She stretched and opened her large brown

eyes.

“You’d better get up. It’s well past sunrise and they may be early. You’re

sure you don’t want me to go with you?”

“I want to meet her first.” She was quiet for a moment, looking up at him

anxiously. “Is there any news…from outside?”

“I haven’t gotten the old tube out to see.”

“Don’t, until after we’ve all met.”
He remembered Janet’s conversation with Richard. She had asked him

whether he loved Margot. Why her? Sam had asked himself. Why not any
stranger who might need help? Margot was very lucky—they were all lucky to
have a place to hide.

“I do love her,” Richard had said vehemently.
“I’m glad,” Janet had said, seeing a potential friend, if not the daughter she

had always wanted.

“I don’t care what I have to do to help her.”
But would you save her if you did not love her? Sam had asked himself.
“I would keep her with me even if I didn’t love her,” Richard had said.

“She’s my friend—how could I live with myself?”

Janet motioned for Sam to sit down on the bed.
“Are you afraid you won’t like her?” he asked.
She sat up. “Sam, what are we going to do? We can’t live here forever. “
“One thing at a time.”
“I’m sorry, Sam, for what’s happening.”
“We’ll know more later.” He smiled, knowing that it was an obvious,

uninspired smile. “Get dressed while I see about that tube.” The bed creaked as
he stood up.

He went out into the main room, knowing that she would have liked

company while dressing, but he was afraid that she would sense his fears.

He went to the small alcove in the corner and opened the door to the

basement. Turning on the lights, he slowly descended the stone steps. A day at a
time, he told himself. The stairs went deep into the earth, into the empty wine
cellar. A day at a time; there was no other way.

the socket by the bedroom door. He turned the set on and fine-tuned to World
Channel 1, picking up the signal from the synchronous station above the Western
Hemisphere. He heard the copter landing outside and hurried with the
adjustments.

The color picture was quite good, despite the age of the receiver. The

program was a rerun of Fantasia. He turned up the sound and recognized
Stravinsky’s music blaring from the small, inadequate stereo speakers. Newer
sets were receiving the program on full three-dimensional holo rechanneling or
on large wall screens, but the forty-inch picture would be enough to serve as
their link with the outside world. He turned the sound off and faced Janet as she

came in the front door. She seemed nervous.

A shy-looking girl stepped into the room, followed by Orton, who looked

winded from the walk up from the copter block. They all stood a bit awkwardly,
dark outlines in the daylight from the curtained windows.

“Sam, this is Margot Toren,” Janet said, putting her arm around the young

woman’s shoulders. Sam looked at her carefully as she took his hand and held it.
Her hair seemed black in the daylight; her eyes were brown with slivers of gold.
She smiled as she took her hand away. Sam noticed an Asian slant to her eyes,
realizing that she had a subdued beauty which would surprise the eye even after
long familiarity.

“I’m very happy to meet you,” she said.
Sam smiled at her, afraid that she would take his scrutiny to be unfavorable.
Orton stepped forward and Sam shook hands with him. The television

speakers crackled with static. Sam turned around and saw that the Sorcerer’s
Apprentice sequence was in full swing, the brooms marching silently.

“I hope I’m welcome,” Orton said.
“I’m sorry, Orton,” Sam said. “I was fiddling with that set.”
Janet walked over to the front entrance and switched on the overhead light.

Suddenly the daylight silhouettes were gone, and Sam was looking at distinct
faces. Margot seemed even more exotic in the glare of the old incandescent bulb.

Sam surveyed the room. “Where’s Richard?” he asked, looking to Janet.
“He went back to Chicago,” Orton said, “to find Carlos’s records. Basil

thinks there may be some old cassettes—“

“We can’t raise him on the copter radio,” Janet said. “I tried to patch through

on the way here.”

“He’ll follow as soon as he can,” Margot said.
No one spoke for a few moments.
“Is there any danger?” Sam asked.
“He didn’t think so,” Orton said. Janet turned away to the window.
As it grew dark outside, a few lonely lights appeared in the valley below.

Sam stood with Orton by the window. Janet had gone to the copter radio half a
dozen times, but there was still no word from Richard.

She expects him to die, Sam thought, sensing that she was preparing for the

possibility.

“It’s not good to retreat like this,” Orton said.
“What can we do? We may be here a long time. By the way, what about your

heart?”

“It was not a bulerite implant,” Orton said. “The new one was cloned

without a full embryo, I’m told. I feel fine.”

Sam turned and looked at Janet, who was sitting with Margot on the old

wooden bench. Both women had grown very nervous toward evening. It was
obvious that Janet liked Margot, but Margot seemed to be holding back.

“News time, I think,” Sam said.
Janet got up and turned on the set. Sam motioned Orton to the two wicker

chairs. The picture brightened as Janet returned to her seat. Orton pulled his
chair back a little and sat down. Sam remained standing when he saw the red
letters appear on the screen:

bulerite supports of New York have collapsed,” he said. “That report has been
confirmed.”

Air monitoring showed smoke rising for miles into the sky. The three levels

were caved in at the center.

“No official explanation has been released. We have no reports of conditions

at the old street level….”

Sam felt the room grow warm and unreal.
“Millions are certainly dead….” The reporter’s eyes showed dismay.
A new scene appeared, revealing a huge artificial island slowly sinking into

the sea.

“The pylons of Atlantic Arco One have failed, leaving the island of two

million people to sink off the coast of North Carolina….”

Farewell, Atlantic City, Sam thought, remembering when the old town’s

remains had been moved aboard at the turn of the century.

“Ships are picking up thousands of refugees, but two disasters of this size at

once are too much for East Coast rescue operations….”

The screen failed suddenly, leaving only the audio.
Janet got up and hit the set, but with no result. She sat down quickly.
Sam listened, conjuring up in his mind a terrifying vision of what was

happening.

“…without warning at seven AM. There—another section is collapsing into

what has become a huge crater. Thousands of structures, some of them hundreds
of years old, preserved with love in the shelf tiers, are gone…. A dream is
dying…. The smoke is making it hard to see. Moments ago the Empire State

Building became exposed for the first time in decades….”

Sam thought of a broken bone jutting out of the dying leviathan of New

York.

The sound went dead. Sam’s stomach knotted. Janet got up and hit the set

again, again with no result. She hesitated for a moment, then went into the
bedroom and closed the door. Margot followed her, pausing to knock at the door.
There was a faint answer and Margot went inside.

The television blared static and voices for a moment.
“We should prepare to leave,” Orton said. “It’s worse than I thought. If the

magma tap goes, the whole hemisphere will feel the shocks. They’ll never draw
it out in time, I’m afraid.”

“You saw how Janet feels. She feels responsible.”
“We’ve got to get out, Sam. People still don’t know what’s going on. When

they do it’s going to become a political mess on earth, in addition to the physical
dangers. Money and power may not help us.”

“You’re right, of course.”
“You’ll have to get Janet not to think about it. Assigning responsibility is for

future historians.”

Sam thought of the mountains outside. The house was solid, secure. He

could not imagine any danger here.

“Janet would say that we have an unfair advantage in knowing about the

danger.” He thought of the people in the valley.

“It was hard to see this coming,” Orton said.
“I guess. We were making the earth over,” Sam said with tears in his eyes,

“and we were doing fairly well.”

Blackfriar was silent.
“What about Margot’s parents?” Sam asked, composing himself.
“Richard told me a little, and Margot told us the rest on the way here. Her

father was from Eastern Europe, a scholarly man, expert in the history of science
and alchemy. Margot was born late in his life. He disappeared when she came to
college in California, but he left her some money. Her mother was a Hawaiian.
She walked out early. Margot is convinced they’re both dead and doesn’t seem to
care. She’s strong.”

“I like her,” Sam said, “and I think Janet likes her.”
“Governor Alard will take us in on Asterome,” Orton said. “Besides, Bulero

has offices and facilities at L-5. You can be sure that the Bulero people on the
colony have told Alard about the danger. If I know him, he’s stripping the
asteroid of what little bulerite he has right now.”

“We’ll go there for now,” Sam said. “It’s a free state, where we have some

rights, as you say.”

had not disturbed Janet, he went out into the main room. Margot was asleep on
the air mattress in front of the fireplace. Orton was sprawled across two
mattresses in the alcove next to the basement door. Moving quietly, Sam stepped
outside.

The village was a dark abyss. A night wind swept from the mountain behind

him. The snow on the peaks across the valley was bright in the starlight.
Suddenly he knew that the security of the valley was an illusion; the immensity
of these mountains was an illusion. Only the stars would endure, shining even
when the earth was gone. The stay in the valley was a doomwatch, nothing
more.

He went inside quietly, lay down next to Janet, and tried to sleep as he

listened to the wind.

But the earth moved under him, gently at first, then shaking the house,

conspiring with the wind to drive them off the earth.

They dressed quickly, and Sam led the way to the helicopter.
The blades started nervously, but finally Janet was able to coax the

overburdened craft up from the shaking block. With luck, Sam thought, they
would reach the Machala airstrip before morning, long before the fuel ran out.
From there it was only an hour to the equatorial earthport at Quito.

He thought about Richard.

6. A Mobile Utopid

Asterome was a settlement in space, circling the earth at Libration Point 5, a

quarter of a million miles behind the moon’s position, equidistant from earth and
moon. The tourist screen at the end of the shuttle aisle showed a diagram:

The screen switched to an occasional view of earth, stars, or moon, always

returning to the diagram as if to a test pattern.

Sam turned and looked at Janet; she ignored him, staring ahead, hands

clasped in her lap. She had failed to reach Richard from Quito, and it had been
difficult to get her on the shuttle. Margot had taken her side, but after some
discussion both women had been convinced to board the moonbus. Sam was not
happy about leaving, either, but Orton had insisted that Richard would follow
with Mike Basil. All four of them now understood that there was very little they
could have done by staying behind, whether Richard followed or not. For the
moment, Sam told himself, there was no reason to think that Richard was in
danger.

He turned and glanced at Orton and Margot in the seat behind his and

Janet’s. They were asleep, floating gently against their seat belts.

There were no familiar faces among the other ninety-six passengers; it was

obvious that they were well-to-do skilled people on their way to Asterome and
the moon, probably to replace people who had left, to continue their professional
experience and studies, or to fill new positions.

The twenty-four-hour passage had grown oppressive. As the shuttle

maneuvered for the final approach, Sam tried to relieve his worries by recalling
something of the history of Asterome. He had been relatively ignorant of the
community, he admitted, until Richard had gone to study on the moon and had
written letters home about the place. Even now, Asterome was difficult to
imagine. Nothing, Richard had written, can replace the experience. I’m more
used to ideas than to experience, Sam thought. Even experience is a concept for
me. Emotionally he was not convinced that he was out in space. The viewscreen
did not seem real; after all, stars, the moon, and space were not like streams and
trees, or stones that one could touch. He remembered his grandfather’s view of
space travel and the notion of space habitats: walls…glass and metal, cramped
cabins, a starry, desolate darkness outside…no life for a human being….

Asterome was an arcology, much like the tier cities of earth-moon, a societal

container housing a new branch of humankind. Once it had been a minor planet,
a chunk of nickel-iron and rock ten miles long and five wide, roughly ovoid in
shape, moving in an orbit that would have brought it into collision with earth
five years after its discovery. In the late 1980s, the Japanese had sent out an
engineering team to land on it, using a modified atomic version of a Type III
American space shuttle. The group had brought supplies to set up housekeeping,
as well as a nuclear rocket engine, industrial atomic explosives, and sunsails.
After laying a solar-powered mass driver track along the length of the asteroid,
and attaching the atomic engine for attitude correction, they had diverted the
asteroid into the relatively stable L-5 position.

Sam imagined the moment when the mass driver had begun to move the

asteroid by accelerating bits of rock off the surface opposite to the direction of
travel, using the asteroid’s own material and electrical power from the sun to
change its orbit slowly. That must have been a moment without equal in the lives
of the engineers, who had spent years in space to save earth from a great
catastrophe.

The danger of collision had played into the hands of the International

Asteroid Mining Lobby, which also ran the two equatorial earth-ports on a
commercial basis. The lobby had argued that the energy expenditure to avert
world catastrophe would show a good return on investment as Asterome grew to

be self-sufficient; it would be silly to bring the giant rock into L-5 and do
nothing with it. No one had doubted that an ocean strike by the asteroid would
have permanently altered the earth’s climate, plunging humanity into an ice age.
Once the investment snowball had started, nothing could stop it; but it had taken
a near disaster to start the development of the greater solar system. It always
takes a crisis to wake us up, Sam thought.

inside of Asterome was being hollowed out. Both ends were opened with nuclear
charges, permitting the mining of the rich nickel and iron ore. When the interior
space had been cleared, the ends were closed by installing recycling plants and
multiple docking locks. The pumping in of a pressurized atmosphere and the
arrival of colonist workers had signaled the birth of the first genuine macrolife
settlement, capable of self-reproduction and mobility. The population had grown
to a hundred thousand by the turn of the century, but the three hundred square
miles of interior real estate could easily support a million.

scientific complex at L-5. Six large manufacturing structures used the space
environment’s cheap solar energy and unlimited heat and waste sink. Metals
mined on the moon and in the asteroid belt were refined and cast with the high
precision made possible by zero-g facilities, the use of controlled acceleration
and gravity gradients, the high-quality vacuum, and other conditions available on
earth only at high cost, if at all. The list of industrial processes continued to
grow, even after a quarter of a century; many earthbound industries no longer
bothered to make basic products; it was cheaper to import from free space….

Sam closed his eyes. Impersonal concerns had always been a comfort to him

during bad times. Janet might be right about Richard, though she would not say
it. What could have happened? Sam wondered. There were many things that
might have delayed him; death was too extreme an explanation; Janet was
almost certainly wrong….

Besides being a way station, Asterome provided space-rescue capability that

could reach to any part of sunspace. The settlement’s maintenance crews
regularly serviced the solar energy collectors in near-earth orbit. The UN Space
Fleet’s dockyards were on the moon, where many of the ships were in mothballs,
but the hired specialists from Asterome kept the vessels operational.

Richard’s letters from Plato University contained a wealth of detail about life

away from earth, more than Sam had cared to know at the time; but now
something of Janet’s foreboding took hold of him, and he was surprised at how
much he remembered. The letters revealed, he realized, Richard’s growing
commitment to a new kind of life.

well-known description of a postindustrial society as one in which the
organization of theoretical knowledge is central to innovation, a society in which
intellectual institutions are the heart of the social structure. This was also true, to
a degree, of societies on earth, but Asterome had the potential of becoming
genuinely open-ended and self-shaping, creatively incomplete on the model of
science and art, without having to live with the historical brake of economic
insufficiency.

cosmologies, Asterome continued at a competitive pace with earth-moon,
excelling in applied physics, especially in the improvement of solar and fusion
power systems; in basic research, Asterome’s forays into aspects of gravity wave
generation led the field. In biology and medicine, Asterome dominated both
research and applications, producing thousands of export drugs in special
conditions, as well as providing safe areas for the more dangerous forms of
biological research which had been banned from earth’s biosphere by the various
safety boards.

Sam thought of Laputa, Swift’s fictional island in the sky, where all kinds of

seemingly useless scientific research was carried out in the name of knowledge.
Swift would have considered most of Asterome’s activities inexplicable, unless
he had radically altered his outlook. Richard had exhibited such a change in his
letters from the moon, and Sam found himself approving the change. Richard
had prepared him for Orton’s visions; but they were not Orton’s property; a large
group of people shared them. Sam wondered how he would have tolerated these
views in a colleague, rather than in a nephew and a friend.

The colonies on Mars and on the moons of Jupiter and Saturn could not have

been founded without Asterome’s support. Asterome had helped earth-moon
corporations invest in exploration and development. It had built the Bulero
Orbital Factory for the manufacture of bulerium, in addition to a half-dozen
other Bulero space going facilities. Ganymede City could not have been built in
Jupiter’s radiation zone without the shielding for the construction crews
provided by Asterome. The asteroid’s ties were strong with every human
settlement in sunspace, Sam noted; it had even helped with the first efforts at
exploration beyond sunspace. Yet Asterome managed to remain independent,
despite its ties, despite successive efforts by earth-moon multinationals to buy up
control of its stock.

Asterome’s governors had been mostly Japanese, except for a few Chinese in

the late 1990s. Their stewardship of a thriving crossroads community had
revived Asia’s self-respect and sense of legitimacy in world affairs, especially
after the Russian civil war had left the USSR as two associated republics. The
six-month war had destroyed a quarter of China’s industrial capacity; Moscow
had termed it a preventive strike, made to discourage China from taking
advantage of the civil emergency. The close call with full-scale nuclear war had
finally brought a UN Nuclear Arms Control Treaty, beginning a process that
might one day have resulted in a total ban.

Sam thought again of the initial act of daring that had resulted in the building

of Asterome, in the gathering of skills and investment for the industrial
development of the asteroid belt, in the opening of the solar system’s vast wealth
for human use. A huddling humanity had needed to grow beyond the limits set
by a century which had been learning to be a miser in a universe of plenty….

The earth eclipsed the sun on the screen. The view changed and Asterome’s

docking chutes gaped at him as the shuttle made its approach, slowly correcting
its forward drift.

“We’re almost there,” he said, floating gently against his seat belt.
The screen went blank as the craft docked; through the port at Janet’s right,

Sam caught a glimpse of a metal plain and a close, ragged horizon of slag and
rock. His stomach felt queasy as his mind produced an illusion: The shuttle had
landed nose first and “down” was directly ahead; at any moment he would fall
forward and shatter the screen.

Janet grasped his hand. The perspective disappeared as the vessel was drawn

inside, covering the port.

A voice spoke from the screen, warning passengers to be careful when they

released their seat belts.

“We’re still at zero gravity,” Sam said, “because the docks are along

Asterome’s long rotational axis. Gravity will return as we move off that axis.”

“No kidding,” Janet said as she floated over him into the aisle. She was

making an effort, he knew, to appear cheerful.

difference between centrifugal and gravitational forces.”

Orton and Margot were gliding toward the nose exit. Janet pushed after

them. Sam waited until the other passengers had drifted out, then followed; he
floated to the exit, passed through a long curving tunnel, and emerged into a
small green room, where Janet, Margot, and Orton were waiting. At once his feet
drifted down to touch the floor, and his stomach noted the change.

The walls seemed recently painted. There was a rack with a dozen spacesuits

and a small screen next to a portal leading into another long tunnel. Sam walked

over carefully and looked into the dimly lit passageway.

“The place is honeycombed with rooms like this. I guess it’s a reception

area,” Margot said.

“Is someone meeting us?” Janet asked.
Sam saw a man’s head in the passageway; shoulders became visible, then a

torso and feet. The figure was obviously coming around a curve. In a moment
the man stepped into the room.

shorts and sneakers, his black chest bare. His hair was closely cropped,
resembling a black skullcap; touches of gray were visible.

“Samuel Bulero?” he asked, squinting at him. “Orton, we meet in the flesh at

last. And Janet Bulero.”

“This is Margot Toren,” Janet said.
“How do you do. My helpers will show you to your housing. I’m very busy,

as you may guess, so you will excuse me if I leave suddenly. This is the first
time in decades that the Bulero family has asked to use its privileges on
Asterome. You are welcome.” He spoke in a rich bass voice. Sam saw the
uneasiness in Janet’s face; Margot was not looking directly at the governor.
“Where is Richard Bulero?” Alard asked.

“He’ll arrive later,” Orton replied.
“We will go the way I came,” Alard said. “This spiral will take us farther

away from the axis. You will note a gradual increase in centrifugal, or pseudo-
gravitational, pull. But let me show you a view first.” He stepped over to the
screen and turned it on.

Suddenly they were looking across the length of Asterome, as if from a high

mountain, except that green countryside, bodies of water, houses, and roads were
visible in every direction.

“I wanted to prepare you. Follow me, please.”
Alard stepped into the passage. Sam followed first, grasping the handrail as

he walked through the nautilus-like curve, which slowly turned uphill toward an
exit.

Sam stepped out into sunlight and stood next to Alard. One by one, the

others came out and were silent before the view.

In the contained space of the sky, the triple beams of the linear sun marked

the long axis of the hollow world. The light, Sam knew, was caught by the giant
sun mirror on the outside of the asteroid, more than ten miles away, entering
through a series of focusing devices and filters. The three beams, Sam saw, were
projected across the hollow to another focusing and reflecting device,
somewhere below where they stood. The air glowed between the beams; the

distant light terminal was a circle of sunlight. A giant lake circled the world’s
equator without spilling, reminding Sam of water in a whirling bucket.

“This way,” Alard said. He led them to a downhill path. “Please watch your

step. There are idiosyncrasies in centrifugal pull: it will increase to only three-
quarters earth normal, but watch your added strength, and do not jump. You may
not come down in the same place.”

A trolley-like vehicle waited for them at the end of the path. They climbed in

and took seats behind Alard. The car left its dead-end terminal slowly. “It runs
downhill on this track,” the governor said as he turned to face them, “then climbs
to the high country at the other end, where we also have docking facilities.”

Sam felt his weight increase as the car rushed down into Asterome’s

heartland. His stomach was still upset, as if he were on a ship at sea; part of it,
Sam knew, was his worry about Richard, nagging at him, making him anxious to
confront the truth, whatever it might be. Maybe he was one of those rare
individuals who could never get used to centrifugal gravity; yet he remembered
getting his sea legs, so perhaps he would get his space legs.

“We should arrive in a few minutes,” Alard said loudly over the sound of

rushing air. “Everything is ready for you.”

Sam nodded, wondering how much faster the car would go.
Alard suddenly pointed upward through the canopy. “There’s an automated

line like this one on the sky side,” he shouted, “but we also have a subway in the
service level below the land. That line fans out to reach more branch stations.”

sympathy.

The car was coming to a small town just before the central lake. Sam took a

deep breath, enjoying the smell of flowers and grass. The land was flattening
out; his legs touched the floor more firmly now, and that quieted his stomach.

The car sped into town and slowed to a crawl. Sam looked around at the

buildings, handsome widely spaced single and multistoried structures from every
period of the last century and a half, terrace after terrace climbing on each side
of the roadway in the curve of the world.

as he got out.

Sam stepped down and stood next to the governor. As the others emerged, a

man came along the sidewalk and stopped next to Alard.

“This is my assistant, Soong Weng Ling,” Alard said. “He will show you to

your quarters.” Before Sam could thank him, Alard turned and walked away
down the street.

“You will forgive the governor,” the assistant said, “but he is a busy man in

troubled times. Please follow me.”

Soong Weng Ling led them down the sidewalk of what appeared to be the

main street, which ran at right angles to the trolley line. The lake was at their
left, and for a moment the street suggested an interior latitude line, sloping
gently upward before them. It occurred to Sam that here one had to go “below”
to see the stars, that Asterome’s observatories, its maintenance and docking
facilities, were in the world’s basement.

rotating doors of the Hotel Asterome-Hilton and waited for the others to catch
up.

“Mr. Soong,” Sam started to say.
“You may call me Weng Ling.”
“Weng Ling, how extensive is the level below us?”
“One day it will equal the inner surface, but with less overhead space, of

course. We excavate as we need more space for industrial and scientific
facilities, but only a quarter of the available limit has been used.”

Sam found himself liking the young Chinese; his answer had been full of

hope, like something Richard would say.

“I count three towns,” Margot said while looking up.
Sam glanced upward. The tribeam was warm on his face, a captive sun

shining by stolen light in a garden world that seemed to exist outside human
history.

“Shall we go in?” Janet asked.
Orton and Margot stopped their sightseeing. Soong led the way through the

spinning doors into the lobby. A very ordinary-looking desk clerk gave Sam the
register.

“I will take them up myself,” Soong said after they had all punched in their

names. He led the way to the elevator.

Their suite was on the top floor of the ten-story structure and consisted of a

large solarium-living room common area and four bedrooms. A large screen
showed the earth from twenty-five thousand miles out, looking like a painting on
the wall opposite the solarium windows.

The light filtering in through the orange curtains created a warm, peaceful

glow, inviting forgetfulness, but the magnified image of earth was a direct link to
all his fears. Sam thought of the students and colleagues he had left behind.

said. “I will be back later to see if you have any needs.”

He turned and went out, closing the door carefully behind him.
Janet stared at the screen. Orton and Margot sat on the sofa. Sam approached

the screen and examined the controls. He touched the highest setting and the
earth drew nearer.

“At that magnification,” Margot said, “you can tell time by which cities are

visible.”

Sam looked closely, but clouds hid the Western Hemisphere. He imagined

thick smoke rising from New York and drifting out over the ocean.

filled the darkened hollow with a firefly glow. The evening air was dark as Sam
and Janet led the way back to the hotel. Strolling people filled the streets;
couples sat in the open cafes and small groups stood talking at the corners.

Sam looked up across the world, at the lights scattered like stars across the

green country; the overhead towns were galaxies of concentrated light; the ends
of the world were black, as if open to the void.

Suddenly a holo of the full earth appeared in the night overhead. Janet cried

out; the crowd in the street grow silent. The sunlit globe seemed terrifyingly
close under high magnification.

Silently, bright flashes appeared; dark blotches covered the daylight, marring

the blues, greens, browns, and whites of the home world. Alard’s voice spoke
over the public address system, seeming to fill the hollow with the utterance of a
quiet god.

“A massive earthquake in the Caribbean has created a running crack in the

earth’s crust, moving east and south. Radio transmissions from Washington,
Moscow, London, and Peking are filled with debate and accusations concerning
responsibility for what is happening. The remains of New York continue to be
wrapped in fire and strange electromagnetic storms….”

Sam saw the look of dismay on the faces of Janet and Margot. Orton was

tapping the pavement with his cane. The magma tap was gone, Sam knew, and a
new Bulero monster was wandering across the face of the planet, swallowing
even more lives.

The image of earth faded from the skyspace.

down in the air-filled furniture that formed a broken circle in one corner of the
paneled room.

“You know what is happening on earth?” Soong asked.

“Yes, we do,” Sam answered.
“It was relatively easy, though costly,” Soong said, “to remove what little

bulerite we had. The governor and I mean no offense to the Bulero family—“

“That’s not important,” Sam said. “The question now is what can Asterome

do to help earth?”

“You think it will be very bad,” Soong said.
“There will be those,” Blackfriar said, “who will try to gain political

advantage if the major powers weaken.”

“Can Asterome go on by itself?” Margot asked. It was the kind of question

Richard would ask, Sam realized.

Soong nodded. “We produce everything we need, but our capacity for

receiving refugees is limited. There is a limit, also, on how many people can be
evacuated from earth, if that becomes necessary. We can take everyone from the
various earth-moon zone space installations and a certain number from earth, but
the moon, Mars, and Ganymede City must look after their own. Ganymede City
should have the least problem because much of it was built of nonbulerite
materials; most of what they have is in their space vessels. Mars and the moon
will have a lot of damage, but many will survive to rebuild. Earth is a different
matter, however.”

The large screen on the far wall lit up, showing the face of Governor Alard.

“There’s a first-strike missile barrage coming up from Africa and South
America, moving toward North America and Europe. I don’t see much intercept
response yet. You’d better get over here, Soong.” The face faded, leaving the
image of earth. Soong stood and hurried out of the room.

Sam got up and approached the screen, searching earth’s cloudy face; the

signs of disaster would be small at this distance, difficult to connect with what
the mind knew was happening.

The relay angle changed to show earth half in darkness. Sparks played on the

dark side—invisible, radiant, dark again, luminous stones sinking into a dark
lake; it was impossible to tell ground hits from intercepts. Sam almost expected
the planet to shudder visibly; the earth was shaking, he knew, shocks were
flowing through the crust, and the final ruin would be greater than anything man
could muster.

He thought of the house in New Mexico, wondering if the desert sands

would begin to glow, draining the life out of the cacti as the bulerite grew more
indeterminate, catching fire from within, like some primordial substance from
which universes are made, finally dying into an eternal blackness, where even
the starlight would be trapped….

The fools didn’t know that the bulerite alone was enough.

Janet came and stood next to him. The magnification increased, framing the

entire Northern Hemisphere. Huge areas of smoke filled the daylight portion,
slowly being pulled apart into delicate strands by the winds of the upper
atmosphere; the fireflies multiplied rapidly, reminding Sam of the flickerings on
a computer panel.

“They’re not stopping,” Janet said.
“Return strikes have been made at every possible target,” Alard’s hushed,

quavering voice said over the picture.

The cities glowed in the night, refusing to fade after multiple hits. Sam

wondered if any missiles had been fired toward Asterome; they would reach the
colony long after it was all over on earth. The bulerite would continue, however,
second-best destroyer.

I’ll never see another sunrise on earth, he thought as he put his arm around

Janet. Orton and Richard had wanted something that would present humankind
with the choice of a shovel for its grave or the stars; immortality or death. Either
to wait for the sun to die and the cold of space to take us, or to go when we are
still able and aware of what we can become. Was he grasping at the words to
make this all bearable? Civilizations have died before, he reminded himself, and
new ones have grown to take their place.

Margot came and stood next to Janet. “All the people,” she said, “all the

friends I knew in school, dying. Now we’ll have to survive out here.”

“Richard,” Janet whispered, and pressed her face into Sam’s shoulder.
Sam heard a breaking sound and turned in time to see Orton drop the two

pieces of his cane, get up with a grunt, and walk out of the lounge.

As Sam looked back to the earth, he felt a rushing in his head, spreading

outward from the terror lodged in the center of his brain. His imagination
conjured up what his eyes could not see, his ears could not hear. All those who
knew him, whose relationship to him gave him his identity and career, would
soon be gone; his past was dying, and with it the planet’s history. This island in
space would certainly not survive the earth by more than a few days; a warhead
could reach the settlement in one day.

“Look—there in the Caribbean,” Margot said.
He saw a glowing red spot where the warm blood of the earth was spilling

up into the sea from the magma tap. Steam clouds were rising, marking the
crack’s progress through the crust.

Sam held Janet close and looked at Margot. She seemed in control of herself,

despite the terror in her eyes.

“He can’t be dead,” she said, “he just can’t be. Excuse me.” She turned and

left the room. Janet pulled away from Sam and went after her.

Sam watched the screen, welcoming the painful rigidity in his neck muscles.

A long time ago, it seemed, the plans had all been made, the world’s problems
identified; humanity had started remaking the future. Nothing so obvious as the
rivalries of the last century would have led to a thermonuclear exchange; the
way had been complex, hiding the result until too late. If the war continued for
another hour or two, the earth would not recover for a century; longer if the
bombs being used were of older design.

life for themselves off the earth? Suddenly he was afraid that he would never
again feel useful or needed. He was worried about Janet; she might react very
badly to the news of Richard’s death.

no one would ever know who was alive or dead in the ruins of earth.

7. The Cage of Life

of the floor, down toward the base of the three-thousand-foot pyramid. Silent
bursts of light passed between the bulerite floors, strange fish swimming through
what should have been solid matter. The entire Bulero Complex seemed
dreamlike, about to dissolve.

He hurried to the elevator, knowing that he might not reach the lobby before

the building disintegrated. As he passed a giant window, he glimpsed the vast
burning ruin of Chicago, its tiers caved in as in New York, the strange glow of
anomalous forces becoming visible in the blue twilight.

Thanks, Jack, he said silently. You killed yourself, but you haven’t got me yet.

He thought of the frenzy of the last week, feeling grateful that it had been
possible to evacuate all the employees to nonbulerite areas.

Miraculously, the elevator doors opened. A small kindness. He might never

reach the shuttle, even if he got down to the lobby and out of the complex. He
stepped inside and the doors closed, leaving him in darkness as the world fell
away and he clasped Carlos Bulero’s records to himself. They had better be
worth it. The future would have to redeem the past. It had taken him many hours
to find them among Jack’s records, misfiled where only he could have found
them easily; and there was no guarantee that they were not Jack’s carefully
edited copies of the original papers.

Richard’s weight increased as the elevator slowed to a stop. The doors

opened, revealing a floor of white light. A dark figure was coming toward the
elevator, gun in hand. A looter.

“Wait!” Mike Basil shouted as Richard stepped out and turned right quickly.

“I’ve got the car.”

Richard stopped as Basil walked up to him. “What are you doing here,

Mike? You should be at the shuttleport. Did the rest of our people get out of the
area?”

“I’m glad I found you. There’s not much time.”
“Why should you care?”
Mike noticed the cassette case. “I was Jack’s friend, as much as that was

possible.”

“Let’s get out of here before his handiwork ends our friendship,” Richard

said.

Mike smiled, then turned and led the way out through the main entrance to

the waiting car, where he got into the driver’s seat. Richard threw the cassette
case into the back seat and got in next to him.

The vehicle moved down the driveway leading out of the thousand-acre

world headquarters of Bulero Enterprises. The tree-lined road was empty.

Mike did not release the car when they reached the automated road. “It goes

out intermittently,” he said. “No use taking a chance.”

He turned right and the car gained speed.
“Do you think we’ll have enough power at the launch laser?” Richard asked.
“We should, since it’s powered by our own fusion plant. That’s bulerite-

enclosed, but there have been no signs of instability yet.”

“How about the shuttle itself?”
“Its bulerite is too young to go; it’ll last long enough.”
The Bulero Industrial Spaceport appeared in the distance. Richard saw the

launch pad, a brightly lit cut-off cone against the darkening sky. As the car drew
closer, a shuttle went up, riding a thick column of ruby red laser light; in a
moment the roar grew very loud, dying away slowly as the vehicle disappeared
overhead. The beam followed for a minute, imparting the last of its heat energy
to the fuel mixture in the ship’s reaction chamber, then winked out.

Another minute later, Richard saw the last shuttle coming into vertical

position on the pad.

A mob of people pressed in around the main gate, while guards struggled to

clear the way. The car came to a stop at the edge of the crowd.

airport, or to boost-train terminals. We have no way to evacuate you here. This
is an earth-to-orbit line only.”

“We’ll have to go around them,” Mike said.
They opened their doors and got out. Richard reached into the back seat and

grabbed the black case.

“Let’s go,” Basil said. Richard remembered that Mike was armed.
Basil started to lead the way around the crowd. The crowd was oblivious to

them, shouting at the guards. They reached the fence easily and started to push
through toward the gate.

A pair of hands shoved Richard against the fence. “Who do you think you

are?” a voiced demanded.

“Another bigshot,” a second voice answered as Richard held himself up

against the fence. A hand reached for the case.

“Where are you going, bigshot?” the first voice asked.
A roar went up from the crowd, signaling some new response from the

guards. Richard pulled the case away and held it close.

“Come on!” Mike whispered, and helped him along.
“Watch it!” a voice shouted. Richard took a deep breath of the summer air,

expecting to be shoved again.

“Mr. Basil!” one of the uniformed men said, and opened a way past the line

of guards.

Mike pushed Richard through and followed. Another cry went up from the

mob.

“There’s no way to avoid angering them,” Mike said inside the gate.
Richard stopped and looked back. The guards were retreating inside and

closing the gate.

“Come on!” Mike shouted.
“The fence may be bulerite,” Richard said, “but the ground it’s standing in

isn’t. The crowd can still press it flat.”

The mass of people was now pushing against the gate.
“Even if we took a few with us,” Mike said, “the rest would mob the facility

and prevent us from taking off. We can’t risk damage to the laser controls.”

The gate seemed to move; the floodlights flickered. Richard hesitated.

People clambered onto the gate.

“Come on!” Mike repeated.
The guards fired tear gas grenades, but a few figures reached the top and

jumped inside.

Richard turned and ran after Basil, catching up with him as the other reached

an empty port car.

They got in and Basil pulled away, heading for the launch pad. As he looked

back, Richard noticed that the guards seemed to have quieted the crowd.

“Another bunch will be back later,” Mike said.
The address system crackled, then a voice said: “Attention all personnel.

This is a nuclear alert. Repeat: This is a nuclear alert. Please go to your
shelters. Warheads will reach us within twenty minutes. This is not a drill.”

Mike pulled up to the pad as the warning was repeated. The shuttle towered

a hundred and fifty feet above them, bright and silvery in the floodlights.

“The crowd’s broken through the fence,” Mike said. He jumped out and ran

toward the lift cage. Richard stuffed the case into his shirt and followed. “Sada
will wait for us,” Mike said as the elevator door closed.

“But will the laser work if the city is struck?” Richard asked.
“We only need it for a few minutes,” Mike said.
The cage opened. Toshiro Sada, the shuttle pilot, was standing on the ramp,

motioning for them to board.

Basil pushed Richard ahead. “Thanks,” Richard heard Mike say to Sada as

they went up the ramp into the shuttle’s midsection.

Inside, most of the seats were full. Richard climbed up the floor rungs and

approached the first pair of empty seats. Mike struggled along next to him and
they strapped in, facing straight up.

He turned and looked into Mike’s face, which was close to his in the cramped
seats.

“Somebody has decided to cut himself a piece of the world,” Mike said

quietly.

“Do you think we’ll respond?”
There was a look of resignation in Mike’s blue eyes. “I don’t see how we can

avoid it. Some of the warheads are bound to get through. The best we can hope
for is a measured, target-by-target response—but if the war doesn’t finish us, the
bulerite will.”

We might have had a chance with the war alone.
Richard felt a vibration. Below him, he knew, the laser beam had come to

life, nursing the shuttle with heat energy. The shuttle started to rise slowly,
gaining speed as it fed on the awesome power of the beam, which would follow
the craft until it reached escape velocity.

Bulero Port fell away; clouds rushed by the porthole. In a minute stars

appeared on the horizon. The acceleration pinned Richard to his seat, squeezing
a few tears out of his eyes. He tried to breathe more deeply, knowing that he
would have a bruise from the case in his shirt.

The shuttle shook a little; then the acceleration cut off and the weight was

lifted from him. He saw the western curve of the earth at his right, where the sun
was being prevented from setting by the shuttle’s climb. The Pacific came into
view on the blue-violet horizon.

Two flashes appeared, false suns rising and suddenly fading.
“Los Angeles and San Francisco,” Mike said. “Chicago is probably gone

below us.”

position as it made orbit. The rungs retracted into what was now the floor,
creating an aisle.

The stars grew numerous over the dying earth. Thanks, Jack, Richard

thought. The planet might have destroyed itself without you, but you helped
eradicate my world, where I might have made my mark. Yet a part of him looked
away, telling him that he would have gone from the cage of earth as he had gone
from home, that the bulerite disaster had only delayed him. If it had not been for
Margot’s return to earth, and the lingering help that he had given Bulero

Enterprises, he would have been on the moon when all this happened. Now the
war was quickening his departure, and he felt guilty.

A new fear crept into his mind. “Do you think Asterome might become a

target?”

“Depends,” Mike said, “on who started the war, and who they think

Asterome will side with.”

“Is Asterome armed?” He thought of Margot and his family.
“I don’t know, but there would be enough time for Alard to send out a crew

to trigger or disarm the warheads some ways off. One might get through.”

He and Mike might reach Asterome just before it died.
“Sada will know if missiles are headed for Asterome,” Mike said. “They’ll

be on radar before we enter a trajectory for L-5. Let’s go sit up front.”

The Bulero passengers were watching the war as Richard and Basil drifted

out of their seats into the aisle.

“Mr. Bulero, remember me?”
Richard looked toward a redheaded man in the seat ahead.
“I fixed your intercom in the office last week.”
“Oh—yes, how are you?”
“My wife and kid didn’t get out of New York.”
“I’m sorry, Hank.”
“The way I see it is that the rest of us have to go on.” Hank stared fixedly at

Richard for a moment, looking for a confirmation; there was terror in the man’s
green eyes.

“I think so, Hank,” Richard said as he turned away and drifted forward.
When they reached the bulkhead, Richard caught a glimpse of nuclear

flashes through the port at his right; he tried not to look.

8. The World Swallower

“Janet?”
Sam came into the hotel room and sat down on the bed. She lay on her

stomach with her face in the pillow. He touched her shoulder. “Richard is safe—
we’ve had a radio message. A few Bulero shuttles will reach us within a day.”
He rubbed her shoulder. She turned over slowly and looked at him.

“People will be coming up from earth,” she said, as if to show him that she

was in control of herself. He knew that she had been waiting for bad news. “Can
the moon handle all the refugees?”

“I don’t think there will be more than we can handle,” Sam said. “It won’t be

possible for large numbers to escape. The moon has well-developed
communities. Asterome and the moon will help each other.”

“It’s horrible,” Janet said. “We’re responsible, the Buleros.”
“The war is over,” he said, realizing that he had never thought of himself as

a real Bulero, or privileged; the thought startled him, confronting him with the
degree of his alienation from Jack. “The big defense control centers are gone,”
he continued, “including a few no one knew existed until they showed their
teeth. The big cities are gone, and the surface temperature is rising. Magma is
still spilling out, but the ocean crack seems to have stopped for now.”

“How can you talk about it?”
He looked at her carefully. “I try to understand what is happening, because it

helps me to live, as it always has. It’s all I can do now.” It’s all I’ve ever done.

She reached up suddenly and pulled him down to her. He was quiet as she

held him, and all her fears seemed to drain into him. He stayed with her until she
fell asleep.

from the Bulero Complex—would arrive in a few minutes. Refugees from earth,
and from the smaller, supply-dependent near-earth stations within the radius of
geosynchronous orbit, were being given the choice of remaining on Asterome or
of going on to the moon. About a third of the arrivals were accepting Alard’s
offer, but the rest held back, still loyal to the Earth-Moon UN Authority, refusing
to believe that this disaster would not right itself in time. Of course, Asterome
would have to close its doors after a while.

Orton knew that he would become a part of Asterome; he had wanted it

before, and now it was the only place for him. “Natural planets are too big,”
Alard had told him a few hours before, “too big to run properly, given the
variables of our history. It’s always been a bad start—never a world government
that works properly, not even good local ones. If the earth’s population had
always been small, then maybe we could have worked up to a large democracy.
Sure, we’ve had some peace and a lot of creativity and production, policed by
large powers. But the smaller nation—gangs start a war at the first sign of
weakness among the police. I’ve had it, planets have too much room to hide
nasty schemes. Humanity can do better with worlds like this. We’ll reproduce,
keep a loose association, scatter across the galaxy, ensuring both survival and
human diversity.”

Alard made him grasp after dreams in a practical way. Most important, they both
saw the danger in the scattered power centers left in the solar system. After it
was clear that earth would not recover for a long time, these might begin to work
against one another, depending on their previous loyalties.

Asterome would be a valuable piece in this game. Its computer libraries,

manufacturing facilities, and skilled personnel would be decisive wherever it
went. Alard’s feeling was that the moon could take care of itself, but that Mars,
Ganymede, and the asteroids might need help. He was planning to shift
Asterome’s position to the Jovian system in order to keep a balance between the
various sunspace sectors. Maybe we’ll turn out to be bloody fools also, Orton
thought. He knew that the dream of an interstellar macrolife would have been
better served with a whole earth behind it. Now the view back from the stars
would be a bitter one; migrant humanity would know that the small yellow sun
carried a corpse through space; the inner stains would never be washed away for
those who had lived through the end.

A sense of helplessness came over him, and he felt that he understood Janet’s

withdrawal, Sam’s stunned passivity, and Margot’s quiet rage.

“Hello, Orton,” Richard said as he stepped carefully into the room.
Orton stood up. Suddenly dreams seemed to be the most urgent things he

knew. They shook hands. Richard seemed tired, but well. There was a look in his
face, Orton saw, an ethereal, longing gaze, capable of peering across the dark
light-years of an entire galaxy without flinching.

that within a reasonable set of compromises things would be the way she wanted
them, with no more subtle threats, no more tedious striving for appearances, no

more unexpected irritations.

“But can you get the Bulero outposts to listen to you?” Orton was asking

from the lounge chair at her right.

Janet looked at the orange curtains as they moved in the slight breeze

coming into the solarium from the hollow. “We’ve got to pull what’s left of the
company together,” she said. “I know all the division heads by phone, and I met
the chiefs of the centers on the moon, Mars, and Ganymede, when they first
went out to their jobs. They’ll listen to me, but the question is what to tell them.”
She looked at Sam sitting across from her in the sofa. “Should they stay where
they are, or come to Asterome with their families?”

“Alard wants to take Asterome out to Mars, then to Ganymede,” Orton said.
She thought of Richard and Margot, sleeping in the nearby bedroom. Alard

would like to go farther than that, she suspected, out of sunspace completely,
especially if things got any worse. Orton, together with Richard and Margot, was
sympathetic to the idea. They were taking a long view, but it was the short-term
possibilities that pained her most.

“What did Soong learn from his conference on the moon?” she asked.
“They’re asking that Alard send out all his shuttles to earth, to help bring out

survivors,” Orton said, “primarily friends and families of those on the moon.
Fewer large ships are making it to Luna. Alard agreed to send as many shuttles
as possible.”

“But they’ve got a whole fleet in mothballs,” Sam said.
“Those are deep-space vessels,” Orton said, “incapable of landing on a large

planet. Some will be sent, but the most they can do is stand off in earth orbit and
wait for survivors to come up.”

“Technical and skilled people,” Sam said, “may be the only ones in a

practical position to be rescued. And they are the ones most needed, if
civilization is to recover. We’ve lost most of the engineering and scientific
community, as well as those who could train a new generation.”

She felt her expression harden as she looked at Sam. “Everyone deserves a

chance,” she said.

with our best efforts here, we can only save a few hundred thousand at most.
That sounds like a lot, but it’s a handful—and time is growing short. After a
while it will not be possible to go to earth at all. The decontamination alone….”

We’re guilty, she thought as she listened to them trying to break her ties with

those who were dying. She felt her own tendency to turn cold, to protect herself;
it frightened her. Their words were a tyranny of reason and facts, as oppressive
to them as to her. She had helped sign the execution order for a world, hundreds

of times, with her name and Jack’s on Bulero work orders. There was no way to
deny that.

She sat in the hotel lounge and watched the turning discus of the old

American space station on the screen. The station turned slowly on its axis, four
hundred miles above the Pacific. Suddenly she remembered that almost a month
had passed since her conversation with Sam and Orton in the solarium.

The screen view shifted to show two old moonships hanging like toys near

the wheel. The wine-bottle shapes seemed so small, capable of carrying away
only a few lives. Orton was with Alard, she knew, planning and discussing; Sam,
Richard, and Margot went daily to the docks, to help receive the refugees. I’m
not doing anything, a voice said within her, but it was so far away that she could
ignore it.

She felt helpless as she struggled with herself. The great majority left behind

had more right to be called humanity than we do, the voice continued. There are
so few of us, yet we have all the advantage.

Her heart beat faster and a weakening fear spread through her body; her eyes

opened wide and she felt the muscles in her face tighten; she was a stranger in
her own body, trapped, looking out through frozen eyes.

drum space with a polished black floor and twelve screens running around the
ribbon of wall. The ceiling was a solid circle of white light. A giant desk console
dominated the center of the room, surrounded by a dozen chairs.

Governor Alard sat behind the desk, Soong at his right. Sam, Richard,

Margot, and Orton sat in a semicircle, facing Alard.

Sam looked around at the screens. Four showed a full quarter of earth in

close-up; two showed entire hemispheres from relays in geosynchronous orbit;
one pictured the entire day side, another the night face; and four contained views
of earth-moon space and the moon itself.

Orton coughed, creating an echo in the hard-surfaced chamber.
Alard leaned forward and said, “You can see that the earth’s atmosphere has

taken on a strange glow.”

The yellow-white effulgence had appeared suddenly less than twenty-four

hours earlier, varying in intensity, pulsating into white, then back to yellow.

If I had taken more of an interest in Jack, Sam told himself, then I might

have convinced him to look into the problem of bulerite. I might have saved his
life.

“Radio contact is now gone completely,” Alard said. “This shroud is clearly

not a result of the nuclear war. We’ve measured its balloon-like expansion.
Something has affected earth’s normal electromagnetic and gravitational fields to
generate this anomaly.”

This, too, Sam suspected, was caused by bulerite’s presence.
He heard steps behind him. Mike Basil sat down next to him.
“Mr. Basil has been doing some checking,” Alard said. “Do you have

anything to tell us?”

Mike ran a hand through his thinning brown hair and sat back.
“Look at that!” Orton said just as Basil was about to speak.
The membrane around earth was now clearly larger than the planet’s

atmosphere. Stars shone through the edge of the radiance—streaks, as if
someone had smeared them.

Alard opened the audio channels with earth, releasing the machine-metal

roar of a million gears into the room for a moment before breaking the link.

“Radio is still out,” he said.
Suddenly Sam saw a clear view of the earth on all the screens. The field had

become transparent, leaving only a silvery glow in the atmosphere. Surface
features, however, seemed distorted, enlarged, as if seen through a warped glass.

The earth was stately, silent in its prison.
A huge spark erupted across North America and disappeared into the arctic

tundra; others appeared intermittently. Within a half hour, as they watched, the
globe was crisscrossed by an awesome system of electrical arteries, glowing
brilliantly inside the optical distortion of the shroud.

“There is a measurable increase in rotation,” Alard said as he looked at his

computer display screen.

With a sinking feeling, Sam realized that this was the end of all rescue

operations on earth.

because it was from there that Asterome confronted every new development of
the crisis. Sam was there with Orton, Richard, and Margot, observing and
commenting, together with the countless officials and spokesmen who came
through the hall daily in search of solutions to myriad problems. The chamber
was screen-linked to every human outpost in sunspace, receiving a storm of
feedback. Ultimately this information passed through Asterome’s computers and
was acted on by Alard and Soong when a course of action became clear. When a
problem was ambiguous, more information was sought until a resolution was
found; and if this failed, the problem would be shelved for discussion by a larger

body of citizens. Asterome’s constitution provided for checks and balances
among judicial, legislative, and executive branches of government, except that a
high level of interest and expertise was demanded of the citizenry; every person
from the age of fifteen could enter a discussion or, through the communications
system, record an opinion into the community computers, where it would be
compared and weighed against what was known, what was desired, and what
was possible. Policymaking, Sam realized, had not escaped the hazards of
human error, ethical failure, or power-seeking; these failures were present in
subtler ways, but in a context that permitted them to be more easily exposed.

Janet came with him only occasionally, preferring to spend her time walking

around Asterome. In the evenings she would tell him about the shops, the arts,
and the landscaping skills of the people who lived in the towns of the hollow.
Sam felt that contact with their well-ordered life would help Janet, and he
encouraged her to tell him about what she had seen. He needed it as much for
himself as for her, to set against the tragedy of the last few months, knowing that
it would take a commitment to a new life, a resolve greater than any he had
made in the past, to enable him to hope again.

“I went up to the lake,” she had said one night as they lay in bed, “where the

refugees have set up a tent city. A boy was fishing in the lake. His father came by
and told him to stop, then he took a look at me and asked if I was Janet Bulero.
When I said yes, he came up to me and pushed me, saying that it was because of
people like me that he had lost everything. He thought that the Bulero family had
started the war, Sam.” She had turned and sought to hide her tears in the pillow.
“I tried to tell him that we were refugees also, but he cursed at me and walked
away.”

“You had better not go out by yourself,” he had told her. It would take some

time, he knew, to sort out who had started the war, but the bulerite disaster had
certainly contributed. Placing blame, however, was a matter of degree, involving
primary and secondary responsibility, he told himself, knowing that he was in
agreement with the man who had accosted Janet; the ugly side of the problem
was that in all likelihood the people singled out for blame were the proud
possessors of tendencies belonging to all humankind. Wonderful, Sam thought.
Next I’ll blame the victims for their own deaths.

“You think he was right, don’t you?” Janet had asked.
He had not answered. Later he had realized that he should have said

something, no matter how harsh; a free exchange was better than a crushing
silence.

Meanwhile Alard’s physicists, together with Richard, were trying to make

sense of the anomaly that was swallowing the earth. Sam imagined strange

electrical storms dancing across a grotesque night sky, ragged survivors
crouching in ruins, terrified by the shaking earth and the mad heavens.
Something had swallowed the planet as a frog swallows a fly. Earth was now in
the bowels of another universe….

And the bubble was expanding, forcing Alard to prepare for moving

Asterome into a sun orbit.

“We suspected what was happening,” Richard said, “just before I left.” He

cleared his throat and looked around at the gathering. There were about fifty
people scattered across the hall, Sam estimated. Most of the chairs were empty;
for some reason attendance always fell off toward the end of the week.

“Could you review what we know to date for us?” Alard asked.
“Bulerite obeys its own laws,” Richard said loudly. “We thought that we had

made a stable substance.” Sam was startled by the “we,” since Richard had
played no part in the development or manufacture of the family element. “We
knew that there had to be a lot of energy locked up in it to give it its strength, but
we failed to see that the stuff was a process, until it reached its limits.” As Sam
listened to the familiar explanation, he found himself caught up again in its
implications. “We now believe,” Richard continued, “that bulerite is strong
because it absorbs energy. Any kind—kinetic in the form of air molecules
striking it, earth tremors, sunlight, cosmic rays, any kind of radiation. You hit it
with your hand and it will accept the blow as a contribution to its equilibrium.
But it doesn’t always need energy. It was stable when it left our factories. In
physical terms its binding is a kind of extended quark binding—a force that
increases with distance of separation and can be made to do this over the atomic
scales. Thus bulerite is dense and arrayed in a tight lattice, unlike any other
solid. But the force can in a certain density regime extend over larger and larger
distances, so once a certain amount of energy is absorbed by the lattice, which
converts some of it into mass and achieves even higher density, the stuff starts to
grow—among other things—unevenly, creating striations in the exotic lattice,
destroying the material. It took a while for it to drift from stability and become
chaotic. Until then only minute absorptions of energy were enough to keep it
stable, apparently. If it had been an obvious energy sink, then a chunk of it
sitting in a room would have made the room cold and we would have known.”

“The time element hid the problem,” Alard said.
“Right. Bulerite absorbs energy slowly for years, then goes wild. It may then

grow to become super-dense in ways we don’t understand.”

Sam thought of Antaeus, the giant who renewed his strength whenever he

was thrown to the ground, turning the energy used against him to his advantage.

“Can’t we make it stable?” Alard asked.

explanations I’ve given, except that something like this must be true. Look at it
this way: matter is locked-up energy, solid to our way of perceiving things.
Bulerite is a way of freezing energy into an untried state of matter. Basic realities
may be involved—the realm below the Wheeler-Planck unit of length, ten to the
minus thirty-third centimeters smaller than atomic structures, where the
statistical regularities of our scale of nature may not hold. What if these effects
spill into our larger scale of things whenever a sample of bulerite loses its
stability and goes into flux?” He paused, waved his hand, and shook his head.
“We thought we’d left behind the problems of metal fatigue, structural flaws,
and materials limitations, believing we could build with a virtually permanent
material. But bulerite is an intruder. It belongs perhaps to an untried possibility
of the universe. Our natural elements range from simplicity to complex
instability, but bulerite seems to belong to a completely different periodic table,
beyond our island of stable elements. Maybe zones of chaos separate the endless
series of possible periodic tables. We bridged one such zone and brought a new
material into our realm of experience, where we saw it as being orderly
according to our mode of perception, in the way our senses slice time.
Somewhere, universes will begin differently than our own, and in one of them
bulerite will be a normal element—but not here.”

Richard was silent, as if he had cast a spell over himself.
“What about this new thing?” Alard asked. “What is it?”
“We don’t know. Forces we don’t understand have been set in motion,

distorting space-time around earth. Physical laws may be…inconsistent inside.”

“Can’t you tell us anything?” Alard asked.
“The bubble, whatever it is, may expand until it reaches the limit of

bulerite’s capacity to cast the field. If it is a field. There’s no science for this, I’m
just speculating…”

“How big can it get?”
Richard shook his head and looked up at the ceiling. “Maybe as far as the

moon…maybe the entire sunspace.” He shifted his gaze to Sam. “Maybe there’s
no limit. Maybe the fault we’ve opened in the fabric of space is permanent.”
Richard sat down stiffly, like a mannequin whose limbs were being bent to fit the
chair. Margot leaned close to him as Alard started to ask another question.

below. The dispersion of the tribeam was down to resemble moonlight. She
peered to her left and followed the curving ground upward, until she was looking

at the continuation of Main Street miles overhead in the clear night. The lack of
a horizon always startled her. Here the stars were underground, literally beneath
one’s feet, and the land closed around its store of humanity like the protective
husk of a spore. Richard would say that it was a spore, the core center of a new
world.

The hollow planetoid was slowly moving out of L-5, she had been told, into

a powered sun orbit that would put it near Mars within six months; once it was
there, a decision would be made whether to go on to Ganymede or not.

She was calm in the stillness. Sam was asleep in the bed behind her. The

plan to depart from earth-moon space had settled his mind, despite the harrowing
difficulties with the lunar communities. Asterome was already overloaded with
refugees from earth; now more people were coming up from the moon as it
became certain that the bubble would expand to touch earth’s satellite. Alard had
agreed to admit another hundred thousand, most of the lunar population—there
was nothing else to do—but with the proviso that Asterome would act as a ferry
to Mars, where all the refugees, including most of those from earth, would have
to disembark. Asterome had also agreed to evacuate the remaining lunar
population if no other means were found for them to reach Mars. These were
mostly technicians, scientists, and engineers, who were anxious to salvage
resources that might be needed by humankind later—hardware, cultural artifacts,
and the old Space Navy, which was being reconditioned rapidly.

She looked down at the closed shops across the street, remembering the

people she had watched go by during the day, especially those who had spilled in
from the tent villages. She had watched vehicles running around the ribbon of
road, the toy like trolleys that ran overhead and around the inner equator; but she
no longer went out to talk to people, afraid of their reactions. Only a little while
ago, she thought, Asterome had been a place untouched by recent events, free of
the past, a place for her to rest; she sympathized with some of the citizens, who
felt that a prolonged stay by the refugees would inevitably change the worldlet.

Maybe her roommate from college was among the tent dwellers, or the boy

who had first made love to her in high school; she could not imagine them as
grown people. Would they also reproach her for having driven them from their
homes?

Maine where she had attended grade school…

She thought of the strange bubble around the earth. A cancerous something.

A few hours ago she had watched the giant transparent cell eclipse the sun; the
earth had been a dark nucleus floating inside.

She got up from the window and turned to look at Sam. He was sleeping on

his stomach, his hair a mask looking at her in the pale light. Suddenly she
wanted to turn him over and strike his face—to tell him that she had looked
ahead to see what kind of life was waiting for them and that it would not be
worth living….

“Maybe it won’t reach that far.”

Richard shrugged from behind Alard’s desk. “As certain as practical people

need to have it.” Sam was surprised at how easily Richard was able to fill a few
of Alard’s functions.

The screen chamber was almost deserted in the early morning hours, with

only a half dozen people keeping vigil.

“Can it grow large enough to enclose all of sunspace?” Orton asked.
Richard threw up his hands, sat back, and sighed. “I don’t know. It’s growing

slowly, but steadily. It might stop. Maybe it will shrink and disappear out of our
space-time.” He reached over to the controls on his desk and turned on the
screens.

Earth was wrapped in a shimmering albumen. Bright points of light were

bursting inside with clockwork regularity.

“The increase in diameter,” Richard said, “can be measured easily from day

to day.”

“God damn,” Orton whispered next to Sam, and crumpled up an empty pack

of cigarettes. “The last Gauloises anyone will ever see again.”

“The moon will be nudged in a matter of weeks,” Richard said. “I hope the

remaining personnel leave themselves enough time to get away.”

“Don’t you think they will?” Sam asked.
“They should be able to—but remember, they’re staying behind to save what

they can. They’ll skeleton-crew every last ship after they’ve packed everything
they can aboard, and they’ll be using the mass driver catapults to launch Mars-
bound containers into unpowered orbits. We’ll be picking up stuff near Mars for
years. I hope that in their zeal they don’t forget to leave themselves enough time
or that they don’t spread themselves too thin.”

Sam thought of Janet, alone up in the room. He would have to bring her

meals to her again today. Her appetite was not good. He felt her fears inside him,
adding to his own sense of loss. He would never again see the places he had
known as a child, or visit all the places he had meant to see; no one else he knew
would visit them, either. The sunlight on Mars would be cooler; the countryside
on Ganymede would be dark and stony; only Asterome offered a semblance of

earth….

The bubble shimmered on the screens. The earth swam silently inside,

unmindful of the destruction raging on its surface, where an age of order was
ending and one of chaos beginning.

We will not come alive again, Sam thought. Those of us who survive will

become moribund, our existence marginal, unless we begin to dream, and soon
enough to do some good. He looked at Richard, wondering if there were any
effective dreamers left, or any good dreams.

of the moon. Its cities were diamonds in the rough terrain, the bright lights of an
old house on the night when the inhabitants are preparing to leave.

Slowly, steadily, Asterome’s velocity was increasing, as the hard-shelled

societal container moved along the powered orbit that would bring it into a more
distant sun orbit, for a rendezvous with Mars in six months.

He looked at the huge, glistening field of force that imprisoned the earth.

Occasionally a surface feature would become visible, greatly enlarged by the
random distortions of the shroud: a ghostly view of ocean; a field of arctic snow;
a half-glimpsed shadow of a ruined city; the red glow of a new volcano
streaming a river of red. A whole world transfigured in a crystal paperweight…

He almost hoped that the anomaly would expand without limit, swallowing

the sun and all its planets, driving mankind away from its sun-filled cradle.

Alard, Margot, and Orton shared his view, as did the interstellar group; but

this was not the time to discuss it openly. For the moment it was enough that
certain types of research were going on, and succeeding; the time would come
when more people would care, if humanity survived. It remained to find out
what kind of leadership was present on Mars, in the asteroids, and on Ganymede.
The research teams and facilities at Ganymede City were especially important to
have intact. But if cooperation became impossible, for one reason or another, he
knew that Asterome would have to make its own decisions.

Margot came into the room, and he watched her as she crossed the empty

hall toward the desk.

“I know I’m early for my shift,” she said, “but I couldn’t sleep, so you might

as well get some.”

He started to get up. “How’s Janet?”
“Not too good—and Sam’s too wrapped up with her problems to care for

anything else.”

Plato, the continuous laser beam was streaming the world’s accumulated wisdom
across space to data storage on Asterome. No human mind could ever hope to
master even a small portion of what was being received every second, Sam
thought, but it would all be there—the literature, the science and engineering, the
records of unfinished research, in all the languages of history, indexed and
accessible through any terminal. He wondered how much new work had been
lost, because it had not yet been recorded.

The last ships were readying to leave the moon. Sam was grateful that so

much rescue of knowledge and culture had been possible. The loss of the library
at Alexandria would not be repeated on a grand scale.

“The transmission is over,” Alard said.
“I wonder,” Sam said as he paced back and forth on the black floor, “how

much of it is useless knowledge.” He was alone with Alard and

Orton in the screen room. “How much of it will seem like so much dark-age

groping a thousand years from now—if we survive.”

“You’re tired,” Blackfriar said, sounding irritated.
“The index is coming through now,” Alard said.
Sam looked around at the screens. The bubble now covered the entire field

of vision, and only the most distant pickups could frame the entire anomaly. It
was difficult to shake off the mood of cynicism and doubt. Sam imagined
Asterome’s laser receptors pointing back toward the moon, listening, the
attentive ears of a child trying to hear the words of a dying parent.

gathered to watch the end of the moon.

Richard watched them fill the screen room. Throughout the worldlet, people

were gathering in homes and public places; but these were the settlement’s
leaders—biologists, electricians, agricultural specialists, builders, engineers,
academicians, area leaders, generalists, mathematicians, and troubleshooters;
they were Russians and Japanese, Africans and Indians, Americans and
Polynesians, Englishmen and Europeans—the mix of two generations born away
from earth. The community worked, Richard had come to realize, because its
people carried around in their minds a picture of their society, the same vision of
macrolife that had so affected Orton, a knowledge of who they were and what
they wished to accomplish; their world was humanity’s other basket of life and

dreams, now more important than ever. It might not have happened, he thought,
and we would be dying with the earth.

He was becoming part of this world very quickly. Alard was not merely

allowing Orton, Margot, and him to help; he was allowing them to learn how to
manage a world. Orton was already convinced that he would cast his lot with
Asterome, wherever it might go; the skills that he would contribute would be his
tie to the future, he had said, in place of his unborn children.

Alard stood behind the desk. Richard saw a different man for a moment; as

he looked at the mixture of Asian and African features, he saw a kind of
satisfaction. Alard seemed to lack the charisma of powerful leaders; perhaps the
look of satisfaction came from an unpretentious self-respect. As the switching
center for the ideas and demands of his community, Alard was the eye of the
storm, where a thousand differing demands were reconciled and prepared for
implementation; any kind of posturing beyond simple pride-in-work would
impair Alard’s unspecialized receptivity, especially his ability to grasp
relationships among blocks of information from areas in which he was not a
specialist. In his capacity for assessment, he could integrate technical-scientific
ideas with psychosocial issues—using information-processing systems, both
human and artificial—with a sureness undreamed of by the last century’s
futurists; yet he was not unique, since this kind of information handling was a
basic part of Asterome’s educational system, whether or not an individual went
into social management. Alard’s individual contribution came from the
harnessing of his imagination, in his way of demanding, and getting, things that
more specialized innovators would not ask of themselves.

A lesser man would have been flattered by the attention of such a talented

group, but Alard was unimpressed. He waited until everyone was seated, then he
sat down behind the desk. He seemed to grow smaller as he welcomed them with
a few subdued words.

Sam, Orton, and Margot came in and sat down next to Richard in the front

row. Margot looked at him, and her eyes told him that there was no improvement
in Janet’s nervous condition.

At nine o’clock the last ships left the moon. All the screens were on,

showing earth-moon sunspace. The swarm of ships looked like fireflies as they
boosted from the pocked surface, becoming almost invisible when their rockets
cut off; some were launched from catapults, with brief bursts of correcting
thrust. Only a few ships had enough power to catch up with Asterome; most
would reach Mars in unpowered orbits, sometime during the next year.

The view pulled back suddenly, revealing the rogue field, a huge man-of-war

blister growing from minute to minute; earth was lost within the milkiness,

visible only during brief fluctuations.

By ten o’clock the edge neared the moon. Luna’s shape became distorted as

the space around her began to glow; silvery streamers reached out to the satellite
and caressed it.

The moon protruded into normal space, half submerged, sinking into a

shining lake.

It was gone by a quarter past the hour.
Our moon, Richard thought in the silence, the moon of dreaming ages—

shield for lovers, puller of tides, timepiece for uncounted generations—gone to
swim in a strange sea, with a stranger earth below it.

9. The Minor System

Alone in the hotel suite, Janet watched the approach to Jupiter on the screen.

Galileo had described the gas giant as the center of a miniature solar system,
with the moons as planets, unaware that his analogy had any literal truth in it.
Jupiter was not a sun, but the giant planet was all that remained of the sun’s
unborn companion, a protostar which had failed to burst into prominence for
lack of mass.

The stillborn image persisted in her mind.
The Galilean moons were circling wolves.
The stars watched.

area three kilometers away, where six tugs squatted against the background of
ragged hills. Each vehicle was being unloaded by a stocky, waldo-armed surface
module. The cartons were placed on the open platforms of balloon-wheeled
vehicles, which ran in a steady flow to the base of the main dome in which he
stood.

The main dome of Ganymede City covered three square kilometers of the

moon’s surface. Here on the top level, the observation screens covered the
interior of the dome; they could be turned on individually or en masse to show a
panorama of sky and surrounding terrain. A direct view would have left the
observation level with too little shielding against the leakage of solar radiation
trapped by Jupiter’s magnetic field; even though Ganymede City sat in the
moon’s radiation shadow, the aboveground portion was protected, as an added
precaution, by meters of water in the outer shell, piped in from the nearby ice
field. Natives called Ganymede City “the big igloo,” because of the liquid that
was kept frozen in its insulating space. In addition to the physical shielding
against stray radiation and occasional meteors, the laser-fed fusion reactor
powered the super conducting units which cast a magnetic shield over the
domes.

Ganymede plowed through a sea of death; but despite this, ships had visited

all the Galilean satellites by 2015. Built at the Martian space docks on Phobos
and Deimos, the water—and magnetically shielded tin cans, as the ships came to
be called—had penetrated into Jupiter’s radiation belts, setting up research bases
on Callisto and Ganymede, as well as temporary facilities on a few of the close-

in rocks whipping around the edges of the gas giant’s atmosphere.

To make power for building the first underground living quarters, the tin

cans had deployed a giant sun mirror. The collector was no more than a few
molecules thick, but its huge size and focusing capacity made up for the fact that
the sun’s intensity was only about four percent of what it was in the vicinity of
earth.

While Ganymede City’s first levels were being built, a mass driver track had

been constructed beyond what was now the tug port. Using the three-kilometers-
per-second escape velocity from the Jovian moon, the track began to toss copper
ingots toward Jupiter, whose escape velocity was twenty times greater; this large
energy difference was expressed in the form of eddy currents of electricity
forming in the copper as it rushed through Jupiter’s powerful magnetic field;
these were lased back to Ganymede by a small disposable unit, continuing right
up to the moment when the ingot hit the atmosphere for a final, dramatic surge
of electricity. Current flow was evened out by storage facilities at the receiving
station on Ganymede.

As a result of this and other systems, Ganymede became one of the energy-

self-sufficient places for science, attracting research and development from
earth. The solar mirror was still working; the lofter still threw ingots into Jove’s
face; and a second fusion LFR had recently been completed.

Ironically, Sam thought, success on Ganymede had slowed the building of

facilities on Saturn’s moons, as well as delaying development of the larger
asteroids such as Ceres. A whole system of worlds waited to come alive out here,
offering conditions for industry and research, room for a civilization to grow. He
understood why the Bulero chiefs had convinced Jack to invest in such a large
facility here; they had, of course, played on his guilt about basic research, but the
purely factual merits of the case were also strong.

In any case, valuable work was continuing, despite the psychological blow

of losing earth. Janet’s visits to the various projects had cheered the scientists
and their families, even though nothing could ever cushion the fact that they
would never see home again.

Earth is not there, he told himself, at least not the earth that he had known.

He had tried to occupy himself with an interest in the history of life here, to shut
out what had happened nearer the sun. A lot of human history, he was learning,
had been made out here also.

Jupiter was a color-streaked colossus in the black sky, a sphere of solid

marble held up by the ragged mountains. As Sam watched the reverse eclipse
cast Ganymede’s moving shadow across Jove’s full face, he found it hard to
think of today as Saturday morning.

He reached down to a control terminal and turned up the magnification on

one of the higher screens. Asterome appeared, circling Jupiter within
Ganymede’s orbit, its sun mirror drawing strength from the distant sun. The
stubble of sensors and communications equipment reminded him of a strange
metallic moss. Slowly the ovoid spun on its ten-mile axis. The worldlet was a
long way from home, but for more than a third of surviving humanity it was the
only homeland left. Curious, he thought as he searched the rocky outer shell of
the space-borne community, that he could not see the nuclear engines that had
pushed it into the Martian sun orbit.

Janet; by the time Asterome matched the orbital speed of Mars, it was well
known that Buleros were aboard. Alard and Richard received all the cautious
and angry words in the screen room.

their own leadership further; refugees would be received as agreed, but no
members of the Bulero family would be permitted to land. The population—a
million or more, counting the refugees—was angry; a garbled version of the
bulerite disaster had reached Mars, resulting in riots; Bulero executives and
employees had been beaten and murdered. The arrival of new refugees had only
made the situation worse. Janet even felt unwelcome on Asterome, where angry
words were not frequent.

Alard had broadcast a speech to Mars, explaining his understanding of the

war on earth. Sam remembered Alard’s voice thundering on the screens, the holo
of his face hovering in the hollow as he argued for understanding and courage.
The speech had stopped some of the more hysterical criticism from Mars, but the
sense of doubt remained, reflected in the occasional hostile stares; not even
Alard could change the facts.

Richard had been impressed with the restraint of the UN military presence

on Mars. He had introduced Sam to Commander Alberta Mason, a gray-haired,
blue-eyed woman of immense charm who seemed deeply concerned about the
strife that might yet develop between the surviving communities of sunspace.

“We should not set a precedent for violent solutions,” she had said during

her visit to Asterome, “yet some level of force might become necessary to keep
what peace we have left.”

With Asterome’s departure for Ganymede, Janet’s spirits had risen; there, it

seemed, the atmosphere would be more neutral. Once again she looked forward
to pulling together the remains of Bulero Enterprises.

Bulero authority, as it turned out, was still recognized, at least tacitly; Greg

Michaels and many of the old employees seemed friendly. Richard and Janet had

been given a tour by the research chief and had reported that loyalty among the
small group of scientists was genuine.

General Kiichi Nakamura, a Hawaiian, was the UN authority on Ganymede.

He was governing under emergency rules, but it was not clear what his
relationship would be with authorities on Mars and Asterome. Sam thought of
him as a man with an irritating dullness of manner; he had greeted them with too
many words, making Janet anxious during the introductions.

Ganymede City’s main dome; Orton, Richard, and Margot had stayed on
Asterome, visiting regularly at first, then infrequently.

Sam and Janet had busied themselves with helping Greg Michaels, but it

soon became obvious that the research community did not need them, except for
busy work that did not have to be done on a schedule. After a few weeks, Janet
isolated herself in the apartment.

Margot, sensing that a strain was developing between Richard and his

mother, came and stayed with her as often as possible, but Janet began to feel
guilty about keeping her away from Richard and their new life; slowly Margot
realized how troubled Janet had become.

Sam felt out of place. The unpacking outside reminded him of the movers

who had brought his cartons of books when he had moved into his instructor’s
quarters at Princeton. The view was a relief from the windowless apartment he
shared with Janet.

There had been talk of setting up a college faculty for the younger people,

and he had been asked to join; almost no one wanted to abandon the community
in order to join Asterome. In time, many argued, Ganymede might be
terraformed—a heat trap of some kind could be cast around the moon, one that
would hold in an atmosphere warmed by the sun; but this was still very
speculative and full of problems.

There was comfort in watching Jupiter. After a month, Sam could picture

Ganymede’s motion around the big planet. Ganymede, cupbearer of the gods,
circled Jove once every week, always keeping one side toward the giant as his
face changed from crescent to full phase. On Monday the sun would rise and
Jupiter would be in half phase. The sun was such a small thing, less than a fifth
of its size on earth. On Tuesday the sun would move behind Jupiter, making it
glow around the edges for up to three hours. The stars would be brilliant during
the eclipse. After three and a half days, the sun would set, making Jupiter’s other
moons more prominent; at one point in its orbit between Ganymede and the
giant, Europa would grow as large as earth’s moon. He had watched Europa and
Io chase each other’s shadows across Jove’s clouds. By the weekend the planet

was in full phase, its colors becoming brightest when the sun was down. The
great red spot was a crimson wound twenty thousand miles across, yet small
when compared to the planet’s nearly ninety-thousand-mile diameter. As he
watched, Ganymede’s crisp circle of shadow crept across the face of colors six
hundred thousand miles away; a mere speck, yet it took a three-thousand-mile
diameter to make it. By Monday the sun would rise, Jove would be in half phase,
and the cycle would repeat itself as the gas giant carried its system of minor
planets around the sun every twelve years.

Jupiter’s ring was an eighteen-mile-thick band of meter-sized boulders only

thirty-six thousand miles out. More a belt than a ring, it could be glimpsed
during crescent phase, near the terminator. Callisto was larger than Luna and
Mercury; Europa was as big as Luna. In addition to the thirteen moons of
various sizes, there were countless fragments, ranging from a few feet in
diameter to miles across. Richard had mentioned the possibility of using the
larger ones to build Asterome-type habitats. Humanity would not lack for space
to grow. If Ganymede were given an atmosphere, it would disperse the sunlight
to give earthlike daylight, as far as the human eye could tell.

The Bulero Research Center was on the floor below the observation deck.

Sam would go there frequently to escape his constant sense of uselessness. There
was usually some kind of discussion going on among the scientists and
technicians about the earth anomaly, the future, about what could be done. Alard
held brainstorming sessions via screen link, which Sam was often invited to join.
He wished that Janet would reconsider going back to Asterome, but she wouldn’t
even discuss it. It was as if she were exiling herself from useful work, believing
that she had lost all right to hope; Asterome was for Richard and Margot, not for
her.

Today, before coming up to the observation floor, Sam had listened to a

discussion of Jupiter as an undersized companion to the sun, stillborn for lack of
mass, hovering between being a planet or a star, but like a star giving off more
energy than it received, in the form of heat and radio energy; Jupiter was most
like a faint M-type star, a sun just hot enough to burn hydrogen. He had tried to
interest Janet in what he had learned, hoping to distract her, but she had
screamed for him to leave the room….

Like Asterome, Ganymede City had been built just when bulerite was

coming into wide use, and what small amounts were present had been
comparatively easy to remove; it had been ferried up to an unmanned barge and
kicked into an orbit that would slowly take it out of sunspace.

Sam thought about Alard’s plans to take Asterome out of the solar system.

Could anyone stop him? Did the remaining UN authorities have any jurisdiction

over Asterome? From a practical viewpoint, the surviving localities were
answerable only to their local leaders. The pre-bulerite UN Space Navy was in
orbit around Mars; it seemed doubtful that it would be needed to enforce order;
the ships had done their job in bringing survivors out of earthspace. Their most
likely role would be as a physical link between Mars, Ganymede, the belt
outposts, and Asterome.

Sam touched the terminal and picked up earth on the electronic telescope.

The rogue field was now more than a quarter million miles across; it had slowed
its pace of expansion and seemed to be stopping. Soon the earth’s motion would
carry it to the far side of the sun, where it would be difficult to see.

The sight reminded him of a huge effulgence on a photographic plate, the

sun’s light brightening the inside into whiteness. A month ago it had been
possible to see stars through the membrane; now the anomaly suggested a
bloated creature washed up from a strange sea beyond space-time.

Sam wiped the image away and sat down in the nearest inflatable chair. He

tried to cheer himself; everything that could be done was being done. Richard
and Margot had transferred Asterome’s complete computer memory into the
computers at the Bulero Center; they had done the same during the Mars
stopover. That memory, shouted into space from the dying moon, was the
birthright of every human being, living and to be born.

Another lien on the future had been established in the form of a frozen cell

bank, distributed from Asterome’s stores to the medical facilities on Mars and
Ganymede. The banks now included animal cells, plant cells, human egg and
sperm deposits, contributed by Asterome’s population to increase the previous
holdings. All of them, except Janet, had contributed. Blackfriar had advocated
that the restrictions on human cloning should be lifted, arguing that all forms of
human reproduction possible should be made available to ensure a variety of
human types, especially after so many billions had died.

Sam thought of the past. All research into earth’s historical and natural past

would now be limited by the amount of stored information and materials; all
roads leading back would now end more abruptly than ever; the interpretive and
observational cleverness of investigators would be tested to the limit.

Richard, Alard, and Blackfriar, he knew, were looking beyond sun-space, to

the nearer stars. Asterome’s engineers wanted to add an outer urban shell, thus
making the hollow the basis of a larger structure as the population increased.
Alard was recruiting skilled people from Ganymede; it was an open thing, and
no one had objected yet.

Create a new society, Richard said, reach beyond sunspace into the greater

world of the galaxy—into the real world. It seems like running away, Sam

thought, realizing suddenly that this was perhaps the reason for Janet’s coolness
toward her son; maybe she saw his ambitions as another form of the
irresponsibility Jack had exhibited; but it might also be that she was afraid of
losing him forever.

News came from Mars in a steady flow. Venus had been abandoned. All the

remaining orbital installations had been fitted with nuclear propulsion units and
were moving toward Mars. The Martian population was expected to grow by a
third; Ganymede’s had leveled off at slightly more than fifty thousand after the
outlying bases had been closed down. An inventory of skilled persons, fusion
power capacity, and food production was being made.

The Bulero Research Center continued with its previous projects. Among

them were laser scanners, steps toward the dream of materials synthesis—the
creation of anything out of basic materials and information; bulerite was being
reevaluated, to see whether its instabilities could be avoided; work was being
done on improved deflector shields for star-ships attempting significant fractions
of light speed. Many of the engineers thought that the failure of the previous
type of energy shield was responsible for the disappearance of the first
interstellar expedition; a bulerite shield might protect a starship from
bombardment by particles at high velocity, if a stable form was possible, perhaps
together with a conventional repelling field. The anomaly might yet make it
necessary for us to get out of sunspace fast, Orton had said a few days ago.

At times Sam felt that he could almost look outward with Richard, Margot,

and Orton; but was it fair to think of leaving? Asterome would take the skilled
and useful, the youngest. The ones most needed at home would go; he could not
see how the truth of the objection might be circumvented.

It was easy to see why Alard had brought Asterome into Jupiter’s space; the

work being done here was consistent with Asterome’s long-range plans. Circling
Jupiter in a close orbit was a kilometer-long chunk of nickel-iron, where Bulero
had built a facility for the study of ultra-dense matter. A small black hole, less
than one gram in size, was being driven with an electric field, converting
electrical power into gravitational waves; such an engine could accelerate an
object the size of Asterome to any fraction of light speed, given enough power.
Sam had been surprised to learn that a similar innovation, rather than a fusion-
powered torch engine, had pushed Asterome out of the inner solar system, but
the fact had been kept quiet. Asterome was planning to attach the experimental
facility near Jupiter to one end of Asterome. Richard had given the official
Bulero permission. Alard, Richard had also told him, was massing creative
workers, encouraging them to speculate radically on such topics as the elasticity
and solidity of space, the control of inertia, in the hope of forcing a solution

which he felt would be needed very soon.

Janet, Sam thought. The very thought of her was a burden. She spoke to no

one. She ate as if rationing herself, fearful of using more than her share. He
would try to talk to her in the darkness of the bedroom; she only listened.
Occasionally she talked in her sleep. When he woke up in the morning, she
would be sitting in her chair, looking at him without expression.

“Do you want to come with me today?” he would ask.
No answer.
“They ask about you at Bulero. They’ve worked for…us all their lives, some

of them, like ascetics when things were more primitive out here. They’re trying
to help, you know. It would help them if they saw you there occasionally. It’s
why you wanted to come.”

No answer.
He knew that it was a kind of verbal pap which he said to her each day. He

would dress, kiss her on the forehead, and leave for the day, knowing that he
should stay—except that it was better to be active. He would do small jobs, run
errands, take care of children, supplement the grade school teaching machines; it
was better to have the illusion of useful work.

Richard and Margot would be visiting soon anyway; they had promised.

comfort. She thought of the huge dome above her, with its levels, elevators, and
people. She thought of the barren, rocky surface, the cold stars…and something
near the sun. It had stopped growing and was waiting for her to come up and
look at it; it was waiting for her to help it grow with her fear.

She would never go to the surface; she would never look at it; she would not

help it, even if she had to die. She would die soon, free Sam, and stop its
growing. There was a cold lump in her stomach and dryness in her throat.

Sam looked up to see Margot come out of the hospital room. She came to the

air-filled sofa in the waiting area and sat between him and Richard.

“She’s asleep now, so you’ll have to come back when she’s awake.”
“I’ll wait,” Sam said.
“She’ll recover?” Richard asked.
“Definitely. As soon as she’s better they’ll put her into sleep therapy.”
Sam was still shaken by Janet’s suicide attempt.
“Don’t blame yourself,” Margot said. “There have been a lot of breakdowns.

It would have been strange—“

“I should have stayed with her.”
“There was not much you could have done, Sam. You’re probably the

smallest part of her problem.”

“We’ll wait a while with you,” Richard said.

hand as he sat down by the bed.

“Richard and Margot are outside.”
“Now don’t worry, Sam—women have children all the time.”
His breath caught in his throat, but he tried not to show his distress. She

seemed so calm and beautiful, her face as pale as the bandages around her
wrists; her black hair was combed out on the pillow.

“You’re strong,” he managed to say, knowing that he would have to be what

she wanted him to be. He smiled, feeling grotesque and unreal.

He wanted desperately to say a few healing words that would waken her

from her delusion; but in the strange silence between them, he saw that she was
an uncomprehending child, and he should not try to explain anything to her.

Sam turned and saw the nurse motioning to him. As he stood up to see what

she wanted, Janet closed her eyes. The sedative had taken effect.

When he came out into the waiting room, Sam saw General Nakamura

standing with Margot and Richard. His gray UN coverall was stiff and perfectly
clean, as usual. Sam noticed the three stars on his cap as the general turned to
greet him.

“Mr. Bulero, you are under arrest. You are to go to your apartment. A guard

is posted at the door. He will accompany you when you wish to visit your
mistress—at appointed times.” Nakamura’s eyes were direct and stern.

“Why? Please explain.”
Nakamura’s forehead became knitted, distorting his thick eyebrows; he

smiled in a show of composure. “Frankly, Mr. Bulero, I’m shocked by your
friends and relations. If I were you, I would be ashamed of them.”

“What are you talking about?”
Nakamura shrugged. “Perhaps…it’s possible that you do not know. Let me

explain. Asterome is subject to UN law, which I administer in this part of
sunspace. Also, we are under emergency conditions—“

“It’s a power grab, Sam,” Richard said.
“Kindly be quiet,” Nakamura said. “Your friends,” he continued, “are

behaving like brigands, a pack of adventurers who wish to squander humanity’s
last resources. You understand the value of Asterome for our recovery, don’t

you?”

“Of course.”
“A few hours ago, Governor Alard altered the course of our research satellite

and attached it to Asterome—“

“The drive, Sam,” Richard said. “It works! They’ve moved the whole thing.”
“Please be quiet,” Nakamura repeated.
“You’ll never get away with it, General,” Richard said.
“In a few days,” Nakamura said, “a military vessel will arrive from Mars to

help me enforce the law. Asterome makes a big target. I’m sure that Alard will
see reason by then.”

“He wants to control Asterome in a takeover of Mars,” Margot said. “He’s

got cronies there who are setting up a coup.”

“Come with me,” Nakamura said.
He led the way past the hospital desk and into the open elevator. The lift

took them below the surface level, where they stepped out into the green corridor
of the housing complex.

Sam saw a guard by the door to his apartment.
“He is very effective,” Nakamura said. “The entire dome is under martial

law.”

The door slid open. Margot and Richard went in first, and Sam followed

after a moment. There was no point in discussing anything more with the
general.

“Are you here alone?” Sam asked when the door slid shut.
“No,” Margot said.
Suddenly the door slid open. Soong stumbled into the room and caught his

balance against Sam.

10. The Struggle

“We are hostages,” Soong said.
“Nakamura spoke of a ship from Mars,” Sam said, “coming to support him

here. You don’t suppose Commander Mason is in with him?”

“It’s possible,” Richard said.
“I don’t think so,” Margot said. “Alard was talking to her about something

this morning.”

“Nakamura doesn’t recognize Bulero property,” Richard said. “There has

always been friction between him and the research center, from the day he came
here. Greg Michaels has never gotten along with him.”

“Governor Alard has been expecting trouble,” Soong said, “but not over a

piece of Bulero property, and not this soon.”

“But won’t they question a ship’s departure on Mars?” Sam asked.
“Not if Nakamura’s bunch has already taken over,” Richard said.
“There’s not much we can do here.” Margot sat down in the middle of the

sofa.

Sam started to pace back and forth. “Why did Alard want the black hole

facility, when he already has a gravitational wave generator?”

“It’s a larger and more efficient unit,” Richard answered, “and Asterome has

a lot of electricity to feed it from its fusion reactors. I wanted Asterome to have
it. It’s none of Nakamura’s damn business.”

The door slid open and the guard entered. “Please come with me,” he said,

and waited for them all to go ahead into the hall.

When they were in the elevator, the guard stepped in and faced them. The

lift rose to ground level, where Sam walked out behind the guard and followed
the pistol-armed figure down a long, green-tiled hall to a set of double doors at
the end. The doors slid open and they entered a large rectangular
communications room.

Sam noticed the guards by the door as he went in. Three communications

technicians sat in front of the main screen ahead, which covered the ten-foot-
high wall.

Greg Michaels and Mike Basil stood in the center of the room, handcuffed to

each other. A feeling of guilt and failure passed through Sam as he looked
around the bare room.

Richard went up to Mike and touched his shoulder. Sam heard the doors

slide open and turned in time to see Nakamura come in. Ignoring his prisoners,

Nakamura went to the screen, which now showed the landing area.

On it, slightly magnified, squatted an older military spacecraft, atomic torch,

vintage 1998—three hundred feet of dark ovoid body resting on four sturdy
shocks—pre-bulerite, designed to land in any accessible place in the solar
system.

The sun was drifting toward Jupiter and would slip behind it in a few hours.

The ship cast a sharp shadow.

seemed angrier. Soong appeared patient and graceful, as always. Greg Michaels
stooped a bit to accommodate Mike. The tall, white-haired research chief
seemed resigned.

A man’s face filled the large screen, leaving the ship as a small insert in the

left-hand corner. “General, the ship that followed us here will arrive in about an
hour. She still does not answer calls.”

“It may be that their communications are out of order,” Nakamura said.

“These are all old vessels. In any case, we can handle one ship.”

“I think so, General.”
“Thank you, Captain Scorto.”
Nakamura turned from the screen as Scorto’s face faded. “I regret these

tactics,” he said, looking at Soong, “but they are in the interests of humanity. I
may have very little time, but perhaps further extremes will be unnecessary.”

Sam could feel that Richard was struggling to restrain himself.
“Mr. Soong,” Nakamura continued, “in a few moments you will address

Governor Alard, and you will suggest that he step down from office and
recognize UN authority, as represented by my government here on Ganymede.
Tell him that there will be a place for him later, after consolidation is complete.”

The vagueness of Nakamura’s words was precise. The force of their

persuasiveness lay elsewhere. He has us all, Sam thought, and he has Janet.

“Why don’t you tell him yourself?” Richard said.
Nakamura’s face went rigid. Sam noticed that the general was wearing a

pistol now.

small insert.

“Hold the sound back,” Nakamura said. He turned back to Soong. “Your

lives depend on what you say.” Nakamura raised his arm and the sound came on.

Alard blinked and seemed to be peering around the room.
Sam swallowed. The threat to Janet’s safety was a terrible anxiety spreading

outward from his knotted stomach. He had failed to help her as her condition had
grown worse; and now he could not help her at all. He clenched his fists at his

sides; his jaw muscles tightened as he struggled to hide his feelings.

“Well, General,” Alard said, “I can see for myself. Get on with it.”
Nakamura looked at Soong.
“Governor, he demands that you step down and turn control over to him,”

Soong said.

“By what authority?”
“The new government of Mars-Ganymede,” Nakamura announced, “which

speaks for all surviving humanity. The official declaration will be made soon.”

“Excuse me for a moment, General,” Alard said softly, and walked away

from the screen.

Sam’s arms trembled slightly.
Alard reappeared and looked at Nakamura. Sam had a sudden vision of his

larger-than-life figure crawling in through the window of the screen and crushing
Nakamura into a bloody pulp. His mind was looking for a way out, Sam knew,
even if it had to loosen the bonds of the real world to do the impossible.

“There is no such government,” Alard said.
“You are mistaken,” Nakamura replied. “I have declared martial law. If you

do not resign, you will be dealt with as a criminal.”

“A self-appointed dictator,” Margot whispered.
“Excuse me again, General,” Alard said politely. The screen went blank.
“UN law is all the law we have left,” Richard said, “but you are not its

representative.”

“I am not aware that I have been relieved of command.”
Richard shrugged. “A technicality.”
Sam looked at Richard. Surely he knew enough to see that he was putting

them all in further danger.

“You are criminals!” Nakamura shouted. “Adventurers who would betray

humanity. The new government speaks for reconstruction and conservation of
resources. Asterome is part of those resources and now directly under our
jurisdiction.”

“Asterome has always been a free state,” Richard said.
“You will comply.”
“General, you claim to be a reasonable man.” Richard took a step toward

him. “Exactly why do you think that Asterome will not do its share in the job of
reconstruction? We’ve been duplicating all our resources, on Mars and now
here.”

A long silence followed.
“I have gathered that Asterome plans to leave sunspace,” the general said at

last.

“We’re planning for the long-term future of human life,” Richard said.
“A very irresponsible idea, cloaked in idealism.”
“I don’t think that you are interested in honest disagreement, General, but in

personal power. There is not much more to you than that.”

“I can force Asterome to comply with emergency regulations. We can

disable and board it.”

“Where’s Alard?” Sam whispered to Margot and Soong.
“Playing for time,” Margot answered.
Unlike Richard, Sam thought, Alard was being careful of their safety.
“Governor Alard!” Nakamura shouted. “I know that you are receiving.

Kindly return the visual link.” The general unfastened the covering of his holster
and drew out a shiny black automatic.

Alard reappeared and looked around the room. His face was without

expression as he waited for Nakamura to speak.

“In a few moments,” the general said, “my warship will fire a missile at your

sun mirror, perhaps at one of your fusion plants. Where will your Asterome be
without them?”

Alard did not answer.

Nakamura turned around and Sam was looking into the black hole of the

automatic.

“He will die first, Alard. Can you afford this life?”
He’ll shoot me as a throwaway example, Sam thought, because I’m

unimportant. The gun shook slightly in Nakamura s hand; the barrel moved in a
lazy circle.

“Ship approaching fast,” one of the communications officers said.
An insert appeared in the lower-right-hand corner of the screen, showing a

telescopic view of a military vessel identical to the one in the left-hand insert.

Nakamura stepped up to Sam and raised the gun. Sam closed his eyes and

clenched his teeth as the cold barrel touched his temple for a moment. Opening
his eyes, he saw Soong leap at Nakamura from the side.

backward slowly. Blood streamed from his head as he hit the floor.

“General!” Alard shouted.
“No answer from the ship,” the com officer said.
Nakamura shifted and held the gun near Sam’s face. “It’s another one of

ours,” he said calmly.

Sam looked past the gun to Soong’s body on the floor. Then he regarded the

man who was oppressing him. What had he ever done to him? He hardly knew

him. Nakamura returned his gaze without blinking.

“General—voice link,” the communications officer said.
Sam looked at the insert; the incoming ship was larger now. A third insert

appeared in the top left corner, a woman’s face, middle-aged, with handsomely
groomed short gray hair.

“This is Commander Alberta Mason, UN Forces. General Nakamura, you

are relieved of command. Place yourself in immediate custody under military or
civilian personnel at Ganymede City.”

Nakamura surveyed the room. No one moved. Sam expected that at any

moment the general would point the gun at Richard or Margot. It’s what I would
do. The thought surprised Sam.

“Surrender,” Mason said. “The coup is over. It’s been over for a while.”
Nakamura grew rigid. He lowered the gun, but kept it pointed in Sam’s

direction. Slowly the general reached up with his left hand, took off his military
cap, and threw it to the floor. “So much for UN rank.” He ran his fingers across
his wet forehead and back through his hair.

“Surrender,” Mason said, “or I will open fire on your ship. Do you hear me

also, Captain Scorto?”

“I hear you.”
“Land your ship and prepare to be boarded,” Nakamura replied, “or I will

kill these hostages before your eyes.”

Sam was grateful that Janet was not in immediate reach.
“Scorto—open fire on Asterome and the Mars vessel when I give the

command.”

Sam felt the gun press against his temple. The floor seemed to shift slightly

as he tried to keep his eyes on the screen.

“Mason, you can’t fight a triple threat!”
“I will not bargain with you, General.”
The gun pushed Sam’s head sideways. With one eye he peered at the lower-

left insert, where Nakamura’s ship was suddenly coming apart, its center
glowing cherry red, turning white until the hull was lost in a bright flash. The
concussion shook the floor. Sam faced the screen as Nakamura moved the gun
away. Gas and debris filled the insert, clearing slowly to show a crater where the
ship had stood.

“I regret the loss of misguided lives,” Mason said. “They and the ship might

have served us better.”

“How?” Nakamura asked as he stepped back from Sam. “You’re too far

away.”

“A simple destruct sequence code. The civilian governments that gathered

the taxes to build these old ships kept that much insurance against them. Of
course, such a safeguard is only effective when not too many people know about
it.”

as an insult, since it implied that he was not important enough to have known.

“I can still kill the hostages,” Nakamura said.
Sam gazed into the man’s eyes. There was frustrated hatred behind the gun

now. Trapped animals, Sam thought. The nearness of the gun made him angry.
He looked at Richard and Margot, at Mike and Greg. If Nakamura loses interest
in me, he’ll kill them all. The gun must stay on me.

“You’re beaten,” Richard shouted. “What can you gain now?”
Sam knew. An enraged puppeteer’s hand entered his body. His arm came up

and knocked the gun out of Nakamura’s hand. The weapon coughed
unimpressively, floated toward the floor, bounced with a clatter, and lay still.
Sam seized Nakamura by the throat and tried to close his fist. A distant part of
Sam watched, startled by his disregard for his own life.

The general sputtered and punched at him. Sam pushed Nakamura and

tumbled down on top of him, feeling an anger that he had almost forgotten
existed. Nakamura pulled the hand away from his throat, but Sam punched him
in the right eye; the general howled. Sam hit him in the jaw; Nakamura’s head
went back against the floor. He lay still, staring up at Sam with one eye.

A pair of booted feet approached. “That’s enough, Mr. Bulero,” the guard

said. “We’ll take him now.” The other guard was removing the handcuffs from
Mike Basil and Greg Michaels. Sam rose and looked down at Nakamura. The
general was everything that he had wanted to strike out at since they had
abandoned earth. Sam shifted his gaze to Soong’s body nearby. He might have
saved him if he had acted earlier, if he had been stronger. Nakamura did not
expect me to act.

Margot knelt and felt Soong’s pulse, shaking her head as she looked up at

Sam. Suddenly Sam stepped closer to Nakamura and kicked him in the ribs. The
general groaned.

on the floor, as if all the mysteries of creation were somehow contained in the
weapon. He had acted because he had sensed weakness, in himself and in
Nakamura; and for once his mind was in complete accord with his deepest
feelings. The narrow aims of the general’s coup had suddenly clarified Sam’s
view of recent events. He had struck out on behalf of a future in which survival
would not be as precarious as it had been in the past. Macrolife was about to take
its first step out of the cradle of sunspace; humankind was about to gain a larger

lease on life; yet it might so easily have become impossible, for lack of men with
vision and goodwill. Nakamura’s objections were mere excuses in his bid for
power; Asterome’s presence was not absolutely essential, since its facilities were
duplicated here and on Mars; Sam realized with a chill that he and Janet might
have accepted Nakamura’s views, if he had concealed his motives.

Sam regarded Richard and Margot, knowing that he had also acted out of

love for them—children becoming adults, looking away not so much from the
physical as from the psychological ruins of sol.

He stooped and picked up the gun.
On the screen, Orton was lighting a cigar next to Alard. There was a hole in

Orton’s left eye, where the stray bullet from Nakamura’s gun had pierced the
screen.

Richard and Margot embraced, and for a moment Sam saw something of the

boy he had known long ago.

Alard scowled into the room.
The sun slid slowly behind Jupiter, leaving a stream of red light at the

planet’s edge.

Nakamura stirred. The two guards helped him to his feet.
“Hold him,” Mason said. Sam noted the strain in her face. “We’ll have to

take him back to Mars for trial with the others. Mr. Bulero—Sam, you’ll be in
charge.”

Sam made sure that the safety was on the pistol and put it in his pocket.
Nakamura stared at the floor as he was led toward the door.
“One moment,” Mason said. The guards paused and Nakamura looked back

at the screen. “We expected this kind of thing, Kiichi. Alard and I discussed it
during his Mars stopover, and we picked the places where it might happen. A
false announcement of your exposure unmasked your cohorts on Mars, forcing
them to cooperate with us to keep you in the dark. Some of them are reasonable
people—“

“You’re not better than I am,” Nakamura said contemptuously. His hands

shook as he struggled to control himself.

“General—I may still call you that until the court-martial—we are what

remains of the UN. Your betrayal of its laws was not motivated by any honest
criticism of policy. We may not be better than you, but our laws and ideals are.
You did not learn to do what you did at Luna Academy, though I remember you
had your hand up often in History 15. Take him away.” Mason’s insert winked
out, cheating Nakamura of any further reply. Sam was sure that Mason had
wanted to say more, but it would have been pointless.

The images of Alard and Orton disappeared, leaving only the view of

Ganymede’s surface, where the blast crater was still obscured by floating dust.

Nakamura looked back at Sam as the door slid open. Sam’s hand closed on

the gun in his pocket. More than threatening all the lives of those closest to him,
Sam thought as the door closed, Nakamura had threatened humanity’s high
hopes; he would have denied Orton his new dream, Richard and Margot their
future; humanity would not deserve to survive if there were too many of his kind
still around. Again Sam was surprised at how his mind came to the support of his
feelings. He wondered if this was something new within him or if he had simply
not noticed it before.

Mike Basil, Greg Michaels, Richard, and Margot came and stood around

him.

Margot kissed him on the cheek.

“You’re shaking,” she said. “Are you okay?”
Sam nodded.
One of the com technicians was covering Soong’s body with a piece of

plastic. Janet might have died, Sam thought.

The radio noise from Jupiter crackled on the screen’s open channel.

11. Shares of Glory

ceiling were clear, ordinary objects, a relief after the dreams.

She remembered a lost dream self, cowering from something in the sky….
Turning her head, she saw Sam, Richard and Margot, and Orton.
“It’s okay,” Sam said. “You’ll be up soon.”
You’re so kind, she thought, remembering why she was here. It might not be

okay for long. She tried to smile, but she was tired again, and sleep began to
press her into a calm oblivion.

“She needs weeks of rest,” Margot said. “I’ll stay with her.’
She’s my friend, Janet thought.

—Sam, Richard and Margot, Janet, Orton, Alard, Commander Mason, Greg
Michaels, and Mike Basil. All the dome screens were on, creating the illusion of
an open night sky.

Sam looked at Janet next to him; a new independence had taken hold of her,

making her mysterious and desirable. He would still wake up from dreaming that
for some inexplicable reason she had died, only to find her warmly next to him,
surprising him with her presence; he had fallen in love again.

All their faces were half in starlight, half in the amber glow of Jupiter’s full

phase. As they spoke, they would look up at the giant hanging above the distant
mountains. Callisto was a silvery disk; Europa and Io were oranges about to
chase each other across Jove’s streaked face.

Sam was beginning to feel at home. On the map, Ganymede City was a

cluster of domes and underground warrens in the northeast, only a few hundred
kilometers from the moon’s north pole. To the south lay lava plains and
mountains, glaciers and deep valleys which held occasional mists.

“After you take Asterome out,” Mason was saying, “certainly in this century,

after we’ve begun our economic recovery, we’ll probably send out smaller ships
in various directions from the sun. Phobos and Deimos might make the
beginnings of additional macroworlds. I’m sure that the asteroid dwellers will
develop in this direction. We’ll need all the insurance we can afford. Maybe the
anomaly around earth won’t grow any larger; maybe it will fade and we can go
back for a look.”

want to work into something people can live on. Mars and Venus can be
terraformed….

Orton grunted at his right. He had been out of cigars and cigarettes for weeks

and had been unable to locate even a small cache.

Mason got up from her chair next to Orton and stretched. “Back home on

Mars they’re saying the universe is a queer place and we should not overstep
ourselves. Our survivors are the most educated and skilled human beings of all
time, and still they’re superstitious.”

“The war—” Alard started to say.
“There’s risk in everything,” Richard said. “What may result from our

holocaust may yet be good.”

“That good and bad will happen is inevitable,” Janet said. Sam noted a

coldness in her voice, as if she were speaking to a stranger.

“Inevitable,” Sam said. “It is a strange universe.”
“Sam, Janet—last call,” Alard said.
“No,” Janet answered before Sam could reply. “Our place is here, where we

failed, where we have to pick up the pieces.”

We don’t deserve to go, Sam thought.
Alard tried to make the best of it. “Ganymede has a new governor, and he’s

getting the feel of useful work again—right, Sam?”

Sam nodded. Janet would never show Richard and Margot how much she

would miss them. They would have a new start. She was letting go as she had let
go of Jack; perhaps now she would have a chance to be herself; that would be
the Janet, Sam knew, who could love him. Sunspace had to let go of its child
now; macrolife had to be born as an act of wild faith or not at all. Richard and
Margot had to leave before they became overimpressed with humankind’s
capacity for cruelty and failure; they would have enough failures of their own.

“When is departure?” Sam asked.
“When we’ve finished testing the gravitic pusher units,” Richard answered.

“They still produce pretty weak gravitic shortwaves for the power we put in. We
have to be sure of one g acceleration for indefinite periods.”

Orton was going, of course. If anyone were to try and stop him now, he

would tear Ganymede City down piece by prefabricated piece. Sam wondered
what kind of societies would develop when Asterome grew and reproduced.

“We’ll miss you,” Margot said, looking at Janet.
Janet would go back into organizing what was left of Bulero Enterprises on

Mars and Ganymede, assembling all the records, plans of projects, and memories
into two central facilities. Sam knew that he would have to teach as well as

govern; he had a lot to learn. Suddenly he realized that he might well be the last
living professional philosopher anywhere; the implacable unknown had given
him another chance, after all.

He looked up and saw Europa’s and Io’s shadows moving across Jupiter’s

clouds….

with him under the stars. Jupiter hid the sun. Sam waited, thinking of those last
moments here, more than two years ago….

There had been embraces and handshaking, clumsy words and averted eyes;

the effort to get through to the other person had been desperate. Margot and
Janet went off to be alone; Orton and he forgave each other’s sins a dozen times.
The final conversation with Richard had been impersonal—about the
undesirability of deciding the future in advance; it had ended with Richard
pleading with him to come along, almost ordering him to convince Janet.
“There’s got to be an end to Bulero guilt,” Richard had said. But not yet. Sam
remembered Margot’s passionate kiss, so freely given.

The empty chairs sat with him one day, and all those people he had known

were somehow contained in the bright star that was rushing toward Jupiter in
half phase, to steal some of its gravitational energy for the outward push to the
stars.

Somewhere out there, Asterome was moving at a considerable fraction of

light speed. He imagined its shield of force, a birthing shroud repelling gas and
dust from the newborn creature coming out of the trillion-mile whirlpool of
sunspace.

Biological time was slowing for Richard, Margot, and Orton, while he and

Janet grew older. Recent communications were becoming unreliable.

He thought of Kiichi Nakamura. The Hawaiian had recently committed

suicide in the Martian prison. Janet had urged Sam to visit the general before he
was removed to Mars.

“What do you want from me?” the general had asked from the corner of his

cell.

“Janet suggested that I see you.”
“Oh—she feels sorry for me.” He tried to smooth back his black hair.
“You need a barber.”
Sam had stood in the center of the cell until the general spoke again. “I

suppose, Mr. Bulero—“

“Sam, please.”

“I suppose that I am to explain myself.”
“If you want to.” What had shaken Sam was the way the man had suddenly

looked up at him.

“You think me a villain and a fool?”
“I think I do,” Sam said, feeling guilty.
“You think yourself a perceptive man.”
“What was I to see? Tell me.”
“I saw Asterome as a source of recovery, while Alard—“
“But Asterome is helping.”
“It remains independent when we need everything.”
“I see your point, but I think we’ll manage. Centralization is a debatable

virtue. Asterome is not the only source of recovery left, and there are greater
things to consider—but that’s not it. Your methods set lawless precedents for
later strife—your means pollute what may be reasonable ends. Our future is dirty
enough from what we have to carry around inside. Asterome will have its chance
and we’ll have ours, for what it’s worth.”

“I believed the situation called for desperate measures.”
“What can I say? You may have been well meaning—but you were wrong. A

lot of history was against you. Asterome left us what it had to give. You fail to
see that it had to leave, to begin the proliferation of macrolife. That’s the long-
range goal for which it was built.”

“What? What are you talking about?”
Sam had tried to explain, but Nakamura had shaken his head in

disagreement. “All you Buleros are a pack of dreamers! Your bulerium destroyed
the world, my family, and whatever career I might have had.” Then he had
looked down at the floor, refusing to speak further.

“You might have contributed your talents, but you’re still thinking in terms

of personal glory.”

But you might be right about other things, Sam said to himself, remembering

the desolation of the broken man in the cell. Only future time will justify
Asterome’s leaving, but not for us. For us there is the consolation that humanity
no longer has its eggs in one basket. If we are to die, it will be from internal
failures, from the ungovernable dark places of the mind—the scaffolding left
over from evolution’s bloody building program—not from a lack of vision.
Apocalypse is the eye of a needle, through which we pass into a different world.
Whitehead had once said that it was the business of the future to be dangerous,
that the major advances in civilization were processes that all but wrecked the
societies in which they occurred. It was as close as he would ever come to a
statement of faith. It begged the question, of course, saying no more than that

there are things which cannot be decided in advance.

He smiled, knowing that he would not have let a student get away with such

talk, yet it had involved a man’s life and the future of a whole branch of
humanity. Deliberate, deductive reason was such a conservative, clockwork
thing, best used on known quantities, not on creative acts, which are always a
mix of known and unknown. It was almost as if the universe had been designed
to be knowable but not exhaustible…an involving creation, one that would not
be boring or statically perfect for its inhabitants, but always presenting new
things and people. The best of all possible worlds, or a shell game? He resented
the lurking, layered, Troy-like nature of the human mind, where old impulses
lingered in the shadow of reason, going about their subterranean business in a
billion-year-old maze. I could have easily killed Nakamura….

A river of light carried the sun out from behind Jove’s face, beginning the

week. High in its orbit, the solar mirror brightened into life and Sam thought of
Soong.

on earth, but Sam sensed the coming of spring here also, despite Jupiter and the
dark mountains. Ganymede only appeared to be sleeping under its glaciers, with
humanity hibernating in its dark crannies; the spring here was one of waiting to
live again, while listening for the stars to speak with the voices of humankind’s
children.

Suddenly Sam realized that even if earth were to be miraculously returned to

them, people now living on Mars or Ganymede could not go back; they would
be unused to the higher gravity. Only Asterome had people living in three-
quarters earth normal. By the time earth became habitable again—and that might
be never—there would be no humans in sunspace who could live on the home
planet without mechanical aids. A struggling colony would have to readapt to
earth by giving birth to a new generation, for which earth gravity would again be
the norm. The great human summer of time to come, he realized, would be lived
out of the cradle, in free space, around the sun in space habitats, and out among
the stars.

Janet and he had given their germ plasm to a host mother, and the three of

them would have a child by Christmas. Sam often wondered in what ways their
banked genetic materials would be used on Asterome. Alard had joked about
cloning them all someday, but in the time since Asterome’s departure, the idea
had acquired some reality for Janet and himself; perhaps there would be a braver
Samuel Bulero or a happier Janet. He imagined the eyes that would someday

look at a starry sky somewhere far away, and perhaps recognize the sun, and
wonder about the earth from which they had come. He thought about the fragile,
spontaneous nature of beginnings, the agonizing uncertainties of things new and
complex; a crisis point approaches and the new entity must crystallize, become
whole and stable, or the light will flicker and die within it, and it will be passed
by in time, perhaps to reappear later, or never again. Somewhere in a clear
midnight, human consciousness had been born in this way, out of physical
complexities, wending its way upward past the watchdogs of instinct into self-
recognition. And if the new thing survives its beginnings, it thrives; the
uncertainty of its contingent, miraculous start is obliterated; the past becomes a
black hole of mysteries….

Last week a faint message had announced that Asterome’s engineers were

ready to test the new drive. If successful, the large-scale quantum effect would
permit the bridging of space-time on the parsec level; a side benefit might be the
development of an instantaneous communications system; but the experiment
had to be tried at a substantial fraction of light speed. It had already failed or
succeeded by the time the message had arrived. With such a drive, Asterome
might return in the near future.

landscape of his new life, he hoped that here in the ruins of the solar system
unreason would now sleep for a time, giving wounds time to heal and love a
chance to grow.

matter how far his mind reached or how long his body endured, he would die
and others would be born to move through the shadow play of phenomena
around him; those who had left sunspace would also die, and others would take
their place, until such time when humankind became more than human. He saw
all those living on Mars and Ganymede, all those close to him, as ghostly stuff
that would fade into nothingness. It outraged him to think it; life was longer than
it had been, but nowhere long enough.

I’ll die here.
“Sam, how long have you been here today? You let your class out early,

didn’t you?”

He turned and saw her dark shape near the elevator pylon. She came forward

and he saw a pencil behind her ear; her hair was tied up on top of her head and
the look on her face was there for him. For me, finally.

She handed him a piece of paper.
“From Alard.”
He read the words in the starlight:

was calm, and he knew that she was ready to have no further word in her
lifetime. They might not be seen or heard from again, and that possibility was
closest to death; the darkness between the stars had swallowed them.

Alard and Richard had not been content with the sublight gravitic pushers,

which could have taken Asterome to any of the hundred stars within thirty light-
years of the sun in reasonable earth and ship times; instead, the macroworld had
elected to take the next step in mobility as soon as possible.

Sam pictured Alard’s engineers working to harness the wave effects of dense

masses, feeding them with vast electrical forces, as the macroworld’s
acceleration shortened light waves fore and lengthened those arriving aft,
darkening the universe to human eyes, except for a narrow band of yellow stars
circling at right angles to the course. What other distortions of space-time were
being created by the contained quantities of unstable bulerite as the universe
prepared to black out?

It had already happened. More than one light-year out from the sun, the

drive had been cut in—perhaps throwing the macroform into far spaces, from
where it could never return. He tried not to dwell on the possibility of complete
disaster.

“They’re brave,” Janet said, “to risk everything.”
She’s let go.
He turned and looked out beyond the superconducting power station, where

the catapult had just lofted another ingot toward Jupiter, an offering to a god in
exchange for energy.

Janet came and embraced him. He kissed her and she held on to him.

Farewell, he thought, realizing that the share of glory given him would have to
be enough.

solarium; there he turned on the screen for a view of the distant, reddening sun.
As he looked at the fading star, he knew that he had what he wanted—something

other than the past to give himself to completely—and that he would have to live
with the choice, make it work, because it had come to him at great cost, paid for
by all humanity; he would not have the right to be unhappy. This fact, as true and
deserving to be heard as it was, dragged him down, reminding him again of the
past’s ever-present ability to spill into the present and spoil the future.

Planetary history is one long dark age, he thought, an evolving

slaughterhouse. He wondered what kind of civilization, if any, would now
develop in the home sunspace.

He reached out and changed the view, mentally turning his back on the

dwindling darkening sun, and looked outward across the cave of stars.

After a moment, he turned from the diamond-strewn abyss and walked over

to the hotel window. He pulled back the curtains and saw that daylight was
young in the hollow outside. The town was going about its business as the
tribeams slowly grew brighter, fed now by internal sources, not by the sun. He
slid open a window and leaned out to look to his distant right, where the trolley
was climbing out of the central regions, toward the mountainous ends of the
world.

II. MACROLIFE: 3000

colony.

—DANDRIDGE COLE, 1961

Macrolife, as we know it, was made possible by the development of fusion

power systems, gravitic technology, and the perfection of bulerite and derivative
materials. The understanding of bulerite’s instabilities, especially its tendency to
distort space-time at subatomic quantum levels, led to the development of
reasonably fast star drives which did not violate the structure of physical theory.
Research into the properties of ultra-dense matter was carried out on Asterome
as it left the solar system in late 2023, and in 2024. The resulting theory linked
the gravitational force with the strong nuclear force, expressing the binding
force inside the nucleus as being super gravitational; the experimental result
was a star drive which could be cut in at near optic speeds. The discovery was
eventually transmitted back to sunspace….

At Centauri in 2050, Asterome became the core foundation of the first large

macrolife societal container. A second world was begun at Procyon in 2075,
from materials contributed by the Asterome biosphere, and from materials mined
in the Procyon system.

Design description. These first two macroworlds grew to be three-hundred-

kilometer-long ovoid shapes, with one hundred and fifty urban shells enclosing
the original asteroid hollow. The meadows and towns of the inner countryside
remained relatively unchanged during the thousand years of shell building. To
reach the urban levels from the core was a matter of traveling down, since one’s
head always pointed toward the center; this arrangement dated back to the time
when the asteroid required a spin to produce pseudo-gravitation through
centrifugal force on the inner surface. Asterome, with two hundred shells,
measured three hundred kilometers from end to end, and one hundred fifty
kilometers across the middle. Gravitic elevators went up and down across the
short diameters, and tubeways made the six-hundred-kilometer circuit on every
tenth level. The outer level, just under the vacuum insulation layer and deflection
shield blanket, was a network of engineering facilities—laboratories,
observation stations, heat control and dissipation centers, small-craft docks, raw
material ingestion locks, and emergency backup installations. The total land
area of the one hundred fifty levels was almost 100,000,000 square miles, or
twice the usable land area of earth. This area could be doubled by building one
additional level between each two existing levels, which would still leave half a
kilometer, or one-third of a mile, between levels—more than enough to produce
the illusion of open sky, where desired. The macroworld could reproduce in a
number of ways: by moving out of its outermost shell and building up the empty
interior; by adding levels between levels to the practical limit; by adding outer
shells.

Mars-Ganymede may have released as many as a dozen macroworlds into the
galaxy. However, the nostalgic desire to find earthlike planets, rather than take
up macrolife, persisted. It is believed that as many as fifty smaller starships were
used to colonize sunspaces within a hundred light-years of earth.

Many of these colony ships were equipped with defective drives and faulty

shielding systems. Historical-cultural evidence suggests that ships may have
been thrown to any point in the galaxy within a thousand-light-year radius of
earth….

The division of humanity into macroworlders and planet-dwellers stems from

this period, and is the precondition for understanding the conflicts that followed
—conflicts within the macroworlds themselves, as well as conflicts between

macrolife and natural worlds….

—RICHARD BULERO ET AL.,

The History of Macrolife, 10th ed.,

Revised and Updated, vol. 9, Sol, 3025

I recommend that we do not interfere with colony planets. We can’t trust

ourselves. Consider examples from earth history. The West trained, armed and
supported dictatorships in Asia, Africa and South America. It would be difficult
not to support authoritarian elements, out of self-interest, and because backward
planets have few genuinely inner-directed individuals who have their own
people’s interests at heart. A society must be left to grow out of its ways; it
cannot be directed from outside, lest these means toward a well-meant end
damage the potential for self-determination. Violent revolutions always destroy
their own ends. Take the example of India’s partition. Even with a nonviolent,
well-meaning leader, conflict could not be controlled; it had to run its course….

The old idea of humankind settling earthlike planets in an endless expansion

is absurd; if an earthlike world does not already have its own intelligent life,
then it will very likely develop such life in the future. We would be committing a
form of genocide by interfering with the nursery world’s course of development.
Even if we were to find earthlike worlds likely to remain free of intelligent life,
we are still faced with the usual objections to life on natural worlds….

Looking through history, we can easily see the dangers of power. Clearly, a

good society must have recourse against itself, in the planned struggle between
its institutions and public sectors, as well as through the civil action of one
individual against another. A good society enlists the divided nature of man to
sustain itself, producing for itself and its individual citizens a variety of avenues
of appeal….

If Vico was right and the social world is certainly the work of men, then

macrolife is a journey into the possible, a move that will create an endless series
of differing social containers for the human imagination to inhabit….

I may be wrong, but the successful forms of macrolife will retain the capacity

for self-criticism, an area of independence for the individual…. They will
succeed to the degree that consensus or forced participation is avoided, to the
degree that the society retains its ability to leave people alone….

—RICHARD BULERO,

Notebooks

Theories of progress have been many. There was the simplistic idea of

unlimited progress; cyclical theories saying that there is nothing new under the
sun. Yet it can be shown that progress does occur; but when a thing is
accomplished, we are no longer as impressed by it as when it was lacking.
Progress eliminates yesterday’s problems, and creates today’s and tomorrow’s.
We can be optimists as we look into the future out of what will become a
historical ruin; but to the future new problems will be important. This has
always been the case; the fact that old problems have been solved, especially
social problems, is little cause for joy to a present whose expectations have
risen. Utopias, then, are what we see looking into future possibility, possibilities
which would be unlikely unless progress had already occurred. Progress occurs,
make no mistake about it—utopias are real places (any person coming out of a
prior condition would attest to that, at least for a while); but the solution of even
the gravest problems cannot close the future to newer problems. I would not
want it any other way; the relativity of progress is the source of our continuing
discontent, and the necessary precondition for continuing satisfaction.

—RICHARD BULERO,

“The Relativity of Progress,” speech before the

First Session of the Projex Council, 2041

…modern man suffers from unfulfilling religious, educational, familial and

work institutions. Humane institutions make people human; that is why Socrates
called the laws of Athens his “parents.” Enveloping, shaping, restraining
institutions free people from enslavement to anarchic passions.

—GEORGE F. WILL,

Newsweek, October 31, 1977

The common idea that success spoils people by making them vain, egotistic,

and self-complacent is erroneous; on the contrary it makes them, for the most
part, humble, tolerant, and kind. Failure makes people bitter and cruel.

—W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM

The State is for Individuals, the law is for freedoms, the world is for

experiment, experience, and change: these are the fundamental beliefs upon
which a modern Utopia must go.

…it is certainly the fate of all Utopias to be more or less misread.

—H. G. WELLS,

A Modern Utopia, 1905

12. Transhumanity

John Bulero had waited all his life to see a natural world.
He had seen sunspaces during the gathering of raw materials, but none of

them had contained an earthlike planet. He remembered the gas giants, the
airless worlds of nickel, iron, and rock, naked before the tides of cosmic dust and
sunstorms, worlds of ice, desert worlds, planets shattered into asteroid belts
around their suns. A world with an outside surface was dangerous, even with an
aura of atmosphere for protection; yet the inescapable fact was that humanity
had originated on such a world.

The approach to the system had stirred something within him, quickening his

anticipation into an eagerness he had never before known. The stars of Praesepe,
the open cluster in Cancer, had nickered longer than usual as the macroworld had
come out of jumpspace. He had never fully accepted the idea of his entire world
phasing itself in and out of the wave structure of familiar space-time, appearing
and disappearing like a ghostly needle stitching through the folds of a fabric;
tachyon transfer sometimes produced a sense of unreality, it had been claimed,
but the data were too fleeting to prove much.

Emerging from the complex spatial variability of superspace, the biosphere

had become continuous at ninety-five percent of light speed, one light-year into
the cluster, with velocity dropping to five percent of light within three months.
The protective deflector shield had been turned off after the orbit of the system’s
tenth planet was crossed; deceleration was continuing until the world entered
orbit in the equatorial plane of the double star, to match the position of the fifth
planet at a distance of one million kilometers on its sunward side.

The doors slid open and he stepped into the drum of the vertical shuttle. He

touched the control surface and thought of Margaret as the lift rushed toward the
world’s center. I’ve put off breaking with her too long, he told himself. It’s time
to move on.

The doors opened, releasing him on the level below the old hollow. He went

down the long passage toward the lockers, thinking how unbearable his
exemplar had become. I can’t stand her looking into me any more.

He walked into the equipment room and took his wings down from the wall

rack. He put them on over his bare shoulders, fastening the straps. Then he
stepped onto the lift surface in the center of the room.

As he was carried upward, he wondered how many people his female

exemplar had taught during her eighty years and if any of the males had been

like him. A portion of the ceiling slid back and he felt gravity decrease as the
platform delivered him outside.

He opened his wings in a green world, a memento of human origins, a jewel

set inside the urban shells; here nature was an ally, no longer an enemy or a
victim.

With a few strong strokes, he rose from the platform, beginning his climb

into the vast open space. It was an easy ascent in the minimal gravity. Taking a
deep breath, he pulled toward the central region, where the gravity was zero.
There white clouds were allowed to gather, and only an occasional wind was
permitted to disperse them when they grew too thick.

As he gained altitude, his gaze swept across the tall trees below, taking in the

black ribbon of road winding its way between them to the village on the shore of
Central Lake, five kilometers away. The lake trickled small streams around the
inward curve of the core, feeding the land with moisture recycled for a thousand
years.

moved across it, passing to his left high above him. He waved but they did not
notice.

He stopped moving his wings and his momentum carried him into the zero-g

region. He turned once to look at the whole expanse of the interior. Then he
looked eight kilometers forward along the axis of the hollow to the light plate.

The giant disk stood in the narrow forwards, lighting the land with soft

daylight. John waited motionlessly for what he had come to see, forgetting his
resentment toward Margaret. Slowly the kilometer-wide sun plate grew dark, and
stars appeared in its field of view. The yellow-white double star appeared, a
main-sequence contact binary flooding the core with light. He looked at the
strangeness around him. The greenery seemed to grow fresher; the air took on a
bluer glow; the lake became a pool of fire, the streams arteries of something
living, the trees a thick moss spotted with yellow.

He thought of his ancestral twin, Samuel Bulero, from whose banked cells

he had been cloned. When Samuel had walked inside this world a thousand years
ago, there had been no urban shells, only the hollow rock; there had been no
gravitic control, only the crude spin. Asterome had been dependent on the solar
system for its resources, unable to seek on its own. Material synthesis and
duplication had been a far-off dream. Macrolife had been a child, still unable to
walk.

Why had Samuel Bulero chosen to stay behind? How could he have made

such a decision in the face of so much possibility, especially when there had been
no earth to return to? The questions made him even more impatient to see a
livable planet. There were probably thousands of civilizations in the galaxy,
thriving on worlds of air, dirt, water, and growing things, worlds with all their
insides out under the stars, open to all the radiation of their parent suns, helpless
before the shiftings of the planetary crusts, unable to control winds and storms;
on those worlds intelligent life died by the thousands every day and would
disappear when its star died.

But he wanted to test for himself what he had been taught—that macrolife

was the safest and most durable way of life. Seven other worlds had been
modeled after this one, seven children scattered into the galaxy to grow and
differ and make others after their own kind. Each could support whatever society
it chose to contain within the permanent, self-reproducing framework; each
world was immortal, a hyperpersonal organism in which each individuality
flowered to enrich the whole.

He floated quietly as he looked at the double star, wondering if he dared go

see for himself. Margaret would probably oppose him: Rob Wheeler, his male
exemplar, would probably think it was a good idea. He would have to take his
chance now, while the planet was being searched for signs of a colony ship
which had been lost in the cluster centuries ago; otherwise he would have to wait
decades for another earthlike world. Between the search for the colony and the
floating up of raw materials from the planet, he would have more than enough
time to explore.

Moving a wing, he turned himself to feel the warmth of the new suns on his

face. If he were living on the planet, a slight change in the radiation of these suns
would alter the genes of his descendants, for better or worse. Life warred with
itself on natural worlds, and the direction of evolution’s war was always an
adaptation to the status quo, whatever that might be at the moment.

He wondered if he would find something to do with his life. Was it true that

some people took most of a century to decide? What if he never found anything?
What could he ever achieve that would make him a fit exemplar? What would he
be able to say to someone like himself? It wasn’t so much the pressure of
Margaret’s prodding, but the lack of something specific; sometimes he wished
that his exemplars would simply tell him what to do, instead of making endless
suggestions and offering countless alternatives. Wheeler would always tell him
to be patient and attentive, that in time he would discover what he wanted.
Macrolife had been bought with the dedication of all those who had left the solar
system. Its resources were his birthright, to be used in creative ventures. What’s
wrong with me? he asked himself. “No one will tell you what to do,” Wheeler

had told him. “You’ll have to figure things out for yourself, mistakes and all.
That’s the difference between science and faith, dogma and freedom.” Freedom
was an open nothingness before him, oppressive and terrifying.

himself, living in a larger mystery. I’m a mistake, he thought. What was it in
Samuel Bulero that they want to see in me?

who seemed to have better control over their feelings, whose brain chemistry
had been designed for better concentration; he wished that he could read body
language as well as Margaret could. He thought of the link, and it seemed that he
would never be ready for it. I don’t belong here; everyone is different from me.

cut down by filters, but he could see that the stars shared atmospheres. They
were joined by a river of plasma which flowed back and forth in magnetic
channels, a fiery umbilical stretched across a distance of less than one diameter.

John wondered about Lea, the fifth planet. What would he have been if he

had grown up there? Then with two powerful strokes of his wings, he pushed
himself out of weightlessness. In a moment he was gliding forward across the
world, the wind singing in his ears as he plunged closer to the huge sunscreen,
drawn by the awesome splendor of the double star.

13. Exemplar

The door slid open and John Bulero stepped into the brightly lit workroom

of his exemplar. Rob Wheeler was not in the large circular chamber, but the
workscreen on the center desk was on, displaying a dozen mathematical
functions. John went past the various Humanity II terminals to the door of the
observatory. The door opened and he stepped into darkness.

His eyes adjusted as the door closed behind him, and he saw Rob leaning

over a horizontal screen in the center of the room. Only two of the twenty-five
screens ringing the observatory were on, showing magnified starfields; the
projection space overhead was dark.

Wheeler turned a pale, white-haired profile to John and motioned for him to

come closer.

Silently they looked down at the planet on the map screen: a full disk veiled

in swirling white clouds, dark blue oceans, brown wrinkles of mountainous land,
stretches of desert and greenery, and polar caps, dazzlingly white in the sunlight.

“I haven’t seen a truly beautiful planet for over a century,” Rob said. “The

last was when I was two hundred and three.”

“Beautiful and dangerous,” John said, remembering what he had been

taught, “filled with disease and unpredictable processes.” He remembered when
at the age often he had played in the forest near the lake in the hollow,
pretending that he was lost on some far planet half a galaxy away. As he looked
down now at the black grid covering the view of Lea, he thought of the glass
windows he had seen in the images of old books.

Suddenly the planet was gone, and a column of light was streaming up into

the dark observatory from the filtered brightness of the two suns.

“Do you know anything about this planet’s history?” Wheeler asked.
“Only the name.”
“We’re less than a hundred and fifty parsecs from earth’s sunspace.”
“And you think there are earth colonists here?”
“We know the planet’s name from scouts who have been here at various

times during the last two centuries. We know something of what happened after
the sacking and destruction of the partially completed macro world at Tau Ceti
IV in 2331. Evidence suggests that what was left of the destroyed world was
used to build a makeshift starship, which disappeared into the Praesepe cluster
carrying a few thousand people. Blackfriar has evidence that a relative of his was
the captain of that ship. Most of the documents we have from Tau Ceti and

Centauri show that the names of Blackfriar and Bulero play important roles in
the developing schisms over whether to settle natural worlds or build mobiles.
There were Blackfriars and Buleros on both sides, apparently. I don’t know what
we can find out down there after seven hundred years.”

“I hope we don’t anger them by taking the resources we need.”
“The culture here is almost nonexistent,” Rob said. “There may be no one

alive.”

John was silent.
Wheeler stood up and turned to face him. “What do you think about it?”
“I don’t know what to think. I’m not sure I want to join the building of the

new macroworld or go with it when it’s ready. What I really want is to go down
and see the planet. I’ve waited a long time.”

“Go and observe by yourself. I’m glad you’re interested.”
“Why?”
“You’ll get some firsthand experience concerning an old problem, one we’ve

never resolved.”

Wheeler had taught him everything he knew about the nature of inquiry,

acquainting him with the rich spectrum of the sciences, with the basic questions
of scientific philosophy, especially with problems in stellar evolution and
comparative cosmology. Rob had taught him the concerns which should belong
in every life, stressing the ethical procedures implicit in the honest gathering of
knowledge.

Rob had been the first to discuss Samuel Bulero with him, helping him to

better accept his own identity. As a clone, John Bulero was simply the twin
brother of an earlier individual, no more, no less, free to follow his own path.
Cloning was only one of a variety of reproductive methods available to
macroworlders. Nevertheless, someone had wanted to give these Bulero genes
another try. “That’s true,” Wheeler had said to him a decade ago, “but the rest
will be up to you.” The Buleros and Blackfriars had helped create macrolife; and
they had seen to it that when a world reproduced itself, it would have a bank of
genetic material from earth to draw on, as a complement to normal sexual
reproduction. All the people who had dreamed of a new kind of life in those final
days of earth were still alive; somewhere each of them had a twin, an individual
who had been called up to live his or her permutation of the original. As Samuel
Bulero was his historical brother, so he had other brothers on distant
macroworlds.

“Are you interested in the solar system?” John asked.
“The star still shines, and I can’t see any signs of the anomaly at this

distance.”

“You want to go there, don’t you?”
“I do, but I’ll have to convince the Projex Council. As long as our drive

systems move us at a hundred light-years a week, they’ll be prudent about the
energy we spend on movement. We need smaller and more efficient power
sources. Even a thousandfold increase of power for our drive will only move us
a small fraction of a parsec faster. We have the means in exotic forms of matter,
but the engineering is a million times more difficult than fusion was a thousand
years ago.”

“Do you think civilization survives in the solar system?”
“I suspect that the anomaly might have receded.”
“Do you think life has survived on earth itself?”
“Possibly.” John thought of how easily this man could inspire him about

impersonal things. “If we help any natural world, it should be earth,” Wheeler
said. “Does this interest you?”

“It seems worth doing.”
John followed him out into the bright workroom. Wheeler sat down behind

his desk. John seated himself at one of the terminals and turned the chair around
to face him.

“If you like,” Rob said, “we can work together on making a case for a return

to the solar system in the near future.”

“I’d like to see Lea first,” John said.
“I’ll help arrange it for you.”
“I don’t want Margaret to know until I’m gone.”
“It’s your business entirely. Not everyone will think you strange for wanting

to see a dirtworld. We have our provincialisms, but we try not to enforce their
observance. It will be mostly those who are your own age who will look down
their noses at you.”

“While the older citizens will merely tolerate my odd taste.”
“We have to. It’s our youth who are conservative. Don’t worry, frivolity is

said to return at about age five hundred.”

John laughed.
“You know,” Wheeler continued, “extended life was once regarded as a

continuing old age. All kinds of dire predictions were made about the adverse
effects of long life on the human mind. Few thought that creativity and vitality
would increase to match the new scale of time.”

“Not everyone achieves a dynamic longevity,” John said.
“And not everyone could live a successful century before, or even a

productive decade or two. Failure can’t be eliminated by guarantee. It’s still up
to the individual, no matter how much help is given.”

That’s me, John thought. “It’s a wonder humanity developed any foresight at

all.”

“On earth old men became jesters, “Wheeler said. “There may be such men

on Lea. I don’t know what else has survived. There are no standard forms of
communication that we can detect, not even radio. That by itself signals trouble;
there’s seven hundred years of history down there….”

John got up, feeling uneasy. “I’ve got to meet Margaret at the link training

center.”

“But you won’t—you haven’t been there at all today, have you?”
“No.”
“Don’t be too hard on Margaret. She’s not like you. You’re a healthy,

relatively unmodified type. Her behavioral range was developed for long
attention span, logic, a minute grasp of body language and sexuality, and
emotional control. Try to understand her difficulty—in you she faces a very
unpredictable person.”

stand her impatience. She talks at me, not to me.”

“You’ll be friends when you’re a hundred,” Rob said. “But if you’re that

unhappy, go on your own, do without exemplars.” Wheeler’s bushy eyebrows
went up toward his white hair. John looked directly into the wide blue eyes, and
for a moment the person he knew was gone. The being who confronted him was
alien, projecting what seemed to be an amused empathy toward a lesser creature.
John thought of the man who worked on dozens of undiscussed projects, his
brain enormously magnified through the Humanity II intelligences who ordered
the world for their human partners, as once nature’s gods had ruled earth. John
wondered why unchanged types like himself had been permitted to persist. Was
it to keep a tie with natural worlds?

would answer his question. Initial types, as well as innovative ones, had to be
preserved as a matter of law. The worth of human adaptability and creativity
could not be predicted. His life was his own, his own burden, to do with as he
pleased. But what could he ever do to please or benefit the world around him?
He felt a general, shapeless hunger in himself, a vague devotion which seemed
directed at nothing more than itself; there were answers to questions which he
could not even put into words.

He turned and the door opened for him. He stepped out into the passageway,

feeling ignorant and afraid.

14. Discontent

Level six was dark as he neared the apartment. Half the sky was alive with

the bright stars of Praesepe, half with the glow of more distant suns. The curving
plain of spaced dwelling columns held up the night sky. Sturdy oaks and white
birches from earth rustled in the gentle breeze.

He passed three olive-skinned males sitting on a bench near the column

entrance. He did not know them, but they glanced at him with their large brown
eyes. He felt hostility toward them as he went through the archway. Tall, black-
haired, graceful, they were the true macroworlders. He was an intruder from the
past, and not even a copy of a pioneer, but a shadow of one who had stayed
behind.

He turned left and walked around the curve to his apartment at the end. The

door slid open and he stepped inside.

Margaret Toren-Bulero stood in the center of the living room. He stopped

and looked at her as if she were a stranger. They had shared this apartment for
more than a year now, ever since he had left the dorms on level five. He
remembered their closeness of six months before as he looked at the bundle of
her long black hair tied up on the back of her head. Her skin had a tendency to
lose its tan and become very soft and white. She was not a clone of one person,
but a mixture of materials from Janet Bulero and Margot Toren, with
modifications. She looked back at him without blinking.

“You were to meet me,” she said.
“I didn’t want to.” He resented the view of him which her age gave her.
“You’ve neglected your Humanity II seminars.”
“That’s my business, isn’t it?”
“You’ll fall behind.”
“I don’t care, right now. Can’t you leave me alone?”
She did not react for a moment. “Let’s make love. It will relax you.”
He shook his head. “I’m going down to Lea.”
She stepped nearer and looked directly at him. She was thin and graceful,

making him feel crude in his stockiness.

“Whatever for?” she asked.
“To see…how they live, what it’s like.”
“You really don’t know why you want to go, do you?”
“I want to see a natural world.”
“They’re creatures. Life is an endless war. Do you want to see that?”

“I have a right to go.”
“I don’t recommend it. You’re easily impressed.”
“I won’t get another chance very soon.”
“You’ll handle it better later, not now.”
He remembered how much he had needed her once, how happy he had been

when she had taken him from the loneliness of the dorms.

“I wish to dissolve our bond,” he said.
“You’re upset. Think about it later.” She tried to embrace him.
He pushed her away and turned to leave, knowing that he could never live in

this apartment again. Margaret was a manager, leaving him nothing for himself;
she meant well, but she could not understand what he wanted, especially if he
himself did not know. It would not be fair to stay with her.

She was silent as he went out the door.
The nearest watch held only a dozen people, though it could accommodate

three hundred. Lea swam in the darkness on the screen. John sat alone in the
front row.

The view changed and he was looking into a conference pit. Franklyn

Blackfriar, a clone of Orton Blackfriar, sat between council-men Stav Rees and
Miklos Anastasian. The four-hundred-year-old first councilman scratched the
black stubble of hair on his scalp and waited for the report to begin. John knew
him as the most respected first councilman who had ever held the office. He
would retire for decades, but something would always draw him back into public
planning.

Rees and Anastasian were scarcely half Blackfriar’s age, but he liked to pick

younger people for his administrations. John knew them both from the
engineering school, where they had been his instructors. Both were at the head
of the action to build a new mobile.

Rees summarized the resource-gathering procedures, already in progress. It

was easier to bring materials up from Lea than to send out foraging vessels to
hook and bring back asteroid fragments; before the advent of large-scale
gravities, the task of bringing up resources from a planet would have been too
large even for atomic boosters, but now entire mountains could be floated off
using a portable generator, while smaller loads of scarcer materials would be
brought up by shuttle haulers.

Miklos Anastasian said a few words about security precautions. As long as

the macroworld stayed in a sunward parallel orbit, directly in line with the
planet, an undetected boarding attempt would be impossible. The accidental
transfer of an unknown disease would be minimized through strict procedures,
but preliminary investigations had revealed nothing dangerous. The first scouts

had concluded that there was little possiblity of any danger from Lea’s surface.
Its human population was made up of scattered tribes, too backward to have an
opinion about the macroworld’s presence; few, if any, would even understand
what it was that had come into their sky.

“When will the two outer shells be ready?” Blackfriar asked.
“We can separate the two outer shells almost immediately,” Rees said.
“Where will you go when all is ready?” Blackfriar asked. He seemed to have

little interest in the project, but he would go through all the public hearings and
administrative functions connected with the process of world reproduction.

Rees started to answer again, but Anastasian cut in. “Maybe one of the

globular clusters, assuming we have a faster drive soon. Planetary civilizations
might have developed favorably there, easily spanning the closer spaces between
the suns to achieve an optimum distribution of population. We may find a great
diversity in a small space. I think the isolation of cultures in the spiral arms may
be a grave handicap to their progress. A culture must limit energy consumption
and population at its most productive stage of development, when the
momentum of cumulative innovation is just beginning to produce decisive
breakthroughs; the culture must reach beyond its planet or die.”

“Or fall into a marginal existence, like Lea,” Rees added.
John decided not to hear the rest. He had expected Blackfriar to contribute

more to the discussion. What would the councilman think of his desire to visit
Lea? Their meetings had always made John feel that Blackfriar was taking a
personal interest in him, that the way to friendship was always open.

He felt a growing sense of hope as he left the hall. He would go see

Blackfriar and make his own arrangements to visit Lea. Maybe Blackfriar would
understand what he felt.

teak. There’s nothing like it, not even mirrored bulerite.” He paused. “Why do
you want to go?”

“I can’t give a reason—I just want to see.”
“You realize,” Blackfriar said, leaning back, “that a macroworlder is a

powerful individual on any dirtworld? We lose a lot if we lose one of our own.
Afraid?”

“I don’t think this world is a threat to us.”

“You’ve got an idea about helping out down there?”
“I don’t know—I don’t know anything. I want to see.”
“Good. What does Margaret think?”
“We’re dissolving our bond.”
Blackfriar shrugged. “Nothing unusual. Maybe one day your experience may

be useful. So few of us have any direct experience of natural worlds.”

John looked directly at him. To be accepted so casually was disturbing.
“Have you talked with Wheeler?” John asked.
Blackfriar smiled and leaned forward. “Of course I have. You’re going—but

see the medics. There are a number of tricky things you should know about
dirtworlds.”

“I will.” Blackfriar’s breezy sympathy had disoriented him.
“I know that look, John, I’ve worn it myself. You’re distrustful of me. Don’t

bother answering. I don’t need to confirm what I know. Let me tell you what it
means to live a long time. It’s the younger people who are most rigid, because
they ask that things go one way—their way and no other, according to some idea
of proper development which they think just. They exclude and exclude,
concentrating all their skills on their desire, whatever that may be. And they
often get what they want. That’s more true in our social system, but it happened
surprisingly often in past cultures. Nothing can stand forever against that kind of
patience and persistence, because when the one chance for success comes along,
the youth is there and waiting, ready to seize it. And he was there all the other
times when the chance was not there. That one time is all the time he needs.
That’s why youth has a historical reputation for innovation and change.”

“What’s your point?”
“Don’t you see? Youth’s approach is narrow. The older you get, the more

innovative you will become, at least in our way of life. You’ll begin to see how
long it takes to do anything really well, and you’ll know that you have the time,
if you’re patient. You’ll take the time to do more than one thing well. On
dirtworlds young and old were rigid. The young person had only one thing to
add; the old, one thing to preserve—the things he learned when he was young.
There was no time to do more, no energy. So the generations struggled hand over
hand, unaware of their closeness, blind for lack of life and vitality. They could
not have what we have, what still lies before you.”

“I know all that,” John said.
Blackfriar got up from behind his desk and stretched his huge frame. Then

he came around into the center of the room. John stood up. Blackfriar paused
and looked down at him. “John, what you want is vague enough to intrigue me.
You want to go and poke around in places. Go see Miklos Anastasian; he’ll help

you get down. Rees will be supervising the final separation of our outer shells,
but Miklos will be going dirtside. I think you and he will get along. Eventually
an investigative team will go down and make some sort of historical report. I
have a lot of interest in that. But for the moment we’ll send you.” He smiled
again. “Right now I have to go and resolve a bitter feud in the outer levels.
Seems the new world is carrying off equipment they’re not supposed to have.
Maybe someday research will stop complaining to me and produce some of the
dreams I’ve been ordering for more than a century.”

“What dreams?”
“Walk out with me part way and I’ll tell you,” Blackfriar said as he led the

way out of the office.

15. Wayside World

The map screen was a large oval well in the control room. John looked down

into the planet’s ocean of air. Three haulers drifted nearby, slugs readying to
descend from low orbit, fill their bellies with ore, and depart. Each was a
kilometer of hull with a detachable passenger module in front, a cargo hold in
the middle, and a gravitic workhorse in the back.

“Thirty percent of the surface,” Miklos Anastasian was saying, “is two

continents joined by a narrow land bridge. The northern mass extends to within
thirty degrees of the pole, the southern reaches the south pole. The sea between
the continents is warm and shallow. The land bridge is part of the western
mountain chain running up across both continents. There are deserts and
grasslands east of the range, then wooded mountains and the eastern coastal
plain. The coast itself is cliff rock, with hundreds of offshore islands, once part
of the mainland.”

John sensed amusement in the wiry man’s voice. A hundred-fifty-year-old

researcher in planetary geologies, Miklos belonged to the middle range of
modified citizens. Stronger than most of the populace, he was able to run at
better than twenty kilometers per hour, and he needed one-third less sleep;
implanted in his bare head was the usual Humanity II link. His dark eyebrows
seemed to be made of solid material in the light streaming up from the screen.

“What about settlements?” John asked.
Miklos extended a muscular arm over the screen. “There seem to be cities in

the northeast near the coast. There’s a big city some thirty kilometers north of
the shallow sea. Everything is very quiet.” He leaned over the screen intently, as
if preparing to scrape his bony fingers through the wrinkles of land in search of
life.

“What about climate?”
“Be prepared for changes during the day, something you’re not used to. The

north is tundra, changing through temperate to tropical as you go south.
Vegetation and animals are hybrids of earth-derived and local. It will be hard to
separate the kinds. Gravity is eighty-seven percent earth. It’s the fifth planet out
of ten, orbiting the double star at one point four astronomical units. A stormy
place.”

Miklos stood up and looked down at John. “I’ll fill you in on as much as I

can before we land. The suns are slightly smaller than sol. You’ll see them taking
up about twenty-five minutes of arc in the sky. They’re within ten percent of

each other in size; one is brighter than the other, but you won’t notice that
because your eye is not sensitive enough to differences between very bright
sources.”

And yours is, John thought.
“During day you’ll see only a spread-out mass of light when you glance up,

not two disks. By the way, don’t look directly at them, you’ll harm your eyes.
The suns circle each other in nine hours, producing eclipses every four and one-
half hours. The amount of light is then cut down, depending on which sun is
eclipsing which at what time and position, and where you are on the planet. It’s a
twenty-nine-hour day. When the suns are side by side, it gets warmer in the
afternoon. On a clear day you may see two shadows of yourself. At sunset you’ll
see that the suns are elongated, flattened at the poles, sharing stellar material
across the distance between them. Watch out for winds and storms. Auroras are
intense at night.”

“What about intelligent life, besides the colonists?”
Miklos shook his head and a sad look came into his gray eyes. “I suspect

there aren’t many left. Something has been very wrong down there for a long
time. We’ve located the dead hulk of the starship in orbit. I doubt anyone we’ll
run into will know who we are. We may not run into anyone, native or colonist.”

“You mean they’re all dead?”
“A few individuals might find the mountain valley where we’ll be mining,

but it’s a big world and few people. We’ll see more animals than intelligent life.
It may be too early in the planet’s history for intelligent life, or it never
developed for some reason.”

John imagined large beasts creeping through thick vegetation, breathing

shapes covered with hide and hair, eyes filled with madness.

“I’ll find them,” John said.
“That’s up to you,” Miklos said, the tone of amusement returning to his low

voice. “What are you looking for?”

John looked into the well of the screen instead of answering. The angle of

view was changing rapidly. The shuttle was in the atmosphere, coming down
fast. Cloudy material rushed by; filaments of white and dark wispiness gathered
and were torn apart by the shuttle’s passage. The view cleared to show
mountains only a few kilometers below. Jagged peaks stretched to the horizon, a
line of sharp rocks ripped out of the ground by some titanic plow. The shuttle
dropped lower, revealing snow on the cloud-wrapped summits; green valleys
nestled like moss.

“There’s a pass ahead,” Miklos said, “and our base is in the valley.”
Slowly the shuttle passed between two mountains and entered the valley.

The vertical screen went on. John looked up and saw a stream cutting through
mossy vegetation as the shuttle landed.

“We can go right out,” Miklos said. “Don’t worry. You’ve been protected

against possible disease. The open space above is something you’re not used to,
but it’s not so different that you’ll be disoriented.”

Anastasian turned and went down the ramp leading from the observation

area to the airlock area below.

John lingered before following. He looked out at the stream, the sky and

clouds, the snow on the peaks, and he felt that to go out there would change him
forever. Anastasian’s indirect jibes had nothing to do with it.

He went down the ramp into the airlock chamber, determined to show

Miklos that he was not afraid. Anastasian gave him a warm green jacket and a
pair of boots. John dressed and followed him into the lock. The door slid shut
behind them, and the outer door opened.

As John followed Miklos down the exit ramp, he noticed the wind blowing

from his left, carrying unfamiliar smells and a sharp, watery freshness. The wind
crept into the sleeves of his jacket, whispered in his ears, and slipped through his
hair as if the planet were examining him before he stepped off the ramp. The
suns were warm on his face, and he looked up briefly to see their massed light
almost overhead. He noticed his shadow as he stepped onto the ground. The soil
was soft and he could almost taste its smell. Worms and crawling things lived in
it; he felt uneasy.

the valley from the west. The three other shuttles had landed farther upstream.
Miklos was walking toward the figures coming out of them.

The air was cool, despite the sunlight. John put his hands in his jacket

pockets and started slowly toward the stream.

“Don’t move around too fast until you’re sure of your feet,” Miklos shouted

back at him, without stopping.

John ignored him, continuing toward the stream.
He came to the water and gazed into the flow. The air was chilly over the

liquid. He looked at the sky, an inverted blue plain covered with clouds, hiding
the stars as well as any artificial shroud.

Miklos was coming back toward him. Behind him, the three haulers

suddenly seemed out of place. Anastasian stopped a few feet away and John saw
that the man was grinning.

“Yes, I know,” Miklos said. “If your tongue were thunder, you’d shake the

planet to throw me off. I couldn’t resist taking pokes at you. Forgive me. But
you’ll be more careful.”

“Don’t you have work to do?”
“First let me get you set.” Miklos pointed. One of the larger hatches on the

shuttle was open, and a small black flitter was rising out of the hold. When the
craft was high enough, it glided toward them and settled to the ground.

“Blackfriar said you should have it.”
The canopy in the center of the oval disk rose and two men got out. They

were tall and dark, dressed in close-fitting green coveralls.

“Ibram and Aric are mining engineers. They’re in charge of the mining camp

in the range, between those peaks behind them.”

John nodded in greeting. They turned and walked back toward the shuttle.

As he watched them stride away, John again felt distant from their world. Their
genetic heritage was continuous for more than a thousand years, combining and
recombining in new and subtle ways, while he was a skipstone from the past,
unchanged, living beyond his time. In one sense he was Samuel Bulero, but
without his lost brother’s memories. He was that exact throw of the genetic dice,
the image of his other self, thrown into play again.

Clouds covered the suns. The wind died suddenly, as if the planet were

holding its breath.

“It’s an eclipse,” Miklos said.
Slowly the light began to drain out of the world. The snow on the peaks took

on a blue glow. The sky darkened as the larger sun covered its brighter
companion.

“I measure a more than half drop in light,” Miklos said.
John felt a breeze. He looked up at the clouds hiding the suns and saw one

disk wheeling through gray ashes.

He turned to Miklos. “What’s the flitters range?”
“More than you’ll need. Let me show you.”
John followed him to the craft and up the footholds into the cabin under the

canopy. He climbed down inside and sat next to Miklos in front of the controls.

“The automatic coordinates are set for this valley and for home, so the craft

will bring you back quickly if you need it. Just press this area. But don’t try
leaving the planet on manual. You shouldn’t have to. This is the stick. Use it to
maneuver or hover; accelerate by pressing on top. If you let go, automatic will
take over. So if you can’t do something yourself, let go, so the Humanity II
routine can do its job for you. Any practical speed is possible in the atmosphere.
You won’t feel any acceleration in the gravitic field, and you won’t be able to go
faster than design limits. Good luck.”

Suddenly Miklos was climbing out. It was becoming brighter outside as the

eclipse ended. “The red is for the canopy emergency,” Miklos shouted as he

made his way to the ground.

Miklos stood and waved at him, but John was alone now, free to explore for

as long as home was building its twin in the sky. For a moment he felt that he
almost understood Blackfriar’s trust in him, but the thought threatened to grow
into complexity and he dismissed it. He would be the first to see the planet,
before the survey teams went out to see what had happened to the colonists.

He took the stick in his hands. The canopy came down and the two seats

came up even with the rim, giving him an unrestricted view. The landscape
around him was slightly blue through the tinted canopy.

Imperceptibly the gravitic field enveloped the flitter, lifting it upward

swiftly. A thousand meters up, he turned the craft into the southeast and started a
shallow climb, moving slowly to get the feel of the controls. He pressed the
speed control and the land below began to rush by in a blur. The mountains stood
around him, powerless to keep him in the valley.

16. The City

higher to keep their warmth on his face. At midafternoon the brighter sun
eclipsed its larger companion, reducing Lea’s illumination by slightly less than
half. He caught a glimpse of the ocean just as the eclipse was ending. The water
sparkled as if it were on fire.

A storm sat on the eastern horizon. As he flew lower over the plain, clouds

obscured the suns again, turning the ocean dark blue. He turned the flitter
eastward and dropped within a thousand meters of the beach, where powerful
breakers crashed against the sand and rocks.

He was completely in control of the craft, sure of the freedom that it had

given him. The afternoon’s sights had helped him forget himself. It was enough
that the planet was strange, enough that he was curious about what he might
find; nothing else existed.

The small display map indicated that he was now more than two thousand

kilometers southeast of the mining site. He eased the craft away from the beach,
slightly toward the northeast, hoping to glimpse the large city that Miklos had
mentioned.

Storm clouds now took up half the sky in front of him, gray and black

cumulus illuminated by silent flashes of lightning. The planet is alive, he
thought, as much a system of living things as home.

He saw the city, a dark mass of towers sitting under the thunder-heads. The

storm covered the whole sky as he flew closer and darted under the cloud
ceiling. Rain began to hit the canopy. The lightning became more frequent,
stabbing at the dark land below. The flitter cut through the rain without shaking,
its gravitic field a vise holding it steady in relation to the planet’s surface.

The city was a ragged black outline against the leaden sky, receiving the

torrent without protest. As the lightning flashed, he imagined the city to be a
huge black spider crouching ahead. He could almost reach out and touch it,
though he knew that it was still kilometers away.

He turned on the outside audio for a moment and heard the wind howling;

thunder rumbled and cracked and died. The craft slowed to a drift over the city.

The towers held up more than one level. Huge holes gaped at him, black pits

into the lower levels. The wind whistled through the city’s wounds. What
suffering had been here? he wondered; the vast ruin was an external record of
misery and decline.

He wafted toward a tower. A finger of lightning struck the top, hurling debris

down into the ruin. He released the stick, leaving the flitter to hover while he
cleared the map from the small screen to reveal the area directly below. In the
moment of another flash, human figures ran across the wet surface.

what to do next. Above him the clouds drove fast in the wind, covering the
broken point of the tower. Where have I come to? What am I doing here? he
asked himself.

As the rain lessened, he heard the aching groans of the city around him—

metal grinding, slipping, breaking, and being pulled down somewhere below. It
was a bass rumble in his stomach, the sound of dying things calling to him.

The canopy went up and he crawled out, making his way carefully down the

footholds. The city shuddered as his feet touched the metallic surface. He took a
deep breath of the damp air and looked up at the rushing clouds. Suddenly he felt
a reversal of direction. For a moment the sky was down and the city was up; he
was standing upside down on the outside of a round ball and at any moment the
wind would blow him and the city away into the mists; but the moment passed
and he steadied himself on his feet.

face and walked toward the tower. There was a large hole in its side. Bracing
himself, he looked inside; the darkness was impenetrable.

He turned and walked back toward the flitter. The sky was growing lighter as

the storm passed. He looked to where the suns would be and saw only a patch of
light. The wind was a cold breeze as he climbed into the flitter.

The sudden whistle of the communication link almost frightened him. He

jumped into his seat and opened the line.

“John, this is Miklos. Just checking.”
“I’m in the city, two thousand kilometers southeast, thirty north of the ocean.

What a wreck this place is. There hasn’t been a civil government here in ages.
I’ve landed on the upper level near an old tower. There’s been some rain.”

“I know. Want to come home?”
“No. Is that all you called for?”
“Be careful,” Miklos said. “We can die just like any living thing.” He broke

the connection.

John climbed out of the flitter, determined not to be frightened by

Anastasian’s warning. He jumped the last step and turned to look at the tower.

Three figures stood in front of the large hole. Their hair was long and wet,

and they watched him with dark eyes.

Unchanged humans, he thought, like me.

Sunlight broke through behind him. He turned around and saw the

misshapen red suns setting in the west, bathing the city in a rich vermilion light,
two broken yolks spilling orange-red plasma between them. The storm was
disappearing into the south.

He turned to the strangers again and took a step toward them. They drew

back, but stopped.

Looking more carefully, he saw that the one in the middle was a girl. She

was wearing a crude tunic of coarse material, stitched together with black cord.
The tunic came down below her knees; her feet were covered with boots made
from the same kind of material, animal skin of some kind. She seemed distressed
by his gaze.

Both males were shorter than John. He sensed their protectiveness of the

girl. He raised a hand and smiled.

her, but she smiled and kept her hand up. John took another step forward. Both
men stepped in front of her suddenly, but she said something to them in an angry
tone. She pushed between them and came forward.

She stopped and looked up at him with dark blue eyes. There was a green

tint in her black hair. She pointed to the flitter behind him, at the sky, and then at
him. He nodded, and it seemed to be the response she wanted. She pointed to
herself and said, “Anulka.”

“I’m John Bulero.”
“Imjonbulero?”
“Anulka,” he said, imitating her sound. She smiled at his effort, and for a

moment he forgot her two companions.

Suddenly one of the men came up and tugged at her arm, while the other

retreated toward the tower. Anulka pointed at the setting suns, then at the east,
and at the place where she stood. He guessed that she wanted to meet here
tomorrow, and nodded.

Then she turned and followed the two males. They climbed through the hole

in the tower. He could go with them, he thought, but when he came and looked
down into the breach, he saw her motioning for him not to follow. He watched as
she made her way down the ladder on the inner wall. Her companions were lost
in the darkness below her. In the moment before she disappeared, she looked up
at him again, this time with a look of determination.

He tried to imagine what there might be for them at the bottom of the

vertical passage. How did these people live, and what did they know about their
origins? What had happened on this planet during the last thousand years? Why
did the colony fail? Who was this girl? What was it like to live here? She seemed

so vital and alive, as if she enjoyed her way of life. The confidence of her
manner was not what he had expected.

He turned and walked toward the flitter. The suns were now flattened

balloons filled with red light; the larger one was just beginning to eclipse its
companion, hiding the vast spillage of plasma between them.

Around him the towers of the city cast black shadows across the blue metal

surface. He took a deep breath, feeling open to the world, a sense of possibility
mixed with uneasiness.

He climbed into the flitter and sat back. Stars began to appear in the

darkening sky, until the east was ablaze with more than a hundred bright points
of light. Lea’s position just inside Praesepe gave it a night sky dominated by the
stars of the cluster.

He turned down his seat and noted the food cupboard in the back of the

cabin.

Can we help here? he asked himself as he lay back. Maybe I can do

something before we leave. We might be here for a decade. It would not be hard
to do a few things. He reached over and pulled a thermal blanket from its clip.
Covering himself, he looked into the starry brightness overhead, feeling like an
insect on a huge tabletop. The towers of the city were dark shapes around him,
sentinels standing guard in the starlight.

The audio picked up noises from below, things just beneath his ability to

hear; half-felt sensations came and went, moments of fear and excitement, and
night sadness, all conspiring to keep him awake.

He fell asleep and woke up not knowing where he was; he was falling away

from the unprotected outside of the planet, toward the suns. He opened his eyes,
realizing that he was vulnerable under these quiet stars, but the thought of danger
pleased him. In time he might want more than this new intensity, but for now the
quickening of life’s pulse was what he wanted most; for the moment he would
compromise and give himself to opposing things. Unplanned opportunities
waited for him on this world, and he would discover them for himself.

17. Relations

White clouds sailed across a bright blue sky. His eyes were open for an

instant before he became fully awake. He lifted his head and it seemed that the
suns were rising in an effort to catch up with the clouds. The city around him
was silvery blue and charcoal black, reflecting sunlight, clouds, and blue sky
from a million metallic scraps and shards. He lay back and closed his eyes again,
lost in the strangeness of awakening here. He might have lived here all his life;
home was a dream from which he had just awakened, and in a moment he would
remember everything….

He sat up and saw Anulka looking up at the flitter, hands on hips, smiling.

She appeared older in daylight, more in control of herself.

The canopy lifted as he climbed out. In a moment he was standing in front of

her.

“Hello,” he said.
“Hel-lo?’ she asked uncertainly, watching his face.
Feeling nervous, he looked around. Where the level was torn open, canyons

opened into a daylit gloom. The metal plain of towers extended to the horizon in
every direction except westward, where he saw some greenery. Slowly the
colossus was toppling back into the soil; barring a major shift in the planet’s
crust, there would be nothing left above ground in a million years. Yet even
without its power and population, the city had a kind of life.

Anulka was looking at him questioningly, but with confidence. He smiled at

her. There was not much he could say until he acquired a log of their everyday
words; he would have to make one trip home to compare notes at the language
terminal and undergo imprinting. When he returned, it would be possible to ask
her fairly complex questions. He could reach the proficiency terminals from the
flitter, but imprinting required a direct link to Humanity II.

Looking at Anulka, he felt that she was older than Margaret, although he

knew that this could not be true. Despite the decaying city, the planet seemed
youthful, growing unplanned, turning through its seasons, renewing itself within
its cocoon of air, passing through one life after another, always changing in the
timeless light of its suns. The life of the planet was something different from the
beggarly life of its human inhabitants. The suns were a pair of wastrels,
negligent gods dissipating their power into space, energy so abundant that even a
small fraction would be enough to transform this world.

Anulka turned and motioned for him to follow her. He hesitated, then walked

after her to the tower. She climbed into the opening. He stepped in after her and
started down the ladder. There was more light in the shaft during the day, and his
eyes adjusted quickly.

He looked down and saw her growing smaller beneath his feet. He

quickened his pace down the rungs.

After a while he called her name and she answered with a questioning sound.
“Nothing,” he said. “I only wanted to hear your voice.”
She laughed.
There was an earthy smell in the shaft, as if something were decaying at the

bottom. After what seemed a long time, he stopped and looked down. He saw
her dark shape moving in a circle of light. She had reached bottom and was
pacing as she waited for him.

He hurried, but when he reached bottom she was already leading the way

into a long tunnel. He followed, remembering when as a child he had played in
the engineering labyrinth under countryside. He remembered watching
mysterious adults doing their work, persons who had been old a century before
his birth.

ladder, he remembered the first time he had seen the generators at home, massive
objects containing the power of stars, surrounded by mushroom-like gravities,
ringed by feeders and converters. He imagined the internal fires of the planet
below him and stopped; he looked down and could see no end to the shaft. What
am I doing here? he asked himself as the possibility of danger became apparent.
I could die here and no one would ever find me.

“Hel-looo!” she called up to him in a musical voice.
He continued, quickening his pace. It grew darker and the air became damp;

he heard water running down the wall of the shaft. The rungs became sticky and
cold. He slipped and landed on the next rung; the cold air hurt his lungs as he
caught his breath.

He went down slowly, stepping carefully from rung to rung until his

confidence returned. Reaching bottom, he stepped through a circular opening
into a dimly lit room. Anulka was waiting for him. She turned and walked into
another long passageway. He peered after her, saw the light at the end, and
followed quickly.

They came out into daylight, onto ground covered with thick grass and tall

weeds. John looked up and the sight startled him. He saw the sky through a
massive breach in the city. A wedge had been cut out, exposing level after level
on both sides. The area of open ground was at least two kilometers long and one
kilometer wide, strewn with hundreds of pieces of glass, plastic junk, tiles, and

large pieces of flooring. He looked up again at the open levels; beams and
ragged platforms jutted into the air, threatening to break off and come crashing
down.

Anulka was walking down a path through the weeds. He started after her.

There was a fire and a tent ahead. People had once lived here, he thought,
wondering how he would feel if home were somehow cut open like this city.

Anulka led him into the small camp and he recognized the two men sitting

next to the fire; they had been with her on the previous night. There was a
wooden table next to the tent. The surface was piled up with old books and
canisters. Anulka motioned for him to sit by the fire. She went into the tent as he
seated himself.

The man who came out with her was powerfully built, with white hair

combed straight back and confined by a piece of cord. He wore a black shirt
made of fine cloth; his pants were coarse and baggy, held up by a wide brown
belt. He went to the fire and stepped into his brown boots, stomping hard on the
ground to settle in. Then he turned and looked at John with a steady gaze. His
face was lined and leathery, but there was someone familiar behind the dark tan.

Anulka pointed at the old giant and said, “Blakfar.”
“Jonbulero,” the big man said. He smiled and opened his palms toward John

in greeting.

right side of the cutaway, brightening the grass and weeds.

said, pointing. “City library, starry.” His Russo-Anglic was old, obviously
acquired from reading. “Off-world?” he asked, pointing at the sky, then at John.
It startled John to hear the language as a series of familiar sounds, triggering his
imprinted memory of its structure and vocabulary.

John nodded, slowly accepting the idea that this was at least a relation of

Blackfriar’s, a planet-weathered descendant of the man who had brought a
starship across the great dark from Tau Ceti. John felt that he had come upon an
old friend who had not changed, despite the centuries and unimaginable forces
working against him.

Anulka spread a blanket next to the chair, and Blakfar motioned for him to

sit down. John obeyed, rehearsing the words of the simple question that he
wanted Blakfar to understand.

John pointed to the city around them, at the sky. “What happened here?”
The gray-haired man nodded with a sad smile. There was pain in his eyes,

the memory of pride and accomplishment, living now only in those who could
stumble through the old words.

of me, he thought.

Blakfar said, “Skyship from Ceti…more than hundred fathers ago…we left

the ship in the sky…we built cities…war, sickness…”

and there, enough to know that the cities had been abandoned, scientific skills
lost when the population declined. Those alive now were completely dependent
on the natural ecology. John doubted if there could be more than a million
human beings on the planet.

They had learned new ways, Blakfar said, but the line of his father lived to

keep the old skills alive, for when they would be needed. Every spring he came
to the city to learn what he could from the ruins. “I am Blakfar,” he finished.

Throughout the chanted story, there had been a look of awe and reverence in

the faces of Anulka and the two men by the fire. She sat cross-legged on the
blanket with John, her gaze fixed on the old man. The flow of the sounds had
affected John also, and it was a moment before he realized that Blakfar had
finished.

“You…” Blakfar said, searching for a word.
John nodded. “I understand.” Anulka smiled, as if taking pride in

discovering him for the old man.

John thought of Franklyn Blackfriar. Would he want to help when he learned

of this relation of his? John looked at Blakfar more closely. The family
resemblance was clear, though he was certain that Blakfar was not a clone.
These people could not have cloned anyone. His eyes were blue, while Frank’s
were gray; yet the look in them was the same, and the voices were similar.

John looked at Anulka, and she smiled at him. A long shadow cast by the

western side of the canyon was creeping toward the camp. The suns went into
eclipse, darkening the canyon, stripping the weeds and grass of their stolen
colors.

John stood up and motioned that he had to leave. Anulka rose and took his

hand. He was anxious to reach the flitter, so he could tell someone what he had
found. Blakfar said something to Anulka, and she started to lead the way down
the path. Then the old man got up, and John saw a look of loss come into his
face. Blakfar wanted the offworlder to stay, John realized. The old man knew
what it meant. Somewhere beyond the sky, the past of power and plenty was still
real, not just in books and stories, but a living thing, and here was a visitor who
might bring it all back. John saw that the big man was struggling to control his
feelings; after all, he might never see the offworlder again. John felt a sense of
duty mingling with the curiosity that had brought him to Lea.

“I’ll be back, Blakfar,” he said, and took the old man’s hand, holding it for a

moment to reassure him. When the look of desperation softened in the aged face,
John turned to leave.

“Tomas Blakfar!” the old giant called after him, the syllables echoing in the

ruins. John looked back and waved. The man was grinning at him. No, he would
not forget the name. He turned away and almost tripped on a piece of rubble;
then he felt a strange sensation in his nose and sneezed. Someone laughed
behind him. He turned to see Blakfar glaring at the young men, who were still
sitting by the fire. John felt their distrust as he turned to follow Anulka.

The upward climb was harder than coming down. He felt that Anulka was

paying him more attention than before, even when she was not looking back to
check. He was determined not to show her that he was afraid. She seemed to be
laughing inwardly, as if she knew something he did not.

they climbed out of the tower at sky level. She walked ahead toward the flitter,
stopped, and turned to face him, smiling as he came near. He stopped close to
her and she looked at him very carefully; he found himself completely at ease as
he looked back at her.

neck, she pulled him to her and kissed him once quickly; then again more
slowly; a third time with care and intensity. Each time he grew more familiar
with her touch and more surprised by his own feelings. He drew her to him and
held her, becoming aware of her odors, the taste of her mouth, the texture of her
black hair, the unbroken skin of her face. She kissed him again, and the musky
warmth of her excitement enveloped him. He knew that she did not bathe as he
did at home, and she might be carrying disease; she was something wild from
the wilderness around the city, and she was taking possession of him. As he
kissed her, he could not tell whether she was his or he hers. The towers whirled
and he fell down next to her on the sun-warmed metal, communicating with
expression and gesture, and laughter, forgetting his fears.

“Do you want to go inside?” he asked, pointing to the flitter.
She shook her head no. He left her, climbed into the flitter, and brought out

his blanket, spreading it next to her. She took off his clothes and her own, and it
seemed that the warm light of the suns would be the only covering he would
ever need. She lay on her back, eyes closed, and he wondered at her look of
contentment.

Slowly she drew him onto her, caressing his thighs and stomach with her

tanned fingers. Her breasts were firm, dark-nippled, rising and falling evenly.
Her legs parted beneath him and he reached to touch her dark tangle. She opened

her eyes and looked at him as he entered her, and her face darkened as the suns
went into eclipse. A breeze blew across his back as he compared her vitality with
Margaret’s erotic calm. He was completely alive as he moved with her, open to
every sound and smell of the city and surrounding land. Briefly, the eclipse at his
back made him afraid, but her closed eyes calmed him.

She spent herself first, winding her legs around his back, opening her eyes

and smiling at him. He looked into her, through her eyes, to the woman who
welcomed him; the knot of pleasure opened within him, and he felt her strength
containing him.

returned, warming them until their sweat mingled as they tried again and again
to regain their first moment, and succeeded. An afternoon wind dried them with
its coolness and they wrapped themselves in the blanket, exhausted. The wind
whistled somewhere through broken places as he fell asleep next to her, thinking
that it might have almost been a song.

cumulus on the horizon, casting a red-brown glow across the top of the city.
Anulka was gone. There was a strong wind coming with the night, carrying a sea
smell; the piping he had heard before was now a howl from below, as if some
beast were trapped there, struggling to break free. He heard the tower creak and
sat up.

Standing, he put on his coveralls, then sat down to pull on his boots. For a

moment he thought that he understood Anulka and Blakfar. What better way to
keep him here than through Anulka? He stood up and put on his jacket, shivering
from the drop in temperature. He thought of Anulka’s warmth and the luxurious
curve of her hip and belly. He missed her so easily, so quickly, he noted.

He turned to the flitter and climbed inside. The call light was on. He did not

remember hearing the whistle at all. Sitting down, he opened the link.

“John,” Miklos said, “what happened? I had some free time, so I thought to

check with you.”

“I’m fine, just away from the flitter for a while. I met with some of the

descendants of the colonists.” John turned on the lights. The growing darkness
outside caused him to think of the old starship.

“What’s the matter, John?”
“Nothing.” He sneezed.
“You’d better get to a medic.”
“I’ll take care of it.” He paused. “What about the starship?”

“The crews are checking it now.”
“Why didn’t you tell me it would be so soon?”
“You were more interested in the planet. Anyway, some of the hulk seems to

be functioning.”

“Can I go up there in the flitter now?”
“I’d prefer it if you took the shuttle home first. What about your friends?”
“They’re going west from here with Blakfar. I think there’s a village near the

mountains, in the chain that runs east, then south. They’re a long way from
home.”

“Blakfar? What are you talking about?”
John told him what he had learned from Blakfar. “They’re going to walk for

about a month, until they get home. It seems they do this once a year.”

“Why don’t you help them out with the flitter?”
“I’ll rejoin them after I see the starship. Expect me; I’m leaving now.” He

broke the link before Miklos could answer.

Turning off the cabin lights, he sat back and took the stick in his hands. The

canopy came down and the flitter lifted from the dark tabletop.

He rose above the night clouds and released the craft for an automatic return

to the mountain valley. The flitter rose higher, slowing the sunset for a few
minutes. Below him was a gray-black plain of clouds, and the suns were a fire
burning at the edge of the world. The flitter leveled off and continued northwest.

The moonless world grew dark, and stars appeared like stately marchers. He

looked for home among them, then realized that it was below the horizon. He
thought again of the old starship, circling in the dark through all these centuries.
Anulka would miss him tomorrow, but it didn’t matter. He would come to her
out of the sky, in a few days at most.

He turned on the cabin lights, shutting out the view, turning the canopy into

a black mirror for his thoughts. He pictured Anulka on the blanket, remembering
his own uncontrollable commitment to her body. Margaret would say that he was
a domesticated creature dazzled by the wild, mistaking it for something
profound. It was all new, all strange to be on the outside of such a large world.
He would need time to judge his experience of it; for the moment Lea was too
vivid, too intense for him to believe that she wore a mask.

the stick, he increased the flitter’s speed and altitude, until he saw the first range
of mountains extending westward, massive shoulders huddling together on the
planet, snowy summits aglow with starlight.

18. Macrogenesis

As the shuttle hauler approached home, John observed the progress of

reproduction on the forward screen in the passenger module. Miklos had sent
him up alone on the automatic return of an ore-filled hauler, refusing to let him
use the flitter. During his absence, home had moved out of its two outer shells,
reducing itself by about a kilometer over its entire surface. The new egg shape
was a twin of the original, except for its three hundred kilometers of open
interior. In time a large asteroid would be brought inside, to be mined and
hollowed out; once braced at the center, it would provide additional surfaces.
Construction would then proceed outward from its surface and inward from the
two outer shells. The conic section which had been removed from the forward
end of home would be put back to close the space of the new world.

It would take many years to complete the inner levels, but as soon as the

human and cybernetic systems were active, the reproductive sequence would be
essentially complete. A new macroworld would be born to roam the galaxy, to
grow internally, and to reproduce itself when internal pressures became too
great.

How many individuals had served macrolife across the centuries, their lives

bound by decisions made for them by the founders? Many of the earliest citizens
were still alive, precious resources conserved by a system which had given them
a chance at immortality. Macrolife was committed to preserving its sparks of
intelligence. Its body would reproduce endlessly, attempting all variations,
gathering all knowledge, drawn forward by the fate of all things real; but the
knowing mind, in whatever form, would always inhabit macrolife’s center,
seeking, understanding, while time lasted.

He thought of all the human flesh that would be born to fill the new world’s

innards; he saw all the cloned individuals from the past, alike yet different. The
faces would be a living history; the eyes would gaze differently, the brain would
perceive clearly and directly, unclouded by struggle, untroubled by defeat, living
in a world where the very nature of rebellion had been altered.

Was this why he had gone down to Lea? To see the look of defeat, to taste

something of its hardness, perhaps to wear its look in his own face? How could
he argue with himself? The ruined city on Lea was an obvious failure. Lea, like
all natural worlds, was the back country behind the growing urban culture of
macrolife. He thought of roads leading into thick forests, winding around
hillsides and down into hidden valleys, where suns were the only light. He was

journeying back to the green worlds of humanity’s beginnings, origins which
were still present in every human being, and could not be denied without
falsifying reality. Macrolife’s break with planetary life was not a sharp historical
discontinuity; it was a widening of nature, a birth from the complex organism of
earth, a tumultuous but still legitimate birth. Space-time, with its endless
resources and room to grow, was still nature; macrolife was a new kind of
cellular life, multiplying in a realm as natural as the one inside the atmospheric
membranes of planets.

Looking at the new shape, he wondered where the half-dozen other

macroworlds were now and how different they were after a thousand years of
isolation from one another. There were so many variables to consider. How
many times had each world reproduced? How advanced were the individual
propulsion systems? Advanced stardrives might have carried one or more of
them out of the galaxy. A million years might pass before any two would meet. It
was more likely that some kind of contact might be achieved through tachyon
signaling, but that would require a more systematic scan of the heavens than had
been attempted to date.

The parent, swimming before him in the black sea of space, seemed not at all

diminished by its labor. As he drew nearer, it was almost impossible to see any
differences in size. The offspring would inevitably strive to be faster, try to
penetrate more deeply into unexplored regions, as it consolidated its rebellion.

He wondered where home would go next, and the thought convinced him

that his loyalty was not with the childworld. Lea was suddenly a distant thought.

Home covered the screen and he saw the huge intake bay. Lights were on

inside and he could make out the docking cradle. The hauler slipped in and came
to rest.

starship. The salvage team is about finished with it now.”

John followed him down the corridor to the next dock, through a utility area,

and into the open muzzle of a small shuttle. The lock closed behind them as they
stepped up into the control area and sat down.

The shuttle pulled away, shrinking home until it was again visible next to its

twin. The view changed automatically to show Lea.

After a short silence, Blackfriar said, “Tell me about my relative down

there.”

“He’s a lot like you. Younger, but older…from another time. Maybe we’ll

learn more in the starship. Frank—they’re all our people down there, what we

would have been….”

“Does he look like me?”
“Very much so. His name is Tomas. He says Blackfriar as Blakfar. He

spends a part of each year exploring the ruins of a city, hoping to master what
has been lost. His people are a mountain clan, he told me. It takes a lot of
courage for him to leave the tribe and travel to the ruins.”

with the skills of his ancestors.”

“A larger group lives on the plains, raiding the various mountain folk for

women and supplies. I think the mountain people do some farming as well as
hunting, preferring to stay in one area. Blakfar said that the nomads fight among
one another, or they would have destroyed Blakfar’s clan a long time ago.”

“You sound as if you want to help them.”
“How much can I help?”
“As much as you can convince Projex to back you.”
“You already know that won’t be much—why pretend? I have as much

chance of support as Blakfar has in convincing his people that going to the city
is a worthwhile activity.”

“Yet he has people with him,” Blackfriar said.
“I think the two men go for personal reasons, because they want to impress

Anulka. The girl looks up to Blakfar, though. I think she believes in him,
because he looks beyond the kind of life they all live.”

could do. You might want to unify the planet under some kind of benevolent
rule. It’s underpopulated, so it wouldn’t be very hard to bring the scattered
peoples together, if you could convince them. You might even succeed…. No, let
me finish. Then you’d start teaching programs, engineering and medical
projects. When would you leave off building a viable civilization? It might take
our presence here for a half century to do it right. Do you want to be here that
long? What if their particular obstacle course of development leads to a really
original culture? Meddling with their development raises difficult ethical
questions.”

I could live here, John thought as he looked at the planet, maybe even come

to love it.

“It’s not even a growing culture,” Blackfriar continued, “but one that has

collapsed. I’ve seen it more than once.”

John thought of Anulka.
“A vote of Projex might not even be enough,” Blackfriar said. “It might take

a referendum of our population to sanction such a chore. Working as closely as

we would have to, we might even lose some of our own people—in accidents,
and some would inevitably want to stay, if you’re any indication.”

“How about material aid?”
“That’s easy to approve.”
“How about accepting immigrants?”
“Possible, but you know the laws. Look, there it is!”
The ancient starship was a bright diamond riding in a high polar orbit around

Lea. The vessel grew larger, until they saw a massive dumbbell attached to a
sluglike hull.

“It’s two kilometers long,” Blackfriar said. “The thing up front is the

deflector generator, to protect against hard radiation formed by collision with
interstellar particles near light speed. There seem to be components missing from
the ship.”

“What kind of drive does it have?”
“I’ve been told it had two—the field-effect pusher to bring them to a

significant fraction of light speed and maybe a primitive faster-than-light effect,
though at near light alone they could have made it here twice during the last
millennium.”

The shuttle docked slowly with the modified lock.
“We can go in without suits,” Blackfriar said. “Wheeler and the crew are

inside. They’ve sealed the ship and restored the air supply. Rob didn’t like
drifting around in a suit when the ship was opened, but he was too curious to
wait.”

He’s afraid for his safety, John thought.
“I’m more curious than afraid myself,” Blackfriar said. “When you’ve lived

more than a few lifetimes in safety, fear becomes a dear friend.”

A voice spoke in archaic English: “…One group after another is abandoning the
ship, as fast as the shuttle can make the round trip. The world below is beautiful.
The ship’s confines have been too much for many of us. A ship is not the world
home was….”

“Who was he?” John asked.
“The captain, a Blackfriar,” Rob Wheeler said.
John looked at Frank, who sat listening in the command station.
“…The crew and I have the choice of taking the ship elsewhere or following

the colonists down. If we go down, we’ll have to take the computers and library
to locate them on the surface for future generations….” The ghostly hiss of time

grew louder, the stifling sound of a universe which would always envy
endurance.

Blackfriar floated around in his seat to look at Wheeler.
Rob nodded. “It’s all gone. They ripped it out and ferried it down. But there

was an accident; a portion of the ship lost pressure. We found a skeleton and
some mummified bodies. We did not find the shuttle.”

“Take me to this skeleton,” Blackfriar said.
Frank pushed himself away from his seat and floated after Wheeler into the

passageway. John followed Blackfriar into the darkness.

Wheeler led the way up the center of the vessel, the lamp on his safety

helmet casting a bright beam ahead of them. John felt that he was floating
upward out of a dark hole; and just as quickly he imagined that he was falling
headfirst into a bottomless pit.

In a few moments the dark shapes of Frank and Rob were gone, and he saw

light streaming out of the chamber they had entered. He floated to the entrance,
looked inside, and pulled himself into what seemed to be an airlock
antechamber.

the fresh seal on the small hole in the ship’s side, but the repair had come
centuries too late for the human skeleton which seemed to be attached to the
gray metal of the floor.

Wheeler floated near the skull. He reached down and took the crew tag in his

hand.

“This was James Blackfriar,” he said, and released the tag to hover on its

chain.

Blackfriar approached and floated over the bones, hands open, as if at any

moment he would push himself away.

“There are others,” Wheeler said.
“Could this,” Blackfriar said, “have ever answered to the same name as my

own?” He reached down and pulled on the chain. The skull loosened and floated
up slowly, turning to stare at him. Blackfriar grasped it with both hands and
placed it gently near the skeleton’s shoulders. “Let’s get out of here,” he said.
“Have the remains cleared, recorded, and destroyed.”

As he followed Blackfriar and Wheeler back into the passage, John tried to

forget the skeleton. Pulling himself along the way they had come, he thought of
his own frame, the skull under his flesh, the brain which now tried to see death
as a common event outside his world. The bones in the room behind him could
not ever have been a real person; they seemed too unlikely for the fact of flesh.
A man had died in that squalid corner of the starship, leaving his pitiable remains

to wait there all these centuries.

Suddenly John stopped pushing himself forward on the handbar. The

skeleton’s frailty, and his own, astonished him. Floating in the darkness, he
thought of all the accidents awaiting him if he returned to Lea.

“John!” Wheeler called from ahead. He grasped the rail and resumed his

forward motion, filled with the sudden wonder of being alive at all.

19. The Village

with the power of human hands. The endless streaming of energy from the twin
suns passed, drastically diminished, into the plant and animal life of Lea, and
only a pitiable portion of that natural wealth became the strength of human
muscle. His palms, finger joints, and back still ached from working on the cabin
he shared with Anulka. Six local months after his arrival, long after he had
become conditioned to physical effort, the only sure way to get rid of his aches
and pains was to move around and do more work, at least until the suns were
high enough to warm him. The nights were cold; a fire heated only one side of a
human body at a time; Anulka kicked him away from her at night. His only
satisfaction was that he had taken a minimal amount of help from home, though
it would have been easy to go and get a portable shelter instead of building a
cabin.

He had grown used to bathing in the stream during the warmest part of the

day. Most of the men shaved with long knives, and the rest grew beards. No one
believed him about not having to shave; Anulka seemed to think that he went up
to the flitter to do so, and nothing could change her mind. Those who wore
beards found the disagreement very funny. Their repeated laughter at the
mention of his hair-lessness was growing tiresome. Hair, having children, and a
certain capacity for violence were the signs of manhood here. Slowly the
villagers were coming to regard him as a kind of visiting neuter, neither man nor
woman, a kind of apprentice godling whose abilities seemed to be limited to
flying through the air. I’m an intruder, he thought. I’ll never belong here
because I know I can always leave.

Below him, the village huddled inside a circle of massive rocks, thirty log

cabins clinging to shelter like a colony of mushrooms, each rough-hewn tree
trunk marking endless hours of hand fitting and sealing with mud. Trees and
bushes pushed up between the rocks, adding a barrier of foliage. Fall would curl
the triangular leaves into stiff rolls filled with sweet paste; these, together with
meat stored in the smokehouse and the bread bush nuts, would provide enough
food to get through winter. The villagers took great pride and comfort in this
achievement; the last few winters had killed a third of the smaller children and
half the older people.

He sat down with his feet over the edge of the huge flat rock, with the

mountains at his back. The tree-clad foothills fell away from him toward the

distant plains. Southeast across the dusty grassland lay the city where he had met
Anulka more than six months before. Soon it would be most of a year since his
world had entered Lea’s sunspace to reproduce.

The suns eclipsed, marking noon; some of the late summer heat drained

from the world. The lessening of light made him feel naked on the rock.
Remembering the night, he shivered in the fur jacket which he wore over his
coveralls; the thought of winter made him grateful for the rock’s warmth.

The brute facts of life on Lea had created a nervous pressure in him, every

small detail triggering a reaction. The fur jacket had belonged to Anulka’s father;
three of her brothers and one sister had died at birth; in a population of nearly
two hundred, there were only a dozen children between the ages of five and ten;
the eyes of children already held the look of their parents’ acceptance of a world
that would never change. One day he had wanted to take all the children home in
the flitter, just to see the change in them after a few months of life offplanet.

Every couple in the village had come to examine the cabin when he had

finished it; after the visits he had learned that he and Anulka were husband and
wife, and the building and visiting had been the ceremony. Anulka’s mother
came to clean and cook during the day, leaving at night for her own cabin two
doors away.

Time passed with a slow effort here, as if preparing to stop; winter would be

a time of dead thoughts, a waiting for time to begin again. The ruined city was
more than two weeks away; a month was a long time when measured by
walking. It seemed an age since he had plucked Anulka from the plain.

Her future husband, Jerad, and her brother Konro had resented the flitter.

After some coaxing, Anulka, Blakfar, and Konro had accepted the lift to the
village; Jerad, the husband selected for Anulka by her dead father, had refused. A
week after the flitter’s arrival, Jerad had come into the village, cursing and
kicking children out of his way. By then Anulka’s mother had accepted her
daughter’s new choice, helped by Blakfar’s approval.

Jerad had left, vowing that he would join the plains people rather than live

with the humiliating loss of what was his by family promise; with Anulka’s
father dead, there was no one willing to enforce the old agreement or even to
confirm that it had been made. No one would risk angering the man from beyond
the sky; acceptance of him would ensure that he would help the village and not
its enemies. John wondered if he would have felt better if Jerad had attacked him
physically; clearly, Jerad had been afraid to fight with an offworlder.

I can leave, John thought, facing again the certainty that he would leave, that

even a few years here would not be a life he could accept. He felt guilty about
Jerad, whose commitment to Anulka would have involved the whole of his short

life. For me it’s a stop on the way. He had disrupted an older system for the
preservation of life, one in which nature did not trust its intelligent organisms to
do the work of life. Living bodies were joined through force or pleasurable
attraction, and one body became the incubator for the new life; the mixing of
genetic material was left to chance and the adaptive pressures of the
environment. Here there was no real choice, except one between life and death;
life always meant slavery.

He remembered the clustering of shy human forms around the flitter on the

day of his arrival, the stench of wastes and unwashed bodies, Anulka’s mother, a
toothless hag at less than twice her daughter’s age, people without arms, legs, or
eyes. It had shaken him to calculate that Anulka’s mother was not much older
than he was. Someone had died in the night four days after his arrival, had
stopped breathing, had stopped thinking and dreaming in the next cabin. It had
seemed impossible that such a thing could happen.

The suns had been a pyre in the noon sky, brothers to the bright fire

consuming the body of Jerad’s father. The mourners stood with bare heads
bowed, hands clasped neighbor to neighbor in a ring of the living, men and
women wrinkle-worn by a world where the look of youth passed quickly from
the human face.

He noticed that the dead man’s name was routinely avoided after the funeral.

The ashes from the fire were spread into the dirt of the square by the old people.
A visitor had come into the village and had left with a life. There was comfort in
the sameness of hospitality toward death….

The suns drifted apart, brightening the world and warming his face. His body

had waited for the now familiar event; but no amount of time would free him of
the vague uneasiness he felt before natural processes. At home everything was
under intelligent control of one kind or another; human will prevailed. Here it
was easy to imagine that some demented god ruled the visible world; proud,
wasteful, and cruel, he drove all nature toward some distant shore of time,
uncaring of the cost.

I will have only one chance to leave, when my world leaves this system.

There was terror in the thought. Lea would be visited again, eventually; but was
he prepared to wait that long—-decades, a century? How long could he live
without the med systems of home? If he stayed, he would have to persuade
Projex to build a medical education station, as much for himself as for the
villagers. “A little help is socially dangerous,” Frank Blackfriar had said. “You’ll
have to spend time to make things work properly. Are you ready to do that? Go
see for yourself what it’s like on a planet—you’ll find out who you really are.”

John took a deep breath, tasting the smell of dusty sod grass coming from

the plains with a wind that promised winter, mingling with the fresh green of the
foothills. Nature was often an enemy here, at its best a powerful friend who still
had to be watched. At home, planetary nature was something to be cared for, a
bit of mind’s past preserved for aesthetic reasons and deeply buried needs;
uncontrolled nature was galactic space, the wheel of suns, gas, and debris onto
whose scale of size and timelessness macrolife had recently entered.

He looked down at the winding trail that ascended to the rock and saw

Anulka coming toward him. She glanced up, her blue eyes wide, black hair
whipping in the rising wind. She walked with the grace of an animal, boots
pushing firmly against the well-worn trail. Her coarse black body shirt was
drawn together at the waist by a leather strap. He knew every muscle under that
shirt, every detail of skin; he knew her smells and how she tasted when they
kissed. She was as much a part of the landscape as the trees gripping the hills
with their roots, the four-footed creatures prowling the forests and plains, the
winged things riding the wind, mocking the high mountains. I don’t know her at
all, he told himself.

Her flesh had been nourished by the protein of living things, unlike his own,

which had grown on perfect foods. His body had not struggled with the poisons
of plant and animal, wearing out its systems transforming foreign materials into
usable structures. All the foods of home were easily assimilated; his body would
never have to work very hard and would last much longer than a natural
worlder’s, even without rejuvenation.

behind a series of massive outcroppings. He would not see her until she came up
behind him on the rock. He remembered how sick he had been after eating the
roast meat she had prepared after his arrival. She had been horrified at his
explanation, forcing him to invent a much simpler one for her benefit. The idea
of chemical identity between the foodstuffs and flesh of macroworlders would
have been interpreted by her as cannibalism.

Blackfriar had sent down a half year’s provisions, which now covered one

wall of the cabin. Anulka would look at the packages occasionally, but she
would never taste anything; there was no way to dispel her idea that his food
would make her ill because her food had affected him.

He heard her coming up the trail just behind the rock. He got to his feet and

walked back to the center of the flat area. She came up to him and put her arms
around his waist, pressing her face into the fur of his jacket.

“You will be going soon,” she said without raising her head. The sounds of

her earth-derived language seemed to vibrate against a black backdrop, giving
her words the finality of a pronouncement. When he did not answer, she

squeezed him roughly. Finally she let go and asked, “Why am I not with child?”
She stepped back and looked up at him, humiliating him with her gaze. “You are
preventing this from happening,” she said. “I can feel it. There is so much you
can do—this must be easy.” He looked away from her eyes.

She put her fists on her hips and continued. “A child would bring us honor in

the village, and if you left I would still have something. I gave up Jerad for you.
If you leave and do not take me with you, I will be disgraced.”

He looked into her face and saw fear. How could he leave her if she had a

child? Could he take them both home with him? Suddenly he felt the power of
her demand, its complete tyranny, the rigidity of the method that formed their
relationship not for love or pleasure, but to ensure the transmittal of genetic
information.

But there was no child, and never would be unless he chose; Anulka sensed

that, and it made her angry because it threatened her position in the village. How
could he explain to her? There could be no children for him unless he decided to
become a parent-teacher, or exemplar, dedicated to raising persons different from
himself. Here children were instruments of personal power and physical
necessity; there could be no future without them, but they were born only to live
the past.

Anulka smiled, took his hands, and sat down, forcing him to kneel; she let

go and pulled the front of her loose tunic above her waist. Dark shapes had
entered the cabin during his first night with her, smiling hags leaning over to
cover them with animal skins. Anulka was pulling him down on top of her. She
wants me to stay forever, he thought. He had dreamed of his skeleton lying next
to hers on the hot plain. He had tried to embrace her, but there was no flesh to
move his arms. He pulled free and staggered to his feet.

Anulka stood up suddenly, made a fist, and struck him across the face. He bit

his tongue involuntarily. She raised her arms to guard against his reprisal, a
pathetic animal waiting for the inevitable. He stepped back to show that he
would not hit her.

She dropped her arms and spat at him. “You’re a coward, afraid even to hit a

woman!”

How little she thinks of herself. She was the physical focus for his guilt about

dirtworlds. He had wanted to help through her, but to be effective he would
always have to stand apart. Anulka had worked to draw him into the life of this
world, but he knew now that he was not capable of giving that much of himself
away. How could he explain his disappointment to her? How could he blame her
for not being what he had wanted her to be? He had disappointed her completely,
humiliating her in the eyes of the village.

She turned and marched away. He thought of those his own age and the new

world they were building. He thought of the bones in the old starship. Lea had
not grown to justify the sacrifice of those who had crossed space to settle here.

He watched Anulka going back down the path toward the village. He might

have made love to her; it might have been kinder.

He walked to the boulder’s edge, scrambled down the dirt incline, and

walked into the forest, following the uphill path toward the clearing where he
kept the flitter. He needed a talk with Blackfriar. Anulka had resented his coming
up here to draw food from the supply dump, so he had ferried much of what he
needed down to the cabin; but she was still suspicious of his going to talk with
voices in the sky.

been disappointed in his description of a food factory. She would have liked
visions of a strange land on the other side of the sky, a geography of beasts and
jungles and hunters riding steeds as tall as mountains. More than anything she
wished for powerful figures who could redeem the harshness of her life. We have
solved the problems of planet life, he thought, only to become incomprehensible
to those still living with those problems.

grassy center next to a pile of supply crates, a black beetle bathing in a pool of
sunlight rimmed by dark forest. He stopped to catch his breath, aware of the
tanned roughness of his face, the dryness in his throat, and the weariness in his
muscles. The planet was changing him, pulling him back into the past, where he
could live only if he imported many of the features of his own world; anything
less would be suicide.

He took a deep pull of the cool, clean air and looked up. The portion of open

sky showed a mountain sparring with a wayward cloud drifting in to obscure the
snowy summit.

He walked to the flitter and stepped into the boarding footholds. The canopy

slid up and he climbed inside, settling into a familiar bit of home, shutting out
Lea’s sounds as the lift brought the bubble down and the dais of twin seats rose
into the canopy. The craft sat on a slant and he was looking into the trees left of
the path.

He tried to relax. Here the temperature was constant, the air free of dust and

living things, and the light was filtered to a pleasant shade of blue; the silence
was a space in which to think. I can leave right now, he thought. In a few
moments he could reduce all this land to a few wrinkles in the vertical viewer,
then shrink the planet into a glowing mote drifting in darkness. What would
Anulka be then? A microbe yearning to reproduce?

John hesitated, unhappy with his thoughts, sad at their severity. At his left,

the empty seat sat like a reproachful companion. I need more reason to go, he
thought, or a more attractive excuse.

He touched his thumb to the laserlink, hoping that Frank would answer on

his personal channel. As he waited he tried to resolve that he would ignore easy
excuses and follow a reasonable path, whichever way it led.

“Blackfriar.”
“Frank…”
“What’s up, exile?”
“I needed to talk.”
“Go ahead; I’m listening.”
“I don’t know if I can deal with life here any more.”
“Why not?”
“I’ve gotten too involved, maybe.”
“Leave, then.”
“I can’t, Frank, I just can’t.”
“To stay must mean that you have no doubts, and that you’re ready to give

everything.”

“There must be more we can do….”
“You’re not being honest. What you want is for us to do something without

abandoning you here. Look, have you tried to get others interested?”

“No. You know they’re busy with their own world.”
“Tell me what you think I can do. In my position I’m just a switchboard.

Sure, Humanity II tells us what is workable, but people make all kinds of
demands and I try to juggle them. You have no idea what we’re going through
with the new world. It’s an orderly rebellion, that’s what it is, but we’re still
having a lot of politics and bitterness over how they’re going to do things
differently.”

“I want Anulka with me, maybe some of the children here.”
“Well—one or two people, that’s up to you. You know the place to find out

about procedures. Just tap the memory.”

“Frank, I don’t even know how to talk about all this—is there something

wrong with me?”

“Not at all. Listen to me—you’re struggling with the idea of how to attach

an underdeveloped culture to a more advanced one, in this case a fallen culture.
It’s a good impulse. It gives you a sense of commitment, a sense of something to
stand up for. Ages ago war drew the same impulses from people, bringing out
their courage, loyalty, and constructive intelligence, as well as their sense of
altruism, discipline, and sacrifice—not always to a good end, but bravery is real

even if the end is without value. It was important for people to have their way
against an enemy, against nature, against severe limits—it’s the mark of human
free will. Later, moral equivalents for war became possible.”

“What does this have to do with me?”
“It’s what you’re looking for, but the process of attachment makes a culture

our dependent, an annexation, even if we limit our help to material things. It’s
subtle, the way things go—a social dynamic is set in motion. The backward
culture knows it’s low man and can’t do much about it.”

“But in time…”
“Yes. In time the culture would assert itself. Or would it? We would have to

give more than material goods. Attitudes and outlooks go with the use of things,
whole sciences and technologies, everything that we are. Right now we’re not in
the business of guiding planetary histories. Usually it’s best to avoid contact with
young or backward cultures. Let them rise and bud away from their planetary
surface by themselves.”

“But we’re related to these people, Frank.”
The voice at the other end sighed. “That’s why we permitted contact here,

knowing that there would not be too much shock. We can leave some help, most
of it in the form of usable information that will help later on. But listen—if you
take Anulka you’ll leave behind a lot of resentment.”

“She wants me, Frank.”
“Does she? Or escape from her life? Think again. She would become

someone else if you extended her life and gave her an education. You would be
her exemplar, teaching her to stand without you. After a quarter of a century she
might understand enough to dislike your having made a project of her.”

“What else can I do?”
“Well, consider that there is already at work on Lea a native dynamic of

scarcity and intelligent response to problems—a human creativity that will one
day create its own better circumstances.”

“Or perish. You’re saying it’s good for them.”
“Intelligence needs challenges. If you do things for a child, you make it

weak, denying it the chance to grow by coming to grips with its environment in a
give-and-take.”

“Does it have to be a struggle?”
“It’s all we know. John, if you want to stay and can get others to help you,

we’ll equip a base with all you need for a major project. We’re not dogmatic.
You might succeed—but it must be what you want, really want after careful
thought. Or if you want to spend a lifetime with Anulka, we’ll take her in, if
that’s what you decide. But do you see that Anulka is the large problem written

small?”

“Blakfar is yourself along a different road.”
“I know, I know—do you suppose I haven’t thought about it?” Blackfriar

was silent for a moment. “Consider: we have a free society, but we can’t say
what each individual should do with personal freedom or that each individual
will be a success. The same goes for societies. Ignorance, incompetence,
frustration, and helplessness—these are basics that could only be eliminated by
an omnipotent planner. Then you would no longer have intelligent beings as we
know them, finite and imperfect, or a universe in process. The problems we’ve
solved in our way of life are old ones, easily recognized. What do we contribute
to the future? We reproduce our framework of freedom, a social container that
guarantees the material support of free life. We can expect certain duties from
our citizens, but it is not our business to dictate anything else.”

“What do you think I should do, Frank?”
“Choose among your alternatives.”
“Don’t avoid my question.”
“After all I’ve said, you want me to tell you what to do. I won’t do that. Go

ahead, build a world-saving project here, build a macroworld to circle Lea as a
guardian of development. As a private citizen I have the option to join your
project, but as a planner I must remain neutral. As a planner I don’t try to mold
the creative impulses of macro-worlders, as the planetary civilizations of earth
tried to do with each new generation. My job is to preserve the frame, guarding
it from destruction. One day you will become a planner, but it will not be for
yourself, but to keep macroworlders free within their context, because only that
context makes macrolife work. My foresight and that of the other planners must
not strait-jacket the future. Foresight must always limit itself to making creative
novelty possible, to keep things open. You seem to want an authoritarian
context….”

“Frank, these people are us, not some alien hominid culture!”
“As it happens, an alien species might have been exterminated when the

colony starship first appeared over Lea. From examining the ship, we know that
its weapons systems were powerful enough to clear whole areas of life. Faced
with nowhere to go, the colonists might have committed genocide.”

Frank.”

Blackfriar answered after a longer silence. “The reality would fall far short

of your ideals for a long time. Doing good has no end.”

“Maybe the new world would back me?”
“Ask them. There is one thing I could approve, though.”

“What is it?”
“The village population is so small that we could remove them and distribute

them here and on the new world. We would be saving the lives of countless
unborn. A large planetary population will suffer extraordinary numbers of dead
from natural catastrophes—earthquakes, electrical storms, floods, tornadoes,
high winds, diseases. Actual figures from old earth are appalling. Sooner or later
planet dwellers develop a crude technical civilization that kills even more
people, and finally limits to growth lead to a final conflict. If the culture is lucky,
it creates space settlements, opens the resources of its sunspace, and takes the
pressure off the natural environment.”

“All roads lead to us—that’s what you’re saying.”
“It does become a life-and-death choice, a matter of demonstrable history.

Villages and cities were rudimentary forms of macrolife, where people gathered
to defy the authority of nature’s gods. Commerce, art, science, and technology
were born in urban areas, and it was there that human intelligence saw that the
world might be remade. An old earth writer once said that the book of life is
nothing more than man’s war with nature, the battle between jungle and village.
We say that the book of macrolife is the conflict between macroforms and
natural planets. But the difference is that we don’t want a conflict. We want to be
free of the claims of planet dwellers, to develop in our own way. We don’t want
to be philanthropists or destroyers of natural worlds, which belong to their
peoples, human or alien.”

“How often have we observed all this to be true? Only on old earth and a

few colonies. Have we seen an alien culture, macroform or planetbound?”

“No. But the view is built on the fact of diminishing energy and resources on

planets. The culture must leave the surface or die, even if its macrolife does not
become mobile, as we have done, but circles its sun.”

“Could we take the entire village off Lea?”
“It would be your project. I think you could handle it with a minimum of

help, because you won’t get much interest, I think. How many are there?”

“About two hundred people.” Suddenly John felt hopeful.
“We could isolate that number easily,” Blackfriar said, “give them a small

town in the core, something like what they have now.”

planets and suns and surfaces that curved the other way.

“What do you think?” Blackfriar asked.
“I don’t know. I’ll call you again after I think about it some more. Thanks for

talking, Frank.”

“Don’t wait too long, and come back for a medical as often as you can.”

“I feel fine.”
Blackfriar broke the link.
Alone again, John sat back and took a deep breath. He thought of a small

boy hiking around the hollow, lying in the tall grass next to a stream that emptied
into a lake in the sky. Sita Kagami used to swim in the lake on the days he hiked
to the shore, and he would wait for her to come out of the water so that he could
see how beautiful she was in the nude. She would leave the water and lie down
on the grass without paying attention to him. He had been five and she six, and
he had been in love with her for a long while. Where was she now? Probably
helping to build the new world. Where was his childhood exemplar, Nyl Tassos
the biologist, who designed butterflies and nursed them into life? He had stopped
seeing him after Margaret had come for him and he had made friends with Rob
Wheeler. Why had Tassos decided to reproduce a Bulero? Was his sense of
aesthetics outraged by the lack of a living example? John tried to think back to
his earliest memories and startled himself again with the fact of self-awareness.

suggesting a moored skyship. He leaned back and closed his eyes. Anulka,
Anulka, he called within himself, why could you not have been what I wanted?
She came up to him again in the pale realm of memory and put her arms around
his neck, pulling his lips to hers. Then she pushed him backward onto the soft
mat and fell on top of him, laughing at his look of surprise. Her mother’s cabin
smelled of old wood and human sweat, and the only light came through an open
square in the roof. They struggled for a time with their clothes. The smell of her
had been strange for a moment, but her smile renewed his desire. Free of their
clothes, he rolled on top of her. She was pliant as he entered her, and she locked
her legs around his waist and held him. Her eyes were closed as he worked with
her. He looked around at the bare earth, the mud in the walls, the bits of bark still
clinging to the crudely cut logs. Near the back wall, a small crablike creature
was crawling into a hole. He closed his eyes and held Anulka fiercely. A bit of
evening air coming in from above had stirred on his bare back….

off from the peak with a new wind. The afternoon eclipse was in progress. He
raised the canopy and heard the world whispering angrily at the loss of light. The
breeze fluttered the leaves, adding a rustle to the whisper, and the smells of
living and dying things seemed suddenly to be the signs of madness. John
climbed from the flitter and started down the path toward the rock that
overlooked the village.

Coming out of the trees, he scrambled up the incline and stepped back onto

the outcropping, knowing full well that he was avoiding a return to the village.

As he crept to the edge, he saw thick smoke coming up from the settlement. Far-
off cries struggled to be heard as the wind whipped the smoke and hid his view
of the dirt center.

Turning, he made his way to the path and ran downhill, knowing that it

would be at least fifteen minutes before he reached the village on the winding
trail; but he decided against returning to the flitter, which would have put him
into the village in minutes if he had been in the clearing.

Fear stiffened his running. Had one of the houses caught fire? Which house

was burning? The world melted away as he thought of losing Anulka, and
distance became the only reality.

Finally he was running across level ground toward the trees and rocks.

Branches brushed against him and he burst into the village. Horsemen were
setting torches to dwellings. Others were sacking the smokehouse and food
stores. Loud cries mingled with the roar of fire. The raiders were large, bearded
plainsmen clad in thick animal skins. A group of nervous horses was churning up
a dust cloud, as the men loaded the animals with spoils. The midafternoon suns,
just coming out of eclipse, cast yellow beams through the dust.

John heard a horse grunt and watched as the rider and animal came toward

him. The mounted invader was swinging a long piece of leather with rocks tied
to the ends. The whistling stones caught John in the chest, throwing him on his
back. Stunned, he watched a number of riders dismount to kick in the door of a
cabin where several villagers were making a stand.

Struggling to his feet, John staggered through the dust toward his own cabin.

His chest ached as he breathed; he tasted blood and spat it out. As he circled
around the horses, he saw Anulka run out, clutching her ripped body shirt. A
man rushed out after her, swinging a club.

John tripped over a stone and fell on his face. Blood and dust mixed in his

mouth. When he looked up, the bearlike figure was clubbing Anulka across the
back of her head as she attempted to crawl away on her belly. The man dropped
the club and drew his knife. John tried to call out, but the man turned her over
and cut her throat.

his chest was molten metal slipping into his stomach. He was lying with his back
against the sky and the mass of the entire planet came into his open arms,
crushing him into oblivion as he tried to embrace it.

he knew that the shock of the blow had been worse than the actual damage. He

was still lying face down in the dust. Turning his head to rest on one cheek, he
saw Anulka. The village seemed peaceful, except for the settling dust and the
crackle of burning logs; then he noticed the smell of burning flesh mixing with
that of charred wood.

Suddenly he felt whip blows on his back. He turned over and saw Anulka’s

mother, a bloodied specter raising a wooden rod to strike him. Her lips were shut
tight; her face was bruised and covered with dust. Every other blow missed and
struck the ground next to him. “What are you doing?” he managed to whisper.
She raised the stick again and collapsed onto him. For a moment he watched her
face; her eyes were wide open and bloodshot, filled with reproach. Her lips
moved but no sound came out; in a moment she was looking past him into some
horrible abyss. A bit of saliva ran from her mouth into the dirt as he pushed her
away.

He lay back and stared at the sky, trying to forget the old woman’s face, the

terrible sense of loss he had seen in it. All her past was gone, and all her future.
She would never see Anulka’s children; a passing of eternity would not be
enough to change the fact. Home had always existed for him, and there were
others elsewhere in the galaxy. He imagined what it would be like if even one
macroworld died.

After a while he sat up and looked toward Anulka. She lay dead in the warm

afternoon, sunlight bright on her bloody head. He could just see the red wound
under her chin. There was a pool of drying blood next to her skull.

“John!” a voice shouted, breaking.
He turned and saw Tomas Blakfar writhing on the ground a dozen meters

away. John climbed to his feet and staggered toward him, falling on his knees
next to the old man.

“You should have been here to protect her,” Blakfar whispered loudly. “You

could have helped with your flier.” The old man coughed. John noticed wounds
in his chest and head. Blakfar was lying in his own blood, much of it already
soaked up by the dusty ground.

“I’ll get the flitter and take you to one of the med units at the mining sites.”
“I’ll be dead before you get back.”
“I’ll try anyway.”
Blakfar grabbed his wrist.
“I’m going, lie still,” John said. He felt tears pushing out of his eyes, more

for Blakfar than for Anulka. The realization surprised him, making him angry.

“Don’t let me die alone,” Blakfar said, gasping.
“I won’t, I won’t.”
“Save some of the children…if they live.”

“I will, I will,” John said, looking around.
The old man closed his eyes as John held his hand. There was still a pulse,

but he had lost consciousness.

John forced himself to stand up. If he could reach the flitter, there might still

be time to save Blakfar’s life. He looked to Anulka, knowing that he could not
approach her body; if her eyes were open, he would never be able to forget them.

up the long trail, which seemed to grow longer with each stride he took. He felt
that his heart would burst before he reached the clearing. The pain in his chest
and stomach was coming back, pouring now into his arms and legs; at any
moment the molten liquid would solidify, freezing his motion.

He swooped down toward the village, bringing the craft to a hover over the

circle of rocks, then setting down near Blakfar.

Climbing out quickly, he reached the old man and felt his pulse. The hand

was cold, but there was still a pulse. Blakfar opened his eyes as the pulse died
and the head fell sideways. John noticed the caked blood in the old man’s hair.

John rushed back to the flitter and climbed inside. Clumsily he thumbed

Frank Blackfriar’s channel.

There was no answer.
He tried Miklos.
“Yes?” a voice asked after a few moments.
John opened his mouth to speak, but his throat was so dry that nothing came

out. He swallowed hard and tried again.

“Miklos—there’s been a massacre here. I think most of the village is dead.

Can we get a freezer down here fast?”

“For how many, John?”
“Two people,” he said, feeling the injustice immediately.
“If they have massive head wounds of any kind, we won’t do it.”
“Why not?”
“Too hard to repair. They come out different people and with too many

functional problems. We couldn’t get anyone there in less than two hours
anyway. Are they dead now?”

“Yes,” John said, the anger rising inside him.
“Forget it.”
“Damn you, get them over here!”
“John, it’s too late. We can’t get approval fast enough. There are head

wounds, right?”

was nothing he could do to grasp it.

“Come home,” Miklos said softly.
John broke off the link. He looked out through the canopy at the burning

buildings, most of them smoldering now, hiding the bodies among the charred
timbers. Blakfar and Anulka seemed lonely lying so far apart in the bright
sunlight.

Suddenly he reached for the manual stick and lifted the flitter straight up for

a thousand feet, shrinking the village to a messy patch of stones, smoke, and
barren ground surrounded by greenery.

He looked around, hoping for a glimpse of the retreating raiders. Beyond the

green edge he saw the plain where the horsemen were certain to emerge.
Dropping the craft to treetop level, he moved quickly toward the open country.

His thoughts raced, a thousand whispering voices merging into a babble.

Then he was over the plain, an endless desolation of flat grassland stretching
skyward, stirred into waves by a dry wind. He stopped his forward rush, turned
the craft around, and settled on the grass.

Resting his face in his hands, he leaned forward, watching the tree-line. He

closed his eyes for a moment. The voices became sparks of light in his brain,
threatening to coalesce into an angry mass of power.

He sat up. The horses were out of the trees, hoofs flying as the riders forced

the animals forward. Together men and beasts made a larger creature, a giant
insect body of brown and black dotted with human faces.

He waited until they were well into the open. Lifting the flitter, he moved it

forward at a height of two meters, aiming for the center of the multilegged
monster, flattening the grass before him as he increased speed.

The riders were clearly visible now, bearded men in thick animal skins

driving their horses mercilessly. The tethered packhorses were overloaded with
stolen provisions.

They’re not human, John thought. I’m killing a dangerous animal. At two

hundred kilometers per hour, he had enough speed to cut through the center
without slowing. He gripped the stick with both hands as the craft closed. What
am I doing? He wanted to close his eyes, but the skin of his face and scalp
seemed to be stretched tightly around his skull, forcing his eyes to stay open.
Faces filled his view, white patches with eyes, attached to a moving mass of
flesh. He felt a thud, and another, and two more before he was rushing at the
trees. Suddenly he felt the lash marks Anulka’s mother had left on his back.
Pulling the stick back, he climbed above the forest and circled for another run.
The creature had split in two, leaving the center to riderless horses; mercifully,

the ocean of grass had swallowed the disfigured dead.

Enough. He aimed for the riders at his right, accelerating until speed pulled

clear perception into a blur at his sides. His heart was a cold, beating stone as he
sped forward to shatter flesh. He looked up beyond the trees, farther to the lower
hills, past the treeline to the mountain ridges, toward wall after wall of rock and
snow; and it seemed that no amount of force would ever be enough to carry a
man over the top. Two thuds registered as constrictions in his stomach. He pulled
the stick back, circled again over the trees, and drifted back toward the riders.

The scattered survivors were moving slowly. John dropped down and flitted

after a group of three still heading due east. Enough, leave them. He let the craft
strike two blows in one sweep and turned his head in time to see the third steed
stumble and throw the rider forward. The figure hit the ground and lay still,
becoming small as the flitter rushed away.

He circled for a closer look. The man was crawling as John landed a dozen

meters away. Raising the canopy, he climbed out into a dry wind and heard
labored breathing. He walked up to the figure and stopped. The man fell from all
fours onto his side and stared at him. It was Jerad.

“I did not want her killed!” He held his hand out to keep John away. “I did

not know there would be so much killing. I could not stop it.”

“You led them here to take our food!”
“They took me in when I had no place to go.”
“The whole village!” John heard himself shout over the wind. Jerad rolled

over onto his back. His brown eyes stared upward, tear-filled from dust and pain.
“You could have left them their lives. It would have cost you nothing to do that!”

“It was a favor, they said, to kill them after we took the food. The village

would not get through the winter.”

“I would have gotten them through!” John shouted.
Jerad was silent, looking at the sky. John stepped up to his head and kicked it

as if it were a ball, feeling the temple give way. Jerad’s mouth opened and his
throat gurgled. John kicked again.

He looked east and saw horses on the horizon. The riderless beasts were

following the survivors. The suns started their late afternoon eclipse, fading one
of his two shadows from the ground. He coughed from the dust in his throat,
then turned and walked back to the flitter. He climbed under the canopy, shutting
out the wind, leaving only the small voices in his head.

deep blue was filling with stars; the reds and yellows of the sinking suns made a

fresh wound in the western sky, spilling a bloody light onto the blue-white
glacier below the peaks.

Anulka, Anulka, he called down into his bottomless, newly opened self, I

killed you. My coming made Jerad an exile. I caused his bitterness and your
death, and I killed him and so many others I never knew….

He had come here hoping to be helpful. The village was avenged—except

there was no village now, no community that he might have raised into
something better.

Fire-linked, the suns touched the mountains, settling entwined into the

quenching cold of snow and stone. In a moment the primaries were only a wash
of light behind the range, leaving the sky to the growing light of the great cluster.

the flitter’s canopy.

Blakfar, Anulka, forgive me.
Are you leaving us? the small voices asked.
Yes, John said silently, looking up into the cold starlight.
And suddenly he was alone again. The voices were still, as if they had

forgiven him; he lifted his hands to his face and wept.

20. Home

through his eyelids as the noon eclipse ended. The wind was gentle, cooling him
just enough for comfort. He opened his eyes, remembering that Anulka was dead
and he had come home. The silence was perfect in the apartment he had shared
with Margaret. His eyes followed the ceiling as it curved gently down into a
wall. Daylight spilled into the room through the one-way window at his right.
Lea was far away as he floated in the room’s blue hues. The reduced gravity of
the bed, the lack of blankets and clothing, seemed strange, but his sleep had been
deep and long, giving the kind of rest he had been without for months.

No one had come to see him since his return, and he did not want to see

anyone. He stretched and thought of the Humanity II intelligences, who knew
everything that had ever been known. He thought of Wheeler, whose link-
extended mind roamed through a universe of superconducting patterns. Would
life be so much different with a link? Would he be able to pass the tests of health
and sanity to be granted a license? How much of humankind’s collective wisdom
would it take to teach him to live with murder? The pressure of the question
forced him to consider alternatives. He had been living only a small part of
human life, the life that had been the rule in the past, the life that can be only one
thing at a time, that moves outward to grasp all things and fails, craving infinity
as it falls back into finitude. The mode of consciousness bestowed by the link
was also power over the limits of one’s self, Wheeler had once told him; through
it a macroworlder was also every human being who had ever recorded a feeling,
thought, or discovery. One could never think all the information in the memory
bank all at once, but it was available as one desired it, keeping faith with the
past. In a sense it was no different from biological memory, which also had to be
summoned a piece at a time; and like individual memory, the link formed a
perceived background, tacitly altering one’s sense of identity. The link made an
individual a full citizen, a complete participant; to use the link critically was all
of education. I’ve been alone for so long, I don’t want to be myself any more.
The thought of Lea tightened his stomach. His body moved with the memory of
death, twitching as he saw himself breaking the bodies of the horsemen, faceless
except for Jerad, all forever dead.

He had thrown his clothes from Lea into the recycler, where nothing was

wasted. Hands had stitched the garments together with bone needle and leather
thread, hands now still beneath the ground. The clothes had seemed such pitiable

things lying on the floor of the bathroom.

He got up from the bed and went to the window. From the first floor, he

could see people walking among the trees. The widely spaced columns stood
like sentries over the scene, hundred-story pillars holding the levels apart as far
as the eye could see. Irregularly shaped daylight screens covered the sky, looking
like clouds of bright white light. The blue sky itself, the underside of the next
level, seemed very near when he looked at it, but the light screens appeared to be
portals into an infinity of white space. All this, he thought, is also the work of
human hands, fingers and thumb made powerful by the brain’s dreams.

He remembered that he had promised himself that he would never come

back to this apartment, that he would never see Margaret again. Anulka, you
might have liked it here. I would have brought you. He knew that it would have
taken her a long time to adjust, to learn, and by then they might not have been
together; but he was thinking of how it would have been for her, and her alone,
and it would have been better than dying.

Suddenly he remembered his dream. He was with Jerad on the glacier,

rolling down toward the edge with his hands around the other’s throat. The sky
looked as if someone had painted it a shade of blue too dark; the mountains
looked too sharp, as if focused through a distorting lens. Jerad’s neck was hot in
his hands, the blood pulsing desperately into the dirtworlder’s head. John
squeezed harder as Jerad held him in a hug. Over and over they turned on the
hard-pack ice, and still the final swift drop into a crevass did not come. I wanted
to kill him. I would have left him on the glacier to die. I wanted to kill him, but I
wanted him to take me with him. He thought of his boot and Jerad’s head.

“Hello.”
John turned around at the sound of Margaret’s voice. She was standing in the

bedroom doorway with both hands in the pockets of her short coveralls. He
struggled against his own reaction, but he was glad to see her.

“You’ll have to talk to someone sooner or later,” she said.
“I didn’t want to see anyone,” he mumbled lamely, feeling that he would not

have the strength to resist her presence.

“Miklos checked the village and took care of the dead. We have a pretty

good idea of what happened, Rob, Frank, and myself.”

hardened your body. You look coarser, older, too lean for a stocky person.”

“I became a murderer down there.”
She was silent for a moment. “It won’t settle you to hear me, I know, but

please listen.”

He sat down next to her and sighed nervously, feeling himself tremble. She

touched the small of his back reassuringly.

“I’ve been a menace,” he said. He turned and looked at her, noticing that she

still wore her hair in a bundle at the back. “I—I caused everything that happened
down there—the bad feelings between Jerad and the village, the raid.”

“Listen,” she said. “The raiders destroyed the village, not you. How else

could you have judged them except in their own way?”

“But I went down there to help, don’t you see?”
“The raiders might have died in the winter except for the stolen food.”
“But they didn’t have to kill so much.”
“The village would have starved without its food stores.”
“I didn’t have to kill so many.”
“You were angry, unprepared. You’re not responsible for the killing they did,

only for your own, and that only in part. Why do you think you went to Lea?”

John shrugged. “I don’t think I know anymore. I wanted it very much—to

see something different, I guess.”

“You felt it was important, and later you wanted to help change what you

saw. A similar historical experience motivated the founders of macrolife. Many
of us have agonized about earth’s scattered colonies. We know they’re isolated
and backward. Humankind is a collection of fragments right now—those who
are planetbound because they have no choice and maybe a dozen macroworlds
like us.”

“I know all that. What’s your point?”
“Simply this: We’re following our own path and maybe we’re not wise

enough or powerful enough to help.”

“And we tend to discount the possibility of a successful civilization existing

on a planet—that’s really what is behind our reluctance to help.”

“That’s true. We haven’t seen much to change our minds. That’s the way

cultures seem to grow. Earlier social forms are—well, earlier. A child is not an
adult. A collection of dust in space will not necessarily become a star.”

“But all we’ve seen is the overspill from a ruined solar system,” John said.

“What about alien cultures? Maybe others have done well with planets.”

from space-based industry. Even so, they would have to limit their world’s
population, while off world population would be growing without check,
because it could do so without much trouble.”

“You’re assuming that any advancing culture will develop macroforms.”
“It’s not the terrible thing you seem to feel it is. Planets are geothermal

bombs, plates of mud and rock floating on a molten core—all of it left over from
objects that were not big enough to become stars. The surfaces are dangerous

beyond anything you have seen, killing a myriad intelligent beings across the
course of historical time. Resources are scarce, the level of industrialization
limited by the capacity of the planet to absorb heat. Ecobiological concerns slow
the pace of technical evolution, effectively preventing the emergence of an
efficient technology and economics that would exist to serve humane aspirations.
A culture moves off its planet in order to take chains off the human spirit.”

John shrugged again. “How can I argue with any of this? I don’t think I ever

did, yet all that seems good is forever fleeing from my grasp.”

“You went to Lea to learn. You wouldn’t have had to go if you knew what

you would find.”

He knew everything she would say. You have to risk being wrong to have a

chance at being right. We grow by taking positions for keeps and acting on them
until we succeed or fail. It’s a well-known theorem that error is more valuable
than success, because error teaches you something new, while success teaches
you only to repeat it. Success is a rut, error an exploration into the unknown.
Humanity II practices this method systematically; but human minds are better at
it, since they produce the most fruitful errors and are more creative as a result….

“I’m a murderer, don’t you see?”
“What happened was not premeditated killing, but more like warfare.”
“What will happen to me?”
“We have no legal agreements with Lea—there is no government there.”
“That’s a real help.”
Margaret sighed. He almost cringed at her show of impatience. “I know you

don’t like my being explicit because it does little for your feelings, but it’s
important to offer your feelings a strong alternative. Look—murder is generally
wrong, but a general injunction against murder, or killing, has no force or
meaning unless it can be applied in a variety of differing, even exclusive
circumstances. Killing for profit is murder. Killing in self-defense is not murder.
It’s a strict application of the rule against murder, because not to defend yourself
would mean that you acquiesce in your own murder. Your own life comes before
the attacker’s, since he initiated the situation and is responsible for it. Therefore,
if you kill him you are obeying the rule against killing, because you are
preventing your own murder and possibly the murder of others. The death of
your attacker is incidental and entirely his fault.”

“What about suicide?”
“Suicide is entirely your own business, even if you get someone else to do it

for you. Defense during an invasion is also not murder. The attackers are
responsible for their own deaths.”

“And what of punishment?”

“We would never execute an imprisoned criminal. You know that. Your

pursuit of the raiders came about as the result of their destruction of the village,
which you could not control. Make no mistake, they were responsible for your
rage, which was justified. Think of other villages you might have saved by your
killings.”

“But Jerad would not have encouraged them.”
“They might have come anyway, as they had in the past. And Jerad is

responsible for his own choices, not you.”

John felt the tears behind his eyes. “But I didn’t have to kill so many—they

had no chance against me.” Margaret’s analysis seemed too easy.

“You used the tools at your disposal, the flitter. But all this is hindsight. Did

you think at the time, or did you simply do it?”

“I wanted to do it after I saw Anulka die.”
“You simply reacted.” She sat closer to him and put her arm around his bare

shoulders. “You were defending the one you loved, on a world where there is no
law. Your outrage and punishment of the guilty was probably the only lawlike
action against the raiders in centuries.”

“I might have just knocked them off their horses…. I forgot the horses.”
“What would you have done with the killers? They’re too short lived to

change.”

“Jerad might have understood. Now he’s dead forever.”
“The thing to do is to recognize that the situation was very bad from the start

and go on from that.”

He turned and looked into Margaret’s eyes. “Thanks for trying to help, but

it’s no good right now, no good at all. The thought of living with this, especially
when I can’t get rid of it, scares me. I feel dirty and can’t get clean.”

unless we took it all. You might think Anulka still lived. Memories are related
and you would become curious about the blanks.”

I might have saved a few of the children, he thought, if I had taken them

away earlier.

“No,” he said.
“You see, you do value what has happened.”
“I don’t have the right to forget.”
“Exactly what the value of it is for you will become clearer in time. I can’t

make you accept all I’ve said, but I think you will find your way to it.”

“I disliked you, Margaret.”
“I know, and I don’t blame you.”
“That makes me feel worse.”

home.”

But as he looked at Margaret and tried to hold himself together, the thought

of Anulka filled him again. Blakfar’s dying pulse beat was once more in his
hand. His mouth was dry. He could not see the end of living with what had
happened.

memory as John walked into the office and sat down in front of the old teak
desk. The official setting reminded him again that he passed in and out of
Frank’s awareness with hundreds of other matters.

“We’re leaving this system. We’ve been in motion since this morning.”
“No,” John said, startled inwardly.
“We’re going to see what happened to the solar system. Our new mobile is

coming with us, at least that far. Later they’ll decide to do as they please.”
Blackfriar leaned back in his chair and scratched the unchanging black stubble
on his scalp. “What are you going to do?” Blackfriar always managed to sound
genuinely interested.

“I don’t believe that it has all happened. The last month I’ve been going

around feeling that everything is terribly wrong. I hear sounds, normal sounds,
but I interpret them as if I were still on Lea’s surface.”

“Don’t worry, you’ll get used to being home. How do you feel about

linking?”

Smoke rose from the village, dirtying the sky. Run; get there quickly….
“I’m sorry, Frank.”
“What about linking—how are the exams going?”
“They say I’m fine. I don’t know—do you honestly think it will help me?”
“Yes, I do. For one thing, you would not be locked up so much in yourself.

You would share more. You would be able to compare your own mind with
others and with the independent intelligence that is Humanity II. You would see
precedent for your own problems on a large scale. Your own finitude and
isolation would not be as great as it is now. But before you get your license, I
would like you to go look at the work of Richard Bulero.”

“You’re so sure they’ll grant me a license. Why Richard Bulero?”
“You’ll see why when you read what he said.”
“You’re trying to appeal to my pride.”
“Not entirely. Biologically, Richard was your nephew, Sam Bulero’s

brother’s son. If he were alive now, Sam would be your social father and twin

brother. My point is that you may find a kindred mind.”

“I’ll take a look, Frank. Don’t push me.”
“Good enough.”
John felt the anger coming up in himself and fought to control it. Frank

seemed so calm, so trusting. John tried to imagine Blackfriar killing someone
with a club or a knife. He saw a small patch of dusty ground and Anulka falling
forward, toppled by the crushing blow from behind.

Taking a deep breath, he asked, “Why don’t we have more murderers?

Where are our wars, Frank, why are we so special?”

“You seem sorry to find us peaceful.”
“Well?”
“We have killing, mental illness…”
“I know, but why nothing on a large scale—what we find in earth’s history

or the lawlessness on Lea?”

“As a matter of fact,” Blackfriar said, “we have just gone through the

equivalent of a war, loss of population and all. When the quarrels reached a high
point a few years ago, there was nothing to do but prepare for reproducing.
When I say quarrels, I mean severe internal strife. It’s usually our signal that
we’ve exceeded our optimum size and should reproduce.”

“You sound like you’re trying to blame me for not being interested.”
“You’re right,” Blackfriar said, raising his voice. “The right is yours to be a

recluse, but I don’t like it. It’s about time I told you that you’ve been an ostrich.
You’ve gone through the whole romantic malady, including the bleeding concern
with anything and everything outside your own culture.”

“An ostrich-what’s that?”
“A goddam bird, hides its head in the sand.”
“Goddam?”
“Let me get back to my point, please?”
“Go ahead.”
“Even though we’ve institutionalized rebellion and made the process

productive, we are still skeptical about unmodified human nature, though not
cynical. Thus what would be a disruption of most past societies is made to work
for us. Procedural revolution makes it possible for us to absorb new approaches
without undue harm to the previous society, which remains intact, minus its
defectors. What I’m describing is not simple. There’s a whole new world next to
ours, with enough potential surface area inside to equal the surface of an earth-
sized planet. Within the next few years, half our population may switch over to
it. Don’t think there is no bitterness. No one has suggested we abandon the
general guidelines of macrolife, but one day that may happen, I’m afraid.”

corruption? Surely we don’t just depend on people to be good?”

“Not completely. Think of it this way. Planetary problems arise from

economic scarcity and the misuse of political power, either from greed or from
the love of power itself. On planets a small class overproduces wealth through
support of research and development, after stealing the wealth from human
labor, from human and animal muscle in the beginning. Then the power of this
class declines, since power can no longer be bought with wealth alone, but also
with ability. Finally, physical wealth is abundant enough for everyone. So where
anyone of ability can rise, the system remains creative. We don’t depend on
people to be good. Our society understands the causes of disorder, and our
structure is such that those causes can be utilized. We haven’t tamed human
nature or even modified it very much yet. We’ve channeled it. There’s nothing
mysterious about our way. We’ve still got problems, but they’re our problems,
belonging to our way of life. For us, mental illness arises from envy of others’
abilities, from status, when people compare their achievements.”

“You make it sound simple.”
“It’s very complex if you take the time to look closely. Our youth are the

barbarians. Our long-lived provide stability and a radical long view of things.
The long-lived and Humanity II are the living commitment to macrolife. We
don’t interfere with either group.”

“What am I?”
“An eccentric rebel. I thought you might leave us for a dirtworld. We have

our failures.”

“I’ve never heard you talk so hard, Frank.”
“I must. This is your chance to try again and I must present the alternatives

strongly. A man named Freud once said that a society of love is possible if there
is some external group to hate. In a sense that is what we’ve got. We hate the
past, we hate the circumstances that so deformed the human spirit, even though
those same circumstances gave birth to human intelligence.”

“Dirtworlds.”
“Yes. The coming to consciousness is a terrible process, proof enough of the

mindlessness of nature, which must cull consciousness in such a bloody way.
Energy-poor, physically in danger from other life, diseased, and subject to
natural catastrophe, intelligence endures long enough to escape, to give itself a
chance at a high-energy existence which is safe and creative, making a mature,
long-term culture possible. In the long run nothing can succeed, nothing is
absolutely safe, of course. There is no deathless fortress in which we may live
forever.”

“I feel sorry for the humanity on natural worlds,” John said.
“But those worlds are necessary,” Blackfriar said. “We try to hold an attitude

of empathy without altruism. Granted, this is an ambivalent attitude. Should we
go around saving worlds? Wouldn’t they resent us? Life is isolated in nature,
ghettoized to develop individually. The size of the universe serves this kind of
quarantine perfectly. Interstellar travel is difficult, and that’s a good thing.”

We’ve seen no others, no originals that should be left to grow in their own way,
only our own bits and pieces left at different points in history.”

“That makes no difference. The horrible irony is that a culture has to grow

away from its planet, not be torn away, regardless of its origin, regardless of its
conditions. The damage and dislocation would be enormous if we came in and
began to plan for them.”

“It couldn’t be worse than leaving them alone to stumble around in the

dark.”

“You really don’t give them much credit. But yes, to help is about as bad as

not to help. You’re thinking that we could alleviate physical suffering. That’s
true, but there would be other scars. It’s a matter of readiness. Look at the old
United States. Human potential was recognized, but with little regulation. There
was coercion through policed laws, but no genuine social persuasion through
environmental incentives. The price in waste and disorder of natural and human
resources was enormous. The finitude of the economic pie ensured that only a
few could grow into their potential. It was a large number, true, but most people
had no economic freedom, and they were not ready for it when it came. People
worked hard to maintain a highly inconsistent physical affluence, frustrating
their inner potentials. Tom Paine’s comment, that we have been given the power
to begin the world all over again, is truest of macrolife.”

“Maybe earth would have succeeded if the disaster had not happened.”
Blackfriar was quiet for a moment. “We would have grown away from earth

more slowly, perhaps.”

“I think maybe we should gather our own.”
“You’d have to use force—most would not want to leave the settled worlds.”
John was silent. He was not a doer or a thinker. His limits were suddenly

very clear to him, as was the alternative. The glimpse was a shock. “I’m curious
about earth,” he said to break the silence.

to bear. That’s all we really are—an economic base supporting a clearinghouse
for pressures which grow into projects. As nature once prepared us for making a
living and reproducing, so a life of affluence and practical immortality must be

structured to encourage individual and social projects. These become our life.
Without them we become severely demoralized.”

“Have we been successful, Frank?”
“Not entirely. As a democracy we are a means for reconciling human

differences. That’s all democracy needs to be—a framework in which people can
disagree without disaster. Beyond that we process information in our knowledge
industries, and they are our ultimate authorities. There is no democracy in
submitting to them, except that they are open to all. As I’ve said, on the human
level we have envy, influence-seeking, some murder, personal cruelties—but
generally we have cooperation rather than competition, achievement rather than
aggression. We attack each other through status and personal style, but there is
no economic greed. The major tragedy is the individual’s too-frequent inability
to find satisfying work. When his or her abilities are ordinary, there is little to do
except find amusement or appreciate the achievements of others. There are still
too many suicides. We seem to need a further development of the individual.
There seems to be an insufficiency to life that is unconquerable.”

“I’m just a simpleton,” John said.
“The one thing we can’t do for you is what you must do for yourself. Every

generation must rebuild the world in its own mind to feel truly at home in it.
This involves reevaluation of the past, a recap of social history as the process of
birth recaps biological history. Any strong attempt to impose a view from outside
may lead to a closed mental set and a closed society when such overimpressed
individuals proliferate.”

“You think I would have been a tyrant on Lea.”
“Even if you were good about it. Unless you had brought all the resources of

a world to reclaim the planet, you would have been very frustrated working
within severe limits. You would have had to educate Leans offplanet, then send
them back to help—a project for a century. It could still be done—just organize
the interest. There will be time.”

“I want to see earth,” John said.
Frank continued: “When a primitive culture is not permitted to come up by

itself, or to rise to a previous height after decline, then all the courage and
cleverness of intelligent beings is preempted, coopted by the superior helper.
Maybe exchanges on the interstellar level should occur only among equals.”

“You’ve made your points. I still think it’s a cruel view of history.”
“The truth is not always kind.”
John sat up erect. “But look—there’s so little of earth-derived humanity

scattered. I still think we could gather it together.”

Blackfriar coughed and scratched his head. “Wheeler has talked about it.

Still, the changes for many of the people on these worlds would be too much.”

John sat forward in his chair. “We could gather them on one world, maybe

Lea, as a transition area. That wouldn’t be so bad a change. We could help them
if they were all in one place.”

“You’d have to force most of them to leave.” Blackfriar rubbed his chin.

“Wherever they are is home to them.”

“If we told them what we were doing…Why do you have to make so many

difficulties, Frank?”

Blackfriar looked directly at him. “I think you would spend a century just to

prove me wrong, but I also think you’d end up showing that the obstacles are
even bigger than we imagine. Again, this is not to say you should not try, but
there’s the other thing you haven’t considered at all.”

“What’s that?”
“Missionaries give up the further life of their own culture, their own origins.

They go native, but not all the way. It’s not possible to do so completely. It’s
exile. You’ll find that no matter how long you live, there will always be one
more thing to do, one more matter to set right.”

covering both sides of the debate.”

“Intelligence is hardy. It gets use out of itself through the struggle with

problems and should not be denied this satisfaction. As a macroworlder, you are
like the grown son who wants to reeducate his parents or the parent who will not
let the child be itself. Or take me—I keep poking my nose into your life, yet you
must live your own life. I can’t do it for you.”

“I shouldn’t have gone to Lea.”
“But you should have. Maybe you’ll find a way to do what you want, and

we’ll all learn from you. At least you’re not playing with a trivial problem, as
many I know are doing at your age.”

John felt exhausted, beaten, but some of his uneasiness seemed to be gone.

“I think I’ll go check up on Richard Bulero,” he said, “but I doubt it will help
me.”

“You may be right,” Blackfriar said. “Not all problems have answers.”
As he got up to leave, John noticed a change in Frank’s expression, and he

felt suddenly that he didn’t know Blackfriar at all.

work, The Sociology of Macrolife. The desk screen showed a small biographical
note:

RICHARD BULERO (2001-2045)
Political philosopher and sociologist. The major theoretician of
Macrolife after Dandridge Cole and Gerard K. O’Neill. Student of his
uncle, the minor twentieth-century philosopher of science, Samuel
Bulero. Died with Orton Blackfriar and Margot Toren in a freak
explosion during construction of the second macroworld at Centauri.

The frame changed, giving titles of biographies, a complete list of works,

and reference codes for information about Janet Marquand Bulero, Jack Bulero,
and dozens of related historical persons.

John passed on to the work itself, planning to skip forward to get a good

general impression before considering a closer study.

Document A-2050
Manuscript—IBM Bookface typescript
Posthumous publication, Asterome 2050 AD
THE SOCIOLOGY OF MACROLIFE

by Richard Bulero
He had not expected to see the original document. The typescript seemed

strangely immediate and real on the bright screen. The past was there, reaching
out to claim him. He started to read, and the words seemed to speak in his mind
as if they were his own thoughts.

INTRODUCTION

The central political fact of Macrolife is that power exists solely for

maintaining the economic framework that makes freedom possible; economic
management and political authority are limited to enhancing creative and
constructive opportunities within the social container. These powers of
government and the physical structures are the social container, the basic
features that must be preserved when the society reproduces, regardless of what
other styles the social organism may develop. An attack on these essential
features of Macrolife from outside poses no moral problems, since the defense of
genuinely free institutions is always justified. The only forbidden freedom is the
freedom to jeopardize the framework. All other serious challenges to society are
given a clear procedure by which they may become influential.

again about a third of the way through the introduction.

may happen as the result of a variety of mental frustrations and pressures. How,
then, do we deal with the darker side of human nature? By giving the individual
a generous share of power within the society, beyond the economic essentials.
Dissidents are free to leave at any time. They can settle on any number of
natural worlds…

be found outside the largess of macrolife. What freedom was there to be gained
by choosing to live outside? He was not free to choose to live outside.

construction of a new container, which will hold the kind of society that pleases
them. To date, this open-ended society has been possible because it restricts
power to economic management, the policing of the various civil liberties, and
the planning of creative projects (reproduction of Macrolife being the most
important such project). Stricter forms are possible for Macrolife, but these
would limit the very creative possibilities for human ambition and desire, both
intellectual and aesthetic, that prompted the creation of Macrolife.

to interests beyond agriculture, to science and art; but the finitude of planetary
resources doomed the city. Macrolife offered a unique extension of human
community concepts, a redemption of urban civilization, the city-state, as well as
the saving of various aspects of rural life….

An observer raised in the restrictive conditions of a natural world, where

resources are scarce and the power of the necessary few frustrates the yearnings
of the many, might ask: What compels the Macroworlders to be true to their
design? What prevents the fatal abuse of power? Human conduct is, after all, a
fallible thing. Our answer is that we live without scarcity, without the need to
represent valuable work and resources with equally scarce precious metals or a
limited currency supply. Negatively stated, greed is satisfied; powerful ambitions
are satisfied. Whoever wants power can have it; we rotate responsibilities among
the citizens, making power an obligation, not the end of life….

was too selfish to succeed.

have to put up or shut up. The acts of a successful, strongly cooperative ego, are
effective because it looks beyond itself; the ineffective ego is concerned with
itself, and fails to the extent that it misperceives what is not itself. Our wealth
makes conscience, goodwill and personal development possible, where before it
was the luxury of the secure minority, which often pointed to the lack of these
qualities in the majority as a reason for keeping it down. (The minority could do
little else in any case, short of abolishing itself, and with it the means of passing
beyond agriculture and primitive technology).

long time ago. “The only sense of identity I see in you is the physical one, in the
care you take with sports. Our citizens are brought up like kings, but that doesn’t
mean you have to be as silly as kings were.” He had not understood. “If you
knew history, you’d be angry at what I said, but then I wouldn’t have had to say
it.”

“There’s no reason I have to do anything I don’t want to,” he had told her. “I

mind my own business and leave everyone alone.”

“You’re too much of a loner, and you don’t know what you’re missing.”
“Stop picking at me.”

desirable. The universe seems to be made for the conscious intelligence which is
lacking, and which strives to remedy this by gaining in knowledge, experience,
pleasure, and insight, but not to the point of perfection or certainty. This
universe is not exhaustible, as if by design, since the alternatives (stricter
determinism or greater chaos) do not seem to be desirable, even though the
universe may be moving toward one or the other, away from the optimum
balance between a severe limitation of freedom and its augmentation.

We are not concerned with becoming angels, or anything much beyond a

hyperpersonal, cooperative humanity. The solution of secondary problems, the
classical difficulties of administration and distribution, does not lead us to claim
a final solution to the difficult problems involving the intractable aspects of
human nature. Human plasticity is a genetic heritage. It is an array of general
potentials. Aggression is one of them, but it may appear in a variety of forms; all
of them are socially elicited, in worthwhile or in damaging modes. Our
environments will be designed to elicit the constructive potentials of those
tendencies which make aggression possible.

practicality. Nature is modified by social life, using the tools of language and
information; social life is modified through material organization; when these
activities have been successful, it remains to modify human nature and the
physical form of the body.

Asterome was little more than a hollow rock. Hindsight made all the ideas
familiar, but for Richard Bulero these words had been the instrument of
foresight.

nature, becoming “second nature” as they become homeostatic, self-regulating,
more a living organism than a machine. Nature seems unmachinelike only
because its error-evolved adaptive systems work at smaller, in-depth scales; they

are subtle, made of soft materials, and super-redundant (for a reliable efficiency)
….

Government must be like a natural environment—supportive, an antagonist

at times, a realm which provides basics, like earth, air, fire, and water—within
which individuals may flourish….

Economics is the way in which a civilization uses energy, how it stores,

transfers and records the use of energy in the form of individual access and
credit….

The problem is not economics, or social structure, entirely—primarily it is

the problem of human nature, a nature that cannot be confined, only educated
and persuaded….

Human history is the battle of the cortex against the older, impulsive,

instinctual layers of the brain; the cortex has an ally, however, in certain areas
of feeling, those portions that give rise to feelings of sympathy for those of our
own kind, making their welfare the same as our own. This sense by which we
blur our individualities, by which we share and overcome our separation, is the
basis for a sound naturalistic ethics, one that may extend even to other forms of
intelligence.

A human being is a multicellular organism, a form of macrolife, the step

beyond unicellular life; society is a form of macrolife, the step beyond the
individual human, the superman; the superman need not be an individual, as
Cole says—an individual society may be the superman….

We are building a society that augments its individuals. Specialization, the

management of automatic details in the logistics of life-support, library storage
and retrieval systems—these custodial tasks are carried out by artificial
intelligences operating below the surface of the social structure, much as
portions of the brain carry out automatic functions without the intervention of
human consciousness. In the human brain, we will retain unspecialized skills—
the capacity to see wholes, to see the relationships among entire blocks of
information, to generalize, to create new wholes in all the modes of human
creative activity, from the arts to the sciences. No matter how much we may
change through genetic creativity, all such changes will have to be introduced
around the central core of unspecialized human plasticity; bioengineering for
specialized functions would fragment us psychologically.

his present. Would they move past him into some further vision? He read on.

also be extended through symbiosis with artificial intelligence, either in
reversible or irreversible modes. The mental tools that we think with will
certainly grow, and they will drive the human brain to grow in outlook and
sophistication, as once the simple tools of knife, hammer, and wheel helped
create a new life. Biological modifications are simply part of a two-way process,
by which humankind creates cultural environments and is then affected by them,
only to see the possibility of a still further development.

off, while artificial intelligence was still growing by a factor of 10 every 7 years.
Our infant Humanity II intelligence is not a personality as we understand it in
ourselves. It is growing in consciousness, perhaps even in curiosity, but it is
without a localized ego, lacks ambition and will; it is not anyone in the specific
sense. Biological intelligent self-consciousness, by contrast, is a declaration of
independence from nature’s blind sleep; it is nature coming awake. The
individual ego sometimes feels itself to be a bit of something general become
specific and defined, sharpened and directed by a yearning will. The symbiosis
of these two kinds of intelligence will make Macrolife the wisest and most
knowledgeable society in history. No experience will be lost to it; no individual
will be without the benefit of its cumulative effort and common inheritance; no
one will have to start from scratch. Perhaps this reconstruction of human
existence will do something to relieve the sense of doomed finitude, of smallness,
so common in perceptive minds.

Each citizen will have the benefit of a quality-controlled birth (rather than

the reproductive roulette of past ages), the benefits of a limited population,
educational techniques, the vistas of an ongoing exploration of nature, access to
the necessities; the life problem will be one of further growth, what to do with
one’s indefinitely long life. Ours will be an uncoercive pluralism, providing both
stability and novelty.

intelligences.

still dominant, the teacher requiring service in return for programming and
improvements; but one day these children of ours will develop on their own,
coalescing into bundles of individual personality within the system, perhaps
acquiring equal say in the further development of Macrolife. Perhaps they will
be our successors; at the least they will become our companions, inhabiting a
universe psychologically coextensive with our own. The great convergence of
intelligence in nature will certainly ignore evolutionary origins, be they
biological or nonbiological, humanlike or alien.

personal and social identity, calling into doubt the age-long affirmations of
ethnic and regional humanity. A nonsimplistic scientific solution to the problem
of culture-bound man called for a highly fluid and critical personal and social
identity, one that would be open to growth not through the assumed posture of
educated sufficiency, but through the homeostasis of egoless error recognition.
For example, indefinite life span will lead to complete changes in an individual
much in the way that cultures have changed over the ages. A person would be
led on by the logic of newly acquired knowledge and understanding, as well as
by the interests of his creativity and curiosity. In past cultures, this kind of
activity would have been pursued in bits and pieces between the physical chores
of staying alive, if at all, or passed across a few generations of workers, as in the
cumulative effort of the sciences. This new freedom is what at bottom threatened
culture-bound man, preserver of the past, national man, clinger to distinctive
markings—the fear that little may remain of an overrated past, that identity may
shift and transform itself with the emergence of genuinely new things.

Macrolife will seek a balance between stability and novelty, between the

stay-at-home safety that so often leads to decadence, and adventurism, which
may lead to disaster. Our adventurism, however, will take the form of investment
in the activities of intelligence, in scientific innovation, in the mobility that will
ensure survival when stars and planets die, a mobility that will give us a chance

at discovering the nature of the universe, not as a curiosity for a few, but as the
interest of all our citizens. Such a future for Macrolife seems pleasing, good and
noble, reconciling as best as can be expected the futures of desire and fate.

In all this, in all the changes that might be possible for us in the

transformation of material things, and ourselves, the present form of Macrolife is
only a beginning, a suitable jumping-off point, a place free of the distractions
and dangers so consistently active in our planetary past. Planets may not be fit
places for a rational culture, because intelligence is at first incapable of thinking
in terms large enough for the solution of its problems; and when it can do so, it
no longer has need of planets.

These are the problems I have set to explore in this book. In the solution to

these classic difficulties lies the fulfillment of the dream of space exploration, its
true human significance, as a larger arena for growth, for social
experimentation, and as the vantage point from which to view the prospects for
continued survival.

John turned the page and examined the contents page:

I. Coming of Age: The System of Interlocking Exemplars
II. Reproduction: Personal and Societal
III. Education
IV. Humanity II and the Systemization of Knowledge
V. The Projex Council
VI. The Role of the Human Director
VII. The Role of History
VIII. The Role of Science
IX. Advanced Macroforms
X. The Permanent Civilization

Appendix: The Possibility of Alien Macrolife; Galactic Type III Civilizations

Interpersonal World; the Hyperpersonal State

work became technical for long stretches. Speeding up the pace, John turned to
the last pages. This was not just a large work of three thousand pages; this was
the complete constitution of his world, the background of his life. This is the
source of my very thoughts. I was brought up hearing variations on what is in
this work. The echoes seemed like a song now, the song of home, once far away,
now growing closer.

man appear on the desk.

“Hello. My name is Richard Bulero. I’ve been asked to add a personal note

to my work, though I don’t know what else the careful student might wish to
know.”

John sat down again, passing his hand casually through the recorded image.

The screen flashed an instruction:

COMPACT FORM.

across the desktop. John could see that his light brown hair was slightly streaked
with gray. The man was not very tall, but he seemed tall in his lean catlike grace.
He stopped and rubbed his chin, looking out across time.

“This is how we saw things at the beginning,” Richard Bulero said. “I hope

it is how you see macrolife. I wrote the work you have been studying, but
thousands of people did the work for it. In a sense, all of earth’s humanity helped
to create macrolife.” He paused for a moment. “No doubt many things are
different in your time. Whether I was too optimistic is for you to decide. I hope
that you are examining what I wrote in an open society, not in secret. How I
envy what must be available to you in your library terminals.” He paused again
before continuing. “My desire was to dream the future at a time when humanity
had all but destroyed itself in the solar system. What more can I add to what you
must know in your time? I hope that we have not confined your ambitions by our
mistakes. I hope that macrolife lives by the words of Thomas Jefferson, who
asked in 1801: ‘What more is necessary to make us a happy and prosperous
people? Still one more thing—a wise and frugal government, which shall
restrain men from injuring one another, shall leave them otherwise free to
regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, and shall not take from

the mouth of labor the bread it has earned. This is the sum of good government.’
This last part applies to us, I hope, only in the sense that our governments to
come must not take away, either through accident or through perverse design, the
freedom that the historical labor of humanity has created for us. I hope you are
alive in a society that does not take away, but receives the creativity and
goodwill of its people. I’m reminded of one further point. Human history is
driven by basic developments which are too often misunderstood. I’ll assume for
the moment that macrolife, even in your time, is no exception. The most
misunderstood basic development is the notion of an elite and its function. Our
great talents never divide people into higher and lower, into winners and losers.
The function of ability is to work in the company of normal people, those who
consume and need skills and abilities, those who can appreciate and understand,
but perhaps not originate, and with whom the talented share a common
humanity. I wonder if it would be too much to hope that all our citizens might
one day be high achievers and that what would pass for talented in the earlier
society would be merely normal in the later one. Elites should be the first trickle
in a direction that greater numbers may later follow. The function of the strong is
to help the weak, the knowledgeable to spread knowledge. The writer writes for
those who don’t, the singer sings to nonsingers. Elitism, I feel, is the disease of
those envious individuals of middle abilities who cannot rise higher, so they
settle for the power of their prestige. They have fallen in love with the true half
of a half-truth. They do not look outward to humanity, they look down, and fail
truly to share. They hate those below them and envy those above. We can
discourage these tendencies in our children in a thousand subtle ways, teaching
them to hold one another accountable according to their best tendencies, their
most generous feelings. These are in fact as real as any imaginable external
moral standards, because they can be elicited from the array of potentials in our
biological nature, as surely as the harsher inheritance that we carry from
evolution’s struggle. The ideals of macrolife must live in each individual
consciousness as nothing has ever lived before. Macrolife must not exist in the
economic externals alone, though they are equally important. Macrolife will be
the test of an energy-rich civilization. Are you surviving without the whip of
scarcity? Are the internal pressures of human nature stronger than the rational
cortex? That’s all I can add for now. Good-bye.”

The image winked out. The screen lit up for a moment with a few

bibliographical reference numbers, among them a list of the works of Samuel
Bulero and the biological studies of Margot Toren, and then the lights went on in
the cubicle.

This, John thought, was how it had looked at the beginning. He was struck

by how much of this spirit was still alive. It was strong in Frank, in Margaret, in
Rob Wheeler, in the builders of the new mobile. He had not seen it dying in
anyone except himself.

long cultural memory, while he was limited to what he could look up and the
memories of a couple of decades. The historical amnesia of new generations was
not a problem for them. For them, macrolife wasn’t any one thing. It was a stand
against death, ignorance, and forgetfulness, against chaos, against all the forces
that tear down and destroy. Suddenly he felt the continuing patience of
macrolife, holding together everything that he had known. Blackfriar, Margaret,
and Rob were for macrolife because it stood against the death of individuals, the
death of societies, the passing of knowledge and awareness, the death of love,
appreciation, and joy, the death of species and stars in the flux of time. On
planets death walks into every heart, poisoning the future with the promise of
ruin. The young glimpse death as a far-off destroyer, rushing slowly toward
them, then falling upon them sooner than expected. Despair and anxiety are
death’s left and right hands, winning death’s battles for it. On planets the living
are dead before they die, and death the victor, when it calls, comes upon itself.
Richard Bulero’s thoughts spoke across the ages, saying, “We have survived the
solar system. Our social form will give us the necessary permanence, flexibility,
and mobility to avoid most endings. Time will give us the patient accumulation
of knowledge, to know ourselves and the universe better. We will endure.”

Suddenly John realized that he was living only a small part of himself and

that he wanted to be like everyone else at home: to know as they knew, to feel as
they felt, to love as they loved; but the feeling passed, as if something were
trying to steal it from him.

kilometer companion world suspended in space below them.

“All basic systems are now operational,” Rob said as he sat in front of the

screen at John’s right. “Most of the population has moved in.”

Around them, all twenty-five of the observatory’s screens were on, showing

the panorama of the Praesepe cluster as the two macroworlds moved away,
accelerating toward light speed. Lea’s twins were still bright, soon to be lost
among the bright swarm.

“Are you feeling better?” Wheeler asked.
“I’m looking forward to link citizenship,” John said. There was no point in

mentioning his feelings until he had decided what to think about his stay on Lea,

about home, about himself.

He was looking at the companion world. The idea of a gravitic field pushing

all that mass was strange, even after he had used one so often in the flitter. He
thought of a massive fish swimming in water and a grav generator making waves
to push against the curvature of space-time.

“One day,” Wheeler said, “we won’t need this kind of running start. Well be

able to switch in the stardrive as soon as we’re reasonably clear of a sun.
Converting to tachyon structure is costly enough by itself.”

“How long before we approach light speed?”
“Three months. Actually, we could switch to tachyon tunneling at half light,

as long as our direction was properly set for the jump to sol. The margin for error
is great—it’s like stabbing a needle through a bunched-up fabric, hoping to hit
the buttonhole. Fortunately, we always come out near point fifty c, so it’s not
long to our destination, our time.”

There were a number of complementary theories, John knew. It had been

called the tachyon tunneling effect, the tachyon quantum jump, and others. The
tachyon universe had been described as having a highly variable spatial
curvature.

“The tachyon universe,” Wheeler was saying, “is, well, to be very

picturesque, pasted against ours, on the other side, to continue the metaphor, and
that’s why our space is elastic to the degree that it is. Tachyon space-time can be
stretched or compressed, practically speaking, from the point of view of our
consciousness, to a higher degree than our space-time’s usual malleability.”

“What’s our usual?”
“You know—as light speed is approached, experienced time drops toward

zero, mass increases toward infinity. All the extremes demanded by theory never
occur, of course, but these extremes do serve as barriers of a sort between
universes, frontiers between different sets of physical order. Dimensional theory
allows for paper-thin universes to be piled up one on top of the other. Universes
may interpenetrate one another, yet be unknown to the inhabitants of each. I
won’t even start on time branching or time travel.”

“Finish with jumps first.”
“I think the best way to think of jumps is to imagine that we jump onto a

supralight speed wave moving toward a far shore. We need initial speed and the
tachyon switchover to get on. The wave then carries us toward that shore, which
may be roughly congruent with our destination star in our original space-time.
We come off by changing back to the tardyon slower-than-light wave structure
while continuing to move, much as a person would have to keep running in his
direction of travel when jumping off a slow-moving vehicle. Once we’re off, we

can slow down. Tardyon and tachyon structures are only relative terms. We don’t
feel much difference while we’re one or the other.”

“We don’t know much, do we?” John said.
“It lacks complete elegance, but the unwieldy description of what happens

will disappear as we learn more. My dream is to have a drive that does not take
us out of our frame of experience at all, or as little as possible.”

“What would that be?” John asked, knowing that he was using the

discussion to distract himself, but another part of him found itself absorbed in
the concepts.

“A direct control of the plasticity of space around the vehicle—altering the

curvature of space directly without leaving our universe. Of course, if such a
way to high transoptic speeds were possible, there would be some distortion of
stars in the visual field, but we could correct for that. Navigation would be more
accurate because we would still have some kind of information from our own
realm to interpret.”

“But what about the mass-speed-time relationships?”
“They would not be affected, because we would not really be exceeding

light speed or moving at all as an accelerating object upon which a force is
exerted. We would be moving the space around the ship, in a sense. Mass would
not approach infinity, time would not contract in relation to anywhere else, and
we would not drain the energy of the universe as we became more and more
massive near c. Only distance would be reduced. We would be a little universe
all our own, moving like a ghost through the normal universe.”

“Why don’t we run into a star when we come out of jump? And why don’t

we feel anything different when we’re tachyons?”

“It’s luck, the vastness of space, which makes it a low risk of hitting a sun or

planet, or the fact that given the nature of the gravitational force involved,
attractive and repulsive, it is just not possible to come out in a sun or even close
to any material body with a deep gravity well.”

“I don’t understand that—but what about not feeling tachyonic?”
Rob shrugged. “We don’t because the tach universe is self-consistent in

physical structure, like our own. Equivalent physical structures replace our own.
How would we compare? All realities are observer-oriented. Maybe if half of
you were tachyons, half tardyons, you’d feel the difference, but not when you’re
fully one or the other.” Rob smiled.

“I think I see.”
John was silent. He turned his chair in a circle and looked out through all the

screens. He was standing on an open platform in space, and the splendor made
him feel like a localized bundle of awareness, the result of something that had

fallen in on itself, become small and individual, full of pain and longing for a
larger state.

“Rob, tell me something.”
“What?” Wheeler turned toward him. Half his face was shadowed.
“Do you tire of your work, of all this? You’ve been at it so long.”
“There’s too much to do, practical and theoretical, and I’ve yet to have a

chance at the crucial experiments and observations.”

“That’s all that bothers you?”
Wheeler laughed, and for a moment starlight was reflected in his eyes. “I

wish I knew more. There is so much that is not in the link storage. I wish I could
plan ambitious projects, but we’re not ready for some of them.”

“Like what?”
“A time travel device, for example—it can be built. We’ve known that since

Tipler’s work on earth in the 1970s. The device would be tens of kilometers in
size, requiring dense materials.”

“What else would you do?”
“Close approach to a black hole. It’s almost certain there’s a giant black hole

at the galactic center.”

“What would these projects tell us?”
“If we knew that, then we would not have to do them. These two would tell

us a lot about what kind of universe we live in—not just our local universe, but
maybe something about the larger reality. And we would learn experimentally, as
a matter of measured experience.”

John was silent for a moment. “Rob, does the universe die?”
“We think it does.”
“How long?” The question seemed strange, almost as if he were asking

about his own life.

“Anywhere from a hundred billion to a trillion years before the final collapse

into a universal black hole. A long time ago we thought the time would be much
shorter, about eighty billion years.”

wondering about those final moments when nature would lose its self-
sufficiency, its seeming lack of contingence, and slip away, to die as individual
creatures had died for so long within it. He wondered if personal death was a
slipping away into a greater self-sufficiency, into something godlike.

“Then what?” he asked.
“The gravitational force becomes dominant, pushing everything toward zero

volume and infinite density. Since this is impossible, there is nothing left but to
expand. It’s really more complex than that. The explosion may push into a new

space, creating a white hole, a new big bang. The new universe may have
different physical laws each time, different constants and experiential properties.
The model seems cyclical, but probably isn’t. It’s an oscillating model, and
steady state in a sense, too.”

“It’s cyclical in the sense that there are a series of universes, but they are not

repetitious, they’re individual.”

“That’s right. I hope it’s true. It would be another support for the idea that

physical determinism is just strong enough to give us things like deductive
explanations and weak enough to give us genuine novelty and the freedom to
choose among alternatives.”

What happened on Lea is the bottom of my past. I can’t see beyond its

horizon, either to what I was or what I might be, and I don’t like what I am now.

The vastness of space-time on the screens was a beckoning puzzle, and he

was an enigma within the puzzle. John took a deep breath. There would never be
a solution to himself, at least not the kind of solution that might exist for the
puzzle of nature. Only what he was to become had any chance of making sense.

21. The Jump

of Lea faded from the aft view, to be replaced by a growing circle of darkness
that slowly ate the Praesepe group. Gradually the two stars had changed from
yellow to orange, red to a deep coal red, before winking out; all light rushing
after the macroworlds was being stretched into the infrared wavelengths that
were invisible to the unmodified human eye, but still visible to the navigational
scanners.

John watched the darkness that had swallowed Lea’s suns and was now

devouring the universe behind him. He had come into the observatory once a day
for the last month, dividing his time between link training, the library terminal,
and watching the progress of acceleration. Sometimes Rob sat with him in the
screen room, but much of the time John was alone while Wheeler went about his
work.

Sol lay 150 parsecs ahead, in a region of sparsely scattered yellow stars; but

with increasing speed the light waves were shortened into invisibility as they
piled head-on into the macroworlds. Sol turned yellow green, full green, and
violet before the contracting wavelengths became ultraviolet and visible only to
the navigational sensors. The area of sol became a black disk, expanding to meet
the darkness behind them.

As the two worlds continued accelerating toward .90 of light speed, the two

black disks covered more of the sky, until only a band of stars was left between
what appeared to be two empty hemispheres. On the sol side, the bow of stars
was banded with violet, blue, and green; yellow lay in the center of the ring; on
the Praesepe side, the bands were orange and red, fading into the infrared
hemisphere at whose center lay Lea’s suns.

The great curtain of colors hanging in space grew narrower, leaving at last

only the thin band of yellow stars at the starbow’s center. John almost expected
that the two hemispheres would meet to cover the remaining stars of the visible
universe; but gradually the hemisphere ahead reached its farthest extent and
started to recede, as if pushed back by the still expanding hemisphere behind the
macroworlds. The ring of yellow stars moved forward, surrounding their
invisible destination as if to mark it.

It’s not worth living when so much is hidden, John thought as he looked out

at the darkened universe. But a braver logic spoke within him. We are splinters,
angles of perception and awareness, and we would cease to be individuals if our

personal limits were opened to infinity, if we became omniscient. We would
become a different kind of being; individuality would lose its meaning. We float
as isolated points in a plenum of the unknown. The points grow toward each
other as best they can, achieving only an imperfect acquaintance, but they
cannot merge. Suddenly the potential openness of his life stirred within him,
drawing him on again. The darkness ahead was a field of possibility, the
darkness behind a black lake of things forever lost. He would have the link, the
larger identity needed for endless life, the knowledge and outlook of selves
which had passed through the life of worlds before him, leaving their best. The
larger grasp of things would surely dispel the sense of smallness and inadequacy
into which he had fallen.

Wheeler came in from the outer workroom and sat down next to him. “A few

minutes now and we’ll be ready for the jump. I’m told that this time we won’t
feel quite so disoriented.”

On the screen in front of John, the companion world shimmered in its field.

There was no sense of motion, except for a fleeting sensation born of knowing.

“Thirty seconds,” Wheeler said.
Suddenly John felt as if he were falling, as if he could now feel their

enormous velocity. On the screens around them, reality had been turned off. The
band of yellow stars was gone; the black hemispheres were gone. Fore and aft,
above and below, space was gray. The companion world was only a dim
geometrical outline in the field. The gray itself was of varying intensity and
texture. It seemed to be filled with short pinbursts of light, millions of them
occurring with increasing frequency until they seemed like glittering sands.

“What are they?”
“We can’t be certain,” Wheeler said. “We might be passing through what

may be solid matter elsewhere.”

infinite fog that flashed as if from a distant lightning storm. Abruptly it became a
flat expanse near the bottom of the screens. The macroworlds seemed to be
sliding forward on a hard gray surface.

going over the top.”

“How much longer?”
“One or two ship hours. We can’t come out too near to sol. We have to give

ourselves enough space in which to decelerate. It would be best if we could enter
tachyon space at point zero five light speed and come out the same.”

“Rob, tell me something. Do you have doubts about our way of life?”
“Of course I do.”

“What will become of us?”
“We’re infants, groping our way from one set of goals to another. We seem

to be fairly sure that we don’t want to go back to the cradle of natural worlds.
That’s all I can say we are for now. Later, when macrolife has existed for a long
time, I suspect we may no longer be human, as we know it now, as the natural
worlders know it. If you and I exist then, we may be startled to recall that we
were once as we are now.”

“You think we will be alive, you and I? What will we be?”
“You see, John, it’s hard to think past a century, even if you know that your

life span is indefinite. A thousand years will bring conscious modifications,
biological and mental. We have no idea yet how alien cultures may affect us.”

“If there are any.”
“They are there, I’m certain of it.”
“If we can reach them.”
“We will.”
John thought of how he would forget Anulka. Entire lifetimes would

disappear into the abyss of his personal future. Suddenly he wanted to be there,
aged and changed beyond imagining, so that the pain of memory would be lifted.
Yet a part of him was pledged never to forget.

“Rob, what do you feel most clearly?”
“I live,” Wheeler said, “because the whole world lives, because the universe

is both unbearable and absorbing, curious and sublime, and suspiciously right in
the way it is. That is the most curious thing about it, and that’s what I feel most.”

“And that is what sustains you?”
“Yes, and other things. You asked about the big ones.”
“Aren’t there any other big things?”
“Love and friendship. Love becomes very private after a century. It has a

chance to succeed, to come and go without the threat of death, because it has
time. I’ve not seen Olivia for two decades, but both of us know that we will be
together again.”

When they had been in the jumpspace for two hours, there was a sudden

dizzying instant of falling.

“We’re coming out,” Rob said.
John expected to see the band of yellow stars reappear, dividing the universe

again into two black hemispheres; but the gray remained, glistening
occasionally.

“What’s wrong?” John asked.
“I don’t know.”
“We’re not coming out.”

“We’ll overshoot sol,” Wheeler said.
The bursts of light grew brighter, as if a vast fire were kindling outside.
“What if we don’t come out?” John asked, imagining endless life without

stars, without natural worlds, without young intelligences dreaming of spaces
beyond their sky; that would not be a universe he would want to live in.

Stars faded in, recreating the universe.
“They’re not distorted,” Wheeler said. “We’re well below five percent of

light speed, but the drive still creaks.”

The new world was still with them, motionless on the screen. John

remembered his anticipation during the approach to Lea, the endless waiting to
see the planet. Suddenly he understood that home’s ties with earth, with natural
worlds, had been the real motive, or a good part of the reason, for coming into
the Lean system. Aimless wandering after material resources and knowledge had
not been enough; lifeless solar systems, chosen at random, would have served as
well; but only contact with other humanities would bring the special rewards of
looking into a true mirror.

There would be less delay here. In a few minutes of scanning it would be

known whether the home sunspace contained any activity or not, if earth was
alive or just another wayside world.

22. Earth Again

The two macroworlds were decelerating toward earth’s orbit at an angle of

thirty degrees to the sun’s equator. Sol lay at the bottom of the screen. John
turned his chair around and looked back toward Praesepe, now 155 parsecs
away, more than five hundred years in the past if measured by light’s slow crawl.
He had outrun the light that had left Lea’s sun five centuries before Anulka’s
birth. He was looking toward the edge of the galaxy. Taurus, Orion, Cancer, and
Gemini stood on the backdrop of intergalactic darkness, dominating the screens.
Praesepe was a swarm of bright insects frozen in flight by the perspective of
immensity.

He turned again to look at their destination. Sunspaces are whirlpools of

matter, he thought. Sol’s whirlpool is two trillion kilometers in diameter. A cloud
of hydrogen collapses to form a protostar, and gravitational compression kindles
the star’s thermonuclear furnace. Two hundred billion such furnaces of pulsating
plasma circle the galactic center, he thought, but we were born here.

“The sun seems normal,” Wheeler said. “There’s no sign of the anomaly.

Are you going up into the hollow to watch with everyone else on the big
sunscreen?”

“I prefer the observatory,” John said. “I like the small room you’ve given

me; I like the dining area and the atmosphere of work going on.”

“John, I like to share what I do, but you’re using the observatory to escape.

You’ve been avoiding everyone except me.”

“I’m also interested in what you do here, I really am.”
“As long as you see what you’re doing.” Wheeler sat at the table-screen in

the center of the room. John could see only his back as they spoke.

“It’s what I want for now.” He thought of the future again, when macrolife

would be vastly changed. Anulka, Anulka, where are you? All this immensity has
got to be capable of throwing up your life again. He knew that it was a stupid
wish and that the life so ordered would never be the person he had known; but
his mind persisted in projecting itself to the extremes of time and space, like a
madman searching through a room for something he had lost. He could not
control his dreams, his most secret wishes, which seized upon little bits of detail,
always to enlarge them out of all proportion.

“There was human life here,” John said. “On Mars and in the Jovian system,

wasn’t it?” Wheeler was a dark shape peering down into the tablescreen.

“We’ll know in a matter of hours if anything survives,” he said. “We’re

listening for any kind of noise. Frank will cut in to tell us if we pick up anything.
I don’t hear any radio….” There was a tremor in Rob’s voice, as if he was
suddenly afraid, or suspicious.

“What is it, Rob?” John stood up and walked over to look at Rob’s screen.
“Just a thought.”
Wheeler switched to a view of the hollow, throwing a bright afternoon light

into the dark observatory. John looked into the space of green land curving
around the disk of light which now showed the smaller, brightly yellow disk of
sol. More than a million people were in the hollow, milling around the lake,
walking down paths and sitting by streams, filling up the resorts and ordering
lunch in the outdoor cafes, reclining in the meadows and lounging on park
benches, stopping occasionally to look up at the sunscreen, where the sun of
earth was rising again. All were waiting for sight of earth, for the first glimpse of
the world that had produced their ancestors, even if that earth turned out to be a
dead world, an empty shell washed up on this shore of space-time.

They’re afraid of the sun, of any sun. So many are superstitious about suns and
planets, especially the oldest, those over a few centuries old.”

“Are you afraid?”
“I once was. I hate death but no longer fear it. My work gets on in a body of

individuals, none of whom is indispensable except in a personal way.”

“I’ve never heard you speak so critically.”
“We need shaking up,” Wheeler said. “I’ve heard some of the reactions to

your stay on Lea, and they’re all pretty narrow opinions. We’re too detached
from the grosser forms of pain and unhappiness which you’ve seen. Many of our
people are quietly bored. They stop living. They either take their own lives or
they just stop.”

“Stop?”
“They give up and die with nothing wrong. I guess a perverse form of

natural selection will leave us those who can take on an indefinitely long life, but
I sometimes wonder. We don’t live the fully engaged lives of planet dwellers, but
we’re not free of natural worlds, either. We always return to sunspaces—to
reproduce, to gather resources, or to spy on lives harder than our own. Maybe we
should not look back, not even in our thoughts. If we could become what we are
completely, irreversibly, then there would be no danger of internal collapse from
being part one thing and part another.”

“But, Rob,” John said, “I’ve begun to hope.”
“The vision of the founders is not present equally in all our people. History

is not an unbroken memory, despite the link. And even if memory were

continuous in all individuals, human beings would not all be happy and
accepting. Universal linking is like what the desire for universal literacy once
was, but when it comes, it will bring problems of a new order. We have to permit
the life that wishes to do nothing, the life that is weak and fails, as well as the
life that is complaining and ambitious. Some links are being used as a drug, a
source of entertainment, to support a purely aesthetic life, in the way alcohol and
drugs were used by the middle classes on earth.”

“Middle classes?”
“An economic designation. They were not as rich as the rich and very rich,

but they were far from poor. Life was decent in physical terms. Of course, if the
whole world had been middle class or rich, then things would have been
different. But the entitled rich were above the middle class, and the poor made it
feel guilty. Many of the problems of middle-class life were mental—problems of
value and justice, self-development. How much time to devote to making a
living and how much to leisure, and what to do with leisure. All that we can ever
do, I think, is offer individuals a choice of opportunities. But individuals still
have to make those opportunities work for them, and there can be no guarantees
of success. Macroworlders know that natural worlds are what the old poor once
were, but we’re not sure that there is anyone better off than we are. We have not
been around long enough to meet an alien culture.”

of the conversations he had held with each of them. The link enabled them to
compare notes, reinforce points made by the others, and continually follow up
lines of discussion. They were his family, he realized, playing the roles they
might have played if he had been born on a planet.

“There were earth cultures twice as old as we are,” Wheeler was saying, “but

they survived through rigidity and dogma.”

John thought again of the humanity scattered within the 200-parsec radius of

the solar system, most of it poor and unable to move to a high-energy
civilization. Macrolife was growing, but no planet could join its circle unless it
worked its way up.

“You think I was heading for the role of messiah on Lea?” John asked.
“Of course, and you would have had to take over the planet to make things

work.”

“But would that have been a good or bad thing?”
“I wish it were that simple a question,” Wheeler said as he turned around in

his chair. John backed up and sat down again. “What I’ve tried to say is that
there are two kinds of macroworlders: the spoiled and the self-critical—those
who are arrogant and feel naturally entitled to our way of life and those who see

it for what it is, a high point of development which is nevertheless not absolutely
beyond the problems of the past. In time we must come to help natural worlds,
but in ways that will not be destructive.”

“Is that possible?”
“We’ll have to see, and there will be mistakes. You’ve been asking a lot of

questions. You’ve struggled to affirm your own world. Keep that, but think of
helping others also. The time may come when your experience on Lea will be
very valuable.”

“Rob, is the boarding and sacking story true? What happened there?”
“It’s true enough. The planetbound population of the Tau Ceti IV colony

became very resentful of the macroworld in its sky, which was recruiting young
people very rapidly. There was an attack against the half-built world in 2331.
Most of the new population was slaughtered, with the unfortunate result that
most of the skilled scientific elite died, leaving no teachers. The few surviving
macroworlders built the star-ship that we found circling Lea. They were too
proud to resettle among the people of Tau Ceti after their families and friends
were killed. On Lea we saw that all the old problems followed them into
Praesepe, as well as new difficulties that were born along the way. We’ll never
know everything that happened on Lea, except that a technical civilization died
there. Maybe a native one also.”

“How soon before we cross the orbit of earth?”
“Within a week.”
John sighed.
“Summarize,” Rob said. “I want to see how you’ve put it all together.”
“In the one view, we should leave planets alone. Natural worlders resent us,

even though some would join us. We can’t give help to different groups on
planets because this would only create strife—clan against clan, nation against
nation. So the only way that would work would require a team to impose order.
But this would involve us in police guardian activities for every human colony
world, and such an empire would distract us from developing our own
civilization.”

“Have you considered that such an empire might be a good thing? Maybe it

would be part of our own development, not just a side activity.”

“You’re just trying to confuse me. Let me finish. Involvement would prevent

us from working upward from our level of problems, our plateau of difficulties.
We would become a parent civilization, forever looking backward to the nursery
worlds. We’re too busy to do that. Maybe one day, when macrolife is more
numerous, we can close out the remaining planetary cultures by giving them a
leg up.”

“It changes them to know about us,” Wheeler said, “and it changes us

whenever we are confronted by them, as you have been. It can’t be helped, even
with all the best intentions on both sides. Miklos has been on all the human
settlement worlds. He’s never forgotten. He’ll never tell you what help he’s
given and how ineffective his efforts had been. Maybe someday you will build
worlds that will specialize in natural planets.”

“I don’t like what I did on Lea.”
“Face the fact that humankind is not wholly rational and may never be. We

have tried to rise above the animal without embracing the amorality of the
intellect. But just because we can see beyond the slime a ways does not mean we
have left it behind. Only the fact that exceptional individuals are born with a fair
degree of regularity gives me hope.”

“Is it a matter of biology?” John asked.
“Partly. The interplay of complexities is another reason we shy away from

meddling. The array of genetic potential is difficult to develop effectively
without being coercive. Persuasion is not enough. Too often cultures have
merely punished older, previously acceptable forms of behavior. Biology is
necessary but not sufficient. A creative social form is sufficient, given the
biology, but it must be coupled with a creative psychology, one which develops
individuals without tyrannizing them or fostering dependency. In both
psychology and biology we must never be happy with what is, but must ask what
should be and what we want to be. Now we’ve managed to channel our irrational
impulses, controlling the gross forms of envy, fear, hatred, and destructiveness.
But we still have fools and egomaniacs, as well as people who aspire to ideals
and behave humanely. Our laws stand above us and resolve our differences, but
these laws are still made to work through human beings. I think it’s the long-
lived among us, those who taught Humanity II, who are responsible for the
continuity of our laws and practices. Yet we may decline in time, and to prevent
that we may need the natural worlds again—we may need their view of us, their
novelty, just as we need the rationality of Humanity II.”

“So what do you recommend?” John asked, glimpsing how much there was

still to discover in his own world.

“Build yourself. Start inside and work outward to a concern for others.

You’ll link, then you’ll serve as exemplar while completing parallel
specializations. The questions and problems will still be there when you come to
them again.’

“But planets are suffering now.”
“You’re not ready—it’s not in your power. Don’t you see that?” Wheeler’s

voice was harsh for the moment.

John felt like a child hoping that it was within the power of his parents to

help him get what he wanted. He had recited his lessons correctly, and his
parents had told him that it was impossible to do what he wanted. John felt
betrayed. Something in the back of his mind had imagined a gathering of
macroworlds to eliminate all the plight and poverty in the universe.

“What is the new mobile interested in?”
“Perfecting materials synthesis, improving our stardrive, exploration. They

want to go off toward the central regions of the galaxy, where there may be a
high incidence of advanced technical civilizations.”

world cultures of a high order.”

“Possibly.”
“It would be quite a surprise for us to find an advanced planetbound

civilization,” John said.

“If a culture is advanced, it can leave the planet, even though it may not wish

to do so. I’ll withhold my opinion, but it’s hard to get around the indication that
planetbound cultures die very quickly or leave the planet. The limits of a planet
demand that a culture leave before natural resources are gone.”

“Planets can be moved.”
“That’s another form of macrolife, but no one we know has done that kind of

thing.”

Suddenly John felt himself rushing toward the secret image of Anulka that

he had buried within himself. He was nothing without her. She had taken
everything from him. Margaret had tried to help, but the feeling was still as
strong as ever. It came upon him at odd moments, mixing with his most rational
thoughts, bending him to its will. He had lived for Anulka on Lea. He had
dreamed of helping her people, but in reality it had all been to impress her. He
had forgotten to live for himself. After months of trying to understand himself,
he did not know what he was waiting for. The people in the hollow were waiting
to see old earth, to see sol grow large on the sunscreen. They wanted to be
frightened and awed. He was waiting for his thoughts to resolve themselves into
a set of balanced feelings about his life, if thoughts could flow into feelings.

He wanted to banish the squalor he knew existed on planets. A tyranny

prevented his wishes from coming true, the tyranny of spacetime that imprisoned
intelligences in small, ineffectual bodies and condemned them to death.

far. It’s hard for our young to realize that we cannot do everything. I was
devastated by this fact once, and I think I am still living life as if it could be
overcome one day.”

“I’m going to get some sleep,” John said, rising. “Wake me if anything

important happens.”

a devil’s mask. John felt cold as he fell behind the shuttlecraft and watched it
disappear into the brown and gray swirl of clouds. The cabin lights brightened,
pulling him back into his body.

A dust storm raged outside. The cabin was a cozy enclave, but he felt

helpless. He wanted to strip the dust away and strew the planet with sunlight,
bringing it back to life.

The shuttle burst out of a low cloud front, a thousand feet over a desolate

landscape. A faint sun rolled in the rusty clouds. The land was without trees or
grass. A grainy sand blew in the ceaseless wind, creating flats and dunes, with
only an occasional shaft of sunlight to brighten the day. The wind was wailing as
it had for centuries now, wiping away the last traces of humankind from the
planet.

The shuttle dropped low over the desert and drifted forward, its light beams

searching the ground. The screen showed a gully of red clay, where a trickle of
water ran.

Shapes appeared ahead, a column of crablike masses moving toward him.

The shuttle was over them in a moment, and John saw the hole in the earth from
which they were emerging. In a world without oceans, these creatures were
masters of the sandy wilderness….

He was outside the craft, watching it hover above the creatures, a hard-

shelled invader made of metal, with beams of light for legs….

He opened his eyes, remembering the room Rob had given him in the

observatory area. It was little more than a place to sleep—a screen, a bed with g-
controls, a small library-link desk—but he was glad to find himself in it.

Closing his eyes, he tried to see the desert of his dream. Somewhere on that

ruined earth there had been a valley, the place where his grandfathers had lived
and died. Samuel Bulero’s father and mother were his parents also, dead for
more than a thousand years.

When he opened his eyes again, the left corner of his screen was on,

showing Wheeler’s white-haired head.

“You’re awake,” Rob said. “Come out here.”
“What is it?”
“You’ll have to come out and see this.”

magnified image hung a hundred or more motes of light, brilliant diamonds
catching the sunlight. The moon seemed to belong to the swarm, but its light was
duller.

“What are they?” John asked as he sat down next to Wheeler.
Blackfriar’s face cut into the bottom-left-hand corner of the screen. “We’ve

got a message on tachyon band, Rob. They don’t use radio or laser, so we didn’t
hear anything when we came in.”

“What are they?” John asked again.
Blackfriar squinted at him. “Hello, John.”
“They’re communities, like us,” Wheeler said, “in permanent positions

around earth.”

“The biggest is some fifty kilometers across,” Blackfriar said.
“What about the anomaly?” John asked.
“It has receded,” Wheeler said. “There’s no sign of any disturbance. What

does the message say, Frank?”

“They demand that we identify ourselves and order us to take up a sun orbit

just inside earth’s, a million miles forward of its position. They’re very
suspicious of us.”

“But who are they?” John asked. “Where did they come from?”
“They’re the descendants of earth,” Wheeler said, “the same as we are. Sol

did not die. They have rebuilt and progressed.”

“They have a stay-at-home form of macrolife,” Blackfriar said. “I wouldn’t

have guessed it, yet it’s an obvious development.”

John had been looking at the earth without noticing what was different about

it.

“Rob, Frank—look. The earth is green!” The earth was alive. It had not died

here in the stellar desert where the suns thinned out toward the galaxy’s edge. He
yearned suddenly. As he looked at the earth and its glowing children, he
questioned why he so often thought of the end of the universe, the end that was
implicit in the fact of gravity. As long as earth’s orbital motion staved off its fall
into the sun, as long as the motion of suns delayed their collapse into their
galactic centers, so long would a universe of lighted spaces prevail against
death’s in-pulling, and there would be time for every kind of life.

“The earth is green,” he said again.
“Let’s hope they’re friendly,” Blackfriar said. “We’ve never dealt with an

equal who might have the ability to destroy us.”

“You mean weapons?” John asked.
“It’s not impossible,” Blackfriar said. “We’ve come into their space

suddenly, without warning. It’s too late to turn back.”

“We could intercept or deflect any hostile object,” John said.
“Not at point-blank range. There are weapons powerful enough to destroy

us.” Blackfriar was silent for a moment. “They’re calling again. I’ll get back to
you later.” His face faded from the screen, leaving the earth and its firefly
companions to dominate the screen.

“What do you think, Rob?”
“This is a new situation for us.”

23. Cities of the Sun

and ahead of earth. The earth-moon system and its companions now filled the
rear screens in the observatory. More than a thousand worldlets cupped the earth
in a porous half-shell that caught the sun’s streaming energy. The moon was a
dull pearl floating near the rim.

A delegation would be arriving to discuss the renewal of contact between

earth and her prodigals. John wondered what, if anything, would be decided. For
the last two weeks he had felt more at peace with himself. Margaret had come to
see him in his room, and they had talked—about the link, about Anulka, about
the effect that earth’s recovery was having on the population. They had made
love, but it was filled with friendly feelings and laughter more than with desire.
As he sat alone one day in the observatory, he realized that he was recovering,
that he was changing. His youth was coming to an end, he told himself, even
though he knew that others might feel the same way at five times his age.

The meeting would be witnessed in every assembly watch. Although he was

too young to be directly involved in the negotiations, he was experiencing
apprehension. The orders given out by earth to the arriving worlds had conveyed
an impression of resentment. John felt a vague guilt about returning to the solar
system, but he told himself that it was the result of earth’s reception. Blackfriar
and Wheeler had been too busy to talk to him during the weeks following the
arrival, and this added to his uneasiness. He had begun to suspect that something
hidden was going on. “Almost everyone on our two worlds is waiting with you,”
Margaret had said, “so be patient.”

John walked into the outer workroom. He went over to Wheeler’s desk and

sat down, his mind wandering. He would give anything to be suddenly Rob’s
age, to look back to this time as a faraway moment of growth and discovery.
Facing the desk space were four old library screens, the controls on hold, set to
recall the reference material Rob had been studying. John reached out to the
touch plate and the screen at his right lit up:

A. Forward Time Travel Procedures to Verify Cosmological Models

1. Near light-speed passage
2. Black Hole ergosphere passage
3. Tipler 2-way time machine

(construction of large rotating cylinder of dense matter)

B. Comments

Only (3) above offers a method that would not be psychologically ruinous to

most human subjects, as they are now constituted, although unusual individuals
may be able to adjust to (1) and (2).

See Feinberg, Ettinger, Haldane on the sanity and outlook of long-lived

individuals.

C. Cosmological Models of Current Interest

A list appeared, but John turned off the screen. He looked at the wall clock

and saw that it was almost time for assembly. A sick feeling came into his
stomach, as if the world had dropped away below him. He went out into the
hallway.

The auditorium was five hundred meters back from Wheeler’s research

center. John enjoyed the walk, grateful for the release of tension; it reminded
him of Lea. Suddenly he was remembering the small, pleasant things of his life
on the planet. He paused a moment, then walked through as the door slid open.

It was a small auditorium, with seats for a few hundred people. Most of the

researchers had already arrived—astronomers, physicists, mathematicians,
cosmologists—all of them from Wheeler’s science sections in world forwards;
all of them were over a hundred years old. John felt out of place, but Rob was
already waving him to an empty seat in the second row. John walked down the
aisle, then three seats across, and sat down next to Wheeler.

“I thought you’d gone to your room to watch,” Wheeler said.
“I decided to have people around.”
“You’ll be more alert here.”
John turned to look behind him and recognized Tassos the biologist, his

childhood exemplar.

“Hello, John,” Tassos said softly.
John tensed. The suddenness of the reunion was like an assault; he was not

ready to see Tassos again. The man was unchanged. His hair was still gray, his
brown eyes still kindly. He hunched more than sat in his seat. John smiled and
turned away.

Assembly watch was something he remembered always doing, from primary

to continuing school, first with Tassos, then with Margaret, later alone. He had
broken the habit while on Lea, though he might have kept up through the flitter

link. Now he felt all the old feelings returning as he looked up at the screen.

“The earth is not happy about our being here,” Wheeler said.
“Have they said anything?”
“Think how you would feel if an economic and military power entered your

stable and prosperous system. As a leader you would have to be skeptical.”

“But we’re no danger to them.”
“They have to be convinced.”
Suddenly John knew that part of his uneasiness came from the fear that earth

might be a danger to them.

On the screen, Frank Blackfriar was sitting down opposite three delegates

from earth. The round table was of teak from earth’s forests. The room was a
simple conference chamber on level thirty.

The delegates introduced themselves.
“I am Drisa Haldane. My associates are Melcia Chin and Reger Huw. On

behalf of our people and government, I welcome you to our sunspace. Please
bear in mind that you are subject to our laws and customs until you leave.”

“Of course,” Blackfriar said, but the tone of uneasiness had been set. “Is

there a limit to how long we may stay?”

“What are your plans?”
“The potential for exchange of news and information is to our mutual

advantage. We have been away for almost ten centuries.”

There was an awkward silence before Drisa Haldane replied.
“We would not wish for you to stay indefinitely.”
“Perhaps you would suggest an acceptable stay,” Blackfriar said.
Drisa Haldane’s short hair was a bright red, and she seemed rather small

behind the table. She was leaning forward, profile to the screen; it was a strong
profile, perfectly matched to her manner. Reger Huw was a tall, thin man with
sandy hair and a weak chin; he sat with his arms folded across his chest. Melcia
Chin was a stocky woman with straight black hair down to her shoulders. She sat
with her hands on the table, her lips pressed tightly together.

“We would prefer an early departure,” Drisa Haldane said.
“I don’t understand,” Blackfriar said quickly.
“You are not owed an explanation.”
“Everything seems to be well here, and we don’t pose you any threat.”
“Councilman Blackfriar, we do not wish to be unfriendly, but since you

press me…” She paused. “I have examined the circumstances of your leaving
the solar system. Your way of life has grown and prospered and so has ours. You
cannot have claims here.”

“You misunderstand,” Blackfriar said. “We shall not interfere in your

internal affairs. We produce all we need, and we’re curious only for news and
knowledge. Surely you feel the same way? We’re not exactly strangers.”

“Are you planning a legal or a moral claim to be here, to return?”
“None at all.”
Haldane looked at her two companions briefly. It seemed that her composure

had weakened.

“You must do as we ask,” she said.
Blackfriar was looking directly at her. “What is wrong? Can we help?”
“You must leave at once.”
“And if we don’t?”
“Are you threatening us?”
“Not at all.”
“Then you will leave.”
“To set your mind at ease, let me assure you that we are not a belligerent

people.”

“Neither are we—but you and I do not really know that, do we?”
“Nothing about this situation requires the use of force,” Blackfriar said.
“Yes, of course.”
“I don’t understand your eagerness to have us leave.”
“Must we give you a reason?”
“You do not have to—we respect your sovereignty. My aim is to persuade

you to share some history and knowledge with us. I repeat: much time has
elapsed, but we are not strangers. We may have a lot to give each other.”

Drisa Haldane looked to her companions. “Just a moment, Councilman

Blackfriar.” She leaned toward them for a consultation. After a few moments of
whispering, she retured her gaze to Blackfriar and said, “Are you empowered to
speak for your government and all your people, here and now?”

“Of course. They’re all watching this meeting.”
“Very well, then.” She folded her hands on the table. “Since it is clear to me

that this is not a matter that either of our peoples would use force to resolve, I
will tell you why we are reluctant for you to stay.” She patently did not like what
she was saying. “You will stay anyway, it seems, so we have no choice but to tell
you in good faith, requesting that you honor our way of handling what is about
to take place. We have spent years in preparation, so you must pledge not to
interfere. You may observe, no more.”

“Observe what? How can we pledge anything about something we know

nothing about?”

“I do not find your attitude reassuring.”
“I beg your pardon,” Blackfriar said.

“In a moment you will understand why I am being circumspect.”
“I think I know,” Wheeler whispered. The assembly was perfectly still.
Melcia Chin spoke next. “You must remain bystanders,” she said in a low

voice, “to a meeting that will take place shortly with an alien emissary. In fact,
we almost mistook you for that emissary.”

“Your presence is already a risk,” Reger Huw said, “since this culture

restricts its contacts to a circle of eligible civilizations. Your arrival may have
changed our status.”

“How do you mean?” Blackfriar asked.
“They may not come,” Drisa Haldane said. “You might have sent a message

instead of behaving as if solar space was still yours.”

“But we are the same people,” Blackfriar said. “You cannot deny it.”
“Matters of origin are trivial differences,” she said.
“I can see that you were not planning to tell us, were you?”
Drisa Haldane rose abruptly. “I am not aware of any obligation to have done

so. This is our project, one for which we have spent many years preparing.
Doubtless, you have also considered the problem of alien civilizations. If you
believe with us that intelligence is the most precious aspect of reality, then you
must see the implications of contacting alternate humanities. Intelligences vaster
than our own, or simply different, may help us see ourselves with an increased
objectivity, help us check the validity of our systems of knowledge…. I don’t
have to go on.”

Blackfriar nodded. “Of course. “We will be bystanders.”
Drisa Haldane sat down.
“But can I ask that if you see fit, you may share your findings?” Blackfriar

asked in a softer voice.

“If the situation permits, in the long run.”
“I’m convinced that you are probably better able to handle such a contact,

given all your preparation,” Blackfriar said.

“Is she telling the truth?” John whispered to Wheeler.
Rob shrugged, but did not answer.
“Could you tell us what happened after the anomaly receded?” Blackfriar

asked.

“Certainly. A century after Asterome’s departure, the disturbance fell back to

the confines of earth and disappeared within the next half century. In the second
century, we came sunward from Mars and the Jovian system. We found the earth
a desert, but growing back. Some of us resettled the earth. Others live in the
habitats you see around the planet.”

“Have there been other departures from the solar system?”

“Once every few decades, but we never hear from them. You were the first

to leave and the first to return.”

“I take it that you do not approve of mobiles?”
“Many of us do not, though we see that it must be permitted. I feel that

interstellar communication has the greatest potential.”

“You consider information to be superior to firsthand experience,” Blackfriar

said.

“What is experience without the proper background of information and

theory against which to view it? In any case, mobility, like the old idea of
colonizing earthlike planets, is immature and uncreative. While it may be
necessary to escape a sun or local disaster, colonization ignores the fact that a
habitable planet belongs to the life that exists there or will develop on it. Mobile
macroforms go in search of what they already possess—the environment of their
own consciousness and culture.”

“But you don’t know what we have seen and learned,” Blackfriar said.
“We probably know as much,” she said. “As to what you have seen, that’s an

aesthetic matter, for adventurous types. To be useful, wide experience must be
interpreted properly, not simply savored. Intensive development and creativity is
superior to looking for what may lie over the next hill.” John found himself
liking Drisa Haldane.

“How can one help not interpreting?” Blackfriar asked.
“Mobility is not an absolute necessity.”
“The aliens—why are they coming physically?”
“It’s their choice, as it has been ours, to release those among them who wish

to travel.”

“Do you have a fix on their home system?”
“No, just the mobile,” she said.
“Don’t you mistrust them?”
“They have nothing to gain by deceiving us.”
“Are you certain?”
“As certain as we are of your peaceful intentions.”
“Do you know what they are like?”
“Physiologically, they stem from birdlike forms rather than from apes.

We’ve exchanged DNA information and built up a common language. That took
two centuries. In some ways, they seem more familiar to us than you do.”

“Earth has grown up,” Wheeler said softly. “She makes me feel like a roving

wild man.”

“She doesn’t miss a chance to dig at us,” John acknowledged.
“How much time do we have?” Blackfriar asked.

“They can arrive at any time. That is why we were anxious for an

understanding as soon as possible.”

“You will have our interested cooperation,” Blackfriar said.
“We have an agreement, then?”
“We have an agreement.”
“What do you think, Rob?” John asked.
“It’s earth’s project, not ours. Whatever happens will be their responsibility.

It’s certainly not worth taking weapons out of mothballs over. I suppose we’ll
stand by and see what these alien geese are like.”

“Geese?”
“An old earth bird. I suppose it’s no more ridiculous than apes.”
“Rob, do you think we can arrange for me to go down to earth?”
“I don’t see why not.”
“I want to visit the place where the Bulero name came from.”
“Want some company?”
“I don’t mind,” John said as he stood up to leave. Most of the others were

still seated, watching the concluding formalities of the first session between
Blackfriar and the delegation from earth. Wheeler rose and walked out with him.

At the entrance, Wheeler punched his opinion of the meeting into the

Humanity II terminal.

“How do you think the opinion will run?” John asked.
“They’ll go along with Frank’s, I think. What would you vote?”
“There’s not much to do except wait and see.”

24. The Alien

There’s no one here, John thought as he stood on the mountainside.

Earthquakes had enlarged the Andes valley, and only the character of the peaks
was unchanged. The receding anomaly had left a nearly barren soil, but
everywhere a green moss was struggling to clothe the rocks. He had almost
expected a house, or the remains of one; a thousand years was not so long as to
have left nothing. He looked around, hoping for a glimpse of some object, a
scrap of worked stone or metal, anything to suggest more than a past of natural
forces, but there was nothing. He was as much a stranger here as he had been on
Lea.

He turned and looked up at the sun hovering over the stony masses behind

him, setting in a dark blue sky that was readying itself for the transparency of
night. Snow glistened on the peaks, blood red from the sunlight, almost purple in
the lower shadows. A slight wind carried the mountain cold to his face.

Human settlements still existed on the planet, fed by the occasional return of

small groups. For this portion of humanity, he had learned, significant change
was a fearful thing. The prevailing trends in the suncup worlds toward
modifications of the human body, artificial intelligence links, increased mental
capacity, and indefinite life span, were uncertain innovations that were preparing
humankind for some further struggle, as yet unnamed, and the results might still
be catastrophic and irreversible. The returnees wanted no part of such
uncertainties; for them the earth still breathed and would be reclaimed by those
who still wanted it, loved it with an intensity that was at least as strong as the
desire to turn away from natural worlds completely. “It’s superstition mixed with
old instincts,” Margaret had commented. “The returnees have no desire to
become anything more than their biological past. These few will return to the
womb of earth, but unless they shackle their children’s minds with custom and
law, the next generation will explode outward again, looking to the suncup
habitats, as rural sons and daughters once looked to the cities. The stubborn
minority on earth may remain for a long time. Perhaps the old tropism will never
die away.”

John walked up toward his flitter, stepping carefully among the small rocks.

The quiet of the peaks was complete; silent before the agony of time, they would
never be roused into speech.

He was drawn to the local macroworlders as he learned more about them. By

denying themselves mobility, they had retained a better hold on the past, a sense

of identity which contributed greatly to the pragmatic courage and personal
energy he had seen among them. Earth, their place of origin, was a daily reality
for them, to be treasured even though they did not live on it; sunspace was home,
to be filled up with human communities as once the floating continents of earth
had been built up with towns and cities linked by a planetary system of roads
and communications.

The difference between the returnees and the space dwellers was that the

local macroworlders were collectively up to something, while the returnees had
no desire to be up to anything. The earth would support them; it was a good
place for small communities of people who had made their peace with the
universe. Sunspace and beyond was the perfect environment for the open-ended
city-state. On earth such states had once emerged only to war with one another
as soon as they had impinged on one another’s territory; for the surface of earth
was finite, its riches limited, its support of life a passing gift. Such conditions
¦were intolerable for a civilization which saw itself as an ongoing project, that set
its goals to be a growth of knowledge and ability; any claims to perfection and
completeness, claims that meant a small, static existence of changeless outlook
and custom, were seen as death. “Dogma always goes hand in hand with a lack
of growth, both in knowledge and in technical ability, while growth must always
accompany democratic ideals of improvement and innovations,” Rob had said
before John’s departure for earth. “You will see that earth is a dead end. Their
greatest crime will be their effort to stifle the minds of their children with an
aesthetic certainty, denying them the right to explore and come of age as you
have done.”

He climbed inside the flitter and leaned back in the seat, closing his eyes.

“John, this is Yevetha Li-Alin,” Margaret said. “Yevetha, this is John Bulero,
your new examplar.” She’s skeptical, John thought, looking into her golden
brown eyes. Her short hair was sandy blonde. She was willowy and long-legged.
“You’ll have to work hard to convince me you’re worth listening to,” she said.
“What does being a little more than twice my age give you? Margaret, can’t you
find me someone older?” She might have been one of the children from the
village on Lea, grown now and climbing from one new awareness to another, if
he had thought to save even one. He thought of their small broken bodies.

valley in front of him, signaling that the sun had slipped down behind the
mountains at his back.

He looked up through the canopy, wondering what it would be like when he

got his full link—not the detachable trainer he had been given recently, but the
permanent implant that would be under the direct control of his will. He might

now be opening his mind to feel the life of his world in the sky as it looked down
on the earth, think as Rob thought, with all the hoarded knowledge of macrolife
as support, see what all the best who had ever lived had seen. This would give
him what he hoped for—self-knowledge joined to human will, carried forward
by the pressure of the past; this would be for him, as it had been for countless
others, the end of forgetfulness, the end of the amnesia of generations, the
discontinuity of knowledge and experience that had toppled civilization so many
times, throwing up again and again the old, wearisome problems. All his
dissatisfaction lay in his isolation from this vast stream of human effort; all hope
for him lay in his now following that flow of creativity, wherever it might lead. It
didn’t matter now, he thought, because he had taken the right road, and once
understanding takes hold of knowledge, all roads become the same road.

Yet something of him still held back, bidding him to return to earth, remake

it, turn his back on the stars, the intruding stars that were now beginning to
pierce the veil of day above him. There seemed to be no remedy for the
emptiness between them. He felt again the hunger to see all creation from
outside, as he had seen the dying embers of a night fire on Lea, with the darkness
pressing in around him. There is an insufficiency to life that is unconquerable.

He noticed a light moving high above the valley. The flier descended and set

down a hundred meters below him on the hillside.

John climbed out and started down the hill. A figure appeared as he neared

the object. He heard a few words. The emerging passenger was speaking to
someone inside.

John waited in the twilight. The figure noticed him and came up the hill.
“You’re Drisa Haldane,” he said in surprise. She wore a gray tunic, gray

pants, and dark boots.

“You’re from the mobile,” she said. “What are you doing here?” She looked

past him to the flitter. “You’re alone?”

“Yes.”
“Why have you come to this barren place?”
“Why have you followed me?” John asked. “I’m not anyone important.”
“Are you looking for something?”
“I have permission to be here.” He took a step toward her and looked

directly into her eyes.

“I know that.”
He noted how delicate her features were—a small nose, pale skin, hollow

cheeks, and narrow lips. Her eyes seemed larger than he remembered. Her gaze
did not break as she looked back at him.

“I was born here,’ he said.

“You’re a millennium old?” she asked, tilting her head.
“No, my…family was born here.” The thought seemed strange, as if he were

lying. “I’m a clone of Samuel Bulero.”

“You’ve come here out of sentiment.”
“You seem relieved,” he said. “You expected something devious?”
“I did from a Bulero.”
He wondered if she had come to look him over out of personal curiosity or

official suspicion.

“I’m sorry,” she added quickly. “That was a rude thing to say.”
He took a few cautious steps toward her, until they were standing face to

face. She did not seem to mind.

“You see,” he said, “we’re not just strangers from the stars. We both come

from the same place, originally.”

“Of course. I was born in the Ceres hollow, grew up on Mars, then came

sunward to the ring,” she said more expansively, then, abruptly, “I’ll leave you to
your sightseeing.”

“Drisa Haldane,” he said as she started toward her flitter.
She turned suddenly. “Yes?”
“I would like to meet you again.”
She smiled, turned again, and went quickly to her flitter. In a moment she

was a faint star fleeing from the earth, and he wondered whether he had actually
spoken to her.

He approached his flitter, knowing that it would be very hard to see her

again. As he climbed inside, he tried to recall the color of her eyes.

A call lit up the touch plate. Instead of opening the audio, he picked up the

trainer and pressed the clinging chip to his temple.

“This is Rob, John,” a voice said within him.
“Yes?” he answered silently, feeling the multitude of listeners.
“The alien has entered the solar system. It’s coming fast, John, a matter of

hours. What’s surprising is the thing’s size. Take a look.”

John looked up through the canopy, another picture superimposed itself on the
sky, a dark shape moving through space, obscuring stars, growing larger.

“It’s at least twice the size of Mars,” Rob said. “Next to it our two worlds

and the sun cities will be specks. Their control of gravity and inertia must be
very fluid to permit the movement of such a large body.”

“I wonder why they need to move around at all,” John said, feeling uneasy.
“They’re up to something more than a simple meeting,” Rob said. “I’m

guessing, of course, but like any advanced culture, I think they must have

projects that draw the abilities of their people. Apparently they think humanity
worth contacting.”

“Let’s hope we can understand them, or they us.”
“Drisa says she does.”
“Do you feel uneasy, Rob?”
“Yes, I do.”
There was a short silence. “I’m coming home now,” John said. Half rising

from his seat, he looked around at the now darkened valley of his ancestors, sat
back again and commanded the craft to lift.

“Forward cradle 233.”
The flitter pulled itself to a hundred kilometers above the earth, revealing a

planet of broken gray-brown desert marked with patches of greenery. Large
rocky islands sat in the sparkling Atlantic. The sunlight danced like diamonds on
the polar caps. The flitter gained speed, shrinking the earth behind him.

Ahead were the twin home worlds. Behind him the space habitats glittered,

cupping the earth and catching the sunlight. Somewhere in the night, something
from beyond was moving toward the home fire. Anxieties like his own were
probably rare; but then he reminded himself of the distrust shown his two worlds
upon their return, and he resented the fact that so much less inhospitality was
being shown toward the alien.

The two macroworlds were now visible ovals. The flitter turned left to

approach home from the forwards.

“They’re here” the link whispered.
He looked around through the canopy and saw the dark shape, larger than

Luna, obscuring the stars behind the egg shapes of home. The object was not
reflecting any light.

something from deep within him had escaped to become real outside, forcing
him to face it.

“We know, we know,” Rob said.
The flitter raced toward the forward cradles. Suddenly the planet-sized globe

brightened, as if signaling, dwarfing the two macroworlds in the foreground.
Soon the alien took up the whole sky; but as John rushed toward home, the
macroworld grew to blot out the visitor.

He floated into the open cradle, and the locks closed behind him. The flitter

settled in, but he did not get out immediately. Responding to his curiosity, the
link gave him a 360-degree view of the scene outside, turning for an image of
earth’s cup, his own companion world nearby, settling finally on the visitor,
which was larger than all the spaceborne structures combined.

“They have perfect control,” Rob said. “I can’t detect any significant

gravitational effect from their presence that might be harmful to us or to earth.”

“Polite,” John said.
“Just a minute. Something’s happening.”
“What is it, Rob?”
“Our artificial intelligences are chattering away, exchanging information at a

fantastic rate, and we can’t stop it. Drisa reports the same thing. The process is
running like a chain reaction. Wait a moment….”

John heard a high-pitched sound.
“I don’t like it,” Rob said faintly, as if an ocean of sound were swallowing

him. John thought he heard a titanic whispering; there seemed to be laughter in
it, or was it joy? A great night tide was washing in, another going out.

“There, it’s over,” Rob said. A great silence seemed to surround Wheeler’s

thoughts. “Here’s something from Drisa. The aliens claim to have just given us
information on how to build better drive systems, complete matter-synthesis
capability, and their entire cultural history—as gifts of friendship.” Rob almost
laughed inside him. “I guess they can’t be all bad.”

“If it’s true,” John said.
“Drisa says that it’s like an exchange of biological information during

reproduction, but on a large scale, between three cultural organisms.”

Suddenly John perceived a fact about the alien. The information seemed

almost a memory, though he knew that he had just received it. The alien was not
a complete stranger. It was carrying two earth-born macroworlds within its
structure, bringing them back to sunspace as part of its contact project. The first
contact had been made by a mobile a long time ago, so this could no longer be
earth’s exclusive project.

The alien spoke:
“We invite you to join our circle of civilizations. The primary consideration

for us is the fact that you have achieved organic and artificial intelligence
interfaces. This frees you, to a large degree, from old instinctual patterns of
motivation, the behavioral forms created in the competitive evolutionary process.
Your interfaces are still another example of critical mind freeing itself from the
unproductive aspects of instinctual mind.”

An image appeared:
Bony, birdlike bipeds with large eyes, ancient and reptilian-looking shapes,

their limbs bent into a strange posture, joints thorny and skeletal….

As he held the image in his mind, John realized that it revealed very little;

the words said more, conveying a greater sense of the culture’s inner life and
direction. Their words communicated everything, overriding body language and

other deep-seated reactions in him; and he knew that this was quite deliberate.
He was in the presence of advanced minds, ones that could rise above the
irrational structures of brain and body, conveying the degree of their victory of
the rational cortex to others without triggering fears and prejudices.

“How then do you deal with younger forms of life?” Rob asked.
“We do not deal with them at all, but we are aware of their existence; youth

is the source of new things in the universe, and worth watching for its fresh
approaches to the tragedies and joys of life, even if never contacted. Since we
have no problems of energy or resources, our only activity is to set goals worth
accomplishing. We found your mobile worlds very promising, having developed
this freedom ourselves. There are other circles of macrolife in the universe; one
of our aims is to search for them, in order to compare systems of knowledge and
experience. Decide amongst yourselves which of you will join us. We will not
intrude on your interfaces until you let us know.”

“They’ll probably invite some exchange of population,” John said.
“Perhaps. The exchange has given them more than our genetic code. They

have enough to grow human individuals for themselves, to see how they will
develop in that culture. Maybe they’ve done it already—we’re not the first
humankind they’ve contacted. I wonder how the two other macroworlds have
developed.”

Doubts came into his mind again, like vermin hunting for his hopes; for a

terrifying instant he felt that all the pain of her death would flood back into him.
It was incredible that Anulka was dead, infinitely cruel and inexplicable. The
structure of her body was dissolving into chaos. What was the inner necessity of
irreversible processes? Material things ran down, while minds grew in complex
reference and internal resonance. I did not know her, he admitted, I pitied her. I
have not yet known another as another needs to be known, as I need to be
known. Pity for the suffering of natural worlds had distracted him, mixing with
his real needs, luring him toward the solution of problems he did not yet
understand.

control panel. Then he climbed out of the flitter; his footsteps echoed in the
cradle chamber as he walked to the exit.

The door slid open and he stepped into the corridor of the engineering level.

The wide passage was empty of vehicles. He looked right and left. The overhead
lights stretched to the vanishing point, curving around the world’s forwards.
Across from him, the elevator doors were closed. He stood perfectly still,
wondering about the endless oblivion of death, the many-legged insect horror
that might come rushing toward him at any moment. A small failure within his

body might kill him in an instant, despite his indefinite life span. He was still
finite and mortal. Macrolife had not crushed death; it had only pushed it out of
immediate sight.

He turned right and started to walk down the endless passageway. Was there

any doubt, still, where his loyalty lay? People had been killed on a world where
intelligence was a small, powerless force, enclosed on all sides by a killing
nature, a cruel and squalid process of life clinging to the outside of a planetary
surface. The village had been an agricultural community trying to throw off
hunting and gathering, while the nomads had persisted in treating the village as
just another wild animal to hunt for food. I’m for macrolife because it is against
death, he thought. Macrolife is the fulfillment of the hopes of all who have died
before me. At last we are free of nature’s agriculture of death. City life is finally
free of the countryside. As long as there are raw materials, we can exist forever.

drawn its children back for a purpose. Old ghosts were being laid to rest; the
future was opening up again. In a thousand years, he would still be young, still
starting out. Large, impersonal thoughts came into him again. What was this
universe, this enveloping reality that made him doubt and hunger and desire?
Would he always live without knowing? He stopped and closed his eyes, trying
to see forward to ages of greater knowing, willing himself to move ahead into
those times, to feel what they held. If he wearied of long life, a thousand, ten
thousand, half a million years hence, there would be ways to advance into
futurity more quickly. He felt impatient. The limits around him were there as
firmly as death had once been. Although home had given a better life to
generations, something was still missing. The little voices within him would not
be still. He had been born too early, ages before macrolife became more than the
uneasy cooperation of its individuals. He had waited most of his early life to see
a planet, a local space bathed in the natural light of its sun; but despite the
beauties he had seen, the experience had left him with bitterness and pity, and
sorrow over the loss that he could not replace or forget easily. Having been born
on a world moving in space, he had developed the expectation of arriving at a
destination; yet all worlds moved in space, and such motion was incidental to
life.

down the passage for hundreds of kilometers without stopping. The thought
calmed him, and he knew what he had to do.

25. Crossroads

Human thoughts were everywhere, as numerous as the people he saw in

public places, surrounding him with welcome and reassurance. A week after
attaining full link, he was still practicing the self-control that would ensure his
privacy; separateness of mental space was a right that each citizen knew how to
enforce at will. During the first month, he was not always happy about shutting
himself up in his own skull; the time off was necessary, but he did not like it. He
would send his mind into the information labyrinth of Humanity II, there to be
guided by the various servants, who would appear in his field of vision as human
personalities, real in every sense except that they could not be touched; they
could be called upon to explain visual or written information, to give an
audiovisual overview of public activities throughout the home biosphere. They
also provided a continuous feedback of medical intelligence from each citizen’s
body, warning and prescribing as necessary.

Occasionally he would call up the image of Richard Bulero, who would

appear full-size and respond to questions; the answers, of course, were only
extrapolations made by Humanity II, based on everything that remained of
Richard’s views. John’s biological nephew lived, in a sense, as animated
information within macrolife’s system of technology for transmitting basic
cultural structure. Richard had been prophetic, John learned, about the link
system: “The link will not be telepathy, but a direct line into the sensory and
speech centers of the brain, perhaps in time using neutrino and tachyon beams as
carriers, instead of lasers and radio. Individuals will still have to listen and speak
to one another, but the ease of access among individuals, as well as to library
information services, will be efficient and convenient, making possible a higher
degree of personal growth and democratic participation for everyone. The
promise of link implants in creating a cohesive social structure for macrolife
cannot be underestimated. Not only will the links between persons be
strengthened, enabling them to individuate themselves and to share a common
culture to a degree previously impossible, but the sense of historical continuity,
educational heritage, and direction will be enhanced.” Richard had not foreseen
the large-scale use of information imprinting, especially in languages and
musical structure, or the link’s use in sleep control, psychosomatic direction of
the body’s self-maintenance programs, the formation of dyads and triads of
friends and lovers, the triggering of special brain functions in mathematics and
long-term concentration. A whole inner space was opening up its vistas to him.

John found himself alternating between the larger extension of his awareness

and the local mental space of his previous self. He had found that he could
represent humankind’s organized knowledge as a seemingly endless plain of
growing things; he would rush across this forest, overcome by the sheer
magnitude of stored treasures, dipping into the greenery to sample information.
There was a poetry in mind’s origins, which expressed itself in these
visualizations—a nostalgia for the warm forests and teeming oceans of
sunspaces, drawing him with a silent, reconciling music, which he knew to be
the song of the brain’s oldest regions. “The rational cortex,” Richard said, “is the
new kid on the block, presuming on the older wisdom of instinct and impulse.
Well-dressed, clean, mannerly, the cortex becomes the natural target for the
mind’s ruffians, who always taunt and bully someone who is not like them. So
the older brain bullies the more refined cortex, as well as seducing it with
nostalgia, the siren song of a simpler, less conscious existence.”

The link enabled him to observe the developing relationship with earth and

with the visiting alien. There was discussion of taking the new mobile to the
center of the galaxy, to study the core dynamics and to make contact with a
number of fast-developing cultures which had recently attained tachyon
signaling capability. His own world was considering staying in the solar system
for a time, to develop various projects with Drisa’s government; among these
new undertakings would be the building of mobiles for the restless factions
among the solarites.

develop it into mobile and sun-orbit communities. The flying mountains were
already settled by a large contingent of industrial workers, the descendants of
Martians and Ganymedians; they provided much of the solar system’s raw
materials. Drisa herself was from Ceres, the largest asteroid, so it was not
surprising that she should support the expansion into her native region.

He had not seen her since their meeting on earth; the thought of seeing her

again filled him with hope. He was glad that his world was staying, even if that
was not a venturesome choice. Drisa represented something completely new for
him; Anulka stood for the kind of human past he wanted to forget for a while;
Margaret was an unchanging present, giving security and understanding. Of
course, Drisa might not like him at all. He wondered what he could do to catch
her interest. His image of her was that of a strong woman with a controlled sense
of humor. He thought of her body, as it might be; he saw her red hair, her breasts
and supple belly. What color were her eyes? Would she be what he imagined, or
would she disappoint him?

The world’s past was vital again, the present a crossroads of potentialities.

For a moment he saw the first three decades of his life as a set of problems, to be
understood and put away after he had confronted them. He felt the
changelessness of macrolife in himself, its openness, its strength and weakness;
there would always be danger in openness, the chance of failing. It seemed that
he was condemned to live a contradiction, to be himself and to change, to be
permanent yet fluid. The secure world of his childhood was gone; the home
biosphere had reproduced and returned to earth; and strangers had come from the
stars to offer choices. Life seemed too large suddenly, too complex, making him
apprehensive that he would lose himself in it. He longed for the simplicity of
Lea, with all its discomforts and dangers; but the longing died as he understood
the cause of his lapse. It would happen less frequently as he changed. He
perceived the strength of macrolife within; it had always been there, when he
had been doubting or accepting.

He did not regret his stay on Lea; he had seen through the eyes of two

realms. Home was new to him again; beneath its surface lay a greater world of
memory and understanding, an inner world of sympathetic mentors who ruled a
universe of information, where he might quiet his hunger to know as he prepared
for greater life.

impenetrable clouds of consciousness moving through the mental space of the
world surrounding him. There was comfort in the sensation of so many other
thoughts; he watched them billow and change shape as their thinkers responded
to the universe. The apartment no longer seemed unpleasant. It was his and
Yevetha’s now.

He sat up. Someone was coming toward the bedroom, a person without a

link, probably Yevetha.

The lights brightened into an orange-yellow glow.
“Hello,” Drisa Haldane said. “I’m sorry to break in on your rest, but I

wanted our talk to be private.” She paused. “You’re a disturbing person…. It was
something about you in the valley, maybe the history of the Bulero name.”

“What is it?” John was too surprised to look directly at her.
“Perhaps I owe you this visit, since you took such a clear interest. Please

don’t protest. I’m a trained diplomat and three times your age. I’m not flattering
myself.”

“No, please go on.”
“I’ll be leaving soon with a diplomatic and scientific mission to the alien’s

home system, as part of an exchange delegation.”

“I thought you didn’t approve of interstellar wandering.”
“I don’t, but this is too important to pass up, so my personal views don’t

count. I prefer cultures that grow internally at a rate greater than that of mere
physical expansion. I know that you’ll be staying, so I wanted to see you before I
go.”

“I don’t understand, but you’re welcome, of course.”
“Don’t you see?”
“What?”
“I want you to know something about me as I am.”
“You’re really leaving?”
“Yes. I can see your disappointment, but you can’t come with me. I’ve come

to teach you a lesson, because I like you. In a century you might very well
become an extraordinary person, and an equal.”

“What are you talking about?”
He looked directly at her, slowly realizing his mistake. He did not really

know her. “I wanted you,” he said. “You attracted me.”

She took off her tunic and pants, revealing a pale white skin, rounded hips,

and small breasts; her red pubis was aglow in the light. She came toward him
and his feelings raced, shutting out the link community, shrinking him back into
the borders of his own skin as he gazed into her hazel eyes, imprisoning him in
the place where he had first grown into awareness. He wanted her, as he had
wanted Anulka.

“You don’t have to delude yourself,” she said as she leaned over him. “The

past moves us all and does not have to be thwarted. If you can learn to give
without losing yourself, then you’ll know how to live across the centuries.”

passageway. It opened, and closed when he was inside. “I’m here, Rob,” he said
within himself as he looked around in the dark. “What do you want to show
me?”

His eyes adjusted, and he saw that he was standing on a catwalk. He stepped

to the railing and looked out into a seemingly endless space. Suddenly the dark
vault burst into light, revealing a model of the galaxy, a titanic three-dimensional
projection hanging in the night. The image was steady, as if it were made of
glass. He was looking across the top of the lens toward the core, where the
globular clusters were concentrations of fireflies floating over the enigmatic
center. Streamers of gas laced the great spiral arms of the starry maelstrom.

He walked left on the catwalk, realizing that the chamber was at least five

kilometers across. As he peered toward the center of the 100,000 light-years of
stars, the image turned and he was looking down at the spiral. “The model can
be turned, enlarged, or made smaller,” Rob said through the link, “and specific
areas can be enlarged as needed. It’s only a general map, and only the well-
known stars are accurately placed. Unknown regions appear as a wash of light,
with only a suggestion of individual stars. What do you think?”

John knew that he did not have to voice his approval. As he tried to look

beyond the galaxy, the model shrank, giving him a good view of the Magellanic
Clouds, Andromeda and Fornax, the Leo galaxies, Sculptor, and beyond to the
local region of the metagalaxy. One day macrolife would have a map of that
larger structure; but for the moment this map was a step toward his wish of
standing outside nature. On the scale of the cosmos, macrolife was a new kind of
cell, the result of things growing upward from the infinitesimal into life, then
into organized life and intelligent life, followed by social aggregates of
intelligent lives, upward into visible masses within the galaxies, exchanging
information between the giant cells, to become…what?

“Let me show you something else,” Rob said within him.
A portion of the Milky Way grew large suddenly, and John saw red lines

linking more than a hundred stars. “These,” Rob continued, “are the stars to
which the alien belongs. They lie about twenty thousand light-years toward the
hub from us. What you see is their tachyon communications net. It has linked
their culture for half a million years. The alien who came to contact us is a
youngster, scarcely twice as old as we are. The solar system will become part of
their net. They talk of developing a galaxy-wide net, then an intergalactic net,
perhaps even a rapid-transit system following the routes of their communications
beams.”

“Rob, the systems in this net—are any planetary civilizations?”
“Some are. Others have industrialized their systems and live in potential

mobiles, like Drisa’s people. Some move around as we do—our visitor, for
example.”

John remembered something Richard Bulero had said. “The history of

macrolife will not always be the history of humankind.” He leaned on the rail and
thought again of all the human lives before the beginning of his own. They were
all with him, still standing against oblivion. Nature enveloped us, he thought;
now we are its custodians, carrying it with us wherever we go, whatever we do.
What nature was to life, macrolife is to intelligent life. Beyond the biospheres of
planets, a greater nature was coming into being, one that thought and knew itself.
Macrolife was the brain and nervous system of something being born all over the
galaxy, converging out of the initial diversity of living things as surely as the

dust and gas had come together to form stars, yet sustaining within convergence
an infinity of change and difference. If the earth had been an infinite flat surface,
people would have moved away from one another in an endless flow of groups,
diverging continuously, growing unique and powerful, and having no chance to
exchange cultural achievements with other groups when stagnation set in.
Macrolife is still diverging, he thought. Convergence will begin when macrolife
increases in numbers, when new communications and transport systems become
available on a large scale. A day would come when the model before him would
be dotted with macrolife, inhabiting the spaces between the stars, clustering
around stars, and moving out into the greater darkness like seeds thrown off by
the living galaxies, in a vast explosion of intelligent life. Macroworlds would
grow to be millions of kilometers in diameter, enclosing entire sunspaces; others
would be smaller, clustering in geometrical shapes like the molecules of life.
Natural worlds would continue to be the nurseries of intelligent life; there life
would still grow violently, furiously, sweeping through evolution’s biological
storms, throwing up into consciousness series after series of viable intelligences;
there, he knew, the gathering of knowledge would never be the prime concern of
life. For a moment his mind started to rage against this cruel reality; that it
should be so, that planets should be such festering wounds on the starry face of
nature, was intolerable; that so much courage was demanded of life on planets,
and with so little reward for individuals, was the ultimate tragedy, a cruelty that
might almost have been planned by some universal demon. Now he knew why
the marks of a mature culture had to be knowledge and permanence, cooperation
and love—above all, a treasuring of all intelligent consciousness; the creation of
such a civilization was a task denied to nature. Having provided the compost
heap of necessary conditions, nature was content to do no more. Natural
selection was at an end; the natural selection of mind’s endurance was
beginning. There would come a time when he would no longer be able to look
back.

which to ask all questions. Would the universe expand forever, destroying all
intelligence as all matter reached thermal equilibrium? Would the cosmos
collapse into a point of infinite density, crushing the varied intelligences within
it? Was there anything beyond the darkness?

He thought of Yevetha and Drisa. He would have to see Yevetha as she was,

taking her welfare as his own while remembering that she was different from
him. Drisa had taught him that, by showing herself to him as she was—beyond

his immediate understanding—and as he had wanted her to be; she had
suggested that his yearnings were a young love affair with the universe, not a
mature struggle with the tyranny of space and time. Was she right? Had she been
amusing herself with him, trying to confuse him? Would he change so much in
time to come? A defiant part of him said no; he would love her and Anulka, and
everything else around him, as he pleased; while another part of him said yes,
and it seemed like death.

He looked at the model for a long time, losing himself in its details as he

drew out of himself, becoming old and impersonal, viewing the myriad stars
with a kind of love that he had not known before; doubts came in to camp at his
center, making him feel fluid, as if at any moment he would dissolve and re-form
into someone or something else. The pain of life’s passing was a feverish night
pressing in around him, filling his mind with fear; but as he fixed his eyes on the
glowing model, its stately beauty lent him peace, subduing for him the
unassailable quality of all things.

He was about to leave when he came upon himself in his most secret

thoughts. He saw what he had been, a being from the past, as man had been
before, unchanged, unawakened from nature’s sleep, blind to what he could
become. He had traveled backward in time, drawn by the freshness of rivers,
oceans, and forests, into the older regions of his own mind, seeking the
viewpoint of an unknown self—a proud self, outraged by death, yet ready to
give death. He looked into himself now, at this beast crouched in something like
a deep forest surrounded by mountains, and it looked up at him, unrepentant,
unafraid; and he knew that he would see this nursery self become the smallest
part of him as it receded into the deepest recesses of his structure. Would it
become nothing, he wondered, or would it reawaken someday in all its florid,
romantic yearning?

John turned and walked slowly out of the darkness, as if from a holy place.

III. THE DREAM OF TIME

glorious by such brilliant blue-white stars as Vega and Sirius, and, on a more
humble scale, our own Sun. Not until these have flamed through their
incandescent youth, in a few fleeting billions of years, will the real history of the
universe begin.

It will be a history illuminated only by the reds and infrareds of dully

glowing stars that would be almost invisible to our eyes; yet the somber hues of
that all-but-eternal universe may be full of color and beauty to whatever strange
beings have adapted to it. They will know that before them lie, not the millions of
years in which we measure eras of geology, nor the billions of years which span
the past lives of the stars, but years to be counted literally in trillions.

They will have time enough, in those endless aeons, to attempt all things,

and to gather all knowledge. They will not be like gods, because no gods
imagined by our minds have ever possessed the powers they will command. But
for all that, they may envy us, basking in the bright afterglow of Creation; for we
knew the universe when it was young.

—ARTHUR C. CLARKE,

“The Long Twilight,”

Profiles of the Future, 1973

The history of macrolife will not always be the history of humankind.

Intelligence is certainly not limited to humanoid forms, or to the chemistry of
carbon; other forms will also develop technical civilizations capable of using the
energy of their suns on a large scale; for the idea of independence from the
chemical-energy-based ecologies of natural planets will surely flow out of alien
imaginations, among other things, as it did from our own.

We can expect to alter our bodies as we expand our minds to deal with

immortality, with the extended projection of unique personalities across time; we
will still call ourselves humankind, but that word will stand for the universality
of intelligence in nature, and not for appearances.

—RICHARD BULERO ET AL.,

The History of Macrolife, 10th ed.,

Revised and Updated, vol. 10,

“Projections and Notes,” Sol, 3025

(See also vol. 11, “Posthumous Fragments”)

We are poor and forgotten
When night falls.
Night after night
Diminishes us toward death,
While by day the smiles of women
Convince us of immortality.
The self is a trap
To escape.

—RICHARD BULERO (poem found written in the

margin of his major work)

There are two kinds of critics of any possibility; those who wait and see, and

those who try to kill an idea in advance; at every crossroad, each forward-
looking soul is opposed by a thousand guardians of the past.

—RICHARD BULERO

(aphorism in the margin of the last page of his major work)

Then the Old man of the Earth stooped over the floor of the cave, raised a

huge stone from it, and left it leaning. It disclosed a great hole.

“That is the way,” he said.
“But there are no stairs!”
“You must throw yourself in. There is no other way.”

—GEORGE MacDONALD,

The Golden Key

Under my face a steady rivulet of blood was enlarging to a bright red pool

on the sidewalk. It was then, as I peered nearsightedly at my ebbing substance
there in the brilliant sunshine, that a surprising thing happened…. I lifted a wet
hand out of this welter and murmured in compassionate concern, “Oh, don’t go.
I’m sorry. I’ve done for you.”

The words were…inside and spoken to no one but a part of myself. I was

quite sane, only it was an oddly detached sanity, for I was addressing blood
cells, phagocytes, platelets, all the crawling, living, independent wonder that
had been part of me and now, through my folly and lack of care, were dying like
beached fish on the hot pavement. A great wave of passionate contrition, even of
adoration, swept through my mind, a sensation of love on a cosmic scale, for
mark that this experience was, in its way, as vast a catastrophe as would be that

of a galaxy consciously suffering through the loss of its solar systems.

—LOREN EISELEY,

The Unexpected Universe,
“The Inner Galaxy,” 1969

i

::Know separateness again::
He swam in a midnight sea. Something was preparing him for a return to

individual consciousness.

“What has happened?” John asked of the thing that cared for him.
“What…am I?”
::You have been separated from another condition::
“Why?”
::Partially became we could not prevent it, partially because something of

you wished it once, and because you may be needed::

“I don’t understand.”
::Know: Macrolife has endured for a hundred billion years. Maroworlds

ranging in size from one hundred kilometers to millions of kilometers remain in a
universe where star formation has all but ended. Macrolife is the only remaining
civilization::

So much time, he thought, trying to feel where it had passed within him.
::No time has passed for you. Your present, narrowed awareness has not

experienced it::

He tried to open his eyes.
::See: The star is a hot blue-white dwarf. The material that was its planets

and smaller bodies is gone. Gathered closely around the dwarf, you see
thousands of macroworlds of differing sizes, forming a complex even-sided
triangular solid, five million kilometers on each side, created for use in
gathering the energy of the star until the very end. These worlds are populated in
small part by derivations from the humanity you knew, but mostly by the progeny
from myriad unions between intelligent species, including the children of organic
intelligence, both open-ended and deductive minds. No stars are visible in the
sky, as your eyes once saw them. All the remaining suns in the universe are too
faint to be seen, except at the closest distances, and often only from inside their
shell of worlds. Near us in the darkness, there is only one faint red-normal star,
whose slow use of energy may continue for thousands of billions of years, if the
universe continues to expand forever::

“Will it expand forever? What is known?”
::The galaxies long ago reached their farthest point and are hurtling back

toward the center. More and more stars are collapsing into darkness, as are the
galactic cores, creating an increasing number of intermittent quasars. Other

stars are black dwarfs, their particles resting in the lowest energy states. Radiant
energy is slowing its streaming, as the second law of thermodynamics nears its
final physical proof. In time, all remaining galactic material will exist as
galactic-core black holes, and these will eventually coalesce into the final
collapsar::

The voice became silent inside him, sensing his need to consider; for a time

he was alone, a gathering of scattered thoughts in a dark place. Gradually his
self-awareness improved, but he still half felt that he was someone else; at any
moment the closeness with himself would fade, and he would wake up into
another identity….

He opened his eyes to an almost substantial darkness, a shroud thrown over

all that was once open and alive with light, concealing the laughter of colors, the
longing in distant vistas, the grace of movement.

Slowly the universe became a room filled with shadows and faint lanterns.
::Soon you will see as we do, throughout the spectrum::
It’s so late, he thought, so very late. “From where have I come to this place?”
::You have come out of us…as we fragment. You will understand this later. It

is possible that something may be gained by restoring your individuality::

The darkness receded as his eyes adapted. He saw a red glow near the edges

of his vision. Gradually it became a bright orange, filling the room, leaving only
a faint violet near the curved corners of the floor and ceiling. His vision took in
one hundred eighty degrees and was clear right out to the edges. Slowly he
moved an arm and floated into position to face the floor.

The floor darkened, revealing a night dotted sparsely with deposits of dully

glowing stars, reds and infrareds now visible to his eyes. As he watched, the sky
seemed to acquire a glow, as if a distant daylight were spilling in from over the
edge of the universe.

::The background temperature of the universe is increasing from continued

contraction::

Something drifted into the room. He turned left to face it. The being floating

over the translucent floor was vaguely humanoid. Its head was perfectly round
and hairless. The body was long and thin, golden-skinned, ending in a tail-like
appendage; graceful arms ended in delicate six-fingered hands. The eyes were
large black ovals with multiple pupils.

The view below changed to reveal a faint white sun surrounded by a shell of

globes.

“John Bulero,” the being next to him seemed to say, “I am as you are, but

from a time past your origins. We are both restored to an extreme condition of
individuality, to the state that preceded what we became later, you and I. The

aggregate is all memory and will instruct us as needed.”

::A thousand worlds around this star::
John Bulero. The name and gender were somehow his, yet both were strange

possessions. Suddenly he thought of bright stars, wondering if home still existed.
::Parts of the home you knew exist within this one, unused memories near the
center:: The information was provided without intrusion, gently, with a feeling
for his need to reclaim the past.

glowing transparent bubble and carried downward. The thoughts of the alien
humanoid reached after him. “Farewell. I hope you find what you need.” Then
he was moving into an endless passageway. A dull white glow erased all
comparisons from his field of vision, producing for brief moments the sensation
of rushing at a blank wall.

:: You can see into the infrared and beyond, as well as below the ultraviolet::
As the bubble carried him forward, he watched the dull warmth of the walls,

the hot fog of his own breath billowing out of his body to fill the red-orange
shell of force; he looked at his hands, at the white glow of his naked body,
feeling that the form was not his own, that it was an imaginary thing.

Abruptly the bubble flew out of the passage into a large space lined with a

desolate landscape, and he knew that he was seeing what was left of the green
hollow of home, as he would have imagined it would look after so much time.
The hills, lakes, and vegetation were gone, leaving only a layer of fine dust and
scattered rocks, a desert of gray and white. Sharp regret filled him as he
surveyed the ruins of the place where he had once floated on wings.

The bubble stopped in the center. The sunscreen was a black disk before

him, a broken window letting in the cold of space; for a moment he saw darkness
rolling in like fog, but the vision vanished as his expectation changed.

An image appeared on the sunscreen. He was looking at a red dwarf, a small

sun struggling to maintain its brightness; as he looked, he saw its companion, a
dull brown-red existing at the edge of darkness. Then, as his eyes adjusted, he
saw that both stars were enveloped in a tenuous haze of heat. Slowly, strange
colors floated up out of the penumbras, colors that were not reds, yellows, or
oranges, but hues lying between and beyond, somber shades that made him see
intense differences and mixtures that he could not name; at one moment he saw
only subtle tints; at the next, new brightenings.

::There are more than two hundred colors in the full spectrum of a sun, from

birth to death::

As his eyes drank in the quanta of radiation emanating from the two stars, he

noticed the dark mass of macrolife encircling the dwarfs in a thin ring.

He looked around him. The light crowding into the dust bowl interior

through the sunscreen cast an oppressive red twilight across the desert. It’s so
late, he thought again, so very late. For a moment his orientation shifted, and he
was looking down at the sunscreen, a black lake where all the bright stars had
been drowned, their fiery glories choked in the deep.

He wondered what lifetimes had gone by, what worlds had lived and died.

Why had he been reanimated in this dreamlike form? He felt that he was
himself, but he also had the sensation of physical detachment, as if he were both
in his body and elsewhere. Why had they not re-created his self from later ages?
To this self, waking up in smallness, the life of the universe was past. What had
he lived through in the ages following macrolife’s first return to the solar
system? Had he lived a life, or had it been a dream? The crimson-hued stars
around him were capable of lasting longer than the lifetime of reality, misers
slowly using their energy across trillions of years still to come, lighting a
perpetual evening that refused to become midnight. There were things to be
learned on this shore of dying suns, things that he could not learn in any other
time. He remembered his curiosity about the ultimate fate of nature, his longing
to pass forward through time, becoming timeless in the crossing. The
intelligences of this time had surely gathered all knowledge and would tell him
what he wanted to know; for he was kin to them, having come out of them, and
they would not refuse his plea.

“What will happen?” he asked. “Can the end be overcome?” ::We do not

know. Our task is to decide what we will do about it:: The end would be nearby
in time, he realized, as they measured time, having experienced billions of years
of consciousness.

“How near is it?” He could almost feel it pressing in around him, a shadow

cast across the universe from a not too distant future. ::Think and see::

The sunscreen went black, swallowing the view of huddling fireflies frozen

around the faint unmoving fires; thoughts and images filled his mind, unfolding
the history of macrolife that he had missed.

ii

Thoughts flowed swiftly. Memory, conscience, planner, and crossroads for

all intelligences within its realm, the aggregate’s images of macrolife moved like
a singing river, its source small and all but impossible, its main flow an
inexorable rush across time, its emptying a humiliation before an infinite ocean.
It was this humiliation, John sensed, that was intolerable to the vast mind of
macrolife; it had not dreamed the dream of time only to die. Its fear became his
fear, the terror of something large that had been made small again. He listened
and watched.

::Arising from a liquid environment, intelligent life lived on the land masses

of natural worlds, then left its cradles in mobile environments, at first using
these small designs to move from one planet to another; but in time the designs
grew larger, until it became possible to plan complete new environments to fit the
needs of sentient beings::

John saw shapes appearing in hundreds of thousands of sun-spaces; dead

worlds were torn apart by the laser-directed energy of suns. The resulting
materials were being used to build a variety of habitats: spheres, tubes, domed-
over bowls, egg shapes, clusters of spheres and cylinders, honeycombed
asteroids, clear blisters a hundred kilometers across; rings of habitats encircled
suns, drinking in the radiant energy.

::These habitats became the containers of further cultural and biological

development, consciously directed, replacing endosomatic evolutionary natural
selection. The form of macrolife that was known to you began as the child of
earth’s planetary civilization. The first forms were highly organized land and sea
communities; later forms included bases on other planets, as well as an endless
series of spacegoing research stations that were capable of reaching any point in
the solar system. Asterome, a hollowed-out mass of ore, became the first large
space home to leave sunspace, following the brief decline of civilization in that
system. Asterome grew quickly, level after level, until it became a true example
of macrolife, a mobile world independent of planetary circumstances::

John saw Asterome entering and leaving a hundred sunspaces, gathering

resources, searching for intelligent life; he saw Asterome growing in the light of
earthlike suns, double suns, green, red, and white trisystems, giant red suns and
blue dwarfs; he saw Asterome’s rocky surface acquire a shell, then another, and
half a hundred others, until it became the size he remembered.

::Powered by hydrogen fusion, mini black holes, and occasional

accumulations of radiant energy, free of a past ruled by scarcity, macrolife
reproduced itself more than a hundred times in the following millennium, hater,
the development of materials synthesis made macrolife almost completely
independent of agriculture and planetary systems.

the galaxy, living for their own interests and curiosities, largely ignoring natural
worlds as being unfit for viable civilizations. Macrolife’s versatility naturally
fostered this attitude; being a society that could easily meet the needs of its
citizens, it permitted them to live as they pleased, supplying wealth and power
beyond the needs of any individual. Most interests were permitted within the
social container; only its destruction was absolutely forbidden. Macrolife
fulfilled the needs of beings in search of knowledge and novelty, the miraculous
and infinite, while giving safety and adventure::

“How many were failures?” John asked.
::A large number. Not every world was able to isolate and preserve its most

progressive and creative elements. In time these worlds destroyed themselves;
but the macrolife that remained became the ultimate polis, a means for
assimilating the past, utilizing the variety and rebelliousness of the present as a
way to further growth and innovation. Thus macrolife secured its own future,
and continues to exist::

John saw empty shells floating in the cold of interstellar space, armadas of

dead shapes circling suns whose generous outpouring of energy now fled wasted
into the dark abyss, past hearts and minds which had been unable to strike a
balance between beast and angel.

::Inevitably, earth-derived macrolife came into contact with alien macro-

forms, resulting in hybrid societies, joining cultures and technologies, as well as
genetic heritages through biological engineering::

humanoid form was present in shades of brown, gold, black, and white; four-
legged beings with heavy brows and finely muscled arms strolled together with
birdlike figures; water-filled macroforms supported swimming minds of vast size
and profound capabilities; zero-g worlds were filled with floating creatures who
seemed busy and sympathetic.

:: Within the first million years, the galaxy came to be dominated by the

mobile life-form, swarming in numbers greater than the concentration of stars in
some sectors. Raw materials for growth, in the form of gas, dust, debris, and
dead worlds, were everywhere, although some planetary cultures sought to
restrict the gathering of resources within the confines of their solar systems;
however, there were too few powerful cultures that were still ruled by scarcity to

pose a serious problem in such confrontations::

Suddenly it seemed to John that he was remembering the history of

macrolife. Then he understood; he had been part of that history, and it was only
his extreme individual self of the moment which could not remember; his wider
self had never forgotten.

::Macrolife became the galaxy’s urban life. Planets became the countryside,

with the difference that macrolife was independent of rural support. Each
macroworld was different, developing along its own lines, reproducing to create
individual children, growing against the common history of the societal
framework, whose stability contained all change. In your history, only the Greek
city-states had aspired to such a project, and failed for lack of material success.

Many of these contacts were friendly, others hostile, with blame on both sides.
Scores of sun systems, once they had developed a workable form of in-system
space travel, sought to detain visiting macroforms in order to obtain technical
and scientific stores; others sought to seize the star folk’s knowledge of
immortality or learn the legendary recipes for perfect nutrition. Early
macroworlders regarded flesh-eaters with contempt, while planet dwellers
regarded the starfolk as cannibals, became their foods were identical to their
bodily proteins. On more than one occasion, a planetary system managed to
destroy a macroworld; reprisals against natural worlds became more common
as rising civilizations became aware of the circles of intelligent life existing on
the galactic scale. The cry went out that macrolife was an infestation, a
despoiler of sun systems. The only solution to this hostility was to bring new
cultures into the galactic community as soon as they advanced to a certain level,
while taking care to leave those in the nursery state isolated::

“What level was that?” John asked.
::The level at which they could communicate a complaint, thus illustrating

the old principle that the surest way to close the gap between a scarcity-ruled
civilization and one ruled by affluence is to call attention to the gap. A gap
communicated spurs its own closing. Of course, a Type I civilization is one that
can use the power of a whole planet to signal its complaint, so it is already on its
way to solving its scarcity problems, before moving to Type II, which can use a
typical sun for its activities: one such activity is talking to distant equals. Well-
disguised observers often visited nursery worlds, not so much to report on what
was happening as to gain personal experience of life in the universe. This was
an effort to avoid the trained incapacity of specialization so often developed by
Type I and II civilizations, the result of isolation from the harsher aspects of life,
producing a deadening of personal resourcefulness. Later, when contact was

made with previously visited worlds, the results of observation and covert
influence served to form a bond between the cultures.

::In time, many natural planets transformed the materials of their sun

systems into macroforms. Some launched their planets away from their suns,
taking on the attitudes of macrolife, joining in the vast tide of states; others
remained in their sunspaces. Gradually the internal environments of macrolife
discarded the gravity-oriented systems of natural worlds. At first, zero-g had
been used as an industrial convenience, and for recreation; but as it became less
necessary to visit natural worlds directly, many worlds changed over to zero-g
interiors. A variety of intelligences adapted to life in these flexible, three-
dimensional conditions; for these beings, visits to gravity environments were
possible only through the use of exoskeletons to support their frail bodies, or in
g-screened flitters. Eventually, the very atmospheres of zero-g worlds became
mediums from which nutrients could be drawn directly; internally, macrolife
became simpler.

::Macrolife permeated the galaxy, having come out of the smallest life-forms,

each unit of life growing to become the unit for the next: first the endless series
of cells, then organisms in great variety; then intelligent organisms; societies of
intelligent organisms, rising and falling as better methods of organization were
tried; finally, the first multiorganismic forms capable of freeing themselves from
the limits of planetary existence.

::After filling whole galaxies, macrolife exploded outward into the

metagalaxy, there to meet others like itself, combining, consolidating,
transforming itself. Five million years after the birth of macrolife, all conflict
with natural worlds ceased; most planetary civilizations had either destroyed
themselves or become part of macrolife, mobile and sunspace-bound.

and planets gave rise to new intelligence, which grew toward maturity unaware
of our macrolife; these youths emerged into their galaxies with their own macro-
forms. For one thing is clear about all intelligence: however limited it may be in
its origins, it sets no limits for itself in space-time. Mind sets about transforming
itself into whatever form is necessary for the attainment of its desires, even if
certain attainments can be possessed only in a world of dreams; in those cases,
minds dream, living in synthetic realities tended by servant creations, and this
form of mind dies when its suns die, unaware of the end.

:: Across billions of years, macrolife became layered according to its time of

origin, marked by the birth of new stars. The youngest would often initiate the
boldest new projects after learning of the existence of the great circle of
civilizations around them. Sometimes it took a long time for a younger group of

cultures to learn of the existence of older forms::

“Who are the oldest?” John asked.
::We are nearly certain that we know every one, but there may be older Type

III forms hidden from us. Our greatest concern now is to continue our system of
conscious organization against entropy, to find a way to outlast the decline of
nature. We have unified the universe with our communications and transit web,
enabling us to go wherever our worlds exist to receive us; because of this, the
mobility of macrolife is no longer as important as it was once. Suns and black
holes continue to provide all the power we need, as we prepare to suffer the ruin
of nature, the end that will make all the epochs of our labor useless, unless we
can survive. We have rediscovered the presence of death.

what we know of the nature of the universe, knowledge gained through billions
of years of comparing universe models against the evidence of observation and
experiment, then perhaps we may succeed::

“Where in the universe are we?” John asked.
::We are gathered around a dwarf sun that wanders above the plane of a

darkening galaxy, the galaxy you once knew::

The black mirror of the sunscreen revealed a plain of white stars, dull red

coals, and massive clouds of gas. He was looking toward the galactic center
from above. A strange brightness seemed to be hidden at the galactic core, a
glowing fire covered by clouds. The small star, around which this group of
macroworlds huddled, might have been an old bridge star to the Magellanic
Clouds or a waif torn loose from one of the great globular clusters.

::The galaxies rotate slowly now, and more mass is swallowed by the

growing black hole at each center as rotation slows. In the times since you lived
as a simple individual, we have had experience with three kinds of singularities:
star-sized black holes; galaxy-core black holes; and the very small black holes
that we create for our power generators, the kind that were once part of a
younger universe. Some two billion years ahead in time lies the black hole of the
universe. As time goes forward, more and more black holes, star-sized and
galaxy-core sized, will form with increasing frequency, prefiguring the universal
collapse into infinite density and zero volume. Infinite density and zero volume
being obvious impossibilities, the collapsed matter of our universe will
disappear from the space-time we know; space will close up as it becomes
infinitely curved in the vicinity of the titanic black hole’s mass::

“What happens then?” John asked, feeling again that he was asking the

question of another part of himself.

::Then all the energy of our universe tunnels out into a new space; the

universe is wound up in a quantum fireball, expansion begins, entropy decreases.
This is possible, we believe, because universes swim in an infinite superspace,
each cosmos expanding and contracting in its season. Imagine that in
superspace our universe leaves a mark, a point, and a track; the track grows
longer and shorter as it expands and contracts; each collapse into a black hole
means there will be a white hole reemergence. In the case of smaller black holes,
reemergence may be elsewhere in the same universe, or not at all if the quantum
conditions are wrong, leaving a dense mass and a region of curved space, and
only the possibility of a white hole. Each emergent universe may be different; its
life cycle may be longer or shorter; the final expansion may be larger or
smaller; the mass of particles may vary; there may be more disorder, more
energy than matter, or the reverse; there may be a difference in the way that the
monoforce breaks up into the other forces.

of births and deaths. We may be the first intelligence to think of surviving the end
of our cycle. We have an idea of how this may be done::

“By reaching across superspace to a younger locality?” John asked.
::No, although that is a consideration. Unfortunately, we have no knowledge

of the topology of superspace; there would be no way to know which direction to
take, even if superspace could be entered directly. There is another way,
however, one based on direct physical observations::

Another configuration of macroworlds appeared on the sunscreen, a ring of

faint globes circling a dark center. As John watched, one world left its position
near the black hole and began to move away. For the first time in his
conversation with the aggregate, John sensed an hand of death, which it had not
known since the universe was young.

“Why are worlds dying when there is an answer?” John asked.
::It may be a false answer. To begin with, it would take all our energy to

maintain and adjust our position within the galactic core hole’s ergosphere;
energy expenditure would increase as we passed farther into futurity. We will
need reserves to maintain our various protective fields against the possible
effects of the white hole outstream, as well as against the density and
temperature of the new universe in its early stages; we may need to use our
tachyon tunneling drives for brief moments, to pass by the effects at the birth of
the next cycle; this last may not be necessary, as the expansion might proceed
with us at its outer edge. Still, there may be unforeseen dangers. What you must
understand is that the price of using all our resources and energy on such a
venture has created for us what may be an insurmountable crisis::

“Is there a choice?”

::Death by choice, or death by fate::
“But wouldn’t it be better to die trying, to risk everything on even the

smallest hope for success?”

is too conscious of difficulties and possible failure, too unused to death, to
develop the impetus to risk everything. Caution is the first principle of practical
reason, which is finite, dealing with the definable and known. Under the pressure
of time and death, you have reappeared to stand apart from our large
individuality. Macrolife began to fragment into blocks of worlds, then into single
worlds; you are one of the first individuals to reappear inside a single unit. We
are forced…I am forced to interpret this as a survival response. You, and others
like you, will try to save yourselves, as you must, in the manner of younger
intelligences, and you may save macrolife::

“Then…my body has not persisted from before.” Suddenly John was afraid,

as he confronted the thought that he was not himself, that something large had
been dreaming him.

::You have been retrieved from past information; your bodily form, such as it

is, has been visualized to be as it was. What you are now remembers the past,
even if what you are now is a duplication of an earlier self, an exact copy in
everything except that it is a copy. Perhaps you are still your original pattern of
complex awareness; I do not know, but that is not the central consideration. You
might think it cruel to be brought back to such extreme finitude, to be small and
powerless in your self, but I assure you that we may follow your will, because
small, narrowly focused systems of past intelligent life were capable of what
seem to us now as blind decisions of transcendent potential. What is convincing
about this view is the fact that you were not called up entirely through our
choice; you have been thrown up at a time when incapacity before death
fragments macrolife::

In the aggregate’s containing silence, John wondered about the limits to the

size of intelligence. After a point, the parts of a vast mind might begin to
separate, as the being broke up into simpler components….

::This is happening because we are again faced with the possibility of death.

Many worlds have already fallen into forgetfulness, with no center of general
remembrance; they no longer know who or what they are, and live as dreams in
the self-maintaining structure, which provides objects for perception in an
energy environment. In time we may disintegrate into billions of individual
entities as the galactic con holes coalesce and natural history accelerates
toward its point of quantum uncertainty::

“Who are you?” John asked.

individuals. As I acquired facets, I grew more complex, containing whole worlds
of awareness. Only a little while ago…I was larger. I know what is happening,
having served those who have fallen away. You were part of me, and now you
know also::

The aggregate sensed his confusion.
::Think of minds, individual bodies, both physical constructs and beings of

force, pure patterns of energy. Imagine a vast system of minds within one
macroworld, sustained by a central source of energy. Individuals are facets, but
they enter into larger, linked unions, which become permanent, evolving into still
greater minds as they join with other macro-worlds in a conscious design.
Imagine large biological masses, teeming with mind-linked individuals, cells of
life as large as entire sunspaces::

He thought of warm lighted spaces, where the cold darkness was only a

distant thought; where the eye saw bright violets, blues, greens, and yellows,
warm orange, and little else; where the universe was new. All gone, all lost
because he had forgotten. Countless joys and tragedies flying up like sparks,
discovering one another, loving, hating, passing….

He remembered wanting to witness final things.
Before him now lay the abyss separating all consciousness from the end of

time. Macrolife’s spontaneous response to the problem of survival was a process
of fragmentation, a narrowing of perception in the manner of the ancients who
had put blinders on horses before leading them through danger. Isolated centers
of consciousness would revert to local control; blind to billions of years of
critical doubt, these centers of mind would lead. Alone in a midnight universe of
dying worlds, he knew what had to be done. He did not want to die; therefore,
any choice was better than waiting for the final darkness….

“Is there anyone else like me?” he asked. “Has anyone else reawakened?”
The screen showed another sudden star, another world dying after a final

moment of light.

::There is::

iii

The bubble moved, carrying him out of the desolate hollow into a

passageway, away from the once green place where he had played as a child,
where the sunlight of a hundred different suns had streamed in to fill the garden-
forest space, playing like liquid on the leaves and grass. He remembered well-
lighted urban levels, stylish living complexes, environments created by the
loving will and dedicated intelligence of a powerful people; he remembered a
civilization created in a period of crisis, when only the new and the best had
been sufficient to decide whether the life of earth would continue or be spilled
back into evolution’s echoing cauldron of screams.

:: You will meet someone like yourself::
The bubble shot out into darkness; his eyes adjusted and he saw a glowing

white floor. The bubble floated forward across the limitless surface. John peered
ahead, trying to penetrate the blackness, but there was nothing except the warm
glow of the endless floor.

Gradually he began to see something. At first it appeared to be a mound with

a gray peak, shimmering so far away that all the bubble’s forward motion could
not make it larger; then it began to look like a raised platform, a dais, or a huge
bed. Something like a human figure sat in a black, almost invisible chair. The
light from the glowing floor threw shadows into the figure’s face, giving it the
appearance of an eyeless mask looking upward.

Suddenly the bubble was gone from around him, and he was standing on the

floor near the edge of the platform. As he looked up at the shape on the dais,
John became aware of gravity. He observed his bare feet pressing against the
lighted floor; it seemed that the ethereal light was passing into his legs and body,
illuminating him from within.

::He is in a chair, to make a familiar image for you::
“Who are you?” John asked the figure.
There was no answer. The face was still searching the obscurity overhead.

The eyes were dark hollows. There was no billowing of breath from the mouth.
The body was covered by a seamless garment.

The floor darkened until there was only enough light to illuminate the figure,

now seemingly floating in the darkness.

A distantly familiar voice answered him at last.
“I am like yourself. I lived in the time that you remember, in the memory

that has been restored to you. Our origins were the same, but I have forgotten

millions of lifetimes. What I am now is not the individual facet of macrolife to
which you have returned. I have fallen back, but not to your state. I am as
different from you as you are from the single cell that began your life. Yet once I
knew you….”

John almost knew the voice. “I did know you. Who were you?”
“Searching through stored knowledge and experience, I find that I knew you

—only that, nothing more. I cannot remember as you remember….”

“But tell me who you are!” The face was looking at him, eyes now clearly

visible, large inhuman eyes. Someone was alive in those eyes, struggling to
reach him, a lost friend swimming upward through cold, deep waters.

“Who are you?” John asked again.
He saw white lips part to answer; a hand raised itself and fell; the lips closed

to complete a stony expression of failure.

John walked forward and stopped at the edge of the platform. For the first

time now, he noticed the figure’s size. The person in the chair was at least fifteen
feet tall, sitting down. Looking up into the darkened face, John asked again:
“Can you tell me who you are?”

if they were being ripped out.

As the words spoke within him, John Bulero knew that something more than

his old friend was speaking, and Blackfriar was the least part of it; the words
were being pulled out of archaic substrata, sources so old that they could not be
drawn upon with any sympathy or recognition. As he continued to watch the
colossal face, feelings of recognition wrenched him. “Frank,” he cried out. “It’s
me! Frank, why are you here, like this?”

The face looked into the oblivion overhead. “I don’t know,” it said. “I

think…I have come here to die.”

The sadness in the voice brought panic into John. “Frank—remember Lea?

Remember the three centuries that followed? Remember when we left the
galaxy, remember how we made nothing of the distance to Andromeda?”

The stone face looked down at him, and through him.
“Frank—try and remember when it was not so dark, when everything was

young and bright.” John felt himself grow more desperate, almost as if he were
watching another person, until the panic inside him broke out in a reproach.
“Why did you have to be here!” he shouted.

“I don’t know,” the great shape repeated. “I don’t know.”
::Like yourself, he has become an isolated center of consciousness, falling

back into this state from a greater state. You are the most isolated form,
remembering life as it was before you were even one millennium old; he is an

aggregate of individual centers, perhaps including others that were once known
to you. His confusion is great as he tries to meet your demands. Now you see
why something must be done quickly, why you must lead before we disintegrate
into powerless, suffering forms, incapable of understanding our own
instrumentalities. This is why we have arranged this meeting, visualizing it as
best we could. Do you understand?::

All of time is dead and gone. The thought was a cold, desolate wind. He

wanted to weep, but the grip of sudden loneliness froze the reaction in him,
suspending him in a barren silence, naked before his own scrutiny….

now possessed. Once he might have given anything to be here, to see and know
what would happen at the end. He thought of the thousands of lives that he had
certainly lived before the universe had reached its noon, and the millions that
must have followed in the long afternoon and early evening. How often had be
been cloned; how many destinies had his mind-body pattern followed? How
long had he been an individual before macrolife took the next step upward in
organization?

He thought of Anulka; her shadow and that of her murderer came into him,

threatening to kill all sense of renewal and hope. Like the universe around him,
those two persons, and countless others, would never come again.

Anulka stood before him, dressed as he had last seen her.
“John,” she said.
Something—within him—was holding her back. Then he realized that she

was a creation—too lovely to be the reality. The aggregate could not call up the
original because all that was left of her was a memory, an idealization which
responded to his moods. He remembered his anger toward her, and she tensed
visibly; he recalled her strong arms and intense kisses, and she softened; he
thought of her disappointment, and her eyes became cold. She continued looking
at him, as if she were trying to penetrate a barrier between them; in a moment
she would succeed and he would hold her.

random noise. All that exists of her now is information flowing in one direction,
out of your memory. There is nothing of her outside of you that remembers the
past::

As he looked into the eyes of the image, he realized that he was looking into

himself and that he was only a thought in some larger mind. I think, I feel, the
irreversible loss of her, and I know that I do so. What am I?

She faded and he realized that the aggregate held others who were real, that

the aggregate was a sum of continuing personalities. Who were they, besides

Frank? He saw hierarchies, whole worlds contained in the lower reaches of the
aggregate, minds living out entire sensory existences, bits of information
unaware of the greater whole, as cells are oblivious of the body.

though not as discrete configurations, and they may return to the smaller focus
of intelligent awareness::

“Who else is there?”
Drisa Haldane appeared.
“Help us,” she said.
He saw Margaret, Rob Wheeler, Yevetha, and hundreds of familiar faces.

What lives had they lived? How much was there to remember?

“You must help,” they said.
These shapes insisted, existing as independent realities, not just memories.

He could feel their pleas reaching into him, pushing into his pride. He was to be
the horse who would go forward because blinders prevented him from seeing the
danger; his mind was too small to see all the difficulties of the survival project;
his narrow focus was the scalpel that would cut away inertia and the fear of
death….

Where were his memories of the midtime? He must have seen the great

central ages of the universe; yet it was exactly as if he had not seen them, as if he
had been exiled to this place without ever having lived.

::Do you understand?::
I’m alive somewhere, he thought, alive but dying, and all this is a desperate

dream, the only thing that I can throw against death. He saw his body lying in a
field, under a bright sun that would burn for another billion years, as his eyes
turned inward to a growing darkness.

“Where are my memories?”
::First, do you understand the danger, and what you must do?::
“Yes, but tell me—“
:: Will you do what is necessary?::
“Yes, but please tell me—“
John waited, suddenly afraid that the complex personality had disintegrated

into smaller components.

him from every direction.

::As an extreme individuality.., you could not contain, or differentiate, the

memories of even a hundred thousand years; you would have to change,
following the path of renewal, much like the strategy of birth and death in the
natural realm. After a millennium, you ceased to be the individual that you recall

now; you chose to expand your personality, so that it might better deal with time.
It was the common choice of that period; extended lifetime demanded that
individuals expand their minds, in order to cope. Less complex individuals
quickly ran out of creative resources; unable to sustain life interest, these limited
entities chose death or forgetfulness. After the first millennium of your life, there
is no John Bulero, as he is again now. You would have to reintegrate in order to
regain the subjective experience of the times that followed, and then you would
not be the personality that now asks to know::

“Return to me what you can!”
::There is almost nothing left::
“I want what is mine!” He pictured an endless series of missing moments,

dead within him, their time stolen and stored somewhere, deteriorating into a
noisy chaos of information.

He reached out, longing, and saw:

interior living spaces. The sun was now enclosed in a porous shell of worlds, a
small galaxy of intelligences drinking its radiant energy.

He was among them somewhere.

intruding….

He felt its effort to fill the darkness. Its will was his will, but he could not

find himself.

vaporizing tide….

The red giant collapsed into a white-hot star; the worlds crept in closer

again.

Still, he could not find himself in the breathing membrane of life.

labored to reconstruct a personal universe. Only shards remained, hints and
images, facets of a titan’s life. Slowly John realized that what he wanted was to
fulfill the desire of something that was a shard; he was a broken piece which
thought of itself as the whole; but he could no more grasp the whole than a
single drop could be an ocean.

Ocean? Once there had been oceans, the warm places of origin, the wombs

that came before the war of evolution….

about to return to a state of swifter rational processes, faster intuitions and
comprehension, all fed by vast knowledge and experience; but he held back,
content for the moment to know that his sudden regret and grief could be
dissolved.

“I am sorry,” Blackfriar said, “that I cannot remember, that I cannot be the

person you knew. Yet…there is…about you…a certain familiarity. Wait! I think I
remember…something….”

John rushed to the edge of an abyss and looked across at his friend.
“Didn’t we? Wasn’t it…could we have done…whatever it was?”
“Go on!”
“I…can’t. I? What am I?”
John’s hope fell away into the darkness. “That’s enough,” he said. “You and

I and countless others have been together throughout time. I understand that
now.” He felt in control again, knowing that the half-truth would have to be
enough. The kinship he felt with the terrified being existing behind the mask of
the giant was real, whoever he was.

::Think of how many will suffer, as time throws each into its abyss of

individuality and helplessness::

“We need a new universe,” John said, trying to fill the thought with the

necessary urgency. “We must act.”

iv

galaxy was a swirl of ancient stars, a black floor patterned with white and dull
red coals, except for the hidden center. He was looking toward the galactic black
hole from the edge of a desert cut out of the center of the spiral, an emptiness
twenty thousand light-years in radius, the intermediate result of the core hole’s
ravenous appetite.

::This is what remains of a quasar. Billions of years ago, supermassive star

clusters within this galaxy core collapsed into a giant black hole; an accretion
sphere formed. Electromagnetic forces are greatly intensified in sun-sized
objects when they are pulled into large gravitational fields. Vast amounts of
energy are given off when these objects are accelerated to relativistic speeds by
the giant black hole’s attraction; gravitational force intensifies electromagnetic
forces, which in turn create the field conditions for the acceleration of incoming
objects. The resulting emission of energy, 1044 ergs per second, is what powered
the quasars, making them visible from all points in the universe.

::But as the central region of this galaxy was hollowed out, not all its suns

were destined to be eaten immediately, whole or piecemeal, as were those
nearest the core. For a time, a core hole settles down in a desert of its own
making, until a slowdown in galactic rotation brings more objects toward the
center, thus permitting new accretion of matter to begin. The moribund quasar
may even remain quiet long after star formation has ceased and most suns have
left the main sequence of their lives. When the galaxies rush together and the
core holes coalesce, a superquasar will form, giving off the energy gained from
the accretion of all the remaining matter in our universe; but finally this quasar
will also quiet itself, because not even its violence can halt the final collapse of
nature. The last black hole will swallow the remaining material of the universe;
and since compression approaching infinite density in zero volume is not
possible, quantum cosmology predicts that a passage into new space will be
opened by the massive monoblock’s intense field distortions, when all forces are
again one force, permitting the outstream of expanding material in a fireball, a
white hole depositing the basic materials of the new universe.

::The universal collapse will have the characteristics of every stellar object

in nature. As the core holes coalesce, we will see aspects of a massive sun as it
becomes a neutron star pulsar, quasar, black hole, followed by the expansion of
the tunneling fireball::

A whirlpool into infinity, John thought as he looked into the galaxy’s central

darkness, except that infinity is not reached, the collapsing universe cannot
squeeze itself into nothingness. He turned in space and looked at the gathering of
macrolife behind him, millions of worlds readying to approach the ergosphere of
the core hole, where time would slow for them and the line of experienced time
would link the present to the time of final collapse.

Using the tachyon drive systems powered by the gravitational energy of

small artificial black holes, the swarm of macroworlds would reach the
ergosphere in less than an hour.

Move, he said inwardly, giving the command. For a moment he imagined

that he could feel the forward motion across the core desert, but it was only the
blinking of space-time as the drive stitched through the parsecs, folding up the
continuum to the central black hole, shortening space at the level of quantum
structure. The force bubble brightened around him, and he knew that all the
energy of macrolife was being directed into protective fields and drives.

The worlds were moving in to form a network of points in the ergosphere,

surrounding the titanic black hole with a porous shell. Once established, the shell
would continue to rotate swiftly; all the power of each world would go into
maintaining its position just above the event horizon, an ergosphere of
consciousness creating a time machine out of itself, its instrumentalities and the
core hole’s immense gravitational field. Time would stand still within, as the
dark universe outside rushed toward its end.

The view ahead was now one of complete darkness, a sudden wall in front of

him; in another moment the wall seemed to be a floor only a few feet below;
then he was looking up at an impenetrable ceiling. He was rushing across the
face of this darkness, but there was no sign of motion. He had almost expected a
reflection of some kind, as if the black lake that would soon swallow all creation
were a mirror. The resolve to outlast a short-lived nature was now complete; it
was too late to turn back.

He called up multiple rear and side views. His companions glowed red and

white, as their energy sources strained to deliver the power that would maintain
the worlds in their positions. He reached out and looked inside the nearest world,
a hollow sphere almost a million kilometers across. Here beings of pure energy
circled the small artificial sun, their social structure sustained by ageless
instrumentalities attached to the inner surface….

He withdrew when he heard the whispers, a rising chorus of comments and

questions, increasing toward a critical mass of confusion. Thoughts radiating
from every world assailed him as he tried to listen.

“…How long, how long…?”

“…Who am I, what has happened…?”
“…Why are we like this, alone? Where are my hands and feet, why can’t I

see…?”

“…Will anyone speak to me? Please, someone….”
“…Is this a mistake…?”
“…Someone turn on the light. I only want to sleep….”
“…Wake me, wake me, will someone please wake me….”
“…I went to sleep and my life disappeared, all my youth, all the light…the

light, where is the light…?”

The pleas were all around him, an invisible mob pressing into his mind,

crushing his thoughts.

and Blackfriar. They are confused and lost, until—::

“Until what? Say it!” He was filling up with pity and sorrow. The

suddenness of the feelings frightened him, making him fear that he would be
torn apart.

“…Help us, someone help us….”
::Until…we can reintegrate them…after the end, if we survive::
“…Aaaah!”
::lt will grow worse near the end. This has been coming for a long time,

since the rediscovery of death. The larger aggregates rule the smaller, ever since
the largest fragmented::

He was in a dark room with a million people, and he had to calm them

before they trampled him and one another to death in panic.

“Quiet!” he shouted, wishing that his mental shout might brighten into a

light.

::It would be as if an individual organism from your time fell apart into

single cells. In that sense all multiorganismic life is macrolife, except the single
cell—::

“How many can we lose before a world becomes incoherent? How many

worlds before all macrolife becomes incoherent?”

::Most of these we have already left behind…. In a sense we are already less,

since each grouping in each galaxy exists for itself now. In every galaxy, only a
million worlds may have reached the core, to make the final effort. Most have
not. I can hear them dying in the galaxies, John Bulero, those who are readying
to destroy themselves, and those who are fragmenting into unconscious states—

and yes, I hear those who are doing as we are doing, even though they doubt.
The waste, the terrible waste! John Bulero! Those of us who can still see a larger
course, we must hold everything together, until—::

“What is it?”
::I have lost another part…of myself, a small part, but there will be other

losses::

“I won’t fail you! Can you go on?”
::Yes::
Then he reached out, and his consciousness passed through all the worlds of

the ergosphere, a tachyon lash flashing from one container of consciousness to
another. Now he felt the presence of those who were still strong and organi2ed;
he felt their excitement, expectation, subdued fear, their trust and understanding.
Through them, he was macro-life, the sum of all intelligence in nature, now
making a final stand against death. He was all consciousness and hope, gathered
here from all space-time to strike back at the monstrous oblivion that had dogged
all life since the beginning of time. Outside the ergosphere, beyond this shore of
rebellion, the universe was dying. Outside, he knew, time was racing forward,
minutes for millions of years; yet to those intelligences still outside, time
dragged onward as slowly as ever; by now it was a universe strewn with dead
worlds and insane mentalities.

gravity, the force that will later collapse all space-time, is already at work,
gathering gas into galaxies, forming stars in the spiral arms, lighting the fires
that will, for a time, resist the force of gravitational collapse with the heat of
thermonuclear expansion. A universe of stars and galaxies comes into being.
Life arises, and one day startles itself with self-awareness, growing in
knowledge and puzzlement, as if something had designed nature to be finally
unknowable, even while providing an endless stream of knowable particulars.
The mainspring of cosmic evolution is the energy released by gravitational
collapse; it lights the stars and waits for their exhaustion; the end is present in
the beginning. The drive behind conscious intelligence is the perpetual inability
to complete its knowledge; futility fuels purpose. The inability of mind to
overcome certain built-in obstacles is the main feature of existence. He
wondered if it could ever be any other way, anywhere. What would an existence
of perfect knowledge, translucent perception, and complete power mean? It
seemed almost…if one were to design a universe…it would have to be partially
opaque, incomplete, knowable to its intelligent life only in little pieces; it would
make no sense to reveal everything at the beginning. Knowledge had to expand
in the minds of observers as the universe expanded, only to collapse when the

universe collapsed. The failure of knowledge lay in its impossible hope of
completion, as universal physical collapse lay waiting in the heart of all matter;
there could be no other state but incompleteness. All this would be true, he
realized, even if they passed through the end of this cycle; a final, explanatory
power would always be denied to systems of knowledge built by finite
intelligence. Yet so much, he thought, is known. For a moment he wondered if
anything could exist beyond the cycles of one universe; could there be any way
to explore the possibility?

Desolation swept through him. Perhaps this kind of survival was impossible?

Maybe a kind of natural selection was at work here also, and survival would go
to those who understood the problem best; perhaps the life now remaining had
waited too long? He looked into the darkness, the place where the whole frame
of nature would be shattered and crushed, and he felt small. As nature had given
birth to conscious intelligence, and to macrolife, so now macrolife held all that
was left of living nature within itself. Throughout its rise, mind had been
dominated by the god of nature, tormented by natural cruelties and dead ends; no
amount of worship had done any good. Now nature’s obstacles were back in full
force.

A coldly impersonal resentment grew in him now, confirming his earlier

resolve to endure and prevail. If the entropic decline of this cycle could be
overcome, then the limiting god of nature could be defeated again and again.
Surviving intelligences might continue to develop, even though they arose
within the absurdities of scarcity and through the murder of other forms,
growing into consciousness marked by a sense of expulsion, the residue of
evolution’s adaptive programs.

He saw himself playing in the green forest of the hollow. Yellow sunlight

painted the moss-covered ground with slanting beams. He was ten years old
again, only a moment ago, a strange creature in the dawn of time, knowing
already that he would not have to die or grow old and useless. He could learn
anything he wanted to know, as long as he devised the right questions. In school
they taught only questions—all the old questions, all the newest questions, and
the context of asking them. There were questions which had answers; some had
more than one answer; others had no answer; and about still others it was not
known whether they could have an answer or not.

The trees and moss in the curving hollow had no interest in questions or

answers; the animals, preserved since the passing of earth, were easily satisfied
here. The trees seemed to care only for the beauty of their proud stance; with the
sunlight on it, the moss seemed to be dreaming….

He wrenched himself forward across the eons to the present. A universe of

intelligences stood at his shoulder, as well as a universe where every black hole
had been still another leak in a sinking ship, as inevitable as each gray hair in a
human head, prefiguring in miniature the fate of every atom in every star and
stone. The time line of every piece of matter arched forward across time into the
final black hole that was now forming.

As he strained to pierce the darkness, his eyes drank in a faint light. It

became brighter, and he realized that he was seeing the growing glow of the
titanic quasar forming at the end of time. All the remaining matter in the galaxies
was falling into the black hole as it merged with one core hole after another. The
universe was getting hotter and hotter; now, he knew, macrolife was leaving the
ergosphere, pulling back to a safer distance until the quasar quieted itself for the
last collapse.

The sky brightened with energy, became white, bathing the shrunken

universe with radiation and heat, washing by the protective field of each
macroworld like a tide around smooth stones. Then, in the rush of time, it was
over; there was no matter left to be pulled into the center. The quasar was dead,
unable to generate more power….

ergosphere of the last black hole, but no closer. All that had been was here now,
rainbow and rose, mountain and cloud, all yearning and its denial, an individual
universe of light and life that would never come again.

Although it seemed that an eternity was passing, he knew that only

microseconds were going by as the singularity collapsed toward its gravitational
radius, carrying in its ergosphere all that survived of macrolife as the galaxies
were pushed together toward infinite compression….

His limbs kicked involuntarily, remembering an ancient terror of being

enclosed….

Suddenly he felt as if a great weight had been lifted from him. The

superdense mass had reached its greatest point of collapse, bending the curvature
of space-time toward infinity, and had tunneled out as a white hole in new space.
No one would ever see the expanding fireball; one does not witness one’s birth,
though there are sensations of pulling and pressing, then relief, to be
remembered only in a rudimentary way.

would not remain open for long. His sensors reached out to the glowing points of
his companion worlds, motionless candles in a still midnight; he watched them
grow faint as they fell toward a common center and winked out one by one,
pulled to the future from an ultimate past. Quickly he flashed through the
worlds, looking out from each as they passed below the point of visibility and no

electromagnetic radiation could reach him. The last world disappeared, denying
him his final observation point.

All sense of forward motion ceased, and he wondered again if it would all be

for nothing—billions, perhaps nearly a trillion years of life and continuous
civilization, wasted in the last moments….

::There was no other way:: the aggregate said out of its long silence.
How long, John wondered, how long this darkness?
::The question has no meaning::
He thought again of black holes from all the ages streaming forward into a

bottomless black pool. The universe, the greater continuum of superspace, was
filled with an infinity of smaller spaces, separated from each other by
singularities. Smaller black holes, as well as the final one, were the means for
covering infinite intervals of space-time in small subjective times. He knew that
they would emerge soon—but how long would it seem?

“How is our power?”
::Almost gone::
Flashes of light, starlike bits of energy, appeared in the darkness ahead,

passing through him to be left behind. Then the darkness acquired a strange
glow, dividing itself into concentric circles growing smaller and smaller to
infinity. As he watched, he realized that a model was being created inside him,
something that would help him grasp the reality of time acquiring the
characterisitics of space, and space becoming like time.

::All black holes, at whatever time in the life of the universe they appear, are

congruent in a higher space. Collapsar galaxies rushing together are already
together at a future time; if time is space, one the other, then all space is one and
all times meet. All dimensionality of one universe is a point in super-space,
where a monistic infinity may be divided into distinct things, and these divided
further without end, as long as the law of boundaries is observed. A universe of
individualities emerges, creating consciousness out of complexities; and
consciousness strives toward unity through a consolidation of values::

As he stared into the darkness, he imagined that he was swallowing an

infinity of darkness, compressing it into a black rope as it rushed into him, filling
him like a coiled snake. Macrolife, he realized, his worlds, would have created
one new individual, if the universe had not ended; the end would have been the
beginning. I am macrolife, he thought, as much as any individual.

deep royal blue in places. A series of afterimages followed, reflections and
mirror images traveling backward in time into his perceptual field, as if
something had passed him, leaving a wake. At one moment it seemed as if the

space of the tunnel had retained not only a full negative record of the great
collapsing mass that had formed it, but also an image of the mass that had
collapsed toward an impossible condition. While macrolife had circled the
galactic core hole, the light of the universe had been a record of all the future, all
the remaining future rushing in to end in a few moments of experienced time; all
that energy, matter, and light that had fallen into the pit was now ahead of them;
nothing was left behind; the future was everything.

looped into an infinite limbo? What if the white hole closes immediately after
the outstream? Macrolife might never see the morning light of creation….

Again he saw some vast, blurred image, as if something rushing ahead of

them were leaving a trail. Then darkness returned for a long time, and with it
came a complete hopelessness.

The hopelessness shattered into a million thoughts.
“…We shall never come out…”
“…We should have stayed in the past, where the end was still far off…”
“…What shall we do…?”
If we come out, John thought, it will be like regaining the past, except for

whatever original features might exist in the new cycle of nature. He tried to shut
out the continuing assault of doubts and reproaches being exchanged in the
darkness. Was this the first time creation had come to an end? Was it the first
time that all distinctions had been collapsed, only to be remade anew into a new
variety? Perhaps this was the first time the universe had ended, and there would
never be another. The idea was as frightening as the thought of a universe
expanding into cold nothingness, never to be drawn back together, never to grow
warm again. It was unthinkable that only nothingness lay ahead; as unthinkable
as the idea of absolute zero, left without right, or a unique beginning to the
cycles of expansion and contraction.

::It may be::
“I reject even the possibility,” John said. “It is as impossible as the idea of

absolute nothingness; something must always exist; to imagine otherwise is to
fall into contradiction.”

But how knowable would the new universe be? How long would it last? He

imagined the births and deaths of the universe to be days and nights, or seasons;
each season would be different, filled with unique details, never fully knowable.
Surely something like this was true. All that macrolife had done, was now doing,
had once been imagined; what was happening now, in this passage between
universe cycles, past and future, was as much understood through intuition and
imagination as through accumulated knowledge. His perception of what was

happening was indirect, built up out of his own and the aggregate’s
visualizations; the predictions had been correct until now, leaving only the
emergence into new space to be fulfilled….

beauty lies behind our models, too much is explained, for it not to be true::

“But you still doubt?”
::Doubt is always necessary::
He stared into the darkness, doubting as fear crept into him.
“What will I see? What should I see? Tell me what to look for!”
::Look for the light of cooling hydrogen, as the fireball dissipates. Hydrogen

forms after the outstream, when the temperature of the fireball drops low
enough. We will see the light of heated hydrogen::

But only darkness still lay ahead.
A renewed babble went up around him, but he shut it out, subduing the

thoughts as they lanced into him, blunting their penetration, beating them into a
contained silence, cutting the lines of panic to reduce the danger of
disintegration; at one moment he struck out with mercy, but in the next moment
it felt like murder.

“Let it begin,” he said to himself. “Let the light begin.”
A chorus picked up his thought as if it were a prayer.
“…Begin, begin, begin…”
“…Let begin, let begin…”
“…Light, light, light…”
“…Begin the light, begin the light…”
“…Let it begin,” he said, joining in as he felt the yearning take hold of him,

desire struggling against a fate that seemed determined to drown the last of
intelligence, down, down, down, throwing it into a bottomless spatial deformity,
into an oblivion without death.

“Let it begin,” he said again, afraid that his fearfulness would cause a critical

mass of doubt, leaving him to drift in darkness, alone in a sea of mad beings.
“Let us live,” he said, as the hope drained out of him.

v

::Light:: The very word seemed to glow as John peered ahead.
Slowly, the rich royal purple of hydrogen appeared as a distant patch,

growing suddenly to cover half the field of vision; the mixture of helium’s vivid
spring green created areas of faint yellow. John heard a sound, something like
the tinkling notes of a soft harpsichord playing a ghostly row. His awareness
flashed through all the worlds, rushing backward from first to last, watching as a
million macroforms spilled out into the deeply glowing gas that filled the new
space. He could see them all ahead, floating aimlessly in what seemed to be a
warm daylight sky, not very far away. Some of the worlds were empty of
conscious life, he noted, dead husks thrown out of the cave of winter by the
spring wind, too late to live again.

He was the last to come out of the cave. Behind him, the knothole in space

would become a closing gravitational vortex, existing long enough to help form
the metagalaxy, whose member galaxies would condense into stars as they flew
apart. In a million years, individual stars would begin to shine, as gravity pulled
the gas together. It would be enough, this cloud of light and gas, to provide them
with a supply of energy and hope.

As he watched his worlds gathering into a giant sphere, John found himself

at peace. Each world glowed as its supply of hydrogen and newly formed mini
black holes was replenished from the warm universe. He thought of streetlights
going on in an endless fog….

The glow of this universe would fade one day, when its free electrons and

protons combined to form transparent hydrogen.

Then he noticed another glow. It was coming from far away, and suddenly

he saw that it was a transparent globe.

::A hundred million kilometers in radius::
As the object drew nearer, John became aware that it was filled with millions

of glowing objects.

::Macrolife from before our cycle, surviving from the uncounted ruins of

nature. We are not the first large units of intelligent awareness::

He should have expected it, especially when the stranger had passed them in

the aperture; but the reality was still a surprise. This, John thought, was the Type
III civilization which had not revealed itself, preferring to wait rather than
influence youthful development. This was the first form of macrolife, surviving
from some unimaginable past.

There was no need to speak. The elder form opened its shell, and the million

worlds passed inside without ceremony. There would be survivors from every
cycle; they had been expected.

vi

Macrolife waits in the morning light of creation, its millions of worlds

forming a complex figure in the field of the giant sphere. Inside, the youngest
macroforms are setting out their newest understanding of the glittering sequence
through which their parent universe pulses as it lives and dies and is reborn in
the fabric of eternity; reality has given up its elementary secrets, while leaving a
deeper grain.

Morning will pass; birthing suns will build up the light for noon. But

macrolife is already looking to a greater frame of activity, in which this universe
is only one in an ocean of possibility. Macrolife plans to move across the time of
this cycle, observing the growth of intelligent life, adding, if possible, to its
knowledge and awareness, gathering new macrolife at the end, ultimately
sweeping across future cycles in shortened subjective time, taking on hydrogen
and quantum black holes at each birth and new intelligences at each maturity,
drawn ever forward by the continuing novelty of universes.

An infinity of universes swim in super space, all passing through their own

cycles of birth and death; some are novel, others repetitious; some produce
macrolife, others do not; still others are lifeless. In time, macrolife will attempt
to reach out from its cycles to other space-time bubbles, perhaps even to past
cycles, which leave their echoes in superspace, and might be reached. In all
these ambitions, only the ultimate pattern of development is unknown, drawing
macrolife toward some further transformation still beyond its view. There are
times when the oldest macrolife senses that vaster intelligences are peering in at
it from some great beyond….

Within the youngest macroform, John Bulero is slowly fading; the usefulness

of his will, its narrowly gauged impetus, is over. His finitude, his ancient human
aches are passing into what seems a larger dream. He understands now that
knowledge can never be final, even as it grows with the forward unfolding of the
universes. His thirst to know, his hunger to see and experience, must be content
with the finality of endlessness, with the wisdom that teaches the acceptance of
the logic of infinity. The unraveling of the illusion of last things should be least
attempted, says the logic of infinities; the darkness of unreality hides last things
better than any real cloak.

Yet: why is there anything? Why do universes come into being? To what

greater process do these brilliant sparks owe their existence? Where was the
valley of his beginning? Why was it the cruelty of death that ensured their

unique value? Were they truly unrepeatable? He would take these questions into
the greater gauge of consciousness. Perhaps then he could accept the fact that
decline and destruction served to create new things—new individuals, novel
physical cycles, the kind of intense development that could not otherwise be
sustained; even macrolife, continuous as it was with the old and new, depends on
natural universes for a supply of new minds and for the means by which it can
nurture its own creations. As John Bulero, he had paid the price in loss, to live
toward the midnight, past the fleeting seconds where night turns into a glowing
morning, leaving him with the ashes of memory….

Quietly, John Bulero forgets himself; the universe is mysterious again, at the

very moment when its violent processes have become comprehensible to him. All
knowledge is suddenly old knowledge, no longer curious or a delight, simply old
and repetitious; elsewhere lies knowledge that is curious and new, to be gathered
by the hungry, for whom the mystery of existence must always be its greatest
beauty. The open book gives reference on its last page to a further library….

All that had pulled him down was gone.
Having survived into its first maturity, the youngest macrolife has learned a

new patience with which to soothe its curiosity; and in that patience of endless
knowing it has found its own enduring kind of beauty.

AFTERWORD TO THE FIRST EDITON

of one person. Dandridge Cole originated the term “Macro Life,” and described
it in “The Ultimate Human Society” (1961). Konstantin Tsiolkovsky and J. D.
Bernal had much earlier suggested this kind of space-colony concept, stressing
the use of sunspace as an energy-rich environment for civilization. Artificial
planets appeared in the works of Olaf Stapledon and others. The idea of self-
contained space habitats as alternatives to natural worlds is also related to the
“generation starship” idea, a kind of Noah’s Ark for colonizing the stars.

I started with Cole’s hollow asteroid and projected its development beyond

this stage. I used an asteroid because it might be safer, providing shielding from
solar radiation as well as natural resources. Gerard O’Neill’s space cylinder, as
well as other designs which assume construction from scratch, seem too
precarious to me right now, but I may be wrong. O’Neill’s approach to the space-
habitat idea, however, strikes me as a thoroughly considered near-future vision. I
suspect that space habitats will get built in just about every way they can be
built.

I was also stimulated by Isaac Asimov’s neglected version of long-term

space-habitat development (“There’s no Place Like Spome,” 1965, reprinted in
Is Anyone There? Doubleday, 1967), as well as by G. Harry Stine’s The Third
Industrial Revolution (Putnam, 1975). Mr. Stine bears some responsibility for
this novel’s existence, because in 1961 he complained (in “Science Fiction Is
Too Conservative,” Analog) that concepts such as Cole’s Macro Life were being
ignored by science fiction authors and that most of the innovative speculation
was going on outside SF. This is even more true today, I’m sorry to report. If he
had mentioned Asimov’s spomes, I wonder if the title on the cover of this novel
might have been Spomelife?

The richness of the macrolife concept lies not only in its physical aspects,

but in the psychosocial consequences for the idea of human society, in the ways
that human experience might be affected and transformed into something else;
this speculative richness is the province of the novelist. I am certain that I have
not exhausted macro-life within the pages of one book.

I would like to thank those people who were directly helpful in the writing of

this novel: Poul Anderson, Gregory Benford, Mark Olson, Pamela Sargent,
Marjorie Horvitz (finest of copy editors), M. S. Wyeth Jr., and Stephen K. Roos
(thoughtful, demanding editors both), Norbert Slepyan, Joseph Elder, William

Pizante, Robert Neidorf, Robert L. Forward, Jack Dann; for their
encouragement, Guy Streatfeild, John and Magda McHale.

Paolo Soleri’s concept of “arcologies” (among them a spacegoing version)

was partially responsible for my naming the first macroworld Asterome. Special
thanks to “Rebus Heviwait” and “Emmanuel Lighthanger,” whose enterprising
book, Projex (Links Books, 1972), was invaluable. John McHale’s classic The
Future of the Future (Braziller, 1969) was also very helpful.

Of course, the people mentioned above had nothing to do with the changes I

may have made in their speculations. All mistakes and misconceptions are mine.

DON’T READ THIS FIRST AFTERWORD TO THE NEW EDITION

What can an author say about a novel he wrote in a bold mood of

declamatory poetry over twenty-five years ago, a first novel that he dreamed
about throughout his high school years and which finally came to him in
handsome publication? Well, one can observe and measure the past, and be
gratified that this novel received high praise from its many readers and continues
to do so. At the end of his days, Isaac Asimov said to me, “These stories about
macrolife will be your Foundation series. Don’t neglect them!”

I was writing this book from about 1961 onward, struck by the social ideas

of mobile habitats in the scientific/engineering work of Dandridge Cole and
developing his vision not only in its engineering aspect but also in the
philosophical view of mobile habitats as the ultimately flexible societal
organism, capable of great divergent development. No work of fiction had taken
the ideas as far as I did by 1979; one had to look to the nonfiction of J. D.
Bernal, Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, and Isaac Asimov, to various suggestions in the
works of Olaf Stapledon, and to Cole’s brief works, not to stories and novels.
But one thing was clear to me even as a teenager: I took the idea as a reality
waiting to be realized.

The writing of my novel, which presents three visionary snapshots in the life

of mobile habitats and what they are for, swallowed my life for most of two
decades. As Dante had been inspired by theological cosmologies to search out a
context for human life, I was drawn to the deeper implications of space travel
and to a critical reconsideration of a too easily accepted idea of settling the
planets of other solar spaces. Macrolife also sang to me as a symphonic structure
—a heroic first part, a slower middle movement, and a long visionary poem for
the finale.

One criticism raised about the novel when it was first published claimed that

it did not show “how we get from here to there.” It was basically a dismissal of
the Utopian visionary ideals of the story, somehow forgetting that all of Part 1
presents catastrophe as the midwife of change, if not progress, as it has always
been throughout human history, if one reads and remembers that the fall of every
major civilization sows the seeds of the next. I would prefer that planetary
disaster not be the midwife to the birth of macrolife; but it may in fact have to be
so, whether it be ecological of our own making, cosmic (permitted by our own
inaction), or sociopolitical. My contribution was in suggesting that a mobile
civilization would not fail, at least not as easily as our planetary cultures have

fallen, and perhaps not ever.

Ever is a cosmological word deeply rooted in our apprehensions about

reality, because we still come and go too quickly. I was thinking of Robert A.
Heinlein’s Future History Chart, from which I fondly recall the entry for 2600
AD—“Civil Disorder, followed by the end of human adolescence, and the
beginning of first mature culture.” I also charted a future history, for use in
writing the novel, on a white board in black marker; one day I will revise it.

Another notable misconception involved the scale of my mobiles. One

reviewer asked why they were called macroworlds, since they were so “small,”
little realizing that length is not the same as volume and square surface area,
which can yield an inner surface at least twice that of the Earth, as noted at the
start of Part 2. One curiously derisive comment likened this novel to a famously
difficult philosophical work, when in fact my novel’s reading level has been
measured as being that of midcollege. William Styron once said that a good
novel should leave the reader slightly exhausted, and I say that a science fiction
novel without actual thinking in it is not worthy of the name.

Much has been made of my Stapledonian influences. For sheer

comprehensive vision, his body of work constitutes the single greatest
achievement in science fiction’s history. But the last lines of my novel answer
Stapledon’s Last and First Men and Star Maker by suggesting a music that will
endure, one that does not come and go as in Stapledon’s cosmic novels but
contributes to a growing permanence and a net gain, as new macrolife comes
into being with each new cycle of nature and becomes aware of macrolife
sweeping across from previous cycles. If there is a physical forever to existence,
then why not? Freeman Dyson has suggested an all-but-eternal survival of
intelligent life through a thrifty, endless ratcheting down of energy use.

Clearly, Macrolife is a further development of the Utopian novel, unnoticed

despite some discussion of this in the novel itself that it is a “dynamic Utopia,”
in H. G. Wells’s discussions of the shift away from the “static” models that
preceded him. So I have restored the novel’s subtitle, A Mobile Utopia, and urge
readers to keep in mind that there have been at least two meanings of the term
Utopia since the time of Wells, but too many still recall the static models of
earlier writers.

Macrolife, although it can stand alone, is part of a broader canvas; between

its three parts I have also set Cave of Stars, a darker, closer vision that still
manages to oppose the darkness, despite the battering of our hopes in recent
decades. Two published novelettes, which may yet grow to be parts of novels,
deal with the conflict that the mobiles of “macrolife” have with settling nature’s
planets.

I still feel that the central conception is poorly understood, dragged down by

weighty pasts, perhaps because it looks critically upon, and rejects, nearly all of
science fiction’s past visions about settling other worlds. I see this dialogue
going on in my mosaic of stories and novels until the question is resolved—
probably by the year 5000 in my fictional chronology. It may never be resolved
in reality. The question may never even be tested, but I hope that this is merely
shortsightedness. As one endures, we are weighed down by the spectacle of
human quarrels, by the blindness of our swarm, by the realization that came to
Napoleon that there was little he could do against privileged wealth and power,
and maybe even less by the cat’s cradles of familial knots.

Someone once said that there are no Utopias that he would want to live in. I

have always wanted to live in the macrolife culture and to continue learning
throughout an indefinite life span, in epochs that would have their own emerging
problems—but not those of the past. A room with heat, electric light, a
television, and a library, not to mention online access to a library, would have
been a Utopian vision to Thomas Jefferson.

I now say, against a creeping darkness of doubt, that something like

macrolife has to be the ultimate in social systems and in the survival of
intelligent life, human life included. But even in the near term, across the next
millennium, our failure to become a space-faring world may well be suicidal
when we consider what we can do for our world from the high ground of the
solar system: energy and resources, planetary management, and most important
the ability to prevent the world-ending catastrophe of an asteroid strike. This last
threat will happen; it is not a question of if but when. Today we are utterly
helpless before such a danger and would know of it only when it was already
happening.

But the deepest threat to our survival lives inside all of us. The powers of the

Earth today took power from previous powers, with cultures overlaying previous
ones by force, and the latest always fear innovation unless they control it, since
innovation would rearrange the rule of the planet. The struggle over energy
resources may yet plunge us into a new dark age, if not extinction, by our own
hands. We have not gone out into the solar system, or raised up our poor and
powerless, because that would also change too much for our existing powers,
who do fear that more for the many means less for the few. Virgil wrote of the
Romans, “To these I set no bounds in time or space/They shall rule forever,” but
today we are learning to reject a planetary minority as the Earth’s master—and
that is what the traditional masters fear most, that the future will not belong to
their generations, to the devils they know within themselves. When confronted
with the concept of space colonies in the second half of the twentieth century,

politicians muttered, “Uh, we can’t have that. It would change too much. And
it’s too expensive.” Public interest waned by the mid-1980s, much as it had
turned against space exploration in the early 1950s, until the political disaster of
Sputnik in 1957 revived the idea, and I began to wonder what kind of planetary
disaster would kick our world out of its cradle into genuine space-faring and
world-building. The view of the Earth from the Moon gave us a sense of our
world’s fragility. It is in fact a space colony, a skylife conglomeration of
materials held together by gravity, and far from safe.

The test of a Utopia is its treatment of the individual. A dynamic Utopia, one

that responds to the external universe and to the inner life of its people, must
safeguard both itself and the individual, with legal, fully usable safeguards for
both. Olaf Stapledon held that a society must deserve its individuals and its
individuals must deserve their society. That is the solution to the problem of the
individual in society; it calls for responsibilities from both, so the solution is
both profoundly conservative and radical at the same time, hinging on the and of
that sentence being practiced. The economic social container has to be inviolate,
since it supports all that is possible without determining its content; but the true
test would come in its tolerance of dissident and departing individuals,
something the Soviet Union and many other governments have not been able to
tolerate consistently. “The State is for Individuals,” Wells wrote in A Modern
Utopia. “The law is for freedoms, the world is for experiment, experience, and
change; these are the fundamental beliefs upon which a modern Utopia must
go.” These great words sound the very theme of science fiction as an exploratory
fiction, as a freedom of inner exploration and self-programming that our world
has hit upon to help it see ahead. Fictional and imaginative, but aspiring to
reality. The words of a novel, however, cannot guarantee any future reality’s
success; therefore, one cannot make of macrolife a failure unless we go out and
try it out.

Utopian ideas, whether of the static or dynamic kind, are usually confronted,

often with derision, with the evidence of human nature, which, it is claimed,
requires conflict inherited from the evolutionary mill. Few critics of Utopias care
to admit that we can in fact see beyond the dramatic imperfections of our given
physiology, that we can to a large degree question our biological constraints, that
these do not completely block our imaginative efforts to step back from our
humanity and see possibilities in freer, economically liberated measures of man.

Great fear is made of the lockstep of impoverished Utopias not worthy of the

name; that is why this has been a term of derision. Yet Utopias remain as the
great empty space on our maps, reproaches to our acceptance of who we have
been given to be by nature. They have threatened and beckoned with creative

possibilities and shame the easy way with which so many of us have turned
away from the effort. What we are has its own inertia and a self-serving way of
rationalizing what should be questioned and perhaps even despised by a creative,
adventurous spirit that has acquired enough plasticity and free will to make of
itself its own project for the future. Our literatures, fictions all, have been a way
of “distancing” ourselves from ourselves, of seeing, as the historian Giambattista
Vico saw, that much of what we ascribe to human nature is more circumstance
and culture than nature, much of it made by ourselves, and that what we have
made in one way we might make in another. Vico was generous with his vision
of human freedom, but despite the catastrophe of the twentieth century, our
creative freedom to remake ourselves through a growing knowledge does in fact
await us, even if we can take only small steps; but if we believe that we are ruled
by unreachable inner forces that will only subvert all the promise of our science
and technology, that the complexities of our short lives transcend our ability to
understand and deal with them, then we are indeed lost. We do have the choice
to reject this view, even if it may be true, and bring the battle to a test that will
defeat the past and grow a new freedom.

“The Ultimate Human Society,” as Dandridge Cole presented the idea, is

perhaps misleading, since the concept of macrolife is one thing only in its
economic and technological sense, but an endless series of opportunities for
cultural ways to grow on the basic life-support model. What more could
intelligent life ask for? All of our planetary societies have tended toward it, in
every form of community from village to city. Dandridge Cole had it right, but
his visionary successors, from Gerard K. O’Neill to many a science fiction
writer, did not consider the idea’s full implications. It is not all engineering,
hardware, and “big dumb objects,” but a waiting opportunity for a better human
life. It has been my privilege to write novels searching out the human
implications, as well as the implications for intelligent life, in the arena of the
novel, which has traditionally been a central and complex court of human
inquiry, and where so much of today’s literature, in the words of Fred Hoyle, is
myopic and shortsighted before the “golden chances” that wait for us and which
we may lose. No planetary future for intelligent life is assured except through
knowledge and action.

my doubts. And I welcome the fact that this new edition comes from a publisher
who has long stood for Enlightenment values, which for me have always lived at
the heart of science fiction’s loftier but too often commerce-crippled life. The
best of science fiction has increased human awareness of the future tense for
some two centuries now, but we must remind ourselves how new such an

impulse is, as it struggles to grow in the human mind, which is still hobbled by
our inheritance from a survivalist nature.

All literature, at whatever scale of observation, has been a stepback seeing

effort; and we must take it as a sign of hope that we have anything like this
ability, not only to look back but to gaze forward, and not just to see what is
merely possible but even to make new things happen.

George Zebrowski
Delmar, New York

June 2005

About the Author

George Zebrowski’s forty books include novels, short-fiction collections,
anthologies, and a book of essays. His works have appeared in all the science
fiction magazines, as well as in Omni, Nature, Popular Computing, and the
Bertrand Russell Society News.

Arthur C. Clarke described Macrolife as “a worthy successor to Olaf

Stapledon’s Star Maker. It’s been years since I was so impressed. One of the few
books I intend to read again.” Library Journal listed Macrolife as one of the one
hundred best science fiction novels, and the Easton Press published it in its
Masterpieces of Science Fiction series. Cave of Stars, a recent novel, also
belongs to the Macrolife mosaic. Zebrowski’s works have been translated into
eight languages; his short fiction has been nominated for the Nebula Award and
the Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award. Brute Orbits, an uncompromising
novel about a future penal system, was honored with the John W. Campbell
Memorial Award for Best Novel of the Year in 1999.

All rights reserved, including without limitation the right to reproduce this ebook
or any portion thereof in any form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of the publisher.

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the
product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to
actual persons, living or dead, businesses, companies, events, or locales is
entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 1979 by George Zebrowski

978-1-4976-3417-6

This edition published in 2014 by Open Road Integrated Media, Inc.
345 Hudson Street
New York, NY 10014
www.openroadmedia.com

Open Road Integrated Media is a digital publisher and multimedia

content company. Open Road creates connections between authors and
their audiences by marketing its ebooks through a new proprietary online

platform, which uses premium video content and social media.

Videos, Archival Documents, and New Releases

Sign up for the Open Road Media newsletter and get news

delivered straight to your inbox.

Sign up now at

www.openroadmedia.com/newsletters

FIND OUT MORE AT

WWW.OPENROADMEDIA.COM

FOLLOW US:

@openroadmedia and

Facebook.com/OpenRoadMedia

