Romance of Three Kingdoms

Written by: Luo Guanzhong

Translated by: C.H. Brewitt Taylor

Ebook design by: DW Three Kingdoms

Romance of Three Kingdoms
  5

a disruption5. But soon Liu Xiu the Latter Han Founder 
restored the empire6, and Han emperors continued their rule 
for another two hundred years till the days of Emperor Xian, 
which were doomed to see the beginning of the empire’s 
division into three parts, known to history as The Three 
Kingdoms. 

But the descent into misrule hastened in the reigns of the 

two predecessors of Emperor Xian---Emperors Huan and 
Ling---who sat in the Dragon Throne about the middle of 
the second century. 

court, but gave his confidence to the Palace eunuchs7. 
He lived and died, leaving the scepter to Emperor Ling, 
whose advisers were Regent Marshal Dou Wu and Imperial 
Guardian Chen Fan8. Dou Wu and Chen Fan, disgusted with 
the abuses of the eunuchs in the affairs of the state, plotted 
the destruction for the power-abusing eunuchs. But Chief 
Eunuch Cao Jie was not to be disposed of easily. The plot 
leaked out, and the honest Dou Wu and Chen Fan were put 
to death, leaving the eunuchs stronger than before. 

the second year, in the era of Established Calm (AD 168), 

5Wang Mang (BC 45-AD 23) was regent and a nephew of the empress 

dowager Wang. He assumed the throne from AD 9 to 23. 

6Liu Xiu (or Guang Wu) (BC 5-AD 57) (reigned AD 25-57) restored Han 

after Wang Mang’s usurpation. The dynasty Liu Xiu restored is also known as 
Eastern Han (capital in Luoyang) or Latter Han. 

7From remote antiquity, eunuchs were employed in China in two main 

functions: As guards and servants in harems or other women’s quarters, and as 
chamberlains to kings. The eunuchs’ confidential position frequently enabled 
them to exercise an important influence over their royal masters and even to 
raise themselves to stations of great trust and power. 

 8Regent Marshal was the highest military office, while Imperial Guardian 

highest civilian office.

Chapter 1
Three Heroes Swear Brotherhood In The Peach Garden;
One Victory Shatters The Rebels In Battlegrounds.

tends to unite; after a long period of union, tends to divide. 
This has been so since antiquity. When the rule of the Zhou 
Dynasty weakened, seven contending kingdoms sprang up1, 
warring one with another until the kingdom of Qin prevailed 
and 
possessed 
the 

empire2. 
But 
when 

Qin’s destiny had been 
fulfilled, arose two 
opposing 
kingdoms, 

Chu and Han, to fight 
for the mastery. And 
Han was the victor3.

The rise of the 

fortunes of Han began 
when Liu Bang the 
Supreme 
Ancestor4 

slew a white serpent 
to raise the banners 
of 
uprising, 
which 

only 
ended 
when 

the 
whole 
empire 

belonged to Han (BC 
202). This magnificent 
heritage was handed 
down in successive 
Han 
emperors 
for 

two hundred years, 
till the rebellion of 
Wang Mang caused 

1Up to this time AD 168, China had had 

five dynasties: Mythology (BC 5000-2200), 
Xia Dynasty (BC 2200-1700), Shang Dynasty 
(BC 1700-1050), Zhou Dynasty (BC 1050-
221), Qin Dynasty (BC 221-206), and Han 
Dynasty (BC 206-AD 220). The Age of Seven 
States was BC 475-221, which was also known 
as the Warring States Period. The seven main 
states were Qin, Chu, Yan, Qi, Wei, Zhao, and 
Han.

2At the end of the Warring States Period, 

Qin conquered other states, and consolidated 
the empire. The first emperor of Qin is credited 
with the building of the Great Wall in large 
scale.

3Qin ruled for only one and a half 

generations, then the old states emerged again.

4Liu Bang (or Gao Zu) (BC 256-195) was 

the founder of Han Dynasty, aka Western Han 
(capital in Changan). From a farmer family. His 
first office was assistant to a magistrate in Pei. 
Joined peasant rebellions against Qin Dynasty. 
Fought under Chu banner. Became a general, 
then ennobled as King of Han. In BC 206 Liu 
Bang defeated Xiang Yu and won the empire. 

Chapter
6
1
Romance of Three Kingdoms
  7

rivals in wickedness and associates in evil deeds, formed 
a powerful party known as the Ten Regular Attendants---
Zhang Rang, Zhao Zhong, Cheng Kuang, Duan Gui, Feng 
Xu, Guo Sheng, Hou Lan, Jian Shuo, Cao Jie, and Xia 
Yun. 

One of them, Zhang Rang, won such influence that he 

became the Emperor’s most honored and trusted adviser. 
The Emperor even called him “Foster Father”. So the corrupt 
state administration went quickly from bad to worse, till the 
country was ripe for rebellion and buzzed with brigandage. 

family, of whom three brothers bore the name of Zhang 
Jue, Zhang Ba, and Zhang Lian, respectively. The eldest 
Zhang Jue was an unclassed graduate, who devoted himself 
to medicine. One day, while culling simples in the woods, 
Zhang Jue met a venerable old gentleman with very bright, 
emerald eyes and fresh complexion, who walked with an 
oak-wood staff. The old man beckoned Zhang Jue into a 
cave and there gave him three volumes of The Book of 
Heaven. 

Arts of Peace. With the aid of these volumes, you can 
convert the world and rescue humankind. But you must be 
single-minded, or, rest assured, you will greatly suffer.” 

asked the name of his benefactor. 

as the old gentleman disappeared in thin air. 

Zhang Jue studied the wonderful book eagerly and strove 

day and night to reduce its precepts to practice. Before long, 
he could summon the winds and command the rain, and he 
became known as the Mystic of the Way of Peace. 

In the first month of the first year of Central Stability (AD 

184), there was a terrible pestilence that ran throughout the 

that Emperor Ling went in state to the Hall of Virtue. As 
he drew near the throne, a rushing whirlwind arose in the 
corner of the hall and, lo! from the roof beams floated down 
a monstrous black serpent that coiled itself up on the very 
seat of majesty. The Emperor fell in a swoon. Those nearest 
him hastily raised and bore him to his palace, while the 
courtiers scattered and fled. The serpent disappeared. 

But there followed a terrific tempest, thunder, hail, and 

torrents of rain, lasting till midnight and working havoc 
on all sides. Two years later the earth quaked in Capital 
Luoyang, while along the coast a huge tidal wave rushed 
in which, in its recoil, swept away all the dwellers by the 
sea. Another evil omen was recorded ten years later, when 
the reign title was changed to Radiant Harmony (AD 178): 
Certain hens suddenly crowed. At the new moon of the sixth 
month, a long wreath of murky cloud wound its way into 
the Hall of Virtue, while in the following month a rainbow 
was seen in the Dragon Chamber. Away from the capital, a 
part of the Yuan Mountains collapsed, leaving a mighty rift 
in the flank. 

Such were some of various omens. Emperor Ling, 

greatly moved by these signs of the displeasure of Heaven, 
issued an edict asking his ministers for an explanation of 
the calamities and marvels. 

rainbows and changes of fowls’ sexes are brought about by 
the interference of empresses and eunuchs in state affairs.” 

The Emperor read this memorial with deep sighs, and 

Chief Eunuch Cao Jie, from his place behind the throne, 
anxiously noted these signs of grief. An opportunity offering, 
Cao Jie informed his fellows, and a charge was trumped up 
against Cai Yong, who was driven from the court and forced 
to retire to his country house. 

With this victory the eunuchs grew bolder. Ten of them, 

Chapter
8
1
Romance of Three Kingdoms
  9

land, whereupon Zhang Jue distributed charmed remedies 
to the afflicted. The godly medicines brought big successes, 
and soon he gained the tittle of the Wise and Worthy Master. 
He began to have a following of disciples whom he initiated 
into the mysteries and sent abroad throughout all the land. 
They, like their master, could write charms and recite 
formulas, and their fame increased his following. 

Zhang Jue began to organize his disciples. He established 

thirty-six circuits, the larger with ten thousand or more 
members, the smaller with about half that number. Each 
circuit had its chief who took the military title of General. 
They talked wildly of the death of the blue heaven and the 
setting up of the golden one; they said a new cycle was 
beginning and would bring universal good fortune to all 
members; and they persuaded people to chalk the symbols 
for the first year of the new cycle on the main door of their 
dwellings. 

With the growth of the number of his supporters grew also 

the ambition of Zhang Jue. The Wise and Worthy Master 
dreamed of empire. One of his partisans, Ma Yuanyi, was 
sent bearing gifts to gain the support of the eunuchs within 
the Palace. 
Zhang Jue

northeastern region of the empire10. The Imperial Protector11 
of Youzhou was Liu Yan, a scion of the Imperial House. 
Learning of the approach of the rebels, Liu Yan called in 
Commander Zhou Jing to consult over the position. 

Zhou Jing said, “They are many and we few. We must 

enlist more troops to oppose them.” 

Liu Yan agreed, and he put out notices calling for 

volunteers to serve against the rebels. One of these notices 
was posted up in the county of Zhuo, where lived one man 
of high spirit. 

pleasure in study. But he was liberal and amiable, albeit a 
man of few words, hiding all feeling under a calm exterior. 
He had always cherished a yearning for high enterprise 
and had cultivated the friendship of humans of mark. He 
was tall of stature. His ears were long, the lobes touching 
his shoulders, and his hands hung down below his knees. 
His eyes were very big and prominent so that he could see 
backward past his ears. His complexion was as clear as jade, 
and he had rich red lips. 

He was a descendant of Prince Sheng of Zhongshan 

whose father was the Emperor Jing12, the fourth emperor 
of the Han Dynasty. His name was Liu Bei. Many years 
before, one of his forbears had been the governor of that very 
county, but had lost his rank for remissness in ceremonial 
offerings. However, that branch of the family had remained 

10Ancient China was divided into nine administrative regions or zhou’s. 

Each region had a capital city, often of the same name. The nine regions were 
Bingzhou, Jingzhou, Jizhou, Liangzhou, Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yizhou, Youzhou, 
and Yuzhou. Over the time more regions were created. During the Three 
Kingdoms period, there were already more than nine regions. A few of the new 
regions were Xizhou, Yangzhou, and Yongzhou. (see map) 

11Imperial Protector was the highest office in an administrative region.
12Reigned BC 157-141.

always the most difficult part is to gain the popular favor. 
But that is already ours. Such an opportunity must not 
pass.” 

And they began to prepare. Many yellow flags and 

banners were made, and a day was chosen for the uprising. 
Then Zhang Jue wrote letters to Eunuch Feng Xu9 and 
sent them by one of his followers, Tang Zhou, who alas! 
betrayed his trust and reported the plot to the court. The 
Emperor summoned the trusty Regent Marshal He Jin and 
bade him look to the issue. Ma Yuanyi was at once taken and 
beheaded. Feng Xu and many others were cast into prison. 

were forced at once to take the field. They took up grandiose 
titles: Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven, Zhang Ba the Lord of 
Earth, and Zhang Lian the Lord of Human. And in these 
names they put forth this manifesto: 

“The good fortune of the Han is exhausted, and the Wise 

and Worthy Man has appeared. Discern the will of Heaven, 
O ye people, and walk in the way of righteousness, whereby 
alone ye may attain to peace.” 

their heads with yellow scarves and joined the army of the 
rebel Zhang Jue, so that soon his strength was nearly half 
a million strong, and the official troops melted away at a 
whisper of his coming. 

Regent Marshal and Guardian of the Throne, He Jin, 

memorialized for general preparations against the Yellow 
Scarves, and an edict called upon everyone to fight against 
the rebels. In the meantime, three Imperial Commanders-
--Lu Zhi, Huangfu Song, and Zhu Jun---marched against 
them in three directions with veteran soldiers. 

Meanwhile Zhang Jue led his army into Youzhou, the 

9One of the Ten Regular Attendants.

saddened him, and he sighed as he read it. 

Suddenly a rasping voice behind him cried, “Sir, why 

sigh if you do nothing to help your country?” 

own height, with a bullet head like a leopard’s, large eyes, a 
swallow pointed chin, and whiskers like a tiger’s. He spoke 
in a loud bass voice and looked as irresistible as a dashing 
horse. At once Liu Bei saw he was no ordinary man and 
asked who he was. 

“Zhang Fei is my name,” replied the stranger. “I live 

near here where I have a farm; and I am a wine seller and 
a butcher as well; and I like to become acquainted with 
worthy people. Your sighs as you read the notice drew me 
toward you.” 

Liu Bei replied, “I am of the Imperial Family, Liu Bei is 

my name. And I wish I could destroy these Yellow Scarves 
and restore peace to the land, but alas! I am helpless.” 

raised some troops 
and tried what we 
could do.” 

This was happy 

news 
for 
Liu 

Bei, and the two 
betook themselves 
to the village inn 
to talk over the 
project. As they 
were drinking, a 
huge, tall fellow 
appeared pushing a hand-cart along the road. At the 
threshold he halted and entered the inn to rest awhile and he 
called for wine. 

“And be quick!” added he. “For I am in haste to get into 

on in the place, gradually becoming poorer and poorer as the 
years rolled on. His father Liu Hong had been a scholar and 
a virtuous official but died young. The widow and orphan 
were left alone, and Liu Bei as a lad won a reputation for 
filial piety. 

 At this time the 

family 
had 
sunk 

deep 
in 
poverty, 

and Liu Bei gained 
his living by selling 
straw sandals and 
weaving grass mats. 
The family home 
was in a village 
near the chief city 
of Zhuo. Near the 
house stood a huge 
mulberry tree, and 
seen 
from 
afar 

its curved profile 
resembled the canopy of a wagon. Noting the luxuriance of 
its foliage, a soothsayer had predicted that one day a man of 
distinction would come forth from the family. 

As a child, Liu Bei played with the other village children 

beneath this tree, and he would climb up into it, saying, “I 
am the Son of Heaven, and this is my chariot!” His uncle, 
Liu Yuanqi, recognized that Liu Bei was no ordinary boy 
and saw to it that the family did not come to actual want. 

When Liu Bei was fifteen, his mother sent him traveling 

for his education. For a time he served Zheng Xuan and Lu 
Zhi as masters. And he became great friends with Gongsun 
Zan. 

Liu Bei was twenty-eight when the outbreak of the 

swear brotherhood, and promise mutual help to one end. We 
will rescue each other in difficulty; we will aid each other in 
danger. We swear to serve the state and save the people. We 
ask not the same day of birth, but we seek to die together. 
May Heaven, the all-ruling, and Earth, the all-producing, 
read our hearts. If we turn aside from righteousness or forget 
kindliness, may Heaven and Human smite us!” 

They rose from their knees. The two others bowed before 

Liu Bei as their elder brother, and Zhang Fei was to be the 
youngest of the trio. This solemn ceremony performed, they 
slew other oxen and made a feast to which they invited the 
villagers. Three hundred joined them, and all feasted and 
drank deep in the Peach Garden. 

the town and offer myself for the army.” 

Liu Bei looked over the newcomer, item by item, 

and he noted the man had a huge frame, a long beard, a 
vivid face like an apple, and deep red lips. He had eyes 
like a phoenix’s and fine bushy eyebrows like silkworms. 
His whole appearance was dignified and awe-inspiring. 
Presently, Liu Bei crossed over, sat down beside him and 
asked his name. 

“I am Guan Yu,” replied he. “I am a native of the east 

side of the river, but I have been a fugitive on the waters for 
some five years, because I slew a ruffian who, since he was 
wealthy and powerful, was a bully. I have come to join the 
army here.” 

Then Liu Bei told Guan Yu his own intentions, and all 

three went away to Zhang Fei’s farm where they could talk 
over the grand project. 

the house are just in full flower. Tomorrow we will institute 
a sacrifice there and solemnly declare our intention before 
Heaven and Earth, and we three will swear brotherhood and 
unity of aims and sentiments: Thus will we enter upon our 
great task.” 

Both Liu Bei and Guan Yu gladly agreed. 
All three being of one 

mind, next day they prepared 
the sacrifices, a black ox, a 
white horse, and wine for 
libation. Beneath the smoke 
of the incense burning on the 
altar, they bowed their heads 
and recited this oath: 

“We 
three---Liu 
Bei, 

Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei---
though of different families, 

actually broken out, and a Yellow Scarves chieftain, Cheng 
Yuanzhi, had invaded the region with a body of fifty thousand 
rebels. Liu Yan bade Zhou Jing and the three brothers to 
go out to oppose them with the five hundred troops. Liu 
Bei joyfully undertook to lead the van and marched to the 
foot of the Daxing Hills where they saw the rebels. The 
rebels wore their hair flying about their shoulders, and their 
foreheads were bound with yellow scarves. 

When the two armies had been drawn up opposite each 

other, Liu Bei rode to the front, Guan Yu to his left, Zhang 
Fei to his right. 

Flourishing his whip, Liu Bei began to hurl reproaches at 

the rebels, crying, “O malcontents! Why not dismount and 
be bound?” 

Their leader 

Cheng Yuanzhi, 
full of rage, sent 
out one general, 
Deng Mao, to 
begin the battle. 
At once rode 
forward Zhang 
Fei, his serpent 
halberd poised 
to strike. One 
thrust and Deng 

Mao rolled off his horse, pierced through the heart. At this 
Cheng Yuanzhi himself whipped up his steed and rode 
forth with sword raised ready to slay Zhang Fei. But Guan 
Yu swung up his ponderous green-dragon saber and rode 
at Cheng Yuanzhi. At the sight, fear seized upon Cheng 
Yuanzhi, and before he could defend himself, the great 
saber fell, cutting him in halves. 

The next day weapons were mustered. But there were 

no horses to ride. This was a real grief. But soon they were 
cheered by the arrival of two horse dealers with a drove of 
horses. 

“Thus does Heaven help us!” said Liu Bei. 
And the three brothers went forth to welcome the 

merchants. They were Zhang Shiping and Su Shuang from 
Zhongshan. They went northwards every year to buy horses. 
They were now on their way home because of the Yellow 
Scarves. The brothers invited them to the farm, where wine 
was served before them. Then Liu Bei told them of the plan 
to strive for tranquillity. Zhang Shiping and Su Shuang 
were glad and at once gave the brothers fifty good steeds, 
and beside, five hundred ounces of gold and silver and one 
thousand five hundred pounds of steel fit for the forging of 
weapons. 

The brothers expressed their gratitude, and the merchants 

took their leave. Then blacksmiths were summoned to forge 
weapons. For Liu Bei they 
made a pair of ancient swords; 
for Guan Yu they fashioned 
a long-handled, curve blade 
called Green-Dragon Saber, 
which weighed a full one 
hundred twenty pounds; and 
for Zhang Fei they created a 
ten-foot spear called Serpent 
Halberd. Each too had a helmet and full armor. 

When weapons were ready, the troop, now five hundred 

strong, marched to Commander Zhou Jing, who presented 
them to Imperial Protector Liu Yan. When the ceremony of 
introduction was over, Liu Bei declared his ancestry, and 
Liu Yan at once accorded him the esteem due to a relation. 

Before many days it was announced that the rebellion had 

Romance of Three Kingdoms
  19

Two heroes new to war’s alarms,
Ride boldly forth to try their arms.
Their doughty deeds three kingdoms tell,
And poets sing how these befell.

Their leader fallen, the rebels threw away their weapons 

and fled. The official soldiers dashed in among them. Many 
thousands surrendered and the victory was complete. Thus 
this part of the rebellion was broken up. 

On their return, Liu Yan personally met them and 

distributed rewards. But the next day, letters came from 
Imperial Protector Gong Jing of Qingzhou Region saying 
that the rebels were laying siege to the chief city and it was 
near falling. Help was needed quickly. 

“I will go,” said Liu Bei as soon as he heard the news. 
And he set out at once with his own soldiers, reinforced 

by a body of five thousand under Zhou Jing. The rebels, 
seeing help coming, at once attacked most fiercely. The 
relieving force being comparatively small could not prevail 
and retired some ten miles, where they made a camp. 

“They are many and we but few,” said Liu Bei to his 

brothers. “We can only beat them by superior strategy.” 

So they prepared an ambush. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, 

each with a goodly party, went behind the hills, right and 
left, and there hid. When the gongs beat they were to move 
out to support the main army. 

Liu Bei to advance. The rebels also came forward. But Liu 
Bei suddenly retired. Thinking this was their chance, the 
rebels pressed forward and were led over the hills. Then 
suddenly the gongs sounded for the ambush. Guan Yu and 
Zhang Fei poured out from right and left as Liu Bei faced 
around to meet the rebels. Under three-side attack, the 
rebels lost heavily and fled to the walls of Qingzhou City. 
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei

are camping in the field. We can attack them by fire.” 

So the Imperial Commanders bade every man cut a 

bundle of dry grass and laid an ambush. That night the wind 
blew a gale, and at the second watch they started a blaze. At 
the same time Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun’s troops attacked 
the rebels and set their camp on fire. The flames rose to the 
very heaven. The rebels were thrown into great confusion. 
There was no time to saddle horses or don armor: They fled 
in all directions. 

Ba, with a group of flying rebels, found a way of escape. But 
suddenly a troop of soldiers with crimson banners appeared 
to oppose them. Their leader was a man of medium stature 
with small eyes and a long beard. He was Cao Cao, a Beijuo 
man, holding the rank of Cavalry Commander. His father 
was Cao Song, but he was not really a Cao. Cao Song had 
been born to the Xiahou family, but he had been brought up 

But Imperial Protector Gong Jing led out an armed body to 
attack them, and the rebels were entirely defeated and many 
slain. Qingzhou was no longer in danger. 

Though fierce as tigers soldiers be,
Battle are won by strategy.
A hero comes; he gains renown,
Already destined for a crown.

Commander Zhou Jing proposed to return to Youzhou. 

But Liu Bei said, “We are informed that Imperial 

Commander Lu Zhi has been struggling with a horde of 
rebels led by Zhang Jue at Guangzong. Lu Zhi was once my 
teacher, and I want to go help him.” 

So Liu Bei and Zhou Jing separated, and the three 

brothers with their troops made their way to Guangzong. 
They found Lu Zhi’s camp, were admitted to his presence, 
and declared the reason of their coming. The Commander 
received them with great joy, and they remained with him 
while he made his plans. 

troops and Lu Zhi’s fifty thousand troops were facing each 
other. Neither had had any success. 

Lu Zhi said to Liu Bei, “I am able to surround these rebels 

here. But the other two brothers, Zhang Ba and Zhang Lian, 
are strongly entrenched opposite Huangfu Song and Zhu 
Jun at Yingchuan. I will give you a thousand more troops, 
and with these you can go to find out what is happening, 
and we can then settle the moment for concerted attack.” 

So Liu Bei set off and marched as quickly as possible to 

Yingchuan. At that time the imperial troops were attacking 
with success, and the rebels had retired upon Changshe. 
They had encamped among the thick grass. 

by Eunuch Cao Teng and had taken this family name. 

delighted in songs and dancing. He was resourceful and full 
of guile. An uncle, seeing the young fellow so unsteady, used 
to get angry with him and told his father of his misdeeds. 
His father remonstrated with him. 

But Cao Cao made equal to the occasion. One day, 

seeing his uncle coming, he fell to the ground in a pretended 
fit. The uncle alarmed ran to tell his father, who came, and 
there was the youth in most perfect health. 

said his father. 

“I have never suffered from fits or any such illness,” said 

Cao Cao. “But I have lost my uncle’s affection, and he has 
deceived you.” 

Thereafter, whatever the uncle might say of his faults, his 

father paid no heed. So the young man grew up licentious 
and uncontrolled. 

A man of the time named Qiao Xuan said to Cao Cao, 

“Rebellion is at hand, and only a man of the greatest 
ability can succeed in restoring tranquillity. That man is 
yourself.” 

And He Yong of Nanyang said of him, “The dynasty of 

Han is about to fall. He who can restore peace is this man 
and only he.” 

Cao Cao went to inquire his future of a wise man of 

Runan named Xu Shao. 

“What manner of man am I?” asked Cao Cao. 
The seer made no reply, and again and again Cao Cao 

pressed the question. 

Then Xu Shao replied, “In peace you are an able subject; 

in chaos you are a crafty hero!” 

Cao Cao greatly rejoiced to hear this. 
Cao Cao graduated at twenty and earned a reputation of 
Cao Cao

Lu Zhi explained, “I had 

surrounded the rebels and was 
on the point of smashing them, 
when Zhang Jue employed 
some of his supernatural 
powers and prevented my 
victory. The court sent down 
Eunuch Zhuo Feng to inquire 

into my failure, and that official demanded a bribe. I told 
him how hard pressed we were and asked him where, in the 
circumstances, I could find a gift for him. He went away in 
wrath and reported that I was hiding behind my ramparts 
and would not give battle and that I disheartened my army. 
So I was superseded by Dong Zhuo, and I have to go to the 
capital to answer the charge.” 

This story put Zhang Fei into a rage. He was for slaying 

the escort and setting free Lu Zhi. But Liu Bei checked 
him. 

“The government will take the due course,” said Liu Bei. 

“You must not act hastily!” 

And the escort and the three brothers went two ways. 
It was useless to continue on that road to Guangzong, so 

Guan Yu proposed to go back to Zhuo, and they retook the 
road. Two days later they heard the thunder of battle behind 
some hills. Hastening to the top, they beheld the government 
soldiers suffering great loss, and they saw the countryside 
was full of Yellow Scarves. On the rebels’ banners were the 
words Zhang Jue the Lord of Heaven written large. 

“We will attack this Zhang Jue!” said Liu Bei to his 

brothers, and they galloped out to join in the battle. 

Zhang Jue had worsted Dong Zhuo and was following up 

his advantage. He was in hot pursuit when the three brothers 
dashed into his army, threw his ranks into confusion, and 
drove him back fifteen miles. Then the brothers returned 

piety and integrity. He began his career as Commanding 
Officer in a county within the Capital District. In the four 
gates of the city he guarded, he hung up clubs of various 
sorts, and he would punish any breach of the law whatever 
the rank of the offender. Now an uncle of Eunuch Jian 
Shuo13 was found one night in the streets with a sword and 
was arrested. In due course he was beaten. Thereafter no 
one dared to offend again, and Cao Cao’s name became 
heard. Soon he became a magistrate of Dunqiu. 

rank of General and was given command of five thousand 
horse and foot to help fight at Yingchuan. He just happened 
to fall in with the newly defeated rebels whom he cut to 
pieces. Thousands were slain and endless banners and 
drums and horses were captured, together with huge sums 
of money. However, Zhang Ba and Zhang Lian got away; 
and after an interview with Huangfu Song, Cao Cao went 
in pursuit of them. 

Meanwhile Liu Bei and his brothers were hastening 

toward Yingchuan, when they heard the din of battle and 
saw flames rising high toward the sky. But they arrived too 
late for the fighting. They saw Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun 
to whom they told the intentions of Lu Zhi. 

“The rebel power is quite broken here,” said the 

commanders, “but they will surely make for Guangzong 
to join Zhang Jue. You can do nothing better than hasten 
back.” 

along the road they met a party of soldiers escorting a 
prisoner in a cage-cart. When they drew near, they saw 
the prisoner was no other than Lu Zhi, the man they were 
going to help. Hastily dismounting, Liu Bei asked what had 
happened. 

13One of the Ten Regular Attendants

Chapter
26
1

Chapter 2 
Zhang Fei Whips The Government Officer;
He Jin Plots To Kill The Eunuchs.
 
Dong Zhuo was born in the far northwest at Lintao in 

the West Valley Land. As the governor of Hedong, Dong 
Zhuo himself was arrogant and overbearing. But the day he 
had treated Liu Bei with contumely had been his last, had 
not Liu Bei and Guan Yu restrained their wrathful brother 
Zhang Fei. 

“Remember 
he 
has 
the 

government commission,” said 
Liu Bei. “Who are we to judge 
and slay?” 

“It is bitter to take orders from 

such a wretch. I would rather 
slay him! You may stay here if 
you wish to, but I will seek some other place,” said Zhang 
Fei. 

“We three are one in life and in death; there is no parting 

for us. We will all go hence.” 

So spoke Liu Bei, and his brother was satisfied. Wherefore 

all three set out and lost no time in traveling until they came 
to Zhu Jun, who received them well and accepted their aid 
in attacking Zhang Ba. At this time Cao Cao had joined 
himself to Huangfu Song, and they were trying to destroy 
Zhang Lian, and there was a great battle at Quyang. 

Zhang Ba was commanding some eighty thousand 

troops. The rebel had led his army to a strong position in 
the rear of the hills. An attack being decided upon, Liu Bei 
was the van leader. On the rebel side a general of Zhang Ba, 
Gao Sheng, came out to offer battle. Liu Bei sent Zhang 
Fei to smite Gao Sheng. Out rode Zhang Fei at full speed, 
his spear ready set. After a few bouts Zhang Fei wounded 

with the rescued general to his 
camp. 

“What offices have you?” 

asked Dong Zhuo, when he had 
leisure to speak to the brothers. 

“None,” replied they. 
And Dong Zhuo treated them 

with disrespect. Liu Bei retired 
calmly, but Zhang Fei was 
furious. 

“We have just rescued this 

menial in a bloody fight,” cried 
Zhang Fei, “and now he is rude 
to us! Nothing but his death can 
slake my anger.” 

Zhang Fei stamped toward 

Dong Zhuo’s tent, holding 
firmly a sharp sword. 

As it was in olden time so it is today,
The simple wight may merit well,
Officialdom holds sway;
Zhang Fei, the blunt and hasty,
Where can you find his peer?
But slaying the ungrateful would
Mean many deaths a year.

Dong Zhuo’s fate will be unrolled in later chapters.

Dong Zhuo

Gao Sheng, who was unhorsed. At this Liu Bei signaled the 
main army to advance. 

Then Zhang Ba, while still mounted, loosened his hair, 

grasped his sword, and uttered his incantations. Thereupon 
began the wind to howl and the thunder to roll, while a dense 
black cloud from the heavens settled upon the field. And 
therein seemed to be horsemen and footmen innumerable, 
who swept to attack the imperial troops. Fear came upon 
them, and Liu Bei led off his troops, but they were in 
disorder and returned defeated. 

Zhu Jun and Liu Bei considered the matter. 
“Zhang Ba uses magic,” said Zhu Jun. “Tomorrow, then, 

will I prepare counter magic in the shape of the blood of 
slaughtered swine and goats. This blood shall be sprinkled 
upon their hosts from the precipices above by soldiers in 
ambush. Thus shall we be able to break the power of their 
shamanic art.” 

So it was done. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei took each a 

thousand troops and hid them on the high cliffs behind the 
hills, and they had a plentiful supply of the blood of swine 
and goats and all manners of filthy things. And so next day, 
when the rebels with fluttering banners and rolling drums 
came out to challenge, Liu Bei rode forth to meet them. 
At the same moment that the armies met, again Zhang Ba 
began his magic and again the elements began to struggle 
together. Sand flew in clouds, pebbles were swept along the 
ground, black masses of vapor filled the sky, and rolling 
masses of foot and horse descended from on high. Liu Bei 
turned, as before, to flee and the rebels rushed on. But as 
they pressed through the hills, the trumpets blared, and 
the hidden soldiers exploded bombs, threw down filth and 
spattered blood. The masses of soldiers and horses in the air 
fluttered to the earth as fragments of torn paper, the wind 
ceased to blow, the thunder subsided, the sand sank, and the 

Huangfu Song 

pebbles lay still upon the ground. 

Zhang Ba quickly saw his magic had been countered 

and turned to retire. Then he was attacked on the flanks by 
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, and in rear by Liu Bei and Zhu 
Jun. The rebels were routed. Liu Bei, seeing from afar the 
banner of Zhang Ba The Lord of Earth, galloped toward it 
but only succeeded in wounding Zhang Ba with an arrow in 
the left arm. Wounded though he was, Zhang Ba got away 
into the city of Yangcheng, where he fortified himself and 
was besieged by Zhu Jun. 

“Commander Huangfu Song had been very successful, 
and Dong Zhuo had suffered many reverses. Therefore the 
court put Huangfu Song in the latter’s place. Zhang Jue 
had died before Huangfu Song’s arrival. Zhang Lian had 
added his brother’s army to his own, but no headway could 
be made against Huangfu Song, whose army gained seven 
successive victories. And Zhang Lian was slain at Quyang. 
Beside this, Zhang Jue’s coffin was exhumed, the corpse 
beheaded, and the head, after exposure, was sent to Capital 
Luoyang. The common crowd had surrendered. For these 
services Huangfu Song was promoted to General of the 
Flying Chariots1 and the Imperial Protector of Jizhou2. 

“Huangfu Song did not forget his friends. His first act 

after he had attained to power was to memorialize the Throne 

1General of the Flying Chariots was the second highest military office, just 

below Regent Marshal. 

2Imperial Protector was the highest office in an administrative region or 

zhou. Ancient China was divided into nine regions. Each region had a capital 
city, often of the same name. The nine regions were Bingzhou, Jingzhou, 
Jizhou, Liangzhou, Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yizhou, Youzhou, and Yuzhou. Over 
the time more regions were created. During the Three Kingdoms period, there 
were already more than nine regions. A few of the new regions were Xizhou, 
Yangzhou, and Yongzhou. (see map)

was then invested. When famine pressed upon the besieged, 
they sent a messenger to offer to surrender, but Zhu Jun 
refused the offer. 

Said Liu Bei to Zhu Jun, “Seeing that the founder of 

the Han Dynasty, Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor, could 
welcome the submissive and receive the favorable, why 
reject these?” 

“The conditions are different,” replied Zhu Jun. “In 

those old days disorder was universal and the people had 
no fixed lord3. Wherefore submission was welcomed and 
support rewarded to encourage people to come over. Now 
the empire is united, and the Yellow Scarves are the only 
malcontents. To receive their surrender is not to encourage 
the good. To allow brigands, when successful, is to give way 
to every license, and to let them surrender when they fail is 
to encourage brigandage. Your plan is not a good one.” 

Liu Bei replied, “Not to let brigands surrender is well. 

But the city is surrounded as by an iron barrel. If the rebels’ 
request be refused, they will be desperate and fight to the 
death, and we can hardly withstood a myriad of such men. 
Moreover, in the city there are many times that number, all 
doomed to death. Let us withdraw from one corner and only 
attack the opposite. They will all assuredly flee and have no 
desire to fight. We shall take them.” 

Zhu Jun saw that the advice was good and followed it. 

As predicted the rebels ran out, led by Han Zhong. The 
besiegers fell upon them as they fled, and Han Zhong was 
slain. The rebels scattered in all directions. But the other 
two rebel chieftains, Zhao Hong and Sun Zhong, came with 
large reinforcements, and as they appeared very strong, 
the imperial soldiers retired, and the new body of rebels 
reentered Wancheng. 

3At the end of Qin Dynasty, anarchy ruled the empire. Uprisings were 

everywhere, and Liu Bang was one of the rebel leaders.

concerning the case of Lu Zhi, who was then restored to 
his former rank for his meritorious conducts. Cao Cao also 
received advancement for his services and is preparing to 
go to Jinan to his new post.” 

Yangcheng, and the approaching break-up of the rebellion 
became evident. Then one of Zhang Ba’s officers, Yan 
Zheng, killed his leader and brought the head in token 
of submission. Thus rebellion in that part of the country 
was stamped out, and Zhu Jun made his report to the 
government. 

However, 
the 
embers 

of the Yellow Scarves still 
smoldered. Three other rebels, 
Zhao Hong, Han Zhong, and 
Sun Zhong, gathered some 
thirty thousand rebels and 
began to murder and rob and 
burn, calling themselves the 
avengers of Master Zhang 
Jue. 

The court commanded the successful Zhu Jun to lead his 

veteran and successful troops to destroy the rebels. He at 
once marched toward the city of Wancheng which the rebels 
were holding. When Zhu Jun arrived, Han Zhong went to 
oppose him. Zhu Jun sent Liu Bei and his brothers to attack 
the southwest corner of the city. Han Zhong at once led the 
best of his troops to defend the city. Meanwhile Zhu Jun 
himself led two thousand of armored horsemen to attack 
the opposite corner. The rebels, thinking the city being lost, 
abandoned the southwest and turned back into the city to 
help the defenders. Liu Bei pressed hotly in their rear, and 
they were utterly routed. They took refuge in the city which 

to attack. Just then there arrived a body of horse and foot 
from the east. At the lead was one general with a broad 
open face, a body as an alert tiger’s, and a torso as a lofty 
bear’s. His name was Sun Jian. He was a native of Fuchun 
in the old state of Wu, a descendant of the famous Sun Zi 
the Strategist4. 

on the River Qiantang and saw a party of pirates, who had 
been plundering a merchant, dividing their booty on the 
river bank. 

“We can capture these!” said he to his father. 
So, gripping his sword, he ran boldly up the bank and 

cried out to this side and that as if he was calling his men 
to come on. This made the pirates believe the soldiers were 
on them and they fled, leaving their booty behind them. He 
actually killed one of the pirates. In this way be became 
known and was recommended for office. 

Then, in collaboration with the local officials, he raised 

a band of one thousand and helped to quell the rebellion of 
one Xu Chang, who called himself the Sun Emperor and had 
ten thousand supporters. The rebel’s son Xu Hao was also 
slain with his father. For this Sun Jian was commended by 
Imperial Protector Zang Min in a memorial to the Throne, 
and he received further promotion to the post of magistrate 
of Yandu, then of Xuyi, and then of Xiapi. 

When the Yellow Scarves rebellion began, Sun Jian 

gathered together the youths of his village, some of the 
merchant class, got a troop of one thousand five hundred of 
veteran soldiers and took the field. Now he had reached the 

4Sun Zi (aka Sun Wu, Suntzu, Sun-tzu, Sun tzu) the author of the famed 
treatise The Art of War. A general of Wu in the Spring and Autumn period, 
Sun Zi made her the mightiest state during his lifetime by defeating Chu and 
conquering Yue. His treatise the Art of War is still avidly read today by many. 
Sun Jian

Sun Jian, having influential 

friends and connections to support 
him, quickly got an appointment 
to a post of Commander of 
Changsha and went to assume the 
new office. But Liu Bei, in spite 
of Zhu Jun’s memorial, waited in 
vain for preferment, and the three 
brothers became very sad. 

Walking along one day in 

the capital, Liu Bei met a court 
official, Zhang Jun, to whom he 
related his services and told his sorrows. Zhang Jun was 
much surprised at this neglect and one day at court spoke to 
the Emperor about it. 

Said he, “The Yellow Scarves rebelled because the 

eunuchs sold offices and bartered ranks. There was 
employment only for their friends, punishment only for 
their enemies. This led to rebellion. Wherefore it would be 
well to slay the Ten Eunuchs and expose their heads and 
proclaim what had been done throughout the whole empire. 
Then reward the worthy. Thereby the land would be wholly 
tranquil.” 

Jun was insulting the Emperor, and the Emperor bade the 
guards thrust Zhang Jun out. 

However, the eunuchs took counsel together and one 

said, “Surely someone who rendered some service against 
rebels resents being passed over.” 

So they caused a list of unimportant people to be prepared 

for preferment by and by. Among them was Liu Bei, who 
received the post of magistrate of the county of Anxi, to 
which he proceeded without delay after disbanding his 
army and sending them home to their villages. He retained 

Sun Jian

fighting area. 

attack the south gate of Wancheng. The north and the west 
gates were simultaneously attacked by Liu Bei and Zhu Jun, 
but the east gate was left free to give the rebels a chance of 
exit. Sun Jian was the first to mount the wall and cut down 
more than twenty 
rebels 
with 
his 

own sword. The 
rebels ran, but the 
leader Zhao Hong 
rode directly at 
Sun Jian with his 
spear 
ready 
to 

thrust. Sun Jian 
leaped down from 
the wall, snatched 
away the spear and with it knocked Zhao Hong from the 
horse. Then Sun Jian, mounting Zhao Hong’s horse, rode 
hither and thither, slaying as he went. 

The rebels fled north. Meeting Liu Bei, they declined to 

fight and scattered. But Liu Bei drew his bow, fitted an arrow, 
and shot their leader Sun Zhong, who fell to the ground. 
The main army of Zhu Jun came up, and after tremendous 
slaughter, the rebels surrendered. Thus was peace brought 
to the ten counties about the Nanyang area. 

Zhu Jun returned to Capital Luoyang, was promoted 

to the General of the Flying Cavalry5, and received the 
governorship of Henan. He did not forget those who had 
helped him to win victory. Thus he reported the merits of 
Liu Bei and Sun Jian to the Throne. 

5General of the Flying Cavalry was the second highest military office, 

just below Regent Marshal, and of the same rank as General of the Flying 
Chariots. 

“I have never wronged the people to the value of a single 

coin: Then where is a bribe to come from?” 

Next day the inspector had the minor officials before 

him and forced them to bear witness that their master had 
oppressed the people. Liu Bei time after time went to rebut 
this charge, but the doorkeepers drove him away and he 
could not enter. 

Now Zhang Fei had been all day drowning his sorrow in 

wine and had drunk far too much. Calling for his horse he 
rode out past the lodging of the inspector, and at the gate 
saw a small crowd of white-haired people weeping bitterly. 
He asked why. 

to bear false witness against our magistrate, with the desire 
to injure the virtuous Liu Bei. We came to beg mercy for 
him but are not permitted to enter. Moreover, we have been 
beaten by the doorkeepers.” 

Fei to fury. His eyes opened wide until they became 
circles; he ground his teeth; in a moment he was off his 
steed, had forced his way past the scared doorkeepers into 
the building, and was in the rear apartments. There he saw 
Imperial Inspector Du Biao sitting on high with the official 
underlings in bonds at his feet. 

“Oppressor of the people, robber!” cried Zhang Fei. “Do 

you know me?” 

But before the inspector 

could reply, Zhang Fei had 
had him by the hair and had 
dragged him down. Another 
moment he was outside and 
firmly lashed to the hitching 
post in front of the building. 
Then breaking off a switch 

two dozens or so as escort. 

The three brothers reached Anxi, and soon the 

administration of the county was so reformed and the rule 
so wise that in a month there was no law-breaking. The 
three brothers lived in harmony, eating at the same table and 
sleeping on the same couch. But when Liu Bei was in public 
sessions or in company of others, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei 
would stand in attendance, were it even a whole day. 

Four months after their arrival, there came out a general 

order for the reduction of the number of military officers 
holding civil posts, and Liu Bei began to fear that he would 
be among those thrown out. In due course the inspecting 
official, Du Biao by name, arrived and was met at the 
boundary. But to the polite obeisance of Liu Bei, he made 
no return, save a wave of his whip as he sat on his horse. 
This made Guan Yu and Zhang Fei furious. But worse was 
to follow. 

his seat on the dais, leaving Liu Bei standing below. After a 
long time he addressed Liu Bei. 

“Magistrate, what was your origin?” 
Liu Bei replied, “I am descended from Prince Sheng of 

Zhongshan. Since my first fight with the Yellow Scarves 
rebels at Zhuo County, I have been in some thirty battles, 
wherein I gained some trifling merit. My reward was this 
office.” 

“You lie about your descent, and your statement of 

services is false!” roared the inspector. “Now the court has 
ordered the reduction of your sort of low class and corrupt 
officials.” 

Liu Bei muttered to himself and withdrew. On his return 

to the magistracy, he took council with his secretaries. 

“This pompous attitude only means the inspector wants 

a bribe,” said they. 

complained, and orders were issued for the arrest of the 
brothers, but they got away to Daizhou and sought refuge 
with Liu Hu, who sheltered them because of Liu Bei’s noble 
birth. 

in their hands, and they put to death all who did not stand 
in with them. From every officer who had helped to put 
down the rebels they demanded presents; and if these were 
not forthcoming, he was removed from office. Imperial 
Commanders Huangfu Song and Zhu Jun both fell victims 
to these intrigues and were deprived from offices, while on 
the other hand the eunuchs received the highest honors and 
rewards. Thirteen eunuchs were ennobled, including Zhao 
Zhong6 who was added to the rank of General of the Flying 
Cavalry; Zhang Rang6 possessed most of the prize farms 
around the capital. The government grew worse and worse, 
and everyone was irritated. 

in Yuyang led by Zhang Ju and Zhang Chun. Memorials 
were sent up in number as snow flakes in winter, but the Ten 
suppressed them all. One day the Emperor was at a feast in 
one of the gardens with the Ten, when Court Counselor Liu 
Tao suddenly appeared showing very great distress. The 
Emperor asked what the matter was. 

“Sire, how can you be feasting with these when the 

empire is at the last gasp?” said Liu Tao. 

wrong?” 

the cities. And all is the fault of the Ten Eunuchs who sell 
offices and injure the people, oppress loyal officials and 
deceive their superiors. All virtuous ones have left the 
services and returned to their places, and are building and 

6Two of the Ten Regular Attendants 

from a willow tree, Zhang Fei gave his victim a severe 
thrashing, only staying his hand when the tenth switch was 
too short to strike with. 

when he heard a shouting before his door. He asked what 
the matter was. 

They told him, “General Zhang Fei had bound somebody 

to a post and was thrashing him!” 

Hastily going outside, Liu Bei saw who the unhappy 

victim was and asked Zhang Fei the reason. 

“If we do not beat this sort of wretch to death, what may 

we expect?” said Zhang Fei. 

“Noble Sir, save me!” cried the inspector. 
Now Liu Bei had always been kindly and gracious, 

wherefore he bade his brother release the officer and go his 
way. 

Then Guan Yu came up, saying, “Brother, after your 

magnificent services you only got this petty post, and even 

here 
you 
have 

been insulted by 
this fellow. A thorn 
bush is no place 
for a phoenix. Let 
us slay this fellow, 
leave here, and go 
home till we can 
evolve a bigger 
scheme.” 

Liu 
Bei 

contented himself with hanging the official seal about 
the inspector’s neck, saying, “If I hear that you injure the 
people, I will assuredly kill you. I now spare your life, and 
I return to you the seal. We are going.” 

The inspector went to the governor of Dingzhou and 

among them?” 

Chen Dan beat his forehead on the steps of the throne and 

did not desist from remonstrance. Then the Emperor grew 
angry and commanded his removal and imprisonment with 
Liu Tao. That night Liu Tao and Chen Dan were murdered. 

him Governor of Changsha, with orders to suppress the 
rebellion of Ou Xing. In less than two months Sun Jian 
reported the county all tranquil. For this he was created 
Lord of Wucheng. 

to move against Yuyang and suppress Zhang Ju and Zhang 
Chun. Liu Hu of Daizhou recommended Liu Bei to Liu Yu. 
Liu Yu welcomed Liu Bei and gave him rank of commander 
and sent him against the rebels. He fought with and worsted 
them and entirely broke their spirit. Zhang Chun was cruel, 
and his leaders turned against him. One of his officers then 
slew him and brought in his head, after which the others 
submitted. The other leader Zhang Ju saw that all was lost 
and killed himself. 

Yuyang being now tranquil, Liu Bei’s services were 

reported to the Throne, and he received full pardon for 
the insult to the imperial inspector. He was made Deputy 

guarding their positions. More regional offices have been 
sought than imperial appointments. Central authority is 
being undermined by local interests. Misfortune is before 
our very eyes!” 

At this the eunuchs pulled off their hats and threw 

themselves at their master’s feet. 

“If Minister Liu Tao disapproves of us,” they said, “we 

are in danger. We pray that our lives be spared and we 
may go to our farms. We yield our property to help defray 
military expenses.” 

And they wept bitterly. 
The Emperor turned angrily to Liu Tao, saying, “You 

also have servants: Why can’t you bear with mine?” 

And thereupon the Emperor called to the guards to eject 

Liu Tao and put him to death. 

Liu Tao cried aloud, “My death matters nothing. The 

pity is that Han Dynasty, after four centuries of reign, is 
falling fast!” 

carry out the Emperor’s order when a minister stopped 
them, shouting, “Strike not! Wait till I have spoken with 
His Majesty.” 

in to the Emperor, to whom he said, “For what fault is 
Counselor Liu Tao to be put to death?” 

the Emperor. 

“All the empire would eat the flesh of the eunuchs if they 

could, and yet, Sire, you respect them as if they were your 
parents. They have no merit, but they are created nobles. 
Moreover, Feng Xu was in league with the Yellow Scarves. 
Unless Your Majesty looks to it, the state will crumble!” 

“There was no proof against Feng Xu,” replied the 

Magistrate of Xiami, then Commanding Officer of Gaotang. 
Then Gongsun Zan praised Liu Bei’s former services, and 
he was promoted to Magistrate of Pingyuan. This place was 
very prosperous, and Liu Bei recovered something of his old 
manner before the days of adversity. Liu Yu also received 
preferment and was promoted to Grand Commander. 

189), Emperor Ling became seriously ill and summoned 
He Jin into the Palace to arrange for the future. He Jin had 
sprung from a humble family of butchers, but his sister had 
become a concubine of rank and borne a son to the Emperor, 
named Liu Bian. After this she became Empress He, and He 
Jin became the powerful Regent Marshal7. 

The Emperor had also greatly loved a beautiful girl, 

Lady Wang, who had borne him a son named Liu Xian. 
Empress He had poisoned Lady Wang from jealousy, and 
the baby had been given into the care of Empress Dong, 
who was the mother of Emperor Ling. Lady Dong was the 
wife of Liu Chang, Lord of Jiedu. As time went on and the 
Emperor Huan had no son of his own, he adopted the son 
of Liu Chang, who succeeded as the Emperor Ling. After 
his accession, Emperor Ling had taken his own mother into 
the Palace to live and had conferred upon her the title of 
Empress Dowager. 

Empress Dong had always tried to persuade her son to 

name Liu Xian as the Heir Apparent, and in fact the Emperor 
greatly loved the boy and was disposed to do as his mother 
desired. When his end was near, one of the eunuchs, Jian 
Shuo, said, “If Liu Xian is to succeed, He Jin must be killed 
to prevent countermoves.” 

The Emperor saw this too. He placed Jian Shuo in 

command of the eight armies of the West Garden in order to 

7Regent Marshal was the highest military office, while Imperial Guardian 

highest civilian office. 

“The matter for the moment is to set up the rightful heir,” 

said Cao Cao. “We can deal with the traitors later.” 

“Who dare to join me in supporting the rightful heir---

Prince Bian?” asked He Jin, the Regent Marshal. 

At once one stood forward, crying, “Give me five 

thousand veterans, and we will break into the Palace, set 
up the true heir, slay the eunuchs, and sweep clean the 
government! Then peace will come to the empire.” 

Minister of the Interior Yuan Feng and nephew of Imperial 
Guardian Yuan Wei. Yuan Shao then held the rank of 
Imperial Commander. 

He Jin mustered five thousand royal guards. Yuan 

Shao put on complete armor and took command. He Jin, 
supported by He Yong, Xun You, Zheng Tai, and more than 
thirty other ministers and high-rank officials, went into the 
Palace. In the hall where lay the coffin of the late Emperor, 
they placed Liu Bian on the throne. After the ceremony was 
over and all had bowed before the new Emperor, Yuan Shao 
went in to arrest Eunuch Jian Shuo. Jian Shuo in terror fled 
into the Palace garden and hid among the shrubs, where he 
was discovered and murdered by Guo Sheng, one of the 
Ten Eunuchs. The guards under Jian Shuo’s command all 
surrendered. 

Yuan Shao said, “Their gangs have broken. The most 

opportune moment is now to slay all the eunuchs!” 

danger and rushed to see Empress He. 

brother was Jian Shuo: Only he was concerned and no 
other. Now the Regent Marshal, on Yuan Shao’s advice, 
wishes to slay everyone of us. We implore your pity, O Your 
Majesty!” 

check Liu Bian’s 
supporters. And 
he summoned He 
Jin to come to 
him. 

But 
at 
the 

very gate of the 
Forbidden 
City, 

He Jin was warned 
of his danger by 
Commander Pan 
Yin who said, “This must be a trap of Jian Shuo to destroy 
you!” 

He Jin rushed back to his quarters and called many of the 

ministers to his side, and they met to consider how to put 
the eunuchs to death. 

At this assembly a man spoke against the plot, “The 

influence of the eunuchs dates back a century and a half, 
during the reigns of Emperors Chong and Zhi. It has spread 
like a noxious weed in all directions. How can we hope 
to destroy it? Above all keep this plot secret, or our whole 
clans will be exterminated.” 

Cao Cao. 

He Jin was very angry at this speech and cried, “What do 

inferiors like you know of the ways of government?” 

“The Emperor is no more. The eunuchs have decided to 
keep the death a secret and forge a command to the Regent 
Marshal to come into the Palace to settle the succession. 
Meanwhile to prevent trouble they have inscribed the name 
of Prince Xian on the roll.” 

summoning He Jin. 

which she invited her 
rival Empress Dong. 

In the middle of the 

feast, when all were 
well 
warmed 
with 

wine, Empress He rose 
and offered a cup to 
her guest, saying, “It 
is not fitting that we 
two should meddle 
in state affairs. In 
the beginning of the 
Han Dynasty, when 
Empress Lu laid hands 
upon the government, 
all her clans were put to 
death9. We ought to remain content, immured in our palaces, 
and leave state affairs to the state officials. That would be 
well for the country, and I trust you will act thus.” 

But Empress Dong only got angry, saying, “You 

poisoned Lady Wang out of jealousy. Now, relying upon the 
fact that your son sits on the throne and that your brother is 
powerful, you speak these wild words. I will command that 
your brother be beheaded, and that can be done as easily as 
I turn my hand!” 

Empress He in her turn became wroth and said, “I tried 

to persuade you with fair words. Why get so angry?” 

of offices?” cried Empress Dong. 

9Empress Lu was wife of Liu Bang, the Han Founder. After Liu Bang’s 

death, she held imperial authority. She appointed members of her own family 
to highly important positions of state and clearly hoped to substitute her own 
family for the reigning Liu family. But these plans were frustrated on her death 
(BC 180).

Yuan Shao

Emperor, “I will protect you.” 

lowly origin, and we owe our good fortune to the eunuchs. 
The misguided Jian Shuo is now dead, and need you really 
put all the others to death as Yuan Shao advises?” 

And He Jin obeyed her wish. He explained to his party, 

saying, “The real offender, Jian Shuo, has met his fate, and 
his clan will be punished. But we need not exterminate the 
whole party nor injure his colleagues.” 

will ruin you!” 

“I have decided,” said He Jin, coldly. “Say no more.” 
Within a few days He Jin became Chair of the Secretariat, 

and his associates received high offices. 

Now Empress Dong summoned the eunuch Zhang Rang 

and his party to a council. 

Said she, “It was I who first brought forward the sister of 

He Jin. Today her son is on the throne, and all the officials 
are her friends, and her influence is enormous. What can 
we do?” 

Zhang Rang replied, “Your Highness should administer 

the state from ‘behind the veil’; create the late Emperor’s 
son Liu Xian a prince; give your brother, the Imperial Uncle 
Dong Chong, a high rank, and place him over the army; and 
use us. That will do it.”  

Empress Dong approved. Next day she held a court and 

issued an edict in the sense proposed. She made Liu Xian 
Prince of Chenliu and Dong Chong General of the Flying 
Cavalry8, and she allowed the eunuchs again to participate 
state affairs. 

When Empress He saw this, she prepared a banquet to 

8General of the Flying Cavalry was the second highest military office, 

just below Regent Marshal, and of the same rank as General of the Flying 
Chariots. 

the previous reign missed their chance because the secret 
had not been kept, and they paid by their own deaths. Now 
you and your brother have many commanders and officers 
behind, so that the destruction of the eunuchs can be but an 
ease. It is a heaven-sent opportunity. Delay no further!” 

But He Jin replied, “Let me think it over.” 
He Jin’s servants overheard the discussion and secretly 

informed the intended victims, who sent further gifts to the 
younger brother He Miao. 

Corrupted by these, He Miao went in to speak with his 

sister Empress He and said, “The General is the chief support 
of the new Emperor, yet he is not gracious and merciful but 
thinks wholly of slaughter. If he slays the eunuchs without 
cause, it may bring about revolution.” 

Soon after He Jin entered and told her of his design to 

put the eunuchs to death. 

affairs and are old servants. To kill the old servants just after 
the death of their master would appear disrespectful to the 
dynasty’s ancestral temple.” 

And as He Jin was of a vacillating mind, he murmured 

assent and left her. 

“What about it?” said Yuan Shao on meeting him. 
“She will not consent. What can be done?” 
“Call up an army and slay them. It is imperative. Never 

mind her consent!” 

orders all round to march soldiers to the capital. 

But Secretary Chen Lin objected, “Nay! Do not act 

without due consideration. The proverb says ‘To cover the 
eyes and snatch at swallows is to fool oneself.’ If in so small 
a matter you cannot attain your wish, what of great affairs? 
Now by virtue of the emperor and with the army under your 
hand, you are like prancing tiger and soaring dragon: You 

And the quarrel waxed hot. 
The eunuchs persuaded the ladies to retire. But in the 

night Empress He summoned her brother into the Palace 
and told him what had occurred. He went out and took 
counsel with the principal officers of state. Next morning a 
court was held and a memorial was presented, saying: 

Prince of Chenliu, a regional prince---only a collateral---
cannot properly occupy any part of the Palace. She is to 
be removed into her original fief of Hejian and is to depart 
immediately.” 

a strong guard was placed about the Imperial Uncle Dong 
Chong’s dwelling. They took away his seal of office and 
he, knowing this was the end, killed himself in his private 
apartments. His dependents, who wailed his death, were 
driven off by the guards. 

The eunuchs Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, having lost 

their patroness, sent large gifts to He Jin’s younger brother, 
He Miao, and his mother, Lady Wuyang, and thus got them 
to put in a good word to Empress He so as to gain her 
protection. And so they gained favor once more at court. 

of He Jin poisoned Empress Dong in her residence in the 
country. Her remains were brought to the capital and buried 
in Wen Tombs10. He Jin feigned illness and did not attend 
the funeral. 

Commander Yuan Shao went one day to see He Jin, 

saying, “The two eunuchs, Zhang Rang and Duan Gui, are 
spreading the report outside that you has caused the death 
of the late empress and is aiming at the throne. This is an 
excuse for you to destroy them. Do not spare them this 
time, or you will pay like Dou Wu and Chen Fan, who in 

10A burial place of court officials and royal families. 

Chapter
52
2

Chapter 3 
In Wenming Garden, Dong Zhuo Denounces Ding Yuan;
With Red Hare, Li Su Bribes Lu Bu. 

What Cao Cao said was this: “The eunuch evil is of very 

old standing, but the real cause of the present trouble is in 
the improper influence allowed them by the emperors and 
the misplaced favoritism they have enjoyed. But a gaoler 
would be ample force to employ against this kind of evil, 
and getting rid of the main culprits is quite enough. Why 
increase confusion by summoning troops from the regions? 
Any desire to slay all of them will speedily become known, 
and the plan will fail.” 

further,” said He Jin with a sneer. 

Cao Cao left the meeting, proclaiming, “The one who 

throws the world into chaos is He Jin!” 

several bases. 

It must be recalled that Dong Zhuo had failed in his 

attempt to destroy the Yellow Scarves rebellion. He would 
have been punished if he had not bribed the Ten Eunuchs 
heavily for their protection. Later, through connections in 
the capital, he obtained rapid promotions from General to 
General of the Front Army, to Lord of Aoxiang, to Imperial 
Protector in the western region of Xizhou and Commander 
of an army of two hundred thousand troops. But Dong Zhuo 
was treacherous and disloyal at heart. So when he received 
the summons to the capital, he rejoiced greatly and lost no 
time in obeying it. He left a son-in-law, Commander Niu Fu, 
to look after the affairs of Xizhou and set out for Luoyang. 
Dong Zhuo took with him a huge army and four generals--
-Li Jue, Guo Si, Zhang Ji, and Fan Chou. 

Dong Zhuo’s adviser and son-in-law, Li Ru, said, “Though 

may do as you please. To use such enormous powers against 
the eunuchs would bring victory as easily as lighting up a 
furnace to burn a hair. Only act promptly: Use your powers 
and smite at once, and all the empire will be with you. But to 
summon forces to the capital, to gather many bold warriors 
into one spot, each with different schemes, is to turn our 
weapons against our own person, to place ourselves in the 
power of another. Nothing but failure can come of it, and 
havoc will ensue.” 

“The view of a mere book-worm,” said He Jin with a 

smile. 

Then one of those about He Jin suddenly clapped his 

hands, laughing, “Solving this issue is as easy as turning 
over one’s hand! Why so much talk?” 

The speaker was Cao Cao. 
 
Wouldst thou withdraw wicked people from thy prince’s 

side,

Then seek counsel of the wise people of the state.
 
What Cao Cao said will be disclosed in later chapters.

ministers of state, while He Jin sent a warm welcome to 
Dong Zhuo, who soon camped at Shengchi Lake and 
stationed there without further action. 

Zhang Rang and the eunuchs knew this move was 

directed against them and said, “This is He Jin’s plot. If we 
do not strike first, our whole clans shall be exterminated.” 

So they hid a band of fifty armed ruffians at the Gate of 

Grand Virtue in the Palace of Happiness, where the Empress 

He Jin

a formal summons has 
come, there are many 
obscurities in it. It would 
be well to send up a 
memorial stating plainly 
our aims and intentions. 
Then we can proceed.” 

So 
Dong 
Zhuo 

composed something like 
this: 

“Thy servant knows 

that 
the 
continual 

rebellions 
owe 
their 

origin to Zhang Rang and 
the Regular Attendants 
of the Inner Bureau, who act counter to all recognized 
precepts. Now to stop the ebullition of a pot the best way is 
to withdraw the fire; to cut out an abscess, though painful, 
is better than to nourish the evil. I have dared undertake a 
military advance on the capital, with thy permission, and 
now pray that Zhang Rang and the other eunuchs be removed 
for the happiness of the dynasty and of the empire.” 

He Jin read this memorial and showed it to his 

partisans. 

Then said Minister Zheng Tai, “A fierce wild beast: If he 

comes, his prey will be humans!” 

to great schemes.” 

appearance innocent, he is a very wolf at heart. Let him 
in, and calamity enters with him. Stop him, do not let him 
come, and thus will you avoid upheaval.” 

gave up their posts and retired, as did more than half the 

Dong Zhuo

Whereupon both Yuan Shao and Cao Cao chose five 

hundred best men under their command, at whose head they 
placed Yuan Shu, a brother of Yuan Shao. Yuan Shu, clad 
in mail, drew up his troops outside the Forbidden City’s 
entrance, while Yuan Shao and Cao Cao, holding swords, 
went as escort. 

When He Jin neared the Palace of Happiness, the officers 

from the Inner Bureau said, “The orders are to admit the 
Regent Marshal and none other.” 

So the escort was detained outside. He Jin went in 

proudly. At the Gate of Grand Virtue, he was met by Zhang 
Rang and Duan Gui, and their followers quickly closed in 
around him. He Jin began to feel alarmed. 

Then Zhang Rang in a harsh voice began to revile 

him: “What crime had Empress Dong committed that she 
should have been put to death? And when the Mother of 
the Country was buried, who feigned sickness and did not 
attend? We raised you and your paltry, huckstering family 
to all the dignity and wealth you have, and this is your 
gratitude! You would slay us. You call us sordid and dirty: 
Who is the cleaner?” 

lived, then they went in to see her. 

They said, “The General, feigning to act under command, 

has called up armies to the capital to destroy us. We pray 
you, Your Majesty, pity and save us!” 

Empress. 

summon the General into your presence and command 
him to cease. If he will not, then we pray but die in your 
presence.” 

Empress He issued the requisite command. 
He Jin was just going to her when Secretary Chen Lin 

advised him not to enter, saying, 
“The eunuchs are certainly 
behind the order and mean your 
harm.” 

But He Jin could only see the 

command of the Empress and 
was oblivious to all else. Said 
he, “Clearly, this is an edict from 
the Empress. What harm?” 

“Our plot is no longer a 

secret,” said Yuan Shao. “Still 
you may go if you are ready to 
fight your way in.” 

“Get the eunuchs out first!” 

said Cao Cao. 

“Silly children!” said He Jin. 

“What can they do against the 
man who holds the forces of the 
empire in his palm?” 

Yuan Shao said, “If you will 

go, then we will come as a guard, 
just as a precaution.” 
Yuan Shao

the gate. Yuan Shu at the head of his guards burst in and 
fell to slaying the eunuchs without regard to age or rank. 
Yuan Shao and Cao Cao broke into the inner part of the 
Palace. Four of the eunuchs---Zhao Zhong, Cheng Kuang, 
Xia Yun, and Guo Sheng---fled to the Blue Flower Lodge 
where they were hacked to pieces. Fire raged, destroying 
the buildings. 

Gui, Cao Jie, and Hou Lan---led by Zhang Rang carried off 
the Empress, Emperor Bian, and Prince Xian of Chenliu 
toward the North Palace. 

hearing of the revolution in the Palace he donned his armor, 
took his spear, and prepared to fight. 

He saw Eunuch Duan Gui hurrying the Empress along 

and called out, “You rebel, how dare you abduct the 
Empress?” 

The eunuch fled. The Empress leaped out of a window 

and was taken to a place of safety. 

General Wu Kuang burst into one of the inner halls where 

he found He Miao, sword in hand. 

“You also were in the plot to slay your own brother,” 

cried Wu Kuang. “You shall die with the others!” 

“Let us kill the plotter against his elder brother!” cried 

many. 

every side. He was hacked to pieces. 

Yuan Shu bade his soldiers scatter and seek out all the 

families of the eunuchs, sparing none. In that slaughter 
many beardless men were killed in error. 

begged Empress He to undertake the direction of affairs, 
and soldiers were sent to pursue Zhang Rang and rescue the 

to escape, but all gates had been shut. The eunuchs closed 
him in, and then the assassins appeared and cut He Jin into 
halves. 

 
Closing the days of the Hans, and the years of their rule 

were near spent,

Stupid and tactless was He Jin, yet stood he highest in 

office,

heard not,

Wherefore fell he a victim under the swords of the 

eunuchs.

 
So He Jin died. Yuan Shao and Cao Cao waited long. By 

and by, impatient at the delay, they called through the gate, 
“Thy carriage awaits, O General!” 

decree was proclaimed: “He Jin has contemplated treachery 
and therefore has been slain! It pardons his adherents.” 

Yuan Shao shouted, “The eunuchs have slain the High 

Minister. Let those who will slay this wicked party come 
and help me!” 

portent, he hastily dressed and went forth to look about him. 
Then he saw a bright light shooting up from a heap of straw. 
He hastened thither and then saw two youths lying behind 
it. 

“To what household do you belong, young gentlemen?” 

asked the farmer. 

The Emperor was too frightened to reply, but his 

companion said, “He is the Emperor. There was a revolution 
in the Forbidden City, and we ran away. I am his brother, 
Prince of Chenliu.” 

The farmer bowed again and again and said, “My name 

is Sui Lie. My brother Sui Yi is the former Minister of the 
Interior. My brother was disgusted with the behavior of the 
eunuchs and so resigned and hid away here.” 

his knees served them with refreshment. 

Eunuch Duan Gui. By and by Min Gong overtook Duan 
Gui and cried, “Where is the Emperor?” 

“He disappeared! I do not know where he is!” 
Min Gong slew Duan Gui and hung the bleeding head 

on his horse’s neck. Then he sent his troops searching in all 

young Emperor and the young Prince of Chenliu. 

the Emperor and the Prince. They burst through the smoke 
and fire and traveled without stopping till they reached the 
Beimang Hills. It was then the third watch. They heard a 
great shouting behind them and saw soldiers in pursuit. 
Their leader, Min Gong, a commander in Henan, was 
shouting, “Traitors, stop, stop!” 

river, where he was drowned. 

The two boys ignorant of the meaning of all this confusion 

and terrified out of their senses, dared not utter a cry. They 
crept in among the rank grass on the river bank and hid. The 
soldiers scattered in all directions but failed to find them. 
So they remained till the fourth watch, shivering with cold 
from the drenching dew and very hungry. They lay down in 
the thick grass and wept in each other’s arms, silently, lest 
anyone should discover them. 

“This is no a place to stay in,” said Prince Xian. “We 

must find some way out.” 

managed to crawl up the bank. They were in a thicket of 
thorn bushes, and it was quite dark. They could not see any 
path. They were in despair when, all at once, millions of 
fireflies sprang up all about them and circled in the air in 
front of the Emperor. 

“Heaven is helping us,” said Prince Xian. 
They followed whither the fireflies led and gradually got 

into a road. They walked till their feet were too sore to go 
further, when, seeing a heap of straw near the road, they 
crept to it and lay down. 

This heap of straw was close to a farm house. In the 

night, as the farmer was sleeping, he saw in a vision two 
bright red suns drop behind his dwelling. Alarmed by the 

Yuan Shao rode out in advance. 

“Who are you?” said Yuan Shao. 
From under the shade of an embroidered banner rode out 

a leader, saying, “Do you have the Emperor?” 

Prince of Chenliu rode to the front and cried, “Who are 
you?” 

“Dong Zhuo, Imperial Protector of Xizhou Region.” 

Dong Zhuo

directions, and he rode off by himself on the same quest. 
Presently he came to the farm. Sui Lie, seeing what hung 
on his horse’s neck, questioned him and, satisfied with his 
story, led him to the Emperor. The meeting was affecting. 
All were moved to tears. 

“The state cannot be without its ruler,” said Min Gong. 

“I pray Your Majesty return to the city.” 

At the farm they had but one sorry nag and this they 

saddled for the Emperor. The young Prince was taken on 
Min Gong’s charger. And thus they left the farm. Not beyond 
one mile from the farm, they fell in with other officials and 
several hundred guards and soldiers made up an imposing 
cavalcade. In the cavalcade were Wang Yun, Minister of the 
Interior; Yang Biao, Grand Commander; Chunyu Qiong, 
Commander of the Left Army; Zhao Meng, Commander of 
the Right Army; Bao Xin, Commander of the Rear Army; 
and Yuan Shao, Commander of the Center Army. Tears were 
shed freely as the ministers met their Emperor. 

A man was sent on in front to the capital there to expose 

the head of Eunuch Duan Gui. 

As soon as they could, they placed the Emperor on a 

better steed and the young Prince had a horse to himself. 
Thus the Emperor returned to Luoyang, and so it happened 
after all as the street children’s ditty ran: 

 
Though the emperor doesn’t rule, though the prince no 

office fills,

Yet a brilliant cavalcade comes along from Beimang 

Hills.

 
The cavalcade had not proceeded far when they saw 

coming towards them a large body of soldiers with fluttering 
banners hiding the sun and raising a huge cloud of dust. The 
officials turned pale, and the Emperor was greatly alarmed. 

the Prince of Chenliu. 

“The 
government 

is really without a 
head. There can be no 
better time than this 
to carry out your plan. 
Delay will spoil all. 
Tomorrow 
assemble 

the officials in the 
Wenming 
Garden 

and address them on 
the subject. Put all 
opponents to death, 
and your prestige is 
settled.” 

So spoke Li Ru, and 

the words pleased Dong Zhuo mightily. 

many guests. As all the officers went in terror of him, no one 
dared be absent. Dong Zhuo himself rode up to the garden 
last of all and took his place with his sword girded on. When 
the wine had gone round several times, Dong Zhuo stopped 
the service and the music and began to speak. 

“I have something to say. Listen quietly all of you!” 
All turned towards him. 
“The emperor is lord of all. If he lacks dignity and 

behaves in an unseemly manner, he is no fitting inheritor of 
the ancestral prerogatives. He who is now on the throne is 
a weakling, inferior to the Prince of Chenliu in intelligence 
and love of learning. The Prince is in every way fitted for 
the throne. I desire to depose the Emperor and set up the 
Prince in his place. What think you?” 

first to utter a word of dissent. But one dared; for suddenly 

Li Ru

said Prince Xian. 

“I have come to protect,” said Dong Zhuo. 
“If that is so, the Emperor is here: Why do you not 

dismount?” 

Dong Zhuo hastily dismounted and made obeisance on 

the left of the road. Then Prince Xian spoke graciously 
to him. From first to last the Prince had carried himself 
most perfectly so that Dong Zhuo in his heart admired his 
behavior, and then arose the first desire to set aside the 
Emperor in favor of the Prince of Chenliu. 

affecting interview with Empress He. 

But when they had restored order in the Palace, the 

Imperial Hereditary Seal, the special seal of the Emperor, 
was missing. 

Dong Zhuo camped without the walls, but every day 

he was to be seen in the streets with an escort of mailed 
soldiers so that the common people were in a state of 
constant trepidation. He also went in and out of the Palace 
careless of all the rules of propriety. 

Commander of the Rear Army Bao Xin spoke of Dong 

Zhuo’s behavior to Yuan Shao, saying, “This man harbors 
some evil design and should be removed.” 

“Nothing can he done till the government is more 

settled,” said Yuan Shao. 

Then Bao Xin saw Minister of the Interior Wang Yun 

and asked what he thought. 

“Let us talk it over,” was the reply. 
Bao Xin said no more but he left the capital and retired 

to the Taishan Mountains. 

Dong Zhuo induced the soldiers of the two brothers He 

Jin and He Miao to join his command, and privately spoke 
to his adviser Li Ru about deposing the Emperor in favor of 

Wherefore the sage Minister Yi Yin1 immured him in the 
Tong Palace till he reformed. Later the Prince of Changyi 
ascended the throne, and in twenty-seven days he committed 
more than three thousand categorical faults. Wherefore 
Regent Marshal Huo Guang2 declared in the ancestral 
temple that the Prince of Changyi was deposed. Our present 
Emperor is young, but he is intelligent, benevolent, and wise. 
He has not committed a single fault. You, Sir, are an imperial 
protector of a frontier region and not a metropolitan official 
and have had no experience in state administration. Neither 
have you the pure intentions of Yi Yin and Huo Guang 
which qualified their actions. The Teacher said: ‘Only with 
Yi Yin’s purpose can one act like Yi Yin. Otherwise, such a 
deed is treason.’” 

Dong Zhuo angrily drew his sword to slay the bold Lu 
1Yi Yin was was helper and prime minister of King Tang, the founder of 

Shang Dynasty. After King Tang’s death, Yi Yin served his sons and grandson. 
Soon after Tai Jia, King Tang’s grandson, ascended the throne, he committed 
many faults, and Yi Yin, acting as regent, exiled Tai Jia to Tong Palace---the 
burial place of King Tang. After three years Yi Yin returned him the throne. 
Tai Jia eventually became an enlightened emperor. Shang Dynasty lasted for 
650 years (BC 1700-1050). It was this act of Yi Yin rather than his services 
in building up an empire that has made him immortal. Whether he did right in 
temporarily dethroning the king was open to question, until a final verdict was 
rendered by Mencius who thought that his ends amply justified his means. This 
historical event attests the extent of the power exercised by a prime minister in 
those days.

2Huo Guang (BC ?-68) a general and regent of Han. After Emperor Wu died, 

Huo Guang became regent to three successive emperors, and the second one 
had been the Prince of Changyi, who was on the throne for only twenty-seven 
days. Huo Guang had the Prince of Changyi declared unfit to rule and deposed 
him. Even though Huo Guang contributed much to the empire’s stabilization, 
after he died, he was distanced by the emperor and most of his family were 
executed for conspiracy charges.

a guest stood up in his place, smote the table and cried. 

“No! No! Who are you that you dare utter such bold 

words? The Emperor is son of the late Emperor and has 
done no wrong. Why then should he be deposed? Are you 
a rebel?” 

The speaker was Ding Yuan, Imperial Protector of 

Bingzhou. 

Dong Zhuo glared at Ding Yuan, roaring, “There is life 

for those who are with me, death for those against!” 

Dong Zhuo drew his sword and made for the objector. 

But the watchful Li Ru had noticed standing behind Ding 
Yuan a particularly dangerous looking henchman of his, 
who was now handling his halberd threateningly, and whose 
eyes were blazing with anger. 

So Li Ru hastily interposed, saying, “But this is the 

banquet chamber, and state affairs should be left outside. 
The matters can be fully discussed tomorrow.” 

His fellow guests persuaded Ding Yuan to leave, and 

after his departure Dong Zhuo said, “Is what I said just and 
reasonable?”  

“You are mistaken, Illustrious Sir,” said Lu Zhi. “Of old 

had donned a embroidered thousand-flower fighting robe, 
a pheasant-tailed helmet, and breast plate, and round his 
waist was a gleaming jade belt with a lion’s head clasp. 
With spear set he rode close behind his master Ding Yuan. 

Ding Yuan, riding forth, pointing his finger at Dong 

Zhuo, began to revile him. 

“Unhappy indeed was this state when the eunuchs became 

so powerful that the people were as if trodden into the mire 
under their feet. Now you, devoid of the least merit, dare to 
talk of deposing the rightful emperor and setting up another. 

Lu Bu

Zhi, but two other officials remonstrated. 

and his violent death would stir the hearts of all people!” 
said Court Counselors Cai Yong and Peng Bo. 

Dong Zhuo then stayed his hand. 
Then said Wang Yun, “A great question like the deposition 

and substitution of emperors is not one to be decided after a 
wine party. Let it be put off till another time.” 

with drawn sword watching them depart. Standing thus, 
Dong Zhuo noticed a spearman galloping to and fro on a 
fiery steed and asked Li Ru who that was. 

keep out of his way, my lord.” 

seen. But next day they reported to him that Ding Yuan had 
come out of the city with a small army and was challenging 
to a battle. Dong Zhuo, with his army, went forth to accept 
the challenge. And the two armies were drawn up in proper 
array. 

Lu Bu was a conspicuous figure in the forefront. His hair 

He was admitted forthwith. 
“Worthy brother, have you been well since we last met?” 

greeted Li Su while bowing. 

“How long it is since we last saw each other!” replied Lu 

Bu, bowing in return. “And where are you now?” 

“I am a general in the Imperial Tiger Army. When I 

learned you were a strong supporter of the Throne, I could 
not say how I rejoiced. I have come now to present to you a 
really fine horse, a five-hundred-mile-a-day horse, one that 
crosses rivers and goes up mountains as if they were the 
level plain. Its name is Red Hare. It will be a fitting aid to 
your valor.” 

Lu Bu bade 

his guards lead 
out the horse. 
It was of a 
uniform color 
like 
glowing-

sun 
red---

not a hair of 
another color. 
It measured ten 
spans from head 
to tail and from hoof to neck eight spans. When it neighed, 
the sound filled the empyrean and shook the ocean. 

 
Mark ye the steed swift and tireless, see the dust, spurned 

by his hoofs, rising in clouds,

Now it swims the river, anon climbs the hill, rending the 

purple mist asunder,

Scornful it breaks the rein, shakes from its head the 

jeweled bridle,

It is as a fiery dragon descending from the highest 

heaven.

This is to desire rebellion and no less!” 

Dong Zhuo could not reply for Lu Bu, eager for the 

fight, rode straight at him. Dong Zhuo fled and Ding Yuan’s 
army came on. The battle went in Ding Yuan’s favor, and 
the beaten troops retired ten miles and made another camp. 
Here Dong Zhuo called his officers to a council. 

“This Lu Bu is a marvel,” said Dong Zhuo. “If he were 

only on my side, I would defy the whole world!” 

At this a man advanced saying, “Be content, O my lord! 

I am a fellow villager of his and know him well: He is 
valorous, but not crafty; he will let go principles, when he 
sees advantages. With this little, blarneying tongue of mine, 
I can persuade him to put up his hands and come over to 
your side.” 

Dong Zhuo was delighted and gazed admiringly at 

the speaker. It was Li Su, a general in the Imperial Tiger 
Army. 

“What arguments will you use with him?” asked Dong 

Zhuo. 

“You have a fine horse, Red Hare, one of the best ever 

bred. I must have this steed, and gold and pearls to win his 
heart. Then will I go and persuade him. He will certainly 
abandon Ding Yuan’s service for yours.” 

Ru. 

“One cannot grudge a horse to win an empire,” was the 

reply. 

So they gave Li Su what he demanded---a thousand 

ounces of gold, ten strings of beautiful pearls, a jeweled 
belt, and Red Hare---and these accompanied Li Su on his 
visit to his fellow villager. 

Li Su reached the camp and said to the guard, “Please 

tell General Lu Bu that a very old friend has come to visit 
him.” 

went on, “Dong Zhuo has long respected your bravery and 
sent these by my hand. Red Hare was also from him.” 

“But, if he loves me like this, what can I do in return?” 
Li Su said, “If a stupid fellow like me can be a general in 

the Imperial Tiger Army, it is impossible to say what honors 
await you.” 

“I am sorry I can offer him no service worth 

mentioning.” 

extremely easy one to perform; but you would not render 
that.” 

slay Ding Yuan and bring over his soldiers to Dong Zhuo’s 
side. What think you of that?” 

“If you would do that, there could be no greater service. 

But such a thing must be done quickly.” 

And Lu Bu promised his friend that he would do the 

deed and come over on the morrow. 

So Li Su took his leave. That very night, at the second 

watch, Lu Bu entered, sword in hand, into his master’s 
tent. He found Ding Yuan reading by the light of a solitary 
candle. 

Seeing who 

came in, Ding 
Yuan said, “My 
son, what is 
afoot?” 

“I am a bold 

hero,” 
said 

Lu Bu. “Do 
not think I am 
willing to be a 
son of yours!” 

“Why 
this 

Lu Bu was delighted with the horse and said, “What 

return can I hope to make for such a creature?” 

“What return can I hope for? I came to you out of a sense 

of what is right,” replied Li Su. 

Wine was brought in and they drank. 
“We have seen very little of each other, but I am constantly 

meeting your honorable father,” said Li Su. 

for years.” 

“Not so; I spoke of Ding Yuan, the man of the day.” 
Lu Bu started. “Yes, I am with him, but only because I 

can do no better.” 

“Sir, your talent is higher than the heavens, deeper 

than the seas. Who in all the world does not bow before 
your name? Fame and riches and honors are yours for the 
taking. And you say you can do no better than remain a 
subordinate!” 

“If I could only find a master to serve,” said Lu Bu. 
“The clever bird chooses the branch whereon to perch; 

the wise servant selects the master to serve. Seize the chance 
when it comes, for repentance ever comes too late.” 

the bravest of all?”, asked Lu Bu. 

“I despise the whole lot except Dong Zhuo. He is 

one who respects wisdom and reveres scholarship; he is 
discriminating in his rewards and punishments. Surely he is 
destined to be a really great man.” 

Lu Bu said, “I wish that I could serve him, but there is 

no way, I fear.” 

Then Li Su produced his pearls and gold and the jeweled 

belt and laid them out before his host. 

“What is this? What does it mean?” said Lu Bu. 
“Send away the attendants,” requested Li Su. And he 

“He who is above us being weak and irresolute is unfit for 
the duties of his high place. Wherefore I, as of old did Yi 
Yin and Huo Guang, will set aside this Emperor giving 
him the title of Prince of Hongnong, and I will place on the 
throne the present Prince of Chenliu. And those who do not 
support me will suffer death.” 

Fear seized them in its grip and they were silent, all but 

Yuan Shao who said, “The Emperor was innocent of any 
fault, and to set him aside in favor of a commoner was 
rebellion and nothing else!” 

I choose to do this thing, who will dare to say nay? Think 
you my sword lacks an edge?” 

“If your sword is sharp, mine is never blunt!” said Yuan 

Shao as his sword flashed out of the sheath. 

The two men stood face to face amid the feasters. 
 
When Ding Yuan by treacherous murder died,
The loss was great to Yuan Shao’s side.
 
The fate of Yuan Shao will be disclosed in later 

chapters.

change, Lu Bu?” 

fell to the earth. 

unjust man, and I have slain him. Let those who back me 
stay. The others may depart.” 

man as his gift, Lu Bu betook himself to Li Su, who led 
him to Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo received him with a warm 
welcome and had wine set before him. 

“Your coming is welcome as the gentle dew to the 

parched grass,” said Dong Zhuo. 

Lu Bu made Dong Zhuo seat himself and then made an 

obeisance, saying, “Pray let me bow to you as my adopted 
father!” 

Dong Zhuo gave his newly won ally gold armor and 

silken robes and spread the feast of welcome. They then 
separated. 

Thence Dong Zhuo’s power and influence increased 

rapidly. He gave the lordship of Hu (an ancient state) and 
the rank Commander of the Left Army to his brother Dong 
Min. He appointed Lu Bu Lord of Luoyang, Commander 
of Capital District, and Cavalry Commander. Dong Zhuo 
made himself Minister of Works, Grand Commander, and 
Commander of the Front Army. 

out the design of deposing the young Emperor. 

The now all-powerful Dong Zhuo prepared a banquet in 

the capital at which all the officers of state were guests. He 
also bade Lu Bu post a company of armed men right and 
left ready for action. The feast began and several courses 
were served with nothing to distinguish that banquet from 
any other. 

Then suddenly the host arose and drew his sword, saying, 

Chapter
76
3

Chapter 4 
The Deposition Of The Emperor: Prince Of Chenliu 

Becomes Emperor;

Schemes Against Dong Zhuo: Cao Cao Presents A 

Sword. 

Dong Zhuo was on the point of slaying Yuan Shao, but 

Li Ru checked him, saying, “You must not kill rashly while 
the business hangs in the balance.” 

Yuan Shao, his sword still unsheathed, left the assembly. 

He hung up the seals of his office at the east gate and went 
to Jizhou Region. 

Dong Zhuo said to Imperial Guardian Yuan Wei, “Your 

nephew behaved improperly, but I pardon him for your 
sake. What think you of my scheme?” 

“What you think is right,” was the reply. 
“If anyone opposes the great scheme, he will be dealt 

with by military law!” said Dong Zhuo. 

The ministers, thoroughly dreaded, promised obedience, 

and the feast came to an end. 

Dong Zhuo asked Counselor Zhou Bi and Commander 

Wu Qiong what they thought of the flight of Yuan Shao. 

Zhou Bi said, “He left in a state of great anger. In such 

a state of excitement much harm may ensue to the present 
state of affairs, especially as the Yuan family have been 
noted for their high offices for four generations, and their 
proteges and dependents are everywhere. If they assemble 
bold people and call up their clients, all the valiant warriors 
will be in arms, and the east region of the Huashang 
Mountains will be lost. You had better pardon Yuan Shao 
and give him a post. He will be glad at being forgiven and 
will do no harm.” 

fails in decision and so is not to be feared. But it would be 

beside being of handsome exterior. He conforms to all the 
rules of propriety: His mourning is sincere, and his speech 
is always correct. Eulogies of him fill the empire. He is well 
fitted for the great duty of consolidating the rule of Han. 

“Now therefore the Emperor is deposed and created 

Prince of Hongnong, and Empress He retires from the 
administration. 

conformity with the decrees of Heaven and Earth, the desires 
of people, and the fulfillment of the hopes of humankind.” 

This having been 

read, Dong Zhuo 
bade the officials 
lead the Emperor 
down 
from 
the 

throne, remove his 
seal, and cause him 
to kneel facing the 
north, styling himself 
faithful 
servant 

of the Throne and 
requesting commands. Moreover Dong Zhuo bade Empress 
He strip off her royal dress of ceremony and await the 
imperial command. Both victims of this oppression wept 
bitterly, and every minister present was deeply affected. 

false Dong Zhuo is the author of this insult, which I will 
risk my life to wipe away!” 

And with this he rushed at Dong Zhuo threatening with 

his ivory baton of office. 

had Ding Guan removed and summarily put to death. Before 
his death, Ding Guan ceased not to rail at the oppressor, nor 

well to give him rank and thus win popular favor.” 

Dong Zhuo followed this advice, and within that day sent 

a messenger to offer Yuan Shao the governorship of Bohai. 

invited to proceed to the Hall of Virtue where was a great 
assembly of officials. 

and said, “The Emperor is a weakling unequal to the burden 
of ruling this land. Now listen ye to the document I have 
prepared!” 

And Li Ru read as follows: 
“The dutiful Emperor Ling too soon left his people. 

The emperor is the cynosure of all the people of this land. 
Upon the present Emperor Bian, Heaven has conferred but 
small gifts: In dignity and deportment he is deficient, and 
in mourning he is remiss. Only the most complete virtue 
can grace imperial dignity. Empress He has trained him 
improperly, and the whole state administration has fallen 
into confusion. Empress Dong died suddenly and no one 
knew why. The doctrine of the three bonds---Heaven, 
Earth, and Human---and the continuity of Heaven and Earth 
interdependence have both been injured. 

Dong Zhuo

was he frightened at death. 

 
The rebel Dong Zhuo conceived the foul design
To thrust the King aside and wrong his line.
With folded arms the courtiers stood, save one
Ding Guan, who dared to cry that wrong was done.
 
Then the emperor designate, Prince of Chenliu, went 

to the upper part of the hall to receive congratulations. 
After this the former Emperor---now Prince of Hongnong-
--, his mother, and the Imperial Consort, Lady Tang, were 
removed to the Palace of Forever Calm. The entrance gates 
were locked against all comers. 

It was pitiful! There was the young emperor, after reigning 

less than half a year, deposed and another put in his place. 
The new Emperor was Liu Xian, the second son of the late 
Emperor Ling. He was nine years of age, five years younger 
than his deposed brother. The new reign-style was changed 
to Inauguration of Tranquillity, the first year (AD 190). 

Becoming the Prime Minister, Dong Zhuo was most 

powerful and arrogant. When he bowed before the Throne, 
he did not declare his name. In going to court he did not 
hasten. Booted and armed he entered the reception halls. He 
amassed a wealth exceeding any other’s. 

His adviser, Li Ru, impressed upon Dong Zhuo constantly 

to employ people of reputation so that he should gain public 
esteem. So when they told him Cai Yong was a man of 
talent, Dong Zhuo summoned him. But Cai Yong would 
not go. Dong Zhuo sent a message to him that if he did 
not come, he and his whole clan should be exterminated. 
Then Cai Yong gave in and appeared. Dong Zhuo was very 
gracious to him and promoted him thrice in a month. Cai 
Yong became High Minister. Such was the generosity of 
the tyrant. 

Prime Minister sends a wine cup of longevity,” said Li Ru. 

“If it be the wine of longevity, you may share it too,” said 

Empress He. 

Then Li Ru became brutally frank. 
“You will not drink?” asked he. 

He 
called 
the 

men with daggers 
and cords and bade 
the Emperor look at 
them. 

“The 
cup, 
or 

these?” said he. 

Then said Lady 

Tang, 
“Let 
the 

handmaid drink in 

place of her lord. Spare the mother and her son, I pray!” 

“And who may you be to die for a prince?” said Li Ru. 
Then he presented the cup to the Empress once more and 

bade her drink. 

author of all this trouble. She would not drink. 

Next Li Ru approached the Emperor. 
“Let me say farewell to my mother,” begged he, and he 

did so in these lines: 

 
“The heaven and earth are changed,
Alas! the sun and the moon leave their courses,
I, once the center of all eyes, am driven to the farthest 

confines,

end,

Everything fails me and vain are my falling tears.”
 
Lady Tang sang: 

were immured in the Palace of Forever Calm and found their 
daily supplies gradually diminishing. The deposed Emperor 
wept incessantly. One day a pair of wallows gliding to and 
fro moved him to verse: 

 
“Spring and the green of the tender grass,
Flushes with joy as the swallows pass;
The wayfarers pause by the rippling stream,
And their eyes will new born gladness gleam;
With lingering gaze the roofs I see
Of the Palace that one time sheltered me.
But those whom I sheltered in all righteousness,
Let’s not stay in silence when the days pass useless?”
 
The messenger, sent by Dong Zhuo from time to time to 

the palace for news of the prisoners, got hold of this poem 
and showed it to his master. 

excuse to put them all out of the way,” said Dong Zhuo. 

Li Ru was sent with ten men into the palace to 

consummate the deed. The three were in one of the upper 
rooms when Li Ru arrived. The Emperor shuddered when 
the maid announced the visitor’s name. 

Presently Li Ru 

entered and offered a 
cup of poisoned wine 
to the Emperor. The 
Emperor asked what 
this meant. 

“Spring 
is 
the 

season of blending 
and 
harmonious 

interchange, and the 

achievement to his master who bade them bury the victims 
without the city. After this Dong Zhuo’s behavior was more 
atrocious than before. He spent his nights in the Palace, 
defiled the imperial concubines there, and even slept on the 
Dragon Couch. 

Once he led 

his soldiers out 
of the city to 
Yangcheng when 
the 
villagers, 

men and women, 
were assembled 
from all sides 
for the annual 
spring festival. 
His 
troops 

surrounded the 

place and plundered it. They took away booty by the cart 
loads, and women prisoners and more than one thousand 
severed heads. The procession returned to Capital Luoyang 
and published a story that they had obtained a great victory 
over some rebels. They burned the heads beneath the walls, 

 
“Heaven is to be rent asunder, Earth to fall away,
I, handmaid of an emperor, would grieve if I followed 

him not.

dead walk not together;

Alas! I am left alone with the grief in my heart.”
 

When they had 

sung these lines, they 
fell 
weeping 
into 

each others’ arms. 

“The 
Prime 

Minister is awaiting 
my report,” said Li 
Ru, “and you delay 
too long. Think you 
that there is any hope 
of succor?” 

The Empress broke into another fit of railing, “The 

rebel forces us to death, mother and son, and Heaven has 
abandoned us. But you, the tool of his crime, will assuredly 
perish!” 

Thereupon Li Ru 

grew more angry, laid 
hands on the Empress 
and threw her out of 
the window. Then 
he bade the soldiers 
strangle Lady Tang 
and forced the lad to 
swallow the wine of 
death. 

Li Ru reported the 

power and sent a secret letter to Minister of the Interior 
Wang Yun: 

“That rebel Dong Zhuo outrages Heaven and has 

deposed his ruler. Common people dare not speak of him: 
That is understandable. Yet you suffer his aggressions as 
if you knew naught of them. How then are you a dutiful 
and loyal minister? I have assembled an army and desire 
to sweep clean the royal habitation, but I dare not lightly 
begin the task. If you are willing, then find an opportunity 
to plot against this man. If you would use force, I am at your 
command.” 

plot against Dong Zhuo. 

One day while among the throng in attendance, mostly 

people of long service, Wang Yun said to his colleagues, 
“This is my birthday, I pray you come to a little party in my 
humble cot this evening.” 

“We certainly will,” they cried, “and wish you long 

life.” 

That night the tables were spread in an inner room, and 

his friends gathered there. When the wine had made a few 
rounds, the host suddenly covered his face and began to 
weep. 

The guests were aghast. 
“Sir, on your birthday too, why do you weep?” said 

they. 

“It is not my birthday,” replied Wang Yun. “But I 

wished to call you together, and I feared lest Dong Zhuo 
should suspect, so I made that the excuse. This man insults 
the Emperor and does as he wishes so that the imperial 
prerogatives are in imminent peril. I think of the days when 
our illustrious founder destroyed the Qin, annihilated Chu, 
and obtained the empire. Who could have foreseen this day 
when that Dong Zhuo has subjugated all to his will? That is 

and the women and jewelry were shared out among the 
soldiers. 

A general named Wu Fu was disgusted at this ferocity 

and sought a chance to slay Dong Zhuo. Wu Fu constantly 
wore a breastplate underneath his court dress and carried in 
conceal a sharp dagger. One 
day when Dong Zhuo came 
to court, Wu Fu met him on 
the steps and tried to stab 
him. But Dong Zhuo was a 
very powerful man and held 
Wu Fu off till Lu Bu came to 
his help. Lu Bu struck down 
the assailant. 

“Who told you to rebel?” 

said Dong Zhuo. 

Wu Fu glared at him 

and cried, “You are not my 
prince, I am not your minister: Where is the rebellion? Your 
crimes fill the heavens, and every person would slay you. I 
am sorry I cannot tear you asunder with chariots to appease 
the wrath of the world!” 

Dong Zhuo bade the guards take him out and hack him 

to pieces. Wu Fu only ceased railing as he ceased to live. 

 
That loyal servant of the latter days of Han.
His valor was high as the heavens, in all ages 

unequaled;

In the court itself would he slay the rebel, great is his 

fame!

Throughout all time will people call him a hero.
 
Thereafter Dong Zhuo always went well guarded. 
At Bohai, Yuan Shao heard of Dong Zhuo’s misuse of 

Lu Bu was at his side. 

“Why so late, Cao Cao?” said Dong Zhuo. 
“My horse is out of condition and slow,” replied Cao 

Cao. 

Dong Zhuo turned to his henchman Lu Bu. 
“Some good horses have come in from the west. You go 

and pick out a good one as a present for him.” 

And Lu Bu left. 
“This traitor is doomed!” thought Cao Cao. He ought to 

have struck then, but Cao Cao knew Dong Zhuo was very 
powerful, and he was afraid to act. He wanted to make sure 
of his blow. 

Now Dong Zhuo’s corpulence was such that he could 

not remain long sitting, so he rolled over couch and lay face 
inwards. 

the good sword firmly. 

But just as Cao Cao was going to strike, Dong Zhuo 

happened to look up and in a mirror he saw the reflection of 
Cao Cao behind him with a sword in the hand. 

why I weep.” 

Then they all wept with him. 
Seated among the guests, however, was Cao Cao, who 

did not join in the weeping but clapped his hands and 
laughed aloud. 

“If all the officers of the government weep till dawn, and 

from dawn weep till dark, will that slay Dong Zhuo?” said 
Cao Cao. 

Wang Yun turned on him angrily. 
“Your forbears ate the bounty of the Hans. Do you feel 

no gratitude? You can laugh?” 

being unable to compass the death of one man. Foolish and 
incapable as I am, I will cut off his head and hang it at the 
gate as an offering to the people.” 

Wang Yun left his seat and went over to Cao Cao. 
“These later days,” Cao Cao continued, “I have bowed 

my head to Dong Zhuo with the sole desire of finding a 
chance to destroy him. Now he begins to trust me, and so I 
can approach him sometimes. You have a sword with seven 
precious jewels which I would borrow, and I will go into his 
palace and kill him. I care not if I die for it.” 

Wang Yun. 

Cao Cao who drained it and swore an oath. After this the 
treasured sword was brought out and given to Cao Cao who 
hid it under his dress. He finished his wine, took leave of the 
guests, and left the hall. Before long the others dispersed. 

The next day Cao Cao, with this short sword girded on, 

came to the palace of the Prime Minister. 

“Where is the Prime Minister?” asked he. 
“In the small guest room,” replied the attendants. 
So Cao Cao went in and found his host seated on a couch. 

we shall know all about it,” said Li Ru. 

everywhere with orders to catch him. A large reward in 
money was offered and a patent of nobility, while those 
who sheltered him would be held to share his guilt. 

Cao Cao traveled in hot haste toward Qiao, his home 

county. On the road at Zhongmou, he was recognized by the 
guards at the gate and made prisoner. They took him to the 
Magistrate. Cao Cao declared he was a merchant, named 
Huang Fu. The Magistrate scanned his face most closely 
and remained in deep thought. 

Presently the Magistrate said, “When I was at the capital 

seeking a post, I knew you as Cao Cao. Why do you try to 
conceal your identity?” 

morrow when he could send Cao Cao to the capital and 
claim the reward. He gave the soldiers wine and food as a 
reward. 

bring the prisoner into his private rooms for interrogation. 

suddenly. And at that moment Lu Bu came along leading a 
horse. 

Cao Cao in a flurry dropped on his knees and said, “I 

have a precious sword here which I wish to present to Your 
Benevolence.” 

Dong Zhuo took it. It was a fine blade, over a foot in 

length, inlaid with the seven precious signs and very keen--
-a fine sword in very truth. Dong Zhuo handed the weapon 
to Lu Bu while Cao Cao took off the sheath which he also 
gave to Lu Bu. 

profuse in his thanks and said he would like to try the horse. 
So Dong Zhuo bade the guards bring saddle and bridle. Cao 
Cao led the creature outside, leapt into the saddle, laid on 
his whip vigorously, and galloped away eastward. 

as if that fellow was going to stab you, only a sudden panic 
seized him and he presented the weapon instead.” 

“I suspected him too!” said Dong Zhuo. 
Just then Li Ru came in and they told him. 
“Cao Cao has no family here in the capital but lodges 

quite alone and not far away,” said Li Ru. “Send for him. If 
he comes forthwith, the sword was meant as a gift. But if 
he makes any excuses, he had bad intentions. And you can 
arrest him.” 

They sent four prison warders to call Cao Cao. 
They were absent a long time and then came back, 

saying, “Cao Cao had not returned to his lodging but rode in 
hot haste out of the eastern gate. To the gate commander’s 
questions he replied that he was on a special message for 
the Prime Minister. He went off at full speed.” 

doubt that he meant assassination!” said Li Ru. 

“And I trusted him so well!” said Dong Zhuo in a rage. 

government has sent stringent orders on all sides to arrest 
you. Your father has gone into hiding to Chenliu. How has 
this all come about?” 

Cao Cao told him and said, “Had it not been for this 

man here with me, I should have been already hacked to 
pieces.” 

Lu Boshe bowed low to Chen Gong, saying, “You are 

the salvation of the Cao family. But be at ease and rest, I 
will find you a bed in my humble cottage.” 

Lu Boshe then rose and went into the inner chamber 

where he stayed a long time. When he came out, he said, 
“There is no good wine in the house. I am going over to the 
village to get some for you.” 

And he hastily mounted his donkey and rode away. The 

two travelers sat a long time. Suddenly they heard at the 
back of the house the sound of sharpening a knife. 

am beginning to doubt the meaning of his going off. Let us 
listen.” 

So they silently stepped out into a straw hut at the back. 
Presently someone said, “Bind before killing, eh?” 
“As I thought,” said Cao Cao. “Now unless we strike 

first, we shall be taken!” 

Suddenly Cao Cao and Chen Gong dashed in, sword in 

hand, and slew the whole household male and female, in all 
eight persons. 

After this they searched 

the house. In the kitchen they 
found a pig bound ready to 
kill. 

“You were too suspicious,” 

said Chen Gong, “and we 
have slain honest folks!” 

you try to harm him?” said Magistrate. 

“How can swallows and sparrows understand the flight 

of the crane and the wild goose? I am your prisoner and to be 
sent to the capital for a reward. Why so many questions?” 

the prisoner said, “Do not despise me. I am no mere hireling; 
only I have not yet found the lord to serve.” 

Said Cao Cao, “My ancestors enjoyed the bounty of Han, 

and should I differ from a bird or a beast if I did not desire to 
repay them with gratitude? I have bowed the knee to Dong 
Zhuo that thereby I might find an opportunity against him, 
and so remove this evil from the state. I have failed for this 
time. Such is the will of Heaven.” 

“And where are you going?” 
“Home to my county. Thence I shall issue a summons 

calling all the bold people to come with forces to kill the 
tyrant. This is my desire.” 

the prisoner, led him to the upper seat, and bowed, saying, 
“I am called Chen Gong. My aged mother and family are 
in the east county of Dongjun. I am deeply affected by your 
loyalty and uprightness, and I will abandon my office and 
follow you!” 

Cao Cao was delighted with this turn of affairs. Chen 

Gong at once collected some money for the expenses of 
their journey and gave Cao Cao a different dress. Then each 
took a sword and rode away toward Qiao. 

Three days later at eventide they reached Chenggao. Cao 

Cao pointed with his whip to a hamlet deep in the woods 
and said, “There lives my uncle, Lu Boshe, a sworn-brother 
of my father. Suppose we go and ask news of my family and 
seek shelter for the night?” 

rode over, dismounted at the farm gate and entered. 

Chen Gong only thought. They rode on some distance 

by moonlight and presently knocked up an inn for shelter. 
Having first fed their horses, Cao Cao was soon asleep, but 
Chen Gong lay thinking. 

“I took him for a true man and left all to follow him, but 

he is as cruel as a wolf. If I spare him, he will do more harm 
later,” thought Chen Gong. 

And Chen Gong rose intending to kill his companion. 
 
In his heart lie cruelty and venom, he is no true man;
In nought does he differ from his enemy Dong Zhuo.
 
The further fortunes of Cao Cao will be told in later 

chapters.

Soon they met their host Lu Boshe coming home, and over 
the saddle in front of him they saw two vessels of wine. In 
his hands he carried fruits and vegetables. 

“Why are you going, Sirs?” Lu Boshe called to them. 
“Wanted people dare not linger,” said Cao Cao. 
“But I have bidden them kill a pig! Why do you refuse 

my poor hospitality? I pray you ride back with me.” 

Cao Cao paid no heed, urging his horse forward. But he 

suddenly drew his sword and rode back after Lu Boshe. 

“Who is that coming along?” called Cao Cao. 
Lu Boshe turned and looked back, and Cao Cao at the 

same instant cut Lu Boshe down. 

Chen Gong was frightened. 
“We were wrong enough before,” cried Chen Gong. 

“What now is this?” 

he would bear it patiently? If he had raised an alarm and 
followed us, we should have been killed.” 

“To kill deliberately is very wrong,” said Chen Gong. 

down!” was the reply.

Romance of Three Kingdoms
  97

property to the cause.” 

This was joyful news, and the call to arms was forthwith 

prepared and sent far and near. So they established a corps 
of volunteers and set up a large white recruiting banner 
with the words Loyalty and Honor inscribed thereon. The 
response was rapid, and volunteers came in like rain drops 
in number. 

Xiahou Dun

Chapter 5 
Cao Cao Appeals To The Powerful Lords;
The Three Brothers Fight Against Lu Bu. 

to slay Cao Cao. But Chen Gong reflected, “I joined him 
to do righteous things. Now if I killed him, I would only 
do unrighteousness, and the people would condemn me. I 
rather leave in silence.” 

Rising from his bed before the sunrise, Chen Gong 

mounted his horse and rode away eastward to his home 
county of Dongjun. 

Cao Cao awoke with the day and missed his companion. 

Thought he, “Chen Gong thinks me brutal because of a 
couple of egoistic phrases I used, and so he has gone. I 
ought to push on too and not linger here.” 

When he saw his father, he related what had happened and 
said he wanted to dispose of all the family property and 
enlist soldiers with the money. 

“Our possessions are but small,” said his father, “and not 

enough to do anything with. However, there is a graduate 
here, one Wei Hong, careless of wealth but careful of virtue, 
whose family is very rich. With his help we might hope for 
success.” 

A feast was prepared, and Wei Hong was invited. 
Cao Cao made him a speech: “The Hans have lost their 

lordship, and Dong Zhuo is really a tyrant. He flouts his 
prince and is cruel to the people, who gnash their teeth with 
rage. I would restore the Hans, but my means are insufficient. 
Sir, I appeal to your loyalty and public spirit.” 

Wei Hong replied, “I have long desired this but, so far, 

have not found a person fit to undertake the task. Since you, 
Cao Cao, have so noble a desire, I willingly devote all my 

cleanse the empire and destroy the evil-doers. We will raise 
a volunteer army and exert all our efforts to maintain the 
dynasty and succor the people. Respond to this, O Nobles, 
by mustering your soldiers.” 

Many from every side answered the summons as the 

following list shows: 

1. Governor of Nanyang---Yuan Shu
2. Imperial Protector of Jizhou Region---Han Fu
3. Imperial Protector of Yuzhou Region---Kong Zhou
4. Imperial Protector of Yanzhou Region---Liu Dai
5. Governor of Henei---Wang Kuang
6. Governor of Chenliu---Zhang Miao
7. Governor of Dongjun---Qiao Mao
8. Governor of Shanyang---Yuan Yi
9. Lord of Jibei---Bao Xin
10. Governor of Beihai---Kong Rong
11. Governor of Guangling ---Zhang Chao
12. Imperial Protector of Xuzhou Region---Tao Qian
13. Governor of Xiliang---Ma Teng
14. Governor of Beiping---Gongsun Zan
15. Governor of Shangdang---Zhang Yang
16. Governor of Changsha---Sun Jian
17. Governor of Bohai---Yuan Shao
 
These contingents varied in size, from ten thousand to 

thirty thousand, but each was complete in itself with its 
officers, civil and military, and battle-leaders. They were 
heading for Capital Luoyang. 

The Governor of Beiping, Gongsun Zan, while on his 

way with his force of fifteen thousand, passed through the 
county of Pingyuan. There he saw among the mulberry trees 
a yellow flag under which marched a small company. When 
they drew nearer, he saw the leader was Liu Bei. 

One day came a certain Yue Jing from Yangping and 

another Li Dian from Julu. These two were appointed to 
Cao Cao’s personal staff. Another was one Xiahou Dun 
from Qiao. He was descended from Xiahou Ying1 of old. 
Xiahou Dun had been trained from his early boyhood to 
use the spear and the club. When only fourteen he had been 
attached to a certain master-in-arms. One day one person 
spoke disrespectfully of his master, and Xiahou Dun killed 
that person. For this deed, however, he had to flee and had 
been an exile for some time. Now he came to offer his 
services, accompanied by his cousin Xiahou Yuan. Each 
brought a thousand trained soldiers. Really these two were 
brothers of Cao Cao by birth, since Cao Cao’s father was 
originally of the Xiahou family, and had only been adopted 
into the Cao family. 

A few days later came Cao Cao’s two cousins, Cao Ren 

and Cao Hong, each with one thousand followers. These 
two were accomplished horsemen and trained in the use of 
arms. 

in buying clothing, armor, flags, and banners. From all sides 
poured in gifts of grain. 

When Yuan Shao received Cao Cao’s call to arms, he 

collected all those under his command to the number of 
thirty thousand. Then he marched from Bohai to Qiao to 
take the oath to Cao Cao. Next a manifesto was issued: 

now make this proclamation. Dong Zhuo defies Heaven and 
Earth. He is destroying the state and injuring his prince. He 
pollutes the Palace and oppresses the people. He is vicious 
and cruel. His crimes are heaped up. Now we have received 
a secret command to call up soldiers, and we are pledged to 

1Xiahou Ying (?-173) a major general of Liu Bang. Ennobled as the Marquis 

of Ruyin and commonly called the Lord of Tang.

Guan Yu. 

“Since things are so, let us pack and go,” said Guan Yu. 
So without more ado, the three brothers, with a few 

horsemen, joined Gongsun Zan and marched with him to 
join the great army. 

One after another the feudal lords came up and encamped. 

Their camps extended over seventy miles and more. When 
all had arrived, Cao Cao, as the head, prepared sacrificial 
bullocks and horses and called all the lords to a great 
assembly to decide upon their plan of attack. 

Then spoke the Governor of Henei, Wang Kuang, “We 

have been moved by a noble sense of right to assemble 
here. Now must we first choose a chief and bind ourselves 
to obedience.” 

Then said Cao Cao, “For four generations the highest 

offices of state have been filled by members of the Yuan 
family, and their clients and supporters are everywhere. As 
a descendant of ancient ministers of Han, Yuan Shao is a 
suitable man to be our chief lord.” 

Yuan Shao again and again declined this honor. But they 

all said, “It must be he! There is no other!” 

And then he agreed. 
So the next day a three-story altar was built, and they 

planted about it the banners of all parties in five directions of 
space. And they set up white yaks’ tails and golden axes and 
emblems of military authority and the seals of leadership 
round about. 

All being ready, the chief lord was invited to ascend the 

altar. Clad in ceremonial robes and girded with a sword, 
Yuan Shao reverently ascended. There he burned incense, 
made obeisance and recited the oath: 

of imperial authority are loosened. The rebel minister, Dong 
Zhuo, takes advantage of the discord to work evil, and 

“Good brother, what 

do you here?” asked 
Gongsun Zan. 

“You were kind to 

me once, and on your 
recommendation I was 
made the magistrate 
of this county. I heard 
you 
were 
passing 

through and came to 
salute you. May I pray 
you, my elder brother, 
enter into the city and 
rest your steed?” 

“Who 
are 
these 

two?” said Gongsun 
Zan, pointing to Liu 
Bei’s brothers. 

“These are Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, my sworn 

brothers.” 

“Were they fighting with you against the Yellow 

Scarves?” asked Gongsun Zan. 

“All my success was due to their efforts,” said Liu Bei. 
“And what offices do they fill?” 
“Guan Yu is a mounted archer; Zhang Fei is a foot 

archer.” 

“Thus are able people buried!” said Gongsun Zan, 

sighing. Then he continued. “All the highest in the land 
are now going to destroy the rebellious Dong Zhuo. My 
brother, you would do better to abandon this petty place and 
join us in restoring the House of Han. Why not?” 

“I should like to go,” said Liu Bei. 
“If you had let me kill him that other time, you would 

Guan Yu

action. Should any depart from this pledge, may he lose his 
life and leave no posterity. Almighty Heaven and Universal 
Earth and the enlightened spirits of our forebears, be ye our 
witnesses!” 

The reading finished, Yuan Shao smeared the blood of the 

sacrifice upon his lips and upon the lips of those who shared 
the pledge. All were deeply affected by the ceremony and 
many shed tears. 

high place and led to his tent, where he took the highest 
place and the others arranged themselves according to rank 
and age. Here wine was served. 

Presently Cao Cao said, “It behooves us all to obey the 

chief we have this day set up, and support the state. There 
must be no feeling of rivalry or superiority based upon 
numbers.” 

chief I must impartially reward merit and punish offenses. 
Let each see to it that he obeys the national laws and the 
army precepts. These must not be broken.” 

“Only thy commands are to be obeyed!” cried all. 
Then Yuan Shao said, “My brother, Yuan Shu, is 

appointed Chief of the Commissariat. He must see to it 
that the whole camp is well supplied. But the need of the 
moment is a van leader who shall go to River Si Pass and 
provoke a battle. The other forces must take up strategic 
positions in support.” 

Then the Governor of Changsha, Sun Jian, offered 

himself for this service. 

“You are valiant and fierce, and equal to this service!” 

said Yuan Shao. 

to River Si Pass. The guard there sent a swift rider to the 
capital to announce to the Prime Minister the urgency of 

calamity falls upon honorable families. Cruelty overwhelms 
simple folks. We, Yuan Shao and his confederates, fearing 
for the safety of the imperial prerogatives, have assembled 
military forces to rescue the state. We now pledge ourselves 
to exert our whole strength and act in concord to the utmost 
limit of our powers. There must be no disconcerted or selfish 

Yuan Shao

cut down from his horse. Most of Bao Zhong’s company 
were captured. Bao Zhong’s head was sent to the Prime 
Minister’s palace. Hua Xiong was promoted to Commander 
in Chief. 

Sun Jian presently approached the Pass. He had four 

generals: Cheng Pu of Tuyin whose weapon was an iron-

Hua Xiong

the situation. 

given himself up to luxury without stint. When the urgent 
news reached Adviser Li Ru, he at once went to his master, 
who much alarmed called a great council. 

Lu Bu stood forth and said, “Do not fear, my father. I 

look upon all the lords beyond the Pass as so much stubble. 
And with the warriors of our fierce army, I will put everyone 
of them to death and hang their heads at the gates of the 
capital!” 

“With your aid I can sleep secure!” said Dong Zhuo. 
But someone behind Lu Bu broke in upon his speech, 

saying, “An ox-cleaver to kill a chicken! There is no need 
for the General to go: I will cut off their heads as easily as I 
would take a thing out of my pocket!” 

man of fierce mien, lithe and supple as a beast. He had round 
head like a leopard and shoulders like an ape’s. His name was 
Hua Xiong of Guanxi. Dong Zhuo rejoiced at Hua Xiong’s 
bold words and at once appointed him Commander of the 
Valiant Cavalry and gave him fifty thousand of horse and 
foot. Hua Xiong and three other generals---Li Su, Hu Zhen, 
and Zhao Cen---hastily moved toward River Si Pass. 

Among the feudal lords, Bao Xin, the Lord of Jibei, was 

jealous lest the chosen Van Leader Sun Jian should win 
too great honors. Wherefore Bao Xin endeavored to meet 
the foe first, and so he secretly dispatched his brother, Bao 
Zhong, with three thousand by a bye road. As soon as this 
small force reached the Pass, they offered battle. 

Fast reacting, Hua Xiong at the head of five hundred 

armored horsemen swept down from the Pass, crying, “Flee 
not, rebel!” 

and destroy Dong Zhuo, we should have a tiger in place of a 
wolf. Do not send him grain. Starve his troops, and that will 
decide the fate of that army.” 

And Yuan Shu gave ears to the detractor and sent no 

grain or forage. Soon Sun Jian’s hungry soldiers showed 
their disaffection by indiscipline, and the spies bore the 
news to the defenders of the Pass. 

Li Ru made a plot with Hua Xiong, saying, “We will 

launch tonight a speedy attack against Sun Jian in front and 
rear so that we can capture him.” 

soldiers of the attacking force were told off and given a full 
meal. At dark they left the Pass and crept by secret paths to 
the rear of Sun Jian’s camp. The moon was bright and the 
wind cool. They arrived about midnight and the drums beat 
an immediate attack. Sun Jian hastily donned his fighting 
gear and rode out. He ran straight into Hua Xiong and the 
two warriors engaged. But before they had exchanged many 
passes, Li Ru’s army came up from behind and set fire to 
whatever would burn. 

disorder. A melee ensued, and soon only Zu Mao was left at 
Sun Jian’s side. These two broke through the Pass and fled. 
Hua Xiong coming in hot pursuit, Sun Jian took his bow 
and let fly two arrows in quick succession, but both missed. 
He fitted a third arrow to the string, but drew the bow so 
fiercely that it snapped. He cast the bow to the earth and set 
off at full gallop. 

that the rebels will too easily recognize. Give it to me, and 
I will wear it!” 

So Sun Jian exchanged his silver helmet with the turban 

for his general’s headpiece, and the two men parted, riding 
different ways. The pursuers looking only for the purple 

spined lance with snake-headed blade; Huang Gai of 
Lingling who wielded an iron whip; Han Dang of Lingzhi 
using a heavy saber; and Zu Mao of Wujun who fought with 
a pair of swords. 

Commander Sun Jian wore a helmet of fine silver 

wrapped round with a purple turban. He carried across his 
body his sword of ancient ingot iron and rode a dappled 
horse with flowing mane. 

Sun Jian advanced to the Pass and hailed the defenders, 

crying, “Helpers of a villain! Be quick to surrender!” 

Hua Xiong bade Hu Zhen lead five thousand out against 

Sun Jian. Cheng Pu with the snaky lance rode out from 
Sun Jian’s side and 
engaged. After a very 
few bouts, Cheng Pu 
killed Hu Zhen on the 
spot by a thrust through 
the throat. Then Sun 
Jian gave the signal 
for the main army to 
advance. But from the Pass, Hua Xiong’s troops rained 
down showers of stones, which proved too much for the 

assailants, and they 
retired 
into 
camp 

at Liangdong. Sun 
Jian sent the report 
of victory to Yuan 
Shao. 

Sun Jian also sent 

an urgent message 
for supplies to the 
commissary. 

Sun Jian is a very tiger in the east. Should he take the capital 

for our guidance, rashly went to attack the enemy: He was 
slain and with him many of our soldiers. Now Sun Jian has 
been defeated. Thus our fighting spirit has suffered and 
what is to be done?” 

Everyone was silent. Lifting his eyes, Yuan Shao looked 

round from one to another till he came to Gongsun Zan, and 
then he remarked three men who stood behind Gongsun 
Zan’s seat. They were of striking appearance as they stood 
there, all three smiling cynically. 

“Who are those men behind you?” said Yuan Shao. 
Gongsun Zan told Liu Bei to come forward, and said, 

“This is Liu Bei, Magistrate of Pingyuan and a brother 
of mine who shared my humble cottage when we were 
students.” 

“It must be the Liu Bei who broke up the Yellow Scarves 

rebellion,” said Cao Cao. 

make his obeisance to the assembly, to whom Liu Bei then 
related his services and his origin, all in full detail. 

Yuan Shao, and he bade Liu Bei sit. 

Liu Bei modestly thanked him, declining. 
Said Yuan Shao, “This consideration is not for your fame 

and office. I respect you as a scion of the imperial family.” 

So Liu Bei 

took his seat in 
the lowest place 
of the long line 
of lords. And 
his two brothers 
with 
folded 

arms took their 
stations behind 
him. 

turban went after its wearer, and Sun Jian escaped along a 
by-road. 

Zu Mao, hotly pursued, then tore off the headdress which 

he hung on the post of a half-burned house as he passed and 
dashed into the thick woods. Hua Xiong’s troops seeing the 
purple turban standing motionless dared not approach, but 
they surrounded it on every side and shot at it with arrows. 
Presently they discovered the trick, went up and seized it. 

This was the moment that Zu Mao awaited. At once he 

rushed forth, his two swords whirling about, and dashed at 
the leader. But Hua Xiong was too quick. With a loud yell, 
Hua Xiong slashed at Zu Mao and cut him down the horse. 
Hua Xiong and Li Ru continued the slaughter till the day 
broke, and they led their troops back to the Pass. 

Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang in time found their 

chief and the soldiers gathered. Sun Jian was much grieved 
at the loss of Zu Mao. 

When news of the disaster reached Yuan Shao, he was 

greatly chagrined and called all the lords to a council. They 
assembled and Gongsun Zan was the last to arrive. 

When all were seated in the tent Yuan Shao said, “The 

swarthy red and his voice deep as the sound of a great bell. 

“Who is he?” asked Yuan Shao. 
Gongsun Zan told them it was Guan Yu, brother of Liu 

Bei. 

“And what is he?” asked Yuan Shao. 
“He is in the train of Liu Bei as a mounted archer.” 
“What! An insult to us all!” roared Yuan Shu from his 

place. “Have we no leader? How dare an archer speak thus 
before us? Let us beat him forth!” 

But Cao Cao intervened. “Peace, O Yuan Shu! Since this 

man speaks great words, he is certainly valiant. Let him try. 
If he fails, then we may reproach him.” 

“Hua Xiong will laugh at us if we send a mere archer to 

fight him,” said Yuan Shao. 

“This man looks no common person. And how can the 

enemy know he is but a bowman?” said Cao Cao. 

“If I fail, then can you take my head,” spoke Guan Yu. 
Cao Cao bade them heat some wine and offered a cup to 

Guan Yu as he went out. 

space.” 

into the saddle. Those in 
the tent heard the fierce roll 
of the drums and then a 
mighty sound as if skies were 
falling and earth rising, hills 
trembling 
and 
mountains 

tearing asunder. And they 
were sore afraid. And while 
they were listening with ears 
intent, lo! the gentle tinkle 
of horse bells, and Guan Yu 
returned, throwing at their 

that Hua Xiong with a company of mail-clad horsemen was 
coming down from the Pass. They were flaunting Sun Jian’s 
captured purple turban on the end of a bamboo pole. The 
enemy was soon hurling insults at those within the stockade 
and challenging them to fight. 

“Who dares go out to give battle?” said Yuan Shao. 
“I will go,” said Yu 

She, a renown general 
of Yuan Shu, stepping 
forward. 

So Yu She went, and 

almost immediately one 
came back to say that 
Yu She had fallen in the 
third bout of Hua Xiong. 

Fear began to lay its 

cold hand on the assembly. 

Then Imperial Protector Han Fu said, “I have a brave 

warrior among my army. Pan Feng is his name, and he 
could slay this Hua Xiong.” 

So Pan Feng was ordered out to meet the foe. With his 

great battle-ax in his hand, Pan Feng mounted and rode forth. 
But soon came the direful tidings that General Pan Feng too 
had fallen. The faces of the gathering paled at this. 

“What a pity my two able generals, Yan Liang and Wen 

Chou, are not here! Then should we have someone who 
would not fear this Hua Xiong,” said Yuan Shao. 

He had not finished when from the lower end a voice 

tolled, “I will go, take Hua Xiong’s head, and lay it before 
you here!” 

All turned to look at the speaker. He was tall and had 

a long beard. His eyes were those of a phoenix and his 
eyebrows thick and bushy like silkworms. His face was a 

displayed his valor,

And the wine was still warm when Hua Xiong had been 

slain.

 
Cao Cao was greatly excited at this success. 
But Zhang Fei’s voice was heard, shouting, “My brother 

has slain Hua Xiong. 
What are we waiting 
for? Why not break 
through the Pass and 
seize 
Dong 
Zhuo? 

Could there have been 
a better time?” 

Again 
arose 

the angry voice of 
Yuan Shu, “We high 
officials are too meek 
and yielding. Here is 
the petty follower of a 
small magistrate daring 
to flaunt his prowess 
before us! Expel him 
from the tent, I say.” 

station of him who has done a great service?” 

“If you hold a mere magistrate in such honor, then I 

simply withdraw,” said Yuan Shu. 

Cao Cao. 

Then he told Gongsun Zan to lead the three brothers 

back to their own camp, and the other chiefs then dispersed. 
That night Cao Cao secretly sent presents of meat and wine 
to soothe the three after this adventure. 

Zhang Fei

feet the head of the slain leader, their enemy Hua Xiong. 

The wine was still warm! 
This doughty deed has been celebrated in verse: 

The power of the man stands first in all the world,
At the gate of the camp was heard the rolling of the battle 

drums;

So eight of the commanders---Wang Kuang, Qiao Mao, 

Bao Xin, Yuan Yi, Kong Rong, Zhang Yang, Tao Qian, and 
Gongsun Zan---were ordered to go in the direction of the 
Tiger Trap Pass to oppose their enemy. Cao Cao and his 
troops moved among them as reserve to render help where 
needed. 

Of the eight, Wang Kuang, the Governor of Henei, 

was the first to arrive, and Lu Bu went to give battle with 
three thousand armored horsemen. When Wang Kuang had 
ordered his army, horse and foot, in battle array, he took his 
station under the great banner and looked over at his foe. 

Lu Bu was a conspicuous figure in front of the line. 

On his head was a triple curved headdress of ruddy gold 
with pheasant tails. He wore a warring velvet-red robe of 
Xichuan silk embroidered with thousand flowers, which was 
overlapped by golden mail adorned with a gaping animal’s 
head, joined by rings at the sides and girt to his waist with 
a belt fastened by a beautiful lion-head clasp. His bow and 
arrows were slung on his shoulders, and he carried a long 
heavy trident halberd. He was seated on his snorting steed 
Red Hare. Indeed Lu Bu was the man among humans, as 
Red Hare was the horse among horses. 

“Who dares go out to fight him?” asked Wang Kuang 

turning to those behind him. 

In response a valiant 

general 
from 
Henei 

named 
Fang 
Yue 

spurred to the front, 
his spear set ready for 
battle. Lu Bu and Fang 
Yue met: Before the 
fifth bout Fang Yue fell 
under a thrust of the 
trident halberd, and Lu 

When Hua Xiong’s troops straggled back and told the 

story of defeat and death, Li Ru was greatly distressed. He 
wrote urgent letters to his master who called in his trusted 
advisers to a council. 

our best leader, and the rebel power has thereby become 
very great. Yuan Shao is at the head of this confederacy, 
and his uncle, Yuan Wei, is holder of the office of Imperial 
Guardianship. If those in the capital combine with those 
in the country, we may suffer. Therefore we must remove 
them. So I request you, Sir Prime Minister, to place yourself 
at the head of your army and break this confederation.” 

Dong Zhuo agreed and at once ordered his two generals, 

Li Jue and Guo Si, to take five hundred troops and surround 
the residence of Imperial Guardian Yuan Wei, slay every 
soul regardless of age, and hang the head of Yuan Wei 
outside the gate as trophy. And Dong Zhuo commanded two 
hundred thousand troops to advance in two armies. The first 
fifty thousand were under Li Jue and Guo Si, and they were 
to hold River Si Pass. They should not necessarily fight. The 
other one hundred fifty thousand under Dong Zhuo himself 
went to Tiger Trap Pass. His counselors and commanders-
--Li Ru, Lu Bu, Fan Chou, Zhang Ji, and others---marched 
with the main army. 

As soon as they arrived, Dong Zhuo bade Lu Bu take thirty 
thousand soldiers and make a strong stockade on the outside 
of the Pass. The main body with Dong Zhuo would occupy 
the Pass. 

News of this movement reaching the confederate lords. 

Yuan Shao summoned a council. 

Said Cao Cao, “The occupation of the Pass would cut 

our armies in two; therefore, we must oppose Dong Zhuo’s 
army on the way.” 

While the council was in progress again came Lu Bu 

to challenge them, and again the commanders moved out 
against him. This time Gongsun Zan, flourishing his spear, 
went to meet the enemy. After a very few bouts Gongsun 
Zan turned and fled; Lu Bu following at the topmost speed 
of Red Hare. Red Hare was a five-hundred-mile-a-day 
horse, swift as the wind. The lords watched Red Hare gained 
rapidly upon the flying horseman, and Lu Bu’s halberd was 
poised ready to strike Gongsun Zan just behind the heart. 
Just then dashed in a third rider with round glaring eyes and 
a bristling mustache, and armed with a ten-foot spear. 

Bu dashed forward. Wang Kuang’s troops could not stand 
and scattered in all directions. Lu Bu went to and fro slaying 
all he met. He was irresistible. 

Luckily, two other troops led by Qiao Mao and Yuan 

Yi came up and rescued the wounded Wang Kuang, and 
Lu Bu pulled back. The three, having lost many troops, 
withdrew ten miles and made a stockade. And before long 
the remaining five commanders came up and joined them. 
They held a council and agreed Lu Bu was a hero no one 
could match. 

And while they sat there anxious and uncertain, it was 

announced that Lu Bu had returned to challenge them. 
They mounted their horses and placed themselves at the 
heads of eight forces, each body in its station on the high 
ground. Around them was the opposing army in formation, 
commanded by Lu Bu, innumerable horse and foot, with 
splendid embroidered banners waving in the breeze. 

They attacked Lu Bu. Mu Shun, a general of Governor 

Zhang Yang, rode out with his spear set, but soon fell at 
the first encounter with Lu Bu. This frightened the others. 
Then galloped forth Wu Anguo, a general under Governor 
Kong Rong. Wu Anguo raised his iron mace ready at his 
rival. Lu Bu whirling his halberd and urging on his steed 
came to meet Wu Anguo. The two fought, well matched 
for ten bouts, when a blow from the trident halberd broke 
Wu Anguo’s wrist. Letting his mace fall to the ground he 
fled. Then all eight of the lords led forth their armies to his 
rescue, and Lu Bu retired to his line. 

The fighting then ceased, and after their return to camp 

another council met. 

Cao Cao said, “No one can stand against the prowess of 

Lu Bu. Let us call up all the lords and evolve some good 
plan. If only Lu Bu were taken, Dong Zhuo could easily be 
killed.” 

with three surrounding warriors at whom he struck one 
after another, and they at him, the flashing of the warriors’ 
weapons looking like the revolving lamps suspended at the 
new year. And the warriors of the eight armies gazed rapt 
with amazement at such a battle. 

But Lu Bu’s guard began to weaken and fatigue seized 

him. Looking hard in the face of Liu Bei, Lu Bu feigned a 
fierce thrust thus making Liu Bei suddenly draw back. Then, 
lowering his halberd, Lu Bu dashed through the angle thus 
opened and got away. 

But was it likely they would allow him to escape? They 

whipped their steeds and followed hard. The soldiers of the 
eight armies cracked their throats with thunderous cheers 
and all dashed forward, pressing after Lu Bu as he made 
for the shelter of the Tiger Trap Pass. And first among his 
pursuers were the three brothers. 

An ancient poet has told of this famous fight in these 

lines: 

“Stay, O twice bastard!” roared he, “I, Zhang Fei of Yan, 

await you!” 

Seeing this opponent, Lu Bu left the pursuit of Gongsun 

Zan and engaged the new adversary. Zhang Fei was elated, 
and he rode forth with all his energies. They two were 
worthily matched, and they exchanged half a hundred bouts 
with no advantage to either side. Then Guan Yu, impatient, 
rode out with his huge and weighty green-dragon saber and 
attacked Lu Bu on the other flank. The three steeds formed 
a triangle and their riders battered away at each other for 
thirty bouts, yet still Lu Bu stood firm. 

swords raised ready to strike. The steed with the flowing 
mane was urged in at an angle, and now Lu Bu had to contend 

Gripped in his mighty hand the long serpent halberd,
His mustache bristled with anger, standing stiff like 

wire.

His round eyes glared, lightning flashes darted from 

them.

Neither quailed in the fight, but the issue was 

undecided.

Guan Yu stood out in front, his soul vexed within him,
His green-dragon saber shone white as frost in the 

sunlight,

His bright colored fighting robe fluttered like butterfly 

wings,

Demons and angels shrieked at the thunder of his 

horse hoofs,

In his eyes was fierce anger, a fire to be quenched only 

in blood.

Next Liu Bei joined the battle, gripping his twin sword 

blades,

The heavens themselves trembled at the majesty of his 

wrath.

These three closely beset Lu Bu and long drawn out 

was the battle,

Always he warded their blows, never faltering a 

moment.

The noise of their shouting rose to the sky, and the 

earth reechoed it,

The heat of battle ranged to the frozen pole star.
Worn out, feeling his strength fast ebbing, Lu Bu 

thought to flee,

He glanced at the hills around and thither would fly 

for shelter,

Then, reversing his halberd and lowering its lofty 

point,

Hastily he fled, loosing himself from the battle;

Ling,

Their glory declined as the sun sinks at the close of day.
Dong Zhuo, infamous minister of state, pulled down the 

youthful Bian.

It is true the new Xian was a weakling, too timid for his 

times.

Then Cao Cao proclaimed abroad these wicked deeds,
And the great lords, moved with anger, assembled their 

forces.

Shao,

Pledged themselves to maintain the ruling house and 

tranquillity.

Of the warriors of that time matchless Lu Bu was the 

boldest.

seas.

dragon,

On his head was a golden headdress with pheasant tails,
About his waist a shaggy belt, the clasp, two wild beasts’ 

heads with gripping jaws,

His flowing, embroidered robe fluttered about his form,
His swift courser bounded over the plain, a mighty wind 

following,

His terrible trident halberd flashed in the sunlight, bright 

as a placid lake.

Who dared face him as he rode forth to challenge?
The bowels of the confederate lords were torn with fear 

and their hearts trembled.

north,

Chapter
122
5

With head low bent, he gave the rein to his courser,
Turned his face away and fled to Tiger Trap Pass.
 
The three brothers maintained the pursuit to the Pass. 

Looking up they saw an immense umbrella of black 
gauze fluttering in the west wind. 

“Certainly there is Dong Zhuo,” cried Zhang Fei. 

“What is the use of pursuing Lu Bu? Better far seize the 
chiefest rebel and so pluck up the evil by the roots!” 

And he whipped up his steed toward the Pass. 

To quell rebellion seize the leader if you can;
If you need a wondrous service then first find a 

wondrous man.

 
 The following chapters will unfold the result of the 

battle.

come riding down from the Pass to see you, General. He is 
in the camp.” 

camp, where he found the visitor was Li Jue, one of the 
much trusted commanders of Dong Zhuo. 

“Wherefore come you?” said Sun Jian. 
Li Jue replied, “You are the one person for whom my 

master has respect and admiration, and he sends me to 
arrange a matrimonial alliance between the two families. 
He wishes that his daughter may become the wife of your 
son.” 

“What! Dong Zhuo, that rebel and renegade, that 

subverter of the Throne! I wish I could destroy his nine 
generations as a thank-offering to the empire! Think you I 
would be willing to have an alliance with such a family? I 
will not slay you as I ought, but go, and go quickly! Yield 
the Pass and I may spare your lives. If you delay, I will 
grind your bones to powder and make mincemeat of your 
flesh!” 

Li Jue threw his arms over his head and ran out. He 

returned to his master and told him what a rude reception 
he had met with. Dong Zhuo asked his adviser Li Ru how 
to reply to this. 

the edge of our army’s desire for battle. It would be well to 
return to the capital and remove the Emperor to Changan, 
as the street children had been lately singing: 

“A Han on the west, a Han on the east.
The deer (emperor) in Changan shall worry least.”

 Li Ru continued, “If you think out this couplet, it applies 

to the present juncture. Half the first line refers to the founder 
of the dynasty, Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor, who became 

Chapter 6 
Burning The Capital, Dong Zhuo Commits An Atrocity;
Hiding The Imperial Hereditary Seal, Sun Jian Breaks 

Faith. 

Zhang Fei rode hard up to the Pass, but the defenders sent 

down stones and arrows like rain so that he could not enter, 
and he returned. The eight lords all joined in felicitations to 
the three brothers for their services, and the story of victory 
was sent to Yuan Shao, who ordered Sun Jian to make an 
immediate advance. 

and Huang Gai, went over 
to the camp of Yuan Shu. 

Tracing figures on the 

ground with his staff, Sun 
Jian said, “Dong Zhuo and I 
had no personal quarrel. Yet 
now I have thrown myself 
into the battle regardless 
of consequences, exposed 
my person to the risk of 
wounds and fought bloody 
battles to their bitter end. 
And why? That I might be 
the means of ridding my 
country of a rebel and---for 
the private advantage of your family. Yet you, heeding the 
slanderous tongue of certain counselor, formerly withheld 
the supplies absolutely necessary to me, and so I suffered 
defeat. How can you explain, General?” 

Yuan Shu, confused and frightened, had no word to reply. 

He ordered the death of the slanderer to placate Sun Jian. 

Then suddenly they told Sun Jian, “Some officer has 

Yuan Shu

Thus if you remove to Changan, there will be no need for 
anxiety.” 

Dong Zhuo was exceedingly pleased and said, “Had you 

not spoken thus, I should not have understood!” 

for Capital Luoyang. 

Here he called all the officials to a great council in the 

Palace and addressed them, “After two centuries of rule 
here, the royal fortune has been exhausted, and I perceive 
that the aura of rule has migrated to Changan, whither I now 
desire to move the court. All you had better pack up for the 
journey.”

reflect. The Land Within the Passes1 is all destruction. There 
is no reason to renounce the ancestral temples and abandon 
the imperial tombs here. I fear the people will be alarmed. It 
is easy to alarm them but difficult to pacify them.” 

“Do you oppose the state plans?” said Dong Zhuo 

angrily. 

Another official, Grand Commander Huang Wan, 

supported his colleague, “In the era of Recommencement 
(AD 23-25), Fan Chong of the Red Eyebrows rebels burned 
Changan to the ground and reduced the place to broken 
tiles2. The inhabitants scattered all but a few. It is wrong to 
abandon these palaces here for a wasteland.” 

Dong Zhuo replied, “The East of the Pass is full of 

sedition, and all the empire is in rebellion. The city of 
Changan is protected by the Yaohan Mountains and the 
Hangu Pass. Moreover, it is near Longyou, whence can be 

1The Land Within the Passes, or Guanzhong, was the area surrounding 

Changan. 

2In the ending years of Wang Mang’s usurpation, rebels ran the country. 

The Red Eyebrows rebels were one of the most active of the robber bands. They 
finally captured Changan, and Wang Mang was killed in the fighting.

ruler in the western city of Changan, which was the capital 
during twelve reigns. The other half corresponds to Liu 
Xiu the Latter Han Founder who ruled from Luoyang, the 
eastern capital during twelve latter reigns. The revolution 
of the heavens brings us back to this starting moment. 

Sun Jian

was given to two of Dong Zhuo’s commanders, Li Jue 
and Guo Si. The people were sent off in bands, each band 
between two parties of soldiers, who drove them torward 
Changan. Enormous numbers fell by the road side and died 
in the ditches, and the escort plundered the fugitives and 
defiled the women. A wail of sorrow arose to the very sky. 

Dong Zhuo’s final orders as he left Capital Luoyang 

were to burn the whole city: Houses, palaces, temples, 
and everything were devoured by the flames. The capital 
became but a patch of scorched earth. 

Dong Zhuo sent Lu Bu to desecrate the tombs of the 

emperors and their consorts for the jewels therein, and the 
common soldiers took the occasion to dig up the graves of 
officials and plunder the cemeteries of the wealthy. The spoil 
of the city, gold and silver, pearls and silks, and beautiful 
ornaments, filled several thousand carts. With these and 
the persons of the Emperor and his household, Dong Zhuo 
moved off to the new capital in the first year of Inauguration 
of Tranquillity (AD 190). 

Luoyang being thus abandoned, the general of Dong 

Zhuo at River Si Pass, Zhao Cen, evacuated that post of 
vantage, which Sun Jian at once occupied. Liu Bei and his 
brothers took Tiger Trap Pass and the confederate lords 

easily brought timber, stone, brick, and building materials. 
In a month or so palaces can be erected. So an end to your 
wild words!” 

Yet Minister of Works Xun Shuang raised another protest 

against disturbing the people, but Dong Zhuo overbore him 
also. 

“How can I stop to consider a few common people when 

my scheme affects the empire?” said Dong Zhuo. 

and Xun Shuang---were removed from their offices and 
reduced to the rank of commoners. 

As Dong Zhuo went out to get into his coach, he met two 

other officers who made obeisance. They were the Chair of 
the Secretariat, Zhou Bi, and the Commander of the City 
Gates, Wu Qiong. Dong Zhuo stopped and asked them what 
they wanted. 

Said Zhou Bi, “We venture to try to dissuade you from 

moving the capital to Changan.” 

Dong Zhuo replied, “You two persuaded me to give Yuan 

Shao office. Now he has already turned traitor, and you are 
of the same party!” 

And without more ado he bade his guards take both 

outside the city and put them to death. The command to 
remove to the new capital immediately was issued. 

Speaking to Dong Zhuo, Li Ru pointed out, “We are 

short of money and food, and the rich people of Luoyang 
could be easily plundered. This is a good occasion to link 
them to the rebels and to confiscate their properties.” 

Dong Zhuo sent five thousand troops out to plunder and 

slay. They captured many thousand wealthy householders 
and, having stuck flags on their heads saying they were 
Traitors and Rebels, drove them out of the city and put them 
to death. Their properties were all seized. 

The task of driving forth the inhabitants, some millions, 

laughed at his colleague’s foresight. He set out his troops in 
fighting order. 

drovers of the people, where are you going?” 

are these?” 

Then from Cao Cao army rode forth Xiahou Dun 

with his spear set, and Lu Bu and Xiahou Dun engaged. 
The combat had hardly begun when Li Ru with a cohort 
came in from the left. Cao Cao bade Xiahou Yuan meet 
this onslaught. However, on the other side appeared Guo 
Si and his company. Cao Cao sent Cao Ren against Guo Si. 
The onrush on three sides was too much to withstand, and 
Lu Bu’s army was overwhelming, so Xiahou Dun had to 
retire to the main line. Thereupon Lu Bu’s armored troops 
attacked and completed the defeat. The beaten army of Cao 
Cao turned toward Yingyang. 

They got as far as the foot of a hill in the evening about 

the second watch, and the moon made it as light as day. Here 
they halted to reform. Just as they were burying the boilers 
to prepare a meal, there arose a great noise of shouting on 
all sides and out came the troops of Governor Xu Rong 
from the ambush fresh to attack. 

Cao Cao, thrown into a flurry, mounted and fled. He ran 

right in the way of the waiting Xu Rong. Then he dashed 
off in another direction, but Xu Rong shot an arrow after 
him which struck him in the shoulder. The arrow still in the 
wound, Cao Cao fled for his 
life. As he went over the hill, 
two soldiers lying in wait 
among the grass suddenly 
dashed out and wounded his 
horse, which fell and rolled 
over. And as he slipped from 

advanced. 

Sun Jian hastened to the late capital which was still in 

flames. When he arrived, dense smoke hung all over it and 
spread for miles around. No living thing, not a fowl, or 
a dog, or a human being, remained. Sun Jian told off his 
soldiers to extinguish the fires and set out camping places 
for the confederate lords. 

has gone west. We ought to follow and attack his rear 
without loss of time. Why do you remain inactive?” 

“All our colleagues are worn out, and there is nothing to 

be gained by attack,” said Yuan Shao. 

utter confusion that reigned---palaces burned, the Emperor 
abducted, the whole world upset, and no one knowing 
whither to turn. The villain will soon be ended, and a single 
blow could exterminate Dong Zhuo. Why not pursue?” 

that mind was to postpone action. So they did nothing. 

cried Cao Cao. 

Then, he and his six generals---Xiahou Dun, Xiahou 

Yuan, Cao Ren, Cao Hong, Li Dian, and Yue Jing---and ten 
thousand troops started in pursuit. 

Dong Zhuo reached it, Governor Xu Rong went to welcome 
the cavalcade. 

Li Ru said, “As there is some danger of pursuit, it would 

be well to order the Governor of this place to lay an ambush 
outside the city. He is to let the pursuers pass and be ready 
to cut off their retreat, when our army beats them off. That 
will teach any others not to follow.” 

Then Dong Zhuo ordered Lu Bu to command the rear 

guard. Very soon they saw Cao Cao coming up, and Lu Bu 

yourself!” 

“My lord, mount my horse quickly! I will go afoot,” said 

Cao Hong. 

“If those wretches come up, what then?” said Cao Cao. 
“The world can do without Cao Hong, but not without 

you, my lord!” 

“If I live, I shall owe you my life,” said Cao Cao. 
So he mounted. 

Cao Hong tore off 
his own breastplate, 
gripped his sword, 
and went on foot 
after the horse. Thus 
they proceeded till 
the 
fourth 
watch 

when they saw before 
them a broad stream, 
and behind they still heard the shouts of pursuers drawing 
nearer and nearer. 

“This is my fate,” said Cao Cao. “I am really doomed!” 
Cao Hong helped Cao Cao down from his horse. Then 

taking off his fighting robe and helmet, Cao Hong took 
the wounded man on his back and waded into the stream. 

When they reached 
the 
further 
side, 

the pursuers had 
already gained the 
bank whence they 
shot arrows. 

Cao Cao all wet 

pushed on. Dawn 
was near. They went 
on another ten miles 

the saddle, he was seized and made prisoner. 

whirling his sword up, cut down both the captors, and 
rescued Cao Cao. It was Cao Hong. 

the well. Soon they brought up the corpse of a woman, not 
in the least decayed although it had been there many days. 
She was dressed in Palace clothing and from her neck hung 
an embroidered bag. Opening this a red box was found, 
with a golden lock, and when the box was opened, they 
saw a jade seal, square in shape, four inches each way. On 
it were delicately engraved five dragons intertwined. One 
corner had been broken off and repaired with gold. There 
were eight characters in the seal style of engraving which 
interpreted read: 

I have received the command from Heaven: May my 

time be always long and prosperous. 

who at once recognized it as the Imperial Hereditary Seal 
of the Emperor.  

Imperial Seal

and then sat down to rest under a precipice. Suddenly loud 
shouting was heard and a party of horse appeared. It was 
Governor Xu Rong who had forded the river higher up. Just 
at this moment Xiahou Dun and Xiahou Yuan, with several 
dozens men, came along. 

“Hurt not my lord!” cried Xiahou Dun to Xu Rong, who 

at once rushed at him. 

But the combat was short. Xu Rong speedily fell under a 

spear thrust of Xiahou Dun, and his troops were driven off. 
Before long Cao Cao’s other generals arrived. Sadness and 
joy mingled in the greetings. They gathered together the few 
hundreds of soldiers left and then returned to Luoyang. 

after extinguishing the fires, camped within the walls, his 
own tent being set up near the Dynastic Temple. His people 
cleared away the debris and closed the rifted tombs. The 
gates were barred. On the site of the Dynastic Temple he 
put up a mat shed containing three apartments, and here he 
begged the lords to meet and replace the sacred tablets, with 
solemn sacrifices and prayers. 

This ceremony over, the others left and Sun Jian returned 

to his camp. That night the stars and moon vied with each 
other in brightness. As Sun Jian sat in the open air looking 
up at the heavens, he noticed a mist spreading over the stars 
of the Constellation Draco. 

“The Emperor’s star is dulled,” said 

Sun Jian with a sigh. “No wonder a 
rebellious minister disturbs the state, 
the people sit in dust and ashes, and the 
capital is a waste.” 

And his tears began to fall. 
Then a soldier pointing to the south 

said, “There is a beam of colored light 
rising from a well!” 

return. Now my lord has it and certainly will come to the 
imperial dignity. But you must not remain here in the north. 
Quickly go home to Changsha, south of the Great River5, 
where you can lay plans for the accomplishment of the 
great design.” 

“Your words exactly accord with my thoughts,” said Sun 

Jian. “Tomorrow I will make an excuse that I am unwell 
and get away.” 

But one among them was a compatriot of the elected chief 
of the confederacy---Yuan Shao. He thought this might be 
of great advantage to him, so he stole away out of the camp 
and betrayed his master. He went to Yuan Shao’s camp, 
informed the secret, and received a liberal reward. Yuan 
Shao kept the informant in his own camp. 

rather unwell and wish to return to Changsha.” 

Yuan Shao laughed, saying, “I know what you are 

suffering from: It is called the Imperial Hereditary Seal!” 

This was a shock to Sun Jian, and he paled but said, 

“Whence these words?” 

of the state and to relieve it from oppression. The seal is 
state property; and since you have got hold of it, you should 
publicly hand it over to me as chief. When Dong Zhuo has 
been slain, it must go back to the government. What do you 
mean by concealing it and going away?” 

“How could the seal get into my hands?” said Sun Jian. 
“Where is the article out of the well near the Hall of 

Paragons?” 

“I have it not: Why harass me thus?” 
“Quickly produce it, or it will be the worst for you!” 
5The Yangtze or Yangzi river, which flows from west to east to the Pacific 

at Shanghai. 

Bian He3 saw a phoenix sitting on a certain stone at the foot 
of the Jing Mountains. He offered the stone at court. The 
King of Chu split open the stone and found a piece of jade. 
In the twenty-sixth year of Qin Dynasty (BC 221), a jade 
cutter made a seal from it, and Li Si4, the First Emperor’s 
Prime Minister, engraved the characters. Two years later, 
while the First Emperor was sailing in Dongting Lake, a 
terrific storm arrived. The Emperor threw the seal to the 
water as a propitiatory offering, and the storm immediately 
ceased. Ten years later again, when the First Emperor was 
making a progress and had reached Huaying, an old man by 
the road side handed a seal to one of the attendants saying, 
‘This is now restored to the ancestral dragon!’ and had then 
disappeared. Thus the jewel returned to Qin. 

the last Emperor of Qin and grandson of the First Emperor, 
presented the seal to Liu Bang the Supreme Ancestor, the 
founder of Han Dynasty. Two hundred years later, in Wang 
Mang’s rebellion, the Emperor’s mother, Lady Yuan, struck 
two of the rebels, Wang Xun and Su Xian, with the seal and 
broke off a corner, which was repaired with gold. Liu Xiu 
the Latter Han Founder got possession of it at Yiyang, and 
it has been regularly bequeathed hereafter. 

trouble in the Palace when the Ten Regular Attendants 
hurried off the Emperor. It was missed on His Majesty’s 

3Bian He of the state of Chu (circa BC 800) found a jadestone in Jing 

Mountains and presented it to two Chu kings, but he was sentenced to amputation 
of both feet because the stone was thought as fake. When a new king took the 
throne, Bian He tried once more, and this time the stone was recognized as the 
purest kind of jade.

4Li Si (BC 280-208) was the statesman who was responsible for most of the 

radical political and cutural innovations made in Qin after BC 221.

me. My plan was to get Yuan Shao with his Henei troops 
to approach Mengching; and my force at Qiao to keep 
Chenggao; while the others of you to hold Suanzao, to close 
the passes of Huanyuan and Daigu, and to take possession 
of the granaries, to control the points of vantage, and thus to 
secure the Capital District. I planned for Yuan Shu with his 
Nanyang army to occupy the counties of Danshi and Xilin 
and go into Wu Pass to help the three supports. All were 
to fortify their positions and not to fight. Advantage lay 
in a diverse military coalition that could show the empire 
a possibility of dealing with the rebellion. We could have 
convinced the people to side with us against Dong Zhuo. 
Victory would have been ours at once. But then came delays 
and doubts and inaction, and the confidence of the people 
was lost, and I am ashamed.” 

saw that the others mistrusted him, and in his heart knew 
that nothing could be accomplished. So he led off his force 
to Yanzhou Region6. 

Then Gongsun Zan said to Liu Bei, “This Yuan Shao is 

an incapable, and things will turns chaotic. We had better 
go too.” 

Liu Bei in command and went to strengthen his own position 
and refresh his troops. 

borrow grain of the Governor of Dongjun, Qiao Mao. Being 
denied, Liu Dai attacked the camp, killed Qiao Mao and 
took over all his army. Yuan Shao seeing the confederacy 
breaking up also marched away and went east. 

On the way home, Sun Jian was passing through Jingzhou 

Region. The Imperial Protector of Jingzhou, Liu Biao, was 
a scion of the imperial house and a native of Shanyang. 

6Liu Dai was the Imperial Protector of Yanzhou at that time. 

Sun Jian pointing toward the heavens as an oath said, “If 

I have this jewel and am hiding it myself, may my end be 
unhappy and my death violent!” 

The lords all said, “After an oath like this, we think he 

cannot have it.” 

Then Yuan Shao called out his informant. 
“When you pulled 

that thing out of the 
well, was this man 
there?” asked he of 
Sun Jian. 

Sun Jian’s anger 

burst forth, and he 
sprang forward to kill 
the man. 

Yuan Shao also 

drew his sword, saying, “You touch that soldier and it is an 
insult to me!” 

Han Dang stepped forth; behind Yuan Shao, Generals Yan 
Liang and Wen Chou were ready to act. In a moment on all 
sides swords flew from their scabbards. But the confusion 
was stayed by the efforts of the others, and Sun Jian left the 
assembly. Soon he broke up his camp and marched to his 
own place. 

Region and sent the letter by a trusty hand to tell Imperial 
Protector Liu Biao to stop Sun Jian and take away the seal. 

Just after this came the news of the defeat and misfortune 

of Cao Cao, and when he was coming home, Yuan Shao 
sent out to welcome him and conduct him into camp. They 
also prepared a feast to console him. 

for the public good, and all you gentlemen nobly supported 

Huang Gai dealt Cai 
Mao a blow with 
the iron whip on the 
armor just over the 
heart. Cai Mao turned 
his steed and fled, and 
Sun Jian got through 
with a sudden rush. 

However, 
there 

arose the sound of 
gongs and drums on the hills behind, and there was Liu 
Biao in person with a large army. 

“Why did you, on the faith of a letter from Yuan Shao, try 
to coerce the chief of a neighboring region?” 

“You have concealed the state jewel, and I want you to 

restore it,” was Liu Biao’s reply. 

“If I have this thing, may I die a violent death!” 
“If you want me to believe you, let me search your 

baggage.” 

“What force have you that you dare come to flout me 

thus?” 

And only Liu Biao’s prompt retirement prevented a 

battle. Sun Jian proceeded on his way. But from the rear of 
the second hill an ambush suddenly discovered itself, and 
Kuai Yue and Cai Mao were still pursuing. Sun Jian seemed 
entirely hemmed in. 

What does a man to hold the state jewel for,
If its possession lead to strife?

How Sun Jian got clear of the difficulty will presently 

be told.

As a young man he had made friends with many famous 
people, and he and his companions were called the Eight 
Wise Ones. The other seven were: 

1. Chen Xiang from Runan
2. Fan Pang from Runan
3. Kong Yu from Luting
4. Fan Kang from Bohai
5. Tan Fu from Shanyang
6. Zhang Jian from Shanyang
7. Cen Zhi from Nanyang
 
Liu Biao was friends with all these. He had three famous 

persons who helped him in the government of his region. 
They were Kuai Liang and Kuai Yue from Yanping, and Cai 
Mao from Xiangyang. 

arrived, Liu Biao ordered Kuai Yue and Cai Mao with ten 
thousand soldiers to bar the way. When Sun Jian drew near, 
the force was arranged in fighting order and the leaders 
were in the front. 

“Why 
are 
you 
thus 

barring the road with armed 
troops?” asked Sun Jian. 

“Why do you, a servant of 

Han, secrete the Emperor’s 
special seal? Leave it with 
me at once and you go free,” 
said Kuai Yue. 

Sun Jian angrily ordered 

out General Huang Gai. On 
the other side Cai Mao rode 
forth with his sword set to 
strike. But after a few bouts 
Huang Gai

his help. In the meantime Yuan Shao had sent to warn Han 
Fu of Gongsun Zan’s threat. Han Fu sought advice from 
Advisers Xun Chang and Xin Ping. 

Xun Chang said, “Governor Gongsun Zan of Beiping is 

commanding a huge and strong army. If he came to attack 
us, we could not stand against him, especially if he had the 
help of Liu Bei and his brothers. At present, Yuan Shao is 
bolder than most, and he has many able and famous leaders 
under him. You cannot do better than ask him to assist in 
administering this region. Yuan Shao will certainly treat you 
with generosity, and you need have no fear from Gongsun 
Zan.” 

Han Fu agreed and sent a message to Yuan Shao by the 

hand of Guan Chun. 

But Commander Geng Wu remonstrated with his master, 

saying, “Yuan Shao is a needy man with a hungry army and 
as dependent on us for existence as an infant in arms on 
its mother. Stop the flow of milk and the infant dies. Why 
should you hand the region over to him? It is nothing less 
than letting a tiger into the sheepfold.” 

Han Fu replied, “I am one of the clients of the Yuan 

family, and I know the abilities of Yuan Shao, which is far 
better than mine. Why are you all so jealous? The ancients 
counseled yielding to the sage.” 

Geng Wu sighed, “Jizhou is lost!” 
When the news got abroad, more than thirty officers of 

Jizhou left their employment and the city. However, Geng 
Wu and Guan Chun hid in the suburbs to await the arrival 
of Yuan Shao. 

They had not long to wait. Some days later, Yuan Shao 

with his soldiers came, and Geng Wu and Guan Chun tried 
to assassinate him with knives. This attempt failed. Yuan 
Shao’s generals, Yan Liang and Wen Chou, beheaded Geng 
Wu and Guan Chun instantly. Thus both of them died, and 

Chapter 7 
Yuan Shao Fights Gongsun Zan At The River Pan;
Sun Jian Attacks Liu Biao Across The Great River. 

At the close of the last chapter Sun Jian was surrounded. 

However, aided by Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, and Han Dang, 
he eventually fought his way through, though with the loss 
of more than half his troops. Sun Jian he returned to the 
South Land, southeast of the Great River1. Henceforward 
Sun Jian and Liu Biao were open enemies. 

Yuan Shao was in Henei. Being short of supplies, he sent 

to borrow from the Imperial Protector of Jizhou, Han Fu, 
whence he obtained the wherewithal to support his army. 

Then one of Yuan Shao’s advisers, Peng Ji, said to him, 

“You are really the strongest power here about. Why then 
depend upon another for food? Jizhou Region is rich and 
wide. Why not seize it?” 

“I have no good plan,” replied Yuan Shao. 
“You 
could 
secretly 

send a letter to Gongsun 
Zan, asking him to attack, 
promising him your support. 
Imperial Protector Han Fu 
of Jizhou, being incapable, 
must ask you to take over 
his region, and you will get 
it without lifting a finger.” 

So the letter was sent. 

When Gongsun Zan saw 
therein the proposal to make 
a joint attack and divide the 
territory, he agreed to give 

1The Yangtze or Yangzi river, which flows from west to east to the Pacific 

at Shanghai. 

Gongsun Zan

Gongsun Zan brought up all his force to the attack. 

Learning the movement, Yuan Shao sent out his army, and 
they met at River Pan. They halted on opposite sides of the 
river, over which was a bridge. 

Gongsun Zan took his station on the bridge and cried to 

his enemy, “Renegade, how dared you mislead me?” 

Yuan Shao rode to the other end of the bridge and, 

pointing at Gongsun Zan, replied, “Han Fu yielded place 
to me because he was unequal to the rule. What concern is 
it of yours?” 

Gongsun Zan replied, “Formerly you were regarded as 

loyal and public spirited, and we chose you chief of the 
confederacy. Now your deeds prove you cruel and base and 
wolf-hearted in behavior. How can you look the world in 
the face?” 

“Who will capture him?” cried Yuan Shao in a rage. 
At once Wen Chou rode out with his spear set. Gongsun 

Zan rode down the bridge to the enemy’s side, where the 
two engaged. Ten bouts showed Gongsun Zan the terrible 
power of Wen Chou, and so he drew off. The enemy came 
on. Gongsun Zan took refuge within his formation, but Wen 
Chou cut his way in and rode this way and that, slaying 

2Each region had a capital, which was often of the same name with the 

region. 

the object of their hatred entered Jizhou City2. 

Yuan Shao’s first act was to confer on Han Fu a high 

sounding title---General Who Demonstrates Grand and 
Vigor Courage in Arms---, but the administration was 
entrusted to four of Yuan Shao’s confidants---Tian Feng, 
Ju Shou, Xu You, and Peng Ji---who speedily deprived the 
Imperial Protector of all power. Full of chagrin, Han Fu 
soon abandoned all, even his family, and rode alone to take 
refuge with the Governor of Chenliu, Zhang Miao. 

brother, Gongsun Yue, to see the usurper and demand his 
share of the region. 

“I want to see your elder brother himself. He and I have 

things to discuss,” said Yuan Shao. 

Thus Gongsun Yue was sent back. But after traveling 

some fifteen miles on the homeward road, Gongsun Yue 
saw a group of soldiers appear. 

soldiers. 

Those of Gongsun Yue’s followers who escaped carried the 
news to their late master’s brother. 

Gongsun Zan was 

very angry and said, 
“Yuan Shao prevailed on 
me to attack, and now 
he has taken possession. 
Also he pretends the 
murderers of my brother 
were not his people. 
Shall I not avenge my 
brother’s injury?” 

right and left. The four 
best of Gongsun Zan’s 
generals offered joint 
battle, but one fell 
under the first stroke 
of the doughty warrior, 
and the other three fled. 
Wen Chou followed 
clearing through to 
the rear of the army. 
Gongsun Zan made for 
the mountains. 

Wen Chou forced 

his horse to its utmost 
pace, crying hoarsely, 
“Down! Dismount and 
surrender!” 

from his shoulders, his helmet fell off, and his hair streamed 
straight behind him as he rode in and out between the 
sloping hills. Then his steed stumbled and he was thrown, 
rolling over and over to the foot of the slope. 

Wen Chou was now very near and poising his spear for 

the thrust. Then suddenly came out from the shelter of a 
grassy mound on the left a general of youthful mien, but 
sitting his steed bravely and holding a sturdy spear. He rode 
directly at Wen Chou, and Gongsun Zan crawled up the 
slope to look on. 

The new warrior was of middle height with bushy 

eyebrows and large eyes, a broad face and a heavy jowl, a 
youth of commanding presence. The two exchanged some 
fifty bouts and yet neither had the advantage. Then Gongsun 
Zan’s rescue force came along, and Wen Chou turned and 
rode away. The youth did not pursue. 

Wen Chou

fellow who he was. 

He bowed low and replied, “My name is Zhao Yun from 

Changshan. I first served Yuan Shao; but when I saw that he 
was disloyal to his prince and careless of the welfare of the 
people, I left him and I was on my way to offer service to 
you. This meeting in this place is most unexpected.” 

Gongsun Zan was very pleased, and the two went 

together to the camp, where they at once busied themselves 
with preparations for a new battle. 

his army into two wings. He had five thousand cavalry in 
the center, all mounted on white horses. Gongsun Zan had 
formerly seen service against the northern frontier tribes, 
the Qiang Peoples, where he always placed his white horses 
in the van of his army, and thus he had won the sobriquet 
of General Who Commands White Horses. The tribes held 
him so much in fear that they always fled as soon as the 
white horses, their sacred creatures, appeared. 

On Yuan Shao’s side Yan Liang and Wen Chou were 

Leaders of the Van. Each had one thousand of archers and 
crossbowmen. They were set out half on either side, those 
on the left to shoot at Gongsun Zan’s right and those on the 
right to shoot at his left. In the center was Qu Yi with eight 
hundred bowmen and ten thousand of foot and horse. Yuan 
Shao took command of the reserve force in the rear. 

Zhao Yun for the first time and, as Gongsun Zan did not feel 
assured of Zhao Yun’s good faith, put him in command of a 
company at the rear. The Van Leader was Yan Guang, and 
Gongsun Zan himself commanded the center. He took his 
place on horseback on the bridge beside an enormous red 
standard on which was displayed the word Commanding 
General in gold embroidery. 

Zhao Yun

turned the tide. Plunging forward on this side, dashing in on 
that, he went through as if there were no antagonists and, 
seeing this, Gongsun Zan turned and came again into the 
fight. The final victory was on his side. 

From the scouts sent to find out how the battle went, Yuan 

Shao heard the good news of Qu Yi’s success in slaying the 
standard bearer, capturing the flag, and his pursuit. So Yuan 
Shao took no further care but rode out with his General Tian 
Feng and a few guards to look on at the enemy and enjoy 
his victory. 

“Ha ha!” Yuan Shao laughed. “Gongsun Zan is an 

incapable.” 

But even as Yuan Shao spoke, he saw in front the 

redoubtable Zhao Yun. His guards hastened to prepare their 
bows, but before they could shoot, Zhao Yun was in their 
midst, and men were falling before him wherever he went. 

The others fled. Gongsun Zan’s army then gathered round 
and hemmed in Yuan Shao. 

Tian Feng then said to his master, “Sir, take refuge in this 

empty building here!” 

But Yuan Shao dashed his helmet to the ground, crying, 

“The brave one rather faces death in the battle than seeks 

From sunrise to noon the drums rolled for the attack, but 

Yuan Shao’s army made no move. Qu Yi made his bowmen 
hide under their shields. They heard the roar of explosions, 
the whistling of arrows, and the rattle of the drums, as Yan 
Guang approached from the other side, but Qu Yi and his 
men lay closer than ever and never stirred. They waited till 
Yan Guang had got close on them and then, as the sound 
of a bomb rent the air, the whole eight hundred men let fly 
their arrows in a cloud. Yan Guang was quite taken aback 
and would have retired, but Qu Yi rode furiously toward 
him, whirled up his sword and cut him down. 

So Gongsun Zan’s army lost that battle. The two wings 

that should have come to the rescue were kept back by the 
bowmen under Yan Liang and Wen Chou. Yuan Shao’s 
troops advanced right up to the bridge. Then Qu Yi rode 
forward, slew the standard bearer, and hacked through the 
staff of the embroidered banner. Seeing this, Gongsun Zan 
turned his steed and galloped away. 

Qu Yi followed. But just as he caught up the fugitive, 

there came prancing forth Zhao Yun, who rode directly at 
him with spear ready to strike. After a few bouts Qu Yi was 
laid in the dust. Then Zhao Yun attacked the soldiers and 

Liu Bei and Zhao Yun were made acquainted with each 

other, and a warm affection sprang up from the very first so 
that they were always together. 

not risk another. They strengthened their defenses, and the 
armies lay inactive for over a month. In the meantime news 
of the fighting had reached Capital Changan, and Dong 
Zhuo was told. 

His adviser, Li Ru, went to see his master and said, “The 

two active leaders of today are Yuan Shao and Gongsun 
Zan, who are at grips at River Pan. Pretend you have an 
imperial command to make peace between them, and both 
will support you out of gratitude for your intervention.” 

“Good!” said Dong Zhuo. 
So he sent the Imperial Guardian, Ma Midi, and the 

Minister of the Inner Bureau, Zhao Qi, on the mission. 
When these men were arriving at the North of Yellow River, 
Yuan Shao sent out to welcome them thirty miles from his 
headquarters and received the imperial command with the 
greatest respect. Then the two officers went to Gongsun 
Zan and made known their errand. Gongsun Zan sent letters 
to his adversary proposing friendship. The two emissaries 
returned to report their task accomplished. Gongsun Zan 
drew off his army. He also sent up a memorial eulogizing 
Liu Bei, who was raised 
to the rank of Governor of 
Pingyuan. 

The farewell between 

Liu Bei and Zhao Yun was 
affecting. They held each 
other’s hands a long time, 
their eyes streaming with 
tears, and could not tear 
themselves apart. 

safety behind a wall!” 

now fought fiercely and with such success that Zhao Yun 
could nowhere force his way in. Yuan Shao was soon 
reinforced by the arrival of his main body and Yan Liang, 
and the two armies pressed forward. Zhao Yun could only 
just get Gongsun Zan safe out of the press. Then they fought 
their way back to 
the bridge. But Yuan 
Shao’s troops still 
came on and fought 
their 
way 
across 

the bridge, forcing 
multitudes of their 
adversaries into the 
water, where many 
were drowned. 

Yuan Shao was leading in person and his troops still 

advanced. But not more than two miles, for soon a great 
shouting was heard behind some hills, whence suddenly 
burst out a body of troops led by Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and 
Zhang Fei. 

At Pingyuan they had heard of the struggle between their 

protector and his enemy, Yuan Shao, and had at once set 
out to help. Now the three riders, each with his peculiar 
weapon, flew straight at Yuan Shao, who was so frightened 
that his soul seemed to leave his body and fly beyond the 
confines of heaven. 

His sword fell from his hand and he fled for his life. He 

was chased across the bridge when Gongsun Zan called in 
his army, and they returned to camp. 

After the usual greetings Gongsun Zan said, “If you 

had not come to our help, we should have been in very bad 
case.” 

“I want revenge on my own part. What care I for his 

help?” said Sun Jian. 

He dispatched Huang Gai to prepare a river fleet, arm 

and provision them. Big warships were to take horses on 
board. The force soon set out. 

News of these preparations came to Liu Biao, and he 

hastily summoned his advisers and warriors. 

Kuai Liang told him to be free from anxiety, and said, 

“Put General Huang Zu at the head of the Jiangxia army 
to make the first attack and you, Sir, support him with the 
forces from Xiangyang. Let Sun Jian come riding the rivers 
and straddling the lakes: What strength will he have left 
after arriving here?” 

So Liu Biao bade Huang Zu prepare to march, and a 

great army was assembled. 

a true hero, but I see now that he is no different from Yuan 
Shao. They are both alike.” 

again,” said Liu Bei. 

Both men wept freely as they separated. 
Now Yuan Shu in Nanyang, hearing that his brother 

had come into Jizhou, sent to beg a thousand horses. The 
request was refused and enmity sprang up between the 
brothers. Yuan Shu also sent to Jingzhou to borrow grain, 
which Imperial Protector Liu Biao would not send. In his 
resentment, Yuan Shu wrote to Sun Jian trying to get him to 
attack Liu Biao. The letter ran like this: 

“When Liu Biao stopped 

you on your way home, it 
was at the instigation of my 
brother. Now the same two 
have planned to fall upon 
your territories southeast of 
the Great River, wherefore 
you should at once strike 
at Liu Biao. I will capture 
my brother for you and 
both resentments will be 
appeased. You will get 
Jingzhou, and I shall have 
Jizhou.” 

reading this letter. “He certainly did bar my way home, 
and I may wait many years for my revenge if I let slip this 
chance.” 

He called a council. 
“You may not trust Yuan Shu. He is very deceitful,” said 

Cheng Pu. 

Liu Biao

which then sailed to and fro, drawing the fire for three days. 
Several times the ships pretended to land, and this drew 
showers of arrows from the bank. At last the arrows of the 
defenders were all shot away and Sun Jian, who collected 
them, found he had many myriads. Then with a fair wind 
Sun Jian’s troops shot them back to the enemy. Those on the 
bank were thrown into great disorder and retired. The army 
then landed. Two divisions led by Cheng Pu and Huang 
Gai set out for Huang Zu’s camp along different roads, and 
between them marched Han Dang. Under this triple attack 
Huang Zu was worsted. He left Fankou and hastened to 
Dengcheng. 

Leaving the ships under the command of Huang Gai, 

Sun Jian led the pursuing force. Huang Zu came out of his 
city and drew up for battle in the open country. When Sun 
Jian had disposed his army, he rode out to the standard. Sun 
Ce, clad in armor, placed himself beside his father. 

Jiangxia and Chen Sheng from Xiangyang. 

Flourishing his whip, Huang Zu abused his enemy, “You 

swarm of rebels from Changsha! Why do you invade the 
land of a scion of the ruling house?” 

Zhang Hui challenged to combat, and Han Dang went out 

to accept. The two champions fought thirty bouts, and then 
Chen Sheng, seeing his fellow general becoming exhausted, 
rode to his aid. Sun Jian saw Chen Sheng coming, laid aside 
his spear, reached for his bow, and shot an arrow wounding 
Chen Sheng in the face. He fell from his horse. Panic seized 
upon Zhang Hui at the fall of his comrade, and he could no 
longer defend himself. Then Han Dang with a slash of his 
sword clove Zhang Hui’s skull in twain. 

Both having fallen, Cheng Pu galloped up to make 

prisoner of Huang Zu, who threw off his helmet, slipped 
from his steed, and mingled for safety among his troops. 

issue of his wife who was of the Wu family. Their names in 
order were Sun Ce, Sun Quan, Sun Yi, and Sun Kuang. Sun 
Jian had a second wife who was the sister of his first wife. 
And the second wife bore him a son and a daughter, the 
former called Sun Lang, the latter Sun Ren. Sun Jian had 
also adopted a son from a Yu family and named him Sun 
Hu. And he had a younger brother named Sun Jing. 

As Sun Jian was leaving on this expedition, his brother 

Sun Jing with all his six sons stood in front of Sun Jian’s 
steed and dissuaded him, saying, “Dong Zhuo is the real 
ruler of the state, for the Emperor is a weakling. The whole 
country is in rebellion, everyone is scrambling for territory. 
Our area is comparatively peaceful, and it is wrong to begin 
a war merely for the sake of a little resentment. I pray you, 
brother, think before you start.” 

Sun Jian replied, “Brother, say no more. I desire to make 

my strength felt throughout the empire, and shall I not 
avenge my injuries?” 

said the eldest son Sun Ce. 

This request was granted, and father and son embarked 

to go to ravage the city of Fankou. 

Now Huang Zu 

had placed archers 
and crossbowmen 
along 
the 
river 

bank. When the 
ships approached, 
a flight of arrows 
met them. Sun Jian 
ordered his troops 
to remain under 
cover in the ships, 

few bouts Cai Mao turned and fled. Sun Jian’s army rode in 
and slaughtered till corpses filled the countryside, and Cai 
Mao took refuge in Xiangyang. 

military law. This defeat was due to his obstinacy.” 

newly wedded wife. 

Sun Jian surrounded Xiangyang and assailed the walls 

daily. One day a fierce gale sprang up, and the pole bearing 
his standard was broken. 

back.” 

Sun 
Jian 
said, 

“I have won every 
battle and the city 
is on the point of 
falling. Shall I return 
because the wind 
felled a flagstaff?” 

He flouted the 

advice and attacked 
the walls still more 
vigorously. 

Within the city the 

defenders had seen 
an omen. Kuai Liang 
told Liu Biao, “Last 
night I saw that a 
great star fall into the 
sky corresponding to 
Sun Jian’s territory. 
I calculated that it inferred the fall of Sun Jian.” 

Then Kuai Liang advised Liu Biao to seek help from 

Yuan Shao as quickly as possible. 

Sun Jian

Sun Jian led on the attack and drove the enemy to the Han 
River where he ordered Huang Gai to move the fleet upriver 
and moor there. 

Huang Zu led 

his defeated troops 
back and told Liu 
Biao, saying, “Sun 
Jian was too strong 
for my army.” 

Kuai Liang was 

called in to advise, 
and he said, “Our 
newly 
defeated 

soldiers 
have 
no 

heart for fighting 
now. Therefore we 
must 
fortify 
our 

position, while we 
seek help from Yuan 
Shao. Then we can 
extricate ourselves.” 

“A stupid move!” 

said Cai Mao. “The 
enemy is at the city 
gates: Shall we fold our hands and wait to be slain? Give me 
troops and I will go out and fight to the finish.” 

So Cai Mao was placed in command of ten thousand 

troops and went out to the Xian Hills where he drew up 
his battle line. Sun Jian led the invaders, now flushed with 
success. 

When Cai Mao approached, Sun Jian looked at him and 

said, “He is brother-in-law to Liu Biao. Who will capture 
him?” 

Cheng Pu set his iron-spined lance and rode out. After a 

Huang Zu

trees the arrows flew in clouds. Sun Jian was hit by several 
arrows and a huge stone crushed in his head. Both he and 
his steed were killed. Sun Jian was only thirty-seven years 
old at his death. 

Then Lu Gong let off a series of bombs, the sign of success, 
as agreed. At this signal Huang Zu, Kuai Yue, and Cai Mao 
led three armies out of the city and fell upon the Changsha 
troops, throwing them into the utmost confusion. 

When 
Huang 

Gai heard the sound 
of battle, he led up 
the troops from the 
ships. He met Huang 
Zu and took Huang 
Zu prisoner after a 
brief fight. 

Cheng Pu set out 

to bear the sad news 
to Sun Ce. While he 
was seeking a way out, he came across Lu Gong. Cheng Pu 
at once put his horse at full speed and engaged Lu Gong. 

to fight his way through the blockade with the letter. One 
Lu Gong, a warrior of great strength, offered himself for 
this service. 

Kuai Liang said, “If you undertake this service, listen 

to my advice. You will have five hundred soldiers: Choose 
good bowmen. Dash through the enemy’s formation and 
make for Xian Hills. You will be pursued; but send a 
hundred soldiers up the hill to prepare large stones, and 
place a hundred archers in ambush in the woods. These 
are not to flee from the pursuers but to beguile them along 
devious ways round to the place where the boulders have 
been prepared. There stones will be rolled down and arrows 
shot. If you succeed, fire off a series of bombs as a signal, 
and the armies in the city will come out to help. If you are 
not pursued, get away as fast as possible. Tonight will be 
suitable as there is very little moon. Start at dusk.” 

force to carry them out. As soon as day began to close in, he 
went quietly out at the east gate. 

soldier came to report: “There was a group of horsemen 
going out from the city!” 

Sun Jian at once mounted and rode out with thirty 

horsemen to discover the cause. Lu Gong’s troops had 
already hidden themselves in the thick woods. Sun Jian 
rode ahead of his escort, and soon he found himself alone 
and close to the enemy. He called out to them to halt. Lu 
Gong at once turned back and came as if to fight. But they 
had only exchanged a single pass when Lu Gong again fled, 
taking the road among the hills. Sun Jian followed but soon 
lost sight of his foe. 

Chapter
164
7

Chapter 8 
Wang Yun Prepares The Chaining Scheme;
Dong Zhuo Rages At Phoenix Pavilion. 
 
This is what Kuai Liang said, “Sun Jian is now gone, 

and his children are but youths. Seize this moment of 
weakness to break into Changsha, and it is yours in one 
beat of the drum. If you return the corpse and make peace, 
you give them time to grow powerful, and evil will ensue 
to Jingzhou.” 

Biao. 

“Why not sacrifice this blundering warrior for a 

region?” 

“But he is my dear friend and to abandon him is 

wrong.” 

the understanding that Sun Jian’s dead body should be 
given in exchange. Sun Ce freed his prisoner, brought away 
his father’s coffin, and the fighting ceased. Sun Jian was 
interred in the plains of Que. When the ceremonies were 
over, Sun Ce led his army home again. 

After a few bouts Lu Gong went down under a spear thrust. 
The battle became general and continued till daylight broke, 
when each drew off his army. Liu Biao withdrew into the 
city. 

father had perished in the fight, and his body had been 
carried within the enemy’s walls. He uttered a great cry, 
and the army joined him with wailing and tears. 

“How can I return home leaving my father’s corpse with 

them?” cried Sun Ce. 

Huang Gai said, “We have Huang Zu as our prisoner. Let 

one enter the city and discuss peace, giving up our prisoner 
for our lord’s body.” 

He had barely finished speaking when an officer in the 

army, Huan Ji, offered himself as messenger, saying, “I am 
an old friend of Liu Biao. I volunteer to take the mission.” 

Sun Ce agreed. So Huan Ji went and peace was 

discussed. 

in a coffin and ready to be delivered as soon as Huang Zu 
returned. Let us both cease fighting and never again invade 
each other’s territories.” 

Huan Ji thanked him and took his leave. 
But as Huan Ji went down the steps, Kuai Liang suddenly 

broke in, saying, “No, no! Let me speak and I will see to it 
that not a single enemy can survive. I pray you first put this 
man to death and then to employ my means.” 

Pursuing his enemy, Sun Jian dies;
On a peaceful mission, Huan Ji is threatened. 

chapter.

every form were incalculable. All his family and retainers 
found quarters in this new city. 

and every visit was like an imperial progress, with booths 
by the roadside to refresh the officials and courtiers who 
attended him to the northwest Royal Gate and saw him 
start. 

On one occasion Dong Zhuo spread a great feast for all 

those assembled to witness his departure; and while it was 
in progress, there arrived a large number of rebels from the 
north who had voluntarily surrendered. The tyrant had them 
brought before him as he sat at table and meted out to them 
wanton cruelties. The hands of this one were lopped off, 
the feet of that; one had his eyes gouged out; another lost 
his tongue. Some were boiled to death. Shrieks of agony 
arose to the very heavens, and the courtiers were faint with 
terror. But the author of the misery ate and drank, chatted 
and smiled as if nothing was going on. 

Another day Dong Zhuo was presiding at a great 

gathering of officers who were seated in two long rows. 
After the wine had gone up and down several times, Lu Bu 
entered and whispered a few words in his master’s ear. 

Dong Zhuo smiled and said, “He was always so. Take 

Minister Zhang Wan outside.” 

The others all turned pale. In a little time a serving man 

brought the head of their fellow guest on a red dish and 
showed it to their host. They nearly died with fright. 

Wan was in league with Yuan Shu to assassinate me. A letter 
he wrote fell by mistake into the hands of my son, so I have 
had him put to death. You gentlemen, who have no reason, 
need have no fear.” 

The officials hastened to disperse. One of them, Minister 

of the Interior Wang Yun, who had witnessed all this, 

Sun Ce set himself to the task of ruling well. Being humble 
and generous, he invited to his side humans of wisdom and 
valor and so bore himself that all the best and bravest of the 
country gathered about him. 

Meanwhile, Dong Zhuo at Capital Changan, when he 

heard of the death of the turbulent Sun Jian, said, “An evil 
that pressed hard upon my heart has been removed!” 

He asked what children Sun Jian had left, and when 

they told him the eldest was but seventeen, he dismissed all 
anxiety from his thoughts. 

spirit waxed worse and worse. He styled himself “Imperial 
Rector,” a name full of honor, and in all his behavior aped 
imperial state. He created his younger brother, Dong Min, 
Lord of Huazhou and made him Commander of the Left 
Army. A nephew, Dong Huang, was made Court Counselor 
and placed in command of the Palace Guard, and everyone 
of his clan, young or old, was ennobled. Eighty miles from 
the capital Dong Zhuo 
laid out a city called 
Meiwo, 
an 
exact 

replica of Changan, 
with 
its 
palaces, 

granaries, treasuries, 
and magazines, and 
employed a quarter 
of a million people 
to 
build 
it. 
Here 

he accumulated supplies sufficient for twenty years. He 
selected eight hundred of the most beautiful maidens and 
sent them to dwell in his new city. The stores of wealth in 

1The Yangtze or Yangzi river, which flows from west to east to the Pacific 

at Shanghai. 

not repay a thousandth part. She has noticed lately that 
her lord’s brows have been knit in distress and knows it 
is on account of the state troubles. But she has not dared 
to ask. This evening he seemed sadder than ever, and she 
was miserable on her lord’s account. But she did not know 
she would be seen. Could she be of any use she would not 
shrink from a myriad deaths.” 

A sudden idea came to Wang Yun, and he stuck the 

ground with his staff. And he said, “Who would think that 
the fate of Han lay on your palm? Come with me!” 

The girl followed him into the house. Then he dismissed 

all the waiting attendants, placed Diao Chan on a chair and 
bowed before her. She was frightened and threw herself on 
the ground, asking in terror what it all meant. 

Said Wang Yun, “You can sympathize with the people of 

Han,” and the fount of his tears opened afresh. 

way: Thy handmaid will never shrink,” said the girl. 

Wang Yun knelt, saying, “The people are on the brink of 

destruction, the prince and his officers are in jeopardy, and 
you, you are the only savior. That wretch Dong Zhuo wants 
to depose the Emperor, and not a person among us can find 
means to stop him. Now he has a son, a bold warrior it is 
true, but both father and son have a weakness for beauty, 
and I am going to use what I may call the ‘chaining’ plan. I 
shall first propose you in marriage to Lu Bu and then, after 
you are betrothed, I shall present you to Dong Zhuo, and 
you will take every opportunity to force them asunder and 
turn sway their countenances from each other, cause the son 
to kill his adopted father and so put an end to the great evil. 
Thus you may restore the altars of the land that it may live 
again. All this lies within your power: Will you do it?” 

“Thy handmaid has promised not to recoil from death 

itself. You may use my poor self in any way, and I must do 

returned to his palace very pensive and much distressed. 
The same evening, a bright moonlight night, he took his 
staff and went strolling in his private garden. Standing near 
one of the creeper trellises, he gazed up at the sky and the 
tears rolled down his cheeks. Suddenly he heard a rustle in 
the Peony Pavilion and someone sighing deeply. Stealthily 
creeping near, he saw there one of the household singing 
girls named Diao Chan. 

she had been taught to sing and dance. At twenty-one, she 
was then just bursting into womanhood, a pretty and clever 
girl whom Wang Yun regarded more as a daughter than a 
dependant. 

After listening for some time, Wang Yun suddenly called 

out, “What mischief are you up to there, you naughty 
girl?” 

The maiden dropped on her knees in terror, saying, 

“Would thy unworthy handmaid dare to do anything 
wrong?” 

“Then what are you sighing about out here in the 

darkness?” 

“May thy handmaid speak from the bottom of her 

heart?” 

“Tell me the whole truth. Do not conceal anything.” 
And the girl said, 

“Thy handmaid has 
been the recipient of 
bountiful 
kindness. 

She has been taught 
to sing and dance 
and been treated so 
kindly that were she 
torn in pieces for her 
lord’s sake, it would 

my best.” 

“But if this gets abroad then we are all lost!” 
“Fear not,” said she. “If thy handmaid does not show 

gratitude, may she perish beneath a myriad swords!” 

“Thank you, thank you!” said Wang Yun. 
Then Wang Yun took from the family treasury many 

pearls and bade a cunning jeweler make therewith a fine 
golden headdress, which was sent as a present to Lu Bu. He 
was delighted and came to thank the donor. When Lu Bu 
arrived, he was met at the gate by Wang Yun himself and 
within found a table full of dainties for his delectation. He 
was conducted into the private apartments and placed in the 
seat of honor. 

Lu Bu said, “I am but a simple officer in the palace of 

a minister. You are an exalted officer of state. Why am I 
treated thus?” 

Poor Wang Yun bows not to an officer’s rank; poor Wang 
Yun bows to his ability “ 

praise and flatter and ply him with wine and to talk of the 
virtues of the Prime Minister and his henchman. 

Lu Bu laughed and drank huge goblets. 
Presently most of the attendants were sent away, only a 

few kept to press the guest to drink. 

said, “Let her come in!” 

Soon appeared two attendants, dressed in white, leading 

between them the exquisite and fascinating Diao Chan. 

“Who is this?” said Lu Bu startled into sobriety. 
“This is my little girl, Diao Chan. You will not be 

annoyed at my familiarity, will you? But you have been so 
very friendly, I thought you would like to see her.” 

Wang Yun bade Diao Chan present a goblet of wine, and 

her eyes met those 
of the warrior. 

Wang 
Yun 

feigning intoxication 
said, “My little child 
begs you, General, 
to take a cup or two. 
We all depend upon 
you, all our house.” 

Lu Bu begged 

Diao Chan to sit 
down. She pretended 
to wish to retire. Her 
master pressed her 
to remain, saying 
that she might do so 
since the guest was 
a dear friend. So she 
took a seat modestly 
near her master. 

Lu Bu kept his 

gaze fixed upon the 
maid, while he swallowed cup after cup of wine. 

“I should like to present her to you as a handmaid: Would 

you accept?” said Wang Yun. 

The guest started up. 
“If that is so, you may rely upon my abject gratitude,” 

said Lu Bu. 

“We will choose a propitious day ere long and send her 

to the palace.” 

Lu Bu was overjoyed. He could not keep his eyes off 

Diao Chan, and loving glances flashed from her liquid 
eyes. 

Diao Chan

Yun stood by while Dong Zhuo stepped out of his chariot, 
and Dong Zhuo and a host of one hundred armed guards 
crowded into the hall. Dong Zhuo took his seat at the top, 
his suite fell into two lines right and left, while Wang Yun 
stood humbly at the lower end. Dong Zhuo bade his people 
conduct Wang Yun to a place beside himself.  

Said Wang Yun, “The great Prime Minister’s abundant 

virtue is as the high mountains. Neither the ancient sages---
Yi Yin1 and the Duke of Zhou2---could attain thereto.” 

Dong Zhuo smiled. They bore in the dishes and the 

wine, and the music began. Wang Yun plied his guest with 
assiduous flattery and studied deference. When it grew late 
and the wine had done its work, Dong Zhuo was invited to 
the inner chamber. So he sent away his guards and went. 

Here the host raised a goblet and drank to his guest, 

saying, “From my youth up I have understood something of 

1Yi Yin was was helper and prime minister of King Tang, the founder of 

Shang Dynasty. After King Tang’s death, Yi Yin served his sons and grandson. 
Soon after Tai Jia, King Tang’s grandson, ascended the throne, he committed 
many faults, and Yi Yin, acting as regent, exiled Tai Jia to Tong Palace---the 
burial place of King Tang. After three years Yi Yin returned him the throne. 
Tai Jia eventually became an enlightened emperor. Shang Dynasty lasted for 
650 years (BC 1700-1050). It was this act of Yi Yin rather than his services 
in building up an empire that has made him immortal. Whether he did right in 
temporarily dethroning the king was open to question, until a final verdict was 
rendered by Mencius who thought that his ends amply justified his means. This 
historical event attests the extent of the power exercised by a prime minister in 
those days. 

2Duke of Zhou was brother of King Wu, who was the founder of Zhou 

Dynasty. After King Wu’s death, the Duke of Zhou served his young son as 
regent. The Duke of Zhou completely ended the Shang domination, and he 
helped establish the Zhou administrative framework, which served as a model 
for future Chinese dynasties. Zhou Dynasty lasted for 800 years (BC 1050-
221).

Yun said, “I would ask you to remain the night, but the 
Prime Minister might suspect something.” 

Lu Bu thanked him again and again and departed. 
Some few days later when Wang Yun was at court and 

Lu Bu was absent, Wang Yun bowed low before Dong Zhuo 
and said, “I wish that you would deign to come to dine at my 
lowly cottage: Could your noble thought bend that way?” 

“Should you invite me, I would certainly hasten,” was 

the reply. 

Wang 
Yun 

thanked 
him. 

Then 
Wang 

Yun went home 
and prepared in 
the 
reception 

hall a feast in 
which 
figured 

every 
delicacy 

from land and 
sea. 
Beautiful 

embroideries 
surrounded the 
chief 
seat 
in 

the center, and 
elegant curtains 
were hung within 
and without. At 
noon next day, 
when the Prime 
Minister arrived, 
Wang Yun met 
him at the gate 
in 
full 
court 

costume. Wang 
Wang Yun

“Excellent!” said the guest. 
Then a curtain was lowered. The shrill tones of reed 

instruments rang through the room, and presently some 
attendants led forward Diao Chan, who then danced on the 
outside of the curtain. 

A poem praises her: 

For a palace this maiden was born,
So timid, so graceful, so slender,
Like a tiny bird flitting at morn
Over the dew-laden lily buds tender.
Were this exquisite maid only mine,
For never a mansion I’d pine.

Another poem runs thus: 

The music falls, the dancer comes, a swallow gliding in,
A dainty little damsel, soft as silk;
Her beauty captivates the guest yet saddens him within,
For he must soon depart and leave her there.
She smiles; no gold could buy that smile, no other smiled so,
No need to deck her form with jewels rare.
But when the dance is over and coy glances come and go,
Then who shall be the chosen of the fair?
 
The dance ended. Dong Zhuo bade them lead the maiden 

in, and she came, bowing low as she approached him. He 
was much taken with her beauty and modest grace. 

“Who is she?” said Dong Zhuo. 
“A singing girl. Her name is Diao Chan.” 
“Then can she sing?” 
The master bade her sing, and she did so to the 

accompaniment of castanets. There is a measure describing 
her youthful beauty: 

astrology and have been studying the aspect of the heavens. 
I read that the days of Han are numbered, and that the great 
Prime Minister’s merits command the regard of all the 
world, as when King Shun succeeded King Yao, and King 
Yu continued the work of King Shun3, all by the strength of 
their own merits, conforming to the mind of Heaven and the 
desire of people.” 

“How dare I expect this?” said Dong Zhuo. 
“From the days of old, those who walk in the way have 

replaced those who deviate therefrom; those who lack virtue 
have fallen before those who possess it. Can one escape 
fate?” 

“If indeed the decree 

of Heaven devolves on 
me, you shall be held 
the first in merit!” said 
Dong Zhuo. 

Wang Yun bowed. 

Then 
lights 
were 

brought in and all 
the attendants were 
dismissed, save the 
serving 
maids 
to 

hand the wine. So the 
evening went on. 

Presently 
Wang 

Yun said, “The music 
of 
these 
everyday 

musicians 
is 
too 

commonplace for your ear, but there happens to be in the 
house a little maid that might please you.” 

3King Yao, King Shun, and King Yu (BC 2400-2200) were the three ideal 

rulers in ancient China. They ascended the throne by their virtues and merits, 
and not by heritage. King Yu was also the founder of the Xia Dynasty.

Diao Chan

Soon after Dong Zhuo took his leave, and Wang Yun 

accompanied him the whole way. 

After he had taken leave, Wang Yun mounted to ride 

homeward. Half way he met two lines of guards with red 
lamps who were escorting Lu Bu who was on horseback 
and armed with his trident halberd. 

Seeing Wang Yun, Lu Bu at once reined in, stopped, 

seized him by the sleeve, and said angrily, “You promised 
Diao Chan to me, and now you have given her to the Prime 
Minister: What foolery is this?” 

I pray you come to my house.” 

So they went together, and Wang Yun led Lu Bu into a 

private room. 

said, “Why do you find fault with me, General?” 

Prime Minister’s palace in a covered carriage: What does it 
mean?” 

at court, the Prime Minister told me he had something to 
talk to me about in my own house. So naturally I prepared 
for his coming, and while we were at dinner he said, ‘I have 
heard something of a girl named Diao Chan whom you have 
promised to my son Lu Bu. I thought it was mere rumor so 
I wanted to ask if it was true. Beside I should like to see 
her.’ I could not say no, so she came in and made her bow 
to the lord of lords. Then he said that it was a lucky day and 
he would take her away with him and betroth her to you. 
Just think, Sir: When the Prime Minister had come himself, 
could I stop him?” 

time I had misunderstood you. I owe you an apology.” 

“The girl has a small trousseau, which I will send as soon 

You stand, a dainty maiden,
Your cherry lips so bright,
Your teeth so pearly white,
Your fragrant breath love-laden;
Yet is your tongue a sword;
Cold death is the reward
Of loving thee, O maiden.
 
Dong Zhuo was delighted and praised her warmly. She 

was told to present a goblet of wine to the guest which he 
took from her hands and then asked her age. 

She replied, “Thy unworthy handmaid is twenty-one.” 
“A perfect little fairy!” said Dong Zhuo. 
Then Wang Yun rose and said, “If the Prime Minister 

would not mind, I should like to offer him this little maid.” 

“How could I be grateful enough for such a kindness!” 
“She would be most fortunate if she could be your 

servant,” said Wang Yun. 

Dong Zhuo thanked his host warmly. 
Then the orders were given to prepare a closed carriage 

and convey Diao Chan to the Prime Minister’s palace. 

“If there is nothing, you may go,” said Dong Zhuo. 
Lu Bu sulkily withdrew. 
Dong Zhuo now thought of nothing but his new mistress 

and for more than a month neglected all affairs, devoting 
himself entirely to pleasure. Once he was a little indisposed, 
and Diao Chan was constantly at his side, never even 
undressing to show her solicitude. She gratified his every 
whim. Dong Zhuo grew more and more fond of her. 

One day Lu Bu went to inquire after his father’s health. 

Dong Zhuo was asleep, and Diao Chan was sitting at the 
head of his couch. Leaning forward she gazed at the visitor, 
with one hand pointed to her heart, the other at Dong Zhuo 
asleep, and her tears fell. Lu Bu felt heartbroken. Dong 
Zhuo drowsily opened his eyes; and seeing his son’s gaze 
fixed on something behind him, he turned over and saw 
who it was. 

to my beauty?” 

He told the servants to turn Lu Bu out, shouting, “Never 

let him enter here again!” 

Li Ru the cause of his anger. 

The adviser hastened to see his master and said, “Sir, 

you aspire to be ruler of the empire. Why then for a small 
fault do you blame the General? If he turns against you, it 
is all over.” 

“Then what can I do?” said Dong Zhuo. 
“Recall him tomorrow; treat him well; overwhelm him 

with gifts and fair words; and all will be well.” 

gracious and said, “I was irritable and hasty yesterday owing 
to my illness and I wronged you, I know. Forgive me.” 

rolls of brocade. And so the quarrel was made up. But though 

as she has gone over to your dwelling.” 

Lu 
Bu 
thanked 

him and went away. 
Next day he went into 
the palace to find out 
the truth, but could 
hear nothing. Then 
he made his way into 
the private quarters 
and questioned the 
maids. Presently one 
told him that the Prime Minister had brought home a new 
bedfellow the night before and was not up yet. Lu Bu was 
very angry. Next he crept round behind his master’s sleeping 
apartment. 

hair at the window. Looking out she saw a long shadow 
fall across the little lake. She recognized the headdress, and 
peeping around she saw it was indeed no other than Lu Bu. 
Thereupon she contracted her eyebrows, simulating the 
deepest grief, and with her dainty handkerchief she wiped 
her eyes again and again. Lu Bu stood watching her a long 
time. 

Soon after he went in to give morning greeting. Dong 

Zhuo was sitting in the reception room. Seeing his henchman, 
Dong Zhuo asked if there was anything new. 

“Nothing,” was the reply. 
Lu Bu waited while Dong Zhuo took his morning meal. 

As he stood beside his master, he glanced over at the curtain 
and saw a woman there behind the screen showing a half 
face from time to time and throwing amorous glances at 
him. He felt it was his beloved, and his thoughts flew to her. 
Presently Dong Zhuo noticed his expression and began to 
feel suspicious. 

we never had a chance to speak.” 

She threw her arms about Lu Bu. 
“If I cannot be your wife in this life, I will in the ages to 

come,” she whispered. 

“If I do not marry you in this life, I am no hero,” said 

he. 

lord!” 

“I have only stolen away for a brief moment, and I am 

afraid that old rebel will suspect something, so I must not 
stay too long,” said Lu Bu. 

Diao Chan clung to his robe, saying, “If you fear the old 

thief so much, I shall never see another sunrise.” 

Lu Bu’s body was with his adopted father Dong Zhuo, his 
heart was with his promised bride Diao Chan. 

Dong Zhuo having quite recovered went to court again, 

and Lu Bu followed him as usual. Seeing Dong Zhuo deep 
in conversation with the Emperor, Lu Bu, armed as he was, 
went out of the Palace and rode off to his chief’s residence. 
He tied up his steed at the entrance and, halberd in hand, 
went to the private apartment to seek his love. He found 
Diao Chan, and she told him to go out into the garden where 
she would join him soon. He went, taking his halberd with 
him, and he leaned against the rail of the Phoenix Pavilion 
to wait for Diao Chan. 

she made her way under the drooping willows and parting 
the flowers as she passed. She was exquisite, a perfect fairy 
from the Palace of the Moon. 

I am not the Minister’s real daughter, yet he treated me as 
his own child. The desire of my life was fulfilled when he 
plighted me to you. But oh! to think of the wickedness of the 
Prime Minister, stealing my poor self as he did. I suffered 
so much. I longed to die, only that I had not told you the 
real truth. So I lived on, bearing my shame as best as I could 
but feeling it mean still to live. Now that I have seen you, I 
can end it all. My poor sullied body is no longer fit to serve 
a hero. I can die before your 
eyes and so prove how true I 
am!” 

Thus speaking she seized 

the curving rail and started 
into the lily pond. Lu Bu 
caught her in his strong 
arms and wept as he held her 
close. 

and startled the lovers. Lu Bu turned, saw who it was, and 
ran away. Dong Zhuo caught up the halberd and ran in 
pursuit. But Lu Bu was fleet of foot while his master was 
very stout. Seeing no hope of catching the runaway, Dong 
Zhuo hurled the halberd. Lu Bu fended it off and it fell to 
the ground. Dong Zhuo picked it up and ran on. But by this 
time Lu Bu was far ahead. Just as Dong Zhuo was running 
out at the garden gate, he dashed full tilt against another 
man running in, and down he went. 

leap.

Crashed his unwieldy body to earth in a shapeless 

heap.

We shall presently see who the other runner was.

Lu Bu stopped. 
“Give me a little time to think,” said he. 
And he picked up his halberd to go. 
“In the deep seclusion of the harem, I heard the stories 

of your prowess. You were the one man who excelled all 
others. Little did I think that you of all heroes would rest 
content under the dominion of another.” 

And tears rained again! 
A wave of shame flooded his face. Leaning his halberd 

against the railing, he turned and clasped the girl to his 
breast, soothing her with fond words. The lovers held each 
other close, swaying to and fro with emotion. They could 
not bring themselves to say farewell. 

In the meantime Dong Zhuo missed his henchman, and 

doubt filled his heart. Hastily taking leave of the Emperor, 
he mounted his chariot and returned to his palace. There at 
the gate stood Lu Bu’s well known steed Red Hare, riderless. 
Dong Zhuo questioned the doorkeepers, and they told him 
the General was within. He sent away his attendants and 
went alone to the private apartments. Lu Bu was not there. 
He called Diao Chan, but there was no reply. He asked 
where she was, and the waiting maids told him she was in 
the garden among the flowers. 

So Dong Zhuo 

went into the garden, 
and there he saw the 
lovers in the pavilion 
in most tender talk. 
Lu 
Bu’s 
trident 

halberd was leaning 
on the railing beside 
him. 

A howl of rage 

escaped Dong Zhuo 

Chapter 9 
Lu Bu Kills Dong Zhuo For Wang Yun;
Li Jue Attacks The Capital On Jia Xu’s Advice. 

The person who collided 

with the irate Dong Zhuo was 
his most trusty adviser Li Ru. 
Li Ru had not fallen in spite of 
the shock and at once scrambled 
to help Dong Zhuo to regain his 
feet and led him inside to the 
library, where they sat down. 

“What were you coming 

about?” said Dong Zhuo. 

“Happening to be passing 

your gates, I heard that you had 
gone into your private garden to look for your adopted son. 
Then came Lu Bu running and crying out that you wanted to 
kill him, and I was coming in as fast as I could to intercede 
for him when I accidentally collided with you. I am very 
sorry. I deserve death.” 

“The wretch! How could I bear to see him toying with 

my fair one? I will be the death of his yet.” 

“Your Graciousness is making a mistake. It is the 

‘plucked tassel’ story over again. But if you remember the 
banquet of old time where all guests were to tear the tassels 
of their hats. In that banquet, King Zhuang of Chu made no 
fuss about the liberties taken with his queen, although the 
hat-tassel in her hand betrayed the culprit Jiang Xiong. His 
restraint stood him good stead, for the same Jiang Xiong 
saved his life when he was hemmed in by the soldiers of 
Qin. After all Diao Chan is only a handmaid, but Lu Bu 
is your trustiest friend and most dreaded commander. If 
you took this chance of making the girl over to him, your 

kindness would win his undying gratitude. I beg you, Sir, to 
think over it well.” 

Dong Zhuo hesitated a long time. He sat murmuring to 

himself. Presently he said, “What you say is right. I must 
think over it.” 

Li Ru felt satisfied. He took leave of his master and went 

away. Dong Zhuo went to his private rooms and called Diao 
Chan. 

“What were you doing there with Lu Bu?” said he. 
She 
began 
to 

weep, saying, “Thy 
handmaid was in 
the garden among 
the flowers, when 
he rushed in on me. 
I was frightened and 
ran away. He asked 
why I ran away 
from a son of the 
family and pursued 
me right to the pavilion, where you saw us. He had that 
halberd in his hand all the time. I felt he was a vicious man 
and would force me to his will, so I tried to throw myself 
into the lily pond, but he caught me in his arms and held me 
so that I was helpless. Luckily just at that moment you came 
and saved my life.” 

“Suppose I send you to him,” said Dong Zhuo. 
Stunned, she pleaded with tears, “What have thy 

handmaid done? My honor of serving only Your Highness 
could not bear being given to a mere underling! Never! I 
would rather die.” 

the wall to kill herself. 

Of soldiers, or their weapons,
There really is no need.
They fought their bloody battles,
And doughty deeds were done;
But in a garden summer house
The victory was won.

The order was given to journey to Meiwo, and the whole 

body of officers assembled to add luster to the start. Diao 
Chan, from her carriage, saw Lu Bu among the crowd. She 
at once dropped her eyes and assumed an appearance of 
deepest melancholy. After the cavalcade started and when 
her carriage had almost disappeared in the distance, the 
disappointed lover reined in his steed on a mount whence 
he could watch the dust that rose around it. Unutterable 
sadness filled his heart. 

Suddenly a voice said, “Why do you not accompany 

the Prime Minister, General, instead of standing here and 
sighing?” 

It was Wang Yun. 
“I have been confined to the house by illness these few 

days,” continued he, “so I have not seen you. But I had to 
struggle out today to see the Prime Minister set off. This 
meeting is most fortunate. But why were you sighing?” 

“Just on account of that daughter of yours,” said Lu Bu. 
Feigning great astonishment, Wang Yun said, “So long a 

time and yet not given to you!” 

“The old ruffian has fallen in love with her himself.” 
“Surely this cannot be true.” 
Lu Bu related the whole story while Wang Yun listened, 

silent, but stamping on the ground as with irritation and 
perplexity. 

such a beast.” 

arms about her, and cried, “I was only joking!” 

bitterly. 

“This is the doing of that Li Ru,” said she. “He is much 

too thick with Lu Bu. He suggested that, I know. Little he 
cares for the Imperial Rector’s reputation or my life. Oh! I 
could eat him alive.” 

Zhuo. 

Bu will try to ruin me if I do. I fear him.” 

be happy together and have no cares.” 

She dried her tears and thanked him. Next day Li Ru 

came again to persuade Dong Zhuo to send the damsel to 
Lu Bu. 

“This is a propitious day,” said Li Ru. 
“He and I standing in the relation of father and son. I 

cannot very well do that,” said Dong Zhuo. “But I will say 
no more about his fault. You may tell him so and soothe him 
as well as you can.” 

said Li Ru. 

your wife to some body else? Do not talk about this any 
further. It would be better not to.” 

eyes up to heaven, saying, “We are dead people, slain by the 
hand of this girl!” 

When a scholar of history reached this episode he wrote 

a verse or two: 

Just introduce a woman,
Conspiracies succeed;

limit the scope of such talents as yours.” 

it not for the relation in which we stand. I fear to provoke 
the hostile criticism of posterity.” 

Wang Yun shook his head, saying, “Your name is Lu Bu; 

his is Dong Zhuo. Where was the paternal feeling when he 
threw the halberd at you?” 

“I had been misled if you had not said that,” said Lu Bu 

hotly. 

“It would be a loyal deed to restore the House of Han, and 
history would hand down your name to posterity perpetually 
fragrant. If you lend your aid to Dong Zhuo, you will be a 
traitor and your name will be tainted through all ages.” 

Lu Bu rose from his place and bowed to Wang Yun. 
“I have decided,” said he. “You need not fear, Sir.” 
“But yet you may fail and bring upon yourself misfortune,” 

said Wang Yun. 

Lu Bu drew his dagger, pricking his arm, and swearing 

by the blood that flowed. 

Wang Yun fell on 

his knees and thanked 
him. 

“Then 
the 
Han 

sacrifices will not be 
cut off, and you will 
be their savior. But this 
must remain a secret, 
and I will tell you 
how the plot shall be 
worked out.” 

Lu Bu took leave with great emotion. 
Wang Yun took into his confidence two colleagues, 

house, and we will talk it over.” 

So they went away together to the house and retired to 

a secret room. After some refreshments, Lu Bu told the 
whole story of the episode in Phoenix Pavilion just as it 
happened. 

Wang Yun said, “He seems to have corrupted my little 

girl and has stolen your wife. He will be an object of shame 
and ridicule to the whole world. And those who do not 
laugh at him will laugh at you and me. Alas! I am old and 
powerless and can do nothing. More pitied than blamed! 
But you, General, you are a warrior, the greatest hero in the 
world. Yet you have been put to this shame and exposed to 
this contempt.” 

A wave of fierce wrath rolled up in Lu Bu. Banging the 

table he shouted and roared. 

His host ostentatiously tried to calm him, saying, “I 

forgot myself. I should 
not have spoken like 
that. Do not be so 
angry, I pray!” 

“I will kill the 

wretch, I swear it! In no 
other way can I wash 
away my shame.” 

“No, no! Do not 

say such a thing,” said 
Wang Yun, putting his 
hand over the other’s 
mouth. “You will bring 
trouble on poor me and 
my family.” 

under another person’s domination,” said Lu Bu. 

oath. 

“If this succeeds, what glorious rank will be yours!” said 

Wang Yun. 

and announced himself as bearer of a decree. He was 
conducted into Dong Zhuo’s presence. After he had made 
his obeisance, Dong Zhuo asked what the decree was. 

“His Majesty has recovered and wishes his ministers 

to meet him in the Palace to consider the question of his 
abdication in your favor. That is what this summons 
means.” 

“What does Wang Yun think of the scheme?” 
“Wang Yun has already begun the construction of the 

Terrace of Abdication and only awaits my lord’s arrival.” 

“Last night I dreamed a dragon coiled round my body,” 

said Dong Zhuo greatly pleased, “and now I get this happy 
tidings! I must not neglect the opportunity.” 

So Dong Zhuo gave instructions to his four trusted 

generals for the safekeeping of his city. Li Jue, Guo Si, 
Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji were to guard Meiwo with three 
thousand troops of the Flying Bear Army. Then Dong Zhuo 
announced his intention of starting on the morrow. 

“When I am Emperor, you shall be Commander of the 

Capital District,” said he. 

“Your minister thanks you,” said Li Su. 
Dong Zhuo went to bid farewell to his ninety-year-old 

mother. 

“Whither are you going, my son?” asked she. 
“I go to receive the abdication of Han; and soon you will 

be the Empress.” 

“I have been feeling nervous and creepy these few days. 

It is a bad sign.” 

Minister Shisun Rui and Imperial Commander Huang 
Wan. 

Shisun Rui said, “The moment is favorable. The Emperor 

has just recovered from his illness, and we can dispatch 
an able talker to Meiwo to persuade Dong Zhuo to come 
here to discuss affairs. Meanwhile we will obtain a secret 
decree as authority for Lu Bu to lay an ambush just inside 
the Palace gates to kill Dong Zhuo as he enters. This is the 
best plan to adopt.” 

“But who would dare to go?” said Huang Wan. 
“Li Su, General of the Imperial Tiger Army, would go. 

He belongs to the same region as Lu Bu and is very angry 
with the Prime Minister for not advancing him. His going 
would assure us the plan would be completed.” 

“Good,” said Wang Yun. “Let us see what Lu Bu thinks 

of it.” 

When Lu Bu was consulted, he told them that this Li 

Su’s persuasion had led him to kill Ding Yuan, his former 
benefactor. 

“If Li Su refuses this mission, I will kill him,” said Lu 

Bu. 

So they sent for Li Su. 
When Li Su arrived, Lu Bu said, “Formerly you talked 

me into killing Ding Yuan and going over to Dong Zhuo. 
Now we find Dong Zhuo means evil for the Emperor and 
is an oppressor of the people. His iniquities are many, and 
he is hated by gods and humans. You go to Meiwo, say you 
have a command from the Emperor to summon the Prime 
Minister to the Palace. He will come, and he will be put to 
death. You will have the credit of being loyal and restoring 
the Hans. Will you undertake this?” 

“I also wish to slay him,” was the reply. “But I could 

not find anyone to assist me. How can I hesitate? Your 
intervention is directly from Heaven.” 

his chamber. He entered and proceeded to his own palace, 
where Lu Bu came to congratulate him. 

armies of the empire, horse and foot,” said Dong Zhuo. 

That night Dong Zhuo slept in the midst of his escort. In 

the suburbs that evening some children at play were singing 
a little ditty, and the words drifted into the bedchamber on 
the wind. 

“The grass in the meadow looks fresh now and green,
Yet wait but ten days, not a blade will be seen.”

The song sounded ominous but Li Su was again prepared 

with a happy interpretation: “It only means that the Lius are 
about to disappear, and the Dongs to be exalted.” 

Next morning at the first streak of dawn, Dong Zhuo 

prepared for his appearance at court. On the way he saw a 
Taoist, dressed in a black robe and wearing a white turban, 
who carried in his hand a tall staff with a long strip of 
white cloth attached. At each end of the cloth was drawn a 
mouth1. 

“What is the meaning of this?” said Dong Zhuo. 
“He is a madman,” said Li Su, and he told the guards to 

drive the fellow away. 

Dong Zhuo went in and found all the officials in court 

dress lining the road. Li Su walked beside his carriage, a 
sword in his hand. When Li Su reached the north gate of the 
Forbidden City, he found the soldiers of Dong Zhuo drawn 
up outside and only the pushers of the Palace carriage, a 
twenty or so, were allowed to proceed further. 

saw that Wang Yun and all the other officials standing at the 

1The staff, the cloth, and the mouths formed the Chinese characters, implied 

the name of Lu Bu. 

have premonitions,” said her son. 

He left her with these words. 
Just before starting, he said to Diao Chan, “When I am 

Emperor, you shall be Lady of the Palace.” 

rejoiced. 

Dong Zhuo went 

out, mounted his 
carriage, and began 
his journey to Capital 
Changan with an 
imposing 
escort. 

Less than ten miles 
the wheel of his 
carriage broke. He 
left it and mounted 
a horse. Another ten miles the horse snorted and neighed, 
threw up his head and snapped the reins. 

Dong Zhuo turned to Li Su and asked what these things 

portended. 

“It means that you are going to receive the abdication of 

the Hans, which is to renew all things: To mount the jeweled 
chariot and sit in the golden saddle.” 

And Dong Zhuo was pleased and convinced with this 

answer. During the second day’s journey a violent gale 
sprang up, and the sky became covered with a thick mist. 

“What does this mean?” said Dong Zhuo. 
The wily Li Su had an interpretation for this also, saying, 

“You are ascending to the place of the dragon: There must 
be bright light and lurid vapor to dignify your majestic 
approach.” 

Dong Zhuo had no more doubts. He presently arrived 

and found many officials waiting without the city gate to 
receive him, all but Li Ru who was ill and unable to leave 

The lust of blood awakened, Lu Bu urged the slaughter 

of Li Ru, who had been the confidant of the murdered Prime 
Minister, and Li Su volunteered to go in search of him. But 
just then a shouting was heard at the gates, and it was told 
them that a household servant had brought Li Ru in bonds. 
Wang Yun ordered his immediate execution in the market 
place. 

Dong Zhuo’s head was exposed in a crowded 

thoroughfare. He was very fat, and the guards made torches 
by sticking splints into the body, spilling the corpse’s grease 
over the ground. The passers-by pelted the head and spurned 
the body with their feet. 

Huangfu Song, and Li Su to destroy Meiwo. Learning the 
news of their master, Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang 
Ji fled west swiftly through the night with their Flying Bear 
Army to Liangzhou Region. 

When arriving 

Meiwo, Lu Bu’s 
first deed was to 
take Diao Chan 
into his charge. 
Then they slew 
every member of 
the Dong family, 
sparing none, not 
even Dong Zhuo’s 
aged mother. The 
heads of Dong Zhuo’s brother Dong Min and his nephew 
Dong Huang were publicly displayed in the market place. 
In Meiwo were hidden many young ladies of good families. 
These were set free. All properties were confiscated. The 
wealth was enormous---several hundred thousand ounces 

door were armed. 

“Why are they all armed?” said Dong Zhuo to Li Su. 
Li Su was silent as he helped push the carriage forward 

swiftly to the entrance. 

are the executioners?” 

At this call sprang from both sides soldiers armed with 

halberds and spears who attacked Dong Zhuo. He had not 
put on the breastplate he usually wore, and a spear pierced 
his breast. 

He sank down in the carriage calling loudly for his son, 

“Where is Lu Bu?” 

“Here, and with a decree to deal with a rebel!” said Lu 

Bu, as he appeared in 
front of his “father.” 

Thereupon 
he 

thrust 
his 
trident 

halberd through the 
victim’s throat. Then 
Li Su hacked off the 
head and held it up. 

Lu Bu, his left hand 

holding his halberd, 
thrust his right hand into his bosom whence he drew the 
decree, crying, “The decree was to slay the rebel Dong 
Zhuo---no other!” 

The whole assembly shouted, “Wan shui! Live forever! 

O Emperor!” 

A sympathetic poet has written a few lines in pity: 

Await the time, O noble, and be king,
Or failing, reap the solace riches bring;
Heaven never is partial, but severely just,
Meiwo stood strong, yet now it lies in dust.

of gold, millions of silver coins, pearls, gems, silks, velvets, 
furs, grain stores. 

When they returned to report success, Wang Yun rewarded 

and feasted the soldiers. Banquets were held in the Ministry 
Hall to which all the officials were invited. They drank and 
congratulated each other. While the feasting was in progress 
it was announced that someone had come and was wailing 
over Dong Zhuo’s corpse exposed in the market place. 

“Dong Zhuo has been put to death,” said Wang Yun, 

angrily. “Every body is glad to be rid of him, and yet one is 
found to lament over him. Who is this?” 

So Wang Yun gave orders to arrest the mourner and bring 

him in. Soon he was brought in, and when they saw him all 
were startled. For he was no other than Imperial Historian 
Cai Yong2. 

been put to death as a rebel, and all the land rejoices. You, a 
Han minister, instead of rejoicing, weep for him. Why?” 

Cai Yong confessed his fault, saying, “I am without 

talent, yet know what is right. I am not the man who turns 
my back on the dynasty and toward Dong Zhuo. Yet once 
I experienced his kindness, and I could not help mourning 
for him. I know my fault is grave, but I pray you regard the 
reasons. If you will leave my head and only cut off my feet, 
you may use me to continue the History of Han, whereby 
I may have the good fortune to be allowed to expiate my 
fault.” 

All were sorry for Cai Yong2, for he was a man of great 

2Cai Yong had had an illustrious career as a court official. When Dong Zhuo 

took over the court, Cai Yong resigned his post as a minister. Later on, Dong 
Zhuo wanted to increase the influence of the government over the local lords, 
and so he invited Cai Yong back, threatening if Cai Yong had refused he would 
have put to death Cai Yong’s whole family. (chatper 4) Cai Yong’s daughter Cai 
Yan was a well-known poetess.

Dong Zhuo, the dictator,
Tyrannized the state,
Fell and his sole mourner
Shared his direful fate.
Zhuge Liang in seclusion
Was content to dream,
Felt his worth and never
Helped a traitor’s scheme.

Those generals---Li Jue, Guo Si, Fan Chou, and Zhang 

Ji---whom Dong Zhuo had left to guard Meiwo fled when 
their master was slain and went into the county of Shanxi 
in Liangzhou Region. Thence they sent in a memorial 
entreating amnesty. But Wang Yun would not hear of it. 

“Four of them were the chief instruments of Dong 

Zhuo’s aggressions. Now though a general amnesty were 
proclaimed, these men should be excluded from its benefit,” 
said Wang Yun. 

hope of pardon and they could only flee. 

Then 
their 

adviser, Jia Xu, 
said, “If we 
throw away our 
arms and flee 
singly, then we 
shall fall easy 
victims to any 
village beadle 
who may seize 
us. Rather let 
us cajole the 
Shanxi people to throw in their lot with us and make a 
sudden onslaught on the capital and so avenge Dong Zhuo. 

talents, and they begged that he might be spared. 

The Imperial Guardian, Ma Midi, secretly interceded for 

him, saying, “Cai Yong is famous as a scholar, and he can 
write glorious history, and it is inadvisable to put to death a 
man renowned for rectitude without consideration.” 

But in vain, for the High Minister was now strong and 

obdurate.  

Wang Yun said, “Centuries ago, Emperor Wu3 spared 

Sima Qian4 and employed him on the annals, with the result 
that many slanderous stories have been handed down to us. 
This is a trying period of great perplexity, and we dare not 
let a specious fellow like this wield his pen in criticism of 
those about the court of a youthful prince and abuse us as 
he will.” 

Remonstrance and appeal being vain, Ma Midi retired. 

But he said to his colleagues, “Is Wang Yun then careless 
of the future? Worthy people are the mainstay of the state; 
laws are the canons of action. To destroy the mainstay and 
nullify the laws is to hasten destruction.” 

As was just said Wang Yun was obdurate. Cai Yong 

whose offense was an expression of gratitude was thrown 
into prison and there strangled. The people of that day wept 
for Cai Yong, for they refused to see any offense in what he 
had done, and death was a harsh punishment. 

3Emperor Wu, aka Liu Che, (reigned BC 141-87) whose reign was longest 

among the Han emperors. Emperor Wu was perhaps the most influential Han 
emperor who concerned not only about expanding territory but also about 
developing trade with other countries (the Silk Road, for example). Emperor 
paid special attention to longevity, and his court often had elaborate rituals. 

4Sima Qian (BC 145-85) astronomer, calendar expert, and the first great 

Chinese historian, noted for his authorship of the “Historical Records” or Shi 
Ji, which is considered to be the most important history of China down to the 
end of the 2nd century.

hope to overcome him. Our case is hopeless. Our best course 
is to desert these four generals, secrete their valuables, and 
leave the army with just a few of our followers.” 

and some others that very night packed up and made their 
way out of camp. They were only half a dozen. They came 
to a river and, while crossing, Hu Chier, tempted by the lust 
of wealth, slew his companion. Then he went to offer the 
head of Niu Fu to Lu Bu. Lu Bu inquired into the matter, 
and when a follower told him the truth, he put the double 
traitor Hu Chier to death. 

Then Lu Bu advanced against the rebels and fell in with 

Li Jue’s force. Without giving them time to form in battle, 
Lu Bu attacked. Horses curvetting and spears set, the army 
dashed in irresistibly, and Li Jue, making no stand, fell back 
a long way. Li Jue took up a position under a hill fifteen 
miles away and thence sent to call his fellows to council. 

Li Jue said, “Lu Bu though brave in battle is no strategist 

and so not really formidable. I will lead my troops to hold 
the mouth of the gorge, and every day I will incite him to 
attack; and when he comes toward me, General Guo Si 
can smite his rear, after the manner of Peng Yue5 when he 
fought against Chu. While thus I am alternating attack and 
retreat, Generals Fan Chou and Zhang Ji will march off in 
different directions toward Changan. Such an attack at two 
points must end both Wang Yun and Lu Bu.” 

Lu Bu reached the hills, a force of Li Jue came out to attack 
him. Lu Bu made an angry dash toward the enemy who retired 
up the hills, whence they shot arrows and hurled stones like 
rain. Lu Bu’s troops halted. At this moment the report came 

5Peng Yue (BC ?-196) a general of Liu Bang. He and Liu Bang had been 

close friends in their native Pei, where Liu Bang later held a minor office. 
Ennobled as King of Liang.

If we succeed, we control the court and the empire. There 
will be enough time to run away if we fail.” 

The plan was adopted, and they spread abroad the story 

that Wang Yun intended to massacre the county. 

Having thus thrown the people into a state of terror, they 

went a step farther and said, “There is no advantage in dying 
for nothing. Revolt and join us!” 

So they cajoled the people into joining them and gathered 

a host equal to one hundred thousand. This horde was divided 
into four parts, and they all set out to raid Capital Changan. 
On the way they fell in with a son-in-law of their late chief, 
Imperial Commander Niu Fu, who marched five thousand 
troop from Xiliang. Niu Fu had set out to avenge his father-
in-law, and he became the Van Leader of the horde. 

As they advanced, the news came to Wang Yun, and he 

consulted Lu Bu. 

“They are a lot of rats,” said Lu Bu. “Never mind how 

many there are of them. Be not in the least anxious.” 

was in advance and met Niu Fu. They fought; Niu Fu was 
outmatched and retired after suffering a slaughter. But 
unexpectedly Niu Fu returned in a night attack, found Li Su 
quite unprepared and drove Li Su’s force some ten miles, 
slaying many. 

Li Su reported the defeat, and Lu Bu raged at him, saying, 

“You have sullied my reputation as a warrior and destroyed 
our fighting spirit!” 

camp gate. 

Next day Lu Bu advanced his own force and engaged 

Niu Fu. He overwhelmed Niu Fu and drove him off. That 
night Niu Fu called in his most trusted man, Hu Chier, to 
advise him. 

Hu Chier said, “Lu Bu is too doughty a fighter for us to 

Li Meng and Wang Fang, began to lend aid to the attackers; 
and by and by they secretly opened the city gate and the 
besiegers 
poured 

in. Lu Bu exerted 
himself to the utmost 
but could not stem the 
tide. At the head of 
some hundred horse, 
he dashed over to the 
Black Lock Gate and 
called out to Wang 
Yun, who was on the 
other side. 

“The case is desperate 

now. Ride with me to a 
place of safety!” 

Wang Yun replied, “If I 

am gifted with the holy spirit 
of the state, I shall succeed 
in restoring the tranquillity 
which I desire. But if I have 
it not, then I offer my body 

a sacrifice. I will not quail before dangers. Send my thanks 
to the noble supporters beyond the Pass for their efforts, and 
bid them remember their country!” 

Lu Bu urged Wang Yun 

again and again, but Wang 
Yun would not leave. Soon 
flames started up all over 
the city, and Lu Bu had 
to leave, abandoning his 
family to their fate. He fled 
to seek refuge with Yuan 
Shu. 

that the rear was being attacked 
and there appeared Guo Si. At 
once Lu Bu wheeled toward the 
new enemy, but immediately the 
rolling drums gave the signal to 
retire, and Lu Bu could not come 
to blows with them. As he called 
in his army, the gongs clanged 
on the other side and his former 
opponent Li Jue came to attack 
his front. But before Lu Bu could 
join battle, his rear was again 
assaulted by Guo Si, who in his turn drew off immediately. 

Thus Lu Bu was baited till his bosom was near bursting 

with rage. The same tactics continued for several days. He 
could neither strike his enemies nor escape them. His troops 
had no rest. 

In the midst of these distracting maneuver, a messenger 

rode up in hot haste to report: “The capital is in imminent 
danger from a double attack of Fan Chou and Zhang Ji.” 

Lu Bu at once ordered a march to save the capital, which 

became a rout when both his opponents Li Jue and Guo Si 
came in pursuit. His loss was heavy. 

He soon reached Changan 

and found the rebels there in 
enormous numbers and the city 
quite surrounded. Lu Bu’s attack 
had but little effect, and as his 
temper became more savage 
under defeat, many of his soldiers 
went over to the rebels. 

He fell into deep melancholy. 

Then a remnant of Dong Zhuo’s 
adherents still in the city, led by 
Zhang Ji

Fan Chou

was our master slain?” 

“His crimes filled the 

heavens and covered the 
earth; no tongue can tell 
them. The day he died 
was a day of rejoicing in 
the whole city as you well 
know,” said Wang Yun. 

not to be forgiven?” 

“Seditious rebels, why bandy words? I am ready to 

die.” 

And Wang Yun was slain at the foot of the tower. 

Moved by the people’s sufferings,
Vexed at his prince’s grief,
Wang Yun compassed the traitor’s death,
That they might find relief.
Everyone knows him a hero,
Leal to the state always:
Living he guarded the princely towers,
His soul keeps guard today.

Having done the loyal minister to death at the Emperor’s 

feet, they proceeded to exterminate also his whole family. 
Everyone mourned. 

Then said the ruffians to each other, “Having gone so far, 

what could be better than to make away with the Emperor 
and complete our scheme?” 

The traitor condoned his crime,
Rebellion ought to cease;
But his licentious followers
Disturb the empire’s peace.

Li Jue, Guo Si, and his 

fellow leaders gave full 
license to their ruffians, 
who robbed and murdered 
their fill. Many high officers 
perished. Ministers Chong 
Fu, Lu Kui, and Zhou Huan, 
Imperial Commanders Cui 

Lie and Wang Qin all died in the fighting. 

In time the rebels penetrated to the inner part of the 

Palace, and the courtiers begged the Emperor to proceed to 
the Gate of Pervading Peace to try to quell the rioting. 

At sight of the yellow umbrella, Li Jue and Fan Chou 

checked their armies, and they all shouted, “Wan shui! 
Long life! O Emperor!” 

The Emperor stood by the tower and addressed them, 

“Nobles, what means it that you enter the capital in this 
unruly manner and without my summons?” 

The two leaders looked up and said, “Dong Zhuo, Your 

Majesty’s Prime Minister, has been slain by Wang Yun, and 
we are here to avenge him. We are no rebels, Sire. Let us 
only have Wang Yun, and we draw off our troops.” 

Wang Yun was actually among the courtiers and at the 

Emperor’s side. 

Hearing this demand, Wang Yun said, “The plan was 

made for the benefit of the Throne. But as this evil has grown 
therefrom, Your Majesty will not grudge losing me. I have 
brought about evil, and I will go down to these rebels.” 

The Emperor was torn with 

sorrow and wavered. But the 
faithful minister leaped from the 
wall, crying, “Wang Yun is here!” 

The two leaders drew their 

swords, crying, “For what crime 

Chapter
210
9

Chapter 10 
Gathering Arms, Ma Teng Moves To Rescue The 

Emperor;

Commanding An Army, Cao Cao Marches to Avenges 

His Father. 

In the last chapter 

the two arch rebels, 
Li Jue and Guo Si, 
proposed to murder 
Emperor Xian, but 
their followers Zhang 
Ji and Fan Chou 
opposed this. 

“No. The people 

will not approve of 
his death now. Restore him to power, and get the leaguers 
inside Changan’s control. Remove his supporters, and then 
we can compass his death. And the empire shall be in our 
hands.” 

the tower, saying, “Why do you still remain? You have slain 
Wang Yun: Now withdraw these soldiers.” 

rank rewards for their good service to your dynasty.” 

“And what ranks, Sirs?” 
All four wrote their wishes and handed them up to the 

Emperor who had no choice but to accede to the request, 
and they were created: 

Lord of Chiyang, Commander of Capital District, Court 
Administrator, and granted Military Insignia. 

Guo Si was appointed General of the Rear Army, Lord 

of Meiyang, Court Administrator, and granted Military 

The fate of the Emperor will be disclosed in the next chapter.

in the night. And yet a 
third time in another place 
but the earth rejected the 
remains. Meanwhile the 
thunder-fire had entirely 
consumed them. So it may 
be said justly that Heaven 
was exceedingly angry 
with Dong Zhuo. 

So now Li Jue and Guo 

Si wielded the real power 
of the scepter, and they 
were hard upon the people. 
They also removed the 
attendants from the Palace 
and replaced them by 
their own creatures, who 
maintained a most perfect 
watch over every movement 
of the Emperor so that he 
was greatly hampered and 
embarrassed. All appointments and demotions were made 
by the two rebels. For the sake of popularity they especially 
summoned Zhu Jun to court, made him Minister of the Inner 
Bureau and associated him with the government. 

One day came a report that the Governor of Xiliang, Ma 

Teng, and the Imperial Protector of Bingzhou, Han Sui, 
with one hundred thousand troops, are rapidly approaching 
the capital with the intention of attacking the rebels in the 
name of the Emperor. 

Now these leaders from the west had laid careful plans. 

Ma Teng and Han Sui had sent trusty friends to the capital to 
find out who would support them. They had conspired with 
three officials---Court Counselors Ma Yu and Chong Shao, 

Guo Si

Insignia. 

Fan Chou was appointed General of the Right Army and 

Lord of Wanian. 

and Lord of Pingyan. 

Li Meng and Wang Fang, for opening the city gates, 

were appointed Imperial Commanders. 

After receiving ranks of nobility, Li Jue and Guo Si 

thanked the Emperor, and went away to camp at Xunung, 
the suburb of Changan. The inferior rebel leaders also were 
gratified with ranks. And once more the capital was free of 
troops. 

Dong Zhuo’s followers, having so far succeeded, did not 

forget their late leader. They sought his corpse for burial, 
but only a few fragments were discoverable. Then they had 
sculptors engrave a statue of fragrant wood in his likeness, 
laid that out in proper form, and instituted a noble’s 

sacrifices and prayers. The 
remains were dressed in the 
robes of a prince, laid in a 
princely coffin for burial. 
They selected Meiwo for 
his tomb and having found 
an auspicious day conveyed 
the coffin thither. 

But a terrific thunder 

storm came on at the time of 
inhumation, and the ground 
was flooded. The coffin 
was rived asunder, and the 
poor remains knocked out 
by thunders. A second time 
they buried the coffin, but 
a similar thing happened 
Li Jue

Meng and Wang Fang left in high spirit. They made a camp 
ninety miles from Changan. 

The force from the west arrived. Ma Teng and Han Sui 

led out their troops to the attack. They found their opponents 
Li Meng and Wang Fang in battle array. 

Ma Teng and Han Sui rode to the front side by side. 

Pointing to the rebel leaders, the commanders abused them, 
crying, “Those are traitors! 
Who will capture them?” 

Hardly were the words 

spoken when there came out 
a youth general with a clear, 
white complexion as jade, 
eyes like shooting stars, 
lithe of body and strong of 
limb. He was armed with a 
long spear and bestrode an 
excellent steed. This young 
leader was Ma Chao, son 
of Ma Teng, then seventeen 
years of age. 

Though young he was 

a supreme valiance. Wang 
Fang, despising him on 
account 
of 
his 
youth, 

galloped forth to fight him. 
Before they had exchanged 
many passes Wang Fang was 
disabled and fell to a thrust 
of the young Ma Chao’s 
spear. The victor turned to 
retire into the formation, 
but Li Meng rode after Ma 
Chao to avenge his fallen 
Ma Chao

and Imperial Commander Liu Fan---to be their inside allies 
and plot against the rebels. These three obtained from the 
Throne two secret edicts conferring the ranks of Commander 
Who Conquers the West on Ma Teng and Commander Who 
Guards the West on Han Sui. With these powers the two 
commanders joined forces and began their march. 

The four leaders of the party in power---Li Jue, Guo Si, 

Fan Chou, and Zhang Ji---held a consultation with their 
generals as to how to meet the attack. 

Adviser Jia Xu said, “Since the attackers are coming 

from a distance, our plan is to fortify and wait till shortage 
of food shall work for us. In a hundred days their supplies 
will be consumed, and they must retire. We can pursue and 
we shall capture them.” 

Li Meng and Wang Fang rose and said, “This plan is bad. 

Give us ten thousand troops, and we will put an end to both 
of them and offer their heads before your ensign.” 

“To fight forthwith means defeat,” said Jia Xu. 
Li Meng and Wang Fang cried 

with one voice, “If we fail, we are 
willing to lose our heads. But if we 
win, then your head is forfeit.” 

Jia Xu then suggested to Li Jue 

and Guo Si, saying, “Seventy miles 
west of the capital stand the Zhouzhi 
Hills. The passes are narrow and 
difficult. Send Generals Zhang Ji 
and Fan Chou to occupy this point 
of vantage and fortify themselves 
so that they may support Li Meng 
and Wang Fang.” 

Li Jue and Guo Si accepted 

this advice. They told off fifteen 
thousand horse and foot, and Li 
Ma Teng

--Ma Yu, Chong Shao, and Liu Fan---, with every member 
of their households, and beheaded them in the market place. 
The heads of the three were exposed at the front gate of the 
capital. 

Being short of food and hearing of the destruction of their 

three adherents in the city, the only course for Ma Teng and 
Han Sui was to retreat. At once Zhang Ji went in pursuit of 
Ma Teng, and Fan Chou followed Han Sui. The retreating 
army under Ma Teng was beaten, and only by Ma Chao’s 
desperate efforts were the pursuers driven off. 

Fan Chou pursued the other army. When he had come 

close, Han Sui rode boldly up and addressed him, saying, 
“You and I, Sir, are fellow villagers. Why then behave so 
unfriendly?” 

Fan Chou replied, “I must obey the commands of my 

chief.” 

“I am here for the service of the state. Why do you press 

me so hard?” said Han Sui. 

At this Fan Chou turned his horse, called in his troops, 

and left Han Sui in peace. Unwittingly a nephew of Li Jue 
had been a witness of this scene; and when he saw the 
enemy allowed to go free, he returned and told his uncle. 
Angry that his enemy had escaped, Li Jue would have sent 
an army to wreak vengeance on his general. 

But his adviser Jia Xu again came in, saying, “The people 

are yet unsettled, it was dangerous to provoke another war. 
Instead, invite Fan Chou to a banquet and, while the feast 
was in progress, executing him for dereliction of duty.” 

This seemed good to Li Jue, so the banquet was prepared. 

Zhang Ji and Fan Chou accepted their invitations and went 
cheerfully. 

change came over their host Li Jue, and he suddenly asked 
Fan Chou, “Why have you been intriguing with Han Sui? 

colleague. 

“You are followed!” 

Hardly had Ma Teng 

spoken when he saw 
that the pursuer was a 
prisoner seated on his 
son’s steed. Now Ma 
Chao had known he was 
followed, but pretended 
not to see, waiting till his 
enemy should have come 
close and lifted his spear to strike. Then Ma Chao suddenly 
wheeled about. The spear thrust met only empty air; and as 
the horses passed, Ma Chao’s powerful arm shot out and 
pulled Li Meng from the saddle. Thus Li Meng and Wang 
Fang’s soldiers were left leaderless and fled in all directions. 
The army of Ma Teng and Han Sui dashed in pursuit, and a 
complete victory was scored. They pressed into one of the 
passes and made a camp. Then they decapitated Li Meng 
and exposed his head. 

generals had fallen under the hand of one young man, they 
knew that Jia Xu had given good advice and was gifted 
with clear prescience. So they valued his plans the more 
highly and decided to act on the defensive. They refused all 
challenges to combat. 

the Xiliang force were all exhausted and the leaders began 
to consider retreat. 

Just at this juncture a household servant of Ma Yu’s 

family betrayed his master and told of the conspiracy of the 
three court officials to assist the attackers. The two chiefs 
Li Jue and Guo Si in revenge seized the three conspirators-

shape of a resurgence of Yellow Scarves in Qingzhou. They 
came, under numerous chieftains, in the number of hundreds 
of thousand and plundered any place they reached. 

this sedition, and when asked who was the man he proposed, 
Zhu Jun said, “You want to destroy this horde of rebels; you 
will fail unless you get the service of Cao Cao.” 

“And where is he?” asked Li Jue. 
“He is Governor of Dongjun. He has a large army, 

and you have only to order him to act. The rising will be 
broken.” 

A messenger went post haste with a command for Cao 

Cao and Bao Xin, Lord of Jibei, to act together in quelling 
the rebellion. As soon as Cao Cao received the court 
command, he arranged with his colleague first to attack the 
rebels at Shouyang. Bao Xin made a dash right into their 
midst and inflicting damage wherever he could, but he was 
killed in a battle. Cao Cao pursued the rebels as they fled. 
Ten thousand surrendered. Then Cao Cao put his quondam 
enemies in the van. When his army reached any place, 
many more surrendered and joined him. After three months 
of these tactics, he had won over many thousands, both of 
soldiers and ordinary folks. 

made the Qingzhou Army, and the others were sent home 
to their fields. In consequence of these successes Cao Cao’s 
prestige and fame became very great and increased daily. He 
reported his success to Capital Changan and was rewarded 
with the title of General Who Guards the East.  

At his headquarters in Yanzhou1, Cao Cao welcomed 

wise counselors and bold warriors, and many gathered 
around him. Two clever persons, uncle and nephew, came 

1Yanzhou had belonged to Liu Dai, but he submitted to Cao Cao, and Cao 

Cao used the region as his base.

You are turning traitor, eh?” 

The unhappy guest was taken aback. Before he could 

frame his words to reply, he saw the assassins rush out with 
swords and axes. In a moment all was over, and Fan Chou’s 
head lay beneath the table. 

Scared beyond measure, his fellow-guest Zhang Ji 

groveled on the floor. 

“Fan Chou was a traitor,” said the host, raising Zhang Ji 

by the arm, “and he has his deserts. You are my friend and 
need not fear.” 

Li Jue gave Zhang Ji command of Fan Chou’s army with 

which Zhang Ji returned to his headquarters garrison in 
Hongnong. 

No one of the 

leaders 
among 

the leaguers dared 
attempt an attack on 
the party newly risen 
from Dong Zhuo’s 
disaffection, while on 
the other hand Jia Xu 
never ceased to urge 
his masters to exert 
themselves for the 
welfare of the people 
and thus to tempt wise 
people to join them. 
And by these means 
the government began 
to prosper, and the 
court to reassert its 
authority. 

However, a new 

trouble arose in the 
Jia Xu

came at Cao Cao’s invitation. 

“I shall prove unworthy of your recommendation,” said 

Cheng Yu to his friend Xun Yu, “for I am rough and ignorant. 
But have you forgotten a fellow villager of yours, Guo Jia? 
He is really able. Why not spread the net to catch him?” 

“I had nearly forgotten,” said Xun Yu suddenly. 
So he told Cao Cao of this man, who was at once 

invited. 

recommended Liu Ye from Henan, who was a descendant of 
Liu Xiu the Founder of Latter Han. When Liu Ye had arrived, 
he was the means of inviting two more: Man Chong from 
Shanyang, and Lu Qian from Wucheng, who were already 
known to Cao Cao by reputation. These two brought to their 
new master’s notice the name of Mao Jie from Chenliu, 
who also came and was given office. Then a famous leader, 
with his troop of some hundreds, arrived to offer service. 
This was Yu Jin of Taishan, an expert horseman and archer, 
and skilled beyond his fellows in every form of military 
exercise. He was made an army inspector. 

to Cao Cao. 

“Who is he?” asked Cao Cao. 
“He is from Chenliu and is 

named Dian Wei. He is the boldest 
of the bold, the strongest of the 
strong. He was one of Zhang 
Miao’s people, but quarreled with 
his tent companions and killed 
some dozens of them with his 
fists. Then he fled to the mountains 
where I found him. I was out 
shooting and saw him follow a 
tiger across a stream. I persuaded 

at the same time, both from 
Yanzhou, named Xun Yu and 
Xun You. The uncle had once 
been in the service of Yuan 
Shao. 

Cao Cao rejoiced when he 

had won the elder Xun to his 
side, saying, “Xun Yu is my 
Zhang Liang2!” 

He made Xun Yu a 

Marching 
General. 
The 

nephew Xun You was famed 
for his ability and had been 
in the court service when it 
was in Luoyang, but he had 
abandoned that career and retired to his village. Cao Cao 
made him a Military Instructor. 

Xun Yu said to Cao Cao, “There is a certain wise person 

of Yanzhou somewhere, but I do not know in whose service 
he is.” 

“Who is he?” 
“Cheng Yu. He belongs to the eastern part of Yanzhou.” 
“Yes; I have heard of him,” said Cao Cao. 
So a messenger was sent to his native place to inquire. 

Cheng Yu was away in the hills engaged in study, but he 

2Zhang Liang, aka Zhang Zifang, the master strategist for Liu Bang. 

His family had served the state of Han as chief ministers during the Warring 
States period. It is said that he received the strategy book of Lu Wang from a 
mysterious old man. When he was young, Zhang Liang plotted to assasinate the 
First Emperor, but failed. He later rebeled against Qin. Joined Liu Bang (BC 
206) to fight against Qin and then Chu. Recommended Han Xin to Liu Bang. 
Zhang Liang’s insights had earned him the name “The Teacher of Emperor”. 
After Liu Bang won the empire, Zhang Liang was enobled as Lord of Liu, but 
did not take office, instead he resigned from political life and traveled.

Xun Yu

Dian Wei

him to join my troop, and I recommend him.” 

“I see he is no ordinary man,” said Cao Cao. “He is fine 

and straight and looks very powerful and bold.” 

“He is. He killed a man once to avenge a friend and 

carried his head through the whole market place. Hundreds 
saw him, but dared not come near. The weapon he uses now 
is a couple of spears, each weighs a hundred and twenty 
pounds, and he vaults into the saddle with these under his 
arm.” 

Wei galloped to and fro carrying the spears. Then he saw 
away among the tents a huge banner swaying dangerously 
with the force of the wind and on the point of falling. A 
crowd of soldiers were vainly struggling to keep it steady. 
Down he leaped, shouted to the men to clear out and held 
the staff quite steady with one hand, keeping it perfectly 
upright in spite of the strong wind. 

“This is old E Lai3 again!” said Cao Cao. 
He gave Dian Wei a post in the headquarters and besides 

made Dian Wei presents of an embroidered robe he was 
wearing and a swift steed with a handsome saddle. 

Cao Cao encouraged able people to assist him, and he 

had advisers on the civil side and valiant generals in the 
army. He became famous throughout the East of the Pass. 

whither he had gone as a place free from the turmoil of the 
partisan struggles. Cao Cao wished to be united with him. 
As a dutiful son, Cao Cao sent the Governor of Taishan, 
Ying Shao, to escort his father to Yanzhou. Old Cao Song 
read the letter with joy, and the family prepared to move. 
They were some forty in all, with a train of a hundred 
servants and many carts. 

3E Lai, whose physical strength was extraordinary, was a general of King 

Zhou, the last king of Shang Dynasty. 

outhouses at the side. However, they were seen and slain. 

Yuan Shao. The murderers fled into the South of River Huai 
with their plunder after having set fire to the old temple. 

Cao Cao, whom the ages praise,
Slew his hosts on his former flight;
Nemesis never turns aside,
Murdered too his family died.

Some of the escort escaped and took the evil tidings to 

Cao Cao. When he heard it he fell to the earth with a great 
cry. They raised him. 

slain my father: No longer can the same sky cover us. I 
will sweep Xuzhou off the face of the earth. Only thus can 
I satisfy my vengeance.” 

Xun Yu and Cheng 
Yu to guard the east 
headquarters 
and 

the three counties of 
Juancheng, 
Fanxia, 

and Dongjun. Then he 
set forth with all the 
remainder to destroy 
Xuzhou and avenge 
his 
father. 
Xiahou 

Dun, Yu Jin, and Dian 
Wei were Van Leaders 
with Cao Cao’s orders 
to slaughter all the 
inhabitants of each 
captured city. 
Cao Cao

Their road led through Xuzhou Region where the 

Imperial Protector, Tao Qian, was a sincere and upright man 
who had long wished to get on good terms with Cao Cao 
but, hitherto, had found no means of effecting a bond of 
union. Hearing that the family of the great man was passing 
through his region, Tao Qian went to welcome them, treated 
them with great cordiality, feasting and entertaining them 
for two days; and when they left, he escorted them to his 
boundary. Further he sent with them one General Zhang 
Kai with a special escort of five hundred. 

the end of summer, just turning into autumn, and at this 
place they were stopped by a tremendous storm of rain. The 
only shelter was an old temple and thither they went. The 
family occupied the main rooms and the escort the two side 
wings. The men of the escort were drenched, angry, and 
discontented. 

secret spot and said, “We are old Yellow Scarves and only 
submitted to Tao Qian because there was no other choice. 
We have never got much out of it. Now here is the Cao 
family with no end of gear, and we can be rich very easily. 
We will make a sudden onslaught tonight at the third watch 
and slay the whole lot. Then we shall have plenty of treasure, 
and we will get away to the mountains.” 

as Cao Song sat waiting anxiously for signs of clearing, he 
suddenly heard a hubbub at the west end of the temple. His 
brother, Cao De, drawing his sword, went out to see what 
it was about, and Cao De was at once cut down. Cao Song 
seized one of the concubines by the hand, rushed with her 
through the passage toward the back of the temple so that 
they might escape. But the lady was stout and could not get 
through the narrow doors, so the two hid in one of the small 

service to Governor Zhang Miao. 

it passed through, slaying the people and desecrating their 
cemeteries. 

to heaven, saying, “I must be guilty of some fault before 

Tao Qian

friend of Tao Qian. Hearing Xuzhou was threatened, Bian 
Rang set out with five thousand troops to his friend’s aid. 
Angered by this move, Cao Cao sent Xiahou Dun to stop 
and kill Bian Rang while still on the march. 

At this time Chen Gong was in office in Dongjun, and 

he was also on friendly terms with Tao Qian. Hearing of 
Cao Cao’s design to destroy the whole population, Chen 
Gong came in haste to see his former companion4. Cao Cao, 
knowing Chen Gong’s errand, put him off at first and would 
not see him. But then Cao Cao could not forget the kindness 
he had formerly received from Chen Gong, and presently 
the visitor was called to his tent. 

Chen Gong said, “They say you go to avenge your 

father’s death on Xuzhou, to destroy its people. I have come 
to say a word. Imperial Protector Tao Qian is humane and 
a good man. He is not looking out for his own advantage, 
careless of the means and of others. Your worthy father met 
his unhappy death at the hands of Zhang Kai. Tao Qian is 
guiltless. Still more innocent are the people, and to slay 
them would be an evil. I pray you think over it.” 

Cao Cao retorted angrily, “You once abandoned me 

and now you have the impudence to come to see me! Tao 
Qian slew my whole family, and I will tear his heart out in 
revenge. I swear it! You may speak for your friend and say 
what you will. I shall be as if I heard not.” 

leave. 

his face.” 

So Chen Gong rode off to the county of Chenliu to give 

4Chen Gong is the magistrate who spared Cao Cao after Cao Cao failed to 

assassinate Dong Zhuo. Chen Gong and Cao Cao then traveled as fugitives to 
Qiao, but they parted haft way. (chapter 4) 

council. 

“The force against us is too strong,” said he. “I will give 

myself up as a prisoner and let him wreak his vengeance on 
me. I may save the people.” 

But a voice was heard saying, “You have long ruled here, 

and the people love you. Strong as the enemy are, they are 
not necessarily able to break down our walls, especially 
when defended by you and your people. I have a scheme to 
suggest that I think will make Cao Cao die in a place where 
he will not find burial.” 

asked what the scheme was. 

Making overtures for friendship, Tao Qian encountered 

deadly hate.

But, where danger seemed most threatening, he 

discovered safety’s gate.

The next chapter will disclose who the speaker was.

Heaven to have brought this evil upon my people!” 

He called together his officials to consult. 
One of them, Cao Bao, 

said, “Now the enemy is 
upon us: We cannot sit and 
await death with folded 
hands. I for one will help 
you to make a fight.” 

Tao 
Qian 
reluctantly 

sent the army out. From a 
distance he saw Cao Cao’s 
army spread abroad like 
frost and rushed far and 
wide like snow. In their 
midst was a large white 
flag and on both sides was 
written Vengeance. 

When he had ranged his troops, Cao Cao rode out dressed 

in mourning white and abused Tao Qian. 

But Tao Qian advanced, and from beneath his ensign 

he bowed low and said, “I wished to make friends with 
you, Illustrious Sir, and so I sent Zhang Kai to escort your 
family. I knew not that his rebel heart was still unchanged. 
The fault does not lie at my door as you must see.” 

“You old wretch! You killed my father, and now you dare 

mumble this nonsense,” said Cao Cao. 

And he asked who would go out and seize Tao Qian. 
Xiahou Dun undertook this service and rode out. Tao 

Qian fled to the inner portion of his array; and as Xiahou 
Dun came on, Cao Bao went to meet him. But just as the 
two horses met, a hurricane burst over the spot, and the 
flying dust and pebbles threw both sides into the utmost 
confusion. Both drew off. 

Tao Qian retired into the city and called his officers to 

 
Cao Bao

Tao Qian and his generals would hold the city as they 
could. 

He was one of the twentieth generation in descent from the 

Kong Rong

Chapter 11 
Liu Bei Rescues Kong Rong At Beihai;
Lu Bu Defeats Cao Cao Near Puyang. 

Cao utterly. Mi Zhu came of a wealthy family of merchants 
in Donghai and trading in Luoyang. One day traveling 
homeward from that city in a carriage, he met an exquisitely 
beautiful lady trudging along the road, who asked him to let 
her ride. He stopped and yielded his place to her. She invited 
him to share the seat with her. He mounted, but sat rigidly 
upright, never even glancing in her direction. They traveled 
thus for some miles when she thanked him and alighted. 

Just as she left she said, “I am the Goddess of Fire from 

the Southern Land. I am on my way to execute a decree of 
the Supreme God to burn your dwelling, but your extreme 
courtesy has so deeply touched me that I now warn you. 
Hasten homeward, remove your valuables, for I must arrive 
tonight.” 

Thereupon she disappeared. Mi Zhu hastily finished his 

journey and, as soon as he arrived, moved everything out 
of his house. Sure enough that night a fire started in the 
kitchen and involved the whole house. After this he devoted 
his wealth to relieving the poor and comforting the afflicted. 
Tao Qian gave him the magistracy office he then held. 

and beg Governor Kong Rong to help. Another should go to 
Qingzhou on a similar mission to get the help from Imperial 
Protector Tien Kai. If the armies of these two places march 
on Cao Cao, he will certainly retire.” 

Tao Qian accepted the plan and wrote two letters. He 

asked for a volunteer to go to Qingzhou, and a certain Chen 
Deng offered himself and, after he had left, Mi Zhu was 
formally entrusted with the mission to the north. Meanwhile 

in without delay. In reply to a question about the reason of 
the visit, Mi Zhu presented Tao Qian’s letter which said that 
Cao Cao was pressing on Xuzhou City and the Imperial 
Protector prayed for help. 

Then said Kong Rong, “Your master and I are good 

friends, and your presence here constrains me to go to his 
aid. However, I have no quarrel with Cao Cao either, so I 
will first write to him to try to make peace. If he refuses my 
offer, then I must set the army in motion.” 

“Cao Cao will not listen to proposals of peace: He is too 

certain of his strength,” said Mi Zhu. 

Kong Rong wrote his letter and also gave orders to 

muster his troops. Just at this moment happened another 
rising of the Yellow Scarves, ten thousand of them, and the 
ruffians began to rob and murder at Beihai. It was necessary 
to deal with them first, and Kong Rong led his army outside 
the city. 

The rebel leader, Guan Hai, rode out to the front, saying, 

“I know this county is fruitful and can well spare ten 
thousand carts of grain. Give me that and we retire; refuse, 
and we will batter down the city walls and destroy every 
soul.” 

Hans, entrusted with the safety of their land. Think you I 
will feed rebels ?” 

Guan Hai whipped his steed, whirled his sword around 

his head and rode forward. Zong Bao, one of Kong Rong’s 
generals, set his spear and rode out to give battle, but 
after a very few bouts Zong Bao was cut down. Soon the 
soldiers fell into panic and rushed pell-mell into the city for 
protection. The rebels then laid siege to the city on all sides. 
Kong Rong was very down-hearted; and Mi Zhu, who now 
saw no hope for the success of his mission, was grieved 
beyond words. 

great Teacher Confucius. Kong Rong had been noted as a 
very intelligent lad, somewhat precocious. When ten years 
old he had gone to see Li Ying, the Governor of Henan, but 
the doorkeeper demurred to letting him in. 

But when Kong Rong said, “I am Minister Li Ying’s 

intimate friend,” he was admitted. 

Li Ying asked Kong Rong what relations had existed 

between their families that might justify the term intimate. 

The boy replied, “Of old my ancestor Confucius 

questioned your ancestor, the Taoist sage Laozi, concerning 
ceremonies. So our families have known each other for 
many generations.” 

Li Ying was astonished at the boy’s ready wit. 
Presently High Minister Chen Wei visited, to whom Li 

Ying told the story of his youthful guest. “He is a wonder, 
this boy,” said Li Ying, pointing to Kong Rong. 

grows up into a clever man.” 

The lad took him up at once saying, “By what you say, 

Sir, you were certainly one of the clever boys.” 

The minister adviser and the governor all laughed, 

saying, “The boy is going to be a noble vessel.” 

Thus from boyhood Kong Rong was famous. As a man 

he rose to be an Imperial Commander and was sent as 
Governor to Beihai, where he was renowned for hospitality. 
He used to quote the lines: 

“Let the rooms be full of friends,
And the cups be full of wine.
That is what I like.”

After six years at Beihai the people were devoted to him. 

The day that Mi Zhu arrived, Kong Rong was, as usual, 
seated among his guests, and the messenger was ushered 

suffer from want. This had won the old lady’s heart and she 
had sent her son to show her gratitude. 

Kong Rong showed his appreciation by treating his guest 

with the greatest respect, making him presents of clothing 
and armor, saddles and horses. 

and I will go out and drive off these fellows.” 

“You are a bold warrior, but they are very numerous. It is 

Taishi Ci

rebels were there in enormous numbers. One day standing 
on the wall, Kong Rong saw afar a man armed with a spear 
riding hard in among the Yellow Scarves and scattering 
them before him like chaff before the wind. 

Before long the man had reached the foot of the wall and 

called out, “Open the gate!” 

But the defenders 

would not open to an 
unknown man, and 
in the delay a crowd 
of rebels gathered 
round the rider along 
the edge of the moat. 
Suddenly wheeling 
about, the warrior 
dashed in among 
them and bowled 
over a dozen at which the others fell back. At this Kong 
Rong ordered the wardens to open the gates and let the 
stranger enter. As soon as he was inside, he dismounted, 
laid aside his spear, ascended the wall, and made humble 
obeisance to the Governor. 

Laihuang. I only returned home yesterday from the north to 
see my mother, and then I heard that your city was in danger 
from a rebel attack. My mother said you had been very kind 
to her and told me I should try to help. So I set out all alone, 
and here I am.” 

This was cheering. Kong Rong already knew Taishi Ci 

by reputation as a valiant fighting man, although they two 
had never met. The son being far away from his home, Kong 
Rong had taken his mother, who dwelt a few miles from the 
city, under his especial protection and saw that she did not 

neighborhood, but I am by the bonds of sentiment and I 
share his sorrows and misfortunes. The Yellow Scarves 
have invested his city, and he is distressed with none to turn 
to, and destruction is very near. You are known as humane, 
righteous, and eager to help the distressed. Therefore at his 
command I have braved all dangers and fought my way 
through his enemies to pray you save him.” 

Liu Bei smiled, 

saying, “And does 
he know there is 
a Liu Bei in this 
world?” 

So 
Liu 
Bei, 

together with Guan 
Yu 
and 
Zhang 

Fei, told off three 
thousand troops and 
set out to help raise 
the siege. When the 
rebel leader Guan Hai saw these new forces arriving, he led 
out his army to fight them, thinking he could easily dispose 
of so small a force. 

The brothers and Taishi Ci with them sat on their horses 

in the forefront of their array. Guan Hai hastened forward. 
Taishi Ci was ready to fight, but Guan Yu had opened the 
combat. He rode forth and the two steeds met. The soldiers 
set up a great noise. After a few bouts Guan Yu’s green-
dragon saber rose and fell, and with the stroke fell the rebel 
leader. 

This was the signal for Zhang Fei and Taishi Ci to take 

a share, and they advanced side by side. With their spears 
ready they dashed in, and Liu Bei urged forward his force. 
The besieged Governor saw his doughty rescuers laying 
low the rebels as tigers among a flock of sheep. None 

a serious matter to go out among them,” said Kong Rong. 

How shall I be able to look her in the face if I do not raise 
the siege? I would prefer to conquer or perish.” 

“I have heard Liu Bei is one of the heroes in the world. If 

we could get his help, there would be no doubt of the result. 
But there is no one to send.” 

“I will go as soon as I have received your letter.” 
So Kong Rong wrote letters and gave them to his 

helper. 

his bow and quiver to his girdle, took his spear in his hand, 
tied his packed haversack firmly to his saddle bow, and rode 
out at the city gate. He went quite alone. 

Along the moat a large party of the besiegers were 

gathered, and they came to intercept the solitary rider. But 
Taishi Ci dashed in among them and cut down several and 
so finally fought his way through. 

Guan Hai, hearing that a rider had left the city, guessed 

what his errand would be and followed Taishi Ci with a 
party of horsemen. Guan Hai spread them out so that the 
messenger rider was entirely surrounded. Then Taishi Ci 
laid aside his spear, took his bow, adjusted his arrows one 
by one and shot all round him. And as a rider fell from 
his steed with every twang of Taishi Ci’s bowstring, the 
pursuers dared not close in. 

Taishi Ci reached Pingyuan, and after greeting his host in 
proper form he told how Kong Rong was surrounded and 
had sent him for help. Then he presented the letter which 
Liu Bei read. 

“And who are you?” asked Liu Bei. 
“I am Taishi Ci, a fellow from Laihuang. I am not 

directions. 

possible a banquet was prepared in their honor. Mi Zhu was 
presented to Liu Bei. Mi Zhu related the story of the murder 
of Cao Song by Zhang Kai, Cao Cao’s vengeful attack on 
Xuzhou, and his coming to beg for assistance. 

Liu Bei said, “Imperial Protector Tao Qian is a kindly 

man of high character, and it is a pity that he should suffer 
this wrong for no fault of his own.” 

“You are a scion of the imperial family,” said Governor 

Kong Rong, “and this Cao Cao is injuring the people, a 
strong man abusing his strength. Why not go with me to 
rescue the sufferers?” 

cautiously,” said Liu Bei. 

“Though my desire to help arises from an old friendship, 

yet it is a righteous act as well. I do not think your heart is 
not inclined toward the right,” said Kong Rong. 

Liu Bei said, “This being so, you go first and give me 

time to see Gongsun Zan from whom I may borrow more 
troops and horses. I will come anon.” 

“You surely will not break your promise?” said the 

Governor. 

“What manner of man think you that I am?” said Liu Bei. 

“The wise one said, ‘Death is common to all; the person 
without truth cannot maintain the self.’ Whether I get the 
troops or not, certainly I shall myself come.” 

So the plan was agreed to. Mi Zhu set out to return 

forthwith while Kong Rong prepared for his expedition. 

Taishi Ci took his leave, saying, “My mother bade me 

come to your aid, and now happily you are safe. Letters 
have come from my fellow townsman, Liu Yao, Imperial 
Protector of Yangzhou, calling me thither and I must go. I 
will see you again.” 

could withstand them, and he then sent out his own troops 
to join in the battle so that the rebels were between two 
armies. The rebels’ force was completely broken and many 
troops surrendered, while the remainder scattered in all 

Liu Bei

under your command, while I with Zhang Fei make a dash 
through to see Tao Qian and consult with him.” 

positions on the ox-horn formation, with Guan Yu and Zhao 
Yun on either side to support them. 

When Liu Bei and Zhang Fei leading one thousand 

troops made their dash to get through Cao Cao’s army, they 
got as far as the flank of his camp when there arose a great 
beating of drums, and horse and foot rolled out like billows 
on the ocean. The leader was Yu Jin. 

Yu Jin checked his steed and called out, “You mad men 

from somewhere, where are you going?” 

Zhang Fei heard Yu Jin but deigned no reply. He only 

rode straight to attack the speaker. After they had fought a 
few bouts, Liu Bei waved his double swords as signal for 
his troops to come on, and they drove Yu Jin before them. 
Zhang Fei led the pursuit and in this way they reached the 
city wall. 

embroidered in white Liu Bei of Pingyuan, and the Imperial 
Protector bade them open the gate for the rescuers to enter. 
Liu Bei was made very welcome, conducted to the residency, 

accept nothing and departed. When his mother saw him, she 
was pleased at his success saying she rejoiced that he had 
been able to prove his gratitude, and after this he departed 
for Yangzhou. 

Liu Bei went away to his friend Gongsun Zan and laid 

before Gongsun Zan his design to help Xuzhou. 

yourself for the sake of another?” said Gongsun Zan. 

faith.” 

“I will lend you two thousand horse and foot,” said 

Gongsun Zan. 

“Also I wish to have the services of Zhao Yun,” said Liu 

Bei. 

Gongsun Zan agreed to this also. They marched away, 

Liu Bei’s own troops being in the front, and Zhao Yun, with 
the borrowed troops, being in rear. 

In due course Mi Zhu returned saying that Kong Rong had 

also obtained the services of Liu Bei. The other messenger, 
Chen Deng, came back and reported that Tien Kai would 
also bring help. Then was Tao Qian’s heart set at ease. 

But both the leaders, though they had promised aid, 

greatly dreaded their antagonist and camped among the 
hills at a great distance, fearful of coming too close to Cao 
Cao’s quarters. Cao Cao knew of their coming and divided 
his army into parts to meet them, so postponing the attack 
on the city itself. 

Presently Liu Bei came up and went to see Kong Rong, 

who said, “The enemy is very powerful, and Cao Cao 
handles his army skillfully. We must be cautious. Let us 
make most careful observations before we strike a blow.” 

“What I fear is famine in the city,” said Liu Bei. “They 

cannot hold out very long. I will put my troops with yours 

Said Liu Bei, “I 

ought to write to Cao 
Cao to press him to 
raise the siege. If he 
refuses, we will attack 
forthwith.” 

Orders were sent to 

the three camps outside 
to remain quiescent till 
the letter could reach 
Cao Cao. 

It happened that 

Cao Cao was holding 
a 
council when 
a 

messenger with a war 
letter was announced. 
The letter was brought in and handed to him and, when he 
had opened and looked at it, he found it was from Liu Bei. 

This is the letter, very nearly: 
“Since meeting you outside the pass, fate has assigned us 

to different quarters of the world, and I have not been able 
to pay my respects to you. Touching the death of your noble 
father, it was owing to the vicious nature of Zhang Kai and 
due to no fault of Tao Qian. Now while the remnant of the 
Yellow Scarves is disturbing the lands, and Dong Zhuo’s 
partisans have the upper hand in the capital, I wish that 
you, Illustrious Sir, would regard the critical position of the 
court rather than your personal grievances, and so divert 
your forces from the attack on Xuzhou to the rescue of the 
state. Such would be for the happiness of that city and the 
whole empire.” 

Cao Cao gave vent to a torrent of abuse: “Who is this Liu 

Bei that he dares write and exhort me? Beside, he means to 
be satirical.” 

Guo Jia

and a banquet prepared in his honor. The soldiers also were 
feasted. 

Tao Qian was delighted with Liu Bei, admiring his high-

spirited appearance and clear speech. Tao Qian bade Mi Zhu 
offer Liu Bei the seal and insignia of the protectorship office. 
But Liu Bei shrank 
back startled. 

“What does this 

mean?” said Liu 
Bei. 

Tao Qian said, 

“There is trouble 
on every side, and 
the kingly rule is no 
longer maintained. 
You, Sir, are a 
member of the family and eminently fitted to support them 
and their prerogatives. I am verging on senility, and I wish 
to retire in your favor. I pray you not to decline, and I will 
report my action to the court.” 

Liu Bei started up from his seat and bowed before his 

host, saying, “Scion of the family I may be, but my merit 
is small and my virtue meager. I doubt my fitness even for 
my present post, and only a feeling of doing right sent me 
to your assistance. To hear such speech makes me doubt. 
Surely you think I came with greed in my heart. May God 
help me no more if I cherished such a thought.” 

“It is a poor old man’s real sentiment,” said Tao Qian. 
Time after time Tao Qian renewed his offer to entrust the 

region of Xuzhou to Liu Bei, but Liu Bei kept refusing. 

In the midst of this came Mi Zhu, saying, “The enemies 

had reached the wall, and something must be done to drive 
them off. The present matter could await a more tranquil 
time.” 

was introducing Chen Gong. 

empire has begun, and warriors are seizing what they can. 
It is strange that you, with all the advantages of population 
and provisions you enjoy, do not strike for independence. 
Cao Cao has gone on an expedition against the east, leaving 
his own territory defenseless. Lu Bu is one of the fighting 
people of the day. If you and he together attacked and got 
Yanzhou, you could then proceed to the dominion.” 

an attack, and soon Lu Bu was in possession of Yanzhou 
and its neighborhood, all but three small counties of 
Juancheng, Fanxia, and Dongjun, which were vigorously 
and desperately defended by Xun Yu and Cheng Yu in 
concert. Cao Cao’s cousin, Cao Ren, had fought many 
battles but was repeatedly defeated, and the messenger with 
the evil tidings had come from him asking prompt help. 

Cao Cao was greatly disturbed by this and said, “If my 

own region be lost, I have no home to return to. I must do 
something at once.” 

“The best thing would be to become friends with Liu Bei 

at any cost and return to Yanzhou,” said Guo Jia. 

waiting messenger and broke camp. The news that the 
enemy had left was very gratifying to Tao Qian, who then 
invited his various defenders into Xuzhou City and prepared 
banquets and feasts in token of his gratitude. 

At one of these, when the feasting was over, he proceeded 

with his wish of retirement in favor of Liu Bei. 

Placing Liu Bei in the seat of highest honor, Tao Qian 

bowed before him and then addressed the assembly, “I am 
old and feeble, and my two sons lack the ability to hold so 
important an office as this. The noble Liu Bei is a descendant 

death and to press on the siege. 

But Guo Jia remonstrated, saying, “Liu Bei has come 

from afar to help Tao Qian, and he is trying the effect of 
politeness before resorting to arms. I pray you, my lord, 
reply with fair words that his heart may be lulled with a 
feeling of safety. Then attack with vigor and the city will 
fall.” 

Cao Cao found this advice good, so he spared the 

messenger, telling him to wait to carry back his reply. 
While this was going on, a horseman came with news of 
misfortune: “Lu Bu has invaded Yanzhou, now holding 
Puyang. The three counties left---Juancheng, Fanxia, and 
Dongjun---are under severe attacks.” 

When Li Jue and Guo Si, the two partisans of Dong Zhuo, 

succeeded in their attack on the capital, Lu Bu had fled to 
Yuan Shu. However, Yuan Shu looked askance at him for 
his instability and refused to receive him. Then Lu Bu went 
to try Yuan Shao, who was a brother of Yuan Shu. Yuan 
Shao accepted the warrior and made use of him in an attack 
upon Zhang Yan in Changshan. But his success filled him 
with pride, and his arrogant demeanor so annoyed the other 
commanders that Yuan Shao was on the point of putting 
him to death. To escape this Lu Bu had gone away to Zhang 
Yang1, Governor of Shangdang, who accepted his services. 

About this time Pang Shu, who had been hiding 

and protecting Lu Bu’s family in Changan since his 
disappearance, restored them to him. This deed angered Li 
Jue and Guo Si so that they put Pang Shu to death and wrote 
to Lu Bu’s protector to serve him the same. To escape this 
Lu Bu once again had to flee and this time joined himself to 
Zhang Miao, the Governor of Chenliu. 

1Zhang Yang was among the eighteen lords who rallied against Dong Zhuo 

at the Tiger Trap Pass. 

you leave me, and there will be none to close my eyes.” 

“Brother, you should accept the offer thus made,” said 

Guan Yu. 

“Why so much fuss?” said Zhang Fei. “We have not 

taken the place. It is he who wishes to give it you.” 

“You all persuade me to do what is wrong,” said Liu 

Bei. 

said, “As you are set in determination, perhaps you will 
consent to encamp at Xiaopei. It is only a little town, but 
thence you can keep watch and ward over the region.” 

he gave in. The feast of victory being now ended, the time 
came to say farewell. When Zhao Yun took his leave, Liu 
Bei held his hands alternately while dashing away the 
falling tears. Kong Rong and Tien Kai went home to their 
own places. 

Xiaopei, they first repaired the defenses, and then they put 
out proclamations in order to calm the inhabitants. 

In the meantime Cao Cao had marched toward his own 

region. 

Cao Ren met and told him, “Lu Bu is very powerful, 

and he has Chen Gong as adviser. Yanzhou is as good as 
lost, with the exception of three counties which have been 
vigorously and desperately defended by Xun Yu and Cheng 
Yu.” 

nothing more; he has no craft. So we need not fear him 
seriously.” 

Then he gave orders to make a strong camp till they 

could think out some victorious plan. 

subordinate generals, Xue Lan and Li Fang, to him and 

of the imperial house. He is of lofty virtue and great talent. 
Let him then take over the rule of this region, and only too 
willingly I shall retire to have leisure to nurse my health.” 

Liu Bei replied, “I came at the request of Governor Kong 

Rong, because it was the right thing to do. Xuzhou is saved; 
but if I take it, surely the world will say I am a wicked 
man.” 

is falling, their realm is crumbling, and now is the time for 
doughty deeds and signal services. This is a fertile region, 
well populated and rich, and you are the man to rule over 
it.” 

“But I cannot accept,” said Liu Bei. 
“Imperial Protector Tao Qian is a great sufferer,” said 

Chen Deng, “and 
cannot 
see 
to 

matters. You may 
not decline, Sir.” 

Said Liu Bei, 

“Yuan Shu belongs 
to a family of rulers, 
who have held the 
highest offices of 
state four times in 
three generations. 
The multitude people respects him. Why not invite him to 
this task?” 

Not worth talking about. This opportunity is a gift from 
Heaven, and you will never cease to regret its loss,” said 
Kong Rong. 

So spoke Kong Rong, but still Liu Bei obstinately 

refused. 

Tao Qian besought him with tears, saying, “I shall die if 

Yanzhou, and I shall go to Puyang.” 

In Puyang, when Chen Gong heard of the enemy’s 

approach, he spoke, saying, “The enemy will be fatigued 
with long marches, so attack quickly before they have time 
to recover.” 

Lu Bu replied, “I, a single horseman, am afraid of none. 

I come and go as I will. Think you I fear this Cao Cao? Let 
him settle his camp; I will take him after that.” 

next day he led out his commanders, and they arrayed their 
armies in open country. Cao Cao took up his station on 
horseback between the two standards, watching while his 

assigned to them the task of holding the city of Yanzhou, 
saying, “I have long waited for opportunity to employ your 
skill. Now I give you ten thousand soldiers, and you are to 
hold the city while I go forth to attack Cao Cao.” 

They accepted. 
But Chen Gong, the strategist, came in hastily, saying, 

“General, you are going away; whither?” 

“I am going to camp my troops at Puyang, that vantage 

point.” 

“You are making a mistake,” said Chen Gong. “The two 

you have chosen to defend this city are unequal to the task. 
For this expedition remember that about sixty miles due 
south, on the treacherous road to the Taishan Mountains, is 
a very advantageous position where you should place your 
best men in ambush. Cao Cao will hasten homeward by 
double marches when he hears what has happened. If you 
strike when half his troops have gone past this point, you 
may seize him.” 

Said Lu Bu, “I am going to occupy Puyang and see what 

develops. How can you guess my big plan?” 

So Lu Bu left Xue Lan in command at Yanzhou and went 

away. 

Now when Cao 

Cao 
approached 

the dangerous part 
of the road near the 
Taishan Mountains, 
Guo Jia warned 
him to take care as 
there was doubtless 
an ambush. 

But Cao Cao laughed, saying, “We know all Lu Bu’s 

dispositions. Xue Lan is keeping the city. Do you think 
Lu Bu has laid an ambush? I shall tell Cao Ren to besiege 

secret road for the camp. 

when Chen Gong reminded him, saying, “The western camp 
is importance point, and it might be attacked.” 

But Lu Bu replied, “The enemy will not dare approach 

after today’s defeat.” 

“Cao Cao is a very able commander,” replied Chen 

Gong. “You must keep a good lookout for him lest he attack 
our weak spot.” 

So arrangements were made for defense. Generals Gao 

Shun, Wei Xu, and Hou Cheng were ordered to march 
there. 

At dusk Cao Cao reached the camp and began an 

immediate attack on all four sides. The defenders could not 
hold him off. They ran in all directions, and the camp was 
captured. Near the fourth watch, when the defending party 
came, Cao Cao sallied forth to meet them and met Gao Shun. 
Another battle then began and waged till dawn. About that 
time a rolling of drums was heard in the west, and they told 
Cao Cao that Lu Bu himself was at hand. Thereupon Cao 
Cao abandoned the attack and fled. 

Gao Shun, Wei Xu, and Hou Cheng pursued him, Lu Bu 

taking the lead. Cao Cao’s two generals, Yu Jin and Yue 
Jing, attacked the 
pursuers but could 
not 
check 
them. 

Cao Cao went away 
north. 
But 
from 

behind some hills 
came out Zhang 
Liao and Zang Ba to 
attack. Lu Qian and 
Cao Hong were sent 
to stop the attackers, but Lu Qian and Cao Hong were both 

opponents arrived and formed up in a circular area. 

all strong men: Zhang Liao of Mayi, backed by Hao Meng, 
Cao Xing, and Cheng Lian; Zang Ba of Huaying, backed by 
Wei Xu, Song Xian, and Hou Cheng. They led an army of 
fifty thousand in total. 

pointing to his opponent, said, “You and I had no quarrel, 
why then did you invade my land?” 

“The empire of Han is the possession of all. What is your 

special claim?” said Lu Bu. 

So saying, Lu Bu ordered Zang Ba to ride forth and 

challenge. From Cao Cao’s side the challenge was accepted 
by Yue Jing. The two steeds approached each other; two 
spears were lifted both together, and they exchanged near 
thirty blows with no advantage to either. Then Xiahou Dun 
rode out to help his colleague and, in reply, out went Zhang 
Liao from Lu Bu’s side. And they four fought. 

halberd, he urged his Red Hare forward to where the fight 
was waging. Seeing him approach, Xiahou Dun and Yue 
Jing both fled, but Lu Bu pressed on after them, and Cao 
Cao’s army lost the day. Retiring ten miles, they made a 
new camp. Lu Bu called in and mustered his troops. 

The day having gone against him, Cao Cao called a 

council, and Yu Jin said, “From the hill tops today I saw a 
camp of our enemies on the west of Puyang. They were but 
few men therein, and tonight after today’s victory, it will 
not be defended. Let us attack; and if we can take the camp, 
we shall strike fear into the heart of Lu Bu. This is our best 
plan.” 

Cao Cao thought so too. He and six of his generals---Cao 

Hong, Li Dian, Mao Jie, Lu Qian, Yu Jin, and Dian Wei-
--and twenty thousand horse and foot left that night by a 

and soon appeared Lu Bu himself. 

“Cao Cao, you rebel, do not flee!” shouted Lu Bu as he 

approached with his halberd ready for a thrust. 

All stopped and looked in each others’ faces: The soldiers 

were weary, their steeds spent. Fear smote them, and they 
looked around for some place of refuge. 

You may lead your lord safely out of the press,
But what if the enemy follow?

next chapter will relate.

defeated. Cao Cao sought safety in the west. Here again his 
retreat was met by Lu Bu’s four generals, Hao Meng, Cao 
Xing, Cheng Lian, and Song Xian. 

The fight became desperate. Cao Cao dashed at the 

enemy’s array. The din was terrible. Arrows fell like pelting 
rain upon them, and they could make no headway. 

Cao Cao was desperate and cried out in fear, “Who can 

save me?” 

Then from the crush dashed 

out Dian Wei with his double 
spears, crying, “Fear not, my 
lord!” 

Dian Wei leapt from his 

steed, leaned his double spears 
against a wall and laid hold of a 
handful of battle-axes. Turning 
to his followers he said, “When the ruffians are at ten paces, 
call out to me.” 

Then he set off with mighty strides, plunging forward, 

careless of the flying arrows. Lu Bu’s horsemen followed, 
and when they got near, Dian Wei’s followers shouted, “Ten 
paces!” 

“Five, then call!” shouted back Dian Wei, and went on. 
Presently, “Five paces!” 
Then Dian Wei spun round and flung the battle-axes. 

With every fling a man fell from the saddle and never a 
battle-ax missed. 

Having thus slain ten or so the remainder fled, and Dian 

Wei quickly remounted his steed, set his twin spears and 
rushed again into the fight with a vigor that none could 
withstand. One by one his opponents yielded, and he was 
able to lead Cao Cao safely out of the press of battle. Cao 
Cao and his commanders went to their camp. 

But as evening fell, the noise of pursuit fell on their ears, 

Lu Bu thought this trick might be tried, and they arranged 

for the Tian family letter to be sent. 

Coming soon after the defeat, when Cao Cao felt 

uncertain what step to take next, the secret letter was read 
with joy. It promised interior help and said the sign should 
be a white flag with the word Rectitude written thereon. 

“Heaven is going to give me Puyang!” said Cao Cao 

joyfully. 

to prepare for the expedition. 

Chen Gong is full of guile. I fear treachery in this letter, and 
you must be careful. If you will go, then enter with only 
one third your army, leaving the others outside the city as 
a reserve.” 

Puyang, which he found gay with fluttering flags. Looking 
carefully he saw among them, at the west gate, the white 
flag with the looked-for inscription. His heart rejoiced. 

That day, just about noon, the city gates opened, and two 

bodies of soldiers appeared as if to fight. Gao Shun was 
the front commander, and Hou Cheng the rear commander. 
Cao Cao told off his general, Dian Wei, to oppose them. 
Neither body, however, came on to full engagement but fell 
back into the city. By this move Dian Wei and his troops 
had been drawn close up to the drawbridge. From within 
the city several soldiers were seen taking any chance of 
confusion to escape and come outside. 

To Cao Cao they said, “We are clients of the Tian family,” 

and they gave him secret letters stating: 

“The signal will be given about the first watch setting by 

beating a gong. That will be the time to attack. The gates 
will be opened.” 

So Cao Cao ordered Xiahou Dun to march to the left 

Chapter 12 
Tao Qian Thrice Offers Xuzhou To Liu Bei;
Cao Cao Retakes Yanzhou From Lu Bu. 

However, help came. Xiahou Dun with a body of soldiers 
found his chief, checked the pursuit, and fought with Lu 
Bu till dusk. Rain fell in torrents swamping everything; and 
as the daylight waned, they drew off and Cao Cao reached 
camp. He rewarded Dian Wei generously and advanced him 
in rank. 

Chen Gong. Then Chen Gong proposed a new stratagem. 

He said, “In Puyang 

there is a rich, leading 
family, 
Tian 
by 

name, who number 
thousands, 
enough 

to populate a whole 
county in themselves. 
Make one of these 
people go to Cao Cao’s 
camp with a pretended 
secret letter about Lu 
Bu’s ferocity, and the 
hatred of the people, 
and their desire to be 
rid of him. And by 
saying that only Gao 
Shun is left to guard the city, and they would help anyone 
who would come to save them. Thus our enemy Cao Cao 
will be inveigled into the city, and we will destroy him either 
by fire or ambush. His skill may be equal to encompassing 
the universe, but he will not escape.” 

Chen Gong

“I am looking for him,” said Li Dian. 
“Quick! Get help from outside,” shouted Dian Wei. “I 

will seek him.” 

way in, looking on every side for Cao Cao. He was not to 
be found. Dashing out of the city, Dian Wei ran up against 
Yue Jing, who asked where their lord was. 

“I have entered the city twice in search of him, but cannot 

find him,” said Dian Wei. 

“Let us go in together,” said Yue Jing. 
They rode up to the gate. But the noise of bombs from 

the gate tower frightened Yue Jing’s horse so that it refused 
to pass. Wherefore Dian Wei alone went in, butting through 
the smoke and dashing through the flames. But he got in 
and searched on every side. 

his way out and disappear leaving him surrounded, he again 
made an attempt to reach the north gate. On the way, sharply 
outlined against the glow, he saw the figure of Lu Bu coming 
toward him with his trident halberd ready to kill. Cao Cao 
covered his face with his hand, whipped up his steed and 
galloped past. 

But Lu Bu came 

galloping up behind 
him and tapping him 
on the helmet with the 
halberd cried, “Where 
is Cao Cao?” 

Cao Cao turned 

and, pointing to a 
dun horse well ahead, 
cried, “There; on that dun! That’s he.” 

the rider of the dun. 

and Cao Hong to the right. Cao Cao led the main army--
-together with Xiahou Yuan, Li Dian, and Yue Jing---into 
the city. 

Li Dian pressed upon his master the precaution, saying, 

“My lord should stay outside the city. Let us go in first.” 

But Cao Cao bade him be silent, saying, “If I do not go, 

who will advance?” 

And so at the first watch Cao Cao led the way. The moon 

had not yet arisen. As he drew near the west gate, they heard 
a crackling sound, then a loud shouting, and then torches 
moved hither and thither. Next the gates were thrown wide 
open, and Cao Cao, whipping up his steed, galloped in. 

But when he reached the state residence, he noticed 

the streets were quite deserted, and then he knew he had 
been tricked. Wheeling round his horse, he shouted to his 
followers to retire. This was the signal for another move. 
An explosion of a signal bomb was heard close at hand, and 
it was echoed from every side in a deafening roar. Gongs 
and drums beat all around with a roar like rivers rushing 
backward to their source, and the ocean boiling up from 
its depths. From two sides east and west came bodies of 
soldiers eager to attack, led by Lu Bu’s generals Zhang Liao 
and Zang Ba. 

Cao Cao dashed off toward the north only to find his 

way barred by Hao Meng and Cao Xing. Cao Cao tried for 
the south gate, but met enemies led by Gao Shun and Hou 
Cheng. Cao Cao’s trusty commander Dian Wei, with fierce 
eyes and gritting teeth, at last burst through and got out, 
with the enemy close after him. 

But when Dian Wei reached the drawbridge, he glanced 

behind him and missed his master. Immediately Dian Wei 
turned back and cut an alley inside. Just within he met Li 
Dian. 

“Where is our lord?” cried Dian Wei. 

the fifth watch. He will come to attack as soon as the news 
gets abroad, and I will have an ambush ready for him in 
Maling Hills. I will get him this time.” 

“Really a fine stratagem!” said Guo Jia. 
So the soldiers were put into mourning, and the report 

went everywhere that Cao Cao was dead. And soon Lu 
Bu heard it, and he assembled his army at once to make a 
surprise attack, taking the road by the Maling Hills to his 
enemy’s camp. 

As he was passing the hills, he heard the drums beating 

for an advance, and the ambushing soldiers leapt out all 
round him. Only by desperate fighting did he get out of the 
melee and with a sadly diminished force returned to his 
camp at Puyang. There he strengthened the fortifications 
and could not be tempted forth to battle. 

This year locusts suddenly appeared, and they consumed 

every green blade. There was a famine, and in the northeast 
grain rose to fifty “strings” of cash a cart. People even took 
to cannibalism. Cao Cao’s army suffered from want, and 
he marched them to Juancheng. Lu Bu took his troops to 
Shanyang. Perforce therefore the fighting ceased. 

In Xuzhou. Imperial Protector Tao Qian, over sixty years 

of age, suddenly fell seriously ill, and he summoned his 
confident, Mi Zhu, to his chamber to make arrangements 
for the future. 

As to the situation the adviser said, “Cao Cao abandoned 

his attack on this place because of his enemy’s seizure of 
Yanzhou; and now they are both keeping the peace solely 
because of the famine. But Cao Cao will surely renew the 
attack in the spring. When Liu Bei refused to allow you 
to vacate office in his favor, you were in full vigor. Now 
you are ill and weak, and you can make this a reason for 
retirement. He will not refuse again.” 

So a message was sent to the little garrison town 

Thus relieved Cao Cao set 

off for the east gate. Then he 
fell in with Dian Wei, who 
took him under his protection 
and fought through the press, 
leaving a trail of death behind 
till they reached the gate. Here 
the fire was raging fiercely, and 
burning beams were falling on 
all sides. The earth element 
seemed to have interchanged 
with the fire element. Dian Wei 
warded off the burning pieces 
of wood with his lance and 
rode into the smoke making a 
way for his lord. Just as they 
were passing through the gate a 
flaming beam fell from the gate 
tower. Cao Cao just warded it off with his arm, but it struck 
his steed on the quarters and knocked the steed down. Cao 
Cao’s hand and arm were badly burned and his hair and 
beard singed. Dian Wei turned back to his rescue. Luckily 
Xiahou Yuan came along just then, and the two raised Cao 
Cao and set him on Xiahou Yuan’s horse. And thus they 
got him out of the burning city. But they had to go through 
heavy fighting till daybreak. 

his tent, anxious for news of his health. He soon recovered 
and laughed when he thought of his escape. 

“I blundered into that fool’s trap, but I will have my 

revenge,” said he. 

“Let us have a new plan soon,” said Guo Jia. 
“I will turn his trick to my own use. I will spread the 

false report that I was burned in the fire, and that I died at 

Dian Wei

do not let them have the 
guidance of affairs.” 

“But I am unequal to so 

great a charge.” 

“I will recommend to you 

one who could assist you. He 
is Sun Qian from Beihai who 
could be appointed to some 
post.” 

Turning to Mi Zhu, Tao 

Qian said, “The noble Liu Bei 
here is the most prominent 
man of the time, and you should serve him well.” 

Still would Liu Bei have put from him such a post, but 

just then the Imperial Protector, pointing to his heart to 
indicate his sincerity, passed away. 

When the ceremonial wailing of the officials was over, 

the insignia of office were brought to Liu Bei. But he would 
have none of them. The following days the inhabitants of the 
town and country around crowded into the state residence, 
bowing and with tears, calling upon Liu Bei to receive the 
charge. 

“If you do not, we cannot live in pence,” said they. 
To these requests his brothers added their persuasion, 

till at length he consented to assume the administrative 
duties. He forthwith appointed Sun Qian and Mi Zhu as 
his Advisers, and Chen Deng his Secretary. He moved 
his army from Xiaopei to Xuzhou City, and he put forth 
proclamations to reassure the people. 

He also attended to the burial ceremonies; he and all his 

army dressing in mourning. After the fullest sacrifices and 
ceremonies, a burial place for the late Imperial Protector 
was found close to the source of the Yellow River. The dead 
man’s testament was forwarded to court. 

Xiaopei calling Liu Bei 
to a counsel on military 
affairs. This brought him 
with his brothers and a 
slender escort. He was at 
once called in to the sick 
man’s chamber. Quickly 
disposing of the inquiries 
about his health, Tao 
Qian soon came to the 
real object of his call for 
Liu Bei. 

“Sir, I asked you to 

come for the sole reason 
that I am dangerously 
ill and likely to die at 
any time. I look to you, 
Illustrious Sir, to consider 
the Hans and their empire 
as more important than 
anything else, and so to 
take over the symbols of 
office of this region, the 
commission and the seal, 
that I may close my eyes 
in peace.” 

“You have two sons, 

why not depute them to 
relieve you?” said Liu 
Bei. 

“Both 
lack 
the 

requisite talents. I trust 
you will instruct them 
after I have gone, but 
Liu Bei

the eastern counties of Chencheng, Yingchuan, and Runan, 
and feed your army on their supplies. The remnants of the 
Yellow Scarves, He Yi and Huang Shao, are there with 
stores and treasures of all kinds that they have amassed by 
plundering wherever they could. Rebels of their stamp are 
easily broken. Break them, and you can feed your army 
with their grain. Moreover, both the court and the common 
people will join in blessing you.” 

quickly began his preparations to carry it out. He left Xiahou 
Dun and Cao Ren to guard Juancheng, while his main body, 
under his own command, marched to seize Chencheng. This 
done they went to Runan and Yingchuan. 

Now when the Yellow Scarves leaders, He Yi and Huang 

Shao, knew that Cao Cao was approaching. They came 
out in a great body to oppose him. They met at Goat Hill. 
Though the rebels were numerous, they were a poor lot, 
a mere pack of beasts without organization and lacking 
discipline. Cao Cao ordered his strong archers and vigorous 
crossbowmen to keep them in check. 

chose a second-rate champion for their side, who rode out 
and was vanquished in the third bout. Then Cao Cao’s army 
pushed forward, and they made a camp at Goat Hill. 

The following day the rebel Huang Shao himself led 

forth his army and made his battle array along a circle. A 
leader advanced on foot to offer combat. He wore a yellow 
turban on his head and a green robe. His weapon was an 
iron mace. 

He shouted, “I am He Man, the devil who shoots across 

the sky. Who dare fight with me?” 

Cao Hong uttered a great shout and jumped from the 

saddle to accept the challenge. Sword in hand he advanced 
on foot and the two engaged in fierce combat in the face 

of Cao Cao, then in Juancheng. 

Said he, angrily, “I have missed my revenge. This Liu 

Bei has simply stepped into command of the region without 
expending half an arrow: He sat still and attained his desire. 
But I will put him to death and then dig up Tao Qian’s corpse 
in revenge for the death of my noble father!” 

Orders were issued for the army to prepare for a new 

campaign against Xuzhou. 

But Adviser Xun Yu remonstrated with Cao Cao, 

saying, “The Supreme Ancestor secured the Land Within 
the Passes1 and his illustrious successor on the throne, Liu 
Xiu, took Henei. They both first consolidated their position 
whereby they could command the whole empire. Their 
whole progress was from success to success. Hence they 
accomplished their great designs in spite of difficulties. 

Henei are Yanzhou and the Yellow River, which you had 
first, and which is of the utmost strategic point of the empire. 
If you undertake this expedition against Xuzhou leaving 
many troops here for defense, you will not accomplish your 
design; if you leave too few, Lu Bu will fall upon us. And 
finally if you lose this and fail to gain Xuzhou, whither will 
you retire? That region is not vacant. Although Tao Qian 
has gone, Liu Bei holds it; and since the people support him, 
they will fight to the death for him. To abandon this place 
for that is to exchange the great for the small, to barter the 
trunk for the branches, to leave safety and run into danger. I 
would implore you to reflect well.” 

Cao Cao replied, “It is not a good plan to keep soldiers 

idle here during such scarcity.” 

“If that is so, it would be more advantageous to attack 
1The Land Within the Passes, or Guanzhong, was the area around 

Changan. 

“Are you also a Yellow Scarves rebel?” said Dian Wei. 
“I have some hundreds of them prisoners in an enclosure 

here.” 

“Why not bring them out?” said Dian Wei. 
“I will if you win this sword from my hand.” 
This annoyed Dian 

Wei who attacked him. 
They engaged and the 
combat lasted for two 
long hours and then 
was still undecided. 
Both rested a while. 
The 
swashbuckler 

was 
the 
first 
to 

recover and renewed 
the challenge. They fought till dusk and then, as their horses 
were quite spent, the combat was once more suspended. 

In the meantime some of Dian Wei’s men had run off 

to tell the story of this wondrous fight to Cao Cao who 
hastened in amazement, followed by many officers to watch 
it and see the result. 

Cao saw him. In Cao Cao’s heart he rejoiced to see such a 
doughty hero and desired to gain his services. So Cao Cao 
bade Dian Wei feign defeat. 

Dian Wei rode out in answer to the challenge, and some 

thirty bouts were fought. Then Dian Wei turned and fled 
toward his own side. The bravo followed and came quite 
close. But a flight of arrows drove him away. 

Cao Cao hastily drew off his men for one and a half miles 

and then secretly sent a certain number to dig a pitfall and 
sent troops armed with hooks to lie in ambush. 

The following day Dian Wei was sent out with one 

hundred horse. His adversary nothing loath came to meet 

of both armies. They 
exchanged some fifty 
blows, neither gaining 
the advantage. Then 
Cao 
Hong 
feigned 

defeat and ran away. 
He Man went after 
him. Just as he closed, 
Cao Hong tried a feint 
and 
then 
suddenly 

wheeling 
about, 

wounded his adversary. 
Another slash, and He 
Man lay dead. 

At once Li Dian 

dashed forward into 

the midst of the Yellow Scarves and laid hands on the rebel 
chief Huang Shao whom he carried off captive. Cao Cao’s 
troops then set on and scattered the rebels. The spoil of 
treasure and food was immense. 

horsemen toward Kobei Hills. But while on their road 
thither there suddenly appeared a force led by a certain 
swashbuckler who shall be nameless for the moment. This 
bravo was a well-built man, thickset and stout. With a waist 
ten span in girth. He used a long sword. 

He barred the way of retreat. He Yi set his spear and rode 

toward him. But at the first encounter the bravo caught He 
Yi under his arm and bore He Yi off a prisoner. All the rebels 
were terror-stricken, dropped from their horses and allowed 
themselves to be bound. Then the victor drove them like 
cattle into an enclosure with high banks. 

Kobei Hills. The swashbuckler went out to meet him. 

Cao Hong

rank of general and received ample rewards. The two rebel 
leaders, He Yi and Huang Shao, were executed. Runan and 
Yingchuan were now perfectly pacified. 

Cao Cao withdrew his army and went back to Juancheng. 

Xiahou Dun and Cao Ren came out to welcome him, and 
they told him that spies had reported Yanzhou City to be 
left defenseless. Lu Bu’s generals, Xue Lan and Li Fang, 
had given up all its garrison to plundering the surrounding 

Xu Chu

Dian Wei. 

cried he laughing. 

Dian Wei, after a faint show of fighting, turned his horse 
and rode away. His adversary intent upon capture, took no 
care, and he and his horse all blundered into the pitfall. The 
hookmen took him captive, bound him, and carried him 
before Cao Cao. 

his tent, sent away the soldiers, and with his own hands 
loosened the leader’s bonds. Then he brought out clothing 
and dressed him, bade him be seated and asked who he was 
and whence he came. 

“I am named Xu Chu. I am from Qiao. When the 

rebellion broke out, I and my relations of some hundreds 
built a stronghold within a rampart for protection. One day 
the robbers came, but I had stones ready for them. I told 
my relatives to keep on bringing them up to me and I threw 
them, hitting somebody every time I threw. This drove off 
the robbers. Another day they came and we were short of 
grain. So I agreed with them to an exchange of plow oxen 
against grain. They delivered the grain and were driving 
away the oxen when the beasts took fright and tore off to 
their pens. I seized two of oxen by the tail, one with each 
hand, and hauled them backwards a hundred or so paces. 
The robbers were so amazed that they thought no more 
about oxen but went their way. So they never troubled us 
again.” 

“I have heard of your mighty exploits,” said Cao Cao. 

“Will you join my army?” 

“That is my strongest desire,” said Xu Chu. 
So Xu Chu called up his clan, some hundreds in all, and 

and went out of the city. 
He met his foes and he 
began to revile them. 
The redoubtable Xu Chu 
went to fight with him, 
but after twenty bouts 
neither combatant was 
any the worse. 

“He is not the sort that 

one man can overcome,” 
said Cao Cao. 

And he sent Dian Wei to attack Lu Bu from another 

direction. Lu Bu stood the double onslaught. Soon after 
the flank commanders joined in---Xiahou Dun and Xiahou 
Yuan attacking the left; Li Dian and Yue Jing surrounding 
the right. Lu Bu had six opponents. These proved really too 
many for him so he turned his horse and rode back to the 
city. 

But when the members of the Tian family saw him 

coming back beaten, they raised the drawbridge. 

Lu Bu shouted, “Open the gates! Let me in!” 
But the Tians said, “We have gone over to Cao Cao!” 

country. They wanted him to go against it without loss of 
time. 

“With our soldiers fresh from victory, the city will fall at 

a tap of the drum,” said they. 

attack was quite unexpected but the two leaders, Xue Lan 
and Li Fang, hurried out their few soldiers to fight. Xu Chu, 
the latest recruit, said he wished to capture these two and he 
would make of them an introductory gift. 

The task was given him and he rode forth. Li Fang with 

his halberd advanced to meet Xu Chu. The combat was brief 
as Li Fang fell in the second bout. His colleague Xue Lan 
retired with his troops. But he found the drawbridge had been 
seized by Li Dian, so that he could not get shelter within the 
city. Xue Lan led his men toward Juye. But Lu Qian pursued 
and killed him with an arrow. His soldiers scattered to the 
four winds. And thus Yanzhou was recaptured. 

Next Cheng Yu proposed an expedition to take Puyang. 

Cao Cao marched his army out in perfect order. The van 
leaders were Dian Wei and Xu Chu; Xiahou Dun and 
Xiahou Yuan led the left wing; Li Dian and Yue Jing led the 
right wing; Yu Jin and Lu Qian guarded the rear. Cao Cao 
himself commanded the center. 

When they approached Puyang, Lu Bu wished to go out 

in person and alone to attack, but his adviser Chen Gong 
protested, 
saying, 

“General, you should 
not go out until the 
arrival of the other 
officers.” 

“Whom 
do 
I 

fear?” said Lu Bu. 

So 
he 
threw 

caution to the winds 

Lu Bu. 

flying everywhere in the wood. He ordered his troops 
forward to set fire on all sides. But to his surprise no one 
rushed out to make for the stockade. Still he heard the 
beating of drums and doubt filled his mind. Suddenly he 
saw a party of soldiers move out from the shelter of the 
stockade. He galloped over to see what it meant. 

and all their leaders dashed forward. Xiahou Dun, Xiahou 
Yuan, Xu Chu, Dian Wei, Li Dian, and Yue Jing all attacked 
at once. Lu Bu was at a loss and fled into the open country. 
One of his generals, Cheng Lian, was killed by an arrow of 
Yue Jing. Two thirds of his troops were lost, and the beaten 
remainder went to tell Chen Gong what had come to pass. 

“We had better leave,” said Chen Gong. “An empty city 

cannot be held.” 

with them, abandoned Dingtao. When Cao Cao’s soldiers 
got into the city, they met with no resistance. Zhang Chao 
committed suicide by burning himself. Zhang Miao fled to 
Yuan Shu. 

Cao. He immediately tranquilized the people and rebuilt the 
cities and their defenses. 

Lu Bu in his retreat fell in with his generals, and Chen 

Gong also rejoined him, so that he was by no means 
broken. 

“I have but small army,” said Lu Bu, “but still enough to 

break Cao Cao.” 

And so he retook the backward road. Indeed: 

Thus does fortune alternate, victory, defeat,
The happy conqueror today, tomorrow, must retreat?

roundly before he left. Chen Gong got away through the 
east gate taking with him the general’s family. 

present services the Tian family were pardoned their 
previous fault. 

alive, he will be a great danger. Hunt him down!” 

determined to follow Lu Bu to Dingtao whither he had gone 
for refuge. 

Lu Bu, Zhang Miao, and Zhang Chao were assembled 

in the city. Gao Shun and other generals were out foraging. 
Cao Cao army arrived but did not attack for many days, and 
presently he withdrew fifteen miles and made a stockade. 
It was the time of harvest, and he set his soldiers to cut the 
wheat for food. The spies reported this to Lu Bu who came 
over to see. But when he saw that Cao Cao’s stockade lay 
near a thick wood, he feared an ambush and retired. Cao 
Cao heard that Lu Bu had come and gone and guessed the 
reason. 

will set up flags there and deceive him. There is a long 
embankment near the camp but behind it there is no water. 
There we will lay an ambush to fall upon Lu Bu when he 
comes to burn the wood.” 

So Cao Cao hid all his soldiers behind the embankment 

except half a hundred drummers, and he got together many 
peasants to loiter within the stockade as though it was not 
empty. 

Lu Bu rode back and told Chen Gong what he had seen. 
“This Cao Cao is very crafty and full of wiles,” said the 

adviser. “Do not act.” 

“I will use fire this time and burn out his ambush,” said 

Chapter 13 
Li Jue and Guo Si Duel In Changan;
The Emperor Establishes Anyi The New Capital. 

gathering the remnant of his army at Dingtao. When all his 
generals had joined him, he began to feel strong enough to 
try conclusions with Cao Cao once again. 

Said Chen Gong, 

who was opposed to 
this course, “Cao Cao 
is too strong right 
now. Seek some place 
where we can rest a 
time before trying.” 

“Suppose I went to 

Yuan Shao,” said Lu 
Bu. 

“Send first to make inquiries.” 
Lu Bu agreed. 
The news of the fighting between Cao Cao and Lu Bu 

had reached Jizhou, and one of Yuan Shao’s advisers, Shen 
Pei, warned him, saying, “Lu Bu is a savage beast. If he gets 
possession of Yanzhou, he will certainly attempt to add this 
region to it. For your own safety you should help to crush 
him.” 

Wherefore Yuan Shao sent Yan Liang with fifty thousand 

troops to destroy Lu Bu. The spies heard this and at once 
told Lu Bu, who was greatly disturbed and called in Chen 
Gong. 

“Go over to Liu Bei, who has lately succeeded to 

Xuzhou.” 

Hence Lu Bu went thither. 
Hearing this, Liu Bei said, “Lu Bu is a hero, and we will 

What was the fate of Lu Bu will appear later.

I drifted about from one place to another, and none of the 
nobles east of the Huashang Mountains seemed willing to 
receive me. When Cao Cao with wicked ambition invaded 
this region and you, Sir, came to its rescue, I aided you by 
attacking Yanzhou and thus diverting a portion of his force. 
I did not think then that I should be the victim of a vile plot 
and lose my leaders and my soldiers. But now if you will, I 
offer myself to you that we may together accomplish great 
designs.” 

Liu Bei replied, “When the late Tao Qian died, there was 

no one to administer Xuzhou, and so I assumed that task for 
a time. Now since you are here, General, it is most suitable 
that I step down in your favor.” 

Whereupon Liu Bei handed the insignia and the seal of 

authority to Lu Bu. Lu Bu was on the point of accepting 
them, when he saw Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, who stood 
behind the Imperial Protector, glaring at him with angry 
eyes. 

of a fighting man, but I could not rule a great region like 
this.” 

strong guest does not oppress his host. You need not fear, 
Lord Liu Bei.” 

Then Liu Bei desisted. Banquets were held and dwelling 

places prepared for the guest and his retinue. 

went with his two brothers. Half through the banquet Lu Bu 
requested Liu Bei to retire to one of the inner private rooms, 
whither Guan Yu and Zhang Fei followed him. There Lu Bu 
bade his wife and daughter bow as to their benefactor. Here 
also Liu Bei showed excessive modesty. 

very modest.” 

receive him with honor.” 

“He was a cruel, bloodthirsty beast.” 

averted from Xuzhou if he had not attacked Yanzhou? 
He cannot be our enemy now that he comes seeking an 
asylum.” 

“Brother, your heart is really too good. Although it may 

be as you say, yet it would be well to prepare,” said Zhang 
Fei. 

The new Imperial Protector with a great following met 

Lu Bu ten miles outside the city gates, and the two chiefs 
rode in side by side. They proceeded to the residence and 
there, after the elaborate ceremonies of reception were over, 
they sat down to converse. 

Said Lu Bu, “After Wang Yun and I plotted to slay Dong 

Zhuo and my misfortune in the Li Jue and Guo Si’s sedition, 

styled 
himself 
Grand 

Commander. 
Their 

conduct was abominable 
but no one dared to 
criticize them. 

Imperial 
Guardian 

Yang Biao and Minister 
Zhu Jun privately talked 
with Emperor Xian and 
said, “Cao Cao has two 
hundred thousand troops 
and many capable advisers 
and leaders. It would be 
well for the empire if he 
would lend his support to 
the imperial family and 

help to rid the government of this evil party.” 

His Majesty wept, “I am weary of the insults and 

contempt of these wretches and should be very glad to have 
them removed.” 

and so make them destroy each other. Then Cao Cao could 
come and cleanse the court,” said Yang Biao. 

“How will you manage it?” asked the Emperor. 
“Guo Si’s wife, Lady Qiong, is very jealous, and we can 

take advantage of her weakness to bring about a quarrel.” 

So Yang Biao received instruction to act, with a secret 

edict to support him. Yang Biao’s wife, Lady Kai, made an 
excuse to visit Lady Qiong at her palace and, in the course 
of conversation, said “There is talk of secret liaison between 
the General, your husband, and the wife of Minister Li Jue. 
It is a great secret, but if Minister Li Jue knew it, he might 
try to harm your husband. I think you ought to have very 
little to do with that family.” 

Li Jue

Zhang Fei heard what Lu Bu said, and his eyes glared, 

crying, “What sort of a man are you that dares call our 
brother ‘younger brother’? He is one of the ruling family--
-a jade leaf on a golden branch. Come out, and I will fight 
you three hundred bouts for the insult.” 

Liu Bei hastily checked the impulsive one, and Guan Yu 

persuaded him to go away. Then Liu Bei apologized, saying, 
“My poor brother talks wildly after he has been drinking. I 
hope you will not blame him.” 

departed. But as the host escorted Liu Bei to his carriage, he 
saw Zhang Fei galloping up armed as for a fray. 

“Lu Bu, you and I will fight that duel of three hundred 

bouts!” shouted Zhang Fei. 

Liu Bei bade Guan Yu check him. Next day Lu Bu came 

to take leave of his host. 

“You, O Lord, kindly received me, but I fear your brothers 

and I cannot agree. So I will seek some other asylum.” 

“General, if you go, the blame is mine. My rude brother 

has offended and must eventually apologize. In the meantime 
what think you of a temporary sojourn at the town where I 
was encamped for some time, Xiaopei? The place is small 
and mean, but it is near, and I will see to it that you are 
supplied with all you need.” 

troops there and took up residence. After he had gone, Liu 
Bei buried his annoyance, and Zhang Fei did not again refer 
to the matter. 

That Cao Cao had subdued the east of the Huashang 

Mountains has been stated before. He memorialized the 
Throne and was rewarded with the title of General Who 
Exhibits Firm Virtue and Lord of Feiting. At this time the 
rebellious Li Jue was commanding the court, and he had 
made himself Regent Marshal, and his colleague Guo Si 

colleague. 

One day, at the close of business at court, Li Jue invited 

Guo Si to his palace. After Guo Si arrived home in the 
evening, rather the worse for too much wine, he was seized 
with a colic. His wife said she suspected poison and hastily 
administered an emetic, which relieved the pain. 

Guo Si began to feel angry, saying, “We did everything 

together and helped each other always. Now he wants to 
injure me. If I do not get in the first blow, I shall suffer some 
injury.” 

emergency. 

This was told to Li Jue, and he in turn grew angry, saying, 

“So Guo Si is doing so and so!” 

Then Li Jue got his guards under way and came to attack 

Guo Si. Both houses had ten thousand, and the quarrel 
became so serious that they fought a pitched battle under 
the city walls. When that was over both sides turned to 
plunder the people. 

Then a nephew of Li Jue, Li Xian, suddenly surrounded 

the Palace, put the Emperor and Empress in two carriages, 
and assigned Jia Xu and Zuo Ling to carry them off. The 
Palace attendants were made to follow on foot. As they 
went out of the rear gate, they met Guo Si’s army who 
began to shoot at the cavalcade with arrows. They killed 
many attendants before Li Jue’s army came up and forced 
them to retire. 

The carriages were got out of the Palace and eventually 

reached Li Jue’s camp, while Guo Si’s soldiers plundered 
the Palace and carried off all the women left there to their 
camp. Then the Palace was set on fire. 

As soon as Guo Si heard of the whereabouts of the 

Emperor, he came over to attack the camp of Li Jue. The 
Emperor between these two opposing factions was greatly 

Lady Qiong was surprised but said, “I have wondered 

why he has been sleeping away from home lately, but I did 
not think there was anything shameful connected with it. I 
should never have known if you had not spoken. I must put 
a stop to it.” 

By and by, when Lady Kai took her leave, Lady Qiong 

thanked her warmly for the information she had given. 

dwelling of Li Jue to a dinner. 

Li Jue is very deep, and one cannot fathom his designs. You 
two are not of equal rank, and if he made away with you, 
what would become of your poor handmaid?” 

Guo Si paid no 

attention, and his wife 
could not prevail on 
him to stay at home. 
Late in the afternoon 
some presents arrived 
from Li Jue’s palace, 
and 
Lady 
Qiong 

secretly put poison 
into the delicacies 
before she set them before her lord. 

Guo Si was going 

to taste at once but she 
said, “It is unwise to 
consume things that 
come from outside. Let 
us try on a dog first.” 

They did and the 

dog died. This incident 
made Guo Si doubt the 
kindly intentions of his 

on them,

Chiefest in all the realm theirs is no common 

appointment,

multitude people,

The empire is drenched with their blood, grisly ruin 

surrounds them.

Steeped in sorrow and sad, read you the ancient 

records;

Long is the tale of years; the tale of sorrow is longer.
Wherefore one who would rule, chiefly must exercise 

forethought.

This and a keen-edged blade, these must suffice to 

maintain one.

Guo Si’s army arrived, and Li Jue went out to give battle. 

Guo Si’s troops had no success and retired. Then Li Jue 
removed the imperial captives to Meiwo with his nephew Li 
Xian as gaoler. Supplies were reduced, and famine showed 
itself on the faces of the eunuchs. The Emperor sent to Li 
Jue to request five carts of rice and five sets of bullock bones 
for his attendants. 

Li Jue angrily replied, “The court gets food morning and 

evening. Why do they ask for more?” 

He sent putrid meat and rotten grain, and the Emperor 

was very vexed at the new 
insult. 

Imperial Counselor Yang Qi 

counseled patience, saying, “Li 
Jue is a base creature but, under 
the present circumstances, Your 
Majesty must put up with it. 
You may not provoke him.” 

The Emperor bowed and was 

alarmed. Indeed: 

Slowly the Hans had declined but renewed their vigor 

with Liu Xiu,

twelve others.

altars,

These were degenerate days, with authority given to 

eunuchs.

the army,

Warriors call to the capital, wishing to drive out the 

vermin;

Though they drove out the leopards, tigers and wolves 

quickly entered.

from Xizhou.

Wang Yun, honest of heart, beguiled this wretch with a 

woman,

Much desired of his henchman, thus sowing seeds of 

dissension.

Strife resulted, and peace no longer dwelt in the empire.
No one suspected that Li Jue and Guo Si would continue 

the evil,

Much to the sorrow of the Middle Kingdom; yet they 

stove for a trifle.

Famine stalked in the Palace, grief for the clashing of 

weapons;

Why did the warriors strive? Why was the land thus 

partitioned?

They had turned aside from the way appointed of 

Heaven.

Kings must ponder these things; heavy the burden lies 

“Li Jue has run off with the Emperor; I have to have the 

officers,” said Guo Si. 

officers. What do you want?” said Yang Biao. 

Yang Mi persuaded him not to slay the speaker. Then Guo 
Si released Yang Biao and Zhu Jun but kept the others in 
the camp. 

help our lord. We have been born in vain,” said Yang Biao 
to Zhu Jun. 

Throwing their arms about each other, they wept and fell 

swooning to the earth. Zhu Jun went home, fell seriously ill 
and died. 

Thereafter the two adversaries fought every day for 

nearly three months, each losing many soldiers. 

Now Li Jue was irreligious and practiced magic. He 

often called witches to beat drums and summon spirits, 
even when in camp. Jia Xu used to remonstrate with him, 
but quite uselessly. 

Yang Qi said to the Emperor, “That Jia Xu, although 

a friend of Li Jue, never seems to have lost the sense of 
loyalty to Your Majesty.” 

Soon after Jia Xu himself arrived. 
The Emperor sent away his attendants and said to Jia 

Xu, weeping the while, “Can you not pity the Hans and 
help me?” 

wish. But, Sire, say no more: Let thy servant work out a 
plan.” 

The Emperor dried his tears, and soon Li Jue came in. 

He wore a sword by his side and strode straight up to the 
Emperor, whose face became the color of clay. 

Then Li Jue spoke, “Guo Si has failed in his duty and 

silent, but the tears fell on his garments. Suddenly someone 
came in with the tidings that a force of cavalry, their sabers 
glittering in the sun, was approaching to rescue them. Then 
they heard the gongs beat and the roll of the drums. 

The Emperor sent to find out who it was. But it was Guo 

Si, and the sadness fell again. Presently arose a great din. 
For Li Jue had gone out to do battle with Guo Si, whom he 
abused by name. 

“I treated you well, and why did you try to kill me?” said 

Li Jue. 

Si. 

“You call me rebel when I am guarding the Emperor?” 
“You have abducted him: Do you call that guarding?” 
“Why so many words? Let us forgo a battle and settle 

the matter in single combat, the winner to take the Emperor 
and go.” 

neither could prevail over the other. 

Then they saw Yang Biao come riding up to them, 

crying, “Rest a while, O Commanders! For I have invited a 
party of officers to arrange 
a peace.” 

Wherefore the two leaders 

retired to their camps. Soon 
Yang Biao, Zhu Jun, and 
sixty other officials came up 
and went to Guo Si’s camp. 
They were all thrown into 
confinement. 

“We came with good 

intentions,” they moaned, 
“and we are treated like 
this.” 
Guo Si

same to the ‘Most Revered.’ Who is worse than the other?” 

of Heaven send you to mock and shame me?” 

But his commander, Yang Feng, checked him. 
“Guo Si is still alive,” said Yang Feng, “and to slay the 

imperial messenger would be giving him a popular excuse 
to raise an army against you. And all the nobles would join 
him.” 

cooled down. Huangfu Li was urged to go away. 

he went out of the camp, he cried loudly, “Li Jue will not 
obey the Emperor’s command. He will kill his prince to set 

up himself!” 

Counselor 
Hu 

Miao tried to shut 
Huangfu Li’s mouth, 
saying, “Do not utter 
such words. You will 
only bring hurt upon 
yourself.” 

But Huangfu Li 

shrieked at him also, 
saying, “You also are 
an officer of state, and 
yet you even back up 
the rebel. When the 
prince is put to shame, 
the minister dies. That 
is our code. If it be my 
lot to suffer death at 
the hands of Li Jue, so 
be it!” 

And Huangfu Li 
Li Jue

imprisoned the court officers. He wished to slay Your 
Majesty, and you would have been captured but for me.” 

The Emperor joined his hands together in salute and 

thanked Li Jue. Li Jue went away. 

him as a man of persuasive tongue and that he came from 
the same county as Li Jue, bade him go to both factions to 
try to arrange peace. 

Si, who said, “I would release the officers if Li Jue would 
restore the Emperor to full liberty.” 

Huangfu Li then went to the other side. To Li Jue he said, 

“Since I am a Xiliang man, the Emperor and the officers 
have selected me to make peace between you and your 
adversary. Guo Si has consented to cease the quarrel. Will 
you agree to peace?” 

“I overthrew Lu Bu; I have upheld the government for 

four years and have many great services to my credit as all 
the world knows. That other fellow, that horse-thief, has 
dared to seize the officers of state and to set himself up 
against me. I have sworn to slay him. Look around you. Do 
you not think my army large enough to break him?” 

in Youqiong, Hou Yi, proud of and confident in his archer’s 
skill, gave no thought to others and governed alone, and he so 
perished. Lately you yourself have seen the powerful Dong 
Zhuo betrayed by Lu Bu, who had received many benefits 
at his hands. In no time Dong Zhuo’s head was hanging 
over the gate. So you see mere force is not enough to ensure 
safety. Now you are a general, with the axes and whips and 
all the symbols of rank and high office; your descendants 
and all your clan occupy distinguished positions. You must 
confess that the state has rewarded you liberally. True, Guo 
Si has seized the officers of state, but you have done the 

all the credit to those witches of his.” 

said Song Guo. 

“You explode a bomb within as signal, and I will attack 

from outside.” 

So the two agreed to act together that very night in 

the second watch. But they had been overheard, and the 
eavesdropper told Li Jue. Song Guo was seized and put to 
death. That night Yang Feng waited outside for the signal 
and while waiting, out came Li Jue himself. Then a melee 
began, which lasted till the fourth watch. But Yang Feng got 
away and fled to Xian. 

But from this time Li 

Jue’s army began to fall 
away, and he felt more 
than ever the losses 
caused by Guo Si’s 
frequent attacks. Then 
came news that Zhang 
Ji, at the head of a large 
army, 
was 
coming 

down from Shanxi to 
make peace between 
the two factions. Zhang 
Ji vowed he would 
attack the one who 
was recalcitrant. Li Jue 
tried to gain favor by 
hastening to send to tell 
Zhang Ji he was ready 
to make peace. So did 
Guo Si. 

So the strife of the 

rival factions ended at 
Guo Si

maintained a torrent of abuse. The Emperor heard of the 
incident, called in Huangfu Li and sent him away to his own 
country Xiliang. 

and he had also the assistance of the Qiangs, the northern 
tribespeople beyond the border. When Huangfu Li spread 
that Li Jue was a rebel and so were those who helped him, 
and that there would be a day of heavy reckoning, those 
stories disturbed the soldiers. 

the Tiger Army, to arrest Huangfu Li; but Wang Chan had 
a sense of right and esteemed Huangfu Li as an honorable 
man. Instead of carrying out the orders, Wang Chan returned 
to say Huangfu Li could not be found. 

Jia Xu tried to work on the feelings of the barbarian 

tribes. He said to them, “The Son of Heaven knows you are 
loyal to him and have bravely fought and suffered. He has 
issued a secret command for you to go home, and then he 
will reward you.” 

paying them, so they listened readily to the insidious 
persuasions of Jia Xu and deserted. 

nature. He is deserted and enfeebled. A high office should 
be granted to him to lead him astray.” 

Marshal. This delighted him greatly, and he ascribed his 
promotion to the potency of his wise witches’ prayers and 
incantations. He rewarded those people most liberally. 

But his army was forgotten. Wherefore his commander, 

Yang Feng, was angry. 

Yang Feng said to General Song Guo, “We have taken 

all the risks and exposed ourselves to stones and arrows in 
his service, yet instead of giving us any reward he ascribes 

The noise of a great shouting arose behind the travelers, and 
a loud voice commanded, “Stop the train!” 

The Emperor burst into tears. 
“Out of the wolf’s den into the tiger’s mouth!” said he. 
No one knew what to do; they were all too frightened. 

But when the rebel army was just upon them, they heard the 
beating of drums and from behind some hills came into the 
open a cohort of one thousand soldiers preceded by a great 
flag bearing the name Han General Yang Feng. 

Having defeated by Li Jue, Yang Feng fled to the foothills 

of the Xian; and he came up to offer his services as soon as 
he heard the Emperor’s journey. Seeing it was necessary to 
fight now, he drew up his line of battle. 

of abuse. 

Yang Feng turned and said, 

“Where is Xu Huang?” 

In response out came a 

valiant warrior gripping a 
heavy battle-ax. He galloped 
up on his fleet bay, making 
directly for Cui Yong, whom 
he felled at the first blow. At 
this the whole force dashed 
forward and routed Guo Si. The defeated army went back 
some seven miles. 

Yang Feng rode forward to see the Emperor who 

graciously said, “It is a great service you have rendered: 
You have saved my life.” 

Yang Feng bowed and thanked him, and the Emperor 

asked to see the actual slayer of the rebel leader. So Xu 
Huang was led to the chariot where he bowed and was 
presented as Xu Huang of Hedong. 

The Emperor recognized the achievement of the 

last, and Zhang Ji memorialized asking the Emperor to go 
to Hongnong near Luoyang. 

The Emperor was delighted, saying, “I have longed to go 

back to the east.” 

the Flying Cavalry and was highly honored. Zhang Ji saw 
to it that the Emperor and the court had good supplies of 
necessaries. Guo Si set free all his captive officers, and Li 
Jue prepared transport for the court to move to the east. 
Li Jue told off companies of his Royal Guard to escort the 
cavalcade. 

The progress had been without incident as far as Xinfeng. 

Near Baling Bridge the west wind of autumn came on to 
blow with great violence, but soon above the howling of the 
gale was heard the trampling of a large body of force. They 
stopped at a bridge and barred the way. 

“Who comes?” cried a voice. 
“The Imperial Chariot is passing, and who dares stop 

it?” said Yang Qi, riding forward. 

Two leaders of the barring party advanced to Yang Qi, 

saying, “General Guo Si has ordered us to guard the bridge 
and stop all spies. You say the Emperor is here: We must see 
him, and then we will let you pass.” 

So the pearl curtain was raised and the Emperor said, “I, 

the Emperor, am here. Why do you not retire to let me pass, 
gentlemen?” 

They all shouted, “Wan shui! Long Life! Long Life!” 

and fell away to allow the cortege through. 

very angry, saying, “I meant to outwit Zhang Ji, seize the 
Emperor, and hold him in Meiwo. Why have you let him 
get away?” 

cavalcade, and overtook it just at the county of Huaying. 

warrior. 

Then the cavalcade went forward, Yang Feng acting as 

escort as far as the city of Huaying, the halting place for the 
night. The Commander of the place, Duan Wei, supplied 
them with clothing and food. And the Emperor passed the 
night in Yang Feng’s camp. 

Next day Guo Si, having mustered his troops, appeared 

in front of the camp, and Xu Huang rode out to engage. But 
Guo Si threw his army out so that they entirely surrounded 
the camp, and the Emperor was in the middle. The position 
was very critical, when help appeared in the person of a 
galloping general from the southeast, and the rebels fell 
away at his assault. Then Xu Huang smote them and so 
scored a victory. 

to be Dong Cheng, the uncle of the Emperor or the “State 
Uncle”. The Emperor wept as he related his sorrows and 
dangers. 

Said Dong Cheng, “Be of good courage, Sire. General 

Yang Feng and I have pledged ourselves to kill both the 
rebels Li Jue and Guo Si and so purify the world.” 

The Emperor bade them travel east as soon as possible, 

and so they went on night and day till they reached their 
destination Hongnong. 

Guo Si led his defeated army back. Meeting Li Jue, he 

told Li Jue of the rescue of the Emperor and whither they 
was going. 

in the east, they will send out proclamations to the whole 
country, calling up the nobles to attack us, and we and our 
families will be in danger,” said Guo Si. 

“Zhang Ji is holding Changan, and we must be careful. 

There is nothing to prevent a joint attack on Hongnong, when 
we can kill the Emperor and divide the empire between us,” 
Xu Huang

These three, 

being promised 
pardon 
for 

their faults and 
crimes and a 
grant of official 
rank, naturally 
responded to the 
call, and thus the 
loyal side was 
strengthened so 
that Hongnong 

was recaptured. But meanwhile Li Jue and Guo Si laid 
waste whatever place they reached, slaying the aged and 
weakly, forcing the strong to join their ranks. When going 
into a fight they forced these people-soldiers to the front, 
and they called them the “Dare-to-Die” soldiers. 

Li Jue and Guo Si’s force was overwhelming. When Li 

Yue, the White Wave leader, approached with his army, Guo 
Si bade his soldiers scatter clothing and valuables along 
the road. The late robbers could not resist the temptation, 
so a scramble began. Then Guo Si’s soldiers fell upon the 
disordered ranks and did much damage. Yang Feng and 
Dong Cheng had to take the Emperor away to the north. 

Li Jue and Guo Si pursued. 
Li Yue said, “The danger is grave. I pray Your Majesty 

mount a horse and go in advance.” 

The Emperor replied, “I cannot bear to abandon my 

officers.” 

They wept and struggled on as best they could. The 

White Wave leader Hu Cai was killed in one attack. 

The enemy came very near, and the Emperor left his 

carriage and went on foot. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng 
escorted him to the bank of the Yellow River. Li Yue sought 

said Li Jue. 

Guo Si found 

this a suitable 
scheme, so their 
armies 
came 

together again 
in one place 
and united in 
plundering the 
countryside. As 
they proceeded 
to Hongnong, they left destruction behind them. 

Yang Feng and Dong Cheng heard of the rebels’ approach 

when they were yet a long way off, so Yang Feng and Dong 
Cheng turned back and decided to meet them at Dongjian. 

Li Jue and Guo Si had previously made their plan. Since 

the loyal troops were few as compared with their own 
horde, they would overwhelm the loyal troops like a flood. 
So when the day of battle came, they poured out covering 
the hills and filling the plains. Yang Feng and Dong Cheng 
devoted themselves solely to the protection of the Emperor 
and Empress. The officials, the attendants, the archives and 
records, and all the paraphernalia of the court were left to 
care for themselves. The rebels ravaged Hongnong, but the 
two protectors got the Emperor safely away into Shanbei. 

When the rebel generals showed signs of pursuit, Yang 

Feng and Dong Cheng had to play a double-edged sword. 
They sent to offer to discuss terms of peace with Li Jue and 
Guo Si; at the same time they sent a secret edict to enlist 
the help from the leaders of the White Wave rebels---Han 
Xian, Li Yue, and Hu Cai. The White Wave was a branch of 
the Yellow Scarves, and Li Yue was actually a brigand and 
had inspired rebels throughout the country. But the need for 
help was so desperate. 

Empress to Dayang. They had no food and at night sought 
shelter in a poor, tile-roofed house. The cottagers gave them 
some boiled millet but it was too coarse to be swallowed. 

protected him. Li Yue was made General Who Conquers the 
North, and Han Xian was appointed General Who Conquers 
the East. 

The flight continued. Soon two officers of rank came up 

with the cortege, and they bowed before His Majesty with 
many tears. They were Imperial Guardian Yang Biao and 
Minister Han Rong. The Emperor and Empress lifted up 
their voices and wept with them. 

Said Han Rong to his colleague, “The rebels have 

confidence in my words. You stay as guard of the Emperor, 
and I will take my life in my hands and try to bring about 
peace.” 

After Han Rong had gone, the Emperor rested for a time 

in Yang Feng’s camp. But Yang Biao requested the Emperor 
to head for Anyi and make the capital there. When the train 
reached the town, they found it containing not a single lofty 
building, and the court lived in grass huts devoid even of 
doors. They surrounded these with a fence of thorns as a 
protection, and within this the Emperor held counsel with 
his ministers. The soldiers camped round the fence. 

colors. They wielded the powers of the Emperor as they 
wished, and officials who offended them were beaten or 
abused even in the presence of the Emperor. They purposely 
provided thick wine and coarse food for the Emperor’s 
consumption. He struggled to swallow what they sent. Li 
Yue and Han Xian joined in recommending to the Throne 
the names of convicts, common soldiers, sorcerers, leeches, 
and such people who thus obtained official ranks. There 
were more than two hundred of such people. As seals could 

a boat to ferry him to the other side. The weather was very 
cold and the Emperor and Empress cuddled up close to each 
other shivering. They reached the river but the banks were 
too high, and they could not get down into the boat. So 
Yang Feng proposed to fasten together the horses’ bridles 
and lower down the Emperor slung by the waist. However, 
the Empress’ brother, Fu De, found some rolls of white silk 
from dead soldiers, and they rolled up the two imperial 
personages in the silk, and thus they lowered them down 
near the boat. Then Li Yue took up his position in the prow 
leaning on his sword. Fu De carried the Empress on his 
back into the boat. 

The boat was too small to carry everybody, and those 

unable to get on board clung to the cable, but Li Yue cut 
them down, and they fell into the water. They ferried over 
the Emperor and then sent back the boat for the others. 
There was a great scramble to get on board, and they had 
to chop off the fingers and hands of those who persisted in 
clinging to the boat. The lamentation rose to the heavens. 

When they mustered on the farther bank, many were 

missing, only a dozen of the Emperor’s suite were left. Yang 
Feng found a bullock cart and transported the Emperor and 

This frightened the Emperor greatly, and his terror 

increased when he saw the whole mountain side suddenly 
light up. Indeed: 

The rebel party, erstwhile split in twain,
To work their wicked will now join three again.

How the Son of Heaven escaped this peril will be told in 

the next chapter.

not be engraved, pieces of metal were hammered into some 
sort of a shape. Court affairs had never degraded to such a 
low point. 

Now Han Rong went to see Li Jue and Guo Si. After 

listening to his vigorous persuasions, the two rebel generals 
agreed to set free the officials and Palace people. 

A famine occurred that same year and people were 

reduced to eating grass from the roadside. Starving, they 
wandered hither and thither. But food and clothing were 
sent to the Emperor from the governor of Henei, Zhang 
Yang, and the governor of Hedong, Wang Yi, and the court 
began to enjoy a little repose. 

Dong Cheng and Yang Feng 

sent laborers to restore the 
palaces in Luoyang with the 
intention of moving the court 
thither. Li Yue was opposed to 
this. 

Dong 
Cheng 
argued, 

“Luoyang is the original capital 
as opposed to the paltry town of Anyi. Removal would be 
but reasonable.” 

Li Yue wound up by saying, “You may get the court to 

remove, but I shall remain here.” 

a start made, Li Yue secretly sent to arrange with Li Jue and 
Guo Si to capture the Emperor. However, this plot leaked 
out and the escort so arranged as to prevent such a thing, 
and they pressed on to the pass at Zhiguan Hills as rapidly 
as possible. Li Yue heard this, and without waiting for his 
rebel colleagues to join him set out to act alone. 

About the fourth watch, just as the cavalcade was passing 

Zhiguan Hills, a voice was heard shouting, “Stop those 
carriages! Li Jue and Guo Si are here!” 

style was changed from Prosperous Stability to Rebuilt 
Tranquillity, the first year (AD 196). 

even reduced in numbers as they were to a few hundreds, 
had not enough to eat and they prowled about stripping the 
bark off trees and grubbing up the roots of plants to satisfy 
their starving hunger. Officers of the government of all but 
the highest ranks went out into the country to gather fuel. 
Many people were crushed by the falling walls of burned 
houses. At no time during the decadence of Han did misery 
press harder than at this period. 

says: 

 
Mortally wounded, the white serpent poured forth its life 

blood at Mangdang Hills;

Blood-red pennons of war waved then in every quarter,
Chieftain with chieftain strove and raided each other’s 

borders,

Midst the turmoil and strife the Kingship even was 

threatened.

Wickedness stalks in a country when the King is a 

weakling,

Brigandage always is rife, when a dynasty’s failing,
Had one a heart of iron, wholly devoid of feeling,
Yet would one surely grieve at the sight of such 

desolation.

 
Imperial Guardian Yang Biao memorialized the Throne, 

saying, “The decree issued to me some time ago has never 
been acted upon. Now Cao Cao is very strong in the east of 
Huashang Mountains, and it would be well to associate him 
in the government that he might support the ruling house.” 

The Emperor replied, “There was no need to refer to the 

Chapter 14 
Cao Cao Moves The Court To Xuchang;
Lu Bu Night-Raids Xuzhou. 

shouted out falsely that the army was that of the two arch 
rebels Li Jue and Guo Si come to capture the imperial 
cavalcade. But Yang Feng recognized the voice of Li Yue 
and bade Xu Huang go out 
to fight him. Xu Huang went 
and in the first bout the traitor 
fell. The White Wave rebels 
scattered, and the travelers got 
safely through Zhiguan Hills. 
Here the Governor of Henei, 
Zhang Yang, supplied them plentifully with food and other 
necessaries and escorted the Emperor to Zhidao. For his 
timely help, the Emperor conferred upon Zhang Yang the 
rank of a Grand Commander. Yang Feng moved his army to 
the northeast of Luoyang and camped at Yewang. 

Capital 
Luoyang 

was presently entered. 
Within the walls all 
was destruction. The 
palaces and halls had 
been burned, the streets 
were overgrown with 
grass and brambles and 
obstructed by heaps of 
ruins. The palaces and 

courts were represented by broken roofs and toppling walls. 
A small “palace” however was soon built, and therein the 
officers of court presented their congratulations, standing in 
the open air among thorn hushes and brambles. The reign 

announced with the very command Cao Cao wanted, and 
Cao Cao immediately set out. 

fallen, and there were no means of rebuilding them, while 
rumors and reports of the coming of Li Jue and Guo Si kept 
up a state of constant anxiety. 

The frightened Emperor spoke with Yang Feng, saying, 

“What can be done? There is no answer from the East of 
Huashang, and our enemies are near.” 

Then Yang Feng and Han Xian said, “We, your ministers, 

will fight to the death for you.” 

But Dong Cheng said, “The fortifications are weak and our 

military resources small, so that we cannot hope for victory, 
and what does defeat mean? I see nothing better to propose 
than a move into the east of Huashang Mountains.” 

The Emperor agreed to this, and the journey began 

without further preparation. There being few horses, the 
officers of the court had to march afoot. Hardly a bowshot 
outside the gate they saw a thick cloud of dust out of which 
came all the clash and clamor of an advancing army. The 
Emperor and his Consort were dumb with fear. Then 
appeared a horseman; he was the messenger returning from 
the East of Huashang Mountains. 

He rode up to the chariot, made an obeisance, and said, 

“General Cao Cao, as commanded, is coming with all the 
military force of the East of Huashang; but hearing that Li 
Jue and Guo Si had again approached the capital, he has 
sent Xiahou Dun in advance. With Xiahou Dun are many 
capable leaders and fifty thousand of proved soldiers. They 
will guard Your Majesty.” 

his staff arrived. Xiahou Dun, Xu Chu, and Dian Wei were 
presented to the Emperor who graciously addressed them. 
Then one came to say a large army was approaching from 

matter again. Send a messenger when you will.” 

So the decree went forth and a messenger bore it into the 

East of Huashang. Now when Cao Cao had heard that the 
court had returned to Capital Luoyang, he called together 
his advisers to consult. 

Xun Yu laid the matter 

before Cao Cao and the 
council 
thus: 
“Eight 

hundred years ago, Duke 
Wen of Jin supported Prince 
Xiang of the declining 
Zhou Dynasty, and all the 
feudal lords backed Duke Wen1. The Founder of the Hans, 
Liu Bang, won the popular favor by wearing mourning for 
Emperor Yi of Chu2. Now Emperor Xian has been a fugitive 
on the dusty roads. To take the lead in offering an army to 
restore him to honor is to have an unrivaled opportunity to 
win universal regard. But you must act quickly or someone 
will get in before you.” 

Cao Cao understood and at once prepared his army 

to move. Just at this moment an imperial messenger was 

1Duke Wen of Jin (reigned 636-628 BC) was ruler of the western state of 

Jin during the Spring and Autumn period. He and his successors made Jin a 
dominant state for nearly 200 years.

2The Qin Dynasty ended in BC 206. From BC 206 to BC 202, there was 

actually no emperor in China; and the principal event in this period of anarchy 
was what we call the Strife between Chu and Han. It was a continuous conflict 
between Xiang Yu and Liu Bang, the former a native of Wu, and the latter of 
Pei. Both of them had been lieutenants under King Huai of Chu. This King, 
aka Emperor Yi, was a descendant of the old ruling house of the state of Chu, 
and during the troubles attending the breakup of the Qin empire, he setup a 
kingdom on the ruins. Xiang Yu eventually became the leader of Chu army; and 
he allegedly had King Huai murdered. Liu Bang, now a leader of Han army, 
mourned King Huai’s death to show his loyal heart.

measure of evil of the two rebels is full, I have two hundred 
thousand of good soldiers to oppose them, and those soldiers 
are fully equal to securing the safety of Your Majesty and 
the Throne. The preservation of the state sacrifice is the 
matter of real moment.” 

High honors were conferred on Cao Cao. He was 

appointed Commander of Capital District, Minister of War, 
and granted Military Insignia. 

The two rebels, Li Jue and Guo Si, wished to attack Cao 

Cao’s army while fatigued from its long march. But their 
adviser, Jia Xu, opposed this, saying, “There was no hope 
of victory. He has both strong soldiers and brave leaders. 
Submission may bring us amnesty.” 

wish to dishearten the 
army?” 

And he drew his 

sword on Jia Xu. But 
the 
other 
officers 

interceded and saved 
the adviser. That same 
night Jia Xu stole out 
of the camp and, quite 
alone, took his way home to his native village. 

Soon the rebels decided to offer battle. In reply, Cao 

Cao sent out Xu Chu, Cao Ren, and Dian Wei with three 
hundred horse. These three leaders dashed into the rebels 
army but quickly retired. This maneuver was repeated, and 
again repeated before the real battle array was formed. 

Then Li Xian and Li Bie, nephews of Li Jue, rode out. At 

once from Cao Cao’s side dashed out Xu Chu and cut down 
Li Xian. Li Bie was so startled that he fell out of the saddle. 
He too was slain. The victor Xu Chu rode back to his own 
side with the two heads. 

the east, and at the Emperor’s command Xiahou Dun went 
to ascertain who these were. He soon returned saying they 
were Cao Cao’s infantry. 

to the imperial chariot and their names having been duly 
communicated. 

Cao Hong said, “When my brother, Cao Cao, heard of 

the approach of the rebels, he feared that the advance guard 
he had sent might be too weak, so he sent me to march 
quickly for reinforcement.” 

“General Cao Cao is indeed a trusty servant!” said the 

Emperor. 

Orders were given to advance, Cao Hong leading the 

escort. By and by scouts came to say that the rebels were 
coming up very quickly. The Emperor bade Xiahou Dun 
divide his force into two parts to oppose them. Xiahou Dun 
and Cao Hong’s armies threw out two wings with cavalry in 
front and foot behind. They attacked with vigor and beat off 
the Li Jue and 
Guo 
Si’s 

rebels 
with 

severe loss of 
ten thousand. 
Then 
Xiahou 

Dun and Cao 
Hong begged 
the Emperor to 
return to Luoyang, and Xiahou Dun guarded the city. 

got them duly camped he went into the city to audience. 
He knelt at the foot of the steps, but was called up hither to 
stand beside the Emperor and be thanked. 

Cao Cao replied, “Having been the recipient of great 

bounty, thy servant owes the state much gratitude. The 

you manage it?” 

“Only this: I have lived meager for thirty years.” 
Cao Cao nodded, “What office do you hold?” 
“I am a graduate recommended for filial piety and 

honesty. I had offices under Yuan Shao and Zhang Yang, 
but came here when the Emperor returned. Now I am one 
of the secretaries. I am a native of Dingtao, and my name is 
Dong Zhao.” 

Cao Cao got up from his place and crossed over, saying, 

“I have heard of you. How happy I am to meet you!” 

Then wine was brought into the tent, and Xun Yu was 

called in and introduced. While they were talking, a man 
came in to report that a party was moving eastward. Cao 
Cao ordered to find out whose people these were, but Dong 
Zhao knew at once. 

the White Wave General Han Xian. They are running off 
because you have come, Illustrious Sir!” 

“Do they mistrust me?” said Cao Cao. 
“They are not worthy of your attention. They are a poor 

lot.” 

“What of this departure of Li Jue and Guo Si?” 
“Tigers without claws, birds without wings---they will 

not escape you very long. They are not worth thinking 
about.” 

so he began to talk of affairs of state. 

Said Dong Zhao, “You, Illustrious Sir, with your noble 

army have swept away rebellion and have become the 
mainstay of the Throne, an achievement worthy of the 
ancient Five Protectors. But the officials will look at it in 
very different ways and not all favorably to you. I think you 
would not be wise to remain here, and I advise a change of 

When Xu Chu offered them to the chief, Cao Cao patted 

him on the back, crying, “You are really my Fan Kuai3!” 

Next a general move forward was made, Xiahou Dun 

and Cao Hong leading the two wings and Cao Cao in the 
center. They advanced to the roll of the drum. The rebels 
fell back before them 
and presently fled. 
They pursued, Cao 
Cao himself leading, 
sword in hand. The 
slaughter went on till 
night. Ten thousands 
were killed and many 
more surrendered. Li 
Jue and Guo Si went 
west, flying in panic like dogs from a falling house. Having 
no place of refuge they took to the hills and hid among the 
brushwood. 

Cao Cao’s army returned and camped again near the 

capital. 

Cao Cao has done a great service, and he will be the man in 
power. There will be no place for us.” 

So they represented to the Emperor that they wished 

to pursue the rebels, and under this excuse withdrew their 
army and camped at Daliang. 

One day the Emperor sent to summon Cao Cao to 

audience. The messenger was called in. Cao Cao noticed 
that the messenger looked remarkably well and could not 
understand it seeing that everyone else looked hungry and 
famine stricken. 

3Fan Kuai (BC ?-189) a brave general of Liu Bang. He and Liu Bang had 

been close friends in their native Pei, where he was a butcher and Liu Bang later 
held a minor office. Enobled as Lord of Zuo.

Cao Cao seized his hands once more, saying, “I shall need 
your advice in future affairs.” 

advisers secretly discussed the change of capital. 

Now Court Counselor Wang Li, who was an astrologer, 

said to Liu Cai, Royal Clan Recorder, “I have been studying 
the stars. Since last spring Venus has been nearing the Guard 
star in the neighborhood of the Measure, and the Cowherd 
(the Great Bear and Vega) crossing the River of Heaven. 
Mars has been retrograding and came into conjunction with 
Venus in the Gate of Heaven, so that metal (Venus) and fire 
(Mars) are mingled. Thence must emerge a new ruler. The 
aura of the Hans is exhausted, and the ancient states of Jin4 
and Wei5 must increase.” 

A secret memorial was presented to the Emperor, 

saying: 

“The Mandate of Heaven has its course and the five 

elements---metal, wood, water, fire, and earth---are out of 
proportion. Earth attacking fire is Wei attacking Han, and 
the successor to the empire of Han is in Wei.” 

a man to the astrologer to say, “Your loyalty is well known, 
but the ways of Heaven are past finding out. The less said 
the better.” 

Then Cao Cao discussed with Xun Yu. 
The adviser expounded the meaning thus: “The virtue of 

Han was fire; your element is earth. Xuchang is under the 
influence of earth, and so your fortune depends on getting 

4Jin state occupied the western part of the empire, in the mountainous area 

north of the Yellow River. During the Spring and Autumn period, under the 
leadership of Duke Wen and his successors, Jin grew into a very large state, 
which broke into three states in the Warring States period.

5Wei was a state in the Warring States period. Wei came into existence after 

the partition of Jin. Succeeded Jin in dominating the empire.

capital to Xuchang. However, it must be remembered that the 
restoration of the capital has been published far and wide and 
the attention of all the people is concentrated on Luoyang, 
hoping for a period of rest and tranquillity. Another move will 
displease many. However, the performance of extraordinary 
deed may mean the acquisition of extraordinary merit. It is 
for you to decide.” 

“Exactly my own inclination!” said Cao Cao, seizing 

his guest’s hand. “But are there not dangers? Yang Feng at 
Daliang and the court officials!” 

“That is easily managed. Write to Yang Feng and set 

his mind at rest. Then say to the high officials plainly that 
there is no food in the capital here, and so you are going to 
another place where there is, and where there is no danger 
of scarcity. When they hear it, they will approve.” 

is a fine general, and I was unwilling to use any great force 
against him. I want to win him over to our side.” 

trouble you. I will have a word with him. I shall disguise 
myself as a soldier this evening and steal over to the enemy’s 

Xu Huang

there. Fire can overcome earth, as earth can multiply wood. 
Dong Zhao and Wang Li agree, and you have only to hide 
your time.” 

So Cao Cao made up his mind. 
Next day at court he said, “Luoyang is deserted and 

cannot be restored, nor can it be supplied easily with food. 
Xuchang is a noble city, resourceful and close to Luoyang, 
which is a grain basin. It is everything that a capital should 
be. I venture to request that the court move thither.” 

overawed to have any independent opinion, so they chose 
a day to set out. Cao Cao commanded the escort, and the 
officials all followed. When they had traveled a few stages 
they saw before them a high mound and from behind this 
there arose the beating of drums. 

Then Yang Feng and Han Xian came out and barred the 

way. In front of all stood Xu Huang, who shouted, “Cao 
Cao is stealing away the Emperor!” 

He seemed a fine fellow; and in his secret soul Cao Cao 
greatly admired him, although he was an enemy. Then Cao 
Cao ordered Xu Chu 
to go and fight Xu 
Huang. The combat 
was battle-ax against 
broadsword, and the 
two men fought more 
than half a hundred 
bouts 
without 

advantage to either 
side. Cao Cao then 
beat the gongs and drew off his troops. 

In the camp a council was called. Cao Cao said, “The 

two rebels themselves need not be discussed; but Xu Huang 

everyone knows. Your valor today won his entire admiration, 
and so he took care that the attack was not vigorous enough 
to sacrifice you. Now he has sent me to invite you to join 
him. Will you not leave darkness for light and help him in 
his magnificent task?” 

Xu Huang sat a long time pondering over the offer. 
Then he said, with a sigh, “I know my masters are 

doomed to failure, but I have followed their fortunes a long 
time and do not like to leave them.” 

“But you know the prudent bird selects its tree, and the 

wise servant chooses his master. When one meets a worthy 
master and lets him go, one is very reckless.” 

“I am willing to do what you say,” said Xu Huang, 

rising. 

“Why not put these two to death as an introductory gift?” 

said Man Chong. 

“It is very wrong for a servant to slay his master. I will 

not do that.” 

“True; you are really a good man.” 
Then Xu Huang, taking only a few horsemen of his own 

men with him, left that night and deserted to Cao Cao. Soon 
someone took the news to Yang Feng, who at the head of a 
thousand strong horsemen, set out to capture the deserter. 

Stop there!” 

mountain side was lit up with torches and out sprang Cao 
Cao’s troops, he himself being in command. 

“I have been waiting here a long time. Do not run away!” 

cried Cao Cao. 

Yang Feng was completely surprised and tried to draw 

off, but was quickly surrounded. Then Han Xian came to his 
rescue, and a confused battle began. Yang Feng succeeded 
in escaping, while Cao Cao kept up the attack on the two 

camp to talk to him. I shall incline his heart toward you.” 

other side and made his way to the tent of Xu Huang, who 
sat there by the light of a candle. Xu Huang was still wearing 
his coat of mail. 

Suddenly 
Man 

Chong ran out in front 
and saluted, saying, 
“You have been well 
since we parted, old 
friend?” 

Xu Huang jumped 

up in surprise, gazed 
into 
the 
face 
of 

the speaker a long 
time, and presently said, “What! You are Man Chong of 
Shanyang? What are you doing here?” 

old friend out in front of the army today, I wanted to say a 
word to him. So I took the risk of stealing in this evening 
and here I am.” 

Xu Huang invited Man 

Chong in, and they sat 
down. 

Then said Man Chong, 

“There are very few as bold 
as you on the earth. Why 
then do you serve such as 
your present chiefs, Yang 
Feng and Han Xian? My 
master is the most prominent 
man in the world---a man 
who delights in wise people 
and appreciates soldiers as 
Man Chong

Counselor and Chair of the Secretariat; Xun You, Minister 
of War; Guo Jia, Minister of Rites and Religion; Liu Ye, 
Minister of Works; Mao Jie, Minister of Agriculture, and 
together with Ren Jun, they were put over the supervision 
of military farms and stores. Cheng Yu was appointed Lord 
of Dongping; Dong Zhao, Magistrate of Luoyang; Man 
Chong, Magistrate of Xuchang. Xiahou Dun, Xiahou Yuan, 
Cao Ren, Cao Hong, Lu Qian, Li Dian, Yue Jing, Yu Jin, and 
Xu Huang were made Commanders; Xu Chu and Dian Wei, 
Commanders of Capital District. All good service received 
full recognition. 

Cao Cao was then the one man of the court. All memorials 

went first to him and were then submitted to the Throne. 
When state matters were in order, Cao Cao gave a great 
banquet in his private quarters to all his advisers, and affairs 
outside the capital were the subject of discussion. 

he carries on the administration of the region. Lu Bu fled to 
Liu Bei when defeated, and Liu Bei gave Lu Bu Xiaopei 
to live in. If these two agreed to join forces and attack, my 
position would be most serious. What precautions can be 
taken?” 

picked soldiers, and I will give the Prime Minister both 
their heads.” 

Xun Yu said, “O Leader, you are brave, but we must 

consider the present circumstance. We cannot start a sudden 
war just as the capital has been changed. However, there is 
a certain ruse known as ‘Rival Tigers and One Prey.’ Liu 
Bei has no decree authorizing him to govern the region. 
You, Sir Prime Minister, can procure one for him, and when 
sending it, and so conferring upon him right in addition 
to his might, you can enclose a private note telling him 
to get rid of Lu Bu. If he does, then he will have lost a 

disordered armies. A great number of the rebels gave in, and 
the leaders found they had too few men left to maintain their 
independence, so they betook themselves to Yuan Shu. 

general was presented and well received. Then again the 
cavalcade set out for the new capital. In due time they 
reached Xuchang, and they built palaces and halls, an 
ancestral temple and an altar, terraces and public offices. 
The walls were repaired, storehouses built and all put in 
order. 

Then came the rewards for Cao Cao’s adherents and 

others. Dong Cheng and thirteen others were raised to rank 
of lordship. All good service was rewarded; certain others 
again, who deserved it, were punished, all according to Cao 
Cao’s sole decision. 

Cao Cao himself was made Prime Minister, Regent 

Marshal, and Lord of Wuping. Xun Yu was made Imperial 

Zhang Fei. 

Liu Bei would not consent. 
Next day, when Lu Bu came to offer congratulations, he 

was received as usual. He said, “I have come to felicitate 
you on the receipt of the imperial bounty.” 

Liu Bei thanked him in due form. But then he saw Zhang 

Fei draw his sword and come up the hall as if to slay Lu Bu. 
Liu Bei hastily interfered and stopped Zhang Fei. 

Lu Bu was surprised and said, “Why do you wish to slay 

me, Zhang Fei?” 

“Cao Cao says you 

are immoral and tells 
my brother to kill 
you,” shouted Zhang 
Fei. 

Liu Bei shouted 

again and again to 
Zhang Fei to go away, 
and he led Lu Bu into 
the private apartments out of the way. Then he told Lu Bu 
the whole story and showed him the secret letter. 

Lu Bu wept as he finished reading, “This is that 

miscreant’s scheme for sowing discord between us.” 

“Be not anxious, elder brother,” said Liu Bei. “I pledge 

myself not to be guilty of such an infamous crime.” 

Lu Bu again and again expressed his gratitude, and Liu 

Bei kept him for a time. They remained talking and drinking 
wine till late. 

Said Guan Yu and Zhang Fei later, “Why not kill him?” 
Liu Bei said, “Because Cao Cao fears that Lu Bu and 

I may attack him, he is trying to separate us and get us 
to swallow each other, while he steps in and takes the 
advantage. Is there any other reason?” 

vigorous warrior from his side, and he could be dealt with 
as occasions serve. Should he fail, then Lu Bu will slay him. 
This is ‘Rival Tigers and One Prey’ ruse; they wrangle and 
bite each other.” 

Cao Cao agreed that this was a good plan, so he 

memorialized for the formal appointment, which he sent to 
Liu Bei. Liu Bei was created General Who Conquers the 
East, Lord of Yicheng, and Imperial Protector of Xuzhou as 
well. At the same time a private note was enclosed. 

he began to prepare a congratulatory address. In the midst 
of this an imperial messenger was announced and was met 
which all ceremony outside the gate. When the epistle had 
been reverently received, a banquet was prepared for the 
messenger. 

by Prime Minister Cao Cao.” 

secret letter. 

After reading it, Liu Bei said, “This matter can be easily 

arranged.” 

lodging to seek repose. Liu Bei, before going to rest, called 
in his councilors to consider the letter. 

death,” said Zhang 
Fei. “Lu Bu is a bad 
man.” 

“But he came to me 

for protection in his 
weakness: How can I 
put him to death? That 
would be immoral,” 
said Liu Bei. 

part?” said Liu Bei. 

“I will guard the city,” said Zhang Fei. 
“You will fail,” said Liu Bei. “After one of your drinking 

bouts, you will get savage and flog the soldiers. Beside you 
are rash and will not listen to anyone’s advice. I shall be 
uneasy all the time.” 

“Henceforth I drink no more wine. I will not beat the 

soldiers and I will always listen to advice,” said Zhang 
Fei. 

“I fear the mouth does not correspond to the heart,” said 

Mi Zhu. 

never broken faith. Why should you be contemptuous?” 
said Zhang Fei. 

satisfied. I will order Adviser Chen Deng to help you and 
keep you sober. Then you will not make any mistake.” 

final orders were given. The army of thirty thousand, horse 
and foot, left Xuzhou and marched toward Nanyang. 

When Yuan Shu heard that a memorial had been presented 

proposing to take possession of his territories, he broke out 
into abuse of Liu Bei. 

have been smart enough to get possession of a large region 
and elbow your way into the ranks of the nobles. I was just 
going to attack you, and now you dare to scheme against 
me! How I detest you!” 

So Yuan Shu at once gave orders to prepare an army of 

one hundred thousand, under Ji Ling, to attack Xuzhou. The 
two armies met at Xuyi, where Liu Bei was encamped in 
a plain with hills behind and a stream on his flank, for his 
army was small. 

Guan Yu nodded assent, but Zhang Fei said, “I want to 

get him out of the way lest he trouble us later.” 

“That is not what a noble man should do,” said his elder 

brother. 

capital with a the reply from Liu Bei. The letter only said 
the instruction would take time to plan and implement. But 
the messenger, when he saw Cao Cao, told him the story of 
Liu Bei’s pledge to Lu Bu. 

Then said Cao Cao, “The plan has failed. What next?” 
Xun Yu replied, “I have another trick called ‘Tiger against 

Wolf’ in which the tiger is made to gobble up the wolf.” 

“Let us hear it,” said Cao Cao. 
“Send to Yuan Shu to say that Liu Bei has sent up a 

secret memorial to the Throne that he wishes to subdue 
the southern regions around the Huai River. Yuan Shu will 
be angry and attack him. Then you will order Liu Bei to 
dispose of Yuan Shu and so set them destroying each other. 
Lu Bu will certainly think that is his chance and turn traitor. 
This is the ‘Tiger against Wolf’ trick.” 

Cao Cao thought this good and sent the messenger and 

also sent a false edict to Liu Bei. When this came, the 
messenger was received with all the ceremonies, and the 
edict ordered the capture of Yuan Shu. After the departure 
of the bearer, Liu Bei called Mi Zhu who pronounced it a 
ruse. 

to be disobeyed.” 

So the army was prepared and the day fixed. 
Sun Qian said, “A trusty man must be left on guard of 

the city.” 

this task. 

“I will guard the city,” said Guan Yu. 

camp for harassment, and many of them were slain. The 
two armies thus stood facing each other. 

In Xuzhou, after Liu Bei had started on his expedition, 

Zhang Fei placed his 
colleague and helper, 
Chen Deng, in charge 
of the administration 
of the region, keeping 
military affairs under 
his own supervision. 
After thinking over 
the matter or some 
time, he gave a 
banquet to all the military officers. 

When they were all seated, he made a speech: “Before 

my brother left, he bade me keep clear of the wine cup for 
fear of accidents. Now, gentlemen, you may drink deep 
today. But from tomorrow wine is forbidden, for we must 
keep the city safe. So take your fill.” 

And with this he and all his guests rose to drink together. 

The wine bearer came to Cao Bao who declined it, saying, 
“I never drink as I am forbidden of heaven.” 

host. “I want you to take just one cup.” 

Cao Bao was afraid to offend, so he drank. 
Now Zhang Fei drank huge goblets with all his guests 

on 
every 
hand 
and 

so swallowed a huge 
quantity of liquor. He 
became quite intoxicated. 
Yet he would drink more 
and insisted on a cup 
with every guest. It came 
to the turn of Cao Bao 

very heavy three-edged sword. 

After he had made his camp, he rode out and began 

abusing his opponents, shouting, “Liu Bei, you rustic 
bumpkin, how dare you invade this land?” 

“I have a decree ordering me to destroy the Governor who 

behaves improperly. If you oppose, you will be assuredly 
punished,” replied Liu Bei. 

Ji Ling angrily rode out brandishing his weapon. 
But Guan Yu cried, “Fool, do not attempt to fight!” 
And Guan Yu rode out to meet him. Then they two fought 

and after thirty bouts neither had an advantage. Then Ji Ling 
cried out for a rest. So Guan Yu turned his horse away, rode 
back to his own array and waited for Ji Ling. 

When the moment came to renew the combat, Ji Ling 

sent out one of his officers, Xun Zheng, to take his place. 

with him who shall be tiger and who shall be deer.” 

our general,” replied Xun Zheng. 

This 
reply 

angered 
Guan 

Yu, who made 
just one attack 
on Xun Zheng 
and brought him 
to the ground. 
At this success 
Liu Bei urged 
on the army, 
and Ji Ling’s 
troops were defeated. They retired to the mouth of the River 
Huaiyin and declined all challenges. 

However, many of their troops were sent into Liu Bei’s 

punishment was remitted. 

The banquet came to an end, and the beaten Cao Bao 

went away burning with resentment. That night he sent a 
letter to Xiaopei relating the insults he had received from 
Zhang Fei. The letter told Lu Bu of Liu Bei’s absence and 
proposed that a sudden raid should be made that very night 
before Zhang Fei had recovered from his drunken fit. Lu Bu 
at once summoned Chen Gong and told him. 

Chen Gong. “If you can seize Xuzhou, do so. It is a good 
chance.” 

hundred cavalrymen, ordering Chen Gong and Gao Shun to 
follow him with the main body. 

under the walls at the fourth watch. It was clear moonlight. 
No one on the ramparts saw him. 

Bei’s secret messenger has arrived!” 

called him. Cao Bao came, and when he saw who was there 
he ordered the gates to be opened. Lu Bu gave the secret 
signal, and the soldiers entered shouting. 

of wine. His servants hastened to arouse him and told him 
an enemy had got the 
gates open. 

They said, “Lu Bu 

got in, and there is 
fighting in the city.” 

Zhang Fei savagely 

got into his armor and 
laid hold of his mighty 
serpent halberd. But as 

who declined. 

“Really, I cannot 

drink,” said Cao Bao. 

“You drank just 

now: Why refuse this 
time?” 

Zhang Fei pressed 

him, but still Cao Bao 
resisted. 

Then Zhang Fei in 

his drunken madness lost control of his temper and said, “If 
you disobey the orders of your general, you shall be beaten 
one hundred strokes.” 

And he called in his guards. Here Chen Deng interfered 

reminding him of the strict injunctions of his brother. 

“You civilians attend to your civil business and leave us 

alone,” said Zhang Fei. 

The only way of escape for the guest was to beg 

remission, and Cao Bao did so, saying, “Sir, if you saw my 
son-in-law’s face, you would pardon me.” 

“Who is your son-in-law?” 

“Lu Bu.” 
“I did not mean 

to have you really 
beaten; but if you 
think to frighten me 
with Lu Bu, I will. 
I will beat you as if 
I was beating him,” 
said Zhang Fei. 

The 
guests 

interposed to beg him off, but their drunken host was 
obdurate, and the unhappy guest received fifty blows. Then 
at the earnest prayers of the others the remainder of the 

city is lost and therewith our sisters-in-law. Have you done 
well?” 

sword to kill himself. 

 
He raised the cup in pledge,
None might say nay;
Remorseful, drew the sword,
Himself to slay.
 
Zhang Fei’s fate will be told in the next chapter.

he was mounting his horse at the gate, the attacking soldiers 
came up. He rushed at them but being still half intoxicated 
made but a poor fight. Lu Bu knowing Zhang Fei’s prowess 
did not press him hard, and Zhang Fei made his way, with 
eighteen leading Guards of Yan, to the east gate, and there 
went out, leaving Liu Bei’s family to their fate. 

Cao Bao, seeing Zhang Fei had but a very small force 

and was still half drunk as well, came in pursuit. Zhang Fei 
saw who it was and was mad with rage. He galloped toward 
Cao Bao and drove him off after a few passes. He followed 
Cao Bao to the moat and wounded him in the back. Cao 
Bao’s frightened steed carried its master into the moat, and 
he was drowned. 

Once well outside 

the city Zhang Fei 
collected his troops, 
and they rode off 
toward 
the 
south 

direction. 

Lu 
Bu 
having 

surprised the city set himself to restore order. He put a guard 
over the residence of Liu Bei so that no one should disturb 
the family. 

Zhang Fei with his few followers went to his brother’s 

camp at Xuyi and told his story of treachery and surprise. 
All were greatly distressed. 

“Success is not worth rejoicing over; failure is not worth 

grieving over,” said Liu Bei with a sigh. 

“Where are our sisters?” asked Guan Yu. 
“They shared the fate of the city.” 
Liu Bei nodded his head and was silent. 
Guan Yu with an effort controlled his reproaches and 

said, “What did you say when you promised to guard the 
city, and what orders did our brother give you? Now the 

lead forth fifty thousand troops. But Liu Bei heard of the 
threatened attack, so he made inclement weather an excuse 
to moved his few soldiers out of Xuyi for Guangling, before 
the attacking force came up. 

However, Gao Shun demanded the promised reward 

through Ji Ling, who put Gao Shun off, saying, “My lord 
has gone away. I will settle this as soon as I can see him and 
get his decision.” 

not decide what to do. 

Then came a letter from Yuan Shu: 
“Although Gao Shun had gone to attack Liu Bei, yet Liu 

Bei had not been destroyed, and no reward could be given 
till he was actually taken.” 

was inclined to attack Yuan Shu himself. 

However, 
his 

adviser, Chen Gong, 
opposed this course, 
saying, “You should 
not. Yuan Shu is 
in 
possession 
of 

Shouchun and has 
a large army, well 
supplied. You are no 
match for him. Rather 
ask Liu Bei to take up his quarters at Xiaopei as one of your 
wings and, when the time comes, let him lead the attack, 
both south and north. Then Yuan Shu and Yuan Shao will 
fall before you, and you will be very powerful.” 

Finding this advice good, Lu Bu sent letters to Liu Bei 

asking him to return. 

and reduced Liu Bei’s force by half. When the messenger 

Chapter 15 
Taishi Ci Fights With The Little Prince;
Sun Ce Cuts Short The White Tiger King. 

about to end his life with his own weapon in Xuyi. 

But Liu Bei rushed forward and caught Zhang Fei in 

his arms, snatched 
away the sword, and 
threw it on the earth, 
saying, “Brothers are 
as hands and feet; 
wives and children 
are as clothing. You 
may mend your torn 
dress, but who can 
reattach a lost limb? 
We three, by the Oath of the Peach Garden, swore to seek 
the same death day. The city is lost, it is true, and my wives 
and little ones, but I could not bear that we should die ere 
our course be run. Beside, Xuzhou was not really ours, 
and Lu Bu will not harm my family but will rather seek to 
preserve them. You made a mistake, worthy brother, but is 
it one deserving of death?” 

their tears fell in sympathy. 

As soon as the news of Lu Bu’s successful seizure of 

his protector’s region reached Yuan Shu, Yuan Shu sent 
promises of valuable presents to Lu Bu to induce him to 
join in a further attack on Liu Bei. The presents are said to 
have been fifty thousand carts of grain, five hundred horses, 
ten thousand ounces of gold and silver, and a thousand rolls 
of colored silk. 

Lu Bu swallowed the bait and ordered Gao Shun to 

Lu Gang, the Governor of Lujiang. Yuan Shu summoned 
the victor, who made obeisance at the foot of the hall of 
audience. Yuan Shu, sitting in state, asked for details of the 
campaign and then invited Sun Ce to the banquet. 

had returned to the lower region of the Great River, where 
he had devoted himself to peaceful ends, inviting to his side 
good people and able scholars. Afterwards, when a quarrel 
broke out between his mother’s brother, Governor Wu Jing 
of Dangyang, and the late Imperial Protector of Xuzhou, 
Tao Qian, Sun Ce removed his mother with all the family 
to Que, he himself taking service under Yuan Shu, who 
admired and loved him greatly. 

“If I had a son like Sun Ce,” said Yuan Shu, “I should die 

without regret.” 

Yuan Shu appointed Sun Ce Commander and sent him 

on various expeditions, all of which were successful. After 
this banquet to celebrate the victory over Lu Gang, Sun 
Ce returned to his camp very bitter over the arrogant and 
patronizing airs of his patron. Instead of retiring to his tent, 
Sun Ce walked up and down by the light of the moon. 

“Here am I, a mere nobody, and yet my father was such 

a hero!” 

And he cried out and wept in spite of himself. 
Then suddenly appeared one who said, laughing loudly, 

“What is this, Sun Ce? While your noble father enjoyed 
the light of the sun, he made free use of me. If his son has 
any difficulty to resolve, why does he not refer it to me also 
instead of weeping here alone?” 

native of Dangyang, who had been in Sun Jian’s service. 
Sun Ce then ceased weeping, and they two sat down. 

“I was weeping from regret at being unable to continue 

my father’s work,” said Sun Ce. 

from Lu Bu came, Liu Bei read the letter. He was quite 
content with the offer, but his brothers were not inclined to 
trust Lu Bu. 

“Such a dishonorable man must have a motive,” said 

Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. 

“Since he treats me kindly, I cannot but trust him,” 

replied Liu Bei. 

So Liu Bei went back to Xuzhou. Lu Bu, fearing that Liu 

Bei might doubt his sincerity, restored Liu Bei’s family; and 
when Lady Gan and Lady Mi saw their lord, they told him 
that they had been kindly treated and guarded by soldiers 
against any intrusion, and provisions had never been 
wanting. 

“I knew he would not harm my family,” said Liu Bei to 

Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. 

However, Zhang Fei was not pleased and would not 

accompany his brothers into the city when they went to 
express their thanks. He went to escort the two ladies to 
Xiaopei. 

city, but your brother behaved very badly, drinking and 
flogging the soldiers, and I came to guard it lest some evil 
should befall.” 

“But I had long wished to yield it to you,” said Liu Bei. 
Thereupon Lu Bu wished to retire in favor of Liu Bei 

who, however, would not hear of it. Liu Bei returned and 
took up his quarters in Xiaopei, but his two brothers would 
not take the situation kindly and were very discontented. 

Said Liu Bei, “One must bow to one’s lot. It is the will of 

Heaven, and one cannot struggle against fate.” 

Lu Bu sent presents of food and stuffs, and peace reigned 

between the two houses. 

soldiers when it was announced that Sun Ce had subdued 

Zhu Zhi

“Why stay here bound to the service of a master? The 

Governor of Dangyang is in distress. Why not get command 
of an army under the pretense of an expedition to relieve 
Wu Jing? Escape the shadow of Yuan Shu and take control 
of Dangyang, then you can accomplish great things.” 

While these two were talking, another man suddenly 

entered, saying, “I know what you two are planning, Noble 
Sirs. Under my hand is a band of one hundred bold fellows 
ready to help Sun Ce in whatever he wishes to do.” 

The speaker was one of Yuan Shu’s advisers named 

Sun Ce

father’s generals---Zhu Zhi, Lu Fan, Cheng Pu, Huang Gai, 
Han Dang, and others. 

When Sun Ce reached Linyang, he saw a body of troops 

in front of him, at 
their head a dashing 
leader of handsome 
and 
refined 
mien. 

As 
soon 
as 
this 

commander saw Sun 
Ce, he dismounted 
and made obeisance. 
It was Zhou Yu from 
Shucheng. 

moved his family to Shucheng where the Zhou family had 
lived. And as Zhou Yu and Sun Ce were of the same age all 
but two months, they became exceedingly good friends and 
sworn brothers, Sun Ce being the elder in virtue of his two 
months’ seniority. Zhou Yu was on his way to visit Sun Ce’s 
uncle, Governor Wu Jing of Dangyang, when the happy 
meeting took place. 

Naturally Sun Ce confided his projects and inmost ideas 

to his friend, who at once said, “I shall put my whole life 
and energy to serve you to reach that grand goal.” 

“Now that you have come, the design is as good as 

accomplished,” said Sun Ce. 

Zhou Yu was introduced to Zhu Zhi and Lu Fan. 
Zhou Yu said, “Do you know of the two Zhangs of 

Guangling? They would be most useful people in working 
out your schemes.” 

“Who are they, the two Zhangs?” said Sun Ce. 
“They are men of transcendent genius who are living 

near here for the sake of tranquillity in these turbulent 
times. Their names are Zhang Zhao and Zhang Hong. Why 

Lu Fan, from Runan. They three then sat and discussed 
schemes. 

“The one fear is that Yuan Shu will refuse to give you the 

troops,” said Lu Fan. 

“I still have the Imperial Hereditary Seal that my father 

left me: That should be good security.” 

“He will certainly lend you troops on that pledge.” 

the details; and not many days after Sun Ce obtained an 
interview with his patron. 

have been unable to avenge my father. Now the Imperial 
Protector of Yangzhou, Liu Yao, is opposing my mother’s 
brother, and my mother and her family are in danger in 
Que. Wherefore I would borrow a few thousands of fighting 
men to rescue them. As perhaps, Illustrious Sir, you may 
lack confidence in me, I am willing to deposit the Imperial 
Hereditary Seal, left me by my late father, as a pledge.” 

want the jewel really, but you may as well leave it with 
me. I will lend you three thousand troops and five hundred 
horses. Return as soon as peace 
can be made. As your rank is 
hardly sufficient for such powers, 
I will memorialize to obtain for 
you higher rank with the title 
of General Who Exterminates 
Brigands, and you can soon 
start.” 

Sun Ce thanked his patron 

most humbly and soon put the 
army in motion, taking with him 
his two new advisers and his 
Yuan Shu

of the Imperial Protector of Yanzhou, Liu Dai. Liu Yao had 
long ruled in Yangzhou and headquartered in Shouchun. 
But Yuan Shu had forced him to flee to the southeast of the 
Great River. He retired to Que and now was battling with 
Wu Jing in Linyang. 

Hearing of the meditated attack on him, Liu Yao 

summoned his generals to take counsel. 

Said General Zhang Ying, “I will take an army and 

entrench at Niuzhu. No army can get past that, whatever its 
strength.” 

Zhang Ying was interrupted by another who shouted, 

“And let me lead the van!” 

All eyes turned to this man. It was Taishi Ci who, after 

helping Kong Rong raise the siege of Beihai, had come to 
serve Liu Yao. 

Hearing him offer to undertake the hazardous post of van 

leader, Liu Yao said, “But you are still young and not yet 
equal to such a charge. Rather stay by my side and await 
my orders.” 

Taishi Ci withdrew in disappointment. 
Soon Zhang Ying led his army to Niuzhu, where the 

stores of grain located. When Sun Ce approached, Zhang 
Ying went to meet him, and the two armies faced each 
other above the Bullock Rapid. Zhang Ying roundly abused 
his opponent, and Huang Gai rode out to attack him. But 
before the combat had 
proceeded far, there 
arose an alarm of 
fire in Zhang Ying’s 
camp. Zhang Ying 
turned back, and then 
Sun Ce advanced in 
full force, compelling 
the enemy to abandon 

not invite them to help you, brother?” 

Sun Ce lost no time in sending letters and gifts, but they 

both declined. Then he visited them in person, was greatly 
pleased with their speech and by dint of large gifts and 
much persuasion, got them to promise to join him. Sun Ce 
appointed them both Counselors and Generals. 

next matter for discussion. The Imperial Protector, Liu Yao, 
was of Donglai, a scion of the imperial family and brother 

Sun Ce

they all bowed in the shrine. 

Then Sun Ce knelt and made a vow, saying, “If I, Sun 

Ce, succeed in my task and restore the authority of my late 
father, then will I restore this temple and order sacrifices at 
the four seasons.” 

When they had remounted, Sun Ce said, “I am going to 

ride along the ridge and reconnoiter the enemy’s position.” 

His commanders begged him to refrain, but he was 

obstinate, and they rode there together, noting the villages 
below. 

A soldier of the other side going along a bye road quickly 

reported the presence of horsemen on the ridge, and Liu Yao 
said, “It is certainly Sun Ce trying to inveigle us to battle. 
But do not go out.” 

Taishi Ci jumped up, saying, “What better chance to 

capture him?” 

the camp, crying, “If there be any valiant men among you, 
follow me!” 

man, and I will go with him.” 

So he also went. The others only laughed at the pair. 
Now having seen all he wished, Sun Ce thought it time 

to return and wheeled round his horse. But when he was 
going over the summit, someone shouted, “Stay, Sun Ce!” 

down the next hill. Sun Ce halted and drew up his little 
escort right and left, he himself with his spear ready. 

“Which is Sun Ce?” shouted Taishi Ci. 
“Who are you?” was the reply. 
“I, Taishi Ci of Laihuang, come to take him prisoner.” 
“Then I am he,” said Sun Ce, laughing. “Come both of 

you together. I am not afraid of you. If I were, I should not 
be Sun Ce!” 

their possession. The defeated general fled to the hills. 

were two, named Jiang Qin from Shouchun and Zhou Tai 
from Jiujiang, who in these turbulent times had got together 
a band of kindred spirits and lived by plundering the country 
along the Great River. They knew Sun Ce by reputation as 
a man who treated able people very liberally and wished 
to join him. So they came with their band, three hundred 
strong, and helped him in this way as an introduction. 
Sun Ce welcomed them and gave the leaders rank. After 
taking possession of the stores of all kinds abandoned by 
the runaways, and enlisting four thousand of those who 
surrendered into his own ranks, Sun Ce moved forward to 
attack Shenting. 

After his defeat Zhang Ying returned to his master 

and told his misfortune. Liu Yao was going to punish his 
failure by death, but listened to his advisers, who asked for 
mercy for the unfortunate man, and sent him to command 
the garrison in Lingling. Liu Yao himself set out to meet 
the invaders. He camped south of the Sacred Hills. Sun Ce 
camped on the opposite side of the hills. 

Sun Ce inquired the natives, “Is there a temple of Liu 

Xiu the Founder of Latter Hans in the vicinity?” 

They said, “There is a temple to the south on the summit 

of the hills.” 

“I dreamed last night that Liu Xiu called me, so I will go 

and pray there,” said Sun Ce. 

But Counselor Zhang Zhao advised, “My lord, you 

should not go as the enemy is on the other side, and you 
may fall into an ambush.” 

“The spirit will help me: What need I fear?” 
So Sun Ce put on his armor, took his spear and mounted, 

taking with him twelve of his commanders as an escort. 
They rode up the hills, dismounted, burned incense, and 

Their steeds galloped off they knew not whither, while 

the two men, each dropping his spear, began a hand to hand 
struggle. Soon their fighting robes were in tatters. Sun Ce 
gripped the short lance that Taishi Ci carried at his back, 

“You and all your 

crowd come on, and 
I will not blench!” 
cried 
Taishi 
Ci 

putting his horse at 
a gallop and setting 
his spear. 

Sun Ce braced 

himself 
for 
the 

shock, 
and 
the 

battle 
began. 

Fifty bouts were fought and still neither combatant had 
the advantage. Sun Ce’s commanders whispered to each 
other their admiration and amazement. Taishi Ci saw that 
the spearmanship of his opponent showed no weak point 
whereby he could gain the advantage, so he decided to 
resort to guile. Feigning defeat he would lead Sun Ce to 
pursue. Taishi Ci however did not retire along the road by 
which he had come, but took a path leading around the hill 
instead of over it. His antagonist followed, shouting, “He 
who retreats is no worthy soldier!” 

But Taishi Ci thought within himself, “He has twelve 

others at his back and I only one. If I capture him, the others 
will retake him. I will inveigle him into some secret spot 
and then try.” 

pursuer, down to the plain. Here Taishi Ci suddenly wheeled 
about and attacked. Again they exchanged half a hundred 
bouts, without result. Then Sun Ce made a fierce thrust, 
which his opponent evaded by gripping the spear under 
his arm, while he himself did the same with his opponent’s 
spear. Neither was wounded but each exerting his utmost 
strength to pull the other out of the saddle they both came 
to the ground. 

I will take him.” 

And Cheng Pu rode forth. 
“You are no antagonist for me,” said Taishi Ci. “Tell 

your master to come out.” 

This incensed Cheng Pu, who rode at his opponent, and 

they two fought thirty bouts. The duel was stopped by the 
gongs of Liu Yao. 

“Why did you sound the retreat?” said Taishi Ci. “I was 

just going to capture the wretch.” 

Zhou Yu led a surprise force thither, and Chen Wu was in 
league with him to betray the city. We have no home now. I 
will hasten to Moling to get the help of Xue Li and Ze Rong 
to retake the city.” 

pursued. 

On the other side Zhang Zhao said to Sun Ce, “Zhou 

Yu’s attack is the cause of this move; they are in no mood to 
fight. A night raid on their camp would finish them.” 

surprise and hastened toward the camp where they scored 
a victory. Their opponents scattered in all directions. 
Taishi Ci alone made a determined stand, and as he could 
not withstand a whole army, he fled with ten horsemen to 
Jingxian. 

Chen Wu. He was a soldier of middle height, sallow of 
complexion and red eye, an odd looking man. But Sun 
Ce held him in high esteem, appointed him Commander, 
and put him in the van of the attack on Xue Li. As Van 
Leader, Chen Wu and a dozen horsemen made a dash into 
the enemy’s formation, where they slew half a hundred 
men. So Xue Li would not fight but remained within his 

while Taishi Ci tore off Sun Ce’s helmet. Sun Ce tried to 
stab with the short lance but Taishi Ci fended off the blow 
with the helmet as a shield. 

Then arose a great 

shouting. 
Liu 
Yao 

had come up with a 
thousand soldiers. Sun 
Ce seemed now in 
sore straits. His twelve 
followers came up, 
and each combatant let 
go his hold. Taishi Ci 
quickly found another 
steed, seized a spear, and mounted. Sun Ce, whose horse 
had been caught by Cheng Pu, also mounted, and a confused 
battle began between the handful of men on one side and a 
whole thousand troops on the other. It swayed and drifted 
down the hill side. However, soon Zhou Yu leading his 
troops came to the rescue, and as evening drew on a tempest 
put an end to the fight. Both sides drew off and returned to 
camp. 

Next day Sun Ce led his army to the front of Liu Yao’s 

camp, and the challenge was accepted. The armies were 
drawn up. 

Sun Ce hung the short lance he had seized from Taishi Ci 

at the end of his spear, waved it in front of the line of battle, 
and ordered his soldiers to shout, “If the owner of this had 
not fled, he would have been stabbed to death!” 

On the other side they hung out Sun Ce’s helmet, and the 

soldiers shouted back, “Sun Ce’s head is here already!” 

Both sides thus yelled defiance at each other, one side 

boasting, the other bragging. Then Taishi Ci rode out 
challenging Sun Ce to a duel to the death, and Sun Ce would 
have accepted. 

thousand. Liu Yao himself fled to Yuzhang and sought 
safety with Liu Biao, Imperial Protector of Jingzhou. 

An attack on Moling was the next move. As soon as Sun 

Ce arrived at the moat, he summoned Commander Xue Li 
to surrender. Someone let fly a furtive arrow from the wall 
which wounded Sun Ce in the left thigh so severely that 
he fell from his steed. Hastily his officers picked up their 
wounded chief and returned to the camp where the arrow 
was pulled out and the wound dressed with the medicines 
suitable for injuries by metals. 

By Sun Ce’s command 

the story was spread abroad 
that the hurt had been fatal, 
and all the soldiers set up 
cries of lamentation. The 
camp was broken up. Xue 
Li, Zhang Ying, and Chen 
Heng made a night sortie 
but fell into a carefully 
prepared ambush. 

Presently 
Sun 
Ce 

himself 
appeared 
on 

horseback, shouting: “Sun 
Ce is here still!” 

His sudden appearance 

created such a panic that 
the soldiers dropped their 
weapons and fell on their 
faces. Sun Ce gave orders 
not to kill them. But their 
leaders fell: Zhang Ying 
from Chen Wu’s spear 
thrust as he turned to run 
away; Chen Heng was 
Jiang Qin

defenses. As Sun Ce was attacking the city, a spy came in 
with the news that Liu Yao and Ze Rong had gone to attack 
Niuzhu, which made Sun Ce move thither in haste. His two 
opponents were ready for battle. 

“I am here!” said Sun Ce, “You had better give in.” 
A general came out from behind Liu Yao to accept the 

challenge. It was Yu 
Mi. But in the third 
bout Sun Ce made him 
prisoner and carried 
him off to the other side. 
Seeing his colleague 
thus 
captured, 
Fan 

Neng rode out to the 
rescue and got quite 
close. But just as he 

was going to thrust, all Sun Ce’s soldiers shouted, “There is 
a man behind you going to strike secretly!” 

At 
this 
Sun 
Ce 

turned and shouted so 
thunderously loud that 
Fan Neng fell out of 
his saddle from mere 
fright. He split his skull 
and died. When Sun Ce 
reached his standard, he 
threw his prisoner to the 
ground. And Yu Mi was 
also dead, crushed to death between the arm and the body 
of his captor. So in a few moments Sun Ce had disposed of 
two enemies, one crushed to death and one frightened to 
death. Thereafter Sun Ce was called the Little Prince. 

to camp. As soon as Sun Ce heard the news, he himself 
rode out to order the guards 
to leave the prisoner, whose 
bonds he loosened with his 
own hands. Then he took off 
his own embroidered robe 
and put it on the captive. 
They entered the camp 
together. 

“I knew you were a real 

hero,” said Sun Ce. “That worm Liu Yao had no use for such 

as you, and so he got beaten.” 

Taishi Ci, overcome by this 

kindness and good treatment, 
then formally surrendered. 

Sun Ce seized his hand and 

said, laughing, “If you had 
taken me at that fight we had 
near the shrine, would you 

have killed me?” 

“Who can say?” said Taishi Ci smiling. 
Sun Ce laughed also and they entered his tent, where 

Taishi Ci was placed in the seat of honor at a banquet. 

Taishi Ci said, “Can you trust me so far as to let me go to 

muster as many as I can of the soldiers of my late master? 
Under the smart of this defeat they will turn against him, 
and they would be a great help to you.” 

with you that at midday tomorrow you will return.” 

Taishi Ci agreed and went off. All the generals said he 

would never return. 

“He is trustworthy and will not break his word,” said the 

chief. 

None of the officers believed he would come back. 

killed by Jiang Qin’s arrow; and the Commander, Xue Li, 
was slain in the turbulence. Thus Sun Ce got possession 
of Moling. Having calmed the people, he sent his soldiers 
away to Jingxian, where Taishi Ci was in command. 

Taishi Ci had assembled two thousand veterans in 

addition to his own troops for the purpose of avenging his 
master. Sun Ce and Zhou Yu on the other hand consulted 
how to capture him alive. 

Zhou Yu planned, “Attack the city on three sides, leaving 

the east gate free for flight. Some distance off an ambush 
shall be prepared, when Taishi Ci, his men fatigued and 
horses spent, shall fall an easy victim.” 

The latest recruits under Taishi Ci’s banner were mostly 

hillmen and unaccustomed to discipline. Beside, the walls 
of the city were pitiably low. One night Sun Ce ordered 
Chen Wu to strip off his long dress, leave his arms save 
a dagger, clamber up the ramparts, and set fire to the city. 
Seeing the flames spreading, Taishi Ci made for the east 
gate and, as soon as he got outside, Sun Ce followed in 
pursuit. The pursuit was maintained for some fifteen miles 
when the pursuers stopped. 

Taishi Ci went on as long as possible, finally halting to 

rest in a spot surrounded by reeds. Suddenly a tremendous 
shouting arose. 
Taishi Ci was 
just 
starting 

when 
tripping 

ropes arose all 
round, his horse 
was thrown and 
he found himself 
a prisoner. 

Taishi 
Ci 

was taken back 

Bridge. 

Yan Yu, sword in hand, took his stand on the bridge, and 

this was reported to Sun Ce, who prepared to accept the 
challenge. 

as my lord’s fate is bound up with that of the army, he should 
not risk a conflict with a mere robber. I wish that you should 
remember your own value.” 

“Your words, O Wise One, are as gold and precious 

stones, but I fear that my soldiers will not carry out my 
commands unless I myself share their dangers.” 

However, Sun Ce sent forth Han Dang to take up the 

challenge. Just as Han Dang reached the bridge, Jiang Qin 
and Chen Wu, who had dropped down the river in a small 
boat, passed under the bridge. Though the arrows fell in 
clouds on the bank, the two men rushed up and fiercely 
attacked Yan Yu as he stood on the bridge. Yan Yu fled and 
Han Dang went in pursuit. But Yan Yu smote up to the west 
gate of the city into which he entered. 

three days no one came out to offer battle. Then at the head 
of his army, Sun Ce came to the west gate and summoned 
the warden. An officer of inconsiderable rank came out and 
stood with one hand resting on a beam while with the other 
he gave point to his abuse of those below. Quickly Taishi 
Ci’s hands sought his 
bow and an arrow was 
on the string. 

“See me hit that 

fellow’s hand,” said 
he, turning to his 
companions. 

Even as the sound 

of his voice died 

But the next day they set up a bamboo rod in the gate of 
the camp, and just as the shadow marked noon Taishi Ci 
returned, bringing with him about a thousand troops. Sun 
Ce was pleased, and his officers had to confess that he had 
rightly judged his man. 

Sun Ce thus marched his army to the South Land, and his 

enemies fled or surrendered before his force. He had now 
several legions and the southeast of the Great River was his. 
He improved the conditions of the people and maintained 
order so that his adherents and supporters daily increased. 
He was called Sun Ce the Bright. 

in terror; but when it had arrived and they saw that no one 
was permitted to loot and not the least attempt was made on 
their houses, they rejoiced and presented the soldiers with 
oxen and wine, for which they were in turn duly rewarded. 
Gladness filled the country side. The soldiers who had 
followed Liu Yao were kindly treated. Those who wished 
to join Sun Ce’s army did so; those who preferred not to 
be soldiers were sent home with presents. And thus Sun Ce 
won the respect and praise of everyone and became very 
powerful. 

family in Que, setting his brother, Sun Quan, and Zhou Tai 
over the city of Xuancheng. Then he headed an expedition 
to the south to reduce Wujun. 

Tiger, who styled himself King of East Wu1 and ruled over 
Wujun. His armies stationed at Wucheng and Jiaxing. 
Hearing of Sun Ce’s approach, Yan Baihu sent his brother, 
Yan Yu, with an army against Sun Ce, and they met at Maple 

1Wu was a state in the Spring and Autumn period. Located southeast in the 

Great River Plain (the South Land). Became dominant in BC 506, when her 
army defeated Chu under the leadership of Wu Qi.

them into his service, and appointed them Commanders as 
a reward for their service, and the joint forces crossed the 
Great River. 

The White Tiger, Yan Baihu, gathered his scattered 

forces and took up a position at Western Ford, but Cheng 
Pu attacked him there and scattered the defenders, chasing 
them as far as Kuaiji. The Governor of the place, Wang 
Lang, was on Yan Baihu’s side and inclined to support him 
actively. 

stood forth, saying, “No! No! Sun Ce as a leader is humane 
and upright, while the White Tiger is a savage ruffian. 
Rather capture him and offer his person as a peace offering 
to Sun Ce.” 

The Governor turned angrily toward the speaker, who 

was an official named Yu Fan from Kuaiji, and bade him be 
silent. Yu Fan withdrew sighing deeply. And the Governor 
went to the help of the White Tiger with whom he joined 
forces at Shanyin. 

Sun Ce came up. When both sides were arrayed, Sun 

Ce rode out and addressed Wang Lang, saying, “Mine is an 
army of good soldiers, and my aim is to restore peace to this 
region, but you give your support to a rebel!” 

got 
possession 
of 

Wujun, you want also 
my territory. I shall 
revenge for the Yans!” 

This 
response 

greatly angered Sun 
Ce. Just as battle was 
to be joined, Taishi Ci 
advanced and Wang 

away, the bowstring 
twanged, the arrow 
sped and lodged in the 
beam, firmly pinning 
thereto the officer’s 
hand. Both sides, those 
on the wall and those 
below it, marveled 
and acclaimed at such 
marksmanship. 

The wounded man was taken away. 
When Yan Baihu the White Tiger heard of the exploit, 

he said, “How can we hope to withstand an army with such 
leaders as this in it?” 

And his thoughts turned toward a peace. He sent his 

brother Yan Yu out to see Sun Ce, who received him civilly, 
invited him into the tent, and set wine before him. 

“And what does your brother propose?” said Sun Ce. 
“He is willing to share this region with you,” was the 

reply. 

cried Sun Ce. 

Sun Ce commanded to put the messenger to death. Yan 

Yu started up and drew his sword; but out flew Sun Ce’s 
blade, and the unhappy messenger fell to the ground. His 
head was hacked off and sent into the city to his brother. 

This had its effect. Yan Baihu saw resistance was 

hopeless, so he abandoned Wujun and fled. Sun Ce pressed 
the attack. Huang Gai captured Jiaxing, and Taishi Ci took 
Wucheng. Several other southern cities were fallen. The 
territory was quickly subdued. Yan Baihu rushed off toward 
Yuhang in the east, plundering on all sides, till a band of 
villagers under the leadership of one Ling Cao checked his 
career of robbery there. Yan Baihu then fled toward Kuaiji. 

supplies is stored at Chadu, distant only some ten miles. 
Our best plan is to seize this place, thus attacking where the 
enemy is unprepared, and doing what they do not expect.” 

and will crush the rebels.” 

So he issued orders to kindle watch fires at all the gates, 

and leave the flags standing to maintain the appearance of 
soldiers in position while the expedition went south. 

go away, the besieged will surely come out and follow you. 
We might prepare a surprise for them.” 

Sun 
Ce 
replied, 

“My preparations are 
complete, 
and 
the 

city will be captured 
tonight.” 

So the army set out. 

Wang Lang heard that 
the besiegers had gone, 
and he went up to the 
tower to reconnoiter. 
He saw the fires blazing, the smoke rising, and the pennons 
fluttering in the breeze as usual and hesitated. 

Zhou Xin said, “He has gone and this is only a strategy. 

Let us go out and smite them.” 

Yan Baihu said, “If he has gone, it is to attack Chadu. 

Let us pursue.” 

“The place is our base of supply,” said Wang Lang, “and 

must be defended. You two lead the way, and I will follow 
with reserves.” 

So Yan Baihu and Zhou Xin went forth with five thousand 

soldiers and drew near their enemy about the first watch, at 
seven miles from the city. The road led through dense forest. 
Then suddenly the drums beat and lighted torches sprang 

Lang came toward him waving a sword. Before they had 
exchanged many passes, Zhou Xin dashed out to help Wang 
Lang. Thereupon Huang Gai rode out to make the sides 
more equal. These latter two were just engaging when the 
drums rolled on both sides, and a general battle began. 

Suddenly confusion was caused in the rear of Wang 

Lang’s army by the sudden onslaught of a small army. 
Wang Lang galloped off to see the attackers were Zhou 
Yu and Cheng Pu. Then an attack was made on his flank, 
so that he was in a 
hopeless position, and 
he and Yan Baihu and 
Zhou Xin, fighting 
desperately to cut an 
alley out, only just 
managed to reach the 
shelter of the city. 
The 
drawbridges 

were raised, the gates 
closed, and preparations made to sustain a siege. 

his troops so as to attack all four gates. Seeing that the city 
was being fiercely attacked, Wang Lang was for making a 
sortie, but Yan Baihu opposed this as hopeless against so 
strong a force outside. 

“We can only strengthen our position and remain behind 

the shelter of the ramparts until hunger forces the besiegers 
to retire,” said Yan Baihu. 

Wang Lang agreed, and the siege went on. For several 

days a vigorous attack was maintained, but with little 
success. 

In a council, Sun Jing, who was the uncle of Sun Ce, 

said, “Since they are holding the city with such resolution, 
it will be difficult to dislodge them. But the bulk of their 

the upper hand. Zhou Tai took the youth in his arms and 
mounted a horse; but as the robbers came on with swords 
to attack him, he dismounted, and though without mail, met 
the robbers on foot and slew them as they came up. Then 
came a horseman armed with a spear, but Zhou Tai laid 
hold of his spear and pulled him to the earth. Then Zhou 
Tai mounted the robber’s horse, and thrusting this way and 
that with the spear fought his way out. So Sun Quan was 
preserved, but his savior had received more than a dozen 
wounds. However, the bandits went away. 

These wounds being due to metal would not heal but 

swelled enormously, and the brave soldier’s life hung in the 
balance. Sun Ce returned and was deeply grieved. 

coastal pirates, I received many spear wounds, but a certain 
wise man named Yu Fan recommended a surgeon who cured 
me in half a month.” 

“Surely this must be Yu Fan of Kuaiji,” replied Sun Ce. 

“That is he; he is so called.” 

“Yes, truly a wise man. I would employ him.” 
So Sun Ce sent two officers to invite Yu Fan, and he 

came at once. He was treated in most friendly fashion and 
appointed an official forthwith. Then the question of treating 
the wounded man was brought up. 

“The surgeon is one Hua Tuo from 

Qiao, who has perfectly marvelous 
medicine skill. I will get him to come,” 
said Yu Fan. 

Shortly the famous Hua Tuo arrived, 

a man with the complexion of a youth 
and a snowy beard. He looked more like 
a saint who had passed the gates of this 
life. He was treated very warmly and 
taken to see the sick general’s wounds. 

up on all sides. Yan Baihu was frightened, turned his horse 
and started to retreat. At once a leader appeared in front in 
whom, by the glare of the torches, he recognized Sun Ce. 
Zhou Xin made a rush at him but fell under Sun Ce’s spear. 
The men surrendered. However, Yan Baihu managed to cut 
his way out and fled to Yuhang. 

return to the city, fled in all haste to the coastal regions. And 
so Sun Ce got possession of the city of Kuaiji. 

Having restored order, a few days later a man came 

bringing the head of the White Tiger as an offering to Sun Ce. 
This man was a native of the county. He was of eight-span 
height, with a square face and wide mouth. He was named 
Dong Xi. Sun Ce appointed him Commander. After this, 
peace reigned in all 
the southeast. Sun Ce 
placed his uncle Sun 
Jing in command of the 
city and made Zhu Zhi 
Governor of Wujun. 
Then Sun Ce returned 
to his own place, south 
of the Great River. 

While 
Sun 
Ce 

was absent, a band 
of brigands suddenly 
attacked Xuancheng, 
left in the care of his 
brother 
Sun 
Quan 

and the leader Zhou 
Tai. As the onslaught 
was made on all sides 
at once, and in the 
night, the brigands got 
Zhou Tai

“The case is not difficult,” said the surgeon. 
And he prepared certain drugs that healed the wounds 

within a month. Sun Ce suitably acknowledged his care and 
skill, and he was allowed to leave with rich rewards. 

so restoring complete tranquillity to the South Land. After 
this he set garrisons at all the strategic points in the old state 
of Wu, and this done, memorialized what he had achieved 
to the Throne. He came to an understanding with Cao Cao 
and sent letters to Yuan Shu demanding the return of the 
Imperial Hereditary Seal he had left in pledge. 

designs, wrote excuses and did not return the state jewel. 
In his own place Yuan Shu hastily summoned about thirty 
of his officers to a council. Among them were Adviser Yang 
Dajiang and Generals Zhang Xun, Ji Ling, Qiao Rui, Lei 
Bo, and Chen Lan. 

Yuan Shu said, “Sun Ce borrowed an army from me 

and set out on an expedition which has made him master 
of the South Land. Now he says nothing of repayment but 
demands the token of his pledge. Truly he is a boor, and 
what steps can I take to destroy him?” 

him, for he is too strongly placed, the Great River as the 
shield. You must first remove Liu Bei in revenge for having 
attacked you without cause, and then you may think about 
Sun Ce. I have a scheme to put the former into your hands 
in a very short time.” 

Yuan Shu went not to destroy the tiger, but instead
Against a dragon forth his army led.

The means Yang Dajiang employed will be made plain 

in the next chapter.

Sun Qian

Chapter 16 
In The Camp Gate, Lu Bu Shoots The Halberd;
At River Yu, Cao Cao Suffers Defeat. 

Adviser Yang Dajiang knew how to remove Liu Bei. 
“What is your plan of attack on Liu Bei?” said Yuan 

Shu. 

Yang Dajiang replied, “Though Liu Bei, now camped at 

Xiaopei, could easily be taken, yet Lu Bu is strongly posted 
at the chief city near. And I think Lu Bu would help Liu 
Bei if it was only for the grudge he bears against you for 
not having given him the gold and studs, grain and horses 
you promised. First of all you should send Lu Bu a present 
whereby to engage his affections and keep him quiet while 
you deal with Liu Bei. You can see to Lu Bu after this is 
done, and Xuzhou is yours.” 

Thereupon two hundred thousand carts of millet was sent, 

with letters, by the hand of Han Yin. The gift pleased Lu Bu 
greatly, and he treated the messenger with great cordiality. 
Feeling sure of no trouble from that quarter, Yuan Shu told 
off one hundred thousand troops against Xiaopei. The army 
was led by Ji Ling as commanding general, and Lei Bo and 
Chen Lan as generals. 

When Liu Bei heard these things he called his officers to 

take counsel. Zhang Fei was for open war forthwith. 

therefore, we must lay the position before Lu Bu and ask 
help.” 

“Do you think that fellow will do anything?” said Zhang 

Fei cynically. 

Liu Bei decided in favor of Sun Qian’s proposal and 

wrote as follows: 

“I have treated him too well for him to do me any harm,” 

said Liu Bei. 

So he mounted and rode away, the two brothers following. 

They came to the camp. 

The host said, “Now 

by a special effort I have 
got you out of danger. I 
hope you will not forget 
that when you come into 
your own.” 

Liu Bei thanked him 

heartily and was invited 
to take a seat. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei took up their usual 

place as guards. 

But when Ji Ling was 

announced, Liu Bei felt a 
spasm of fear and got up to 
go away. 

“You two are invited for 

the particular purpose of a 
discussion,” said the host. 
“Do not take it amiss.” 

Liu Bei, being quite 

ignorant of his intentions, was very uneasy. Presently his 
fellow guest entered. Seeing Liu Bei in the tent, and in the 
seat of honor, Ji Ling 
was puzzled, hesitated 
and tried to withdraw. 
But 
the 
attendants 

prevented this and Lu 
Bu, advancing, laid hold 
of him and drew him 
into the tent as if he had 
been a child. 

extensive as the heavens. Now Yuan Shu, moved by a 
desire for revenge, is sending a force against this place, and 
its destruction is imminent unless you intervene to save it. I 
trust you will send an army quickly to protect the town, and 
our happiness will be inexpressible.” 

Receiving this Lu Bu called in Chen Gong to whom he 

said, “I have just received gifts from Yuan Shu and a letter, 
with the intent of restraining me from helping Liu Bei. Now 
comes a letter from Liu Bei asking help. It seems to me that 
Liu Bei where he is can do me no harm; but if Yuan Shu 
overcomes Liu Bei and comes to an understanding with the 
leaders around the Huashang Mountains, then the power 
of the north is so much nearer, and I should be unable to 
resist the attacks of so many leaders and should never sleep 
secure. I will aid Liu Bei: That is the better course for me.” 

Now Yuan Shu’s force sent against Xiaopei went thither 

as quickly as possible, and soon the country to the southeast 
fluttered with pennons by day and blazed with watch fires 
by night, while the rolling of the drums reverberated from 
heaven to earth. 

The five thousand troops at Liu Bei’s disposal were led 

out of the city and arranged to make a brave show, but it 
was good news to him to hear that Lu Bu had arrived and 
was quite near. Lu Bu camped only half a mile away to the 
southwest. When Yuan Shu’s general, Ji Ling, heard of his 
arrival, he wrote letters reproaching Lu Bu for his treachery. 
Lu Bu smiled as he read them. 

“I know how to make both of them love me,” said Lu 

Bu. 

So he sent invitations to both Liu Bei and Ji Ling to come 

to a banquet. 

his brothers dissuaded him, saying, “There is some treachery 
in his heart.” 

saying, “Let us see what General Lu Bu has to say first. 
After that there will be time to go to our tents and fight.” 

you fight,” said Lu Bu. 

the other Zhang Fei was dying for a fight; and neither of the 
two chiefly concerned would signify assent. 

Then suddenly the host turned to his attendants, saying, 

“Bring my trident halberd!” 

They did so, and he sat there gripping that graceful but 

effective weapon in his right hand. Both guests felt very ill 
at ease and turned pale. 

Lu Bu went on, saying, “I have tried to persuade you to 

make peace, for that is the command of the Most High. It 
shall be put to the test.” 

He then bade his servants take the halberd outside beyond 

the gate and set it up. 

Then speaking to his two guests, he said, “That gate is 

one hundred and fifty paces distant. If I can hit that left 
branch of the halberd-head with an arrow, you will both 
withdraw your armies. If I miss, you can go away and 
prepare for immediate battle. I shall stand against either of 
you who does not abide by what I say.” 

distance! How could anyone hit it?” 

So he assented, thinking he would have plenty of fighting 

after his host had missed the mark. Of course Liu Bei was 
willing. 

They all sat down again and wine was served. When this 

had been drunk, the host called for his bow and arrows. Liu 
Bei silently prayed that Lu Bu would hit the mark. 

Lu Bu turned back his sleeves, carefully fitted an arrow 

to the string and pulled the bow to its utmost stretch. A slight 
exclamation escaped him as the bow curved like the harvest 

“Do you wish to slay me?” asked Ji Ling. 
“Not at all,” replied Lu Bu. 
“Then you are going to slay Long-Ears?” 
“No; not that.” 
“Then what does it mean?” 
“Liu Bei and I are brothers. Now, General, you are 

besieging him, and so I have come to the rescue.” 

“Then slay me,” said Ji Ling. 
“There would be no sense in that. All my life I have 

disliked fighting and quarrels, but have loved making peace. 
And now I want to settle the quarrel between you two.” 

“May I ask how you think of doing so?” 
“I have a means and one approved of Heaven itself.” 
Then Lu Bu drew Ji Ling within the tent and led him up 

to Liu Bei. The two men faced each other, full of mutual 
suspicion, but their host placed himself between them and 
they took their seats, Liu Bei on the right hand of the host. 

silence, Lu Bu spoke, saying, “I wish you two gentlemen to 
listen to me and put an end to your strife.” 

Liu Bei made no reply, but Ji Ling said, “I have come 

with an army of one hundred thousand at the express bidding 
of my master to take Liu Bei. How can I cease the strife? I 
must fight.” 

“What!” exclaimed Zhang Fei drawing his sword. “Few 

as we are, we regard 
you no more than a 
lot of children. What 
are you compared 
with a million Yellow 
Scarves? You dare 
hurt our brother!” 

Guan Yu urged 

him to be silent, 

That day at his camp gate.
Hou Yi, the archer of ancient days,
Brought down each mocking sun,
And the apes that gibbered to fright Yang Youji
Were slain by him, one by one.
But we sing of Lu Bu that drew the bow,
And his feathered shaft that flew;
For one hundred thousand soldiers could doff their 

mails

When he hit the mark so true.

Lu Bu laughed loud at the success of his shot. 
Dropping his bow he seized his guests by the hands, 

saying, “The command of Heaven indeed! And now you 
cease from fighting!” 

He ordered the soldier attendants to pour out great goblets 

of wine and each drank. Liu Bei in his inmost heart felt 

moon sailing through the sky. “Twang!” went the bowstring, 
and the arrow sped like a falling star. And it struck the 
slender tongue of the halberd head full and square. A roar 
of acclamation from all sides greeted the exploit. 

The multitude people often hail their praise: 

O Lu Bu was a wonderful archer,
And the arrow he shot sped straight;
By hitting the mark he saved his friend

marriage, an alliance such as existed between the ancient 
states of Qin and Jin1.” 

Lu Bu was well disposed toward the scheme, but went 

in to consult his wife. Now Lu Bu had two wives and one 
concubine. He first married a lady of the Yan family, and she 
was the legal wife. Then he took Diao Chan as a concubine. 
And while he was living at Xiaopei, he had married a 
secondary wife, a daughter of Cao Bao. Lady Cao had died 
quite young leaving no issue. Neither had Diao Chan borne 
any children. So that Lu Bu had but one child, this daughter, 
of whom he was dotingly fond. 

When he broached the subject, his wife said, “The 

Yuans have dominated the regions around the River Huai 
these many years. They have a large army and are very 
prosperous. One day a Yuan will become emperor, and our 
daughter may hope to be an empress. But how many sons 
has Yuan Shu?” 

“Only this one.” 
“Then we should accept the offer. Even if our daughter 

does not become Empress, Xuzhou has a new ally.” 

Lu Bu decided to accept and so treated the messenger 

with extreme generosity. Han Yin went back with a favorable 
answer. The wedding gifts were then prepared ready for 
Han Yin to take to the bride’s family. They were received 
and banquets and merry-making filled all the time. 

1Jin was a state that occupied the western part of the empire, in the 

mountainous area north of the Yellow River. During the Spring and Autumn 
period, under the leadership of Duke Wen and his successors, Jin grew into a 
very large state, which broke into three states in the Warring States period. Qin 
was a western-most state existed in both Spring and Autumn and Warring States 
periods. Because Jin blocked its way to the east, Qin was shielded from the wars 
in the central plain. Wars between Qin and Jin were not few, but intermarriages 
between the two houses were frequent, and this alliance strengthened both 
states.

rather lucky; his fellow guest sat silent, nodding his head. 

Presently Ji Ling said, “I cannot disobey your command, 

General, but let me depart. What will my master say and 
will he believe me?” 

“I will write a letter and confirm it,” said Lu Bu. 
After a few more rounds of the wine, Ji Ling asked that 

he might have the letter and after that departed. 

When the brothers took their leave, Lu Bu again 

reminded Liu Bei, saying, “Do not forget I have delivered 
you today!” 

Liu Bei thanked him and departed. Next day the leaders 

broke camps, and the soldiers were gone. 

When Ji Ling had got back to the South of River Huai and 

told the story of the feat of archery and the peace making 
that followed, and had presented the letter, his lord was very 
wroth. 

acting!” cried Yuan Shu. “He has saved Liu Bei, but I will 
lead a large army myself and settle both Liu Bei and him.” 

“Be careful, my lord,” said Ji Ling. “Lu Bu is braver 

and stronger than most leaders and has a wide territory. He 
and Liu Bei together make a powerful combination, not 
easy to break. But there is another course. I have found out 
that his wife, Lady Yan, has a daughter just of marriageable 
age; and as you have a son, you could arrange a marriage 
alliance with Lu Bu. If his daughter wedded your son, Lu 
Bu would certainly slay your enemy for you. This is called 
‘Relative-above-Stranger’ plan.” 

This scheme appealed to Yuan Shu, who soon set about 

its accomplishment. He sent presents by the hand of Han 
Yin, who was to discuss the question. 

When Han Yin saw Lu Bu, he said, “My master has an 

immense respect for you, Illustrious Sir, and he desires to 
ensure perpetual alliance between the two families by a 

“Not even that.” 
Lu Bu laughed, saying, “Then you mean me to go by the 

rule for common people.” 

“Nor that either.” 
“Then what do you mean?” 
Chen Gong said, “In the midst of the present troubles, 

when there is great rivalry among the nobles, do you not see 
that the others will be exceedingly jealous of your marriage 
alliance with such a high family as the Yuans? Suppose you 
postpone the choice of the day, most likely when your fine 
morning arrives, the wedding party will fall into an ambush 
on the road and the bride be carried off. Then what could 
be done? My opinion is that you would have done better 
to refuse. But since you have consented, then carry out the 
plan at once before the lords hear of it, and so send the girl 
over without delay to Shouchun. You can hire a lodging 
there till you have selected the wedding day, and the odds 
are greatly against any failure.” 

“What you say is quite to the point,” replied Lu Bu. 
He went into the private apartments to see his wife and 

told her the bride elect would set out immediately and the 
trousseau was to be prepared as far as it could be. On his 
side he chose some good horses and had a wedding carriage 
got ready. The escort consisted of Han Yin and two of Lu 
Bu’s generals, Song Xian and Wei Xu. The procession went 
out of the city to the sound of music. 

placidly waiting till the evening of his life passed into night. 
Hearing this burst of music he inquired the occasion, and 
the servants told him. 

device, then,” said Chen Gui. “Liu Bei is in danger.” 

Thereupon in spite of his many infirmities, he went to 

see Lu Bu. 

Next day Chen Gong went to see the messenger in his 

lodging, and when the usual ceremonies and greetings had 
been exchanged, the two men sat down to talk. 

Gong said, “Who originated this scheme by which Yuan 
Shu and Lu Bu are to become connections by this marriage 
so that Liu Bei’s head may fall?” 

Han Yin was terrified. “I pray you not to let it get abroad,” 

said he. 

“I certainly shall keep it secret. But if there be any delay, 

some other person will find it out and that spells failure,” 
said Chen Gong. 

“What would best be done?” 
“I will see Lu Bu and get him to send the girl immediately 

so that the marriage may be concluded quickly.” 

in high respect.” 

With this Chen Gong took his leave and sought an 

interview with Lu Bu. 

“I hear your daughter is to be married to Yuan Shu’s son. 

That is capital, but no one knows when.” 

“That has yet to be considered,” said Lu Bu. 
“There were certain fixed rules as to the period between 

sending presents and consummation of the marriage: 
Emperors, a year; nobles, half a year; high officers, three 
months; and common people, one month.” 

Lu Bu replied, “As to Yuan Shu, Heaven has already 

put into his hands the Imperial Hereditary Seal, and he will 
surely arrive at the dignity one day. So, I should think the 
imperial rule would apply.” 

“No, it will not.” 
“The nobles’ rule, then?” 
“No, nor that.” 
“The high officers’?” 

surprised at,” said Lu Bu at first. 

Then came two officers, Song Xian and Wei Xu, saying, 

“As you ordered us, we went into the Huashang Mountains 
to purchase horses. We had got three hundred when, on our 
way back, on the borders of Xiaopei some robbers stole half 
of them. We hear that the real robbers were Zhang Fei and 
his soldiers, who took on the guise of brigands.” 

expedition against Xiaopei. When Liu Bei heard that an 
attack threatened, he led out his army to oppose it, and the 
two armies were arrayed. 

Liu Bei rode to 

the front and said, 
“Elder brother, why 
have you brought an 
army against me?” 

Lu 
Bu 
began 

abusing him, saying, 
“That shot of mine 
at the Archery Feast 
saved you from grave 
danger. Why then did you steal my horses?” 

dare to take yours?” said Liu Bei. 

“You stole a hundred and fifty in the person of your 

brother Zhang Fei. You only used another man’s hand.” 

Thereupon Zhang Fei, with his spear set, rode out, 

saying, “Yes; I stole your good horses, and what more do 
you expect?” 

Lu Bu replied, “You goggled-eyed thief! You are always 

treating me with contempt.” 

“Yes; I took your horses and you get angry. You did not 

say any thing when you stole my brother’s Xuzhou.” 

“Noble Sir, what brings you here?” asked Lu Bu. 
“I heard you were dead, and I came to mourn,” quavered 

the old man. 

“Who said that?” exclaimed his host. 
“Once upon a time you received grand presents from 

Yuan Shu that you might slay Liu Bei, but you got out by 
that clever shot at your halberd. Now they suddenly seek a 
marriage alliance thinking to get hold of your daughter as a 
pledge. The next move will be an attack on Xiaopei and, that 
gone, where are you? Whatever they ask in future, grain or 
troops or anything else, and you yield, will bring your own 
end nearer, and make you hated all round. If you refuse, then 
you are false to the duties of a relative, and that will be an 
excuse to attack you openly. Beside this Yuan Shu intends 
to call himself emperor, which would be rebellion, and you 
would be of the rebel’s family: Something abominable, 
which the multitude people would not suffer.” 

Lu Bu was much disturbed to hear this. 
“I have been misled by Chen Gong!” cried he. 
So he hurriedly sent Zhang Liao 

to bring the wedding party, which 
had been ten miles away, back to 
the city. When they had come, Lu 
Bu threw Han Yin into prison and 
sent a reply to Yuan Shu saying 
curtly that the girl’s trousseau was 
not ready and she could not be 
married till it was. 

Chen Gui wanted Han Yin to be 

sent to Capital Xuchang. But Lu 
Bu was hesitating what course to 
adopt, when he heard that Liu Bei 
was enlisting soldiers and buying horses for no apparent 
reason. 

Zhang Liao

bright moon. They met opposition from Song Xian and Wei 
Xu’s men, but the soldiers were driven off by Zhang Fei, 
and the besieging force was passed without difficulty. Zhang 
Liao pursued, but was held off by Guan Yu’s rearguard. It 
seemed Lu Bu was not dissatisfied at the flight, for he took 
no personal trouble to prevent it. He made formal entry into 
the city, settled local affairs, and appointed Gao Shun as 
Governor. 

Liu Bei approached Xuchang and encamped outside the 

city, whence he sent Sun Qian to see Cao Cao and relate the 
events that brought him there. 

brother.” 

Then Cao Cao invited Liu Bei to enter the city. 
Leaving his brothers at the camp, Liu Bei, with Sun Qian 

and Mi Zhu, went to Cao Cao, who received him with the 
greatest respect. The story of Lu Bu’s perfidy was again 
related. 

“He has no sense of right,” said Cao Cao. “You and I, my 

brother, will attack him together.” 

and it was late evening before the visitor left for his own 
camp. 

Xun Yu then had an interview with his master and said, 

“If you are not on your guard, Liu Bei will be your undoing. 
You ought to destroy him. He is too much of a hero.” 

Cao Cao made no reply and his adviser retired. 
Presently Guo Jia came, and Cao Cao said, “I have been 

advised to kill Liu Bei: What of such a scheme?” 

“A bad scheme,” said Guo Jia. “You are the popular 

champion, pledged to relieve the people from oppression, 
and only by truth and rectitude can you secure the support 
of the noble-minded. Your only fear is lest they stay away. 
Now Liu Bei is a clear hero. He has come to you for help 

Lu 
Bu 
rode 

forward 
to 
give 

battle, and Zhang Fei 
advanced. A reckless 
fight began, and the 
two warriors kept 
it up for a hundred 
bouts 
without 
a 

decisive stroke. Then 
Liu Bei, fearing some accident to his brother, hastily beat 
the gongs as a signal to retire and led his army into the city. 
Lu Bu then invested it. 

Liu Bei called his brother and chided him as the cause of 

all this misfortune. 

“Where are the horses?” said Liu Bei. 
“In some of the temples and courts,” replied Zhang Fei. 
Liu Bei sent a messenger out to speak softly and offer to 

restore the stolen horses if hostilities were to cease. Lu Bu 
was disposed to agree but Chen Gong opposed. 

Bei.” 

Under Chen Gong’s influence the request for peace was 

rejected, and the attackers on the city pressed harder. 

Liu Bei called Mi Zhu and Sun Qian to him to ask 

advice. 

Said Sun Qian, “The one person that Cao Cao detests is 

Lu Bu. Let us then abandon the city and take refuge with 
Cao Cao, from whom we may borrow troops to destroy 
him.” 

“If we try to get away, who will lead the van?” 
“I will do my best,” said Zhang Fei. 
So Zhang Fei led the way; Guan Yu was rearguard; and 

in the center was Liu Bei with the non-fighting portion. The 
cavalcade started and went out at the north gate under the 

capital if he left it. So he sought the advice of Xun Yu. 

Said the Adviser, “Lu Bu has no notion of a policy. He is 

led astray by any little advantage that presents itself to his 
eyes. All you need do is to obtain promotion for him, giving 
him some additional title, and tell him to make peace with 
Liu Bei, and he will do it. The south is no threat then.” 

“Good,” said Cao Cao. 
And he acted upon the hint and sent an Imperial Legate, 

Wang Ze, to Xuzhou with the official announcement and a 
letter urging peace, while he went on with preparations to 
meet the other danger from Zhang Xiu. 

thousand troops in three divisions. Xiahou Dun was the Van 
Leader, and they went to River Yu and camped there. 

Jia Xu succeeded in persuading Zhang Xiu of the 

hopelessness of resistance. 

is too large for you to oppose,” said Jia Xu. 

Seeing the truth of this, Zhang Xiu sent his adviser to 

propose sub mission. Cao Cao was greatly pleased with the 
messenger, admiring his ready and fluent repartee, and tried 
to win him to his service. 

Now I am with Zhang Xiu who esteems my advice, and I 
should not like to abandon him,” said Jia Xu. 

Jia Xu left and next day conducted his master into Cao 

Cao’s presence. Cao Cao was very generous. Then he 
entered Wancheng with a small force, the greater part of the 
army being put in camp outside where the lines extended 
some three miles. Great banquets were given every day by 
Zhang Xiu, and Cao Cao was always being entertained. 

more than usual merry mood, he asked the attendants if 
there were any singing girls in the city. 

and protection, and to put him to death would be to alienate 
all good people and put fear into the hearts of all the able 
advisers. Hampered by these difficulties, where will you 
find those whose help you need? To remove the dangers 
represented by one man and thereby injure yourself in the 
eyes of all humankind is a sure means of destruction. These 
conditions need careful consideration.” 

“What you say exactly fits in with what I think,” said 

Cao Cao, greatly pleased with these remarks. 

His next step was to memorialize the Emperor to give 

Liu Bei the imperial protectorship of Yuzhou. 

Again Cheng Yu said, “Liu Bei is certain to rise to the 

top. He will never remain in a subordinate position. You 
had better remove him.” 

Cao Cao answered, “Now is just the time to make use of 

good people. I will not forfeit the regard of the world for the 
sake of removing one individual. Guo Jia and I both see this 
in the same light.” 

Wherefore Cao Cao rejected all persuasion to work 

against Liu Bei but sent him three thousand soldiers and ten 
thousand carts of grain, and set him on his way to Yuzhou. 
Liu Bei was to march to Xiaopei, occupy it, call together his 
former soldiers, and attack Lu Bu. 

Cao, who prepared to march an army to subjugate Lu Bu. 
But just then hasty news came that Zhang Ji, who had gone 
to the attack of Nanyang, had been wounded by a stray 
arrow and had died. His nephew, Zhang Xiu, had succeeded 
to the command of his army; and with Jia Xu as strategist, 
Zhang Xiu had joined Liu Biao and camped at Wancheng. 
They intended to attack the capital and get possession of the 
Emperor’s person. 

His nephew, Cao Amin, heard the question and said, 

“Peeping through one of the partitions last evening, I saw 
a perfectly beautiful woman in one of the courts. They told 
me she was the wife of Zhang Ji, Zhang Xiu’s uncle. She is 
very lovely.” 

Cao Cao, inflamed by the description given him of the 

beauty, told his nephew to go and bring her to visit him. Cao 
Amin did so, supported by an armed escort, and very soon 
the woman stood before Cao Cao. 

She was a beauty indeed, and Cao Cao asked her name. 
She replied, “Thy handmaid was wife to Zhang Ji; I was 

born of the Zhou family.” 

“Do you know who I am?” 
“I have known the Prime Minister by reputation a long 

time. I am happy to see him and be permitted to bow before 
him,” said she. 

“It was for your sake that I allowed Zhang Xiu to submit; 

otherwise I would have slain him and cut him off root and 
branch,” said Cao Cao. 

“Indeed, then, I owe my very life to you; I am very 

grateful,” said she. 

“To see you is a glimpse of paradise, but there is one 

thing I should like better. Stay here and go with me to the 
capital where I will see that you are properly cared for. What 
do you say to that, my lady?” 

She could but thank him. 
“But Zhang Xiu will greatly wonder at my prolonged 

absence, and gossips will begin to talk,” said she. 

“If you like, you can leave the city tomorrow.” 
She did so; but instead of going at once to the capital, 

she stayed with him among the tents, where Dian Wei was 
appointed as a special guard over her apartments. Cao Cao 
was the only person whom she saw, and he passed the days 
in idle dalliance with the lady, quite content to let time flow 
Xun Yu

by. 

But people told Zhang Xiu what had gone amiss, and he 

was angry at the shame brought upon the family. 

secret, wait till he appears again to carry on business, and 
then do so and so.” 

A plan was arranged quite secretly. 
Next day Zhang Xiu went into Cao Cao’s tent, saying, 

“Since the surrendered troops are deserting in great number, 
it would be well to camp them in the center of your camp 
to prevent this.” 

Cao Cao gave the permission, and Zhang Xiu moved and 

placed his army in four camps. 

was a man to be feared, being both brave and powerful. It 
was hard to know how to attack him. So counsel was taken 
with Hu Juer, the commander of one camp and a man of 
enormous strength and activity. He could carry a burden 
of six hundred pounds and two hundred miles in a day. Hu 
Juer proposed a plan. 

He said, “The fearsome thing about Dian Wei is his 

double halberds. But get him to come to a party and make 
him quite drunk before you send him back. I will mingle 
among his escort and so get into his tent and steal away his 
weapons. One needs not fear him then.” 

So the necessary arms were prepared and orders given 

in the various camps. This done Zhang Xiu gave a banquet, 
and the intended victim was invited and plied vigorously 
with wine so that he was quite intoxicated when he left. 
And, as arranged, Hu Juer mingled with his escort and made 
away with his weapons. 

he heard the voices of men and neighing of horses and sent 
out to ask what it meant. They told him it was the night 

the spears stood around him like reeds on the river bank. 
Being totally without mail, he was soon wounded in several 
places. He fought desperately till his sword snapped and 
was no longer of any use. Throwing it aside he seized a 
couple of soldiers and with their bodies as weapons felled 
ten of his opponents. The others dared not approach, but 
they shot arrows at him. These fell thick as rain, but he still 
maintained the gate against the assailants. 

and they wounded Dian Wei in the back with spear thrusts. 

patrol going the rounds, and 
he was satisfied. 

Near the second watch 

of the night again was heard 
some noise in the rear of his 
tent, and one of the fodder 
carts was reported to be 
burning. 

“One of the soldiers has 

dropped a spark; there is 
nothing to be alarmed at,” 
said Cao Cao. 

But very soon the fire 

spread on all sides and 
became alarming. Cao Cao 
called Dian Wei. But he, 
usually so alert, was lying 
down quite intoxicated. 

However, the beating of 

gongs and rolling of drums 
mingling with his dreams 
awoke Dian Wei, and he 
jumped 
up. 
His 
trusty 

halberds had disappeared. 
The enemy was near. He 
hastily 
snatched 
up 
an 

infantryman’s sword and 
rushed out. At the gate he 
saw a crowd of spearmen 
just bursting in. Dian Wei 
rushed at them slashing all 
around him, and twenty or 
more fell beneath his blows. 
The others drew back. But 

Uttering a loud 
cry he fell. The 
blood 
gushed 

from the wound 
in torrents, and 
he died. Even 
after 
he 
was 

dead not a man 
dared to come 
in by the main 
gate. 

Cao 
Cao, 

relying on Dian Wei to hold the main gate, had fled in haste 
by the rear gate. Cao Amin accompanied him on foot. Then 
Cao Cao was wounded 
by an arrow in the arm, 
and three arrows struck 
his 
horse. 
However, 

fortunately, the horse 
was a fine Dawan beast 
full of spirit and, in spite 
of its wounds, it bore its 
master swiftly and well 
as far as the bank of 
River Yu. 

Here some of the pursuers came up, and Cao Amin was 

hacked to pieces. Cao Cao 
dashed into the river and 
reached the further side, 
but there an arrow struck 
his steed in the eye and 
it fell. Cao Cao’s eldest 
son, Cao Ang, dismounted 
and yielded his horse to 

generals of Yu Jin, seeing he advance thus boldly, also 
attacked, and Zhang Xiu was overcome. They pursued him 
a great distance until his force was almost annihilated. With 
the miserable remnant he finally fled to Liu Biao. 

Cao Cao’s army reformed, and the commanders 

mustered. Then Yu Jin went to see his master and told him 
of the conduct of the Qingzhou soldiers and their looting 
and why he had attacked them. 

“Why did you not tell me before you made the camp?” 
Yu Jin related what had occurred. 
Said Cao Cao, “When the first thought of a leader in the 

time of greatest stress is to maintain order and to strengthen 
his defenses, giving no thought to slander but shouldering 
his burdens bravely, and when he thereby turns a defeat into 
a victory, who, even of the ancient leaders, can excel Yu 
Jin?” 

Cao Cao rewarded Yu Jin with a golden armor and the 

lordship of Yishou. But Cao Cao reprimanded Xiahou Dun 
for the lack of discipline among his soldiers. 

Sacrifices in honor of the dead warrior Dian Wei were 

instituted. Cao Cao himself led the wailing and paid due 
honors. 

Turning to his officers he said, “I have lost my first born 

son, but I grieve not so heavily for him as for Dian Wei. I 
weep for him!” 

All were sad at the loss of this general. Then orders were 

issued to return to the capital. 

When Imperial Legate Wang Ze, bearing the imperial 

decree, reached Xuzhou, he was met by Lu Bu, who 
conducted him into the residence where the decree was read. 
It conferred Lu Bu the title General Who Pacifies the East, 
and a special seal accompanied the mandate. The private 
mediating letter was also handed over and the messenger 
detailed the high appreciation in which Lu Bu was held by 

his father, who galloped 
on. Cao Ang was killed 
by arrows, but Cao Cao 
himself got away. Soon 
after he met several of his 
officers who had rallied a 
few troops. 

The 
soldiers 
of 

Qingzhou under Xiahou 
Dun seized the occasion to plunder the people. Yu Jin took 
his army, fell upon them, and slew many. Thus he protected 
and appeased the people. The plunderers, meeting Cao 
Cao on the road, knelt down howling and said Yu Jin had 
mutinied and attacked them. Cao Cao was surprised, and he 
gave order to Xiahou Dun, Xu Chu, Li Dian, and Yue Jing 
to attack Yu Jin. 

Now when Yu Jin saw his master and a great company 

approaching, he at once stopped the attack and set his troops 
to make a camp. 

have turned traitor. Why do you not explain now that the 
Prime Minister has arrived? Why first make a camp?” 

and are very close. It is necessary to prepare for defense or 
we shall not withstand them. Explanation is a small matter, 

but defense is very 
important.” 

Soon 
after 
the 

camp was finished, 
Zhang Xiu fell upon 
them. Yu Jin himself 
rode out to face 
them. 
Zhang 
Xiu 

drew back. The other 

the Chief Minister of State. Lu Bu was greatly pleased. 

Next came news that a messenger from Yuan Shu had 

arrived. 

When he had been introduced, he said, “My master’s 

project of declaring himself emperor is advancing. He has 
already built a Palace and will speedily choose Empress and 
concubines and would come to the South of River Huai. 
He is looking forward to receiving the fiancee of the Heir 
Apparent.” 

“Has the rebel gone so far?” cried Lu Bu in a rage. 
He put the messenger to death and Han Yin into the cage. 

He drafted a memorial of thanks and sent it to the capital, at 
the same time sending, too, Han Yin, the unfortunate agent 
who had arranged the marriage alliance. He also replied to 
Cao Cao’s private meditating letter asking to be confirmed 
in his protectorship of Xuzhou. The letter was sent by the 
hand of Chen Deng. 

Cao Cao was pleased to hear of the rupture of the marriage 

arrangement between the houses of Yuans and Lus, and 
forthwith put Han Yin to death in the market place. 

Bu is cruel, stupid, and facile. The longer he remains, the 
worse.” 

wolf with a savage heart, and it will be hard to feed him for 
long. If it had not been for you and your father, I should not 
have known all the circumstances and you must help me to 
get rid of him.” 

“Anything the Prime Minister wishes to do shall have 

my assistance,” was the reply. 

As a reward Cao Cao obtained an annually grant of two 

thousand carts of grain for Chen Gui and the governorship 
of Guangling for Chen Deng, who then took his leave. 

As he was saying farewell, Cao Cao took him by the hand, 
Yu Jin

Yuan Shu on Xuzhou, and that frightened Lu Bu. 

When discord rose between Qin and Jin,
They were attacked by Yue and Wu,
And when a promised bride never came,
An army marched to enforce the claim.
 
How all this fell out will be shown in the next chapter.

saying, “I shall depend upon 
you in the eastern affairs.” 

Chen 
Deng 
nodded 

acquiescence. 
Then 
he 

returned to Lu Bu, who 
asked him how the visit 
was. 

Chen Deng told him, “My 

father received a generous 
annuity, and I was made 
Governor of Guangling.” 

Lu Bu enraged, saying, 

“You did not ask Xuzhou for 
me, but you got something 
for yourself. Your father advised me to help Cao Cao by 
breaking off the marriage, and now I get nothing at all of 
what I asked, while you and your father get everything. I 
have been victimized by your father.” 

He threatened Chen Deng with his sword. 
Chen Deng only laughed, saying, “O General, how 

unwary you are!” 

“I, unwary?” 
“When I saw Cao Cao, I said that to keep you going was 

like feeding a tiger. The tiger must be kept fully fed or he 
would eat humans. But Cao Cao laughed and replied, ‘No; 
not that. One must treat the Commander like a falcon. Not 
feed it till the foxes and hares are done. Hungry, the bird is 
of use; full fed it flies away.’ I asked who were the quarry. 
He replied, ‘Yuan Shu of the South of River Huai, Sun Ce of 
the South Land, Yuan Shao of Jizhou, Liu Biao of Jingzhou, 
Liu Zhang of Yizhou, and Zhang Lu of Hanzhong; these are 
the foxes and hares.’” 

he understands me.” 

Chen Deng

abominably cruel as those of the Shang Dynasty that they 
are to be overthrown. Indeed this should not be done.” 

Yuan Shu did not hear this with pleasure. 
Said he, “We Yuans came from the Chen family, the 

same ancestry with King Shun3. By the rule of interpreting 
the signs of fate, the day has come when earth (Chen) 
receives fire (Liu). Beside there is an oracle saying, ‘One 
who replaces the Hans must wade through deep mire.’ My 
name means ‘the high road.’ It fits exactly. Further than this, 
I possess the Imperial Hereditary Seal and must become 
lord of all, or I turn from Heaven’s own way. Finally, I have 
made up my mind, so if anyone says too much, that person 
will simply suffer death.” 

Yuan Shu arrogated himself the insignia of royalty and 

assigned Second Glory the reign title. He set up officials 
with titles only given by an emperor, and rode in a chariot 
decorated with the dragon and phoenix, and offered 
sacrifices after the manner of an emperor in the north and 
south suburbs. Also he appointed the daughter of Feng Fang 
his Empress and his son Heir Apparent, and he pressed for 
the early wedding of Lu Bu’s daughter with his son so that 
the Palace entourage might be complete. 

But when Yuan Shu heard of the fate of his marriage 

ambassador, Han Yin, who was sent to the capital and was 
executed, Yuan Shu was very angry and began at once to plan 
for revenge. He made Zhang Xun his Grand Commander 
and gave Zhang Xun the command of more than two 
hundred thousand soldiers with the instruction to invade 
Xuzhou. The army consisted of seven divisions under seven 
commanders: Zhang Xun led the Center Army; Qiao Rui, 
the First Left Army; Lei Bo, the Second Left Army; Han 

3King Yao, King Shun, and King Yu (BC 2400-2200) were the three ideal 

rulers in ancient China. They ascended the throne by their virtues and merits, 
and not by heritage. King Yu was also the founder of Xia Dynasty.

Chapter 17 
Yuan Shu Marches Out An Army Of Seven Divisions;
Cao Cao And Three Generals Join Forces. 

The south of River Huai was very fruitful, and Yuan Shu, 

as governor of such a large territory, was very influential. 
He was not a little puffed up. The possession of the Imperial 
Hereditary Seal, pledged by Sun Ce, added to his pride. And 
he seriously thought of assuming the full style. 

As a preliminary he assembled all his officers and 

addressed them thus: “The Supreme Ancestor, the Founder 
of Han Dynasty, was only a very minor official1, and yet 
he became ruler of the empire. The dynasty has endured 
four centuries, and its measure of fortune has run out. It no 
longer possesses authority; the cauldron is on the point of 
boiling over. My family has held the highest offices of state 
for four generations and is universally respected. Wherefore 
I wish, in response to the will of Heaven and the desire of 
the people, to assume the Imperial Dignity. What think ye 
of the proposal, my officers?” 

Secretary Yan Xiang rose in opposition at once, saying, 

“You may not do this. King Wen, the Ancestor of the Zhou2, 
was of distinguished virtue and held many offices. Till 
the last years of Shang Dynasty, he had two thirds of the 
empire. Still he served and was loyal to the ruling house. 
Your house is honorable, but it is not so glorious as that 
of Zhou. The Hans may be reduced, but they are not so 

1Liu Bang’s first office was assistant to a magistrate in Pei. 
2King Wen, aka the Scholar King, founder of the Zhou Dynasty, father 

of King Wu. King Wen did not actually founded the dynasty, but he laid the 
foundation for Zhou. At the end of Shang Dynasty, the state Zhou of King Wen 
had already possessed two-thirds of the empire, but King Wen still faithfully 
served the last emperor of Shang. The final conquest was completed by King 
Wu and King Wu’s brother, the Duke of Zhou.

misfortune that has come to us is due to the two Chens, who 
fawned upon the central government in order to obtain rank 
and appointments. Now remove the evil by putting these 
two to death and sending their heads to Yuan Shu. Then he 
will retire and leave us in peace.” 

Lu Bu acquiesced and had the two arrested. 
But the son, Chen Deng, only laughed, saying, “What is 

this anxiety about? These seven armies are no more to me 
than so many heaps of rotting straw. They are not worth 
thinking about.” 

your life,” said Lu Bu. 

“General, if you will listen to poor me, the region will be 

perfectly safe.” 

“Let us hear what you have to say.” 
“Yuan Shu’s troops are numerous but they are only a 

flock of crows; they are not an army under a leader. There 
is no mutual confidence. I can keep them at bay with the 
ordinary guards of the place and could overcome them by 
some unsuspected stratagem. If I should fail, I have another 
plan by which I can not only protect the region but capture 
our enemy.” 

“Let us have it.” 
Chen Deng said, “Han Xian and Yang Feng4, two of the 

leaders of our enemies, are old servants of the Han Dynasty 
who fled from fear of Cao Cao and, being homeless, sought 
refuge with Yuan Shu. He despises them, and they are 
dissatisfied with his service. A little letter from the court 
will secure their help as our allies, and with Liu Bei to help 
us on the outside, we can certainly overcome Yuan Shu.” 

4Han Xian used to be a White Wave rebel leader. Yang Feng had been a 

commander under Li Jue. When the Emperor fled from Changan to Luoyang, 
he enlisted these two leaders as escorts to fend off Li Jue and Guo Si’s pursuit. 
(chapter 13) 

Xian, the Third Left Army; 
Chen Ji, First Right Army; 
Chen Lan, Second Right 
Army; and Yang Feng, the 
Third Right Army. Each 
commander was instructed 
to make a certain town his 
objective. 

The Imperial Protector 

of Yangzhou, Jin Shang, 
was ordered to superintend 
the commissariat, but he 
declined the office. And 
so Yuan Shu put Jin Shang 

to death. Ji Ling was in command of the reserves to help 
wherever he was required. Yuan Shu led thirty thousand 
troops, and he appointed three generals, Li Deng, Liang 
Gang, and Yue Jiu, to go up and down and coordinate the 
grand march. 

Lu Bu found out from his scouts that his own Xuzhou 

City was the objective of Zhang Xun; the other towns to be 
first attacked being Xiaopei, 
Yidu, Langye, Jieshi, Xiapi, 
and Junshan. The invading 
armies 
were 
marching 

twenty miles a day, and 
plundering the countryside 
as they advanced. 

Lu Bu summoned his 

advisers to a council to 
which came Chen Gong, 
Chen Deng, and Chen Gui. 

When all had assembled, 

Chen Gong said, “This 

Zhang Xun

Ji Ling

Qiao Rui; Chen Gong to Yidu against Chen Ji; Zhang Liao 
and Zang Ba to Langye against Lei Bo; Song Xian and Wei 
Xu to Jieshi against Chen Lan. Lu Bu himself led against 
the main body under Zhang Xun, leaving a small guard in 
Xuzhou City. 

Lu Bu camped ten miles from the walls. When the enemy 

came up, Zhang Xun thought Lu Bu too strong to attack 
with the force he had, so he retired seven miles to await 
reinforcements. 

That night, in the second watch, Han Xian and Yang 

Feng arrived, and soon the flare was lighted as arranged. 
Lu Bu’s troops were admitted to the camp and caused great 
confusion. Then Lu Bu gave a full attack, and Zhang Xun 
was routed and fled. Lu Bu pursued till daylight, when he 
fell in with one of the other bodies led by Ji Ling. Both 
sides faced each other; but at the very beginning of the 
engagement Yang Feng and Han Xian also attacked, and Ji 
Ling was forced to fly. 

from the rear of some hills. These looked very imposing. 
As the ranks opened Lu Bu saw a leader’s guard with flags 
bearing dragons and phoenixes and representations of the 
sun and moon, the stars in the four groups of the Great 
Bear Constellation, the five directions of the Earth, golden 
gourds, silver axes, yellow halberds, white yaks’ tails, all 
imperial emblems. And beneath a yellow silken parasol sat 
Yuan Shu on horseback, clad in silver mail with a sword 
handle showing at each wrist. 

Standing out in front of the array, Yuan Shu railed at his 

opponent calling him traitor and bastard. Lu Bu said nothing 
but rode forward ready for battle, and Li Deng, one of Yuan 
Shu’s leaders, advanced to take the challenge. They met, 
but at the third bout, Li Deng was wounded in the hand, 
whereupon his spear fell to the ground, and he fled. Lu Bu 

“You shall take the letters 

yourself,” said Lu Bu. 

Chen Deng agreed, and 

a memorial detailing his 
intentions was sent to the 
capital, letters to Yuzhou to 
Liu Bei, and finally Chen 
Deng was sent, with a small 
escort, to wait for Han Xian 
on the road to Xiapi. 

When Han Xian’s army 

had halted and pitched 
camp, Chen Deng went to 
see Han Xian who said, 

“What are you here for? You belong to Lu Bu.” 

do you call me a Lu Bu’s man? If you, General, hitherto a 
minister of state, now serve a traitor, you will nullify the 
grand services you rendered in protecting the Emperor in 
the flight from Changan. Beside, the suspicious Yuan Shu 
will assuredly do you some harm, and you will regret not 
having taken this opportunity to work against him.” 

Han Xian sighed, saying, “I would return to my allegiance 

if there should be any opportunity.” 

for cooperation. 

Han Xian read it and said, “Yes; I know. You may return 

to your master and say General Yang Feng and I will turn 
our weapons and smite Yuan Shu. Look out for a signal 
flare, and let your master come to our aid.” 

As soon as Chen Deng had got back and reported his 

success, Lu Bu divided his troops into five divisions, each 
of ten thousand, and sent them to five threatened towns to 
meet his enemies. Gao Shun led one army to Xiaopei against 

Yang Feng

Whereat Yuan Shu fled in great trepidation, and his army 

melted into fugitives in all directions. The new army fell 
upon them with great slaughter. Yuan Shu and the remnant 
of his army retreated into the below regions of River Huai. 

Victory being now secure, Lu Bu, in company with 

Guan Yu, Yang Feng, and Han Xian returned to Xuzhou, 
where there were banquets and feasting and rewards for the 
soldiers and generals of five divisions. These over, Guan 
Yu took his leave and returned to Yuzhou, while Han Xian 
was appointed Governor of Yidu, and Yang Feng Governor 
of Langye. 

There had been a question of keeping these two in 

Xuzhou City, but Chen Gui opposed it, saying, “Let them 
hold those places in Huashang Mountains, which will be all 
yours within a year.” 

in the meantime to await orders. 

of his father. “They would be a basis for our conspiracy 
against Lu Bu.” 

lengthen the tiger’s claws and teeth,” said Chen Gui. 

So Chen Deng could only approve of his father’s 

precautions. 

so he sent to the South Land to ask a loan of troops from 
Sun Ce. 

Seal, he secretly calls himself emperor and rebels against 
the Hans. I would rather punish such a renegade than help 
him.” 

So Sun Ce rejected. The letter refusing help added to 

Yuan Shu’s anger. 

waved on the advance, and his men prevailed. The other 
side fled, leaving much spoil, clothing, mail, and horses. 

Yuan Shu’s defeated troops had not gone far when a 

strong army, led by Guan Yu, appeared barring his way. 

“Traitor! Why have they not slain you?” cried Guan Yu. 

will smite him before I deal with the others.” 

But his adviser, Yang Dajiang, dissuaded him from this 

course. 

Having refused help to his powerful rival, Sun Ce thought 

it wise to take measures for his own safety. So he stationed 
an army at Jiangkou. Soon after came a messenger from 
Cao Cao bearing Sun Ce’s appointment as Governor of 
Kuaiji with orders to raise an army and reduce Yuan Shu. 

called a council at which Zhang Zhao opposed this course. 

army and ample supplies. He is not to be attacked lightly. 
You had better write to Cao Cao persuading him to attack 
the South of River Huai and we will be auxiliaries. Between 
the two armies, Yuan Shu must certainly be defeated. If by 
the remotest chance we lose, we have Cao Cao to come to 
our rescue.” 

it before Cao Cao. In the meantime, after the defeat at River 
Yu, Cao Cao had reached Xuchang where his first thought 
was to institute sacrifices to his beloved lost leader, Dian 
Wei. He conferred rank upon his son Dian Man and took 
him into his own palace to be cared for. 

Presently arrived Sun Ce’s messenger with letters, and 

next came a report that Yuan Shu, being short of food, 
had made a raid on Chenliu. Cao Cao thought the moment 
opportune, so he issued orders for the south expedition, 
leaving Cao Ren to hold the capital. The army marched, horse 
and foot, one hundred seventy thousand, with commissariat 
wagons of food to the number of over a thousand. Messages 
were sent to summon Sun Ce, Liu Bei, and Lu Bu. 

Yuzhou borders, and he was called in to the Prime Minister’s 
tent. After the usual salutations, two human heads were 
Chen Gui

produced by Liu Bei. 

“Whose are these?” asked Cao Cao in surprise. 
“The heads of Han Xian and Yang Feng.” 
“Why did this happen?” 
“They were sent to control Yidu and Langye, but 

they allowed their soldiers to plunder the people. Bitter 
complaints 
arose, 

so I invited them to 
a banquet and my 
brothers 
dispatched 

them when I gave the 
signal by dropping 
a cup. Their armies 
gave in at once. Now 
I have to apologize 
for my fault.” 

Why talk of a fault?” 

And Cao Cao praised Liu Bei’s action. 
When the joint army reached Lu Bu’s Xuzhou borders, 

he came to meet it. Cao Cao spoke graciously to him and 
conferred upon him the title of General of the Left Army, 
promising him an official seal as soon as he returned to the 
capital. Lu Bu was very pleased. 

Then the three armies were made into one force, Cao Cao 

being in the center, Lu 
Bu to the left wing, 
and Liu Bei to the 
right wing. Xiahou 
Dun and Yu Jin were 
Leaders of the Van. 

On Yuan 
Shu’s 

side, General Qiao 
Rui 
with 
fifty 
Zhang Zhao

operations and capture the city. On the other hand, the 
defenders knew the value of delay and simply held on. After 
a month’s vigorous siege, the fall of Shouchun seemed as 
far off as it was at first, and supplies were very short. Letters 
were sent to Sun Ce who sent a hundred thousand carts of 
grain. When the usual distribution became impossible, the 
Chief of the Commissariat, Ren Jun, and the Controller of 
the Granaries, Wang Hou, presented a statement asking 
what was to be done. 

“Serve out with 

a smaller measure,” 
said Cao Cao. “That 
will save us for a 
time.” 

“But if the soldiers 

murmur, what then?” 

“I 
shall 
have 

another device.” 

As ordered the controller issued grain in a short measure. 

Cao Cao sent secretly to find out how the army took this; 
and when he found that complaints were general and the 
soldiers were saying that the Prime Minister was fooling 
them, he sent a secret summons to the controller. 

to lend me something to pacify the soldiers with. You must 

not refuse.” 

“What does the 

Prime 
Minister 

wish?” 

“I want the loan of 

your head to expose 
to the soldiery.” 

“But I have done 

nothing 
wrong!” 

thousand troops was 
appointed Van Leader. 
The armies met on the 
confines of the city of 
Shouchun. Qiao Rui 
and Xiahou Dun rode 
out and opened battle. 
But Qiao Rui fell in the 
third bout, and his troops fled into the city. 

attack on the west. The other three land corps took each one 
face---Cao Cao on the north, Lu Bu on the east, and Liu Bei 
on the south. The city of Shouchun was in a parlous state. 

At this juncture Yuan Shu summoned his officers. 
Yang Dajiang explained the case, “Shouchun has suffered 

from drought for several years, and the people are on the 
verge of famine. Sending an army would add to the distress 
and anger the people, and victory would be uncertain. I 
advise not to send any more soldiers there, but to hold on till 
the besiegers are conquered by lack of supplies. Meanwhile, 
Your Highness, with regiment of guards, will move over to 
the other side of River Huai, which is quite ready, and we 
shall also escape the enemy’s ferocity.” 

troops under Li Deng, Yue Jiu, Liang Gang, and Chen Ji 
were appointed to guard Shouchun. Then a general move 
was made to the other side of the River Huai. Not only the 
remained army went over, but all the accumulated wealth of 
the Yuan family, gold and silver, jewels and precious stones, 
were moved also. 

Cao Cao’s army of one hundred seventy thousand 

needed daily a considerable quantity of food; and as the 
country around had been famine-stricken for several years, 
nothing could be got there. So he tried to hasten the military 

and the besiegers were in possession. The officers of the 
garrison---Li Deng, Yue Jiu, Liang Gang, and Chen Ji---
were captured alive and were executed in the market place. 
All the paraphernalia of imperial state were burned, and the 
whole city wrecked. 

When the question of crossing the river in pursuit of Yuan 

Shu came up, Xun Yu opposed it, saying, “The country has 
suffered from short crops for years, and we should be unable 
to get grain. An advance would weary the army, harm the 
people, and possibly end in disaster. I advise a return to the 
capital to wait there till the spring wheat shall have been 
harvested and we have plenty of food.” 

Cao Cao hesitated. 
Before he had made up his mind, there came an urgent 

message: “Zhang Xiu, with the support of Liu Biao, was 
ravaging the country all round. There were rebellions in 
Nanyang and Jiangling, and Cao Hong could not cope 
with it. Cao Hong had been worsted already in several 
engagements and was in sore straits.” 

Cao Cao at once wrote to Sun Ce to command the Great 

River so as to prevent any move on the part of Liu Biao, 
while he prepared his army to go to deal with Zhang Xiu. 
Before marching Cao Cao directed Liu Bei to station at 
Xiaopei, as he and Lu Bu being as brothers might help each 
other. 

to Liu Bei, “I am leaving you at Xiaopei to dig a ‘pitfall for 
the tiger.’ You will only take advice from Chen Deng and 
Chen Gui, and there can be no mishap. You will find so-
and-so your ally when needed.” 

So Cao Cao marched to Xuchang where he heard that 

Duan Wei had slain Li Jue and Wu Xi killed Guo Si, and 
they presented the heads of these two. Beside the whole 
clan of Li Jue, more than two hundred, had been arrested 

exclaimed the unhappy man. 

“I know that, but if I do not put you to death, there will 

be a mutiny. After you are gone, your wife and children 
shall be my care. So you need not grieve on their account.” 

Wang Hou was about to remonstrate further, but Cao 

Cao gave a signal. The executioners hustled Wang Hou out, 
and he was beheaded. His head was exposed on a tall pole, 
and a notice said, “In accordance with military law, Wang 
Hou had been put to death for peculation and the use of a 
short measure in issuing grain.” 

This appeased the discontent. Next followed a general 

order threatening death to all commanders if the city was 
not taken within three days. Cao Cao in person went up 
to the very walls to 
superintend the work 
of filling up the moat. 
The defenders kept 
up constant showers 
of stones and arrows. 
Two inferior officers, 
who left their stations 
in fear, were slain by 
Cao Cao himself. 
Thereafter he went on foot to work with his soldiers and 
to see that work went on continuously and no one dared 

be a laggard. Thus 
encouraged, the army 
became 
invincible, 

and 
no 
defense 

could 
withstand 

their onslaught. In a 
very short time the 
walls were scaled, 
the gates battered in, 

fields, they dismounted and pushed aside the stalks so that 
none were trampled down. 

One day, when Cao 

Cao was riding through 
the fields, a dove suddenly 
got up, startling the horse 
so that it swerved into the 
standing grain, and a large 
patch was trampled down. 
Cao Cao at once called the Provost Marshal and bade him 
decree the sentence for the crime of trampling down corn. 

“How can I deal with your crime?” asked the Provost 

Marshal. 

satisfy public opinion?” 

Cao Cao laid hold of the sword by his side and made to 

take his own life. All hastened to prevent him. 

and Autumn history, the laws were not applied to those of 
the most important. You are the supreme leader of a mighty 
army and must not wound yourself.” 

Cao Cao pondered for a long time. At last he said, “Since 

there exists the reason just quoted, I may perhaps escape the 
death penalty.” 

Then with his sword he cut off his hair and threw it on the 

ground, saying, “I cut off the hair as touching the head.” 

Then he sent messengers to exhibit the hair throughout 

the whole army, saying, “The Prime Minister, having 
trodden down some corn, ought to have lost his head by the 
terms of the order; now here is his hair cut off as an attack 
on the head.” 

army so that not a person dared be disobedient. A poet 
wrote: 

and brought to the capital. They were all put to death at 
various gates and their heads exposed as warning. The 
people cheered the end of those two rebels. 

In the Emperor’s palace a large number of officials were 

assembled at a peace banquet. The Emperor rewarded the 
two successful leaders, Duan Wei with the title of General 
Who Destroys Rebellion and Wu Xi General Who Wrecks 
Villainy, and sent to guard Changan. They came to audience 
to express their gratitude and marched away. 

Then Cao Cao sent in a memorial that Zhang Xiu was 

in rebellion, and an army must be sent against him. The 
Emperor in person arranged the chariot and escorted Cao 
Cao out of the city when he went to take command of the 
expedition. It was the summer, the fourth month of the third 
year of Rebuilt Tranquillity (AD 198). Xun Yu was in chief 
military command in Xuchang. 

passed through a wheat region, and the grain was ready for 
harvesting but the peasants had fled for fear, and the corn 
was uncut. Cao Cao sent proclamations to all villages and 
towns: 

“I am sent on 

the 
expedition 
by 

command 
of 
the 

Emperor to capture 
a rebel and save the 
people. I cannot avoid 
moving in the harvest 
season; but if anyone 
trample 
down 
the 

corn, he shall be put to death. Military law is strict without 
exception, and the people need fear no damage.” 

The people were very pleased and lined the road, wishing 

success to the expedition. When the soldiers passed wheat 

bold,

And their myriad inclinations by one leader are 

controlled.

head,

said.

army, Zhang Xiu wrote to Liu Biao for help. Then Zhang 
Xiu led out his troops, with his two generals, Lei Xu and 
Zhang Xian. 

in front and pointing at Cao Cao railed at him, saying, “O 
false and pretended supporter of benevolence and justice! 
O shameless one! You are just a beast of the forest, and 
absolutely devoid of humanity.” 

This annoyed Cao 

Cao who sent out 
Xu Chu against the 
insulter. Zhang Xian 
came to meet him and 
fell in the third bout. 
Thence Zhang Xiu’s 
troops fled and were 
pursued to the very 
walls of Nanyang, only 
managing to get within 
just before the pursuit 
came up. The city was 
then closely besieged. 

Seeing the moat 
Xu Chu
Guo Jia

Chapter 18 
Giving Counsels, Jia Xu Directs A Great Victory;
Braving Battlefield, Xiahou Dun Loses An Eye.
 
Jia Xu, as he had guessed the enemy’s intention, had also 

devised a countermove. So he went to his chief and said, “I 
saw Cao Cao very carefully reconnoitering round about the 
city. He certainly noticed that the southeast corner of the 
wall had been lately restored with mud bricks of a different 
kind, and that the fencing barrier is badly out of repair. He 
will try to effect an entrance there. Wherefore he is making 
a feint attack at the opposite point. He is piling up straw 
and making ostentatious preparations whereby to cajole us 
into withdrawing from the real point of attack to defend the 
northwest. His troops will scale the walls in the darkness 
and try to enter at the southeast.” 

asked Zhang Xiu. 

best and bravest soldiers to fill their bellies, to take only the 
lightest outfit and conceal themselves in the houses near the 
southeast corner. Then disguise the townspeople as soldiers 
and send them to pretend to defend the northwest. Tonight 
we will let the enemy climb up the walls and enter the city 
and, once they are fairly within, give the signal and the 
concealed soldiers will rush out upon them. We may even 
capture Cao Cao himself.” 

The stratagem was decided upon. 
Soon the scouts told Cao Cao: “The defenders of the 

city have moved to the northwest where noisy preparations 
for defense are going on. The opposite corner is left 
undefended.” 

“They have fallen into my trap!” said Cao Cao 

gleefully. 

was so wide and deep that approach to the wall would be 
difficult, Cao Cao’s commanders began to fill up the ditch 
with earth. Then with sand bags, brushwood, and bundles 
of grass they built a great mound near the wall and on this 
erected steps so that they could look over into the city. 

Cao Cao rode round the city closely inspecting the 

defenses. Three days later he issued an order to make a 
mound of earth and brushwood at the northwest corner, as 
he would mount the walls at that point. He was observed 
from within the city by Jia Xu. 

Jia Xu went to Zhang Xiu and said, “I know what Cao 

Cao intends, and I can defeat him by a countermove.” 

Even amongst the very foremost
There is one who leads the way;
Someone sees through your devices,
Be as crafty as ye may.

chapter.

when he retired into 
the city again. 

Cao 
Cao 
then 

rallied his army and 
mustered his soldiers. 
He had lost fifty 
thousand and much 
baggage, while two 
of his generals, Lu 
Qian and Yu Jin were wounded. 

to write off to Liu Biao to cut off Cao Cao’s retreat so that 
he might be utterly destroyed. 

Liu Biao was preparing an army for this purpose, when 

a scout came to say that Sun Ce had encamped in the river 
at Hukou. 

Kuai Liang said, “This move of Sun Ce in the river is part 

of Cao Cao’s strategy, and there will be never-ending regret 
if Cao Cao is allowed to escape. An immediate expedition 
is necessary.” 

to block Cao Cao, leaving Huang Zu to hold Jingzhou’s 
points of vantage. Zhang Xiu, having been informed of the 
movement of Liu Biao, went with Jia Xu to smite Cao Cao 
on the rear. 

In the meantime Cao Cao’s army, marching very leisurely, 

had arrived at Xiangyang. 

great cry, and when his officers asked the reason thereof, he 
replied, “I remembered that here, only a year ago, I lost my 
great general: Dian Wei. Is that not a reason to grieve?” 

make a great sacrifice and mourn for his lost leader. At 
the ceremony he himself burned incense and wailed and 

all the gear needed for scaling walls, and all day they kept 
up the attack on the northwest angle. 

to the opposite corner, where they climbed the wall, broke 
up the fencing barrier, and got into the city apparently 
without disturbing any of the guards. There was no sign 
of life anywhere as they entered. But just as they were 
leaving the wall, suddenly a bomb exploded and they found 
themselves in an ambush. They turned to retire, but Zhang 
Xiu immediately fell on the rear and began a slaughter. Cao 
Cao’s troops were totally defeated and fled out of the gate 
into the country. Zhang Xiu kept up the pursuit till daybreak, 

Zhang Xiu

his scouts, he wished to follow the retreating army. 

Jia Xu opposed it and said, “It will lead to a defeat.” 
However, Liu Biao said, “It is wrong to lose such a 

chance.” 

Jia Xu

prostrated himself. The army was much affected by his 
devotion. After the sacrifices to the lost hero, he sacrificed 
to the names of his nephew Cao Amin and his eldest son 
Cao Ang, both of whom had died at the same time. He also 
sacrificed to his lost soldiers and even to his Dawan steed 
which had been killed by an arrow. 

had gone to help Zhang Xiu and was camped at Anzhong, 
thereby cutting his road of retreat. 

Cao Cao replied to the letter, saying, “I have been 

marching only a short distance each day and of course 
knew of the pursuit. But my plans are laid and, as I am near 
Anzhong, my enemy will be broken. You need not have any 
fears.” 

Then Cao Cao hastened his march till he came near where 

Liu Biao had taken position. Zhang Xiu still shortened the 
distance. Cao Cao ordered his men during the night to open 
a secret way through a pass, where he laid an ambush. 

With the first light of dawn Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu 

met. As Cao Cao’s force looked small, they thought he had 
retired so they boldly advanced into the pass to smite him. 
Then the ambush was opened, and both the attackers’ forces 
were cut up. The fighting ended; Cao Cao’s soldiers went 
outside the pass and encamped. 

their beaten troops and then held a conference. 

“How could we have foreseen such a wicked ruse?” said 

Liu Biao. 

“Let us try again,” said Zhang Xiu. 
Wherefore they joined forces at Anzhong. 
But Xun Yu discovered through his spies that Yuan Shao 

was preparing an attack on Capital Xuchang, so he at once 
wrote to Cao Cao who, much disturbed by this news, set out 
homeward right away. When Zhang Xiu heard this through 

baggage in their hasty flight. Zhang Xiu pursued, but 
suddenly a troop came out from the shelter of some hills 
and checked him. Fearful to try further, he hastened back 
to Anzhong. 

The other general, Liu Biao, asked the adviser to explain 

his apparent inconsistency, saying, “When our veteran and 
brave soldiers were going to pursue those who retreated, 
you said our men would lose the day; and when defeated 
men pursued the victors, you foretold victory. You were 
right in both cases, but we wish you would enlighten us.” 

“It is easy to explain. You, Generals, although skilled 

leaders, are not a match for our enemy. Though Cao Cao 
had lost a battle, he had able generals to keep the rear and 
guard against pursuit. Our soldiers are good, but not a match 
for them. That is how I knew. For as much as Cao Cao’s 
hurried retreat was due to trouble in the capital, and he had 
beaten off our attack, I knew he would retire at his utmost 
speed and not take his usual precautions. I ventured to take 
advantage of his laxity.” 

understanding of the conditions. On the advice of Jia Xu 
then Liu Biao returned to Jingzhou, while Zhang Xiu took 
up his position at Xiangyang so that each strengthened the 
other as the lips protect the teeth from cold. 

When Cao Cao, during his retreat, heard that his army 

was being pursued, he hastily turned back to support the 
rearguard. Then he saw the pursuing army draw off. 

been for the troops that came out of the hills, we should all 
have been lost.” 

“What troops?” asked Cao Cao in surprise. 
The leader of the troops then advanced, slung his spear 

and, dismounting, made a low obeisance. He was Li Tong, 
Imperial Commander, from Jiangxia. 

And 
so 
finally 

pursuit was decided 
upon. They had not 
marched more than 
four miles before they 
came upon Cao Cao’s 
rearguard, who fought 
with great vigor and 
bravery so that the 
pursuers were beaten 
off and went home discomfited. 

not following your advice.” 

“Now set your army 

in order and pursue,” 
said Jia Xu. 

“But we have just 

suffered defeat!” cried 
both leaders. “Do you 
now counsel pursuit?” 

“Yes, and the result 

will be a great victory 
if you go now. I will 

venture my head on that,” said Jia Xu. 

would not accompany 
him. So one army only 
started in pursuit. 

However, 
this 

was 
enough. 
Cao 

Cao’s rear-guard was 
thoroughly 
routed 

and abandoned their 
wagons 
and 
their 

suppose my return has made him change his intention,” said 
Cao Cao. 

Then he opened the letter and read it. It was couched in 

very arrogant terms. 

“Yuan Shao is so exceedingly rude that I will attack 

him,” said Cao Cao. “Only I think I am not quite strong 
enough. What should be done?” 

Guo Jia said, “My 

lord, you know well 
who lost, and why, in 
the conflict between 
Liu Bang, the Supreme 
Ancestor, and Xiang 
Yu, his rival. The 
former won only by 
superior 
wisdom. 

Xiang Yu was the 
stronger, but in the end he was overcome. Your rival has ten 
weak points whereas you have ten strong ones, and, though 
his army is large, it is not terrible.” 

Then Guo Jia continued, “Yuan Shao is overmuch 

devoted to ceremony and deportment; while you are 
sympathetic and natural; this is an excellence in conduct. 
He is antagonistic and drives; you are conciliatory and lead; 
so you have the advantage of popular approval. For many 
years the government has been lax, and he makes it more so; 
you strive vigorously after efficiency; this is the excellence 
of able administration. He is outwardly liberal but grudging 
at heart, and too given to nepotism; you appear exacting, 
but you understand and use people after their ability; this 
is the advantage of correct appreciation. He is a visionary 
but lacking in decision; you are a man of prompt decision 
and direct action; this is an advantage in policy. He loves 
to gather about him people of renown; you treat people as 

Cao Cao asked him why he had come. 
Li Tong replied, “I was in command at Runan when I 

heard of the struggle going on, so I came to lend you any 
help I could.” 

the title Lord Who Renders High Services, and confirmed 
him in his command as the defense of Runan against Liu 
Biao and Zhang Xiu. Then Li Tong expressed his thanks 
and took his leave. 

On his return to the capital, Cao Cao presented a 

memorial on the good services rendered by Sun Ce, and the 
Emperor made him Lord of Wu1 with the title General Who 
Destroys Rebels. The messenger bearing the decree bore 
also the order to repress Liu Biao. 

Cao Cao went to his palace and there received the 

ceremonial calls of congratulation. These finished, Xun Yu 
asked, saying, “You, Sir, marched very leisurely to Anzhong: 
How came it that you felt certain of victory?” 

retreat cut off, fight vigorously and desperately. I retired 
slowly to entice the enemy into following whereby I could 
do as I wished with them. Basing my movements on these 
considerations I felt secure.” 

Xun Yu bowed his head in admiration. 
When Guo Jia entered, Cao Cao said, “Why so late, 

Sir?” 

master, “Yuan Shao sends this expressing he desires to send 
an army to attack Gongsun Zan and wishes you to lend 
provisions and troops.” 

“I heard Yuan Shao was going to attack Xuchang. I 
1Wu was a state in the Spring and Autumn period. Located southeast in the 

Great River Plain (the South Land). Became dominant in BC 506, when her 
army defeated Chu under the leadership of Wu Qi.

Bingzhou. With all this a private letter was written by Cao 
Cao urging upon him to attack Gongsun Zan and promising 
assistance. So Yuan Shao’s army started. 

In the meantime the two Chen Deng and Chen Gui were 

playing their game. At every feast and gathering in Xuzhou, 
they uttered the most fulsome praises of Lu Bu. Chen Gong 
was greatly displeased and took an opportunity to talk about 
them to his master. 

“They flatter you to 

your face, but what is in 
their hearts? You ought to 
be most carefully on your 
guard.” 

“Hold your tongue!” 

was the angry reply. “You 
are 
simply 
slandering 

them without the slightest 
excuse. You want to harm good people.” 

away sad at heart, “and we shall suffer.” 

He thought seriously 

of abandoning Lu Bu, 
but that would be too 
painful a wrench. Beside 
he feared people would 
laugh at him. 

So the days passed 

sorrowfully for him. One 
day, with a few horsemen, 

he rode out to the country near Xiaopei to hunt. On the high 
road he saw a messenger galloping along in hot haste and 
began to wonder what it might mean. He left the hunt, rode 
across country, and intercepted the rider. 

“Where are you from? Who sent you?” asked Chen 

you find them regardless of their reputation; this is where 
you excel in moral virtue. He is compassionate to those 
at hand, but careless about those out of sight; your care 
is all-embracing; this is where you excel in humanity. He 
lends a ready ear to calumny and is misled; you may be 
flooded with evil counsel, but you preserve independence; 
this is where you excel in perspicacity. His sense of right 
and wrong is confused; your appreciation is accurate and 
clear; this is where you excel in administrative capacity. 
He loves the make-believe force, but is ignorant of military 
essentials; you would overcome with far inferior numbers 
as you possess military genius; this is where you excel in 
war. With your ten superiorities, you will have no difficulty 
in overcoming Yuan Shao.” 

“How can I be worth as much as you say?” said Cao 

Cao, smiling. 

“What Guo Jia has said about the ten points in your 

favor agrees exactly with what I think,” said Xun Yu. “Yuan 
Shao’s army is not formidable in spite of its size.” 

“The real and dangerous enemy is Lu Bu,” said Guo 

Jia. “When Yuan Shao has gone north to destroy Gongsun 
Zan, we ought to sweep away Lu Bu and so clear away our 
danger from that side; for if this is not done, our attack on 
Yuan Shao will be the signal for an attempt on the capital. 
That would be most serious.” 

Cao Cao saw things in the same light as his advisers 

and began to discuss plans for an attack on Lu Bu. Xun Yu 
was of opinion that they should first secure the fidelity and 
aid of Liu Bei. So letters were written, and they waited his 
assurance before moving a soldier. Then, in order to reassure 
Yuan Shao, his emissary was treated with great kindness, 
and a memorial presented to the Emperor asking extra 
honors for him. Yuan Shao was made Imperial Protector of 
the four northern regions---Jizhou, Qingzhou, Youzhou, and 

as a secretary. So a letter was written, and Jian Yong set out 
at once on his journey. 

Then preparations were made for defense: Liu Bei 

commanding at the south gate; Sun Qian at the north gate; 
Guan Yu at the west gate; and Zhang Fei at the east gate. Mi 
Zhu and his brother Mi Fang commanded the family guard 
in the center. 

The two Mis were put in command of the house guard 

because they were Liu Bei’s brothers-in-law; Liu Bei had 
taken a sister of Mi Zhu as a second wife. Hence they were 
suitable men to guard the family. 

ascended the tower and said, “I have no quarrel with your 
master, why do you come here with an army?” 

“You have plotted with Cao Cao to injure my master as 

we know now: Why should I not bind you?” 

Bei did not go out to repulse Gao Shun; he only kept the 
gate fast closed. 

Soon after, Zhang Liao 

led an attack on the west 
gate, then kept by Guan 
Yu, who addressed Zhang 
Liao from the wall. 

“You are too good a 

man to waste yourself on 

rebels,” said Guan Yu. 

Zhang Liao hung his 

head and made no reply. 
Guan Yu knew that Zhang 
Liao had a sound heart and 
high principles and said no 
more, as he was unwilling 

Gong. 

his captors belonged. But they searched him and found a 
letter, the secret reply to Cao Cao’s letter from Liu Bei. The 
messenger and the letter were both taken straight to Lu Bu. 

Lu Bu questioned the man, who said, “The Prime 

Minister sent me to bear a letter to Imperial Protector Liu 
Bei. I was now taking back the reply. I know nothing more, 
and I am ignorant of the contents of the letters.” 

So Lu Bu tore it open and read: 
“I have received your commands concerning the 

destruction of Lu Bu, and dare I for a moment venture to 
disregard them? But my force is weak and I must act with 
extreme circumspection. If you move your main body, then 
I will hasten forward, and in the meantime my army shall be 
got ready and weapons prepared. I await your command.” 

Lu Bu was really alarmed. 
“The wretches!” cried he. “To dare to act thus!” 
The unhappy messenger was put to death and 

countermoves planned. Chen Gong and Zang Ba went to 
enlist the help of the Taishan Mountains bandits---Sun Guan, 
Wu Dun, Yin Li, and Chang Xi---so that they would take 
Yanzhou in the East of Huashang Mountains. Gao Shun and 
Zhang Liao went to attack Liu Bei in Xiaopei. Song Xian 
and Wei Xu went west to attack Runan and Yingchuan. And 
Lu Bu took command of a large body of troops ready to 
afford help wherever needed. 

The departure of the army under Gao Shun against 

Xiaopei was reported to Liu Bei, who assembled his officers 
at a council. 

Sun Qian advised sending a message to the capital to 

inform Cao Cao of their danger. In response to the chief’s 
call, Jian Yong, a fellow townsman of Liu Bei, offered to 
take the message. Up to that moment Jian Yong had served 

Xiahou Yuan and Xiahou Dun

to wound Zhang Liao. Nor did he go out to attack. 

Zhang Liao then drew off and proceeded to the east gate, 

and Zhang Fei went out to give battle. Soon it was told 
Guan Yu, who came over quickly. He saw Zhang Fei going 
out, but Zhang Liao was already withdrawing. Zhang Fei 
wished to pursue, but his brother held him back. 

“He is afraid and so has gone away. It would be best to 

pursue,” said Zhang Fei. 

“No,” said Guan Yu. “As a warrior he is not inferior to 

either of us, but I have spoken a few straight words, and he 
has sunk deep. He is repentant and that is why he will not 
meet us.” 

So Zhang Fei understood, and the gates were shut and 

orders given for careful defense. When Jian Yong, Liu Bei’s 
messenger, reached the capital, he saw Cao Cao and told 
him what had happened. The advisers were called to discuss 
a plan. 

Shao, but Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu may attack me in the 
rear.” 

Xun You, the nephew of Xun Yu, replied, “Both these 

latter have been too recently defeated to do anything so 
rash. But Lu Bu is a bold fighting man, and if he joined 
forces with Yuan Shu and they set themselves to conquer 
River Huai and River Si, the problem would he difficult.” 

moment before they have fully made up their mind. Smite 
before they are fully prepared.” 

And Cao Cao did so. An army of fifty thousand were sent 

in advance with four commanders---Xiahou Dun, Xiahou 
Yuan, Lu Qian, and Li Dian. Cao Cao commanded the 
Center Army, which marched by divisions, and Jian Yong 
brought up the rear. 

Soon the scouts informed Gao Shun. He sent flying 

went after this new enemy. There was no escape for Cao 
Xing. He was overtaken and fell with a fatal spear wound 
full in the face. Both sides were stricken dumb with 
amazement. 

Dun rode back toward his own side. Gao Shun went in 
pursuit and, waving on his army, attacked so vigorously that 
he won the day. Xiahou Yuan defended for his elder brother 
as they fled. Lu Qian and Li Dian led various divisions back 
to Jibei and made a camp. 

Liu Bei; and as Lu Bu 
opportunely 
arrived 

with 
Zhang 
Liao, 

these three arranged 
their forces so that 
each attacked one of 
the brothers. 

Dauntless 
was 

Xiahou 
Dun, 
that 

warrior bold,

His courage had 

been proved of old;

But smitten sore 

one hapless day,

He might not in the 

battle stay.

The fate of Liu Bei 

will be told in the next 
chapter.

messengers to Lu Bu, who detached two hundred horse 
with Hou Cheng, Cao Xing, and He Meng to assist him. 
Gao Shun posted this reinforcement and his army about ten 
miles from Xiaopei to meet Cao Cao’s army. Lu Bu and the 
main army also followed close. 

When Liu Bei saw the enemy retiring from the city, 

he knew Cao Cao’s army was close at hand. So, making 
arrangements for guarding the city within, he and his two 
brothers marched their troops out of the city and made a 
camp, that they might be ready to assist. 

having marched out in advance, first came into touch with 
Gao Shun. Xiahou Dun at 
once rode out with spear 
set and offered a challenge. 
It was accepted and the 
two leaders fought half a 
hundred bouts. Then Gao 
Shun began to weaken 
and had to turn back. He 
rode round to the rear of 
his array. Xiahou Dun was 
not the man to quail, so 
he followed right into the 
enemy’s 
country. 
Then 

Cao Xing, one of Lu Bu’s 
generals, secretly strung his bow, fitted an arrow and, when 
Xiahou Dun had come quite near, shot at him. The arrow hit 
Xiahou Dun full in the left eye. He shrieked, and putting up 
his head, pulled out the arrow and with it the eye. 

“Essence of my father, blood of my mother, I cannot 

throw this away!” cried Xiahou Dun, and he put the eye 
into his mouth and swallowed it. 

Then resuming his firm grip of his spear, Xiahou Dun 

Cao Xing

Chapter 19 
Cao Cao Fights In Xiapi;
Lu Bu Perishes At The White Gate Tower. 

went to smite Guan Yu, while Lu Bu attacked Zhang Fei. 
Both brothers went out to give battle, while Liu Bei force 
was held in reserve. But then Lu Bu suddenly attacked both 
Guan Yu and Zhang Fei from the rear, and the brothers were 
forced to flee. Liu Bei with a few score of horsemen rushed 
back to Xiaopei. As he approached the gate with Lu Bu 
pressing him close, he shouted to the soldiers on the wall 
to lower the drawbridge. Lu Bu was so close behind that 
the archers on 
the wall feared 
to shoot lest they 
should 
wound 

their lord, and so 
Lu Bu got into 
the gate. The gate 
guards could not 
force him back 
so they scattered 
in all directions. 
Lu Bu led his force into the city. 

Liu Bei saw the position was too desperate for him to 

reach his residence, and he must abandon all his family. So 
he hastened through the city and left by the west gate out at 
which he and his scanty following fled for very life. 

When Lu Bu reached the residence, he was met by Mi 

Zhu who said, “The hero does not destroy a person’s family. 
Your rival for the empire is Cao Cao, and my master, always 
mindful of the good turn you did him at the Archery Feast, 
would not be ungrateful. But he could not help going to Cao 

Cao, and I think you will pity him.” 

bear to harm his wives and children?” 

take care of them. Next Lu Bu led his army into Huashang 
Mountains to Yanzhou, leaving Gao Shun and Zhang Liao 
to guard Xiaopei. 

the city. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, each with a handful of 
soldiers, had got away to the hills. As Liu Bei with his few 
horsemen was making the best of their way from the scene 
of his defeat, he heard someone coming up behind him. 
When he got closer the person proved to be Sun Qian. 

be alive or dead, and my wife and children are lost to me! 
What can I do?” said Liu Bei. 

Sun Qian replied, “I see nothing better than getting away 

to Cao Cao, whence we may be able to plan our future 
moves.” 

directed their way to Xuchang, choosing by-roads rather 
than highways. When their small supplies ran out, they 
entered a village to beg. But when the people of any place 
heard that Liu Bei of Yuzhou was the man who needed help, 
they vied with each other in offering all that was required. 

came out and made a low obeisance. They asked his name 
and he gave it as Liu An, of a well known family of hunters. 
Hearing who the visitor was, the hunter wished to lay before 
him a dish of game, but though he sought for a long time, 
nothing could be found for the table. So Liu An came home, 
killed his wife and prepared a portion for his guest. 

While eating Liu Bei asked, “What flesh is it?” 
Liu An told him: “Wolf.” 

Liu Bei

daylight, just as Liu Bei was leaving, he went to the stables 
in the rear to get his horse and passing through the kitchen; 
he saw the dead body of a woman lying on the table. The 
flesh of one arm had been cut away. Quite startled he asked 
what this meant, and then he knew what he had eaten the 
night before. He was deeply sorry at this proof of his host’s 
regard and the tears rained down as he mounted his steed 
at the gate. 

“I wish I could go with you,” said Liu An, “but as my 

mother still lives, I cannot go so far from home.” 

Liu Bei thanked him and went his way. The party took 

the road by Liangcheng, and as they were going out, they 
saw not far off a thick cloud of dust. When the troop came 
nearer, they found the troops were of Cao Cao’s army, and 
with them they traveled to the main camp where they found 
Cao Cao himself. Cao Cao shed tears at the sad story of Liu 
Bei’s distress, the loss of the city, his brothers and wives 
and children. When Liu Bei told him of the hunter who had 
sacrificed his wife to feed them, Cao Cao sent the hunter a 
present of a hundred ounces of silver as a reward. 

The march then was continued to Jibei, where Xiahou 

Yuan welcomed them. They heard that his brother Xiahou 
Dun was still ill from the wound he had received in the eye. 
Cao Cao went to the sick man’s bedside to see him and had 
him removed to Xuchang for skilled treatment. 

Presently scouts, sent out particularly for tidings of Lu 

Bu, returned, saying, “Lu Bu has allied himself with the 
bandits in the east, and they are attacking Yanzhou.” 

At this Cao Cao dispatched Cao Ren with three thousand 

soldiers to take Xiaopei, while he, in conjunction with Liu 
Bei, moved against Lu Bu. 

They went east. As they reached the Mangdang Hills 

near Xiao Pass, they met the a band of thirty thousand 

Taishan 
Mountains 

brigands barring their 
road. The chieftains of 
the bandits were Sun 
Guan, Wu Dun, Yin 
Li, and Chang Xi who 
rode out with their 
spears set. However, 
Xu Chu plunged into 
the battle and easily 
beat them back and chased them right up to the pass. 

he had gone to start an expedition to save Xiaopei. He left 
the protection of Xuzhou to Chen Gui and set out with Chen 
Deng. 

As Chen Deng was starting, Chen Gui said to him, 

“Remember the words of Cao Cao, that the business of the 
east is in our hands. Now is our moment, for Lu Bu is about 
to suffer defeat.” 

“Father, I can look after the outside. But when Lu Bu 

returns beaten, you must arrange with Mi Zhu to keep him 
out of the city. I shall find a means of escape,” said Chen 
Deng. 

“His family is here, and he has many friends. How about 

them?” 

“I also have a scheme to settle them.” 
Then Chen Deng went to see Lu Bu, to whom he said, 

“Xuzhou is surrounded, and this city will be fiercely 
attacked. We ought to provide for possible retreat, and I 
advise storing grain and money in Xiapi. We could retreat 
there if the day went adversely. Why not see about this in 
good time?” 

and little ones thither,” said Lu Bu. 

and with them was sent much grain and treasures and 
coins. 

And then the soldiers marched to the relief of the pass. 

About half way there Chen Deng said, “Let me go first 
to reconnoiter so that you, my lord, may advance with 
confidence.” 

Thus Chen Deng parted company with his chief and 

preceded him to the pass where he was received by Chen 
Gong. 

do not advance. He is going to inquire into it.” 

“The enemy is in great force, and we cannot be too 

careful,” said Chen Gong. “We are holding the pass, and 
you should persuade our master to take steps to guard 
Xiaopei.” 

Chen Deng said, “Your words are true.” 
That evening he went up to the heights from which he 

could see Cao Cao’s army, which was quite close to the 
pass. Then he wrote three notes, tied them to arrows, and 
shot them into Cao Cao’s camp. 

Next day he left and hastened back to Lu Bu and said, 

“Those bandits are about to give up the pass to the enemy, 
but I have left Chen Gong to hold it. You had better make 
an attack tonight and hold him.” 

“Had it not been for you, the pass would have been lost,” 

said Lu Bu. 

Then he sent Chen Deng back to arrange a fire signal 

with Chen Gong for simultaneous action. 

“Cao Cao’s troops have found a secret way through the 
pass, and I fear Xuzhou is already lost. You ought to go 
back at once.” 

At this the pass was abandoned, and Chen Gong began 

to 
retreat. 
Then 

Chen Deng gave the 
prearranged signal. 

Lu Bu saw the 

fire and advanced 
in the darkness to 
the relief of the 
pass. Presently he 
met Chen Gong’s 
army; and as neither 
recognized the other 
in the darkness, a fierce battle ensued. Nor was the trick 
discovered till daylight came. 

While these things were going on, Cao Cao had noted 

the signal and advanced as fast as possible. The bandits, 
who alone remained to hold the pass, were easily driven out 
and scattered in all directions. 

When daylight came and the trick was discovered, Lu 

Bu and Chen Gong set off together for Xuzhou. But when 
they arrived and summoned the gate, instead of opening 
the doors, the guards on the wall saluted them with a thick 
flight of arrows. 

and shouted, “You stole our master’s city, and now we 
are going to give it back to him. You will not enter here 
again!” 

“Where is Chen Gui?” cried Lu Bu, angrily. 
“We have slain him!” was the reply. 
“Where is Chen Deng?” said Lu Bu turning to Chen 

Gong. 

“Do you still hold to your delusion, General, that you ask 

where this specious rogue is?” 

Lu Bu bade them search through all the ranks, but 

Chen Deng was not to be found. Then they decided to go 
to Xiaopei. But ere they had got half way there, suddenly 
appeared the troops under the command of Gao Shun and 
Zhang Liao. 

They said, “Chen Deng came to us saying you, General, 

was surrounded and wanted help, so we came at once.” 

“Another trick of that false rogue!” said Lu Bu. “Surely 

he shall die for this.” 

They went with all 

speed to Xiaopei, only 
to see as they drew 
near, the ensigns of the 
enemy displayed all 
along the walls, for the 
city had been taken by 
Cao Ren. 

While Lu Bu stood 

at the foot of the 
rampart reviling the 
traitor, 
Chen 
Deng 

himself appeared on 
the wall and pointing 
to Lu Bu cried, “Did 
Cao Ren

you think that I, a minister of the dynasty, would serve a 
rebel like you?” 

Lu Bu in his wrath was about to make a desperate attack, 

but suddenly a great noise was heard, and an army came 
up behind him. It was led by no other than Zhang Fei. Gao 
Shun went to engage him, but he had no chance of success. 
Lu Bu then joined in the fray. Then another army appeared, 
and the leader this time was Cao Cao himself, and his army 
rushed to the attack. Seeing that he had no hope of victory, 
Lu Bu went away toward the east, with Cao Cao in pursuit. 
Lu Bu’s army marched till they were worn out. 

sword ready to strike, Guan Yu called out, “Do not flee, O 
Lu Bu! Guan Yu is waiting for you.” 

what was happening. And soon Zhang Fei came up once 
more. By desperate efforts Lu Bu and his troops cut an alley 
through the press and got free. After this they started for 
Xiapi as fast as they could travel, and Hou Cheng helped to 
keep the pursuers at bay and welcomed them into the city. 

So the two brothers, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, were 

together again after their separation. Both shed tears of 

joy as they told each 
other what they had 
seen and suffered. 

“I was on the 

Haizhou Road when 
I heard of you,” said 
Guan Yu. “I lost no 
time in starting.” 

“And 
I 
had 

been 
camped 
in 

the Mangdang Hills for a long time. It is happiness to be 
together again.” 

their elder brother, and made their salutations with tears. 
In Liu Bei’s heart, sadness and joy intermingled. Next they 
were presented to Cao Cao, and with him they went into the 
captured Xuzhou City. 

of the family. And Chen Gui and Chen Deng came to present 
their salutations. A grand banquet was prepared for the 
officers at which Cao Cao presided as host, and Chen Gui 
and Liu Bei occupied the seats of honor to his right and left. 
At the close of the banquet, Cao Cao paid the two Chens the 
highest compliments on their success and rewarded them 
with the revenues of ten counties beside giving the son the 
title of General Who Quells the Waves. 

began to scheme for the taking of Xiapi, the sole place now 
left to Lu Bu, where he had taken refuge. 

Cheng Yu said the course was inadvisable. 
“If Lu Bu be pressed too hard, he may get clear by a 

desperate effort and throw himself into the arms of our 
especial enemy, Yuan Shu. These two as allies would be 
difficult to overcome. Rather send a capable man to guard 

the South of River Huai, one able to secure you against 
Lu Bu on one hand and to hold Yuan Shu on the other. 
Moreover the bandits are in Huashang Mountains and still 
our enemies. They must be watched.” 

Cao Cao replied, “I can keep the whole of Huashang 

Mountains, and I will request Liu Bei to take the south.” 

“Could I dare withstand your command?” said Liu Bei. 
So forthwith Liu Bei, leaving Mi Zhu and Jian Yong at 

Xuzhou, went south, taking in his train Guan Yu, Zhang 
Fei, and Sun Qian. And Cao Cao led his army to Xiapi. 

of grain, and he had the protection of River Si, so he sat 
quiet, satisfied that he could maintain his defense. So he 
allowed Cao Cao’s army to approach without molestation. 

“You ought to attack Cao Cao’s army as they come up, 

before they have time to make camps and defenses. They 
will only have a fatigued army to oppose to your fresh 
troops, and you will certainly defeat them.” 

So said Chen Gong, but Lu Bu replied, “I have suffered 

too many defeats lately to take any risk. Wait till they 
actually attack, and you will see them floating away on the 
waters.” 

So Lu Bu neglected the confidant’s advice and waited 

till the enemy had settled into their camp. This done, the 
attackers advanced against the city. From the foot of the 
wall, Cao Cao called to Lu Bu to listen while he spoke. Lu 
Bu ascended to the wall where he stood. 

family and that of Yuan Shu were likely to be united by 
marriage, I sent an army against you. Yuan Shu was guilty 
of treason, while you had to your credit on the destruction 
of Dong Zhuo. For what reason have you sacrificed all your 
merits to throw in your lot with a rebel? It will be over 
late to regret when this city shall have fallen. But if you 

surrender and help me to support the ruling house, you shall 
not lose your rank.” 

Lu Bu replied, “If 

the Prime Minister 
will retire, we may 
be able to discuss the 
matter.” 

But Chen Gong, 

standing 
near 
his 

master, began to rail 
at Cao Cao for a rebel 
and shot an arrow that struck his plumed helmet. 

“My 
oath, 
but 

I will slay you at 
least!” cried Cao Cao, 
pointing his finger at 
Chen Gong. 

Then the attack on 

the walls began. 

“They have come 

from far and cannot 
maintain 
this 
for 

long,” said Chen Gong. “General, go out with your horse 
and foot and take up a position outside, leaving me to 
maintain the defense with the remainder of our troops. If he 
engages you, I will come out and strike at his rear ranks; if 
he attacks the city, you can come to our aid. In ten days their 
stores will fail, and we can beat them off. This will place 
them between the ox-horns.” 

“The advice seems good,” said Lu Bu. 
Lu Bu went back to his palace and prepared his weapons. 

As it was the depth of winter, he made his army take plenty 
of wadded clothing to keep them warm. Lady Yan, his wife, 
heard of it and came to ask whither he was going. He told 

her of Chen Gong’s plan. 

abandoning your wife and little ones, and going with a 
paltry force. Should any untoward event happen, will your 
handmaid and her lord ever meet again?” 

Lu Bu hesitated and for three days made no move. 
Then Chen Gong came to see him again and said, “The 

enemy are all round the city; and unless you go out soon, 
you will be quite hemmed in.” 

“I am thinking it would be better to maintain a stubborn 

defense,” said Lu Bu. 

“Our enemies are short of food and have sent for supplies 

to Xuchang. These will soon arrive, and you should go out 
with some veterans and intercept the convoy. That loss 
would be a heavy blow.” 

Lu Bu agreed and went in to tell his wife the new plan. 
She wept saying, “If you go, do you think Chen Gong 

and others equal to the defense of the city? Should anything 
go wrong, you would be very sorry. You abandoned me at 
Changan, and it was only through the fortunate kindness of 
Pang Shu that I was hidden from our enemies and rejoined 
you. Who would have thought you would leave me again? 
But go, go your way as far as you wish, and do not mind 
your wife.” 

And she wept bitterly. 
Lu Bu very sadly went to take leave of Diao Chan who 

said, “You are my lord and my life. You must not be careless 
and ride out alone.” 

“You need not fear. With my mighty trident halberd and 

Red Hare, who dare come near me?” 

He went out. But when he met Chen Gong, he said, 

“That story about supplies for Cao Cao is all false, one of 
his many ruses. I am not going to stir.” 

Chen Gong sighed. He felt all was lost. 

said he. 

Thereupon Lu Bu remained in his own quarters with his 

ladies, drinking freely to dissipate his sorrows. 

proposed, “Yuan Shu in the South of River Huai is very 
powerful. Why not write to him to renew the marriage 
alliance? Yuan Shu can hardly refuse to rescue the affianced 
bride of his son.” 

So Lu Bu wrote and bade these two take the letter. 
Xu Si said, “You ought to send a strong escort with us to 

force a way through.” 

So Lu Bu told off one thousand troops and two of his 

generals, Zhang Liao and He Meng, to conduct his messenger 
beyond the pass. They started that same night at the second 
watch, Zhang Liao leading and He Meng bringing up the 
rear. They got out of the city, crept past Liu Bei’s camp, 
and got beyond the danger zone. Then half the escort went 
on, and Zhang Liao led the remainder back toward the city. 
At the pass he found Guan Yu waiting. However, at that 
moment Gao Shun came to his help, and they all returned 
and reentered the gates. 

The two messengers presently reached Shouchun, saw 

Yuan Shu, and presented the letter. 

messenger and repudiated the marriage. Now he sends to 
ask for it.” 

“It is all due to the vile plans of that monster Cao Cao. 

If pray you, Illustrious Sir, consider it carefully,” replied 
Xu Si. 

“But if your master was not hemmed in by his enemy 

and in imminent danger, he would never have thought of 
renewing this proposal of marriage.” 

The messengers said, “You may decide not to help him, 

but the teeth are cold when the lips are gone. It will not 
make for your happiness and comfort.” 

send soldiers after the girl has arrived here.” 

headed back to Xiapi. 

When the party reached Liu Bei’s camp, Xu Si decided, 

“We must wait the night falls, and Wang Kai and I will 
try to get through in the darkness. The escort of He Meng 
remaining behind to protect our rear.” 

across without discovery. But the escort found themselves 
faced by Zhang Fei. 
He Meng tried to fight 
but was captured in 
the very first bout, 
and the five hundred 
troops of his half 
company were either 
killed or they fled. 

The prisoner was 

taken to Liu Bei, who 
forwarded him to the main camp. There he told the story of 
the marriage and the scheme to save the city. Cao Cao was 
angry and ordered the execution of He Meng at the main 
gate. 

greatest diligence with threats of rigorous punishment of 
the officers of any corps that permitted any communication 
between the besieged and the outer world. 

Every soldier felt mightily afraid. 
Liu Bei returned to camp and cautioned his brothers, 

saying, “We are in the most important place with regard to 
the South of River Huai, and you must be very careful not 

to allow any breach of this command.” 

just captured one of the enemy’s leaders, and there is no 
word of praise or reward for us: Nothing but new orders and 
threats. What do you make of that?” 

“You are wrong to complain,” said Liu Bei. “These are 

orders of the Commander-in-Chief, and what would happen 
were there no orders? Do not disobey them, brother.” 

Xu Si and Wang Kai had got back to Lu Bu and told him 
what Yuan Shu had said, that if the girl came the soldiers 
should go. 

“But how can she be sent?” said Lu Bu. 
Xu Si said, “That is the difficulty. He Meng’s capture 

means that Cao Cao knows the whole plan of getting help 
from the South of River Huai. I do not see how anyone but 
you yourself could hope to get through the close siege.” 

“Suppose we tried, today?” said Lu Bu. 
“This is an ill-omened day. You must not try today. 

Tomorrow is a very lucky day, especially in the evening, 
for any military action.” 

Then Lu Bu ordered Zhang Liao and Gao Shun, “Get 

ready three thousand troops for the venture, and prepare a 
light carriage. I will lead the first seventy miles, thence you 
can escort the bride-elect the remainder of the way to her 
new home.” 

Next evening toward the second watch, Lu Bu wrapped 

up his daughter in soft wadded garments, bound her about 
with a mailed coat, and took her on his back. Then with his 
mighty trident halberd in hand, he mounted Red Hare and 
rode at the head of the cavalcade out of the city gate. Zhang 
Liao and Gao Shun followed. 

the way. 

“Stop!” they shouted. 
Lu Bu had no desire to fight; all he wished was to get 

through, so he made for a side road. Liu Bei came in pursuit 
and the two parties engaged. Brave as he might be, Lu Bu 
was almost helpless now that he was hampered by a girl on 
his shoulders, whom he was desperately anxious to preserve 
from hurt. Beside other parties came up all shouting and 
attacking, and he had no alternative but to give up his project 
and return into the city of Xiapi. He reached his palace very 
sad at heart. The besiegers returned to camp well pleased 
that no one had got beyond their lines. 

Lu 
Bu 
found 

consolation 
in 
the 

wine cup. The siege 
had gone on for two 
months, and still the 
city stood. Then they 
heard 
that 
Zhang 

Yang, Governor of 
Henei, 
had 
been 

inclined to come to the 

help of Lu Bu. But one of his subordinates, Yang Chou, had 
assassinated him and was bringing his head as an offering 
to Cao Cao, when Yang Chou had also been slain by Kui 
Gu, one of the Governor’s adherents. Kui Gu had then led 
the force to Daicheng. 

In the camp of the besiegers, there now arose much 

murmuring. Cao Cao sent Shi Huan to intercept and kill 
Kui Gu. 

Then he called a counsel, saying, “Though Zhang 

Yang, who meant to hurt us, is happily no more, yet we are 
threatened on the north by Yuan Shao, and on the west Liu 
Biao and Zhang Xiu are a menace. Here we meet with no 

success against the city of Xiapi. We are for leaving Lu Bu 
to his fate and returning home. What do you think?” 

Among them Xun You fought against the idea, saying, 

“You must not act like this. Lu Bu has lost much, and his 
spirit is broken. The spirit of the leader expresses that of his 
army; and when the leader fails, his soldiers do not fight. 
Chen Gong is clever, but nothing is done. Lu Bu broken, 
Chen Gong without decision, it only needs a sharp attack, 
and we shall succeed.” 

“I have a plan to propose,” said Guo Jia, “a plan to 

overcome the city at once. It is better than two hundred 
thousand troops.” 

River Yi,” said Xun Yu. 

“That is it,” said Guo Jia, smiling. 
Cao Cao accepted the suggestion with joy and set his 

troops to cut the banks of River Yi and River Si, and moved 
his army to the high ground whence they watched the 
drowning out of Xiapi. Only the east gate remained clear 
of water. 

The besieged soldiers hastened to their leader. 
Lu Bu said, “Why should I fear? My good horse can go 

as well through the water as over the land.” 

And he again returned to the wine cup for consolation, 

drinking deeply with his wife and concubine. 

The 
continual 

drinking bouts told at 
last, and Lu Bu began 
to look dissipated. 
Seeing himself in a 
mirror one day, he was 
startled at the change 
and said to himself, 
“I am injuring myself 

with wine. No more from this day forward!” 

He then issued an order that no one should drink wine 

under penalty of death. 

Now one of his generals, Hou Cheng, lost fifteen horses, 

stolen by one of his subordinates, Hou Cao, who intended 
to resell them to Liu Bei. Hou Cheng found out where the 
horses were, went out after them, and recovered them after 
killing Hou Cao. And Hou Cheng’s colleagues congratulated 
him on his success. To celebrate the occasion, Hou Cheng 
brewed a few barrels of wine to be drunk at the feast. 

Cheng sent the bottles of wine to Lu Bu’s palace with a 
petition explaining, “By your virtue of warlike renown, I 
have recovered my horses; and as my comrades come with 
their congratulations, I brew some bottles of wine, first to 
offer Your Lordship and second to ask your permission to 
have a little wine at the feast.” 

Lu Bu took it very angrily, saying, “When I have 

forbidden all wine, you brew some and begin to give feasts: 
You are simply defying me!” 

However, Song Xian, Wei Xu, 
and other officers came in and 
interceded, and after a time Lu 
Bu softened. 

“You ought to lose your head 

for this disobedience. But for 
the sake of your colleagues, the 
punishment shall be reduced to a 
hundred strokes.” 

They tried to beg him off this, 

but only succeeded in reducing 
the number of blows to one half. 

Wei Xu

was 
permitted 
to 

return 
home, 
his 

colleagues came sadly 
to console him. 

“Had it not been 

for you, I should have 
been put to death,” 
said Hou Cheng. 

Song Xian replied, 

“All Lu Bu cares for 

is his family. There is no pity for anyone else. We are no 
more than the weeds by the roadside.” 

Wei Xu said, “The city is besieged; the water is drowning 

us out. There will not be much more of this, for we may die 
any day.” 

“He is a beast, with neither a 

sense of humanity nor of right. 
Let us leave him,” said Song 
Xian. 

“He is not worth fighting for. 

The best we could do would be 
to seize him and hand him over 
to Cao Cao,” said Wei Xu. 

“I was punished because I got 

my horses back again, yet all he 
trusts in is his own Red Hare. If 
you two will betray the gate and seize Lu Bu, I will steal the 
horse and go out to Cao Cao’s camp.” 

night Hou Cheng sneaked into the stables and got Red Hare 
away. He hastened to the east gate which was opened to let 
him through. The guard made a pretense of pursuing him 
but only a pretense. 

Hou Cheng reached the besiegers’ camp, presented the 

Song Xian

horse and told Cao Cao what had been arranged. They 
would show a white flag and open the gates to his army. 
Hearing this Cao Cao had a few notifications written out, 
which were attached to arrows and shot over the walls. This 
is one of them: 

“Regent Marshal Cao Cao has received a command from 

the Emperor to destroy Lu Bu. Those who interfere with 
the operations of his grand army, whatever their rank, shall 
be put to death in the gate on the day that the city shall be 
captured. Should anyone capture Lu Bu or bring his head, 
he shall be well rewarded. Let all take note of this.” 

Next day at daylight a tremendous hubbub was heard 

without the city and Lu 
Bu, halberd in hand, 
hasted to the wall to see 
what it meant. As he 
went from gate to gate 
inspecting the defenses 
and guards, he censured 
Wei Xu for letting Hou 
Cheng escape and get 
away with his horse. Lu Bu threatened to punish Wei Xu. 
But just then the besiegers began a fierce attack as the white 
flag had just appeared, and Lu Bu had to turn all his energies 
to defense. The assault lasted till noon, when the attacking 

force drew off for a time. 

Lu Bu was taking a 

rest in the tower and fell 
asleep in his chair. Song 
Xian sent away Lu Bu’s 
attendants. When they 
had gone, he stole Lu 
Bu’s weapon, the trident 
halberd 
in 
which 
he 

trusted. Then Song 
Xian and Wei Xu fell 
upon Lu Bu together 
and before he was 
well 
awake 
had 

bound him with cords, 
trussing him so that 
he could not move. 
Lu Bu shouted for 
his guards, but they 
were driven off by the 
two traitor generals 
and could not come 
near. Then a white 
flag was shown, and 
the besiegers again 
approached the city. 

The traitors shouted out, “Lu Bu has been captured 

alive!” 

down the famous halberd. The gates were flung open, and 
the enemy entered the city. Gao Shun and Zhang Liao, who 

were at the opposite gate, were surrounded and cut off by 
the water and helpless. They were captured. Chen Gong 
made a dash to the south gate but was also taken by Xu 
Huang. Presently Cao Cao entered and at once gave orders 
to turn the streams back into their usual courses. He put out 
proclamations to sooth the people. 

Cao Cao and Liu Bei, with Guan Yu and Zhang Fei 

behind, seated themselves side by side in the White Gate 
Tower. The captives were brought before them. Lu Bu 
looked a pitiable object. Although a very tall man, he was 
tied up in a veritable ball. 

“The bonds are very tight,” cried he, “I beseech you to 

loosen them!” 

“Bindings a tiger must binding tight, of course,” replied 

Cao Cao. 

Seeing Hou Cheng, Song Xian, and Wei Xu standing 

there looking pleased at their success, Lu Bu said, “I treated 
you all well enough: How could you turn against me?” 

Said Song Xian, “You listened to the words of your 

women, but rejected the advice of your generals. Was not 
that mean?” 

Lu Bu was silent. Then Gao Shun was brought forward. 
“What have you to say?” asked Cao Cao. 
Gao Shun sulkily held his tongue. He was ordered out to 

execution. 

Next Chen Gong was led in. 
“I hope you have been well since we last saw each other, 

Chen Gong?” said Cao Cao. 

“Your ways were crooked, and so I left you,” said Chen 

Gong. 

“You say I was crooked; and what of your serving Lu 

Bu?” 

and wickedness.” 

your position today?” 

Turning toward Lu Bu, Chen Gong said, “This man 

would not follow my advice. Had he done so, he would not 
now be a captive.” 

“What think you 

ought to be done about 
this day’s work?” said 
Cao Cao. 

“There is death for 

me today, and that is 
the end!” said Chen 
Gong undauntedly. 

“Very well for you; 

but what of your mother and wife and children?” 

“It is said that one who rules with due regard to filial 

piety does not harm a person’s family; one who would show 
benevolence does not cut off the sacrifices at a person’s 
tomb. My mother and wife and children are in your hands. 
But since I am your prisoner, I pray you slay me quickly 
and not to try to harrow my feelings.” 

Gong turned and walked away, repulsing the attendants who 
would stop him. Cao Cao rose from his place and walked 
with Chen Gong, the tears falling from his eyes. Chen Gong 
never looked at him. 

Turning to his guards Cao Cao said, “Let his mother and 

family be taken to Xuchang and looked after immediately. 
Any postponement will be punished!” 

The condemned man heard him but uttered no word. He 

stretched out his neck for the blow. Tears sprang to the eyes 
of all present. His remains were honorably coffined and 
buried in Xuchang. 

A poem pitying Chen Gong’s fate says: 
Chen Gong

Neither hope of life nor fear of death moved him.
How brave was he, a hero indeed!
But his lord heeded not his words,
Wherefore in vain possessed he great talents.
Nevertheless, in that he stood by his master.
To parting with wife and mother,
He merits our pity and profound respect.
Who would resemble Chen Gong
That day he died at the White Gate Tower?

While Cao Cao sadly escorted Chen Gong on the way to 

death, Lu Bu appealed to Liu Bei, “Noble Sir, you sit there 
an honored guest while poor I lie bound at your feet. Will 
you not utter one word to alleviate my lot?” 

Liu Bei nodded. 
As Cao Cao returned to his place, Lu Bu called out, “Your 

only trouble, Illustrious Sir, is myself, and I am on your side 
now. You take the lead, I will help you, and together the 
world is at our feet.” 

“What do you think?” said Cao Cao turning to Liu Bei. 
“You are willing to forget the episodes of Ding Yuan and 

Dong Zhuo?” 

“Truly the lout is not to be trusted!” said Lu Bu, looking 

at Liu Bei. 

“Strangle and expose!” ordered Cao Cao. 
As he was led away, Lu Bu turned once more to Liu 

Bei, “You long-eared lout, you forget now the service I 
rendered you that day at my camp gate, when my arrow hit 
the mark!” 

death, and why are you scared at it?” 

Everyone turned to look: The guards were hustling 

Zhang Liao to the place of judgment. Cao Cao ordered Lu 
Bu’s execution. 

A poet has written upon the death of Lu Bu: 

The flood spreads wide, the city drowns,
Its lord is captive. Nought avails
His courser’s speed or halberd’s thrust.
The tiger erstwhile fierce, now whines
For mercy. Cao Cao had meted him
Full well, a falcon flown at will
And hungry kept. Poor fool! He let
Chen Gong’s advice be overborne
By harem tattle; vainly now
He rails against the Long-Ears’ faith.

And another poem says: 

Round is the hungry tiger, eater of men, for whom is no pity,
Since the blood of his victims is fresh and not yet dry.
Liu Bei spoke no word in favor of Lu Bu,
To whom even a father’s life was not sacred.

 
It was recorded earlier that the executioners were hustling 

Zhang Liao forward. 

Pointing to him from above, Cao Cao said, “He has a 

familiar face.” 

“You were not 

likely to forget me: 
You saw me before 
in 
Puyang,” 
said 

Zhang Liao. 

“O, 
so 
you 

remember me, eh?” 

“Yes; more is the 

pity.” 

“Pity for what?” 
“That the fire that day was not fierce enough to burn you 

up, rebel that you are.” 

Cao Cao began to get angry. 
“How dare you insult me?” cried he and lifted his sword 

to kill the bold speaker. 

The undaunted Zhang Liao never changed color, but 

stretched out his neck for the blow. Then a man behind Cao 
Cao caught his arm, and in front of him another dropped on 
his knees, saying, “O Prime Minister, I pray thee stay thy 
hand!” 

Lu Bu whining was not spared,
Railing Zhang Liao far better fared.

Who was it that saved Zhang Liao? The next chapter will 

show.

Chapter 20 
Cao Cao Organizes A Hunting Expedition In Xutian;
Dong Cheng Receives A Secret Command In The 

Palace. 

The last chapter 

said that Cao Cao was 
checked in his angry 
attack upon Zhang 
Liao. They were Liu 
Bei who held his arm 
and Guan Yu who 
knelt before him. 

“A 
man 
as 

generous-hearted as 
he is should be saved,” said Liu Bei. 

Guan Yu said, “I know him well as loyal and righteous. I 

will vouch for him 
with my own life!” 

Cao Cao threw 

aside his sword and 
smiled. 

“I also know 

Zhang Liao to be 
loyal and good. 
I was just testing 
him,” said he. 

Cao Cao loosed 

the 
prisoner’s 

bonds with his own 
hands, had a change 
of dress brought in, 
and clothed him 
therewith. Then he 
Zhang Liao

was led to a seat of honor. This kindly treatment sank deep 
into Zhang Liao’s heart, and he hastened to declare formally 
that he yielded. And then he was given the rank of Imperial 
Commander and the title of Lordship. 

Zhang Liao was sent on 

a mission to win over the 
bandit leader Zang Ba, who 
hearing what had happened, 
came forthwith and gave 
in his submission. He was 
graciously received, and 
his former colleagues---
Sun Guan, Wu Dun, and 
Yin Li---also yielded, with 
the exception of Chang Xi, 
who remained obdurate. 
All these former enemies 
who came over were kindly 
treated and given posts of responsibility wherein they might 
prove the reality of their conversion. Lu Bu’s family were 
sent to the capital. 

After the soldiers 

had been rewarded 
with feasting, the 
camp was broken 
up and the army 
moved 
away 
to 

Xuchang. Passing 
through 
Xuzhou 

the people lined the 
roads and burned 

incense in honor of the victors. They also petitioned that 
Liu Bei should be their protector. 

Zang Ba

You must wait till he has been received in audience and 
obtained his reward. After that he shall be sent here.” 

The people bowed low to the ground to express their 

thanks. Che Zhou, General of the Flying Cavalry, was given 
command of Xuzhou for the moment. 

After the army had arrived at the capital, rewards were 

granted to all the officers who had been in the expedition. 
Liu Bei was retained in the capital, lodging in an annex to 
the Prime Minister’s palace. 

Next day a court was held, and Cao Cao memorialized 

the services of Liu Bei who was presented to Emperor Xian. 
Dressed in court robes, Liu Bei bowed at the lower end of 
the audience arena. The Emperor called him to the Hall and 
asked his ancestry. 

Liu Bei replied, “Thy servant is the son of Liu Hong, 

grandson of Liu Xiong, who was a direct descendant of 
Prince Sheng of Zhongshan, who was the son of His Majesty 
the Emperor Jing1.” 

Genealogies, and therefrom a secretary read: 

“Liu Jing the Filial Emperor begot fourteen sons of 

whom the seventh was Liu Sheng, Prince of Zhongshan. 
Sheng begot Liu Zhen, Lord of Luchang. Zhen begot Liu 
Ang, Lord of Pei. Ang begot Liu Lu, Lord of Zhang. Lu 
begot Liu Lian, Lord of Yishui. Lian begot Liu Ying, Lord 
of Qinyang. Ying begot Liu Jian, Lord of Anguo. Jian 
begot Liu Ai, Lord of Guangling. Ai begot Liu Xia, Lord of 
Jiaoshui. Xia begot Liu Shu, Lord of Zuyi. Shu begot Liu 
Yi, Lord of Qiyang. Yi begot Liu Bi, Lord of Yuanze. Bi 
begot Liu Da, Lord of Yingchuan. Da begot Liu Buyi, Lord 
of Fengling. Buyi begot Liu Hui, Lord of Jichuan. Hui begot 
Liu Xiong, Governor of Zhuo. Xiong begot Liu Hong, who 
held no office or rank; and Liu Bei is his son.” 

1Reigned BC 157-141. 

The Emperor compared this with the registers of the 

Imperial House and found by them that Liu Bei was his 
uncle by descent. The Emperor seemed greatly pleased and 
requested Liu Bei to go into one of the side chambers where 
he might perform the ceremonial obeisance prescribed for 
a nephew to his uncle. In his heart he rejoiced to have this 
heroic warrior uncle as a powerful supporter against Cao 
Cao who really held all the power in his own hands. The 
Emperor knew himself to be a mere puppet. He conferred 
upon his uncle the rank of General of the Left Army and the 
title of Lord of Yicheng. 

When the banquet was concluded, Liu Bei thanked the 

Emperor and went out of the Palace. And from this time he 
was very generally styled the “Imperial Uncle.” 

When Cao Cao returned to his palace, Xun Yu and his 

fellow advisers went in to see him. 

Xun Yu said, “It is no advantage to you, Illustrious Sir, 

that the Emperor recognizes Liu Bei as an uncle.” 

“Liu Bei may be recognized as uncle, but he is under 

my orders since I control the decrees of the Throne. He will 
be all the more ready to obey. Beside I will keep him here 
under the pretense of having him near his sovereign, and 
he will be entirely in my hands. I have nothing to fear. The 
man I fear is Yang Biao, who is a relative of the two Yuan 
brothers. Should Yang Biao conspire with them, he is an 
enemy within and might do much harm. He will have to be 
removed.” 

Hence Cao Cao sent a secret emissary to say that Imperial 

Guardian Yang Biao was intriguing with Yuan Shu, and on 
this charge Yang Biao was arrested and imprisoned. And his 
death would have been compassed had his enemy dared. 

at the capital, and he remonstrated with Cao Cao, saying, 
“Yang Biao comes from a family famed for virtue for at 

Cao Cao

least four generations. You cannot trump up so foolish a 
charge as that against him.” 

“It is the wish of His Majesty!” retorted Cao Cao. 
“If the child Emperor Cheng of Zhou Dynasty had put 

Duke Chao to death, could the people have believed Duke 
Zhou, the Regent Marshal, had nothing to do with it?” 

So Cao Cao had to relinquish the attempt, but he took 

away Yang Biao’s offices and banished him to his family 
estate in the country. 

Court Counselor Zhao Yan, an opponent of the Prime 

Minister, sent up a memorial impeaching Cao Cao for 
having removed a minister of state from office without a 
decree. Cao Cao’s reply to this was the arrest of Zhao Yan 
and his execution, a bold stroke which terrified the bulk of 
officers and reduced them to silence. 

position. He said, “Illustrious Sir, your prestige grows daily. 
Why not seize the opportunity to take the position of Chief 
of the Feudatory Princes?” 

“There are still too many supporters of the court,” was 

the reply. “I must be careful. I am going to propose a royal 
hunt to try to find out the best line to follow.” 

fleet horses, famous falcons, and pedigree hounds, and 
prepared bows and arrows in readiness. They mustered a 
strong force of guards outside the city. 

When the Prime Minister proposed the hunting 

expedition, the Emperor said he feared it was an improper 
thing to do. 

expeditions yearly at each of the four seasons in order to 
show their strength. They were called Sou, Miao, Xien, and 
Shou, in the order of spring, summer, autumn, and winter. 
Now that the whole country is in confusion, it would be 

wise to inaugurate a hunt in order to train the army. I am 
sure Your Majesty will approve.” 

So the Emperor with the full paraphernalia for an imperial 

hunt joined the expedition. He rode a saddled horse, carried 
an inlaid bow, and his quiver was filled with gold-tipped 
arrows. His chariot followed behind. Liu Bei and his brothers 
were in the imperial train, each with his bow and quiver. 
Each party member wore a breastplate under the outer robe 
and held his especial weapon, while their escort followed 
them. Cao Cao rode a dun horse called “Flying-Lightning,” 
and the army was one hundred thousand strong. 

out as guards round the hunting arena which extended over 
some one hundred square miles. Cao Cao rode even with 
the Emperor, the horses’ heads alternating in the lead. The 
imperial attendants immediately following were all in Cao 
Cao’s confidence. The other officers, civil and military, 
lagged behind, for they dared not press forward into the 
midst of Cao Cao’s partisans. 

One day the Emperor was riding toward the hunting 

grounds and noticed his newly found uncle respectfully 
standing by the roadside. 

“I should like to see my uncle display his hunting skill,” 

said the Emperor. 

Liu Bei mounted 

his steed at once. Just 
then a hare started 
from its form. Liu 
Bei shot and hit it 
with the first arrow. 

The 
Emperor, 

much struck by this 
display, rode away 
over a slope. Suddenly a deer broke out of the thicket. He 

shot three arrows at 
it but all missed. 

“You try,” said 

the Emperor turning 
to Cao Cao. 

“Lend me Your 

Majesty’s 
bow,” 

Cao Cao replied. 

Taking the inlaid 

bow and the golden-
tipped arrows, Cao 
Cao pulled the bow and hit the deer in the shoulder at the 

first shot. It fell in 
the grass and could 
not run. 

Now the crowd 

of officers seeing 
the 
golden-barbed 

arrow sticking in the 
wound concluded at 
once that the shot 
was the Emperor’s, 
so they rushed up 

and shouted “Wan shui! O King! Live forever!” 

Cao Cao rode 

out pushing past 
the Emperor and 
acknowledged 
the 

congratulations. 

They all turned 

pale. Guan Yu, who 
was 
behind 
Liu 

Bei, was especially 
angry. The silkworm 

eyebrows stood up fiercely, and the red phoenix eyes glared 
as, sword in hand, he rode hastily forth to cut down the 
audacious Prime Minister for his impertinence. 

However, Liu Bei hastily waved him back and shot at 

him a meaning glance so that Guan Yu stopped and made 
no further move. 

Liu Bei bowing toward Cao Cao said, “Most sincere 

felicitations! A truly supernatural shot, such as few have 
achieved!” 

“It is only the enormous good fortune of the Son of 

Heaven!” said Cao Cao with a smile. 

Then he turned his steed and felicitated the Emperor. But 

he did not return the bow; he hung it over his own shoulder 
instead. 

The hunt finished with banqueting; and when the 

entertainments were over, they returned to the capital, all 
glad of some repose after the expedition. 

of decorum. 

One day Guan Yu said to Liu Bei, “Brother, why did 

you prevent me from killing that rebel and so ridding the 
world of a scoundrel? He insults the Emperor and ignores 
everybody else.” 

“When you throw stones at a rat, beware of the vase,” 

quoted Liu Bei. “Cao Cao was only a horse’s head away 
from Our Lord, and in the midst of a crowd of his partisans. 
In that momentary burst of anger, if you had struck and 
failed, and harm had come to the Emperor, what an awful 
crime would have been laid to us!” 

“If we do not rid the world of him today, a worse evil 

will come of it,” said Guan Yu. 

“But be discreet, my brother. Such matters cannot be 

lightly discussed.” 

The Emperor sadly returned to his palace. With tears in 

his eyes, he related what had occurred in the hunt to his 
consort, Empress Fu. 

“Alas for me!” said he. “From the first days of my 

accession, one vicious minister has succeeded another. I was 
the victim of Dong Zhuo’s evil machinations. Then followed 
the rebellion of Li Jue and Guo Si. You and I had to bear 
sorrows such as no others have borne. Then came this Cao 
Cao as one who would maintain the imperial dignity, but he 
has seized upon all real authority and does as he wishes. He 
works continually for his own glorification, and I never see 
him but my back pricks. These last few days in the hunting 
field, he went in front of me and acknowledged the cheers 
of the crowd. He is so extremely rude that I feel sure he has 
sinister designs against me. Alas, my wife, we know not 
when our end may come!” 

“In a whole court full of nobles, who have eaten the 

bread of Han, is there not one who will save his country?” 
said she. 

Thus spoke the Empress, and at the same moment there 

stepped in a man who said, “Grieve not, O Imperial Pair! I 
can find a savior for the country.” 

Wan. 

“Have you heard of Cao Cao’s wanton and perverse 

behavior?” said the Emperor, drying his eyes. 

“You mean the deer shooting? Who did not see that, 

indeed? But the whole court is full of his clan or his creatures. 
With the exception of the relatives of your Consort, there is 
not one loyal enough to deal with a rebel. I have no authority 
and can do nothing, but there is General Dong Cheng, the 
State Uncle, who could do it.” 

I know he has had much experience of state troubles.” 

Fu Wan replied, “Everyone of your attendants is a 

partisan of Cao Cao, and this sort of thing must be kept 
most profoundly secret or the consequence will be most 
serious.” 

“Then what can be done?” said the Emperor. 
“The only plan I can think of is to send gifts of a robe and 

a jade girdle to Dong Cheng, and in the lining of the girdle 
hide a secret edict authorizing him to take certain steps. 
When he gets home and has read the edict, he can elaborate 
plans as quickly as possible, and neither the spirits above 
nor the demons below will know anything about them.” 

The 
Emperor 

approved, and Fu 
Wan went out. The 
Emperor then with 
his own hand drew 
up a decree, writing it 
with blood drawn by 
biting his finger. He 
gave the document 
to Empress Fu to sew 
into the purple lining 
of the girdle. When all was done, he put on the robe and 
girded it with the girdle. Next he bade one of the attendants 
summon State Uncle Dong Cheng to the Palace. 

Dong Cheng came; and after the ceremonies were 

finished, the Emperor said, “A few nights ago I was talking 
with the Empress of the terrible days of the rebellion, and 
we thought of your good services then, therefore we have 
called you in to reward you.” 

The minister bowed his head in thanks. Then the Emperor 

led Dong Cheng out of the Reception Hall to the Temple of 
Ancestors, and they went to the gallery of Worthy Ministers, 
where the Emperor burned incense and performed the usual 
ceremonies. After this they went to see the portraits, and 

among them was one of the founder of the dynasty, Liu 
Bang the Supreme Ancestor. 

begin his great achievement?” said the Emperor. 

“Your Majesty is pleased to joke with thy servant,” said 

Dong Cheng, rather startled at the question. “Who does 
not know the deeds of the Sacred Ancestor? He began life 
as a minor official in Sishang. There gripping his sword, 
he slew a white serpent, the beginning of his struggle for 
the right. Speedily he mastered the empire: In three years 
had destroyed Qin and, in five, also Chu. Thus he set up a 
dynasty that shall endure forever!” 

“Such heroic forefathers! Such weakling descendants! 

How sad it is!” said the Emperor. 

Pointing to the portraits right and left, he continued, 

“Are not these two Zhang Liang2, Lord of Liu, and Xiao 
He3, Lord of Cuo?” 

“Certainly. The Supreme Ancestor was greatly assisted 

by these two.” 

The Emperor glanced right and left. His attendants were 

rather far away. Then he whispered to Dong Cheng, “You, 

2Zhang Liang, aka Zhang Zifang, the master strategist for Liu Bang. 

His family had served the state of Han as chief ministers during the Warring 
States period. It is said that he received the strategy book of Lu Wang from a 
mysterious old man. When he was young, Zhang Liang plotted to assasinate the 
First Emperor, but failed. He later rebeled against Qin. Joined Liu Bang (BC 
206) to fight against Qin and then Chu. Recommended Han Xin to Liu Bang. 
Zhang Liang’s insights had earned him the name “The Teacher of Emperor”. 
After Liu Bang won the empire, Zhang Liang was enobled as Lord of Liu, but 
did not take office, instead he resigned from political life and traveled. 

3Xiao He (BC ?-193) a close adviser of Liu Bang. He and Liu Bang had 

been friends in their native Pei, where Liu Bang later held a minor office. 
Recommended Han Xin to Liu Bang. Became Han’s prime minister. Enobled 
as the Lord of Cuo.

like these two, must stand by me.” 

with those men,” said the Uncle. 

Changan. I have never forgotten, and I could never reward 
you properly.” 

Then pointing to his own robe, the Emperor continued, 

“You must wear this robe of mine, girded with my own 
girdle, and it will be as though you are always near your 
Emperor.” 

Dong 
Cheng 

bowed his gratitude 
while the Emperor, 
taking off the robe, 
presented it to his 
faithful minister. At 
the same time he 
whispered, “Examine 
it closely when you 
get home, and help 
your Emperor carry out his intention.” 

Dong Cheng understood. He put on the robe and the 

girdle, took leave and left the chamber. 

The news of the audience for Dong Cheng had been 

taken to the Prime Minister, who at once went to the Palace 
and arrived as Dong Cheng was passing out at the Donghua 
Gate. They met face to face, and Dong Cheng could in 
nowise avoid him. Dong Cheng went to the side of the road 
and made his obeisance. 

“Where are you from, State Uncle?” asked Cao Cao. 
“His Majesty summoned me into the Palace and has 

given me this robe and beautiful girdle.” 

“Why did he give you these?” 
“He had not forgotten that I saved his life in the old 

days.” 

“Take it off and let me see it.” 
Dong Cheng who knew that a secret decree was hidden 

away somewhere in the garments was afraid Cao Cao would 
notice a breach somewhere in the material, so he hesitated 
and did not obey. But Cao Cao called his guards, and they 
took off the girdle. Then Cao Cao looked it over carefully. 

“It certainly is a very handsome girdle,” said he. “Now 

take off the robe and let me look at that.” 

Dong Cheng’s heart was melting with fear, but he dared 

not disobey. So he handed over the robe. Cao Cao took it and 
held it up against the sun with his own hand and minutely 
examined every part of it. 

girdle and turning to his attendants said, “How is it for 
length?” 

“Beautiful!” they chorused. 
Turning to Dong Cheng, he said, “Will you give these 

to me?” 

“My Prince’s presents to me I dare not give to another. Let 

me give you another robe in its stead,” said Dong Cheng. 

“Is there not some intrigue connected with these presents? 

I am sure there is,” said Cao Cao. 

“How could I dare?” said Dong Cheng, trembling. “If 

you are so set upon it, then I must give it up.” 

It was all a joke,” said the Prime Minister. 

made the best of his way home. When night came and he 
was alone in his library, he took out the robe and looked 
over every inch of it most carefully. He found nothing. 

them carefully. That means there is something to be looked 
for but I can find no trace of it. What does it mean?” he 

soliloquized. 

Then he lifted 

the 
girdle 
and 

examined that. The 
jade plates were 
carved 
into 
the 

semblance of small 
dragons interlaced 
among 
flowers. 

The lining was of 
purple silk. All was 

sewn together most carefully and neatly, and he could find 
nothing out of the common. He was puzzled. He laid the 
belt on the table. Presently he picked it up and looked at it 
again. He spent long hours over it but in vain. He leaned 
over on the small table, his head resting on his hands and 
was almost asleep, when a candle snuff fell down upon the 
girdle and burned a hole in the lining. He hastily shook 
it off, but the mischief was done: A small hole had been 
burned in the silken lining, and through this there appeared 
something white with blood red marks. He hastily ripped 
it open and drew out the decree written by the hand of the 
Emperor himself in characters of blood. It read: 

“Of human relationships, that between parents and 

children stands first. 
Of the various social 
ties that between 
prince and minister 
stands 
highest. 

Today Cao Cao, 
the wicked, is a 
real tyrant, treating 
even 
his 
Prince 

with indignity. With 

the support of his faction and his army, he has destroyed 
the principles of government. By conferring rewards and 
inflicting punishments, he has reduced the Emperor to a 
nonentity. I have grieved over this day and night. I have 
feared the empire would be ruined. 

“You are a high minister of state and my own relative. 

You must recall the difficulties of the Great Founder’s 
early days and draw together the loyal and right-minded to 
destroy this evil faction and restore the prerogatives of the 
Throne. Such a deed would be indeed an extreme joy to the 
spirits of my ancestors. 

“This decree, written in blood drawn from my own veins, 

is confided to a noble who is to be most careful not to fail in 
executing his Emperor’s design. 

“Given in the era of Rebuilt Tranquillity, fourth year and 

the third month of spring.” (AD 199) 

So ran the decree, and Dong Cheng read it with streaming 

eyes. There was no sleep for him that night. Early in the 
morning he returned to his library and reread it. No plan 
suggested itself. He laid the decree down on the table and 
sought in the depths of his mind for some scheme to destroy 
Cao Cao, but could not decide upon any. And he fell asleep 
leaning over his table. 

It happened that Minister Wang Zifu, with whom Dong 

Cheng was on terms of great intimacy, came to visit him 
and, as usual, walked into the house unannounced and went 
straight to the library. His host did not wake, and Wang 
Zifu noticed, hardly hidden by his sleeve, the Emperor’s 
writing. 

Wondering what this might be, Wang Zifu drew it out, 

read it, and put it in his own sleeve. 

not well? Why are you asleep at this time of day?” 

He was aghast; he 
almost fell to the 
ground. 

“So you want to 

make away with Cao 
Cao? I shall have to 
tell him,” said Wang 
Zifu. 

“Then, 
brother, 

that is the end of the Hans,” said his host, with tears. 

served the Hans and ate of their bounty. Am I devoid of 
loyalty? I would help you, brother, as far as lies in my 
power.” 

“It is well for the country that you think like this,” said 

Dong Cheng. 

talk over such plans and pledge ourselves to sacrifice all in 
the cause of Han.” 

a roll of white silk and wrote his own name at the top and 
signed it, and Wang Zifu followed suit. 

Then the visitor said, “General Wu Zilan is one of my 

best friends. He ought to be allowed to come in.” 

Dong Cheng replied, “Of all the officials of the court, 

Commander Chong Ji and Court Counselor Wu Shi are my 
best friends. Certainly they would back me up.” 

So the discussion proceeded. Presently a servant 

announced no other than these very two men Dong Cheng 
just mentioned. 

“This is providential,” said Dong Cheng, and he told 

Wang Zifu to hide behind a screen. 

Ji referred to the 
incident at the hunt 
and the shooting of 
the stag. 

“Were you not 

angry at that?” said 
Chong Ji. 

Dong 
Cheng 

answered, “Though 
we be angry, what 
can we do?” 

swear, but I cannot get anyone to back me up.” 

“One should perish for one’s country; one should not 

mind,” said Chong Ji. 

At this moment Wang Zifu appeared from behind the 

screen, saying, “You two want to kill Cao Cao! I shall 
have to let him know this. And Uncle Dong Cheng is my 
witness.” 

we will be Han ghosts, which is better than being sycophants 
of a traitor,” said Chong Ji, angrily. 

Dong Cheng said, “We were just saying we wanted to 

see you two on this matter. Wang Zifu is only joking.” 

Then he drew forth the decree and showed it to the two 

newcomers, who also wept as they read it. They were asked 
to add their names to the silk roll. 

Zilan to come.” 

He left the room and very soon returned with his friend, 

who also wrote his name in the presence of all the others. 

drink success to the new plot. While there, a new visitor, 
Ma Teng, Governor of Xiliang, was announced. 

“Say I am indisposed,” said the host, “and cannot receive 

visitors.” 

The doorkeeper took the message, whereat Ma Teng 

angrily said, “Last night at the Donghua Gate, I saw him 
come out in robe and girdle. How can he pretend illness 
today? I am not come from mere idleness, why does he 
refuse to see me?” 

The doorkeeper went in again and told his master what 

the visitor had said and that he was very angry. Then Dong 
Cheng rose, excused himself saying he would soon return, 
and went to receive Ma Teng. 

After the visitor had saluted and they were both seated, 

Ma Teng said, “I have just come from a farewell audience 
and wished to bid you good bye. Why did you want to put 
me off?” 

“My poor body was taken suddenly ill. That is why I was 

not waiting to welcome you,” said Dong Cheng. 

“You do not look as if you were ill. Your face wears the 

very bloom of health,” said Ma Teng bluntly. 

His host could say no more and was silent. The visitor 

shook out his sleeves and rose to depart. 

He sighed deeply as he walked down the steps, saying to 

himself, “Not one of them is any good. There is no one to 
save the country.” 

This speech sank deeply into Dong Cheng’s heart. He 

stopped his guest, saying, “Who is no good to save the 
country? Whom do you mean?” 

of the stag, filled my breast with anger. But if you, a near 
relative of the Emperor, can pass your time in wine and idle 
dalliance without a thought of doing away with rebellion, 
where can anyone be found who will save the dynasty?” 

However, Dong Cheng doubts were not set at rest. 

Pretending great surprise, he replied, “The Prime Minister 

is of high rank and has the confidence of the court. Why 
then do you utter such things?” 

“So you find that wretch Cao Cao a good man, eh?” 
“Pray speak lower: There are eyes and ears very near 

us.” 

“The sort of people who covet life and fear death are not 

those to discuss any great undertaking.” 

So saying, Ma Teng rose to go sway. By this time his 

host’s doubts were set at rest. He felt that Ma Teng was 
loyal. 

So Dong Cheng said, “Do not be angry any more. I will 

show you something.” 

Whereupon 
he 

invited Ma Teng to 
go into the room 
where 
the 
others 

were 
seated 
and 

then showed him the 
decree. As Ma Teng 
read it, his hair stood 
on end; he ground his 
teeth and bit his lips 
till the blood came. 

“When you move, remember the whole force of my army 

is ready to help,” said Ma Teng. 

Dong Cheng introduced him to the other conspirators, 

and then the pledge was produced, and Ma Teng was told 
to sign his name. He did so, at the same time smearing the 
blood as a sign of the oath and saying, “I swear to die rather 
than betray this pledge!” 

Pointing to the five he said, “We require ten for this 

business, and we can accomplish our design.” 

wrong sort will spoil all,” said Dong Cheng. 

read on till he came to the name Liu, of the imperial clan, 
when clapping his hands he cried, “Why not consult him?” 

“Whom?” cried they altogether. 
Ma Teng very slowly and deliberately spoke his name. 

To a very trusty servant comes an Emperor’s decree,
And a scion of the ruling house can prove his loyalty.
 
If the readers turns to the next chapter, they will see 

whom Ma Teng talked about.

Ma Teng

Chapter 21 
In A Plum Garden, Cao Cao Discusses Heroes.

“Who is it?” was the question on the lips of the 

conspirators. 

Liu Bei. He is here and we will ask him to help.” 

“Though he is an uncle of the Emperor, he is at present 

a partisan of our enemy, and he will not join,” said Dong 
Cheng. 

Cao Cao advanced to acknowledge the congratulations 
due to the Emperor, Liu Bei’s sworn brother Guan Yu was 
behind him, and grasped his sword as if to cut down Cao 
Cao. However, Liu Bei signed to him to hold his hand and 
Guan Yu did. Liu Bei would willingly destroy Cao Cao, 
only he thinks Cao Cao’s teeth and claws are too many. You 
must ask Liu Bei, and he will surely consent.” 

Here Wu Shi urged caution, saying, “Do not go too fast. 

Let us consider the thing most carefully.” 

They dispersed. Next day after dark Dong Cheng went 

to Liu Bei’s lodging taking with him the decree. As soon 
as Dong Cheng was announced, Liu Bei came to greet him 
and led him into a private room where they could talk freely. 
The two younger brothers were there as well. 

“It must be something unusually important that has 

brought Uncle Dong Cheng here tonight,” said Liu Bei. 

suspected something, so I came by night.” 

Wine was brought in, and while they were drinking, Dong 

Cheng said, “Why did you check your brother the other day 
at the hunt, when he was going to attack Cao Cao?” 

Liu Bei was startled and said, “How did you know?” 
“Nobody noticed but I saw.” 

Liu Bei could not prevaricate and said, “It was the 

presumption of the man that made my brother so angry. 
Guan Yu could not help it.” 

The visitor covered his face and wept. 
“Ah,” said he, “if all the court ministers were like Guan 

Yu, there would be no sighs for lack of tranquillity.” 

visitor to try him, so he cautiously replied, “Where are the 
sighs for lack of tranquillity while Cao Cao is at the head 
of affairs?” 

Dong Cheng changed color and rose from his seat. 
“You, Sir, are a relative of His Majesty, and so I showed 

you my inmost feelings. Why did you mislead me?” 

But Liu Bei said, “Because I feared you might be 

misleading me, and I wanted to find out.” 

At this Dong Cheng drew out the decree he had received 

and showed it. His host was deeply moved. Then Dong 
Cheng produced the pledge. There were only six names to 
it, and these were Dong Cheng, Wang Zifu, Chong Ji, Wu 
Shi, Wu Zilan, and Ma Teng. 

share,” said Liu Bei, and at Dong Cheng’s request he added 
his name and signature to the others and handed it back. 

“Now let us but get three more, which will make ten, and 

we shall be ready to act.” 

“But you must move with great caution and not let this 

get abroad,” said Liu Bei. 

The two remained talking till an early hour in the morning 

when the visitor left. 

Now in order to put Cao Cao quite off the scent that any 

plot against him was in progress, Liu Bei began to devote 
himself to gardening, planting vegetables, and watering 
them with his own hands. Guan Yu and Zhang Fei ventured 
to remonstrate with him for taking to such an occupation 

when great matters needed attention. 

“The reason for this you may not know,” replied he. 
And they said no more. 

One day when the two brothers were absent, and Liu Bei 

was busy in his garden, two generals of Cao Cao, Xu Chu 
and Zhang Liao, with an escort came from Cao Cao, saying, 
“The command of the Prime Minister is that you come at 
once.” 

“What important affair is afoot?” asked Liu Bei 

nervously. 

your presence.” 

All he could do was to follow. 
When Liu Bei arrived, Cao Cao met him and laughingly 

said, “That is a big business you have in hand at home.” 

This remark made Liu Bei turn the color of clay. Cao 

Cao took him by the hand and led him straight to the private 
garden, saying, “The growth of vegetables that you are 
trying to learn is very difficult.” 

Liu Bei breathed again. He said, “That is hardly a 

business. It is only a solace.” 

the trees today, and suddenly my thoughts went back to a year 
ago when we were thrashing Zhang Xiu. We were marching 
through a parched county, and everyone was suffering from 
thirst. Suddenly I lifted my whip, and pointing at something 
in the distance I said, ‘Look at those fruitful plum trees in 
the forest ahead.’ The soldiers heard it, and it made their 
mouths water. Seeing the plums kindles my appreciation. I 
owe something to the plums, and we will repay it today. I 
ordered the servants to heat some wine very hot and sent to 
invite you to share it.” 

suspected any sinister design. He went with his host to a 
small spring pavilion in a plum garden, where the wine 
cups were already laid out and green plums filled the dishes. 
They sat down to a confidential talk and free enjoyment of 
their wine. 

gathering and threatening rain. The servants pointed out a 
mass of cloud that looked like a dragon hung in the sky. 
Both host and guest leaned over the balcony looking at it. 

“Do you understand the evolution of dragons?” asked 

Cao Cao of the guest. 

“Not in detail.” 
“A dragon can assume any size, can rise in glory or hide 

from sight. Bulky, it generates clouds and evolves mist; 
attenuated, it can scarcely hide a mustard stalk or conceal a 
shadow. Mounting, it can soar to the empyrean; subsiding, 
it lurks in the uttermost depths of the ocean. This is the 
midspring season, and the dragon chooses this moment for 
its transformations like a person realizing his own desires 
and overrunning the world. The dragon among animals 
compares with the hero among people. You, General, have 
traveled all lakes and rivers. You must know who are the 

heroes of the present day, and I wish you would say who 
they are.” 

“I am just a common dullard. How can I know such 

things?” 

“Do not be so modest,” said Cao Cao. 
“Thanks to your kindly protection I have a post at court. 

But as to heroes I really do not know who they are.” 

“You may not have looked upon their faces, but you must 

have heard their names.” 

“Yuan Shu of the South of River Huai, with his strong 

army and abundant resources: Is he one?” asked Liu Bei. 

shall put him out of the way shortly.” 

“Well, Yuan Shao then. The highest offices of state have 

been held in his family for four generations, and his clients 
are many in the empire. He is firmly posted in Jizhou, and 
he commands the services of many able people. Surely he 
is one.” 

“A bully, but a coward. He is fond of grandiose schemes, 

but is devoid of decision. He makes for great things but 
grudges the necessary sacrifice. He loses sight of everything 
else in view of a little present advantage. He is not one.” 

“There is Liu Biao of Jingzhou. He is renowned as a man 

of perfection, whose fame has spread on all sides. Surely he 
is a hero.” 

“He is a mere semblance, a man of vain reputation. No; 

not he.” 

“Sun Ce is a sturdy sort, the chief of all in the South 

Land. Is he a hero?” 

“He has profited by the reputation of his father Sun Jian. 

Sun Ce is not a real hero.” 

“What of Liu Zhang of Yizhou?” 
“Though he is of the reigning family, he is nothing more 

than a watch dog. How could you make a hero of him?” 

“What about Zhang Xiu, Zhang Lu, Han Sui, and all 

those leaders?” 

Cao Cao clapped his hands and laughed very loudly, saying, 

“Paltry people like them are not worth mentioning.” 

“With these exceptions I really know none.” 
“Now heroes are the ones who cherish lofty designs in 

their bosoms and have plans to achieve them. They have 
all-embracing schemes, and the whole world is at their 
mercy.” 

“Who is such a person?” said Liu Bei. 

Cao Cao pointed his finger first at his guest and then at 

himself, saying, “The only heroes in the world are you and 
I.”

Liu Bei gasped, and the spoon and chopsticks rattled to 

the floor. Now just at that moment the storm burst with a 
tremendous peal of thunder and rush of rain. 

Liu Bei stooped down to recover the fallen articles, 

saying, “What a shock! And it was quite close.” 

“What! Are you afraid of thunder?” said Cao Cao. 
Liu Bei replied, “The Sage One paled at a sudden peal of 

thunder or fierce gust of wind. Why should one not fear?” 

Thus he glossed over the real fact, that it was the words 

he had heard that had so startled him. 

Constrained to lodge in a tiger’s lair,
He played a waiting part,

But when Cao Cao talked of breaking humans,
Then terror gripped his heart.
But he cleverly used the thunder peal
As excuse for turning pale;
O quick to seize occasions thus!
He surely must prevail.

The shower had passed, and there appeared two men 

rushing through the garden, both armed. In spite of the 
attendants, they forced their way to the pavilion where sat 
the two friends. They were Guan Yu and Zhang Fei. 

practice when Cao Cao’s invitation had come so 
peremptorily. On their return they heard that two officers 
had arrived and led away Liu Bei to the Prime Minister. 
They hastened to his palace and were told their brother was 
with his host in the grounds, and they feared something had 
happened. So they rushed in. 

Now when they saw their brother quietly talking with 

Cao Cao and enjoying a cup of wine, they took up their 
usual places and meekly stood waiting. 

“Why did you come?” said Cao Cao. 
“We heard that you, Sir, had invited our brother to a wine 

party, and we came to amuse you with a little sword play,” 
said they. 

“This is not a Hongmen Banquet,” replied Cao Cao. 

“What use have we for Xiang Chang and Xiang Ba of 
old?1” 

Liu Bei smiled. The host ordered wine to be served to the 

two “Fan Kuais” to allay their anxiety and, soon after, the 
three took their leave and returned homeward. 

“We were nearly frightened to death,” said Guan Yu. 
The story of the dropped chopsticks was told. The two 

asked what their brother intended by his actions. 

“My learning gardening was to convince Cao Cao of 

my perfect simplicity and the absence of any ambition. But 
when he suddenly pointed to me as one of the heroes, I was 
startled, for I thought he had some suspicions. Happily the 
thunder at that moment supplied the excuse I wanted.” 

“Really you are very clever,” said they. 
Next day Cao Cao again invited Liu Bei and while the 

two were drinking, Man Chong, who had been dispatched 
to find out what Yuan Shao was doing, came to present his 
report. 

Man Chong said, “Gongsun Zan has been completely 
1At that time Liu Bang, Governor of Pei, and Xiang Yu, King of West Chu, 

were fighting Qin under the Chu banner. Liu Bang was the first commander 
who entered Qin’s capital, Xianyang. The loss of this honor enraged Xiang 
Yu, and he was set to attack Liu Bang’s force. But his uncle Xiang Ba wanted 
to mediate the situation, and Xiang Ba invited Liu Bang to visit Xiang Yu’s 
camp in Hongmen. During a banquet at Hongmen, Xiang Yu’s adviser Fan 
Zeng ordered Xiang Chang to perform a sword-dance and take the chance to 
kill Liu Bang. However, as Xiang Chang closed in Liu Bang, Xiang Ba rose 
to perform another sword-dance and fend off the attack. Just then Liu Bang’s 
general Fan Kuai bursted in, armed and angry-looking. Fan Kuai proclaimed 
his lord’s achievements and denounced the murder plot. In the confusion, Liu 
Bang slipped away and rushed back to his camp.
Gongsun Zan

defeated by Yuan Shao.” 

interrupted Liu Bei. 

“They were at war, and Gongsun Zan got the worst of 

it, so he acted on the defensive, building a high wall about 
his army and on that erecting a high tower, which he called 
the Yijing Tower. Therein he placed all his grain, one 
hundred thousand carts total, and took up his own quarters. 
His fighting troops passed in and out without ceasing, 
some going out to give battle, others returning to rest. One 
of them was surrounded and sent to ask Gongsun Zan to 
rescue him. Gongsun Zan said, ‘If I rescue him, hereafter 
everyone will want to be helped and will not exert himself.’ 
So Gongsun Zan did not go. This disgusted his soldiers, and 
many deserted to the enemy so that his army diminished. He 
sent letters to the capital to crave help, but the messenger 
was captured. He sent to Zhang Yan to arrange with him for 
a two-pronged joint attack, and those letters with the plans 
also fell into Yuan Shao’s hands. The plans were adopted 
by Yuan Shao, who gave the signals agreed upon. Thus 
Gongsun Zan fell into an ambush, lost heavily, and retreated 
into the city. There he was besieged, and a subterranean 
passage was pierced into the tower where he lodged. The 
tower was set on fire, and Gongsun Zan could not escape. 
So he slew his wife and little ones and hanged himself. The 
flames destroyed the bodies of the whole family. 

“Yuan Shao has added the remnants of the vanquished 

army to his own and so become yet stronger. His brother 
Yuan Shu in the South of River Huai, however, has become 
so arrogant and cruel that the people have turned against 
him. Then Yuan Shu had sent to say he would yield the title 
of Emperor, which he had assumed, in favor of Yuan Shao. 
Yuan Shao demanded the Imperial Hereditary Seal also, and 
Yuan Shu promised to bring it in person. Now Yuan Shu has 

abandoned River Huai and is about to move to the North of 
Yellow River. If he succeeded, the two brothers will control 
adjoining regions and be dangerous.” 

that, in the days of success and prosperity, the dead chieftain, 
Gongsun Zan, had pushed his interest and shown him much 
kindness. Moreover he was anxious to know the fate of 
Zhao Yun. 

In his heart he thought, “What better chance am I likely 

to get of setting myself free?” 

over to join his brother, he will surely pass through Xuzhou. 
I beg you to give me an army with which to smite him on 
the way. That will finish Yuan Shu.” 

“Memorialize the Emperor tomorrow, and I will give 

you an army,” said Cao Cao. 

gave him command of fifty thousand horse and foot, and 
sent Generals Zhu Ling and Lu Zhao with him. 

At parting with Liu Bei, the Emperor shed tears. 
As soon as Liu Bei reached his lodging, he set about 

preparations for immediate departure, taking his seal as 
General and preparing his weapons. Dong Cheng went 
three miles away from the city to bid him farewell. 

“You must not mind my going. This journey will 

assuredly help on the scheme,” said Liu Bei. 

never forget what His Majesty requires of us.” 

They parted. Presently his brothers asked him why he 

was in such a hurry to get away. 

Liu Bei replied, “I have been a bird in a cage, a fish in 

a net. This is like the fish regaining the open sea and the 
bird soaring into the blue sky. I suffered much from the 
confinement.” 

Then he ordered Zhu Ling and Lu Zhao to march the 

troops faster. 

Please visit the DW Three Kingdoms website to download Part 2!

