Sounder

WILLIAM H. ARMSTRONG 

OceanofPDF.com

To Kip, Dave, and Mary

OceanofPDF.com

“A man keeps, like his love, his courage dark.”

—Antoine de Saint Exupéry

OceanofPDF.com

Contents

Cover

Title Page

Author’s Note

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

PRAISE FOR Sounder

Copyright

About the Publisher

OceanofPDF.com

Author’s Note

FIFTY YEARS AGO I learned to read at a round table in the center of a

large, sweet-smelling, steam-softened kitchen. My teacher was a

gray-haired black man who taught the one-room Negro school

several miles away from where we lived in the Green Hill district

of the county. He worked for my father after school and in the

summer. There were no radios or television sets, so when our

lessons were  nished he told us stories. His stories came from

Aesop, the Old Testament, Homer, and history.

There was a lasting, magni cent intoxication about the man

that has remained after half a century. There was seldom a

preacher at the whitewashed, clapboard Baptist church in the

Green Hill district, so he came often to our white man’s church

and sat alone in the balcony. Sometimes the minister would call

on this eloquent, humble man to lead the congregation in prayer.

He would move quietly to the foot of the balcony steps, pray with

the simplicity of the Carpenter of Nazareth, and then return to

where he sat alone, for no other black people ever came to join

him.

He had come to our community from farther south, already old

when he came. He talked little, or not at all, about his past. But

one night at the great center table after he had told the story of

a coon dog.

It is the black man’s story, not mine. It was not from Aesop, the

Old Testament, or Homer. It was history—his history.

That world of long ago has almost totally changed. The church

balcony is gone. The table is gone from the kitchen. But the story

remains.

W. H. ARMSTRONG

OceanofPDF.com

I

THE TALL MAN stood at the edge of the porch. The roof sagged from the

two rough posts which held it, almost closing the gap between his

head and the rafters. The dim light from the cabin window cast

long equal shadows from man and posts. A boy stood nearby

shivering in the cold October wind. He ran his  ngers back and

forth over the broad crown of the head of a coon dog named

Sounder.

“Where did you  rst get Sounder?” the boy asked.

“I never got him. He came to me along the road when he wasn’t

more’n a pup.”

The father turned to the cabin door. It was ajar. Three small

children, none as high as the level of the latch, were peering out

into the dark. “We just want to pet Sounder,” the three all said at

once.

“It’s too cold. Shut the door.”

“Sounder and me must be about the same age,” the boy said,

tugging gently at one of the coon dog’s ears, and then the other.

He felt the importance of the years—as a child measures age—

which separated him from the younger children. He was old

enough to stand out in the cold and run his  ngers over Sounder’s

head.

No dim lights from other cabins punctuated the night. The

whitewashed ceiling. Sometimes on Sundays the boy walked with

his parents to set awhile at one of the distant cabins. Sometimes

they went to the meetin’ house. And there was school too. But it

was far away at the edge of town. Its term began after harvest and

started, walking the eight miles morning and evening. But after a

had said, “Give it up, child. It’s too long and too cold.” And the

boy, remembering how he was always laughed at for getting to

would be bigger and could walk faster and get to school before it

started and wouldn’t be laughed at. And when he wasn’t dead-

tired from walking home from school, his father would let him

hunt with Sounder. Having both school and Sounder would be

mighty good, but if he couldn’t have school, he could always have

Sounder.

“There ain’t no dog like Sounder,” the boy said. But his father

did not take up the conversation. The boy wished he would. His

father stood silent and motionless. He was looking past the rim of

half-light that came from the cabin window and pushed back the

darkness in a circle that lost itself around the ends of the cabin.

The man seemed to be listening. But no sounds came to the boy.

across the  atlands. It wavered through the foothills, louder than

any other dog’s in the whole countryside.

What the boy saw in Sounder would have been totally missed

by an outsider. The dog was not much to look at—a mixture of

Georgia redbone hound and bulldog. His ears, nose, and color

were those of a redbone. The great square jaws and head, his

muscular neck and broad chest showed his bulldog blood. When a

possum or coon was shaken from a tree, like a  ash Sounder

would clamp and set his jaw-vise just behind the animal’s head.

Then he would spread his front paws, lock his shoulder joints, and

let the bulging neck muscles  y from left to right. And that was

all. The limp body, with not a torn spot or a tooth puncture in the

skin, would be laid at his master’s feet. His master’s calloused

hand would rub the great neck, and he’d say “Good Sounder,

good Sounder.” In the winter when there were no crops and no

pay,  fty cents for a possum and two dollars for a coonhide

bought  our and overall jackets with blanket linings.

But there was no price that could be put on Sounder’s voice. It

had bounced o  the walls of a cave. It mellowed into half-echo

before it touched the air. The mists of the  atlands strained out

only  utelike redbone mellowness came to the listener. But it was

bounced from slope to slope in the foothills like a rubber ball. But

it was not an ordinary bark. It  lled up the night and made music

silver strings.

While Sounder trailed the path the hunted had taken in search

grew, the longer the silences, for, by nature, the coon dog would

try to surprise his quarry and catch him on the ground, if possible.

But the great voice box of Sounder would have burst if he had

tried to trail too long in silence. After a last, long-sustained

stillness which allowed the great dog to close in on his quarry, the

voice would burst forth so fast it over owed itself and became a

melody.

A stranger hearing Sounder’s treed bark suddenly  ll the night

might have thought there were six dogs at the foot of one tree.

But all over the countryside, neighbors, leaning against slanting

knew that it was Sounder.

“If the wind does not rise, I’ll let you go hunting with me

tonight.” The father spoke quietly as he glanced down at boy and

dog. “Animals don’t like to move much when it’s windy.”

“Why?” the boy asked.

“There are too many noises, and they can’t hear a killer slipping

up on them. So they stay in their dens, especially possums,

because they can’t smell much.”

The father left the porch and went to the woodpile at the edge

of the rim of light. The boy followed, and each gathered a chunk-

stick for the cabin stove. At the door, the father took down a

“There’s plenty of coal oil,” he said.

The boy closed the door quickly. He had heard leaves rattling

across the frozen ground. He hoped his father didn’t hear it. But

he knew the door wouldn’t shut it out. His father could sense the

rising wind, and besides, it would shake the loose windowpanes.

Inside the cabin, the boy’s mother was cutting wedge-shaped

pieces of corn mush from an iron pot that stood on the back of the

stove. She browned them in a skillet and put them on the tin-

topped table in the middle of the room. The boy and the three

younger children ate their supper in silence. The father and

heard so many times he no longer listened. “The crop will be

better next year. There’ll be more day work. The hunting was

better last year.”

This winter the hunting was getting worse and worse. The wind

came stronger and colder than last year. Sometimes Sounder and

his master hunted in the wind. But night after night they came

hungry for solid food too. Corn mush had to take the place of

stewed possum, dumplings, and potatoes.

Not long after supper, Sounder’s master went out of the cabin

and stood listening, as he always did, to see if he could hear the

cold winter wind beginning to rise in the hills. When he came

back into the cabin, he took o  his blanket-lined overall jacket

door as if he were asking if someone had forgotten to light the

lantern and start across the  elds of dead stalks to the lowlands or

past the cottonwoods and jack oaks to the hills. The boy took

Sounder some table scraps in a tin pan. As Sounder licked the

bottom of the pan it rattled against a loose board in the porch as

if somebody were walking across the  oor.

Later, when it was time for the smaller children in the cabin to

go to bed, Sounder’s master got up, put on his overall jacket, and

went outside. He did not take the lantern or Sounder or the boy

with him. The stern order to the coon hound to go back under the

porch came in through the cabin door, and Sounder’s whining

continued long after the footsteps on the frozen path had died

out.

Inside the cabin, the boy’s mother sat by the stove, picking

kernels of walnuts with a bent hairpin. The woman watched each

year for the walnuts to fall after the  rst hard frost. Each day she

under the stove. When kernel-picking time came, before it was

dark each day, the boy or the father took a hammer with a

homemade handle, went to the  at rock, and cracked as many as

could be kerneled in a night.

The troubled whimper of a child came through the little door

that led to the shed-room where the children slept.

“You must go to bed soon,” the mother said. “Your little brother

gets addled in his sleep when you ain’t in bed with him.”

The boy reached into his mother’s lap, where the golden half-

“You eat the crumbs from the bottom of the hull basket,” she said.

“I try to pick two pounds a night. That’s thirty cents’ worth.

Fifteen cents a pound at the store if they’re mostly half-kernels

and dry. The man won’t pay if they’re all in crumbs.”

Sometimes the woman told the boy stories she had heard at the

meetin’ house. “The Lord do powerful things” she would say. The

boy liked it when she told her stories. They took away night

loneliness. Night loneliness was always bad when the younger

children had gone to bed, or when the father was not in the cabin.

“Night loneliness is part fearing,” the boy’s mother had once said

to him. But the boy was never afraid when his father was near.

Perhaps she too felt the loneliness that came with the wind as it

ended, at the edge of the cabin walls. So she told the boy a story

evil in the world. When the story was over, she sent the boy to

bed and continued picking out kernels and adding them to the

neat mound in the folds of her apron.

The boy pressed his head deep into his straw pillow. The pillow

was cold, but it felt smooth, and it smelled fresh. He had the same

feeling he got when he rubbed his face against the sheets that

hung on the clothesline every Monday. His mother washed his

pillowcase and sheet every week, just like she did for the people

who lived in the big house down the road. He buried himself deep

in his side of the straw tick; he felt where the wooden slats of the

bed crossed under his body. He rolled close to his little brother

and tucked the edge of the coverlet under his body to keep out

the cold that seeped up through the straw ticking. His little

brother’s body warmed him.

He heard Sounder whimpering under the porch. But Sounder

was warm because the boy’s father had put two burlap sacks

under the porch for the time when the hard frosts came. The boy

thought there must be two pounds of nuts in the pile on his

mother’s lap. His mother always said “Two pounds is a good

night’s work if you can start early and there ain’t a sick child to

rock.”

He wondered where his father had gone without Sounder; they

always went together at night. He heard the thump, thump,

 oor as he scratched at a  ea in his short tan hair.

The boy dreamed of the stalk land covered by the Lord’s mighty

 ood. He wondered where the animals would go if the water rose

over the foothills. “Cabins built on posts would just  oat like

boats, porch and all,” he assured himself in a whisper. If they

 oated from the far ends of the land and all came together, that

would be a town, and he wouldn’t be lonely anymore …

When the boy awoke in the morning, he went to the window.

He remembered his dream of the  ood covering the stalk land. He

called the younger children. His breath steamed up the

windowpane. He wiped the steam away with the bottom of his

 st. His dream had not come true. There was no  oodwater rising

in the bottomland. Except for frost on the ground, everything

looked just the same as it had yesterday. The younger children

looked, saw nothing, and asked, “What is it?”

The big blue-enameled possum kettle was boiling on top of the

chunk stove. It had two lids and doubled for cooking and heating.

The boy felt the brown paper bag of walnut kernels on the shelf

behind the stove. “Yes,” he said to his mother, “I think there are

two pounds.”

then the other to its glowing warmth. He circled his arms in a

wide embrace around the pipe and rubbed his hands together.

shirt and soaked inward through his whole body. He pulled in

deep breaths from above the stove to catch the steam escaping

the rhythm of the bubbles that went lob, lob, lob on the surface of

the fast-boiling pot.

In a skillet on the second stove lid there were pork sausages! He

sni ed the thin lines of smoke curling up from under the edges of

each of them. Pork sausage was for Christmas. But he knew it

wasn’t Christmas yet. His mother put a pan of cold biscuits on the

lid of the possum kettle to warm. She was humming to herself.

The lid stopped jumping up and down, and the steam began to

whistle softly as it squeezed from under the lid.

The smell that came from under the lid wasn’t possum. It was

ham bone. The boy had only smelled it twice in his life, once

before in his own cabin, and once when he was walking past the

big house down the road. The sausage and ham-bone smells  lled

around the door. They excited Sounder, and now he was

scratching at the door.

Sounder hadn’t had much to eat yesterday. Besides a few

sack and put them away for the next meal. Then they would be

put in a pan, sprinkled with a little water to keep them soft, and

warmed over. The boy called to Sounder to stop and go away. His

mother stopped her humming and said, “Shush, child, you’ll wake

your father.”

Then she went back to her humming. His mother always

hummed when she was worried. When she held a well child on

her lap and rocked back and forth, she sang. But when she held a

sick child close in her arms and the rocker moved just enough to

that the child heard the deep concerned breathing of terror above

the sound of the humming. The boy always thought her lips

looked as though they were glued together when she hummed.

They seemed to be rolled inward and drawn long and thin. Once

when she kissed him good night when he was sick, they were

cold, he remembered. But when she sang or told stories, her lips

were rolled out, big and warm and soft.

Outside, the wind still blew, the sun was weak, and the earth

was gray. Several times the boy went out to bring wood for his

mother. He ate sausage and biscuits at the tin-topped table with

the other children.

 re. The top of the possum kettle bounced up and down again

he pulled the ham half out of the water and turned it over. The

boy felt warm and proud inside when he saw his father’s great

hand take hold of the handle of the hot lid without using a pot rag

the way his mother always did. Finally his father took from the

shelf a  at oak slab, bigger than any of the pans or dishes, and put

it on the table.

The boy liked to smell the oak slab. It smelled like the Mercy

Seat meetin’-house picnic held every summer. He also liked to rub

where the grease had soaked it. His father had hollowed it out

during long winter evenings as he sat by the stove. The boy had

cleaned up the shavings and slipped them under the door of the

stove when the draft was open. They burned with a bright  ame,

and they made a great mystery for the boy: The curled ones

straightened out as they burned, but the straight ones curled up.

The boy remembered when the oak slab had had ham on it

before. One year his father had won a pig in a shooting match and

raised it to a hog. They had eaten one ham and traded one for

beans and  our at the store. That year they had spareribs and

chitlins and pan scrapple. Sometimes when the boy’s father

spareribs and sowbelly—lots of sowbelly, but not much spareribs.

The boy’s father took the ham from the kettle and put it on the

oak slab. “Save the ham-boilin’ for Sounder,” he reminded the

boy’s mother.

“Sounder will eat good now,” the boy said.

The father sharpened the butcher knife with the whetstone he

used to whet his scythe and his goose-necked brier hook in the

summer when he cut brambles and young sumac in the

fencerows. He cut big pieces of ham, and they stuck out from

under the brown tops of the biscuits. It was like a Christmas

bigger than a pork-sausage Christmas. The boy slipped a piece of

the fat rind into a biscuit and took it out to Sounder. When the

ham-boiling had cooled, he  lled Sounder’s pan and ran his

 ngers up and down the great dog’s back as he lapped it up.

The windows of the cabin stayed steamed up almost all day, the

kettle had boiled so long. The cold wind continued to blow

outside. Nothing moved except what the wind moved—dead

which were dead and ready to be blown away, bare branches of

poplars, and the spires of tall pines. Toward evening the father

wiped the steam away from the glass and looked out a couple of

times. The dry cottonwood chunks burned like gunpowder in the

stove. In one or two spots the side of the stove gave o  a red

glow.

time at the meetin’-house picnic, boys with patches the same

color as their overalls had laughed at him and pointed to the

checkered gingham on the knees of his overalls. He had felt mad

and hurt. But his mother had said, “Pay no mind, child,” and had

led him away. He hoped no one would laugh at his father. His

father wouldn’t be hurt. He didn’t get hurt. He would get mad and

 ght back, and the boy was always afraid when his father got

mad.

When the woman had patched the torn place, she got the

walnut basket, folded her apron in her lap, and began to pick out

the rocker only moved enough to squeak. She hummed softly, and

her lips looked glued together. “Look down, look down that

lonesome road.” The boy wished she would stop humming and

tell a story about the Lord or King David, but she kept humming

“That Lonesome Road.”

The boy decided it was lonesomer in bed in the dark than it was

staying up. He was glad he could set a long time after the young

children had gone to bed. Once he had been gathering weeds

which his father had cut at the edge of a lawn. On the lawn a lady

sat under a tree reading a story aloud to some children. He

himself. He would have a book with stories in it, then he wouldn’t

be lonesome even if his mother didn’t sing.

OceanofPDF.com

II

THE ROAD WHICH passed the cabin lay like a thread dropped on a

patchwork quilt. Stalk land, fallow  elds, and brushland, all

appeared to be sewn together by wide fencerow stitches of trees.

Their bare branches spread out to join together the separate

patches of land. Weeds grew on either side of the road in summer,

and a thin strip of green clung to life between the dusty tracks. In

summer a horse and wagon made almost no noise in the soft

earth. In winter when the ground was frozen, the rattle of wheels

and each distinct hoofbeat punctuated the winter quiet. When the

wind blew, little clouds of dust would rise in the road and follow

the wind tracks across the  elds.

The boy was allowed to go as far as he wanted to on the road.

But the younger children couldn’t go past the pine clump toward

the big house and the town, or the bramble patch where they

picked blackberries in summer in the other direction. Almost no

one passed on the road in winter except to buy  our at the store

far down the road or to go to the town of a Saturday. Even in

summer a speck on the horizon was a curiosity. People sitting on

cabin porches would wonder whether the speck would take the

form of man, woman, or child.

The third day after the boy had awakened to the smell of ham

bone and pork sausage, it was still cold and the wind still blew.

But the cabin still smelled good, and there was plenty to eat. Just

bring in wood for the night. The dim light of the lamp ran past

the boy as he stood motionless in the open cabin door.

“Shut the door,” the boy’s father called from where he sat near

the stove. But the boy did not move.

Just past the edge of the porch three white men stood in the

dim light. Their heavy boots rattled the porch  oor, and the boy

backed quickly into the cabin as they pushed their way in.

“There are two things I can smell a mile,” the  rst man said in a

loud voice. “One’s a ham cookin’ and the other’s a thievin’

nigger.”

“Get up,” the second man ordered. The warm, but frozen circle

of man, woman, and three small children around the stove

jumped to their feet. A stool on which a child had been sitting fell

backward and made a loud noise. One of the men kicked it across

the room. The boy did not move from his place just inside the

door.

“Here’s the evidence,” said the  rst man. He jerked at the

grease-spotted cloth on the tin-topped table. The oak slab and the

half-eaten ham fell to the  oor with a great thud and slid against

the wall.

the door kicked it shut and swore about the cold.

“Stick out your hands, boy,” ordered the second man. The boy

started to raise his hands, but the man was already reaching over

the stove, snapping handcu s on the outstretched wrists of his

father.

The click of the handcu s was like the click of a gate latch at

the big house where the boy had once gone with his father to

work. He had swung on the gate and played with the latch until

someone had called out from the house, “If you want to swing on

a gate, boy, swing on the one behind the house. Get away from

the front.”

The third stranger, who had not spoken, turned toward the

door. “I’ll bring up the wagon.” But he did not open the door.

Suddenly the voice of the great dog shattered the heavy,

seemingly endless silence that came between the gru  words of

cabin from the  elds. He had grown restless from waiting to go

hunting with his master and had wandered away to hunt alone.

That’s why he hadn’t warned them. He always barked and

sometimes, even in daytime, he would start from under the porch,

the hair on his back straightening before anyone had sighted a

creature’s movin’ ” the boy’s mother would say.

Now he was growling and scratching at the door. The noise

seemed to undo the fearful shock that had held the smaller

children ashen and motionless. The youngest child began to cry

and hid behind his mother. He tugged at her apron, but the

woman did not move.

The men were speaking roughly to Sounder’s master. “That tear

in your overalls where the striped ticking is—that’s where you

tore them on the door hook of the smokehouse. We found threads

of torn cloth in the hook. You gonna wear nothing but stripes

pretty soon. Big, wide black and white stripes. Easy to hit with a

shotgun.”

The deputy who had started out to bring up the wagon kicked

the closed door and swore at the dog on the other side.

“Go out and hold that mongrel if you don’t want him shot.” He

held the door ajar the width of the boy’s body and thrust him out.

The boy fell on the back of the dog, whose snarling jaws had

pushed into the light between the boy’s legs. A heavy boot half

pushed, half kicked the entangled feet of the sprawled boy and

the nose of the dog and slammed the door. “Get that dog out of

the way and hold him if you don’t want him dead.”

The boy, regaining his balance, dragged Sounder o  the porch

and to the corner of the cabin. Then the deputy, hearing the

barking move back from the door, opened it and came out. He

walked out of the circle of light but returned soon leading a horse

wagon.

The appearance of the horses and the added confusion of

people coming from the cabin roused Sounder to new fury. The

boy felt his knees give. His arms ached, and his grip on the dog’s

collar was beginning to feel clammy and wet. But he held on.

“Chain him up,” said the sheri .

The boy thought they were telling him to chain up Sounder, but

then he saw that one of the men had snapped a long chain on the

handcu s on his father’s wrists. As the men pushed his father into

the back of the wagon his overalls caught on the end of the tail-

gate bolt, and he tore a long hole in his overalls. The bolt took

one side of the ticking patch with it. The man holding the chain

man swung the loose end of the chain, and it struck the boy’s

father across the face. One of the deputies pulled the chain tight

and tied it to the wagon seat. The two deputies climbed on the

wagon seat; the sheri  mounted the saddled horse. The cabin

door was open; the boy’s mother was standing in the doorway. He

did not see his brother and sisters.

Sounder was making an awful noise, a half-strangled mixture of

growl and bark. The boy spoke to him, but the great paws only

dug harder to grip the frozen earth. Inch by inch the boy was

losing his footing. Numbness was beginning to creep up his arms

house.

The wagon started, and the sheri  rode behind it on his horse.

corner of the porch. Sounder raced after the wagon. No one yelled

wasn’t holding the reins turned on the seat, aimed his shotgun at

the dog jumping at the side of the wagon, and  red. Sounder fell

in the road, and the sheri  rode around him. Sounder’s master

was still on his back in the wagon, but he did not raise his head to

look back.

The boy struggled to his feet. His head hurt where he had hit it

against the corner of the porch. Now his mother spoke for the  rst

time since he had opened the door to bring in wood. “Come in,

child, and bring some wood.”

Sounder lay still in the road. The boy wanted to cry; he wanted

to run to Sounder. His stomach felt sick; he didn’t want to see

Sounder. He sank to his knees at the woodpile. His foot hurt

where the door had been slammed on it. He thought he would

carry in two chunk-sticks. Maybe his mother would drag Sounder

out of the road. Maybe she would drag him across the  elds and

bury him. Maybe if she laid him on the porch and put some soft

rags under him tonight, he might rise from the dead, like Lazarus

did in a meetin’-house story. Maybe his father didn’t know

Sounder was dead. Maybe his father was dead in the back of the

over the rough road on his back, and the deputy had turned

around on the seat and shot him.

The second chunk-stick was too big. It slipped out of the boy’s

arms. Two of his  ngers were bruised under the falling wood.

Suddenly a sharp yelp came from the road. Just like when a bee

stung Sounder under the porch or a brier caught his ear in the

Bruised foot and  ngers, throbbing head were forgotten. He raced

into the dark. Sounder tried to rise but fell again. There was

another yelp, this one constrained and plaintive. The boy, trained

in night-sight when the lantern was dimmed so as not to alert the

wood’s creatures, picked out a blurred shape in the dark.

Sounder was running, falling,  oundering, rising. The hind part

the front part from the earth. He twisted, fell, and heaved his

great shoulders. His hind paws dug into the earth. He pushed

himself up. He staggered forward, sideways, then fell again. One

front leg did not touch the ground. A trail of blood, smeared and

blotted, followed him. There was a large spot of mingled blood,

hair, and naked  esh on one shoulder. His head swung from side

to side. He fell again and pushed his body along with his hind

legs. One side of his head was a mass of blood. The blast had torn

o  the whole side of his head and shoulder.

The boy was crying and calling Sounder’s name. He ran

not make a sign to stop. The boy followed the coon dog under the

trailed o  into a pleading whisper.

The cabin door opened, and the boy’s mother stood in the door.

The pale light of the lamp inside ran past the woman, over the

edge of the porch, and picked out the  gure of the boy on his

hands and knees. “Come in, child,” the woman said. “He is only

dying.”

Inside the cabin the younger children sat huddled together near

the stove. The boy rubbed his hands together near the stovepipe

to warm them. His bruised  ngers began to throb again. His foot

and his head hurt, and he felt a lump rising on the side of his

head. If Sounder would whimper or yelp, I would know, the boy

thought. But there was no sound, no thump, thump, thump of a

paw scratching  eas and hitting the  oor underneath.

“Creatures like to die alone,” the mother said after a long time.

“They like to crawl away where nobody can  nd them dead,

especially dogs. He didn’t want to be shot down like a dog in the

road. Some creatures are like people.”

The road, the boy thought. What would it be like? Did the

shotgun blast a hole in the road?

“I ain’t got the wood,” the boy said at last. “I’ll light the lantern

and get it.”

“You know where the wood is. You won’t need the lantern,” the

woman said.

The boy paused in the doorway. Then he took the lantern from

the nail where it hung beside the possum sack. He took the

lantern to the stove, lit a splinter of kindling through the open

door-draft, and held it to the lantern wick the way his father

always did. His mother said nothing to him. She spoke to the

younger children instead. “I ain’t fed you yet.”

When he got outside, the boy did not go to the woodpile. He

followed the trail of blood in its zigzag path along the road. At the

end of it there was a great wide spot, dark on the frozen ground.

Little clumps of Sounder’s hair lay in the blood. There was no

hole where the shotgun had blasted. At the edge of the dark stain,

the boy touched his  nger to something. It was more than half of

Sounder’s long thin ear. The boy shivered and moved his  nger

away. He had seen dead lizards and possums and raccoons, but

he’d never seen a human animal, like Sounder, dead.

It wouldn’t work, he thought. But people always said to put

things under your pillow when you go to bed, and if you make a

wish, it will come true. He touched Sounder’s ear again. It was

cold. He picked it up. One edge of it was bloody, and jagged like

the edge of a broken windowpane. He followed the zigzag trail

back along the road, but he could scarcely see it now. He was

the ground, tried to see under the porch. He called Sounder.

hurt. He put the ear in the pocket of his overall jacket. He was

going to put it under his pillow and wish that Sounder wasn’t

dead.

The wind had stopped blowing. This would have been a good

into the foothills. The boy was still crying. He had not forgotten

the wood. Now he put out the lantern and hung it against the

went into the cabin.

The loneliness that was always in the cabin, except when his

mother was singing or telling a story about the Lord, was heavier

than ever now. It made the boy’s tongue heavy. It pressed against

his eyes, and they burned. It rolled against his ears. His head

seemed to be squeezed inward, and it hurt. He noticed grease

spots on the  oor where the oak slab and the ham had fallen. He

he thought, with that great rip in his overalls.

His mother sat by the stove. “You must eat,” the woman said.

The boy had been outside a long time. His mother had fed the

other children, and they were already in bed. She did not take

she would say with long spaces between. Sometimes she would

would set as long as his mother would let him. Maybe his mother

would let him set and listen all night.

The boy listened for a yelp, a whine, a thump, thump, thump

even move enough to squeak. One chunk-stick burning atop

another in the stove rolled against the stove door with a slight

thump. The boy started toward the cabin door.

“You know it was the stove,” the mother said as she reached for

the poker to push the wood back from the door.

“It sounded outside,” the boy said as he pulled the door closed

after him.

Soon he returned carrying the lantern. “I want to look more,”

he said. “I keep hearin’ things.” He lit the lantern from the stove

she might say “Hang it back, child” as she often did when he

wanted to go along the fencerows and hunt with Sounder after

dark.

Outside, he murmured to himself, “That was the stove, I

reckon.” He put the lantern on the ground and tried to see under

the cabin. Nothing moved in the dim light. He wished the light

knees, he touched the lantern and tipped it over. He grabbed it by

“Don’t let it fall over; it’ll explode” his father had said to him so

many times when they hunted together. He sucked his burned

someone had stepped on it. The mean man who had kicked him

with his big boot, the boy thought. He straightened it as best he

could with his hurt  ngers and put it on the porch.

He blew out the lantern and hung it by the possum sack. He

had seen going into the foothills had disappeared. There were

gravestones behind the meetin’ house. Some were almost hidden

in the brambles. If the deputy sheri  had turned around on the

seat of the wagon and shot his father, the visiting preacher and

somebody would bring him back and bury him behind the meetin’

house, the boy thought. And if Sounder dies, I won’t drag him

over the hard earth. I’ll carry him. I know I can carry him if I try

hard enough, and I will bury him across the  eld, near the

fencerow, under the big jack oak tree.

The boy picked up Sounder’s bent tin pan and carried it into the

surprise and half opened her mouth. But, seeing the boy’s face in

the lamplight, she closed her mouth, and the rocker came slowly

of the stove.

In the corner of the room next to the dish cupboard, the boy

 lled Sounder’s tin with cold ham-boiling from the possum kettle.

were sorry she had asked and would like to take it back.

“For if he comes out.”

“You’re hungry, child. Feed yourself.”

The boy put Sounder’s tin under the porch, closed the door,

pushed the night latch, sat down behind the stove, and began to

eat his supper.

OceanofPDF.com

III

IN THE MORNING the boy’s mother did not cook any pork sausage for

breakfast. The ham was on the tin-topped table, but she did not

uncover it. Everybody had biscuits and milk gravy. There was still

a faint smell of ham, but the boy missed the scent of sausage

coming up to him as he stood warming himself. He had hurried

out and called Sounder and looked under the house before he had

 nished buttoning his shirt, but his mother had made him come

in. She knew he would be crawling under the cabin, so she made

him put on last year’s worn-out overalls and a ragged jacket of his

father’s that came down to his knees. It wouldn’t keep out much

cold because it was full of holes.

The boy’s mother put what was left of the pork sausage and the

ham in a meal sack. When she had wrapped her walnut kernels in

brown paper and tied them with string, she tied a scarf around

her head and put on a heavy brown sweater that had pink  annel-

outing patches on the elbows. She put the brown package in the

basket she always carried when she went to the store. She put the

meal sack over her shoulder.

“I’m taking the kernels to the store to sell them,” she said to the

boy. She did not say where she was going with the meal sack she

had swung over her shoulder.

“Watch the  re, child,” she said. “Don’t go out of hollerin’

distance and leave the young ones. Don’t let them out in the cold.

“Warm some mush in the skillet for you all to eat at dinnertime.

I’ll be home before suppertime.

“Whatever you do, child, don’t leave the children with a roaring

 re and go lookin’ for Sounder. You ain’t gonna  nd him this day.

If a stranger comes, don’t say nothin’.”

The boy had nodded each time she spoke. He thought he would

say “Yes” or “Don’t worry, I will,” but he didn’t. He pushed the

younger children back out of the cold and closed the door.

As his mother stepped o  the porch and started for the road she

began to hum softly to herself. It was a song the boy had heard

her sing many nights in the cabin:

You gotta walk that lonesome valley,

You gotta walk it by yourself,

Ain’t nobody else gonna walk it for you.

The boy wanted to run after her. He watched as she became

smaller and smaller, until the meal sack over her shoulder was

just a white speck. The rest of her became a part of the brown

road and the gray earth. When the white speck had faded into the

earth, the boy looked up at the sky.

“No sun to thaw things out today,” he said aloud to himself. His

father always spoke aloud to the wind and the sky, and sometimes

talk.

People would be very mean to his mother today, the boy

thought. He wondered if she would tell them that the ham had

slid across the  oor. If she told them, they might just throw it out

and feed it to their dogs. They might let his mother keep it and

bring it home again. They wouldn’t let her keep the pork sausage,

for it was wrapped in clean white paper and not cooked. They

might push and pull his mother and put her in the back of a

spring wagon and take her away too. She would spill the walnut

kernels, and then she wouldn’t be able to sell them to buy

sowbelly and potatoes.

The boy had hoped the sun would shine. It would soften the

frozen crust of earth and make it easier for him to dig a grave for

one would come along and see him carrying the grub hoe and

he was doing. If anybody passed while he was digging the grave,

him o  the land.

He felt like crying, but he didn’t. Crying would only bother him.

He would have his hands full of tools or be carrying Sounder’s

because he wouldn’t have a free hand to wipe it.

He took in an armload of wood and punched up the  re. “Don’t

to go out some more.” He went to his bed and took Sounder’s ear

from under the pillow. He would bury it with Sounder. He

smelled his pillow. It still smelled clean and fresh. He put the ear

in his pocket so the children wouldn’t ask questions as he passed

them on the way out. He smoothed his pillow. He was glad his

mother washed his sheet and pillowcase every week, just like she

did for the people who lived in the big houses with curtains on

the windows. About twice a year his mother washed a lot of

curtains. The clothesline was  lled with them, and they were thin

and light and ru ed and  u y. It was more fun to rub your face

against the curtains than on the clean sheets every Monday. The

curtains, moving in the breeze, were like the sea’s foam. The boy

had never seen sea foam, but his mother had told him that when

the Lord calmed the mighty Jordan for people to cross over, the

water moved in little ripples like curtains in a breeze, and soft

white foam made ru es on top of the water.

remembered that if he put his face close against the curtains on

the washline he could see through them. He thought there were

always eyes, close against the curtains, looking out at him. He

watched the windows out of the corner of his eye; he always felt

scared until he had passed. Passing a cabin was di erent. In a

cabin window there were just faces with real eyes looking out.

He could go out now, he thought. The wood in the stove had

burned down some, and it would be safe. Besides, he would be

close by for a while. Getting the body of Sounder from under the

they would ask a lot of questions like “Why is Sounder dead?” and

“Will he stay dead?” and many more that he would not want to

answer.

“When I’m out, don’t be yellin’ for me. I’ll be through in a

while,” he said to the smallest child, who was looking out of the

window, his chin barely high enough to rest on the sill.

There’s no hurry, the boy thought. I have all day, and it’s still

early. And he looked out of the window too. “If you’re inside you

look out, and if you’re outside you look in, but what looks both

ways? That’s a riddle; what’s the answer?” He directed it to no

the boy repeated, and then he answered his own riddle. “The

paid any attention.

“I must go now,” said the boy to his brother and sisters, “before

it gets colder. The wind is starting up, so keep the door shut.”

Sounder had not died in his favorite spot right behind the porch

steps where he had a hole dug out and where the boy’s father had

put two co ee sacks for a pallet. His mother had said, “Sounder

will crawl to the darkest, farthest part of the cabin.” That’s why

she had made the boy put on his ragged clothes.

The boy could not see all the way under the cabin. At one time

rats had lived there, and they had pushed up the earth in some

places so that it almost touched the beams. They did this so they

could gnaw through the  oor from below.

He hurt his head and shoulders on nails sticking down from

above as he crawled. He hurt his knees and elbows on broken

glass, rusty sardine cans, and broken pieces of crockery and

dishes. The dry dust got in his mouth and tasted like lime and

grease. Under the cabin it smelled stale and dead, like old

carcasses and snakes. The boy was glad it was winter because in

summer there might have been dry-land moccasins and

copperheads under the cabin. He crawled from front to back,

looking along the spaces between the beams.

Sounder was not to be seen. The boy would have to go back

and forth. Maybe Sounder had pushed with his hind feet and dug

a hole into which he had settled. The threadbare knees of last

year’s overalls opened up, and his bare knees scraped the soil. His

them out.

He crawled over every spot under the cabin, but Sounder’s body

was not there. The boy felt in his pocket. He had lost Sounder’s

ear under the cabin. It made no di erence. It could be buried

there.

But where was Sounder’s body? he wondered. Perhaps the

injuries in the side of his head and shoulder were only skin

wounds. They looked so terrible, but maybe they were not bad

after all. Perhaps Sounder had limped down the road, the way the

wagon had taken his master, and died. Perhaps he had only been

knocked senseless and that was why he zigzagged so crazily,

running for the cabin.

No wild creature could have carried the dead body away. Foxes

could carry o  dead squirrels and possums. But no animal was big

enough to drag Sounder’s body away. Maybe the boy, looking

under the cabin with the lantern, had caused Sounder to crawl out

the other side and die in the brown stalk land.

The boy was crying now. Not that there was any new or sudden

sorrow. There just seemed to be nothing else to  ll up the vast

lostness of the moment. His nose began to run and itch. The tears

ran down through the cobwebs and dust that covered his face,

hands and mixed dust with tears. His eyes began to smart.

He followed the road the way the wagon had taken his father as

far as he dared leave the  re and the children in the cabin, still in

hollering distance. There was no sign of Sounder’s body. He

spiraled the brown stalk land in ever-widening circles, searching

the fencerows as he went. Under the jack oaks and the

cottonwoods there was nothing. In the matted Scotch-broom

tangle he visualized the great tan body as he carefully picked each

step. But the dog was not there.

OceanofPDF.com

IV

AFTER THE BOY had fed the children and eaten something himself, he

sat down by the warm stove and looked out of the window. There

was nothing else to do. Now and then a cloud would cross the sun

that had  nally burned its way out of the gray. The boy watched

the cloud shadows roll over the  elds and pass over the cabin.

They darkened the window as they passed.

He carried in wood for the night before the sun began to

weaken. Then he looked out of the window again to where his

mother would appear. Finally he saw a speck moving on the road.

He watched it grow.

“She’s coming,” he said to the younger children, and they

crowded around him and pushed their faces against the window.

“She’s been gone long enough to walk to town and more,” he

added.

“What will she bring?” one of the children asked.

“She’ll bring nothin’, but maybe things to eat. She won’t bring

no stick candy. Don’t ask her for none. Don’t ask her nothin’.”

Several times during the day the boy had said to himself,

“Maybe they’ll let him come home if she takes back the stu .

her.

“I gave the stu  back,” she said when she got to the cabin.

The boy’s throat hurt with a great lump, and when he

swallowed, it would hurt more. If his father had come, it would

have been easy. Together they could have found Sounder’s body

and buried him.

When the boy’s mother heard that he had not found Sounder

under the cabin, she stood in the doorway and thought for a long

time. If one of the children had stood in the door that long, she

would have said “Go in or out, child.”

“Creatures like to die under somethin’,” she said at last, “and

there ain’t nothin’ else close to crawl under. He wasn’t hit in his

vitals, I reckon. He’s got a  esh wound. He’s gone into the woods

to draw out the poison with oak-leaf acid.”

Now she shut the door and put her basket on the tin-topped

table. “Poke up the  re,” she said to the boy. “Oak leaves has

strong acid that toughens the skin, just like the oak bark that they

use to tan leather in the tannery. The creature beds down with the

wound against a heap of oak leaves. The leaves make a poultice

that draws out the poison and heals the wound with a hard brown

scab. That’s why creatures head for the swampland around the big

water when the mange hits. Wet leaves heals better.”

“Sounder’s blood would wettin the leaves,” the boy said after he

had stood a long time with the poker in his hand. His eyes were

shape and turn to blue and red.

“Sounder was jumping at the wagon and hard to hit,” the boy’s

o  the hide on his head and shoulder. If he was, he’s gone to the

to do. If he ain’t dead now, he’ll come limpin’ home, powerful

hungry, in time.”

“Tomorrow or the day after?” the boy asked.

“Longer, maybe four days, or more like seven. But don’t be all

hope, child. If he had deep head wounds, he might be addled

crazy and not know where he wandered o  to die.”

The boy’s mother had brought home the empty meal sack. In

her basket she had some fat meat, potatoes, and a small bottle of

vanilla  avoring, which she had bought with the money she got

for her walnut kernels. From the bottom of the basket she took

the folded brown paper bag into which she poured each night’s

pickin’s and put it on the shelf. She also brought home an empty

cardboard box which the storekeeper had given her. She didn’t

say where she had been, besides the store, or what had happened.

The boy could see that her eyes were  lled with hurt and said

nothing. The younger children remembered not to ask anything

except, looking in the empty box, one said, “Nothin in here?”

“I’m gonna use it to put a cake in,” the mother said.

“Better go out and crack nuts for the night’s pickin’ before

dark,” she said to the boy.

The boy scooped up a tin pail of nuts from the big box under

still sore from crawling under the cabin, he hesitated a long time

and then another, tracing the fencerows that had more oaks than

other trees, the far lowland woods and the foothills. “I’ll go there

 rst tomorrow,” he said to himself as he faced the foothills.

“There’s big patches of oak trees there. And whenever Sounder

was given his head, he picked the hills for huntin’.”

When night came, his mother hummed and picked kernels. She

did not tell a story. The boy wanted to ask who carried in wood to

keep the people in jail warm. He knew they had big stoves in big

jails. Once his mother had told him a story about three people

named Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego who were in jail.

Some mean governor or sheri  got mad and had them thrown

right into the jail stove, big as a furnace, but the Lord blew out

the  re and cooled the big stove in a second. And when the jail

keeper opened the stove door, there stood Shadrach, Meshach,

and Abed-nego singing:

Cool water, cool water;

The Lord’s got green pastures and cool water.

“Tell me about Joseph in the jail and the stone quarry in Egypt

and chiselin’ out rocks to make ole Pharaoh’s gravestone,” the boy

to his thinking.

No stove could be that big, he thought. He watched the red

coals through the open draft in the stove door brighten each time

the wind blew loud enough to make a low whistling noise in the

stove, but the boy did not try to convince himself that it might be

the thump of Sounder scratching  eas underneath the  oor. He

was thinking of tomorrow.

Tomorrow he would go into the woods and look for Sounder.

“The wind whistlin’ in the pipe is bothersome,” he said. He hated

the cold wind. It blew through his clothes and chilled his body

inside and made him shiver. He hoped the wind would not be

blowing in the woods tomorrow. The wind made the woods noisy.

The boy liked the woods when they were quiet. He understood

quiet. He could hear things in the quiet. But quiet was better in

the woods than it was in the cabin. He didn’t hear things in cabin

quiet. Cabin quiet was long and sad.

“Turn the pipe-damper a little and the whistlin’ will stop,” his

mother said at last.

The next day he walked the great woodlands, calling Sounder’s

name. The wind blew through his clothes and chilled him inside.

When he got home after dark, his clothes were torn. His throat

hurt with a great lump choking him. His mother fed him and said,

“Child, child, you must not go into the woods again. Sounder

might come home again. But you must learn to lose, child. The

born to lose, I reckon. But Sounder might come back.”

But weeks went by, and Sounder did not come back.

One night the boy learned why his mother had brought home

the bottle of vanilla  avoring. Now it was Christmas and she was

making a cake. When the four layers were spread out on the tin-

topped table and she began to ice them, the boy noticed that she

put three together in a large cake and made a small one of the

leftover layer.

“Why we having two cakes?” the boy asked. But she was

humming to herself and did not answer him. When she had

 nished, she put the small cake on the top shelf of the dish

cupboard. The big one she put in the cardboard box she had

brought from the store.

The sweet smell of baking and vanilla had drawn the smaller

children from the stove to the edge of the table. The woman

reached over or walked around them as she worked. “I’m done,”

she  nally said. “You can lick the pans.”

The boy had not moved from his chair by the stove. Today he

had searched the oak clumps along the far fencerows for Sounder.

He never got the sweet pan till last, anyway. It always went from

came.

handed him the icing pan.

In the morning the woman told the boy that she wanted him to

walk to town, to the jail behind the courthouse, and take the cake

to his father. “It’s a troublesome trip,” she said. “But they won’t

the cardboard box and said, “Carry it  at if your hands don’t get

too cold. Then it’ll look mighty pretty when you fetch it to him.”

She stood at the edge of the porch until he was far enough away

not to be able to look back and see her crying, then called to him,

“Whatever you do, child, act perkish and don’t grieve your

father.”

On the road, the boy felt afraid. He had been to the town at

Christmastime before. Not on Christmas Day, but a few days

before, to help his father carry mistletoe and bunches of

bittersweet berries that his father sold by the wall in front of the

courthouse or on the corner by the bank. And sometimes, when it

was getting late and they still had trimmings to sell, his father

would go to the back door of houses along the street and say

“Ma’am, would you need some trimmin’s?” and hold up the

biggest sprig of mistletoe left in his grain sack. They usually sold

most of the mistletoe, the boy remembered, but bunches of

bittersweet that the boy had carried all day were always left over

for nothin’ now” his father would say.

From early fall until gathering time, the father and boy kept

Bittersweet was easy. “Pull down one vine and trim it, and you’ve

got as much as a man can carry” his father always said. “But it

takes a heap of fearful climbin’ for mistletoe.” They had already

big load, she might have taken it,” the boy said to himself.

The boy’s fearful feeling increased as he got nearer town. There

were big houses and behind the curtained windows there were

eyes looking out at him. There would be more people now, and

somebody might say “What you got in that box, boy?” or “Where

you goin’, boy?”

Church bells were ringing in the town. It was Christmas, and

some people went to church on Christmas. In town the people he

saw were laughing and talking. No one noticed him and he was

glad. He looked at the store windows out of the corner of his eye.

They were silvery and gold and green and red and sparkling. They

were  lled with toys and beautiful things. With the Christmas

money from peddling, his father had bought what toys he could

for the boy and his little brother and sisters. They had worn-out

given them to her to bring home.

was sure he could learn to read if he had a book. He could read

 gures. He wanted to stop and stand and look straight at the

Perhaps the people had o ered his mother old books, but she had

they o ered her the books their children had used up and worn

not that many books in the world.

It was cold, but there were a few people standing or sitting

along the wall in front of the courthouse. Winter or summer, there

were always people there. The boy wondered if they knew it was

Christmas. They didn’t look happy like some of the people he had

seen. He knew they were looking at him, so he hurried quickly

past and around the corner to the back of the courthouse. The

steps going up to a wide door. But the back was gray cement and

three  oors high, with iron bars over all the windows.

The only door that led into the jail had a small square of glass

at about the height of a man, and there were iron bars over the

inside the windows with the iron bars. Somewhere a voice was

singing “God’s gonna trouble the water.” From one of the

windows there came the sound of laughter. Now and then a door

slammed with the deep clash of iron on iron. There was a rattle of

tin pans. The boy felt very lonely. The town was as lonely as the

cabin, he thought.

A large red-faced man opened the door and said, “You’ll have to

wait. It ain’t visitin’ hours yet. Who do you want to see? You’ll

have to wait.” And he slammed the door before the boy could

speak.

It was cold on the gray side of the building, so the boy went to

the corner near the wall where the people and visitors stood or

sat. The sun was shining there. The boy had forgotten it was still

Christmas, the waiting seemed so long. A drunk man staggered

along the street in front of the courthouse wall, saying “Merry

and he smiled at the boy too.

Finally the great clock on the roof of the courthouse struck

twelve. It frightened the boy because it seemed to shake the town.

Now the red-faced man opened the door and let several people in.

Inside, the man lined everybody up and felt their clothes and

the top. The boy could hear iron doors opening and closing. Long

squeezed the cake in his hands and broke it into four pieces. “This

swore and threw the pieces back in the box. The boy had been

very hungry. Now he was not hungry. He was afraid. The man

shoved the box into the boy’s hands and swore again. Part of the

cake fell to the  oor; it was only a box of crumbs now. The man

swore again and made the boy pick up the crumbs from the  oor.

The boy hated the man with the red face with the same total

but helpless hatred he had felt when he saw his father chained,

chain the deputy sheri  behind his own wagon and then scare the

horse so that it would run faster than the cruel man could. The

deputy would fall and bounce and drag on the frozen road. His

 ne leather jacket would be torn more than he had torn his

father’s overalls. He would yell and curse, and that would make

the horse go faster. And the boy would just watch, not trying to

stop the wagon….

The boy would like to see the big red-faced man crumpled on

the  oor with the crumbs. Besides the red face, the boy had

noticed the fat, bulging neck that folded down over the man’s

collar and pushed up in wrinkled circles under his chin. The bull

the cattle chute at the big house where his father worked. The

horse doctor had been trying to vaccinate the bull in the neck, but

the rope through the ring in the bull’s nose didn’t keep the bull

against the side of the chute. Then the horse doctor had gotten

mad and said, “Get a chain. I’ll make him stand still.”

When the chain was snapped around the bull’s neck, the farm

hands pulled it over the crossbar of the chute posts and hooked it.

But when the horse doctor stuck the bull in the neck, he lunged

chain, and choked himself to death before one of the farm hands

could jab him with a pitchfork and make him slacken the chain.

The legs of the bull folded under him and the chain buried itself

in the fat of his neck. When the farm hands  nally got the chain

unhooked from the crossbar, the bull’s head fell in the dirt, and

blood oozed out of its mouth and nostrils….

The bull-necked man would sag to his knees, the boy thought,

and crumple into a heap on the  oor. Just the way the bull did,

the boy thought, and blood would ooze out of his mouth and

nose.

“Get up,” the red-faced man said, “you wanta take all day?”

The boy stood up. He felt weak and his knees shook, but there

were no more tears in his eyes.

the bars, looking at him. Each step echoed against the iron ceiling

grated corridor a sad voice was singing:

Far away on Judah’s plains

The shepherds watched their sheep.

The boy’s father stood with his hands on the bars. He did not

have his hands and feet chained together. Seeing the hands that

could handle a hot pot lid without a pot rag, open the stove door

without using a poker, or skin a possum by holding the hind legs

of the carcass with one hand and the hide with the other and just

pulling, the boy knew his father could have choked the cruel man

with the bull neck.

The father looked at the boy and said, “Child.” On the way, the

boy had thought about what he would say to his father. He had

practiced talking about his mother selling kernels at the store and

buying the cake makings, his little brother and sisters being all

right, no strangers coming past, not  nding Sounder’s body. And

he was going to ask his father where Sounder came to him along

the road when he wasn’t more’n a pup. He practiced saying them

all over and over to get the quiver and the quiet spells out of his

perkish and don’t grieve your father.”

But the boy was full of mixed hate and pity now, and it addled

attached on the inside. The boy had left the lid of the box on the

was a cake, before—” But he couldn’t  nish. An awful quiet spell

destroyed all his practice.

“Sounder might not be dead,” the boy said. He knew his father

was grieved, for he swallowed hard and the quiet spells came to

him too.

“I’ll be back ’fore long,” said his father.

From somewhere down the corridor there came a loud belly

laugh, and a loud voice called out, “Listen to the man talk.”

“Tell her not to grieve.” His father was almost whispering now.

“Sounder didn’t die under the cabin.” But the boy couldn’t keep

the quivering out of his voice.

“Tell her not to send you no more.” The quiet spells were

getting longer. The man stopped looking through the bars at the

boy and looked down at the cake.

“If he wasn’t shot in his vitals,” the boy said, “he might get

healed in the woods.” Then there was a long quiet spell that was

split in the middle by the loud clank of an iron door banging shut.

“Tell her I’ll send word with the visitin’ preacher.”

The big red-faced man with the bull neck opened the corridor

he had felt standing outside the jail door. He choked up. He had

grieved his father. He hated the red-faced man, so he wouldn’t cry

until he got outside.

“Come on, boy,” the man yelled, swinging the big key ring.

“Go, child,” the father said. “Hurry, child.”

The boy was the last person through the big iron door. The bull-

necked man pushed him and said, “Git, boy, or next time you

won’t get in.”

OceanofPDF.com

V

THE BOY MOVED quickly around the corner and out of sight of the iron

door and the gray cement walls of the jail. At the wall in front of

the courthouse he stood for a while and looked back. When he

had come, he was afraid, but he felt good in one way because he

would see his father. He was bringing him a cake for Christmas.

And he wasn’t going to let his father know he was grieved. So his

father wouldn’t be grieved.

Now the sun had lost its strength. There were only a few people

loa ng around the courthouse wall, so the boy sat for a spell. He

felt numb and tired. What would he say to his mother? He would

tell her that the jailer was mean to visitors but didn’t say nothing

to the people in jail. He wouldn’t tell her about the cake. When he

told her his father had said she shouldn’t send him again, that he

would send word by the visiting preacher, she would say “You

grieved him, child. I told you to be perk so you wouldn’t grieve

him.”

Nobody came near where the boy sat or passed on the street in

front of the wall. He had forgotten the most important thing, he

thought. He hadn’t asked his father where Sounder had come to

him on the road when he wasn’t more’n a pup. That didn’t make

any di erence.

necked man had ruined everything, the boy had thought his

father would begin to think and say “If a stray ever follard you

could fetch it home and keep it for a dog.”

“Wouldn’t do no good now,” the boy murmured to himself.

Even if he found a stray on the way home, his mother would say

“I’m afraid, child. Don’t bring it in the cabin. If it’s still here when

mornin’ comes, you take it down the road and scold it and run so

it won’t foller you no more. If somebody come lookin’, you’d be in

awful trouble.”

A great part of the way home the boy walked in darkness. In

the big houses he saw beautiful lights and candles in the

windows. Several times dogs rushed to the front gates and barked

as he passed. But no stray pup came to him along the lonely,

empty stretches of road. In the dark he thought of the bull-necked

man crumpled on the  oor in the cake crumbs, like the strangled

bull in the cattle chute, and he walked faster. At one big house

the mailbox by the road had a lighted lantern hanging on it. The

boy walked on the far side of the road so he wouldn’t show in the

the boy’s father had once told him.

When court was over, they would take his father to a road

when they took his father away in the wagons where convicts

were penned up in huge wooden crates, he could follow.

The younger children were already in bed when the boy got

that might make his mother feel bad, questions like “Is everybody

chained up in jail? How long do people stay in jail at one time?”

The boy’s mother did not ask hurtful questions. She asked if the

boy got in all right and if it was warm in the jail. The boy told her

that the jailer was mean to visitors but that he didn’t say nothing

to the people in jail. He told her he heard some people singing in

the jail.

“Sounder ain’t come home?” the boy said to his mother after he

had talked about the jail. He had looked under the porch and

called before he came into the cabin.

Now he went out, calling and looking around the whole cabin.

He started to light the lantern to look more, but his mother said,

“Hang it back, child. Ain’t no use to fret yourself. Eat your supper,

you must be famished.”

“He said not to come no more,” the boy  nally said to his

mother to ask him if he had been perk and didn’t grieve his

see the red-faced man lying on the jail  oor with blood oozing out

of the corners of his mouth. After a long quiet spell the rocker

began to squeak, and it made the boy jump, but his mother didn’t

notice. She began to rock as she picked out walnut kernels. She

hummed for a while, and then she began to sing like she was

almost whispering for no one to hear but herself:

You’ve gotta walk that lonesome valley,

You’ve gotta walk it by yourself,

Ain’t nobody else gonna walk it for you …

In bed, the pressure of the bed slats through the straw tick felt

good against the boy’s body. His pillow smelled fresh, and it was

smooth and soft. He was tired, but he lay awake for a long time.

He thought of the store windows full of so many things. He

thought of the beautiful candles in windows. He dreamed his

father’s hands were chained against the prison bars and he was

still standing there with his head down. He dreamed that a

wonderful man had come up to him as he was trying to read the

store signs aloud and had said, “Child, you want to learn, don’t

you?”

In the morning the boy lay listening to his mother as she

the stovepipe as she adjusted it. She was singing softly to herself.

Then the boy thought he heard another familiar sound, a faint

whine on the cabin porch. He listened. No, it couldn’t be. Sounder

always scratched before he whined, and the scratching was

always louder than the whine. Besides, it was now almost two

months later, and the boy’s mother had said he might be back in a

week. No, he was not dreaming. He heard it again. He had been

sleeping in his shirt to keep warm, so he only had to pull on his

overalls as he went. His mother had stopped singing and was

listening.

There on the cabin porch, on three legs, stood the living

skeleton of what had been a mighty coon hound. The tail began to

wag, and the hide made little ripples back and forth over the ribs.

One side of the head and shoulders was reddish brown and

hairless; the acid of the oak leaves had tanned the surface of the

wound the color of leather. One front foot dangled above the

 oor. The stub of an ear stuck out on one side, and there was no

eye on that side, only a dark socket with a splinter of bone

showing above it. The dog raised his good ear and whined. His

one eye looked up at the lantern and the possum sack where they

hung against the wall. The eye looked past the boy and his

mother. Where was his master? “Poor creature. Poor creature,”

said the mother and turned away to get him food. The boy felt

of his head. The tail wagged faster, and he licked the boy’s hand.

The shattered shoulder never grew together enough to carry

weight, so the great hunter with the single eye, his head held to

one side so he could see, never hopped much farther from the

cabin than the spot in the road where he had tried to jump on the

porch or by the side of the road, the one eye was always turned in

the direction his master had gone.

The boy got used to the way the great dog looked. The stub of

ear didn’t bother him, and the one eye that looked up at him was

warm and questioning. But why couldn’t he bark? “He wasn’t hit

in the neck” the boy would say to his mother. “He eats all right,

his throat ain’t scarred.” But day after day when the boy snapped

his  ngers and said “Sounder, good Sounder,” no excited bark

burst from the great throat. When something moved at night, the

whine was louder, but it was still just a whine.

Before Sounder was shot, the boy’s mother always said “Get the

pan, child” or “Feed your dog, child.” Now she sometimes got the

pan herself and took food out to Sounder. The boy noticed that

sometimes his mother would stop singing when she put the food

pan down at the edge of the porch. Sometimes she would stand

and look at the hunting lantern and possum sack where they

hung, unused, against the cabin wall. …

The town and the jail seemed to become more remote and the

Uncertainty made the days of waiting longer too.

The boy waited for the visiting preacher to come and bring

word of his father. He thought the people for whom his mother

washed the soft curtains could certainly write and would write a

letter for his mother. But would someone in the jail read it for his

father? Perhaps none of the people in jail could read, and the big

man with the red face would just tear it up and swear. The

visiting preacher might write a letter for the boy’s father. But how

would it get to the cabin since no mailman passed and there was

no mailbox like the boy had seen on the wider road nearer the

town?

The boy wanted to go to the town to  nd out what had

happened to his father. His mother always said “Wait, child,

wait.” When his mother returned laundry to the big houses, she

asked the people to read her the court news from their

newspapers. One night she came home with word of the boy’s

father; it had been read to her from the court news. When the

younger children had gone to bed, she said to the boy, “Court’s

over.” And then there was one of those long quiet spells that

always made the boy feel numb and weak.

“You won’t have to fret for a while about seein’ him in jail. He’s

gone to hard labor.”

“For how long?” the boy asked.

“It won’t be as long as it might. Folks has always said he could

do two men’s work in a day. He’ll get time o  for hard work and

judge said it.”

“Where’s he gonna be at?” the boy asked after he had

swallowed the great lump that  lled up his throat and choked

him.

“Didn’t say. The people that has the paper says it don’t ever say

wher’ they gonna be at. But it’s the county or the state. Ain’t

never outside the state, the people says.”

“He’ll send word,” the boy said.

OceanofPDF.com

VI

NOW THE CABIN was even quieter than it had been before loneliness put

its stamp on everything. Sounder rolled his one eye in lonely

dreaming. The boy’s mother had longer periods of just humming

without drifting into soft singing. The boy helped her stretch

longer clotheslines from the cabin to the cottonwood trees at the

edge of the  elds. In the spring the boy went to the  elds to work.

He was younger than the other workers. He was afraid and lonely.

He heard them talking quietly about his father. He went to do

yard work at the big houses where he had gathered weeds behind

his father. “How old are you?” a man asked once when he was

paying the boy his wages. “You’re a hard worker for your age.”

The boy did not remember his age. He knew he had lived a

long, long time.

And the long days and months and seasons built a powerful

restlessness into the boy. “Don’t fret” his mother would say when

he  rst began to talk of going to  nd his father. “Time’s passin’.

Won’t be much longer now.”

To the end of the county might be a far journey, and out of the

county would be a far, far journey, but I’ll go, the boy thought.

long journey. Jacob goes into a strange land where his uncle lives,

goes on the longest journey of all and has more troubles, but the

Lord watches over him. And in Bible-story journeys, ain’t no

journey hopeless. Everybody  nds what they suppose to  nd.”

The state had many road camps which moved from place to

the boy would go searching in autumn when work in the  elds

was  nished. One year he heard “Yes, the man you speak of was

here, but I heard he was moved to the quarry in Gilmer County.”

One year it had been “Yes, he was in the quarry, but he was sick

in the winter and was moved to the bean farm in Bartow County.”

More often a guard would chase him away from the gate or from

standing near the high fence with the barbed wire along the top

of it. And the guard would laugh and say “I don’t know no names;

I only know numbers. Besides, you can’t visit here, you can only

visit in jail.” Another would sneer “You wouldn’t know your old

man if you saw him, he’s been gone so long. You sure you know

who your pa is, kid?”

The men in striped convict suits, riding in the mule-drawn

wagons with big wooden frames resembling large pig crates,

yelled as they rode past the watching boy, “Hey, boy, looking for

slats of the crate for a familiar face. He would watch men walking

in line, dragging chains on their feet, to see if he could recognize

the  elds to the cabin. Once he listened outside the gate on a

Sunday afternoon and heard a preacher telling about the Lord

loosening the chains of Peter when he had been thrown into

prison. Once he stood at the guardhouse door of a quarry, and

some ladies dressed in warm heavy coats and boots came and

sang Christmas songs.

In his wandering the boy learned that the words men use most

the roads from one town to another, but if he could, he would

follow railroad tracks. On the roads there were people, and they

frightened the boy. The railroads usually ran through the  at

silent countryside where the boy could walk alone with his

terrifying thoughts. He learned that railroad stations, post o ces,

courthouses, and churches were places to escape from the cold for

a few hours in the late night.

His journeys in search of his father accomplished one wonderful

thing. In the towns he found that people threw newspapers and

magazines into trash barrels, so he could always  nd something

with which to practice his reading. When he was tired, or when

he waited at some high wire gate, hoping his father would pass in

practice the small-lettered words.

In his lonely journeying, the boy had learned to tell himself the

stories his mother had told him at night in the cabin. He liked the

way they always ended with the right thing happening. And

people in stories were never feared of anything. Sometimes he

found and make new stories. But the ends never came out right,

and they made him more afraid. The people he tried to put in

people he wouldn’t be afraid of if he met them on the road. He

thought he liked the David and Joseph stories best of all. “Why

you want ’em told over’n over?” his mother had asked so many

times. Now, alone on a bed of pine needles, he remembered that

he could never answer his mother. He would just wait, and if his

mother wasn’t sad, with her lips stretched thin, she would stop

humming and tell about David the boy, or King David. If she felt

good and started long enough before bedtime, he would hear

about Joseph the slave-boy, Joseph in prison, Joseph the dreamer,

and Joseph the Big Man in Egypt. And when she had  nished all

about Joseph, she would say “Ain’t no earthly power can make a

story end as pretty as Joseph’s; ’twas the Lord.”

The boy listened to the wind passing through the tops of the tall

pines; he thought they moved like giant brooms sweeping the sky.

The moonlight raced down through the broken spaces of swaying

the stories his mother had told him about King David. The Lord

had said to David that when he heard the wind moving in the

on his side and he would win. When David moved his army

around into the hills to attack his enemy, he heard the mighty

roar of the wind moving in the tops of the trees, and he cried out

to his men that the Lord was moving above them into battle.

The boy listened to the wind. He could hear the mighty roaring.

He thought he heard the voice of David and the tramping of many

feet. He wasn’t afraid with David near. He thought he saw a

lantern moving far o  in the woods, and as he fell asleep he

thought he heard the deep, ringing voice of Sounder rising out of

his great throat, riding the mist of the lowlands.

OceanofPDF.com

VII

WHEN THE BOY came home after each long trip in search of his father,

the crippled coon hound would hobble far down the road to meet

him, wag his tail, stand on his hind legs, and paw the boy with his

good front paw. But never a sound beyond a deep whine came

from him. The bits of news he might bring home his mother

received in silence. Someone had heard that his father was

moved. Someone had been in the same work gang with his father

for four months last summer on the Walker county road. When

she had heard all he had heard, she would say “There’s patience,

child, and waitin’ that’s got to be.”

Word drifted back that there had been a terrible dynamite blast

in one of the quarries that had killed twelve convicts and

wounded several others. His mother had had the people read her

the story from their newspapers when she carried the laundry.

None of the prisoners killed was the boy’s father.

The months and seasons of searching dragged into years. The

boy helped his mother carry more and more baskets of laundry to

and from the big houses; the clotheslines grew longer and longer.

The other children, except for the littlest, could fetch and tote too,

but they didn’t like to go by themselves.

something or when somebody said that a road camp was moving,

the way and say nothing. Looking back from far down the road,

the boy would see her watching at the edge of the porch. She

seemed to understand the compulsion that started him on each

long, fruitless journey with new hope.

Once the boy waited outside the tall wire fence of a road camp.

Some convicts were whitewashing stones along the edge of a

pathway that came toward the gate near where he stood. One

might be his father, he thought. He could not tell until they got

over the stones. He leaned against the fence and hooked his

might know something anyway, he thought. He wished they

would stand up and walk from one stone to the next. Then he

would know his father easily by his walk. He could still remember

the sound of his footsteps approaching the cabin after dark, the

easy roll of the never-hurrying step that was the same when he

went to work in the morning and when he came home from the

long day in the  elds. The boy had even been able to tell his

father’s walk by the swing of the lantern at his side. But none of

the men whitewashing the round rocks that lined the path stood

up and walked. They crawled the few feet from stone to stone,

and crawling, they all looked the same.

Suddenly something crashed against the fence in front of the

boy’s face. A jagged piece of iron tore open the skin and crushed

had been sitting under a tree with a shotgun across his knees, get

up and come to a toolbox  lled with picks and crowbars which

stood near the fence.

The piece of iron lay on the inside of the fence at the boy’s feet.

to wire and fell on the ground. The boy pulled his  ngers away

from the wire mesh and began to suck on them to stop the

throbbing. Tears ran down over his face and mixed with the blood

on his hand. Little rivulets of blood and water ran down his arm

and dropped o  the end of his elbow.

The guard was swaying back and forth with laughter. His gun

lay on the lid of the open toolbox. His arms swung in apelike

gyrations of glee, and he held another piece of iron in one hand

and his cap in the other. A white strip of forehead, where his

uniform cap kept o  the sun, shone between his brown hair and

his sunburned face. His laughter had burst the button from his

tieless shirt collar, and a white strip outlined his gaunt neck. For a

second he reminded the boy of a garden scarecrow blowing in the

tied on with a white rag just like the white band around the

guard’s neck, the head tilting from side to side, inviting a well-

placed stone to send it bouncing along a bean row.

The men whitewashing the rocks made no sounds. No one

among them suddenly raised himself to the height of a man

almost as tall as a cabin porch post.

“He ain’t there,” the boy murmured to himself. If he was, the

boy knew, by now he would be holding the scarecrow of a man in

on the skinny neck, the way he had seen Sounder clamp his great

jaws on a weasel once, with the head stuck out one side of the

jaws and the body the other. And the man would wheeze and

squirm like the weasel had. His legs would paw the air in circles

like his hands, then he would go limp, and the boy’s father would

loosen his grip, and the man in the brown uniform would fall in a

heap, like when somebody untied the white rag that held the

scarecrow to the stake. And the heap would roll down the slope

and lodge against the fence, like the scarecrow rolled along a

bean row until it caught in the brambles at the edge of the

garden.

Feeling defeat in the midst of his glee because the boy had not

run but stood still and de ant, sucking the blood from his bruised

 ngers, the guard stopped laughing and yelled at him, “That’ll

looking back, began to walk slowly away. The guard began to

laugh again and threw the scrap of iron over the fence. It landed a

few feet from the boy. He looked at the iron and he looked at the

The iron would split it open with a wide gash, and blood would

darken the white spot and make it the color of the man’s

ground.

Still sucking his  ngers, the boy looked once more at the men

need to wait and ask. His father was not crawling among them.

Later that day, passing along a street in a strange and lonely

town, he saw a man dump a box of trash into a barrel. He noticed

that a large brown-backed book went in with the trash. He waited

until the man went back into the building and then took the book

from the barrel. It was a book of stories about what people think.

There were titles such as Cruelty, Excellent Men, Education,

Cripples, Justice, and many others. The boy sat down, leaned back

against the barrel, and began to read from the story called

Cruelty.

I have often heard it said that cowardice is the mother of cruelty, and I

have found by experience that malicious and inhuman animosity and

 erceness are usually accompanied by weakness. Wolves and  lthy bears,

and all the baser beasts, fall upon the dying.

The boy was trying to read aloud, for he could understand

when she told him stories of the Lord and Joseph and David. All

it was only making his bruised  ngers hurt more. He would carry

it with him anyway.

He passed a large brick schoolhouse with big windows and

children climbing on little ladders and swinging on swings. No

one jeered at him or noticed him because he had crossed the

side. Soon the painted houses ran out, and he was walking past

unpainted cabins. He always felt better on his travels when he

came to the part of town where the unpainted cabins were.

Sometimes people came out on the porch when he passed and

talked to him. Sometimes they gave him a piece to eat on the

way. Now he thought they might laugh and say “What you

carryin’, child? A book?” So he held it close up against him.

“That’s a school too,” the boy said to himself as he stood facing

a small unpainted building with its door at the end instead of the

school because it had more windows than a cabin.

At the side of the building two children were sloshing water out

dog that came from underneath to bark at the boy. The school

was built on posts, and a stovepipe came through the wall and

stuck up above the rafters. A rusty tin pipe ran from the corner of

the roof down to the cistern where the children were playing.

The dog had gone back under the building, so the boy entered

the yard and moved toward the children. If one of them would

work the pump handle, he could wash the dried blood o  his

hand. Just when he reached the cistern, a wild commotion of

barking burst from under the  oor of the school. Half a dozen

dogs, which followed children to school and waited patiently for

lunchtime scraps and for school to be over, burst from under the

building in pursuit of a pig that had wandered onto the lot. In the

drainpipe, and it clattered down the wall and bounced on the

cement top of the cistern. With a pig under the building and the

dogs barking and racing in and out, the school day ended.

Two dozen or more children raced out the door, few of them

touching the three steps that led from the stoop to the ground.

Some were calling the names of dogs and looking under the

building. The boy found himself surrounded by strange inquiring

you moved to?” “That your book?” “You comin’ here to school?”

“Kin you read that big a book?” The boy had put his bruised hand

against his side.

Just when the commotion was quieting down, a man appeared

at the schoolhouse door. The children scattered across the lot in

pen,” he called to one child.

Then it was quiet. The boy looked at the man in the doorway.

They were alone now. The dogs had followed the children. And

the pig, hearing a familiar call from the corner of the lot, had

come grunting from his sanctuary and gone in the direction of the

call.

In his many journeyings among strangers the boy had learned

to sni  out danger and spot orneriness quickly. Now, for the  rst

time in his life away from home, he wasn’t feared. The lean

elderly man with snow-white hair, wearing Sunday clothes, came

down the steps. “This pipe is always falling,” he said as he picked

it up and put it back in place. “I need to wire it up.”

“I just wanted to wash my hand. It’s got dried blood on it where

I hurt my  ngers.”

“You should have run home.”

“I don’t live in these parts.”

“Here, I’ll hold your book, and I’ll pump for you.” And the

mellow eyes of the man began to search the boy for answers,

answers that could be found without asking questions.

“We need warm soapy water,” the teacher said. “I live right

close. Wait ’til I get my papers and lock the door, and I’ll take you

home and  x it.”

The boy wanted to follow the man into the schoolhouse and see

what it was like inside, but by the time he got to the steps the

man was back again, locking the door. “I usually put the school in

morning before they get here.”

At the edge of the school lot the man took the road that led

away from the town. They walked without much talk, and the boy

began to wish the man would ask him a lot of questions. When

they had passed several cabins, each farther from the other as

they went, the man turned o  the road and said, “We’re home. I

small wire hook on the neatly whitewashed gate which led into a

yard that was green, the teacher stopped talking.

A cabin with a gate and green grass in the yard is almost a big

house, the boy thought as he followed the man.

Inside the gate the man went along the fence, studying some

plants tied up to stakes. He began to talk again, not to the boy,

but to a plant that was smaller than the others. “You’ll make it,

little one, but it’ll take time to get your roots set again.”

The boy looked at the white-haired old man leaning over like

he was listening for the plant to answer him. “He’s conjured,” the

boy whispered to himself. “Lots of old folks is conjured or

said, “if you get yourself plain carried o  by their soft spell-talk.”

But before the boy could trouble his mind anymore, the man

straightened up and began talking to him. “Some animal dug

under the roots and tore them loose from the earth. It was wilted

badly and might have died. But I reset it, and I water it every day.

It’s hard to reset a plant if it’s wilted too much; the life has gone

out of it. But this one will be all right. I see new leaves startin’.”

“What grows on it?” the boy asked, thinking it must be

something good to eat if somebody cared that much about a

plant.

“It’s only a  ower,” the man said. “I’ll water it when the earth

has cooled a little. If you water a plant when the earth is too

warm, it shocks the roots.”

Inside the cabin the man started a  re in the cookstove and

heated water. As he washed the boy’s hand with a soft white rag

or gate.” Before the boy could answer, the teacher began to talk

about the plant he must remember to water.

He don’t wanta know nothin’ about me, the boy thought.

“When I saw your book, I thought you were coming to enroll

for school. But you don’t live in these parts, you say.”

“I found the book in a trash barrel. It has words like I ain’t used

to readin’. I can read store-sign words and some newspaper

words.”

“This is a wonderful book,” said the teacher. “It was written by

a man named Montaigne, who was a soldier. But he grew tired of

liked to walk on country roads.”

The teacher lit two lamps. The boy had never seen two lamps

burning in the same room. They made the room as bright as

daylight.

“People should read his writings,” the man continued. “But few

do. He is all but forgotten.” But the boy did not hear. He was

thinking of a cabin that had two lamps, both lit at the same time,

and two stoves, one to cook on and one to warm by.

The man sat in a chair between two tables that held the lamps.

There were books on the tables too, and there were shelves  lled

not with pans and dishes, but with books. The mellow eyes of the

man followed the boy’s puzzled glances as they studied the

strange warm world in which he had suddenly found himself.

“I will read you a little story from your book.” The boy watched

as the  ngers of the man turned the pages one way and then the

other until he found what he wanted to read.

“This is a very short story about a king named Cyrus, who

wanted to buy the prize horse that belonged to one of his soldiers.

Cyrus asked him how much he would sell the horse for, or

whether he would exchange him for a kingdom. The soldier said

gain a friend…. But now I have told you the whole story so

there’s no use for me to read it. ”

“You’ve been a powerful good friend to take me in like this,”

the boy said at last. “My  ngers don’t hurt no more.”

“I am your friend,” said the man. “So while I heat some water

to soak your hand and make your cot for the night, you tell me all

about yourself.”

“I had a father and a dog named Sounder,” the boy began. …

OceanofPDF.com

VIII

“WHO’S BEEN KINDLY to your hurts?” the boy’s mother asked as she

looked down at the clean white rags that bandaged the boy’s

 ngers. Rocking on the porch, she had seen the white dot

swinging back and forth in the sun when the boy wasn’t much

more than a moving spot far down the road. “For a while I wasn’t

sure it was you,” she said. “Why you walkin’ fast? You done found

him? Is your hand hurt bad? Is that a Bible somebody’s done

mistreated?” The woman’s eyes had come to rest on the book the

boy held in his good hand.

“No. It’s a book. I found it in a trash can.”

“Be careful what you carry o , child,” his mother said. “It can

cause a heap o’ trouble.”

“I got somethin’ to tell,” the boy said as he sat down on the

edge of the porch and ran his bandaged  ngers over the head of

the great coon dog who had stopped his jumping and whining and

lay at the boy’s feet with his head cocked to the side, looking up

with his one eye. The younger children sat in a line beside the

boy, waiting to hear.

“Is he poorly?” the woman asked slowly. “Is he far?”

“It’s about somethin’ else,” the boy said after a long spell of

quiet. “I ain’t found him yet.”

The boy told his mother and the children about his night in the

teacher’s cabin. The teacher wanted him to come back and go to

school. He had been asked to live in the teacher’s cabin and do his

chores. The children’s eyes widened when they heard the cabin

fence and a gate. He told how the teacher could read and that

there were lots of books on shelves in the cabin. “Maybe he will

write letters to the road camps for you,” the mother said, “ ’cause

you’ll be so busy with schoolin’ and cleanin’ the schoolhouse for

him that you can’t go searchin’ no more.”

“Maybe I’d have time,” the boy said. “But he says like you,

‘Better not to go. Just be patient and time will pass.’ ”

“It’s all powerful puzzlin’ and aggravatin’, but it’s the Lord’s

will.” The boy noticed that his mother had stopped rocking; the

loose boards did not rattle as the chair moved on them.

“The teacher said he’d walk all the way and reason about it if

you didn’t want me to come to him. You don’t want me to go, but

I’ll come home often as I can. And sometime I might bring word.”

“It’s a sign; I believes in signs.” The rocker began to move back

and forth, rattling the loose boards in the porch  oor. “Go child.

The Lord has come to you.”

carried was his book with one cover missing—the book that he

couldn’t understand. In the summers he came home to take his

father’s place in the  elds, for cabin rent had to be paid with  eld

work. In the winter he seldom came because it took “more’n a

day’s walkin’ and sleepin’ on the ground.”

“Ain’t worth it” his mother would say.

Each year, after he had been gone for a whole winter and

returned, the faithful Sounder would come hobbling on three legs

far down the road to meet him. The great dog would wag his tail

and whine. He never barked. The boy sang at his work in the

 elds, and his mother rocked in her chair and sang on the porch

of the cabin. Sometimes when Sounder scratched  eas under the

porch, she would look at the hunting lantern and the empty

possum sack hanging against the wall. Six crops of persimmons

and wild grapes had ripened. The possums and raccoons had

gathered them unmolested. The lantern and possum sack hung

untouched. “No use to nobody no more,” the woman said.

The boy read to his brother and sisters when he had  nished his

day in the  elds. He read the story of Joseph over and over and

never wearied of it. “In all the books in the teacher’s cabin, there’s

no story as good as Joseph’s story” he would say to them.

The woman, listening and rocking, would say “The Lord has

come to you, child. The Lord has certainly come to you.”

parched the earth, and the crops had been laid by. The boy had

come home early because there was nothing to do in the  elds.

“Dog days is a terrible time,” the woman said. “It’s when the

the teacher had told him that dog days got their name from the

Dog Star because it rose and set with the sun during that period.

not confuse it.

“It sure is hot,” he said instead. “Lucky to come from the  elds

early.” He watched the heat waves as they made the earth look

like it was moving in little ripples.

Sounder came around the corner of the cabin from somewhere,

went to his cool spot under the porch. “That’s what I say about

dog days,” the woman said. “Poor creature’s been addled with the

heat for three days. Can’t  nd no place to quiet down. Been down

the road nearly out o’ sight a second time today, and now he

musta come from the fencerows. Whines all the time. A mad dog

is a fearful sight. Slobberin’ at the mouth and runnin’ every which

way ’cause they’re blind. Have to shoot ’em ’fore they bite some

child. It’s awful hard.”

“Sounder won’t go mad,” the boy said. “He’s lookin’ for a cooler

spot, I reckon.”

into a ripply form through the heat waves. “Scorchin’ to be

walkin’ and totin’ far today,” she said as she pointed to the  gure

on the road.

A catbird fussed in the wilted lilac at the corner of the cabin.

sayin’ that if a catbird fusses ’bout nothin’, somethin’ bad is

comin’. It’s a bad sign.”

“Sounder, I reckon,” the boy said. “He just passed her bush

when he came around the cabin.”

In the tall locust at the edge of the fence, its top leaves

yellowed from lack of water, a mockingbird mimicked the catbird

with half a dozen notes, decided it was too hot to sing, and

disappeared. The great coon dog, whose rhythmic panting came

through the porch  oor, came from under the house and began to

whine.

As the  gure on the road drew near, it took shape and grew

indistinct again in the wavering heat. Sometimes it seemed to be a

sulfurous clouds at every other step. Once or twice they thought it

might be a brown cow or mule, dragging its hooves in the sand

and raising and lowering its weary head.

Sounder panted faster, wagged his tail, whined, moved from the

dooryard to the porch and back to the dooryard.

something on its back and limping.

“The children still at the creek?” she asked.

“Yes, but it’s about dry.”

Suddenly the voice of the great coon hound broke the sultry

August deadness. The dog dashed along the road, leaving three-

pointed clouds of red dust to settle back to earth behind him. The

mighty voice rolled out upon the valley, each  utelike bark

echoing from slope to slope.

“Lord’s mercy! Dog days done made him mad.” And the rocker

was still.

Sounder was a young dog again. His voice was the same mellow

sound that had ridden the November breeze from the lowlands to

the hills. The boy and his mother looked at each other. The

catbird stopped her fussing in the wilted lilac bush. On three legs,

the dog moved with the same lightning speed that had carried

him to the throat of a grounded raccoon.

Sounder’s master had come home. Taking what might have

been measured as a halting half step and then pulling a sti , dead

leg forward, dragging a foot turned sideways in the dust, the man

limped into the yard. Sounder seemed to understand that to jump

up and put his paw against his master’s breast would topple him

into the dust, so the great dog smelled and whined and wagged

his tail and licked the limp hand dangling at his master’s side. He

head and tail together.

through the dust. What had been a shoulder was now pushed up

seemed to rest upon it. The mouth was askew too, and the voice

came out of the part farthest away from the withered, wrinkled,

lifeless side.

The woman in the still rocker said, “Lord, Lord,” and sat

su ocated in shock.

“Sounder knew it was you just like you was comin home from

work,” the boy said in a clear voice.

Half the voice of the man was gone too, so in slow, measured,

stuttering he told how he had been caught in a dynamite blast in

the prison quarry, how the dead side had been crushed under an

avalanche of limestone, and how he had been missed for a whole

night in the search for dead and wounded. He told how the pain

of the crushing stone had stopped in the night, how doctors had

pushed and pulled and encased the numb side of his body in a

cast, how they had spoken kindly to him and told him he would

die. But he resolved he would not die, even with a half-dead

body, because he wanted to come home again.

“For being hurt, they let me have time o  my sentence,” the

man said, “and since I couldn’t work, I guess they was glad to.”

“The Lord has brought you home,” the woman said.

The boy heard faint laughter somewhere behind the cabin. The

children were coming home from the creek. He went around the

cabin slowly, then hurried to meet them.

“Pa’s home,” he said and grabbed his sister, who had started to

run toward the cabin. “Wait. He’s mighty crippled up, so behave

like nothin’ has happened.”

“Can he walk?” the youngest child asked.

“Yes! And don’t you ask no questions.”

“You been mighty natural and considerate,” the mother said to

the younger children later when she went to the woodpile and

called them to pick dry kindling for a quick  re. When she came

back to the porch she said, “We was gonna just have a cold piece

’cause it’s so sultry, but now I think I’ll cook.”

Everything don’t change much, the boy thought. There’s eatin’

and sleepin’ and talkin’ and settin’ that goes on. One day might be

di erent from another, but there ain’t much di erence when

they’re put together.

Sometimes there were long quiet spells. Once or twice the boy’s

mother said to the boy, “He’s powerful proud of your learnin’.

Read somethin’ from the Scriptures.” But mostly they just talked

about heat and cold, and wind and clouds, and what’s gonna be

done, and time passing.

coon dog would lie facing his master, with his one eye  xed and

his one ear raised. Sometimes he would tap his tail against the

earth. Sometimes the ear would droop and the eye would close.

Then the great muscles would  ex in dreams of the hunt, and the

mighty chest would give o  the mu ed whisper of a bark.

Sometimes the two limped together to the edge of the  elds, or

wandered o  into the pine woods. They never went along the

road. Perhaps they knew how strange a picture they made when

they walked together.

About the middle of September the boy left to go back to his

teacher. “It’s the most important thing,” his mother said.

And the crippled man said, “We’re  ne. We won’t need

nothin’.”

“I’ll come for a few days before it’s cold to help gather wood

and walnuts.”

The broken body of the old man withered more and more, but

when the smell of harvest and the hunt came with October, his

spirit seemed to quicken his dragging step. One day he cleaned

the dusty lantern globe, and the old dog, remembering, bounced

on his three legs and wagged his tail as if to say “I’m ready.”

The boy had come home. To gather the felled trees and chop

the standing dead ones was part of the  eld pay too. He had been

cutting and dragging timber all day.

Sometimes he had looked longingly at the lantern and possum

sack, but something inside him had said “Wait. Wait and go

together.” But the boy did not want to go hunting anymore. And

without his saying anything, his father had said, “You’re too tired,

child. We ain’t goin’ far, no way.”

In the early darkness the halting, hesitant swing of the lantern

marked the slow path from  elds to pine woods toward the

lowlands. The boy stood on the porch, watching until the light

was lost behind pine branches. Then he went and sat by the stove.

His mother rocked as the mound of kernels grew in the fold of her

apron. “He been mighty peart,” she said. “I hope he don’t fall in

the dark. Maybe he’ll be happy now he can go hunting again.”

And she took up her singing where she had left o .

Ain’t nobody else gonna walk it for you,  

You gotta walk it by yourself.

Sounder’s scratching at the door awakened the boy. It was still

night, but the  rst red glow of dawn was rising in a faint crescent

over the pine woods.

“Sounder just couldn’t poke slow enough for your father,” the

mother said to the boy as they stood in the doorway, straining

and sifting the dark for some movement.

“Lantern wouldn’t burn out in this time,” the boy said. “No sign

of light. He must have fallen or got tired. Sounder will show me.”

Sounder was already across the road into the stalk land,

back to be sure that the boy was following.

Across the stalk land, into the pine woods, into the climbing,

brightening glow of the dawn, the boy followed the dog, whose

anxious pace slowed from age as they went. “By a dog’s age,

Sounder is past dying time,” the boy said half aloud. Fear had

always prompted him to talk to himself.

Deep in the pine woods, along a deserted logging road, the boy

and dog came to a small open space where there had once been a

log ramp. The sun was just beginning to drive its  rst splinters of

light through the pines, bouncing against tree trunks and earth. At

the foot of one of the trees the boy’s father sat, the lantern still

burning by his side.

“So tuckered out he fell asleep,” the boy said to himself.

But the  gure did not move when Sounder licked his hand. The

boy put his hand on his father’s good shoulder and shook ever so

gently. The chin did not lift itself; no eyes turned up to meet the

boy. “Tired, so tired.”

When the boy returned to the cabin and told his mother, her

lips grew long and thin and pale. But when she  nally spoke, they

were warm and soft as when she sang. “When life is so tiresome,

there ain’t no peace like the greatest peace—the peace of the

insurance.”

They buried the boy’s father in the unfenced lot behind the

meetin’ house. The preacher stood amid the sumac and running

briars before the mound of fresh red earth and read:

The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want, He maketh me to lie down in

green pastures.

“There’s plenty of wood, and I must go back to school,” the boy

told his mother several days after they had buried his father.

“Sounder ain’t got no spirit left for living. He hasn’t gone with me

to the woods to chop since Pa died. He doesn’t even whine

anymore. He just lies on his co ee sacks under the cabin steps.

I’ve dug a grave for him under the big jack oak tree in the stalk

land by the fencerow. It’ll be ready if the ground freezes. You can

carry him on his co ee sacks and bury him. He’ll be gone before I

come home again.”

And the boy was right. Two weeks before he came home for

Christmas, Sounder crawled under the cabin and died. The boy’s

mother told him all there was to tell.

“He just crawled up under the house and died,” she said.

The boy was glad. He had learned to read his book with the

torn cover better now. He had read in it: “Only the unwise think

that what has changed is dead.” He had asked the teacher what it

has seen it blooming. It was not quite clear to the boy then, but it

was now.

Years later, walking the earth as a man, it would all sweep back

over him, again and again, like an echo on the wind.

The pine trees would look down forever on a lantern burning

out of oil but not going out. A harvest moon would cast shadows

forever of a man walking upright, his dog bouncing after him.

And the quiet of the night would  ll and echo again with the deep

voice of Sounder, the great coon dog.

OceanofPDF.com

PRAISE FOR 
Sounder 

and his family in the 19th-century American South. The human

characters’ namelessness lends them universality as oppressed

people, while the author’s authentic, detailed descriptions assure

their individuality. An extraordinarily sensitive book.” —School

Library Journal

“Written with quiet strength and taut with tragedy. Grim and

honest, the book has a moving, elegaic quality that is reminiscent

of the stark inevitability of Greek tragedy.”

—The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books

“There is an epic quality in the deeply moving, long-ago story of

cruelty, loneliness, and silent su ering. The power of the writing

lies in its combination of subtlety and strength.”

—The Horn Book

“The writing is simple, timeless, and extraordinarily moving. An

outstanding book.” —Commonweal

“The main characters, though nameless, are sharply etched and

the portrayal of the quiet dignity with which the boy and his

moving.” —ALA Booklist

OceanofPDF.com

Copyright

Harper Trophy® is a registered trademark of HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

Sounder

Text copyright © 1969 by William H. Armstrong

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By

payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable

right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be

reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or

introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means,

whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the express

written permission of HarperCollins e-books.

Edition © APRIL 2011 ISBN: 978-0-062-10556-1

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Sounder / by William H. Armstrong; illustrated by James Barkley.

p. cm.

Summary: Angry and humiliated when his sharecropper father is jailed for stealing food for

his family, a young black boy grows in courage and understanding by learning to read and

through his relationship with his devoted dog Sounder. 

ISBN 0-06-440020-4 (pbk.) - ISBN 0-06-073946-0 (special ed. pbk.) 

        1. African Americans—Fiction. 2. Dogs—Fiction. 3. Family Life—Fiction. 4. Poverty—

Fiction. [1. African Americans—Juvenile  ction.] I. Title.

PZ7.A73394 So 1969
70-85030

[Fic]
CIP

AC

Revised Harper Trophy edition, 2002

Visit us on the World Wide Web! www.harperchildrens.com

11 12 13     LP/CW     60 59 58 57 56 55 54

OceanofPDF.com

About the Publisher

Australia 

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd. 

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) 

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au 

Canada 

HarperCollins Canada 

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor 

Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca 

New Zealand 

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited 

P.O. Box 1 Auckland, 

New Zealand 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz 

United Kingdom 

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 

77-85 Fulham Palace Road 

London, W6 8JB, UK 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk 

United States 

HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 

10 East 53rd Street 

New York, NY 10022 

http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com

OceanofPDF.com

