Houghton Mifflin Company 

Boston 

For all the children 
To whom we entrust the future 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Giver 

It was almost December, and Jonas was beginning to be 
frightened. No. Wrong word, Jonas thought. Frightened meant 
that deep, sickening feeling of something terrible about to 
happen. Frightened was the way he had felt a year ago when an 
unidentified aircraft had overflown the community twice. He 
had seen it both times. Squinting toward the sky, he had seen 
the sleek jet, almost a blur at its high speed, go past, and a 
second later heard the blast of sound that followed. Then one 
more time, a moment later, from the opposite direction, the 
same plane. 
At first, he had been only fascinated. He had never seen 
aircraft so close, for it was against the rules for Pilots to fly 
over the community. Occasionally, when supplies were de-
livered by cargo planes to the landing field across the river, the 
children rode their bicycles to the riverbank and watched, 
intrigued, the unloading and then the takeoff directed to the 
west, always away from the community. 
But the aircraft a year ago had been different. It was not a 
squat, fat-bellied cargo plane but a needle-nosed single-pilot 
jet. Jonas, looking around anxiously, had seen others — adults 
as well as children — stop what they were doing and wait, 
confused, for an explanation of the frightening event. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 

Then all of the citizens had been ordered to go into the 
nearest building and stay there. IMMEDIATELY, the rasping 
voice through the speakers had said. LEAVE YOUR BICY- 

CLES WHERE THEY ARE. 
Instantly, obediently, Jonas had dropped his bike on its 
side on the path behind his family’s dwelling. He had run 
indoors and stayed there, alone. His parents were both at 
work, and his little sister, Lily, was at the Childcare Center 
where she spent her after-school hours. 
Looking through the front window, he had seen no 
people: none of the busy afternoon crew of Street Cleaners, 
Landscape Workers, and Food Delivery people who usually 
populated the community at that time of day. He saw only 
the abandoned bikes here and there on their sides; an 
upturned wheel on one was still revolving slowly. 
He had been frightened then. The sense of his own 
community silent, waiting, had made his stomach churn. He 
had trembled. 
But it had been nothing. Within minutes the speakers had 
crackled again, and the voice, reassuring now and less 
urgent, had explained that a Pilot-in-Training had misread 
his navigational instructions and made a wrong turn. Des-
perately the Pilot had been trying to make his way back 
before his error was noticed. 

NEEDLESS TO SAY, HE WILL BE RELEASED, the voice 
had said, followed by silence. There was an ironic tone to 
that final message, as if the Speaker found it amusing; and 
Jonas had smiled a little, though he knew what a grim 
statement it had been. For a contributing citizen to be re-
leased from the community was a final decision, a terrible 
punishment, an overwhelming statement of failure. 

Even the children were scolded if they used the term 
lightly at play, jeering at a teammate who missed a catch or 
stumbled in a race. Jonas had done it once, had shouted at 
his best friend, “That’s it, Asher! You’re released!” when 
Asher’s clumsy error had lost a match for his team. He had 
been taken aside for a brief and serious talk by the coach, 
had hung his head with guilt and embarrassment, and 
apologized to Asher after the game. 
Now, thinking about the feeling of fear as he pedaled 
home along the river path, he remembered that moment of 
palpable, stomach-sinking terror when the aircraft had 
streaked above. It was not what he was feeling now with 
December approaching. He searched for the right word to 
describe his own feeling. 
Jonas was careful about language. Not like his friend, 
Asher, who talked too fast and mixed things up, scrambling 
words and phrases until they were barely recognizable and 
often very funny. 
Jonas grinned, remembering the morning that Asher had 
dashed into the classroom, late as usual, arriving 
breathlessly in the middle of the chanting of the morning 
anthem. When the class took their seats at the conclusion of 
the patriotic hymn, Asher remained standing to make his 
public apology as was required. 
“I apologize for inconveniencing my learning commu-
nity.” Asher ran through the standard apology phrase rap-
idly, still catching his breath. The Instructor and class 
waited patiently for his explanation. The students had all 
been grinning, because they had listened to Asher’s expla-
nations so many times before. 
“I left home at the correct time but when I was riding 

along near the hatchery, the crew was separating some 
salmon. I guess I just got distraught, watching them. 
“I apologize to my classmates,” Asher concluded. He 
smoothed his rumpled tunic and sat down. 
“We accept your apology, Asher.” The class recited the 
standard response in unison. Many of the students were 
biting their lips to keep from laughing. 
“I accept your apology, Asher,” the Instructor said. He 
was smiling. “And I thank you, because once again you 
have provided an opportunity for a lesson in language. 
‘Distraught’ is too strong an adjective to describe salmon-
viewing.” He turned and wrote “distraught” on the in-
structional board. Beside it he wrote “distracted.” 
Jonas, nearing his home now, smiled at the recollection. 
Thinking, still, as he wheeled his bike into its narrow port 
beside the door, he realized that frightened was the wrong 
word to describe his feelings, now that December was al-
most here. It was too strong an adjective. 
He had waited a long time for this special December. 
Now that it was almost upon him, he wasn’t frightened, but 
he was . . . eager, he decided. He was eager for it to come. 
And he was excited, certainly. All of the Elevens were 
excited about the event that would be coming so soon. 
But there was a little shudder of nervousness when he 
thought about it, about what might happen.  
Apprehensive, Jonas decided. That’s what I am. 
 
“Who wants to be the first tonight, for feelings?” Jonas’s 
father asked, at the conclusion of their evening meal. 
It was one of the rituals, the evening telling of feelings. 

Sometimes Jonas and his sister, Lily, argued over turns, 
over who would get to go first. Their parents, of course, 
were part of the ritual; they, too, told their feelings each 
evening. But like all parents — all adults — they didn’t 
fight and wheedle for their turn. 
Nor did Jonas, tonight. His feelings were too compli-
cated this evening. He wanted to share them, but he wasn’t 
eager to begin the process of sifting through his own 
complicated emotions, even with the help that he knew his 
parents could give. 
“You go, Lily,” he said, seeing his sister, who was much 
younger — only a Seven — wiggling with impatience in 
her chair. 
“I felt very angry this afternoon,” Lily announced. “My 
Childcare group was at the play area, and we had a visiting 
group of Sevens, and they didn’t obey the rules at all. One 
of them — a male; I don’t know his name — kept going 
right to the front of the line for the slide, even though the 
rest of us were all waiting. I felt so angry at him. I made my 
hand into a fist, like this.” She held up a clenched fist and 
the rest of the family smiled at her small defiant gesture. 
“Why do you think the visitors didn’t obey the rules?” 
Mother asked. 
Lily considered, and shook her head. “I don’t know. 
They acted like . . . like ...” 
“Animals?” Jonas suggested. He laughed. 
“That’s right,” Lily said, laughing too. “Like animals.” 
Neither child knew what the word meant, exactly, but it 
was often used to describe someone uneducated or clumsy, 
someone who didn’t fit in. 

“Where were the visitors from?” Father asked. 
Lily frowned, trying to remember. “Our leader told us, 
when he made the welcome speech, but I can’t remember. 
I guess I wasn’t paying attention. It was from another 
community. They had to leave very early, and they had 
their midday meal on the bus.” 
Mother nodded. “Do you think it’s possible that their 
rules may be different? And so they simply didn’t know 
what your play area rules were?” 
Lily shrugged, and nodded. “I suppose.” 
“You’ve visited other communities, haven’t you?” Jonas 
asked. “My group has, often.” 
Lily nodded again. “When we were Sixes, we went and 
shared a whole school day with a group of Sixes in their 
community.” 
“How did you feel when you were there?” 
Lily frowned. “I felt strange. Because their methods 
were different. They were learning usages that my group 
hadn’t learned yet, so we felt stupid.” 
Father was listening with interest. “I’m thinking, Lily,” 
he said, “about the boy who didn’t obey the rules today. 
Do you think it’s possible that he felt strange and stupid, 
being in a new place with rules that he didn’t know 
about?” 
Lily pondered that. “Yes,” she said, finally. 
“I feel a little sorry for him,” Jonas said, “even though I 
don’t even know him. I feel sorry for anyone who is in a 
place where he feels strange and stupid.” 
“How do you feel now, Lily?” Father asked. “Still 
angry?” 
“I guess not,” Lily decided. “I guess I feel a little sorry 
for him. And sorry I made a fist.” She grinned. 

Jonas smiled back at his sister. Lily’s feelings were 
always straightforward, fairly simple, usually easy to re-
solve. He guessed that his own had been, too, when he was 
a Seven. 
He listened politely, though not very attentively, while 
his father took his turn, describing a feeling of worry that 
he’d had that day at work: a concern about one of the 
newchildren who wasn’t doing well. Jonas’s father’s title 
was Nurturer. He and the other Nurturers were responsible 
for all the physical and emotional needs of every new-child 
during its earliest life. It was a very important job, Jonas 
knew, but it wasn’t one that interested him much. 
“What gender is it?” Lily asked. 
“Male,” Father said. “He’s a sweet little male with a 
lovely disposition. But he isn’t growing as fast as he 
should, and he doesn’t sleep soundly. We have him in the 
extra care section for supplementary nurturing, but the 
committee’s beginning to talk about releasing him.” 
“Oh, no,” Mother murmured sympathetically. “I know 
how sad that must make you feel.” 
Jonas and Lily both nodded sympathetically as well. 
Release of newchildren was always sad, because they 
hadn’t had a chance to enjoy life within the community yet. 
And they hadn’t done anything wrong. 
There were only two occasions of release which were not 
punishment. Release of the elderly, which was a time of 
celebration for a life well and fully lived; and release of a 
newchild, which always brought a sense of what-could-we-
have-done. This was especially troubling for the Nurturers, 
like Father, who felt they had failed somehow. But it 
happened very rarely. 
“Well,” Father said, “I’m going to keep trying. I may 

ask the committee for permission to bring him here at night, 
if you don’t mind. You know what the night-crew Nurturers 
are like. I think this little guy needs something extra.” 
“Of course,” Mother said, and Jonas and Lily nodded. 
They had heard Father complain about the night crew be-
fore. It was a lesser job, night-crew nurturing, assigned to 
those who lacked the interest or skills or insight for the 
more vital jobs of the daytime hours. Most of the people on 
the night crew had not even been given spouses because 
they lacked, somehow, the essential capacity to connect to 
others, which was required for the creation of a family unit. 
“Maybe we could even keep him,” Lily suggested 
sweetly, trying to look innocent. The look was fake, Jonas 
knew; they all knew. 
“Lily,” Mother reminded her, smiling, “you know the 
rules.” 
Two children — one male, one female — to each family 
unit. It was written very clearly in the rules. 
Lily giggled. “Well,” she said, “I thought maybe just this 
once.” 
 
Next, Mother, who held a prominent position at the De-
partment of Justice, talked about her feelings. Today a re-
peat offender had been brought before her, someone who 
had broken the rules before. Someone who she hoped had 
been adequately and fairly punished, and who had been 
restored to his place: to his job, his home, his family unit. 
To see him brought before her a second time caused her 
overwhelming feelings of frustration and anger. And even 

guilt, that she hadn’t made a difference in his life. 
“I feel frightened, too, for him,” she confessed. “You 
know that there’s no third chance. The rules say that if 
there’s a third transgression, he simply has to be released.” 
Jonas shivered. He knew it happened. There was even a boy 
in his group of Elevens whose father had been released years 
before. No one ever mentioned it; the disgrace was 
unspeakable. It was hard to imagine. 
Lily stood up and went to her mother. She stroked her 
mother’s arm. 
From his place at the table, Father reached over and took 
her hand. Jonas reached for the other. 
One by one, they comforted her. Soon she smiled, 
thanked them, and murmured that she felt soothed. 
The ritual continued. “Jonas?” Father asked. “You’re 
last, tonight.” 
Jonas sighed. This evening he almost would have pre-
ferred to keep his feelings hidden. But it was, of course, 
against the rules. 
“I’m feeling apprehensive,” he confessed, glad that the 
appropriate descriptive word had finally come to him. 
“Why is that, son?” His father looked concerned. 
“I know there’s really nothing to worry about,” Jonas 
explained, “and that every adult has been through it. I know 
you have, Father, and you too, Mother. But it’s the 
Ceremony that I’m apprehensive about. It’s almost De-
cember.” 
Lily looked up, her eyes wide. “The Ceremony of 
Twelve,” she whispered in an awed voice. Even the small-
est children — Lily’s age and younger — knew that it lay 
in the future for each of them. 

“I’m glad you told us of your feelings,” Father said. 
“Lily,” Mother said, beckoning to the little girl, “Go on 
now and get into your nightclothes. Father and I are going 
to stay here and talk to Jonas for a while.” 
Lily sighed, but obediently she got down from her chair. 
“Privately?” she asked. 
Mother nodded. “Yes,” she said, “this talk will be a 
private one with Jonas.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Jonas watched as his father poured a fresh cup of coffee. He 
waited. 
“You know,” his father finally said, “every December 
was exciting to me when I was young. And it has been for 
you and Lily, too, I’m sure. Each December brings such 
changes.” 
Jonas nodded. He could remember the Decembers back to 
when he had become, well, probably a Four. The earlier ones 
were lost to him. But he observed them each year, and he 
remembered Lily’s earliest Decembers. He remembered 
when his family received Lily, the day she was named, the 
day that she had become a One. 
The Ceremony for the Ones was always noisy and fun. 
Each December, all the newchildren born in the previous 
year turned One. One at a time — there were always fifty in 
each year’s group, if none had been released — they had 
been brought to the stage by the Nurturers who had cared for 
them since birth. Some were already walking, wobbly on 
their unsteady legs; others were no more than a few days old, 
wrapped in blankets, held by their Nurturers. 
“I enjoy the Naming,” Jonas said. 
His mother agreed, smiling. “The year we got Lily, we 
 
 
11 

knew, of course, that we’d receive our female, because 
we’d made our application and been approved. But I’d been 
wondering and wondering what her name would be. 
“I could have sneaked a look at the list prior to the cer-
emony,” Father confided. “The committee always makes 
the list in advance, and it’s right there in the office at the 
Nurturing Center. 
“As a matter of fact,” he went on, “I feel a little guilty 
about this. But I did go in this afternoon and looked to see 
if this year’s Naming list had been made yet. It was right 
there in the office, and I looked up number Thirty-six — 
that’s the little guy I’ve been concerned about — because it 
occurred to me that it might enhance his nurturing if I could 
call him by a name. Just privately, of course, when no one 
else is around.” 
“Did you find it?” Jonas asked. He was fascinated. It 
didn’t seem a terribly important rule, but the fact that his 
father had broken a rule at all awed him. He glanced at his 
mother, the one responsible for adherence to the rules, and 
was relieved that she was smiling. 
His father nodded. “His name — if he makes it to the 
Naming without being released, of course — is to be Ga-
briel. So I whisper that to him when I feed him every four 
hours, and during exercise and playtime. If no one can hear 
me. 
“I call him Gabe, actually,” he said, and grinned. 
“Gabe.” Jonas tried it out. A good name, he decided. 
Though Jonas had only become a Five the year that they 
acquired Lily and learned her name, he remembered the 
excitement, the conversations at home, wondering about 
her: how she would look, who she would be, how 

she would fit into their established family unit. He re-
membered climbing the steps to the stage with his parents, 
his father by his side that year instead of with the Nur-
turers, since it was the year that he would be given a new-
child of his own. 
He remembered his mother taking the newchild, his 
sister, into her arms, while the document was read to the 
assembled family units. “Newchild Twenty-three,” the 
Namer had read. “Lily.” 
He remembered his father’s look of delight, and that his 
father had whispered, “She’s one of my favorites. I was 
hoping for her to be the one.” The crowd had clapped, and 
Jonas had grinned. He liked his sister’s name. Lily, barely 
awake, had waved her small fist. Then they had stepped 
down to make room for the next family unit. 
“When I was an Eleven,” his father said now, “as you 
are, Jonas, I was very impatient, waiting for the Ceremony 
of Twelve. It’s a long two days. I remember that I enjoyed 
the Ones, as I always do, but that I didn’t pay much at-
tention to the other ceremonies, except for my sister’s. She 
became a Nine that year, and got her bicycle. I’d been 
teaching her to ride mine, even though technically I wasn’t 
supposed to.” 
Jonas laughed. It was one of the few rules that was not 
taken very seriously and was almost always broken. The 
children all received their bicycles at Nine; they were not 
allowed to ride bicycles before then. But almost always, the 
older brothers and sisters had secretly taught the younger 
ones. Jonas had been thinking already about teaching Lily. 
There was talk about changing the rule and giving the 
bicycles at an earlier age. A committee was studying 

was not the element of suspense that there is with your 
Ceremony. Because I was already fairly certain of what my 
Assignment was to be.” 
Jonas was surprised. There was no way, really, to know 
in advance. It was a secret selection, made by the leaders of 
the community, the Committee of Elders, who took the 
responsibility so seriously that there were never even any 
jokes made about Assignments. 
His mother seemed surprised, too. “How could you have 
known?” she asked. 
His father smiled his gentle smile. “Well, it was clear to 
me — and my parents later confessed that it had been ob-
vious to them, too — what my aptitude was. I had always 
loved the newchildren more than anything. When my 
friends in my age group were holding bicycle races, or 
building toy vehicles or bridges with their construction 
sets, or — “ 
“All the things I do with my friends,” Jonas pointed out, 
and his mother nodded in agreement. 
“I always participated, of course, because as children we 
must experience all of those things. And I studied hard in 
school, as you do, Jonas. But again and again, during free 
time, I found myself drawn to the newchildren. I spent al-
most all of my volunteer hours helping in the Nurturing 
Center. Of course the Elders knew that, from their obser-
vation.” 
Jonas nodded. During the past year he had been aware of 
the increasing level of observation. In school, at recreation 
time, and during volunteer hours, he had noticed the Elders 
watching him and the other Elevens. He had seen them 
taking notes. He knew, too, that the Elders were 

“There are very rarely disappointments, Jonas. I don’t 
think you need to worry about that,” his father reassured 
him. “And if there are, you know there’s an appeal proc-
ess.” But they all laughed at that — an appeal went to a 
committee for study. 
“I worry a little about Asher’s Assignment,” Jonas con-
fessed. “Asher’s such fun. But he doesn’t really have any 
serious interests. He makes a game out of everything.” 
His father chuckled. “You know,” he said, “I re-
member when Asher was a newchild at the Nurturing 
Center, before he was named. He never cried. He giggled 
and laughed at everything. All of us on the staff enjoyed 
nurturing Asher.” 
“The Elders know Asher,” his mother said. “They’ll 
find exactly the right Assignment for him. I don’t think 
you need to worry about him. But, Jonas, let me warn you 
about something that may not have occurred to you. I 
know I didn’t think about it until after my Ceremony of 
Twelve.” 
“What’s that?” 
“Well, it’s the last of the Ceremonies, as you know. 
After Twelve, age isn’t important. Most of us even lose 
track of how old we are as time passes, though the infor-
mation is in the Hall of Open Records, and we could go 
and look it up if we wanted to. What’s important is the 
preparation for adult life, and the training you’ll receive in 
your Assignment.” 
“I know that,” Jonas said. “Everyone knows that.” 
“But it means,” his mother went on, “that you’ll move 
into a new group. And each of your friends will. You’ll no 
longer be spending your time with your group of Elevens. 
After the Ceremony of Twelve, you’ll be with your Assign- 

the comfort objects, like Lily’s, were soft, stuffed, imagi-
nary creatures. Jonas’s had been called a bear. 
“Here you are, Lily-billy,” he said. “I’ll come help you 
remove your hair ribbons.” 
Jonas and his mother rolled their eyes, yet they watched 
affectionately as Lily and her father headed to her sleeping-
room with the stuffed elephant that had been given to her 
as her comfort object when she was born. His mother 
moved to her big desk and opened her briefcase; her work 
never seemed to end, even when she was at home in the 
evening. Jonas went to his own desk and began to sort 
through his school papers for the evening’s assignment. But 
his mind was still on December and the coming Ceremony. 
Though he had been reassured by the talk with his par-
ents, he hadn’t the slightest idea what Assignment the 
Elders would be selecting for his future, or how he might 
feel about it when the day came. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19 

“Oh, look!” Lily squealed in delight. “Isn’t he cute? 
Look how tiny he is! And he has funny eyes like yours, 
Jonas!” Jonas glared at her. He didn’t like it that she had 
mentioned his eyes. He waited for his father to chastise 
Lily. But Father was busy unstrapping the carrying basket 
from the back of his bicycle. Jonas walked over to look. 
It was the first thing Jonas noticed as he looked at the 
newchild peering up curiously from the basket. The pale 
eyes. 
Almost every citizen in the community had dark eyes. 
His parents did, and Lily did, and so did all of his group 
members and friends. But there were a few exceptions: 
Jonas himself, and a female Five who he had noticed had 
the different, lighter eyes. No one mentioned such things; it 
was not a rule, but was considered rude to call attention to 
things that were unsettling or different about individuals. 
Lily, he decided, would have to learn that soon, or she 
would be called in for chastisement because of her in-
sensitive chatter. 
Father put his bike into its port. Then he picked up the 
basket and carried it into the house. Lily followed be- 

hind, but she glanced back over her shoulder at Jonas and 
teased, “Maybe he had the same Birthmother as you.” 
Jonas shrugged. He followed them inside. But he had 
been startled by the newchild’s eyes. Mirrors were rare in 
the community; they weren’t forbidden, but there was no 
real need of them, and Jonas had simply never bothered to 
look at himself very often even when he found himself in a 
location where a mirror existed. Now, seeing the newchild 
and its expression, he was reminded that the light eyes 
were not only a rarity but gave the one who had them a 
certain look — what was it? Depth, he decided; as if one 
were looking into the clear water of the river, down to the 
bottom, where things might lurk which hadn’t been dis-
covered yet. He felt self-conscious, realizing that he, too, 
had that look. 
He went to his desk, pretending not to be interested in 
the newchild. On the other side of the room, Mother and 
Lily were bending over to watch as Father unwrapped its 
blanket. 
“What’s his comfort object called?” Lily asked, picking 
up the stuffed creature which had been placed beside the 
newchild in his basket. 
Father glanced at it. “Hippo,” he said. 
Lily giggled at the strange word. “Hippo,” she repeated, 
and put the comfort object down again. She peered at the 
unwrapped newchild, who waved his arms. 
“I think newchildren are so cute,” Lily sighed. “I hope I 
get assigned to be a Birthmother.” 
“Lily!” Mother spoke very sharply. “Don’t say that. 
There’s very little honor in that Assignment.” 
“But I was talking to Natasha. You know the Ten who 
 
 
 
21 

voice that all the Speakers seemed to develop, saying 
things like, ATTENTION. THIS IS A REMINDER TO 
FEMALES UNDER NINE THAT HAIR RIBBONS ARE 
TO BE NEATLY TIED AT ALL TIMES. 
He turned toward Lily and noticed to his satisfaction 
that her ribbons were, as usual, undone and dangling. 
There would be an announcement like that quite soon, he 
felt certain, and it would be directed mainly at Lily, though 
her name, of course, would not be mentioned. Everyone 
would know. 
Everyone had known, he remembered with humiliation, 
that the announcement ATTENTION. THIS IS A RE- 
MINDER TO MALE ELEVENS THAT OBJECTS ARE 
NOT TO BE REMOVED FROM THE RECREATION 
AREA AND THAT SNACKS ARE TO BE EATEN, 
NOT HOARDED had been specifically directed at him, 
the day last month that he had taken an apple home. No 
one had mentioned it, not even his parents, because the 
public announcement had been sufficient to produce the 
appropriate remorse. He had, of course, disposed of the 
apple and made his apology to the Recreation Director the 
next morning, before school. 
Jonas thought again about that incident. He was still 
bewildered by it. Not by the announcement or the neces-
sary apology; those were standard procedures, and he had 
deserved them — but by the incident itself. He probably 
should have brought up his feeling of bewilderment that 
very evening when the family unit had shared their feel-
ings of the day. But he had not been able to sort out and 
put words to the source of his confusion, so he had let it 
pass. 
It had happened during the recreation period, when he 
had been playing with Asher. Jonas had casually picked 
 
23

my hand onto the ground!” Asher had just dropped it once 
again. 
So Jonas laughed too, and with his laughter tried to ig-
nore his uneasy conviction that something had happened. 
But he had taken the apple home, against the recreation 
area rules. That evening, before his parents and Lily arrived 
at the dwelling, he had held it in his hands and looked at it 
carefully. It was slightly bruised now, because Asher had 
dropped it several times. But there was nothing at all 
unusual about the apple. 
He had held a magnifying glass to it. He had tossed it 
several times across the room, watching, and then rolled it 
around and around on his desktop, waiting for the thing to 
happen again. 
But it hadn’t. The only thing that happened was the 
announcement later that evening over the speaker, the an-
nouncement that had singled him out without using his 
name, that had caused both of his parents to glance mean-
ingfully at his desk where the apple still lay. 
Now, sitting at his desk, staring at his schoolwork as his 
family hovered over the newchild in its basket, he shook 
his head, trying to forget the odd incident. He forced him-
self to arrange his papers and try to study a little before the 
evening meal. The newchild, Gabriel, stirred and whim-
pered, and Father spoke softly to Lily, explaining the feed-
ing procedure as he opened the container that held the 
formula and equipment. 
The evening proceeded as all evenings did in the family 
unit, in the dwelling, in the community: quiet, reflective, a 
time for renewal and preparation for the day to come. It 
was different only in the addition to it of the newchild with 
his pale, solemn, knowing eyes. 
 
 
 
 
25 

Jonas rode at a leisurely pace, glancing at the bikeports 
beside the buildings to see if he could spot Asher’s. He 
didn’t often do his volunteer hours with his friend because 
Asher frequently fooled around and made serious work a 
little difficult. But now, with Twelve coming so soon and 
the volunteer hours ending, it didn’t seem to matter. 
The freedom to choose where to spend those hours had 
always seemed a wonderful luxury to Jonas; other hours of 
the day were so carefully regulated. 
He remembered when he had become an Eight, as Lily 
would do shortly, and had been faced with that freedom of 
choice. The Eights always set out on their first volunteer 
hour a little nervously, giggling and staying in groups of 
friends. They almost invariably did their hours on Recre-
ation Duty first, helping with the younger ones in a place 
where they still felt comfortable. But with guidance, as 
they developed self-confidence and maturity, they moved 
on to other jobs, gravitating toward those that would suit 
their own interests and skills. 
A male Eleven named Benjamin had done his entire 
nearly-Four years in the Rehabilitation Center, working 
with citizens who had been injured. It was rumored that he 
was as skilled now as the Rehabilitation Directors 

themselves, and that he had even developed some ma-
chines and methods to hasten rehabilitation. There was no 
doubt that Benjamin would receive his Assignment to that 
field and would probably be permitted to bypass most of 
the training. 
Jonas was impressed by the things Benjamin had 
achieved. He knew him, of course, since they had always 
been groupmates, but they had never talked about the boy’s 
accomplishments because such a conversation would have 
been awkward for Benjamin. There was never any 
comfortable way to mention or discuss one’s successes 
without breaking the rule against bragging, even if one 
didn’t mean to. It was a minor rule, rather like rudeness, 
punishable only by gentle chastisement. But still. Better to 
steer clear of an occasion governed by a rule which would 
be so easy to break. 
The area of dwellings behind him, Jonas rode past the 
community structures, hoping to spot Asher’s bicycle 
parked beside one of the small factories or office buildings. 
He passed the Childcare Center where Lily stayed after 
school, and the play areas surrounding it. He rode through 
the Central Plaza and the large Auditorium where public 
meetings were held. 
Jonas slowed and looked at the nametags on the bicycles 
lined up outside the Nurturing Center. Then he checked 
those outside Food Distribution; it was always fun to help 
with the deliveries, and he hoped he would find his friend 
there so that they could go together on the daily rounds, 
carrying the cartons of supplies into the dwellings of the 
community. But he finally found Asher’s bicycle — 
leaning, as usual, instead of upright in its port, as it should 
have been — at the House of the Old. 
 
 
 
 
27 

slow-paced place, unlike the busy centers of manufacture 
and distribution where the daily work of the community 
occurred. 
Jonas was glad that he had, over the years, chosen to do 
his hours in a variety of places so that he could experience 
the differences. He realized, though, that not focusing on 
one area meant he was left with not the slightest idea — 
not even a guess — of what his Assignment would be. 
He laughed softly. Thinking about the Ceremony again, 
Jonas? He teased himself. But he suspected that with the 
date so near, probably all of his friends were, too. 
He passed a Caretaker walking slowly with one of the 
Old in the hall. “Hello, Jonas,” the young uniformed man 
said, smiling pleasantly. The woman beside him, whose 
arm he held, was hunched over as she shuffled along in her 
soft slippers. She looked toward Jonas and smiled, but her 
dark eyes were clouded and blank. He realized she was 
blind. 
He entered the bathing room with its warm moist air and 
scent of cleansing lotions. He removed his tunic, hung it 
carefully on a wall hook, and put on the volunteer’s smock 
that was folded on a shelf. 
“Hi, Jonas!” Asher called from the corner where he was 
kneeling beside a tub. Jonas saw Fiona nearby, at a differ-
ent tub. She looked up and smiled at him, but she was busy, 
gently washing a man who lay in the warm water. 
Jonas greeted them and the caretaking attendants at 
work nearby. Then he went to the row of padded lounging 
chairs where others of the Old were waiting. He had 
worked here before; he knew what to do. 
“Your turn, Larissa,” he said, reading the nametag on 
 
 
 

From the corner of his eye he could see his friend Fiona 

help the old man from the tub and tenderly pat his thin, 
naked body dry with an absorbent cloth. She helped him 
into his robe. 
Jonas thought Larissa had drifted into sleep, as the Old 
often did, and he was careful to keep his motions steady 
and gentle so he wouldn’t wake her. He was surprised 
when she spoke, her eyes still closed. 
“This morning we celebrated the release of Roberto,” 
she told him. “It was wonderful.” 
“I knew Roberto!” Jonas said. “I helped with his feed-
ing the last time I was here, just a few weeks ago. He was a 
very interesting man.” 
Larissa opened her eyes happily. “They told his whole 
life before they released him,” she said. “They always do. 
But to be honest,” she whispered with a mischievous look, 
“some of the tellings are a little boring. I’ve even seen 
some of the Old fall asleep during tellings — when they 
released Edna recently. Did you know Edna?” 
Jonas shook his head. He couldn’t recall anyone named 
Edna. 
“Well, they tried to make her life sound meaningful. 
And of course,” she added primly, “all lives are meaning-
ful, I don’t mean that they aren’t. But Edna. My goodness. 
She was a Birthmother, and then she worked in Food 
Production for years, until she came here. She never even 
had a family unit.” 
Larissa lifted her head and looked around to make sure 
no one else was listening. Then she confided, “I don’t 
think Edna was very smart.” 

Jonas laughed. He rinsed her left arm, laid it back into 
the water, and began to wash her feet. She murmured 

Jonas grinned. “I wish I’d been there to see it.” 
Larissa frowned. “I don’t know why they don’t let chil-
dren come. Not enough room, I guess. They should en-
large the Releasing Room.” 
“We’ll have to suggest that to the committee. Maybe 
they’d study it,” Jonas said slyly, and Larissa chortled with 
laughter. 
“Right!” she hooted, and Jonas helped her from the tub. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33

Usually, at the morning ritual when the family members 
told their dreams, Jonas didn’t contribute much. He rarely 
dreamed. Sometimes he awoke with a feeling of fragments 
afloat in his sleep, but he couldn’t seem to grasp them and 
put them together into something worthy of telling at the 
ritual. 
But this morning was different. He had dreamed very 
vividly the night before. 
His mind wandered while Lily, as usual, recounted a 
lengthy dream, this one a frightening one in which she had, 
against the rules, been riding her mother’s bicycle and been 
caught by the Security Guards. 
They all listened carefully and discussed with Lily the 
warning that the dream had given. 
“Thank you for your dream, Lily.” Jonas said the stan-
dard phrase automatically, and tried to pay better attention 
while his mother told of a dream fragment, a disquieting 
scene where she had been chastised for a rule infraction she 
didn’t understand. Together they agreed that it probably 
resulted from her feelings when she had reluctantly dealt 
punishment to the citizen who had broken the major rules a 
second time. 
 
 
 
34 

Father said that he had had no dreams. 
“Gabe?” Father asked, looking down at the basket where 
the newchild lay gurgling after his feeding, ready to be 
taken back to the Nurturing Center for the day. 
They all laughed. Dream-telling began with Threes. If 
newchildren dreamed, no one knew. 
“Jonas?” Mother asked. They always asked, though they 
knew how rarely Jonas had a dream to tell. 
“I did dream last night,” Jonas told them. He shifted in 
his chair, frowning. 
“Good,” Father said. “Tell us.” 
“The details aren’t clear, really,” Jonas explained, trying 
to recreate the odd dream in his mind. “I think I was in the 
bathing room at the House of the Old.” 
“That’s where you were yesterday,” Father pointed out. 
Jonas nodded. “But it wasn’t really the same. There was 
a tub, in the dream. But only one. And the real bathing 
room has rows and rows of them. But the room in the 
dream was warm and damp. And I had taken off my tunic, 
but hadn’t put on the smock, so my chest was bare. I was 
perspiring, because it was so warm. And Fiona was there, 
the way she was yesterday.” 
“Asher, too?” Mother asked. 
Jonas shook his head. “No. It was only me and Fiona, 
alone in the room, standing beside the tub. She was laugh-
ing. But I wasn’t. I was almost a little angry at her, in the 
dream, because she wasn’t taking me seriously.” 
“Seriously about what?” Lily asked. 
Jonas looked at his plate. For some reason that he didn’t 
understand, he felt slightly embarrassed. “I think I 

He sank back down into his chair, puzzled. He waved to 
Father and Lily as they left the dwelling, carrying Gabe in 
his basket. He watched while Mother tidied the remains of 
the morning meal and placed the tray by the front door for 
the Collection Crew. 
Finally she sat down beside him at the table. “Jonas,” 
she said with a smile, “the feeling you described as the 
wanting? It was your first Stirrings. Father and I have been 
expecting it to happen to you. It happens to everyone. It 
happened to Father when he was your age. And it hap-
pened to me. It will happen someday to Lily. 
“And very often,” Mother added, “it begins with a 
dream.” 
Stirrings. He had heard the word before. He remem-
bered that there was a reference to the Stirrings in the 
Book of Rules, though he didn’t remember what it said. 
And now and then the Speaker mentioned it. ATTENTION. 

A REMINDER THAT STIRRINGS MUST BE REPORTED IN 

ORDER FOR TREATMENT TO TAKE PLACE. 
He had always ignored that announcement because he 
didn’t understand it and it had never seemed to apply to 
him in any way. He ignored, as most citizens did, many of 
the commands and reminders read by the Speaker. 
“Do I have to report it?” he asked his mother. 
She laughed. “You did, in the dream-telling. That’s 
enough.” 
“But what about the treatment? The Speaker says that 
treatment must take place.” Jonas felt miserable. Just when 
the Ceremony was about to happen, his Ceremony of 
Twelve, would he have to go away someplace for treat-
ment? Just because of a stupid dream? 
 
 
37 

"All of your adult life. But it becomes routine; after a 
while you won't even pay much attention to it." 
She looked at her watch. "If you leave right now, you 
won't even be late for school. Hurry along. 
"And thank you again, Jonas," she added, as he went to 
the door, "for your dream." 
Pedaling rapidly down the path, Jonas felt oddly proud to 
have joined those who took the pills. For a moment, 
though, he remembered the dream again. The dream had 
felt pleasurable. Though the feelings were confused, he 
thought that he had liked the feelings that his mother had 
called Stirrings. He remembered that upon waking, he had 
wanted to feel the Stirrings again. 
Then, in the same way that his own dwelling slipped 
away behind him as he rounded a corner on his bicycle, the 
dream slipped away from his thoughts. Very briefly, a little 
guiltily, he tried to grasp it back. But the feelings had 
disappeared. The Stirrings were gone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39

"Lily, please hold still," Mother said again. 
Lily, standing in front of her, fidgeted impatiently. "I 
can tie them myself," she complained. "I always have." 
"I know that," Mother replied, straightening the hair 
ribbons on the little girl's braids. "But I also know that they 
constantly come loose and more often than not, they're 
dangling down your back by afternoon. Today, at least, we 
want them to be neatly tied and to stay neatly tied." 
"I don't like hair ribbons. I'm glad I only have to wear 
them one more year," Lily said irritably. "Next year I get 
my bicycle, too," she added more cheerfully. 
"There are good things each year," Jonas reminded her. 
"This year you get to start your volunteer hours. And re-
member last year, when you became a Seven, you were so 
happy to get your front-buttoned jacket?" 
The little girl nodded and looked down at herself, at the 
jacket with its row of large buttons that designated her as a 
Seven. Fours, Fives, and Sixes all wore jackets that fas-
tened down the back so that they would have to help each 
other dress and would learn interdependence. 
The front-buttoned jacket was the first sign of inde- 

Lily grinned and wriggled away from her mother. ''And 
this year you get your Assignment,'' she said to Jonas in an 
excited voice. "I hope you get Pilot. And that you take me 
flying!" 
"Sure I will," said Jonas. "And I'll get a special little 
parachute that just fits you, and I'll take you up to, oh, 
maybe twenty thousand feet, and open the door, and — " 
"Jonas," Mother warned. 
"I was only joking," Jonas groaned. "I don't want Pilot, 
anyway. If I get Pilot I'll put in an appeal." 
"Come on," Mother said. She gave Lily's ribbons a final 
tug. "Jonas? Are you ready? Did you take your pill? I want 
to get a good seat in the Auditorium.'' She prodded Lily to 
the front door and Jonas followed. 
It was a short ride to the Auditorium, Lily waving to her 
friends from her seat on the back of Mother's bicycle. Jonas 
stowed his bicycle beside Mother's and made his way 
through the throng to find his group. 
The entire community attended the Ceremony each year. 
For the parents, it meant two days holiday from work; they 
sat together in the huge hall. Children sat with their groups 
until they went, one by one, to the stage. 
Father, though, would not join Mother in the audience 
right away. For the earliest ceremony, the Naming, the 
Nurturers brought the newchildren to the stage. Jonas, from 
his place in the balcony with the Elevens, searched the 
Auditorium for a glimpse of Father. It wasn't at all 
41 
 

part of the community. If he were released, they would not 
see him again. Ever. Those who were released — even as 
newchildren — were sent Elsewhere and never returned to 
the community. 
Father had not had to release a single newchild this year, 
so Gabriel would have represented a real failure and 
sadness. Even Jonas, though he didn't hover over the little 
one the way Lily and his father did, was glad that Gabe had 
not been released. 
The first Ceremony began right on time, and Jonas 
watched as one after another each newchild was given a 
name and handed by the Nurturers to its new family unit. 
For some, it was a first child. But many came to the stage 
accompanied by another child beaming with pride to re-
ceive a little brother or sister, the way Jonas had when he 
was about to be a Five. 
Asher poked Jonas's arm. ''Remember when we got 
Phillipa?'' he asked in a loud whisper. Jonas nodded. It had 
only been last year. Asher's parents had waited quite a long 
time before applying for a second child. Maybe, Jonas 
suspected, they had been so exhausted by Asher's lively 
foolishness that they had needed a little time. 
Two of their group, Fiona and another female named 
Thea, were missing temporarily, waiting with their parents 
to receive newchildren. But it was rare that there was such 
an age gap between children in a family unit. 
When her family's ceremony was completed, Fiona took 
the seat that had been saved for her in the row ahead of 
Asher and Jonas. She turned and whispered to them, "He's 
cute. But I don't like his name very much." She made a face 
and giggled. Fiona's new brother had been 
 
 
43

back again to the seats, for the Fives, Sixes, Sevens, and fi-
nally, last of the first day's ceremonies, the Eights. 
Jonas watched and cheered as Lily marched proudly to 
the stage, became an Eight and received the identifying 
jacket that she would wear this year, this one with smaller 
buttons and, for the first time, pockets, indicating that she 
was mature enough now to keep track of her own small 
belongings. She stood solemnly listening to the speech of 
firm instructions on the responsibilities of Eight and doing 
volunteer hours for the first time. But Jonas could see that 
Lily, though she seemed attentive, was looking longingly 
at the row of gleaming bicycles, which would be presented 
tomorrow morning to the Nines. 
Next year, Lily-billy, Jonas thought. 
It was an exhausting day, and even Gabriel, retrieved in 
his basket from the Nurturing Center, slept soundly that 
night. 
Finally it was the morning of the Ceremony of Twelve. 
 
Now Father sat beside Mother in the audience. Jonas could 
see them applauding dutifully as the Nines, one by one, 
wheeled their new bicycles, each with its gleaming 
nametag attached to the back, from the stage. He knew that 
his parents cringed a little, as he did, when Fritz, who lived 
in the dwelling next door to theirs, received his bike and 
almost immediately bumped into the podium with it. Fritz 
was a very awkward child who had been summoned for 
chastisement again and again. His transgressions were 
small ones, always: shoes on the wrong feet, schoolwork 
misplaced, failure to study adequately for a quiz. But each 
such error reflected negatively on his parents' guidance and 

time with no meaningful changes. There was new clothing: 
different undergarments for the females, whose bodies were 
beginning to change; and longer trousers for the males, with 
a specially shaped pocket for the small calculator that they 
would use this year in school; but those were simply 
presented in wrapped packages without an accompanying 
speech. 
Break for midday meal. Jonas realized he was hungry. He 
and his groupmates congregated by the tables in front of the 
Auditorium and took their packaged food. Yesterday there 
had been merriment at lunch, a lot of teasing and energy. 
But today the group stood anxiously, separate from the other 
children. Jonas watched the new Nines gravitate toward their 
waiting bicycles, each one admiring his or her nametag. He 
saw the Tens stroking their new shortened hair, the females 
shaking their heads to feel the unaccustomed lightness 
without the heavy braids they had worn so long. 
"I heard about a guy who was absolutely certain he was 
going to be assigned Engineer," Asher muttered as they ate, 
"and instead they gave him Sanitation Laborer. He went out 
the next day, jumped into the river, swam across, and joined 
the next community he came to. Nobody ever saw him 
again." 
Jonas laughed. "Somebody made that story up, Ash," he 
said. "My father said he heard that story when he was a 
Twelve." 
But Asher wasn't reassured. He was eyeing the river 
where it was visible behind the Auditorium. "I can't even 
swim very well," he said. "My swimming instructor said that 
I don't have the right boyishness or something." 

could apply for children, had always been a successful one. 
Like the Matching of Spouses and the Naming and 
Placement of newchildren, the Assignments were scrupu-
lously thought through by the Committee of Elders. 
He was certain that his Assignment, whatever it was to 
be, and Asher's too, would be the right one for them. He 
only wished that the midday break would conclude, that the 
audience would reenter the Auditorium, and the suspense 
would end. 
As if in answer to his unspoken wish, the signal came 
and the crowd began to move toward the doors. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 

Now Jonas's group had taken a new place in the Auditorium, 
trading with the new Elevens, so that they sat in the very 
front, immediately before the stage. 
They were arranged by their original numbers, the 
numbers they had been given at birth. The numbers were 
rarely used after the Naming. But each child knew his 
number, of course. Sometimes parents used them in irrita-
tion at a child's misbehavior, indicating that mischief made 
one unworthy of a name. Jonas always chuckled when he 
heard a parent, exasperated, call sharply to a whining 
toddler, "That's enough, Twenty-three!'' 
Jonas was Nineteen. He had been the nineteenth new-
child born his year. It had meant that at his Naming, he had 
been already standing and bright-eyed, soon to walk and 
talk. It had given him a slight advantage the first year or 
two, a little more maturity than many of his group-mates 
who had been born in the later months of that year. But it 
evened out, as it always did, by Three. 
After Three, the children progressed at much the same 
level, though by their first number one could always tell 
who was a few months older than others in his group. 
Technically, Jonas's full number was Eleven-nineteen, 
 
 
50 

since there were other Nineteens, of course, in each age 
group. And today, now that the new Elevens had been ad-
vanced this morning, there were two Eleven-nineteens. At 
the midday break he had exchanged smiles with the new 
one, a shy female named Harriet. 
But the duplication was only for these few hours. Very 
soon he would not be an Eleven but a Twelve, and age 
would no longer matter. He would be an adult, like his 
parents, though a new one and untrained still. 
Asher was Four, and sat now in the row ahead of Jonas. 
He would receive his Assignment fourth. 
Fiona, Eighteen, was on his left; on his other side sat 
Twenty, a male named Pierre whom Jonas didn't like much. 
Pierre was very serious, not much fun, and a worrier and 
tattletale, too. "Have you checked the rules, Jonas?" Pierre 
was always whispering solemnly. "I'm not sure that's within 
the rules.'' Usually it was some foolish thing that no one 
cared about — opening his tunic if it was a day with a 
breeze; taking a brief try on a friend's bicycle, just to 
experience the different feel of it. 
The initial speech at the Ceremony of Twelve was made 
by the Chief Elder, the leader of the community who was 
elected every ten years. The speech was much the same each 
year: recollection of the time of childhood and the period of 
preparation, the coming responsibilities of adult life, the 
profound importance of Assignment, the seriousness of 
training to come. 
Then the Chief Elder moved ahead in her speech. 
"This is the time," she began, looking directly at them, when 
we acknowledge differences. You Elevens have spent all 
your years till now learning to fit in, to standard- 
 
 
 
51

Number One — her name was Madeline — returned, 
finally, amidst applause, to her seat, wearing the new 
badge that designated her Fish Hatchery Attendant. Jonas 
was certainly glad that that Assignment was taken; he 
wouldn't have wanted it. But he gave Madeline a smile of 
congratulation. 
When Two, a female named Inger, received her Assign-
ment as Birthmother, Jonas remembered that his mother 
had called it a job without honor. But he thought that the 
Committee had chosen well. Inger was a nice girl though 
somewhat lazy, and her body was strong. She would enjoy 
the three years of being pampered that would follow her 
brief training; she would give birth easily and well; and the 
task of Laborer that would follow would use her strength, 
keep her healthy, and impose self-discipline. Inger was 
smiling when she resumed her seat. Birthmother was an 
important job, if lacking in prestige. 
Jonas noticed that Asher looked nervous. He kept turn-
ing his head and glancing back at Jonas until the group 
leader had to give him a silent chastisement, a motion to 
sit still and face forward. 
Three, Isaac, was given an Assignment as Instructor of 
Sixes, which obviously pleased him and was well deserved. 
Now there were three Assignments gone, none of them 
ones that Jonas would have liked — not that he could have 
been a Birthmother, anyway, he realized with amusement. 
He tried to sort through the list in his mind, the possible 
Assignments that remained. But there were so many he 
gave it up; and anyway, now it was Asher's turn. He paid 
strict attention as his friend went to the stage and stood 
self-consciously beside the Chief Elder. 
 
 
53 

Poor Asher, who always talked too fast and mixed up 
words, even as a toddler. As a Three, eager for his juice and 
crackers at snacktime, he one day said ''smack'' in-stead of 
''snack'' as he stood waiting in line for the morning treat. 
Jonas remembered it clearly. He could still see little 
Asher, wiggling with impatience in the line. He remembered 
the cheerful voice call out, ''I want my smack!'' 
The other Threes, including Jonas, had laughed ner-
vously. "Snack!'' they corrected. ''You meant snack, Asher!'' 
But the mistake had been made. And precision of language 
was one of the most important tasks of small children. Asher 
had asked for a smack. 
The discipline wand, in the hand of the Childcare worker, 
whistled as it came down across Asher's hands. Asher 
whimpered, cringed, and corrected himself instantly. 
"Snack," he whispered. 
But the next morning he had done it again. And again the 
following week. He couldn't seem to stop, though for each 
lapse the discipline wand came again, escalating to a series 
of painful lashes that left marks on Asher's legs. Eventually, 
for a period of time, Asher stopped talking altogether, when 
he was a Three. 
"For a while," the Chief Elder said, relating the story, we 
had a silent Asher! But he learned.'' 
She turned to him with a smile. ''When he began to talk 
again, it was with greater precision. And now his lapses are 
very few. His corrections and apologies are very prompt. 
And his good humor is unfailing.'' The audience murmured 
in agreement. Asher's cheerful disposition was well-known 
throughout the community. 
 
 
55

Jonas prepared himself to walk to the stage when the 
applause ended and the Chief Elder picked up the next 
folder and looked down to the group to call forward the 
next new Twelve. He was calm now that his turn had come. 
He took a deep breath and smoothed his hair with his hand. 
''Twenty,'' he heard her voice say clearly. ''Pierre.'' 
She skipped me, Jonas thought, stunned. Had he heard 
wrong? No. There was a sudden hush in the crowd, and he 
knew that the entire community realized that the Chief 
Elder had moved from Eighteen to Twenty, leaving a gap. 
On his right, Pierre, with a startled look, rose from his seat 
and moved to the stage. 
A mistake. She made a mistake. But Jonas knew, even as 
he had the thought, that she hadn't. The Chief Elder made 
no mistakes. Not at the Ceremony of Twelve. 
He felt dizzy, and couldn't focus his attention. He didn't 
hear what Assignment Pierre received, and was only dimly 
aware of the applause as the boy returned, wearing his new 
badge. Then: Twenty-one. Twenty-two. 
The numbers continued in order. Jonas sat, dazed, as they 
moved into the Thirties and then the Forties, nearing the 
end. Each time, at each announcement, his heart jumped for 
a moment, and he thought wild thoughts. Perhaps now she 
would call his name. Could he have forgotten his own 
number? No. He had always been Nineteen. He was sitting 
in the seat marked Nineteen. 
But she had skipped him. He saw the others in his group 
glance at him, embarrassed, and then avert their eyes 
quickly. He saw a worried look on the face of his group 
leader.                                   
 
 
57 

The audience was clearly ill at ease. They applauded at the 
final Assignment; but the applause was piecemeal, no 
longer a crescendo of united enthusiasm. There were mur-
murs of confusion. 
Jonas moved his hands together, clapping, but it was an 
automatic, meaningless gesture that he wasn't even aware 
of. His mind had shut out all of the earlier emotions: the 
anticipation, excitement, pride, and even the happy kinship 
with his friends. Now he felt only humiliation and terror. 
The Chief Elder waited until the uneasy applause sub-
sided. Then she spoke again. 
"I know," she said in her vibrant, gracious voice, "that 
you are all concerned. That you feel I have made a mis-
take." 
She smiled. The community, relieved from its discom-
fort very slightly by her benign statement, seemed to 
breathe more easily. It was very silent. 
Jonas looked up. 
"I have caused you anxiety," she said. "I apologize to 
my community." Her voice flowed over the assembled 
crowd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 

she was looking at one of the Elders. The Committee of 
Elders was sitting together in a group; and the Chief Elder's 
eyes were now on one who sat in the midst but seemed oddly 
separate from them. It was a man Jonas had never noticed 
before, a bearded man with pale eyes. He was watching 
Jonas intently. 
"We failed in our last selection," the Chief Elder said 
solemnly. "It was ten years ago, when Jonas was just a 
toddler. I will not dwell on the experience because it causes 
us all terrible discomfort.'' 
Jonas didn't know what she was referring to, but he could 
sense the discomfort of the audience. They shifted uneasily 
in their seats. 
"We have not been hasty this time," she continued. "We 
could not afford another failure." 
"Sometimes," she went on, speaking now in a lighter 
tone, relaxing the tension in the Auditorium, "we are not 
entirely certain about the Assignments, even after the most 
painstaking observations. Sometimes we worry that the one 
assigned might not develop, through training, every 
attribute necessary. Elevens are still children, after all. What 
we observe as playfulness and patience — the requirements 
to become Nurturer — could, with maturity, be revealed as 
simply foolishness and indolence. So we continue to 
observe during training, and to modify behavior when 
necessary. 
"But the Receiver-in-training cannot be observed, can-
not be modified. That is stated quite clearly in the rules. He 
is to be alone, apart, while he is prepared by the cur-rent 
Receiver for the job which is the most honored in our 
community." 
 
 
61

Jonas nodded, agreeing, as he recalled the incident, and 
its accompanying misery. 
"But you will be faced, now,'' she explained gently, 
“with pain of a magnitude that none of us here can com-
prehend because it is beyond our experience. The Receiver 
himself was not able to describe it, only to remind us that 
you would be faced with it, that you would need immense 
courage. We cannot prepare you for that. 
"But we feel certain that you are brave," she said to 
him. 
He did not feel brave at all. Not now. 
"The fourth essential attribute," the Chief Elder said, "is 
wisdom. Jonas has not yet acquired that. The acquisition 
of wisdom will come through his training. 
"We are convinced that Jonas has the ability to acquire 
wisdom. That is what we looked for. 
"Finally, The Receiver must have one more quality, and 
it is one which I can only name, but not describe. I do not 
understand it. You members of the community will not 
understand it, either. Perhaps Jonas will, because the 
current Receiver has told us that Jonas already has this 
quality. He calls it the Capacity to See Beyond." 
The Chief Elder looked at Jonas with a question in her 
eyes. The audience watched him, too. They were silent. 
For a moment he froze, consumed with despair. He 
didn't have it, the whatever-she-had-said. He didn't know 
what it was. Now was the moment when he would have to 
confess, to say, "No, I don't. I can't," and throw himself on 
their mercy, ask their forgiveness, to explain that he had 
been wrongly chosen, that he was not the right one at all. 
 
 
 
63

Now, for the first time in his twelve years of life, Jonas felt 
separate, different. He remembered what the Chief Elder 
had said: that his training would be alone and apart. 
But his training had not yet begun and already, upon 
leaving the Auditorium, he felt the apartness. Holding the 
folder she had given him, he made his way through the 
throng, looking for his family unit and for Asher. People 
moved aside for him. They watched him. He thought he 
could hear whispers. 
"Ash!" he called, spotting his friend near the rows of 
bicycles. "Ride back with me?" 
"Sure." Asher smiled, his usual smile, friendly and fa-
miliar. But Jonas felt a moment of hesitation from his 
friend, an uncertainty. 
"Congratulations," Asher said. 
"You too," Jonas replied. "It was really funny, when 
she told about the smacks. You got more applause than 
almost anybody else.'' 
The other new Twelves clustered nearby, placing their 
folders carefully into the carrying containers on the backs 
of the bikes. In each dwelling tonight they would be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65 

"You've been greatly honored,'' his mother said. ''Your 
father and I are very proud.'' 
"It's the most important job in the community,'' Father 
said. 
"But just the other night, you said that the job of making 
Assignments was the most important!'' 
Mother nodded. ''This is different. It's not a job, really. I 
never thought, never expected — " She paused. ''There's 
only one Receiver." 
"But the Chief Elder said that they had made a selection 
before, and that it failed. What was she talking about?" 
Both of his parents hesitated. Finally his father de-
scribed the previous selection. ''It was very much as it was 
today, Jonas — the same suspense, as one Eleven had been 
passed over when the Assignments were given. Then the 
announcement, when they singled out the one — " 
Jonas interrupted. "What was his name?" 
His mother replied, "Her, not his. It was a female. But 
we are never to speak the name, or to use it again for a 
newchild." 
Jonas was shocked. A name designated Not-to-Be-
Spoken indicated the highest degree of disgrace. 
"What happened to her?" he asked nervously. 
But his parents looked blank. "We don't know," his fa-
ther said uncomfortably. "We never saw her again." 
A silence fell over the room. They looked at each other. 
Finally his mother, rising from the table, said, "You've 
been greatly honored, Jonas. Greatly honored.'' 
 
Alone in his sleepingroom, prepared for bed, Jonas opened 
his folder at last. Some of the other Twelves, he had no- 

Jonas was stunned. What would happen to his friend-
ships? His mindless hours playing ball, or riding his bike 
along the river? Those had been happy and vital times for 
him. Were they to be completely taken from him, now? The 
simple logistic instructions — where to go, and when — 
were expected. Every Twelve had to be told, of course, 
where and how and when to report for training. But he was a 
little dismayed that his schedule left no time, apparently, for 
recreation. 
The exemption from rudeness startled him. Reading it 
again, however, he realized that it didn't compel him to be 
rude; it simply allowed him the option. He was quite certain 
he would never take advantage of it. He was so completely, 
so thoroughly accustomed to courtesy within the community 
that the thought of asking another citizen an intimate 
question, of calling someone's attention to an area of 
awkwardness, was unnerving. 
The prohibition of dream-telling, he thought, would not be 
a real problem. He dreamed so rarely that the dream-telling 
did not come easily to him anyway, and he was glad to be 
excused from it. He wondered briefly, though, how to deal 
with it at the morning meal. What if he did dream — should 
he simply tell his family unit, as he did so often, anyway, 
that he hadn't? That would be a lie. Still, the final rule said ... 
well, he wasn't quite ready to think about the final rule on 
the page. 
The restriction of medication unnerved him. Medication 
was always available to citizens, even to children, through 
their parents. When he had crushed his finger in the door, he 
had quickly, gasping into the speaker, notified his mother; 
she had hastily requisitioned relief-of-pain 
 
 
 
 
69 

tioned lie, of course. But the reason for precision of 
language was to ensure that unintentional lies were never 
uttered. Did he understand that` they asked him. And he 
had. 
He had never, within his memory, been tempted to lie. 
Asher did not lie. Lily did not lie. His parents did not lie. 
No one did. Unless ... 
Now Jonas had a thought that he had never had before. 
This new thought was frightening. What if others — adults 
— had, upon becoming Twelves, received in their 
instructions the same terrifying sentence? 
What if they had all been instructed: You may lie? 
His mind reeled. Now, empowered to ask questions of 
utmost rudeness — and promised answers — he could, 
conceivably (though it was almost unimaginable), ask 
someone, some adult, his father perhaps: "Do you lie?- 
But he would have no way of knowing if the answer he 
received were true. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 

''I go in here, Jonas," Fiona told him when they reached 
the front door of the House of the Old after parking their 
bicycles in the designated area. 
"I don't know why I'm nervous," she confessed. "I've 
been here so often before." She turned her folder over in 
her hands. 
"Well, everything's different now," Jonas reminded her. 
"Even the nameplates on our bikes," Fiona laughed. 
During the night the nameplate of each new Twelve had 
been removed by the Maintenance Crew and replaced with 
the style that indicated citizen-in-training. 
"I don't want to be late," she said hastily, and started up 
the steps. "If we finish at the same time, I'll ride home with 
you." 
Jonas nodded, waved to her, and headed around the 
building toward the Annex, a small wing attached to the 
back. He certainly didn't want to be late for his first day of 
training, either. 
The Annex was very ordinary, its door unremarkable. He 
reached for the heavy handle, then noticed a buzzer on the 
wall. So he buzzed instead. 
 
 
72 

"Yes?" The voice came through a small speaker above 
the buzzer. 
"It's, uh, Jonas. I'm the new — I mean — " 
„Come in.” A click indicated that the door had been 
unlatched. 
The lobby was very small and contained only a desk at 
which a female Attendant sat working on some papers. She 
looked up when he entered; then, to his surprise, she stood. 
It was a small thing, the standing; but no one had ever 
stood automatically to acknowledge Jonas's presence 
before. 
"Welcome, Receiver of Memory," she said respectfully. 
"Oh, please," he replied uncomfortably. "Call me 
Jonas." 
She smiled, pushed a button, and he heard a click that 
unlocked the door to her left. "You may go right on in," 
she told him. 
Then she seemed to notice his discomfort and to realize 
its origin. No doors in the community were locked, ever. 
None that Jonas knew of, anyway. 
"The locks are simply to insure The Receiver's privacy 
because he needs concentration,'' she explained. "It would 
be difficult if citizens wandered in, looking for the Depart-
ment of Bicycle Repair, or something." 
Jonas laughed, relaxing a little. The woman seemed 
very friendly, and it was true — in fact it was a joke 
throughout the community — that the Department of Bi-
cycle Repair, an unimportant little office, was relocated so 
often that no one ever knew where it was. 
"There is nothing dangerous here,'' she told him. "But,'' 
she added, glancing at the wall clock, ''he doesn't like to 
be kept waiting." 
 
 
73 

more descriptions of offices and factories and committees? 
He had only a second to look around because he was 
aware that the man sitting in a chair beside the table was 
watching him. Hastily he moved forward, stood before the 
man, bowed slightly, and said, "I'm Jonas." 
"I know. Welcome, Receiver of Memory." 
Jonas recognized the man. He was the Elder who had 
seemed separate from the others at the Ceremony, though 
he was dressed in the same special clothing that only 
Elders wore. 
Jonas looked self-consciously into the pale eyes that 
mirrored his own. 
"Sir, I apologize for my lack of understanding...." 
He waited, but the man did not give the standard 
accepting-of-apology response. 
After a moment, Jonas went on, "But I thought — I 
mean I think," he corrected, reminding himself that if pre-
cision of language were ever to be important, it was cer-
tainly important now, in the presence of this man, "that you 
are the receiver of Memory. I'm only, well, I was only 
assigned, I mean selected, yesterday. I'm not anything at 
all. Not yet." 
The man looked at him thoughtfully, silently. It was a 
look that combined interest, curiosity, concern, and per-
haps a little sympathy as well. 
Finally he spoke. "Beginning today, this moment, at 
least to me, you are The Receiver. 
"I have been The Receiver for a long time. A very, very 
long time. You can see that, can't you?" 
Jonas nodded. The man was wrinkled, and his eyes, 
though piercing in their unusual lightness, seemed tired. 
 
 
 
 
75 

when I tried before to train a successor, I failed. Please ask 
any questions that will help you." 
In his mind, Jonas had questions. A thousand. A million 
questions. As many questions as there were books lining 
the walls. But he did not ask one, not yet. 
The man sighed, seeming to put his thoughts in order. 
Then he spoke again. "Simply stated," he said, ''although 
it's not really simple at all, my job is to transmit to you all 
the memories I have within me. Memories of the past.'' 
"Sir," Jonas said tentatively, "I would be very interested 
to hear the story of your life, and to listen to your 
memories. 
"I apologize for interrupting," he added quickly. 
The man waved his hand impatiently. "No apologies in 
this room. We haven't time.'' 
"Well,'' Jonas went on, uncomfortably aware that he 
might be interrupting again, "I am really interested, I don't 
mean that I'm not. But I don't exactly understand why it's 
so important. I could do some adult job in the community, 
and in my recreation time I could come and listen to the 
stories from your childhood. I'd like that. Actually," he 
added, "I've done that already, in the House of the Old. 
The Old like to tell about their childhoods, and it's always 
fun to listen.'' 
The man shook his head. "No, no," he said. "I'm not 
being clear. It's not my past, not my childhood that I must 
transmit to you. 
He leaned back, resting his head against the back of the 
upholstered chair. "It's the memories of the whole world,'' 
he said with a sigh. ''Before you, before me, before the 
previous Receiver, and generations before him.'' 
Jonas frowned. "The whole world?" he asked. ''I don't 

"Downhill? The term means nothing to you?'' 
''Nothing, sir." 
Well, it's a place to start. I'd been wondering how to 
begin. Move to the bed, and lie face down. Remove your 
tunic first.'' 
Jonas did so, a little apprehensively. Beneath his bare 
chest, he felt the soft folds of the magnificent cloth that 
covered the bed. He watched as the man rose and moved 
first to the wall where the speaker was. It was the same 
sort of speaker that occupied a place in every dwelling, but 
one thing about it was different. This one had a switch, 
which the man deftly snapped to the end that said OFF. 
Jonas almost gasped aloud. To have the power to turn 
the speaker off. It was an astonishing thing. 
Then the man moved with surprising quickness to the 
corner where the bed was. He sat on a chair beside Jonas, 
who was motionless, waiting for what would happen next. 
"Close your eyes. Relax. This will not be painful.'' 
Jonas remembered that he was allowed, that he had even 
been encouraged, to ask questions. "What are you going to 
do, sir?'' he asked, hoping that his voice didn't betray his 
nervousness. 
"I am going to transmit the memory of snow,'' the old 
man said, and placed his hands on Jonas's bare back. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 

Jonas felt nothing unusual at first. He felt only the light 
touch of the old man's hands on his back. 
He tried to relax, to breathe evenly. The room was ab-
solutely silent, and for a moment Jonas feared that he might 
disgrace himself now, on the first day of his training, by 
falling asleep. 
Then he shivered. He realized that the touch of the hands 
felt, suddenly, cold. At the same instant, breathing in, he felt 
the air change, and his very breath was cold. He licked his 
lips, and in doing so, his tongue touched the suddenly chilled 
air. 
It was very startling; but he was not at all frightened, 
now. He was filled with energy, and he breathed again, 
feeling the sharp intake of frigid air. Now, too, he could feel 
cold air swirling around his entire body. He felt it blow 
against his hands where they lay at his sides, and over his 
back. 
The touch of the man's hands seemed to have disap-
peared. 
Now he became aware of an entirely new sensation: 
pinpricks? No, because they were soft and without pain. 
Tiny, cold, featherlike feelings peppered his body and face. 
He put out his tongue again, and caught one of the 
 
 
 
80 

 
 
dots of cold upon it. It disappeared from his awareness in-
stantly; but he caught another, and another. The sensation 
made him smile. 
One part of his consciousness knew that he was still lying 
there, on the bed, in the Annex room. Yet another, separate 
part of his being was upright now, in a sitting position, and 
beneath him he could feel that he was not on the soft 
decorated bedcovering at all, but rather seated on a flat, hard 
surface. His hands now held (though at the same time they 
were still motionless at his sides) a rough, damp rope. 
And he could see, though his eyes were closed. He could 
see a bright, whirling torrent of crystals in the air around 
him, and he could see them gather on the backs of his hands, 
like cold fur. 
His breath was visible. 
Beyond, through the swirl of what he now, somehow, 
perceived was the thing the old man had spoken of — snow 
— he could look out and down a great distance. He was up 
high someplace. The ground was thick with the furry snow, 
but he sat slightly above it on a hard, flat object. 
Sled, he knew abruptly. He was sitting on a thing called 
sled. And the sled itself seemed to be poised at the top of a 
long, extended mound that rose from the very land where he 
was. Even as he thought the word ''mound," his new 
consciousness told him hill. 
Then the sled, with Jonas himself upon it, began to move 
through the snowfall, and he understood instantly that now 
he was going downhill. No voice made an explanation. The 
experience explained itself to him. 
His face cut through the frigid air as he began the de- 
 
 
 
 
81 

"That's right. A little weight off this old body.'' 
"But it was such fun! And now you don't have it any-
more! I  took it from you!" 
But the old man laughed. "All I gave you was one ride, 
on one sled, in one snow, on one hill. I have a whole world 
of them in my memory. I could give them to you one by 
one, a thousand times, and there would still be more." 
"Are you saying that I — I mean we — could do it 
again?" Jonas asked. "I'd really like to. I think I could 
steer, by pulling the rope. I didn't try this time, because it 
was so new. 
The old man, laughing, shook his head. "Maybe an-
other day, for a treat. But there's no time, really, just to 
play. I only wanted to begin by showing you how it works. 
"Now," he said, turning businesslike, ''Lie back down. I 
want to — " 
Jonas did. He was eager for whatever experience would 
come next. But he had, suddenly, so many questions. 
"Why don't we have snow, and sleds, and hills."' he 
asked. "And when did we, in the past? Did my parents have 
sleds when they were young? Did you?" 
The old man shrugged and gave a short laugh. "No," he 
told Jonas. "It's a very distant memory. That's why it was 
so exhausting — I had to tug it forward from many 
generations back. It was given to me when I was a new 
Receiver, and the previous Receiver had to pull it through a 
long time period, too." 
"But what happened to those things? Snow, and the rest 
of it?" 
"Climate Control. Snow made growing food difficult, 
limited the agricultural periods. And unpredictable weath- 
 
 
 
83 

He didn't move. There was no sled. His posture didn't 
change. He was simply alone someplace, out of doors, 
lying down, and the warmth came from far above. It was 
not as exciting as the ride through the snowy air; but it was 
pleasurable and comforting. 
Suddenly he perceived the word for it: sunshine. He 
perceived that it came from the sky. 
Then it ended. 
"Sunshine,” he said aloud, opening his eyes. 
"Good. You did get the word. That makes my job easier. 
Not so much explaining." 
"And it came from the sky." 
"That's right," the old man said. ''Just the way it used to. 
"Before Sameness. Before Climate Control," Jonas 
added. 
The man laughed. "You receive well, and learn quickly. 
I'm very pleased with you. That's enough for today, I think. 
We're off to a good start." 
There was a question bothering Jonas. "Sir," he said, 
"The Chief Elder told me — she told everyone — and you 
told me, too, that it would be painful. So I was a little 
scared. But it didn't hurt at all. I really enjoyed it.'' He 
looked quizzically at the old man. 
The man sighed. "I started you with memories of pleas-
ure. My previous failure gave me the wisdom to do that.'' 
He took a few deep breaths. "Jonas," he said, "it will be 
painful. But it need not be painful yet." 
"I'm brave. I really am." Jonas sat up a little straighter. 
The old man looked at him for a moment. He smiled. 
"I can see that," he said. "Well, since you asked the ques- 
 
 
 
85

The old man nodded to him. He looked drained, and a 
little sad. 
"Sir?" Jonas said shyly. 
"Yes? Do you have a question?-" 
"It's just that I don't know your name. I thought you were 
The Receiver, but you say that now I’m The Receiver. So I 
don't know what to call you.'' 
The man had sat back down in the comfortable uphol-
stered chair. He moved his shoulders around as if to ease 
away an aching sensation. He seemed terribly weary. 
"Call me The Giver,'' he told Jonas. 

"You slept soundly, Jonas?" his mother asked at the 
morning meal. "No dreams?" 
Jonas simply smiled and nodded, not ready to lie, not 
willing to tell the truth. "I slept very soundly," he said. 
"I wish this one would," his father said, leaning down 
from his chair to touch Gabriel's waving fist. The basket 
was on the floor beside him; in its corner, beside Gabriel's 
head, the stuffed hippo sat staring with its blank eyes. 
"So do I," Mother said, rolling her eyes. "He's so fretful 
at night." 
Jonas had not heard the newchild during the night be-
cause as always, he had slept soundly. But it was not true 
that he had no dreams. 
Again and again, as he slept, he had slid down that 
snow-covered hill. Always, in the dream, it seemed as if 
there were a destination: a something — he could not 
grasp what — that lay beyond the place where the 
thickness of snow brought the sled to a stop. 
He was left, upon awakening, with the feeling that he 
wanted, even somehow needed, to reach the something that 
waited in the distance. The feeling that it was good. That it 
was welcoming. That it was significant. 
 
 
 
88 

But he did not know how to get there. 
He tried to shed the leftover dream, gathering his 
schoolwork and preparing for the day. 
School seemed a little different today. The classes were 
the same: language and communications; commerce and 
industry; science and technology; civil procedures and gov-
ernment. But during the breaks for recreation periods and 
the midday meal, the other new Twelves were abuzz with 
descriptions of their first day of training. All of them talked 
at once, interrupting each other, hastily making the required 
apology for interrupting, then forgetting again in the 
excitement of describing the new experiences. 
Jonas listened. He was very aware of his own admoni-
tion not to discuss his training. But it would have been im-
possible, anyway. There was no way to describe to his 
friends what he had experienced there in the Annex room. 
How could you describe a sled without describing a hill and 
snow; and how could you describe a hill and snow to 
someone who had never felt height or wind or that feathery, 
magical cold? 
Even trained for years as they all had been in precision 
of language, what words could you use which would give 
another the experience of sunshine? 
So it was easy for Jonas to be still and to listen. 
After school hours he rode again beside Fiona to the 
House of the Old. 
"I looked for you yesterday," she told him, "so we could 
ride home together. Your bike was still there, and I waited 
for a little while. But it was getting late, so I went on 
home." 
"I apologize for making you wait," Jonas said. 

seemed to be just her hair. And just for that flickering in-
stant. 
He ran through it in his mind. It was clearly beginning to 
happen more often. First, the apple a few weeks before. The 
next time had been the faces in the audience at the 
Auditorium, just two days ago. Now, today, Fiona's hair. 
Frowning, Jonas walked toward the Annex. I will ask 
The Giver, he decided. 
The old man looked up, smiling, when Jonas entered the 
room. He was already seated beside the bed, and he seemed 
more energetic today, slightly renewed, and glad to see 
Jonas. 
"Welcome," he said. "We must get started. You're one 
minute late." 
"I apologi —" Jonas began, and then stopped, flustered, 
remembering there were to be no apologies. 
He removed his tunic and went to the bed. "I'm one 
minute late because something happened," he explained. 
"And I'd like to ask you about it, if you don't mind." 
You may ask me anything." 
Jonas tried to sort it out in his mind so that he could 
explain it clearly. "I think it's what you call seeing-beyond," 
he said. 
The Giver nodded. "Describe it," he said. 
Jonas told him about the experience with the apple. 
Then the moment on the stage, when he had looked out 
and seen the same phenomenon in the faces of the crowd. 
"Then today, just now, outside, it happened with my 
friend Fiona. She herself didn't change, exactly. But 
something about her changed for a second. Her hair looked 
different; but not in its shape, not in its length. I can't 
 
 
 
 
 
91 

But it didn't come. Instead, The Giver instructed him, 
"Call back the memory of the ride on the sled. Just the be-
ginning of it, where you're at the top of the hill, before the 
slide starts. And this time, look down at the sled." 
Jonas was puzzled. He opened his eyes. "Excuse me," he 
asked politely, "but don't you have to give me the 
memory?" 
"It's your memory, now, It's not mine to experience any 
longer. I gave it away." 
"But how can I call it back?" 
"You can remember last year, or the year that you were 
a Seven, or a Five, can't you?" 
"Of course." 
"It's much the same. Everyone in the community has 
one-generation memories like those. But now you will be 
able to go back farther. Try. Just concentrate." 
Jonas closed his eyes again. He took a deep breath and 
sought the sled and the hill and the snow in his conscious-
ness. 
There they were, with no effort. He was again sitting in 
that whirling world of snowflakes, atop the hill. 
Jonas grinned with delight, and blew his own steamy 
breath into view. Then, as he had been instructed, he 
looked down. He saw his own hands, furred again with 
snow, holding the rope. He saw his legs, and moved them 
aside for a glimpse of the sled beneath. 
Dumbfounded, he stared at it. This time it was not a 
fleeting impression. This time the sled had — and contin-
ued to have, as he blinked, and stared at it again — that 
same mysterious quality that the apple had had so briefly. 
And Fiona's hair. The sled did not change. It simply was — 
whatever the thing was. 
 
 
 
 
93 

Probably when you saw the faces take on color it wasn't as 
deep or vibrant as the apple, or your friend's hair." 
The Giver chuckled, suddenly. "We've never completely 
mastered Sameness. I suppose the genetic scientists are still 
hard at work trying to work the kinks out. Hair like Fiona's 
must drive them crazy." 
Jonas listened, trying hard to comprehend. "And the 
sled?" he said. "It had that same thing: the color red. But it 
didn't change, Giver. It just was." 
"Because it's a memory from the time when color was." 
"It was so — oh, I wish language were more precise! The 
red was so beautiful!" 
The Giver nodded. "It is." 
"Do you see it all the time?" 
"I see all of them. All the colors." 
"Will I?" 
"Of course. When you receive the memories. You have 
the capacity to see beyond. You'll gain wisdom, then, along 
with colors. And lots more." 
Jonas wasn't interested, just then, in wisdom. It was the 
colors that fascinated him. "Why can't everyone see them? 
Why did colors disappear?" 
The Giver shrugged. "Our people made that choice, the 
choice to go to Sameness. Before my time, before the 
previous time, back and back and back. We relinquished 
color when we relinquished sunshine and did away with 
differences." He thought for a moment. "We gained control 
of many things. But we had to let go of others." 
"We shouldn't have!" Jonas said fiercely. 
The Giver looked startled at the certainty of Jonas's re-
action. Then he smiled wryly. "You've come very quickly 
 
 
95 

Days went by, and weeks. Jonas learned, through the 
memories, the names of colors; and now he began to see 
them all, in his ordinary life (though he knew it was ordi-
nary no longer, and would never be again). But they didn't 
last. There would be a glimpse of green — the landscaped 
lawn around the Central Plaza; a bush on the riverbank. The 
bright orange of pumpkins being trucked in from the 
agricultural fields beyond the community boundary — seen 
in an instant, the flash of brilliant color, but gone again, 
returning to their flat and hueless shade. 
The Giver told him that it would be a very long time 
before he had the colors to keep. 
"But I want them!" Jonas said angrily. "It isn't fair that 
nothing has color!" 
"Not fair?" The Giver looked at Jonas curiously. "Ex-
plain what you mean." 
"Well ...” Jonas had to stop and think it through. "If 
everything's the same, then there aren't any choices! I want 
to wake up in the morning and decide things! A blue tunic, 
or a red one?" 
He looked down at himself, at the colorless fabric of his 
clothing. "But it's all the same, always." 
 
 
 
 
 
97 

"It's safer." 
"Yes," Jonas agreed. "Much safer." 
But when the conversation turned to other things, Jonas 
was left, still, with a feeling of frustration that he didn't 
understand. 
He found that he was often angry, now: irrationally 
angry at his groupmates, that they were satisfied with their 
lives which had none of the vibrance his own was taking 
on. And he was angry at himself, that he could not change 
that for them. 
He tried. Without asking permission from The Giver, 
because he feared — or knew — that it would be denied, he 
tried to give his new awareness to his friends. 
"Asher," Jonas said one morning, "look at those flowers 
very carefully." They were standing beside a bed of 
geraniums planted near the Hall of Open Records. He put 
his hands on Asher's shoulders, and concentrated on the red 
of the petals, trying to hold it as long as he could, and 
trying at the same time to transmit the awareness of red to 
his friend. 
"What's the matter?" Asher asked uneasily. "Is some-
thing wrong?" He moved away from Jonas's hands. It was 
extremely rude for one citizen to touch another outside of 
family units. 
"No, nothing. I thought for a minute that they were 
wilting, and we should let the Gardening Crew know they 
needed more watering." Jonas sighed, and turned away. 
One evening he came home from his training weighted 
with new knowledge. The Giver had chosen a startling and 
disturbing memory that day. Under the touch of his hands, 
Jonas had found himself suddenly in a place that was 
completely alien: hot and windswept under a vast 
 
 
 
99

continued to roar into his consciousness as he pedaled 
slowly home. 
"Lily," he asked that evening when his sister took her 
comfort object, the stuffed elephant, from the shelf, "did 
you know that once there really were elephants? Live 
ones?" 
She glanced down at the ragged comfort object and 
grinned. "Right," she said, skeptically. "Sure, Jonas." 
Jonas went and sat beside them while his father untied 
Lily's hair ribbons and combed her hair. He placed one hand 
on each of their shoulders. With all of his being he tried to 
give each of them a piece of the memory: not of the tortured 
cry of the elephant, but of the being of the elephant, of the 
towering, immense creature and the meticulous touch with 
which it had tended its friend at the end. 
But his father had continued to comb Lily's long hair, 
and Lily, impatient, had finally wiggled under her brother's 
touch. "Jonas," she said, "you're hurting me with your 
hand." 
"I apologize for hurting you, Lily," Jonas mumbled, and 
took his hand away. 
" 'Ccept your apology," Lily responded indifferently, 
stroking the lifeless elephant. 
 
"Giver," Jonas asked once, as they prepared for the day's 
work, "don't you have a spouse? Aren't you allowed to 
apply for one?" Although he was exempted from the rules 
against rudeness, he was aware that this was a rude ques-
tion. But The Giver had encouraged all of his questions, not 
seeming to be embarrassed or offended by even the most 
personal. 
The Giver chuckled. "No, there's no rule against it. 
 
 
101 

"When you become the official Receiver, when we're 
finished here, you'll be given a whole new set of rules. 
Those are the rules that I obey. And it won't surprise you 
that I am forbidden to talk about my work to anyone except 
the new Receiver. That's you, of course. 
"So there will be a whole part of your life which you 
won't be able to share with a family. It's hard, Jonas. It was 
hard for me. 
"You do understand, don't you, that this is my life? The 
memories?" 
Jonas nodded again, but he was puzzled. Didn't life 
consist of the things you did each day? There wasn't any-
thing else, really. "I've seen you taking walks," he said. 
The Giver sighed. "I walk. I eat at mealtime. And when I 
am called by the Committee of Elders, I appear before 
them, to give them counsel and advice." 
"Do you advise them often?" Jonas was a little fright-
ened at the thought that one day he would be the one to 
advise the ruling body. 
But The Giver said no. "Rarely. Only when they are 
faced with something that they have not experienced be-
fore. Then they call upon me to use the memories and ad-
vise them. But it very seldom happens. Sometimes I wish 
they'd ask for my wisdom more often — there are so many 
things I could tell them; things I wish they would change. 
But they don't want change. Life here is so orderly, so 
predictable — so painless. It's what they've chosen. 
"I don't know why they even need a Receiver, then, if 
they never call upon him," Jonas commented. 
"They need me. And you," The Giver said, but didn't 
explain. "They were reminded of that ten years ago." 

us about how the brain works," Jonas told him eagerly. "It's 
full of electrical impulses. It's like a computer. If you 
stimulate one part of the brain with an electrode, it — " He 
stopped talking. He could see an odd look on The Giver's 
face. 
"They know nothing," The Giver said bitterly. 
Jonas was shocked. Since the first day in the Annex 
room, they had together disregarded the rules about rude-
ness, and Jonas felt comfortable with that now. But this 
was different, and far beyond rude. This was a terrible ac-
cusation. What if someone had heard? 
He glanced quickly at the wall speaker, terrified that the 
Committee might be listening as they could at any time. 
But, as always during their sessions together, the switch 
had been turned to OFF. 
"Nothing?" Jonas whispered nervously. "But my in-
structors — " 
The Giver flicked his hand as if brushing something 
aside. "Oh, your instructors are well trained. They know 
their scientific facts. Everyone is well trained for his job. 
"It's just that . . . without the memories it's all mean-
ingless. They gave that burden to me. And to the previous 
Receiver. And the one before him." 
"And back and back and back," Jonas said, knowing the 
phrase that always came. 
The Giver smiled, though his smile was oddly harsh. 
"That's right. And next it will be you. A great honor." 
"Yes, sir. They told me that at the Ceremony. The very 
highest honor." 
 
Some afternoons The Giver sent him away without training. 
Jonas knew, on days when he arrived to find The 
 
 
 
 
 
105 

wind-torn areas like the place he had seen in memory, the 
place where the elephant died? 
 
"Giver," he asked one afternoon following a day when he 
had been sent away, "what causes you pain?" 
When The Giver was silent, Jonas continued. "The Chief 
Elder told me, at the beginning, that the receiving of 
memory causes terrible pain. And you described for me that 
the failure of the last new Receiver released painful 
memories to the community. 
"But I haven't suffered, Giver. Not really." Jonas smiled. 
"Oh, I remember the sunburn you gave me on the very first 
day. But that wasn't so terrible. What is it that makes you 
suffer so much? If you gave some of it to me, maybe your 
pain would be less." 
The Giver nodded. "Lie down," he said. "It's time, I 
suppose. I can't shield you forever. You'll have to take it all 
on eventually. 
"Let me think," he went on, when Jonas was on the bed, 
waiting, a little fearful. 
"All right," The Giver said after a moment, "I've de-
cided. We'll start with something familiar. Let's go once 
again to a hill, and a sled." 
He placed his hands on Jonas's back. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 

It was much the same, this memory, though the hill seemed 
to be a different one, steeper, and the snow was not falling 
as thickly as it had before. 
It was colder, also, Jonas perceived. He could see, as he 
sat waiting at the top of the hill, that the snow beneath the 
sled was not thick and soft as it had been before, but hard, 
and coated with bluish ice. 
The sled moved forward, and Jonas grinned with de-
light, looking forward to the breathtaking slide down 
through the invigorating air. 
But the runners, this time, couldn't slice through the 
frozen expanse as they had on the other, snow-cushioned 
hill. They skittered sideways and the sled gathered speed. 
Jonas pulled at the rope, trying to steer, but the steepness 
and speed took control from his hands and he was no 
longer enjoying the feeling of freedom but instead, terri-
fied, was at the mercy of the wild acceleration downward 
over the ice. 
Sideways, spinning, the sled hit a bump in the hill and 
Jonas was jarred loose and thrown violently into the air. He 
fell with his leg twisted under him, and could hear the 
crack of bone. His face scraped along jagged edges of ice 

and when he came, at last, to a stop, he lay shocked and 
still, feeling nothing at first but fear. 
Then, the first wave of pain. He gasped. It was as if a 
hatchet lay lodged in his leg, slicing through each nerve 
with a hot blade. In his agony he perceived the word "fire" 
and felt flames licking at the torn bone and flesh. He tried 
to move, and could not. The pain grew. 
He screamed. There was no answer. 
Sobbing, he turned his head and vomited onto the frozen 
snow. Blood dripped from his face into the vomit. 
"NOOOOO!" he cried, and the sound disappeared into 
the empty landscape, into the wind. 
Then, suddenly, he was in the Annex room again, 
writhing on the bed. His face was wet with tears. 
Able to move now, he rocked his own body back and 
forth, breathing deeply to release the remembered pain. 
He sat, and looked at his own leg, where it lay straight 
on the bed, unbroken. The brutal slice of pain was gone. 
But the leg ached horribly, still, and his face felt raw. 
"May I have relief-of-pain, please?" he begged. It was 
always provided in his everyday life for the bruises and 
wounds, for a mashed finger, a stomach ache, a skinned 
knee from a fall from a bike. There was always a daub of 
anesthetic ointment, or a pill; or in severe instances, an in-
jection that brought complete and instantaneous deliver-
ance. 
But The Giver said no, and looked away. 
Limping, Jonas walked home, pushing his bicycle, that 
evening. The sunburn pain had been so small, in 
comparison, and had not stayed with him. But this ache 
lingered. 
 
 
 
 
109 

the hunger had caused excruciating spasms in his empty, 
distended stomach. He lay on the bed, aching. "Why do you 
and I have to hold these memories?" 
"It gives us wisdom," The Giver replied. "Without 
wisdom I could not fulfill my function of advising the 
Committee of Elders when they call upon me." 
"But what wisdom do you get from hunger?" Jonas 
groaned. His stomach still hurt, though the memory had 
ended. 
"Some years ago," The Giver told him, "before your 
birth, a lot of citizens petitioned the Committee of Elders. 
They wanted to increase the rate of births. They wanted 
each Birthmother to be assigned four births instead of three, 
so that the population would increase and there would be 
more Laborers available." 
Jonas nodded, listening. "That makes sense." 
"The idea was that certain family units could accom-
modate an additional child." 
Jonas nodded again. "Mine could," he pointed out. "We 
have Gabriel this year, and it's fun, having a third child." 
"The Committee of Elders sought my advice," The Giver 
said. "It made sense to them, too, but it was a new idea, and 
they came to me for wisdom." 
"And you used your memories?" 
The Giver said yes. "And the strongest memory that 
came was hunger. It came from many generations back. 
Centuries back. The population had gotten so big that 
hunger was everywhere. Excruciating hunger and starva-
tion. It was followed by warfare." 
Warfare? It was a concept Jonas did not know. But 
hunger was familiar to him now. Unconsciously he rubbed 

The Giver sighed. "You're right," he said. "But then 
everyone would be burdened and pained. They don't want 
that. And that's the real reason The Receiver is so vital to 
them, and so honored. They selected me — and you — to 
lift that burden from themselves." 
"When did they decide that?" Jonas asked angrily. "It 
wasn't fair. Let's change it!" 
"How do you suggest we do that? I've never been able to 
think of a way, and I'm supposed to be the one with all the 
wisdom." 
"But there are two of us now," Jonas said eagerly. "To-
gether we can think of something!" 
The Giver watched him with a wry smile. 
"Why can't we just apply for a change of rules?" Jonas 
suggested. 
The Giver laughed; then Jonas, too, chuckled reluc-
tantly. 
"The decision was made long before my time or yours," 
The Giver said, "and before the previous Receiver, and — " 
He waited. 
"Back and back and back." Jonas repeated the familiar 
phrase. Sometimes it had seemed humorous to him. 
Sometimes it had seemed meaningful and important. 
Now it was ominous. It meant, he knew, that nothing 
could be changed. 
 
The newchild, Gabriel, was growing, and successfully 
passed the tests of maturity that the Nurturers gave each 
month; he could sit alone, now, could reach for and grasp 
small play objects, and he had six teeth. During the day-
time hours, Father reported, he was cheerful and seemed 
 
 
 
 
113 

Was there someone there, waiting, who would receive the 
tiny released twin? Would it grow up Elsewhere, not 
knowing, ever, that in this community lived a being who 
looked exactly the same? 
For a moment he felt a tiny, fluttering hope that he knew 
was quite foolish. He hoped that it would be Larissa, 
waiting. Larissa, the old woman he had bathed. He 
remembered her sparkling eyes, her soft voice, her low 
chuckle. Fiona had told him recently that Larissa had been 
released at a wonderful ceremony. 
But he knew that the Old were not given children to 
raise. Larissa's life Elsewhere would be quiet and serene as 
befit the Old; she would not welcome the responsibility of 
nurturing a newchild who needed feeding and care, and 
would likely cry at night. 
"Mother? Father?" he said, the idea coming to him un-
expectedly, "why don't we put Gabriel's crib in my room 
tonight? I know how to feed and comfort him, and it would 
let you and Father get some sleep." 
Father looked doubtful. "You sleep so soundly, Jonas. 
What if his restlessness didn't wake you?" 
It was Lily who answered that. "If no one goes to tend 
Gabriel," she pointed out, "he gets very loud. He'd wake all 
of us, if Jonas slept through it." 
Father laughed. "You're right, Lily-billy. All right, 
Jonas, let's try it, just for tonight. I'll take the night off and 
we'll let Mother get some sleep, too." 
 
Gabriel slept soundly for the earliest part of the night. 
Jonas, in his bed, lay awake for a while; from time to time 
he raised himself on one elbow, looking over at the crib. 
 
 
 
 
115 

leased the rest of the calming day on the lake. Again Ga-
briel slept. 
But now Jonas lay awake, thinking. He no longer had 
any more than a wisp of the memory, and he felt a small 
lack where it had been. He could ask The Giver for an-other 
sail, he knew. A sail perhaps on ocean, next time, for Jonas 
had a memory of ocean, now, and knew what it was; he 
knew that there were sailboats there, too, in memories yet 
to be acquired. 
He wondered, though, if he should confess to The Giver 
that he had given a memory away. He was not yet qualified 
to be a Giver himself; nor had Gabriel been selected to be a 
Receiver. 
That he had this power frightened him. He decided not 
to tell. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 

Jonas entered the Annex room and realized immediately 
that it was a day when he would be sent away. The Giver 
was rigid in his chair, his face in his hands. 
"I'll come back tomorrow, sir," he said quickly. Then he 
hesitated. "Unless maybe there's something I can do to 
help." 
The Giver looked up at him, his face contorted with 
suffering. "Please," he gasped, "take some of the pain." 
Jonas helped him to his chair at the side of the bed. Then 
he quickly removed his tunic and lay face down. "Put your 
hands on me," he directed, aware that in such anguish The 
Giver might need reminding. 
The hands came, and the pain came with them and 
through them. Jonas braced himself and entered the mem-
ory which was torturing The Giver. 
He was in a confused, noisy, foul-smelling place. It was 
daylight, early morning, and the air was thick with smoke 
that hung, yellow and brown, above the ground. Around 
him, everywhere, far across the expanse of what seemed to 
be a field, lay groaning men. A wild-eyed horse, its bridle 
torn and dangling, trotted frantically through the mounds of 
men, tossing its head, whinnying in panic. It stumbled, 
finally, then fell, and did not rise. 
 
 
 
118 
 

Jonas heard a voice next to him. "Water," the voice said 
in a parched, croaking whisper. 
He turned his head toward the voice and looked into the 
half-closed eyes of a boy who seemed not much older than 
himself. Dirt streaked the boy's face and his matted blond 
hair. He lay sprawled, his gray uniform glistening with wet, 
fresh blood. 
The colors of the carnage were grotesquely bright: the 
crimson wetness on the rough and dusty fabric, the ripped 
shreds of grass, startlingly green, in the boy's yellow hair. 
The boy stared at him. "Water," he begged again. When 
he spoke, a new spurt of blood drenched the coarse cloth 
across his chest and sleeve. 
One of Jonas's arms was immobilized with pain, and he 
could see through his own torn sleeve something that 
looked like ragged flesh and splintery bone. He tried his 
remaining arm and felt it move. Slowly he reached to his 
side, felt the metal container there, and removed its cap, 
stopping the small motion of his hand now and then to wait 
for the surging pain to ease. Finally, when the container 
was open, he extended his arm slowly across the blood-
soaked earth, inch by inch, and held it to the lips of the 
boy. Water trickled into the imploring mouth and down the 
grimy chin. 
The boy sighed. His head fell back, his lower jaw drop-
ping as if he had been surprised by something. A dull 
blankness slid slowly across his eyes. He was silent. 
But the noise continued all around: the cries of the 
wounded men, the cries begging for water and for Mother 
and for death. Horses lying on the ground shrieked, raised 
their heads, and stabbed randomly toward the sky with their 
hooves. 

Jonas did not want to go back. He didn't want the memo-
ries, didn't want the honor, didn't want the wisdom, didn't 
want the pain. He wanted his childhood again, his scraped 
knees and ball games. He sat in his dwelling alone, 
watching through the window, seeing children at play, 
citizens bicycling home from uneventful days at work, 
ordinary lives free of anguish because he had been selected, 
as others before him had, to bear their burden. 
But the choice was not his. He returned each day to the 
Annex room. 
The Giver was gentle with him for many days following 
the terrible shared memory of war. 
"There are so many good memories," The Giver re-
minded Jonas. And it was true. By now Jonas had experi-
enced countless bits of happiness, things he had never 
known of before. 
He had seen a birthday parry, with one child singled out 
and celebrated on his day, so that now he understood the 
joy of being an individual, special and unique and proud. 
He had visited museums and seen paintings filled with 
all the colors he could now recognize and name. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 

On the floor there were packages wrapped in brightly 
colored paper and tied with gleaming ribbons. As Jonas 
watched, a small child began to pick up the packages and 
pass them around the room: to other children, to adults who 
were obviously parents, and to an older, quiet couple, man 
and woman, who sat smiling together on a couch. 
While Jonas watched, the people began one by one to 
untie the ribbons on the packages, to unwrap the bright 
papers, open the boxes and reveal toys and clothing and 
books. There were cries of delight. They hugged one an-
other. 
The small child went and sat on the lap of the old 
woman, and she rocked him and rubbed her cheek against 
his. 
Jonas opened his eyes and lay contentedly on the bed, 
still luxuriating in the warm and comforting memory. It had 
all been there, all the things he had learned to treasure. 
"What did you perceive?" The Giver asked. 
"Warmth," Jonas replied, "and happiness. And — let me 
think. Family. That it was a celebration of some sort, a 
holiday. And something else — I can't quite get the word 
for it." 
"It will come to you." 
"Who were the old people? Why were they there?" It had 
puzzled Jonas, seeing them in the room. The Old of the 
community did not ever leave their special place, the House 
of the Old, where they were so well cared for and 
respected. 
"They were called Grandparents." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123 

"Which you won't attend," The Giver pointed out. 
"No, of course not, because I won't even know about it. 
By then I'll be so busy with my own life. And Lily will, 
too. So our children, if we have them, won't know who 
their parents-of-parents are, either. 
"It seems to work pretty well that way, doesn't it? The 
way we do it in our community?" Jonas asked. "I just didn't 
realize there was any other way, until I received that 
memory." 
"It works," The Giver agreed. 
Jonas hesitated. "I certainly liked the memory, though. I 
can see why it's your favorite. I couldn't quite get the word 
for the whole feeling of it, the feeling that was so strong in 
the room." 
"Love," The Giver told him. 
Jonas repeated it. "Love." It was a word and concept 
new to him. 
They were both silent for a minute. Then Jonas said, 
"Giver?" 
"Yes?" 
"I feel very foolish saying this. Very, very foolish." "No 
need. Nothing is foolish here. Trust the memories and 
how they make you feel." 
"Well," Jonas said, looking at the floor, "I know you 
don't have the memory anymore, because you gave it to me, 
so maybe you won't understand this — " 
"I will. I am left with a vague wisp of that one; and I 
have many other memories of families, and holidays, and 
happiness. Of love." 
Jonas blurted out what he was feeling. "I was thinking 
that . . . well, I can see that it wasn't a very practical way 
 
 
 
 
125 

with embarrassment. He had rehearsed them in his mind all 
the way home from the Annex. 
"Do you love me?" 
There was an awkward silence for a moment. Then Fa-
ther gave a little chuckle. Jonas. You, of all people. Preci-
sion of language, please!" 
"What do you mean?" Jonas asked. Amusement was not 
at all what he had anticipated. 
"Your father means that you used a very generalized 
word, so meaningless that it's become almost obsolete," his 
mother explained carefully. 
Jonas stared at them. Meaningless? He had never before 
felt anything as meaningful as the memory. 
"And of course our community can't function smoothly 
if people don't use precise language. You could ask, 'Do 
you enjoy me?' The answer is `Yes,' " his mother said. 
"Or," his father suggested, "'Do you take pride in my 
accomplishments?' And the answer is wholeheartedly 
'Yes.'" 
"Do you understand why it's inappropriate to use a word 
like 'love'?" Mother asked. 
Jonas nodded. "Yes, thank you, I do," he replied slowly. 
It was his first lie to his parents. 
 
"Gabriel?" Jonas whispered that night to the newchild. 
The crib was in his room again. After Gabe had slept 
soundly in Jonas's room for four nights, his parents had 
pronounced the experiment a success and Jonas a hero. 
Gabriel was growing rapidly, now crawling and giggling 
across the room and pulling himself up to stand. He could 
 
 
 
 
 
127 

"There could be love," Jonas whispered. 
 
The next morning, for the first time, Jonas did not take his 
pill. Something within him, something that had grown there 
through the memories, told him to throw the pill away. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129 
 

TODAY IS DECLARED AN UNSCHEDULED HOLIDAY. Jonas, 
his parents, and Lily all turned in surprise and looked at the 
wall speaker from which the announcement had come. It 
happened so rarely, and was such a treat for the entire 
community when it did. Adults were exempted from the 
day's work, children from school and training and volunteer 
hours. The substitute Laborers, who would be given a 
different holiday, took over all the necessary tasks: nurtur-
ing, food delivery, and care of the Old; and the community 
was free. 
Jonas cheered, and put his homework folder down. He 
had been about to leave for school. School was less impor-
tant to him now; and before much more time passed, his 
formal schooling would end. But still, for Twelves, though 
they had begun their adult training, there were the endless 
lists of rules to be memorized and the newest technology to 
be mastered. 
He wished his parents, sister, and Gabe a happy day, and 
rode down the bicycle path, looking for Asher. 
He had not taken the pills, now, for four weeks. The 
Stirrings had returned, and he felt a little guilty and em-
barrassed about the pleasurable dreams that came to him 
 
 
 
 
130 

as he slept. But he knew he couldn't go back to the world of 
no feelings that he had lived in so long. 
And his new, heightened feelings permeated a greater 
realm than simply his sleep. Though he knew that his failure 
to take the pills accounted for some of it, he thought that the 
feelings came also from the memories. Now he could see all 
of the colors; and he could keep them, too, so that the trees 
and grass and bushes stayed green in his vision. Gabriel's 
rosy cheeks stayed pink, even when he slept. And apples 
were always, always red. 
Now, through the memories, he had seen oceans and 
mountain lakes and streams that gurgled through woods; 
and now he saw the familiar wide river beside the path 
differently. He saw all of the light and color and history it 
contained and carried in its slow-moving water; and he 
knew that there was an Elsewhere from which it came, and 
an Elsewhere to which it was going. 
On this unexpected, casual holiday he felt happy, as he 
always had on holidays; but with a deeper happiness than 
ever before. Thinking, as he always did, about precision of 
language, Jonas realized that it was a new depth of feelings 
that he was experiencing. Somehow they were not at all the 
same as the feelings that every evening, in every dwelling, 
every citizen analyzed with endless talk. 
"I felt angry because someone broke the play area rules," 
Lily had said once, making a fist with her small hand to 
indicate her fury. Her family — Jonas among them — had 
talked about the possible reasons for rule-breaking, and the 
need for understanding and patience, until Lily's fist had 
relaxed and her anger was gone. 
But Lily had not felt anger, Jonas realized now. Shallow 
 
 
 
 
131 

nized Asher's voice. He saw his friend, aiming an imagi-
nary weapon in his hand, dart from behind one tree to an-
other. "Blam! You're in my line of ambush, Jonas! Watch 
out!" 
Jonas stepped back. He moved behind Asher's bike and 
knelt so that he was out of sight. It was a game he had often 
played with the other children, a game of good guys and 
bad guys, a harmless pasttime that used up their contained 
energy and ended only when they all lay posed in freakish 
postures on the ground. 
He had never recognized it before as a game of war. 
"Attack!" The shout came from behind the small store-
house where play equipment was kept. Three children 
dashed forward, their imaginary weapons in firing position. 
From the opposite side of the field came an opposing 
shout: "Counter-attack!" From their hiding places a horde 
of children — Jonas recognized Fiona in the group — 
emerged, running in a crouched position, firing across the 
field. Several of them stopped, grabbed their own 
shoulders and chests with exaggerated gestures, and pre-
tended to be hit. They dropped to the ground and lay sup-
pressing giggles. 
Feelings surged within Jonas. He found himself walking 
forward into the field. 
"You're hit, Jonas!" Asher yelled from behind the tree. 
"Pow! You're hit again!" 
Jonas stood alone in the center of the field. Several of 
the children raised their heads and looked at him uneasily. 
The attacking armies slowed, emerged from their crouched 
positions, and watched to see what he was doing. 
 
 
 
 
 
133 

"I said I apologize, Jonas." 
Jonas sighed. It was no use. Of course Asher couldn't 
understand. "I accept your apology, Asher," he said wearily. 
"Do you want to go for a ride along the river, Jonas?" 
Fiona asked, biting her lip with nervousness. 
Jonas looked at her. She was so lovely. For a fleeting in-
stant he thought he would like nothing better than to ride 
peacefully along the river path, laughing and talking with 
his gentle female friend. But he knew that such times had 
been taken from him now. He shook his head. After a 
moment his two friends turned and went to their bikes. He 
watched as they rode away. 
Jonas trudged to the bench beside the Storehouse and sat 
down, overwhelmed with feelings of loss. His child-hood, 
his friendships, his carefree sense of security — all of these 
things seemed to be slipping away. With his new, 
heightened feelings, he was overwhelmed by sadness at the 
way the others had laughed and shouted, playing at war. But 
he knew that they could not understand why, without the 
memories. He felt such love for Asher and for Fiona. But 
they could not feel it back, without the memories. And he 
could not give them those. Jonas knew with certainty that 
he could change nothing. 
 
Back in their dwelling, that evening, Lily chattered merrily 
about the wonderful holiday she had had, playing with 
her friends, having her midday meal out of doors, and (she 
confessed) sneaking a very short try on her father's bicycle. 
    "I can't wait till I get my very own bicycle next month. 
Father's is too big for me. I fell," she explained matter-of- 
 
 
 
 
 
135 

waiting, and then I get the smaller one all cleaned up and 
comfy. Then I perform a small Ceremony of Release and — 
" He glanced down, grinning at Gabriel. "Then I wave bye-
bye," he said, in the special sweet voice he used when he 
spoke to the newchild. He waved his hand in the familiar 
gesture. 
Gabriel giggled and waved bye-bye back to him. "And 
somebody else comes to get him? Somebody from 
Elsewhere?" 
"That's right, Jonas-bonus." 
Jonas rolled his eyes in embarrassment that his father 
had used the silly pet name. 
Lily was deep in thought. "What if they give the little 
twin a name Elsewhere, a name like, oh, maybe Jonathan? 
And here, in our community, at his naming, the twin that 
we kept here is given the name Jonathan, and then there 
would be two children with the same name, and they would 
look exactly the same, and someday, maybe when they 
were a Six, one group of Sixes would go to visit an-other 
community on a bus, and there in the other community, in 
the other group of Sixes, would be a Jonathan who was 
exactly the same as the other Jonathan, and then maybe 
they would get mixed up and take the wrong Jonathan 
home, and maybe his parents wouldn't notice, and then — " 
She paused for breath. 
"Lily," Mother said, "I have a wonderful idea. Maybe 
when you become a Twelve, they'll give you the Assign-
ment of Storyteller! I don't think we've had a Storyteller in 
the community for a long time. But if I were on the Com-
mittee, I would definitely choose you for that job!" 

"Giver," Jonas asked the next afternoon, "Do you ever think 
about release?" 
"Do you mean my own release, or just the general topic 
of release?" 
"Both, I guess. I apologi — I mean I should have been 
more precise. But I don't know exactly what I meant." 
"Sit back up. No need to lie down while we're talking." 
Jonas, who had already been stretched out on the bed when 
the question came to his mind, sat back up. 
"I guess I do think about it occasionally," The Giver 
said. "I think about my own release when I'm in an awful 
lot of pain. I wish I could put in a request for it, some-
times. But I'm not permitted to do that until the new Re-
ceiver is trained." 
"Me," Jonas said in a dejected voice. He was not looking 
forward to the end of the training, when he would become 
the new Receiver. It was clear to him what a terribly 
difficult and lonely life it was, despite the honor. 
"I can't request release either," Jonas pointed out. "It was 
in my rules." 
The Giver laughed harshly. "I know that. They ham-
mered out those rules after the failure ten years ago." 

time, she sat there in the chair where you sat on your first 
day. She was eager and excited and a little scared. We 
talked. I tried to explain things as well as I could." 
"The way you did to me." 
The Giver chuckled ruefully. "The explanations are 
difficult. The whole thing is so beyond one's experience. 
But I tried. And she listened carefully. Her eyes were very 
luminous, I remember." 
He looked up suddenly. "Jonas, I gave you a memory 
that I told you was my favorite. I still have a shred of it 
left. The room, with the family, and grandparents?" 
Jonas nodded. Of course he remembered. "Yes," he said. 
"It had that wonderful feeling with it. You told me it was 
love." 
"You can understand, then, that that's what I felt for 
Rosemary," The Giver explained. "I loved her. 
"I feel it for you, too," he added. 
"What happened to her?" Jonas asked. 
"Her training began. She received well, as you do. She 
was so enthusiastic. So delighted to experience new things. I 
remember her laughter ... " 
His voice faltered and trailed off. 
"What happened?" Jonas asked again, after a moment. 
"Please tell me." 
The Giver closed his eyes. "It broke my heart, Jonas, to 
transfer pain to her. But it was my job. It was what I had to 
do, the way I've had to do it to you." 
The room was silent. Jonas waited. Finally The Giver 
continued. 
"Five weeks. That was all. I gave her happy memories: a 
ride on a merry-go-round; a kitten to play with; a picnic. 

you — by transferring something happy and cheerful. But 
the times of laughter were gone by then. She stood up very 
silently, frowning, as if she were making a decision. Then 
she came over to me and put her arms around me. She 
kissed my cheek." As Jonas watched, The Giver stroked 
his own cheek, recalling the touch of Rosemary's lips ten 
years before. 
"She left here that day, left this room, and did not go 
back to her dwelling. I was notified by the Speaker that 
she had gone directly to the Chief Elder and asked to be 
released." 
"But it's against the rules! The Receiver-in-training 
can't apply for rel — " 
"It's in your rules, Jonas. But it wasn't in hers. She 
asked for release, and they had to give it to her. I never 
saw her again." 
So that was the failure, Jonas thought. It was obvious 
that it saddened The Giver very deeply. But it didn't seem 
such a terrible thing, after all. And he, Jonas, would never 
have done it — never have requested release, no matter 
now difficult his training became. The Giver needed a 
successor, and he had been chosen. 
A thought occurred to Jonas. Rosemary had been re-
leased very early in her training. What if something hap-
pened to him, Jonas? He had a whole year's worth of 
memories now. 
"Giver," he asked, "I can't request release, I know that. 
But what if something happened: an accident? What if I 
fell into the river like the little Four, Caleb, did? Well, that 
doesn't make sense because I'm a good swimmer. But what 
if I couldn't swim, and fell into the river and was 

"They certainly would. They wouldn't know how to deal 
with it at all." 
"The only way I deal with it is by having you there to 
help me," Jonas pointed out with a sigh. 
The Giver nodded. "I suppose," he said slowly, "that I 
could — " 
"You could what?" 
The Giver was still deep in thought. After a moment, he 
said, "If you floated off in the river, I suppose I could help 
the whole community the way I've helped you. It's an 
interesting concept. I need to think about it some more. 
Maybe we'll talk about it again sometime. But not now. 
"I'm glad you're a good swimmer, Jonas. But stay away 
from the river." He laughed a little, but the laughter was 
not lighthearted. His thoughts seemed to be else-where, and 
his eyes were very troubled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
145 

Jonas glanced at the clock. There was so much work to be 
done, always, that he and The Giver seldom simply sat and 
talked, the way they just had. 
"I'm sorry that I wasted so much time with my ques-
tions," Jonas said. "I was only asking about release be-
cause my father is releasing a newchild today. A twin. He 
has to select one and release the other one. They do it by 
weight." Jonas glanced at the clock. "Actually, I suppose 
he's already finished. I think it was this morning." 
The Giver's face took on a solemn look. "I wish they 
wouldn't do that," he said quietly, almost to himself. 
"Well, they can't have two identical people around! 
Think how confusing it would be!" Jonas chuckled. 
"I wish I could watch," he added, as an afterthought. He 
liked the thought of seeing his father perform the cere-
mony, and making the little twin clean and comfy. His fa-
ther was such a gentle man. 
"You can watch," The Giver said. 
"No," Jonas told him. "They never let children watch. 
It's very private." 
"Jonas," The Giver told him, "I know that you read your 
training instructions very carefully. Don't you remember 
that you are allowed to ask anyone anything?" 

Jonas nodded. "Yes, but — " 
"Jonas, when you and I have finished our time together, 
you will be the new Receiver. You can read the books; 
you'll have the memories. You have access to everything. It's 
part of your training. If you want to watch a release, you 
have simply to ask." 
Jonas shrugged. "Well, maybe I will, then. But it's too 
late for this one. I'm sure it was this morning." 
The Giver told him, then, something he had not known. 
"All private ceremonies are recorded. They're in the Hall 
of Closed Records. Do you want to see this morning's 
release?" 
Jonas hesitated. He was afraid that his father wouldn't 
like it, if he watched something so private. 
"I think you should," The Giver told him firmly. 
"All right, then," Jonas said. "Tell me how." 
The Giver rose from his chair, went to the speaker on 
the wall, and clicked the switch from OFF to ON. 
The voice spoke immediately. "Yes, Receiver. How 
may I help you?" 
"I would like to see this morning's release of the twin." 
"One moment, Receiver. Thank you for your instruc-
tions." 
Jonas watched the video screen above the row of 
switches. Its blank face began to flicker with zig-zag lines; 
then some numbers appeared, followed by the date and 
time. He was astonished and delighted that this was avail-
able to him, and surprised that he had not known. 
Suddenly he could see a small windowless room, empty 
except for a bed, a table with some equipment on it — 
Jonas recognized a scale; he had seen them before, when 
he'd been doing volunteer hours at the Nurturing Center — 
 
 
 
 
147 

pounds ten ounces. A shrimp.'" 
"That's the special voice he uses with Gabriel," Jonas 
remarked, smiling. 
"Watch," The Giver said. 
"Now he cleans him up and makes him comfy," Jonas 
told him. "He told me." 
"Be quiet, Jonas," The Giver commanded in a strange 
voice. "Watch." 
Obediently Jonas concentrated on the screen, waiting for 
what would happen next. He was especially curious about 
the ceremony part. 
His father turned and opened the cupboard. He took out 
a syringe and a small bottle. Very carefully he inserted the 
needle into the bottle and began to fill the syringe with a 
clear liquid. 
Jonas winced sympathetically. He had forgotten that 
newchildren had to get shots. He hated shots himself, 
though he knew that they were necessary. 
To his surprise, his father began very carefully to direct 
the needle into the top of newchild's forehead, puncturing 
the place where the fragile skin pulsed. The newborn 
squirmed, and wailed faintly. 
"Why's he — " 
"Shhh," The Giver said sharply. 
His father was talking, and Jonas realized that he was 
hearing the answer to the question he had started to ask. 
Still in the special voice, his father was saying, "I know, I 
know. It hurts, little guy. But I have to use a vein, and the 
veins in your arms are still too teeny-weeny." 
He pushed the plunger very slowly, injecting the liquid 
into the scalp vein until the syringe was empty. 

same sort of chute into which trash was deposited at 
school. 
His father loaded the carton containing the body into the 
chute and gave it a shove. 
"Bye-bye, little guy," Jonas heard his father say before 
he left the room. Then the screen went blank. 
The Giver turned to him. Quite calmly, he related, 
"When the Speaker notified me that Rosemary had applied 
for release, they turned on the tape to show me the process. 
There she was — my last glimpse of that beautiful child — 
waiting. They brought in the syringe and asked her to roll 
up her sleeve. 
"You suggested, Jonas, that perhaps she wasn't brave 
enough? I don't know about bravery: what it is, what it 
means. I do know that I sat here numb with horror. 
Wretched with helplessness. And I listened as Rosemary 
told them that she would prefer to inject herself. 
"Then she did so. I didn't watch. I looked away." 
The Giver turned to him. "Well, there you are, Jonas. 
You were wondering about release," he said in a bitter 
voice. 
Jonas felt a ripping sensation inside himself, the feeling 
of terrible pain clawing its way forward to emerge in a cry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
151 

"I won't! I won't go home! You can't make me!" Jonas 
sobbed and shouted and pounded the bed with his fists. 
"Sit up, Jonas," The Giver told him firmly. 
Jonas obeyed him. Weeping, shuddering, he sat on the 
edge of the bed. He would not look at The Giver. 
"You may stay here tonight. I want to talk to you. But 
you must be quiet now, while I notify your family unit. No 
one must hear you cry." 
Jonas looked up wildly. "No one heard that little twin 
cry, either! No one but my father!" He collapsed in sobs 
again. 
The Giver waited silently. Finally Jonas was able to 
quiet himself and he sat huddled, his shoulders shaking. 
The Giver went to the wall speaker and clicked the 
switch to ON. 
"Yes, Receiver. How may I help you?" 
"Notify the new Receiver's family unit that he will be 
staying with me tonight, for additional training." 
"I will take care of that, sir. Thank you for your in-
structions," the voice said. 
"I will take care of that, sir. I will take care of that, sir," 
Jonas mimicked in a cruel, sarcastic voice. "I will do what- 

 
ever you like, sir. I will kill people, sir. Old people? Small 
newborn people? I'd be happy to kill them, sir. Thank you 
for your instructions, sir. How may I help y — " He 
couldn't seem to stop. 
The Giver grasped his shoulders firmly. Jonas fell silent 
and stared at him. 
"Listen to me, Jonas. They can't help it. They know 
nothing." 
"You said that to me once before." 
"I said it because it's true. It's the way they live. It's the 
life that was created for them. It's the same life that you 
would have, if you had not been chosen as my successor." 
"But he lied to me!" Jonas wept. 
"It's what he was told to do, and he knows nothing else." 
"What about you? Do you lie to me, too?" Jonas almost 
spat the question at The Giver. 
"I am empowered to lie. But I have never lied to you." 
Jonas stared at him. "Release is always like that? For 
people who break the rules three times? For the Old? Do 
they kill the Old, too?" 
"Yes, it's true." 
"And what about Fiona? She loves the Old! She's in 
training to care for them. Does she know yet? What will 
she do when she finds out? How will she feel?" Jonas 
brushed wetness from his face with the back of one hand. 
"Fiona is already being trained in the fine art of re-
lease," The Giver told him. "She's very efficient at her 
work, your red-haired friend. Feelings are not part of the 
life she's learned." 
Jonas wrapped his arms around himself and rocked his 

"That's true. And having you here with me over the past 
year has made me realize that things must change. For years 
I've felt that they should, but it seemed so hopeless. 
"Now for the first time I think there might be a way," 
The Giver said slowly. "And you brought it to my atten-
tion, barely — " He glanced at the clock. "two hours ago." 
Jonas watched him, and listened. 
 
It was late at night, now. They had talked and talked. Jonas 
sat wrapped in a robe belonging to The Giver, the long 
robe that only Elders wore. 
It was possible, what they had planned. Barely possible. 
If it failed, he would very likely be killed. 
But what did that matter? If he stayed, his life was no 
longer worth living. 
"Yes," he told The Giver. "I'll do it. I think I can do it. 
I'll try, anyway. But I want you to come with me." 
The Giver shook his head. "Jonas," he said, "the com-
munity has depended, all these generations, back and back 
and back, on a resident Receiver to hold their memories for 
them. I've turned over many of them to you in the past 
year. And I can't take them back. There's no way for me to 
get them back if I have given them. 
"So if you escape, once you are gone — and, Jonas, you 
know that you can never return — " 
Jonas nodded solemnly. It was the terrifying part. "Yes," 
he said, "I know. But if you come with me — " 
The Giver shook his head and made a gesture to silence 
him. He continued. "If you get away, if you get beyond, if 
you get to Elsewhere, it will mean that the community has 

The Giver looked at him with a questioning smile. Jonas 
hung his head. Of course they needed to care. It was the 
meaning of everything. 
"And in any case, Jonas," The Giver sighed, "I wouldn't 
make it. I'm very weakened now. Do you know that I no 
longer see colors?" 
Jonas's heart broke. He reached for The Giver's hand. 
"You have the colors," The Giver told him. "And you 
have the courage. I will help you to have the strength." 
"A year ago," Jonas reminded him, "when I had just 
become a Twelve, when I began to see the first color, you 
told me that the beginning had been different for you. But 
that I wouldn't understand." 
The Giver brightened. "That's true. And do you know, 
Jonas, that with all your knowledge now, with all your 
memories, with all you've learned — still you won't un-
derstand? Because I've been a little selfish. I haven't given 
any of it to you. I wanted to keep it for myself to the last." 
"Keep what?" 
"When I was just a boy, younger than you, it began to 
come to me. But it wasn't the seeing-beyond for me. It was 
different. For me, it was hearing-beyond." 
Jonas frowned, trying to figure that out. "What did you 
hear?" he asked. 
"Music," The Giver said, smiling. "I began to hear 
something truly remarkable, and it is called music. I'll give 
you some before I go." 
Jonas shook his head emphatically. "No, Giver," he said. 
"I want you to keep that, to have with you, when I'm gone." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
157 

"As Receiver-in-training, you're held in very high re-
spect already. So I think you wouldn't be questioned very 
forcefully." 
"I'd just say I was on some important errand for the 
Receiver. I'd say it was all your fault that I was out after 
hours," Jonas teased. 
They both laughed a little nervously. But Jonas was 
certain that he could slip away, unseen, from his house, 
carrying an extra set of clothing. Silently he would take his 
bicycle to the riverbank and leave it there hidden in bushes 
with the clothing folded beside it. 
Then he would make his way through the darkness, on 
foot, silently, to the Annex. 
"There's no nighttime attendant," The Giver explained. 
"I'll leave the door unlocked. You simply slip into the room. 
I'll be waiting for you." 
His parents would discover, when they woke, that he 
was gone. They would also find a cheerful note from Jonas 
on his bed, telling them that he was going for an early 
morning ride along the river; that he would be back for the 
Ceremony. 
His parents would be irritated but not alarmed. They 
would think him inconsiderate and they would plan to 
chastise him, later. 
They would wait, with mounting anger, for him; finally 
they would be forced to go, taking Lily to the Ceremony 
without him. 
"They won't say anything to anyone, though," Jonas 
said, quite certain. "They won't call attention to my rude-
ness because it would reflect on their parenting. And any-
way, everyone is so involved in the Ceremony that they 

would not be disrupted — such a disruption would be 
unthinkable. But searchers would be sent out into the 
community. 
By the time his bicycle and clothing were found, The 
Giver would be returning. Jonas, by then, would be on his 
own, making his journey Elsewhere. 
The Giver, on his return, would find the community in a 
state of confusion and panic. Confronted by a situation 
which they had never faced before, and having no memo-
ries from which to find either solace or wisdom, they 
would not know what to do and would seek his advice. 
He would go to the Auditorium where the people would 
be gathered, still. He would stride to the stage and 
command their attention. 
He would make the solemn announcement that Jonas 
had been lost in the river. He would immediately begin the 
Ceremony of Loss. 
"Jonas, Jonas," they would say loudly, as they had once 
said the name of Caleb. The Giver would lead the chant. 
Together they would let Jonas's presence in their lives fade 
away as they said his name in unison more slowly, softer 
and softer, until he was disappearing from them, until he 
was no more than an occasional murmur and then, by the 
end of the long day, gone forever, not to be mentioned 
again. 
Their attention would turn to the overwhelming task of 
bearing the memories themselves. The Giver would help 
them. 
 
"Yes, I understand that they'll need you," Jonas had said at 
the end of the lengthy discussion and planning. "But 
 
 
 
 
 
161 

It would work. They could make it work, Jonas told him-
self again and again throughout the day. 
But that evening everything changed. All of it — all the 
things they had thought through so meticulously — fell 
apart. 
 
That night, Jonas was forced to flee. He left the dwelling 
shortly after the sky became dark and the community still. It 
was terribly dangerous because some of the work crews 
were still about, but he moved stealthily and silently, stay-
ing in the shadows, making his way past the darkened 
dwellings and the empty Central Plaza, toward the river. 
Beyond the Plaza he could see the House of the Old, with 
the Annex behind it, outlined against the night sky. But he 
could not stop there. There was no time. Every minute 
counted now, and every minute must take him farther from 
the community. 
Now he was on the bridge, hunched over on the bicycle, 
pedaling steadily. He could see the dark, churning water 
far below. 
He felt, surprisingly, no fear, nor any regret at leaving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
163 

decision. Even I voted for Gabriel's release when we had 
the meeting this afternoon." 
Jonas put down his fork and stared at his father. "Re-
lease?" he asked. 
Father nodded. "We certainly gave it our best try, didn't 
we?" 
"Yes, we did," Mother agreed emphatically. 
Lily nodded in agreement, too. 
Jonas worked at keeping his voice absolutely calm. 
"When?" he asked. "When will he be released?" 
"First thing tomorrow morning. We have to start our 
preparations for the Naming Ceremony, so we thought we'd 
get this taken care of right away. 
"It's bye-bye to you, Gabe, in the morning," Father had 
said, in his sweet, sing-song voice. 
 
Jonas reached the opposite side of the river, stopped 
briefly, and looked back. The community where his entire 
life had been lived lay behind him now, sleeping. At dawn, 
the orderly, disciplined life he had always known would 
continue again, without him. The life where nothing was 
ever unexpected. Or inconvenient. Or unusual. The life 
without color, pain, or past. 
He pushed firmly again at the pedal with his foot and 
continued riding along the road. It was not safe to spend 
time looking back. He thought of the rules he had broken 
so far: enough that if he were caught, now, he would be 
condemned. 
First, he had left the dwelling at night. A major trans-
gression. 
Second, he had robbed the community of food: a very 
 
 
 
 
165

dark. Gradually the distances between communities wid-
ened, with longer stretches of empty road. His legs ached 
at first; then, as time passed, they became numb. 
At dawn Gabriel began to stir. They were in an isolated 
place; fields on either side of the road were dotted with 
thickets of trees here and there. He saw a stream, and made 
his way to it across a rutted, bumpy meadow; Gabriel, 
wide awake now, giggled as the bicycle jolted him up and 
down. 
Jonas unstrapped Gabe, lifted him from the bike, and 
watched him investigate the grass and twigs with delight. 
Carefully he hid the bicycle in thick bushes. 
"Morning meal, Gabe!" He unwrapped some of the food 
and fed them both. Then he filled the cup he had brought 
with water from the stream and held it for Gabriel to drink. 
He drank thirstily himself, and sat by the stream, watching 
the newchild play. 
He was exhausted. He knew he must sleep, resting his 
own muscles and preparing himself for more hours on the 
bicycle. It would not be safe to travel in daylight. 
They would be looking for him soon. 
He found a place deeply hidden in the trees, took the 
newchild there, and lay down, holding Gabriel in his arms. 
Gabe struggled cheerfully as if it were a wrestling game, 
the kind they had played back in the dwelling, with tickles 
and laughter. 
"Sorry, Gabe," Jonas told him. "I know it's morning, 
and I know you just woke up. But we have to sleep now." 
He cuddled the small body close to him, and rubbed the 
little back. He murmured to Gabriel soothingly. Then 

flesh, as well as Gabriel's light golden curls, would be no 
more than smears of gray against the colorless foliage. But 
he remembered from his science and technology studies at 
school that the search planes used heat-seeking devices 
which could identify body warmth and would hone in on 
two humans huddled in shrubbery. 
So always, when he heard the aircraft sound, he reached 
to Gabriel and transmitted memories of snow, keeping some 
for himself. Together they became cold; and when the 
planes were gone, they would shiver, holding each other, 
until sleep came again. 
Sometimes, urging the memories into Gabriel, Jonas felt 
that they were more shallow, a little weaker than they had 
been. It was what he had hoped, and what he and The Giver 
had planned: that as he moved away from the community, 
he would shed the memories and leave them be-hind for the 
people. But now, when he needed them, when the planes 
came, he tried hard to cling to what he still had, of cold, 
and to use it for their survival. 
Usually the aircraft came by day, when they were hid-
ing. But he was alert at night, too, on the road, always lis-
tening intently for the sound of the engines. Even Gabriel 
listened, and would call out, "Plane! Plane!" sometimes 
before Jonas had heard the terrifying noise. When the air-
craft searchers came, as they did occasionally, during the 
night as they rode, Jonas sped to the nearest tree or bush, 
dropped to the ground, and made himself and Gabriel cold. 
But it was sometimes a frighteningly close call. 
As he pedaled through the nights, through isolated 
landscape now, with the communities far behind and no 
sign of human habitation around him or ahead, he was 
 
 
 
 
169 

Now the landscape was changing. It was a subtle change, 
hard to identify at first. The road was narrower, and bumpy, 
apparently no longer tended by road crews. It was harder, 
suddenly, to balance on the bike, as the front wheel wobbled 
over stones and ruts. 
One night Jonas fell, when the bike jolted to a sudden 
stop against a rock. He grabbed instinctively for Gabriel; and 
the newchild, strapped tightly in his seat, was uninjured, 
only frightened when the bike fell to its side. But Jonas's 
ankle was twisted, and his knees were scraped and raw, 
blood seeping through his torn trousers. Painfully he righted 
himself and the bike, and reassured Gabe. 
Tentatively he began to ride in daylight. He had forgot-
ten the fear of the searchers, who seemed to have diminished 
into the past. But now there were new fears; the unfamiliar 
landscape held hidden, unknown perils. 
Trees became more numerous, and the forests beside the 
road were dark and thick with mystery. They saw streams 
more frequently now and stopped often to drink. Jonas 
carefully washed his injured knees, wincing as he rubbed at 
the raw flesh. The constant ache of his swollen ankle was 
eased when he soaked it occasionally in the cold water that 
rushed through roadside gullies. 
 
 
 
171 

behind them, it was almost impossible to find food. They 
finished the meager store of potatoes and carrots they had 
saved from the last agricultural area, and now they were 
always hungry. 
Jonas knelt by a stream and tried without success to 
catch a fish with his hands. Frustrated, he threw rocks into 
the water, knowing even as he did so that it was useless. 
Finally, in desperation, he fashioned a makeshift net, 
looping the strands of Gabriel's blanket around a curved 
stick. 
After countless tries, the net yielded two flopping sil-
very fish. Methodically Jonas hacked them to pieces with a 
sharp rock and fed the raw shreds to himself and to Ga-
briel. They ate some berries, and tried without success to 
catch a bird. 
At night, while Gabriel slept beside him, Jonas lay 
awake, tortured by hunger, and remembered his life in the 
community where meals were delivered to each dwelling 
every day. 
He tried to use the flagging power of his memory to re-
create meals, and managed brief, tantalizing fragments: 
banquets with huge roasted meats; birthday parties with 
thick-frosted cakes; and lush fruits picked and eaten, sun-
warmed and dripping, from trees. 
But when the memory glimpses subsided, he was left 
with the gnawing, painful emptiness. Jonas remembered, 
suddenly and grimly, the time in his childhood when he had 
been chastised for misusing a word. The word had been 
"starving." You have never been starving, he had been told. 
You will never be starving. 
Now he was. If he had stayed in the community, he 
 
 
 
 
173 

Jonas felt more and more certain that the destination lay 
ahead of him, very near now in the night that was ap-
proaching. None of his senses confirmed it. He saw nothing 
ahead except the endless ribbon of road unfolding in 
twisting narrow curves. He heard no sound ahead. 
Yet he felt it: felt that Elsewhere was not far away. But 
he had little hope left that he would be able to reach it. His 
hope diminished further when the sharp, cold air began to 
blur and thicken with swirling white. 
Gabriel, wrapped in his inadequate blanket, was 
hunched, shivering, and silent in his little seat. Jonas 
stopped the bike wearily, lifted the child down, and real-
ized with heartbreak how cold and weak Gabe had be-
come. 
Standing in the freezing mound that was thickening 
around his numb feet, Jonas opened his own tunic, held 
Gabriel to his bare chest, and tied the torn and dirty blanket 
around them both. Gabriel moved feebly against him and 
whimpered briefly into the silence that surrounded them. 
Dimly, from a nearly forgotten perception as blurred as 
the substance itself, Jonas recalled what the whiteness was. 

flickered suddenly, and he felt tiny tongues of heat begin to 
creep across and into his frozen feet and legs. He felt his 
face begin to glow and the tense, cold skin of his arms and 
hands relax. For a fleeting second he felt that he wanted to 
keep it for himself, to let himself bathe in sunlight, unbur-
dened by anything or anyone else. 
But the moment passed and was followed by an urge, a 
need, a passionate yearning to share the warmth with the 
one person left for him to love. Aching from the effort, he 
forced the memory of warmth into the thin, shivering body 
in his arms. 
Gabriel stirred. For a moment they both were bathed in 
warmth and renewed strength as they stood hugging each 
other in the blinding snow. 
Jonas began to walk up the hill. 
The memory was agonizingly brief. He had trudged no 
more than a few yards through the night when it was gone 
and they were cold again. 
But his mind was alert now. Warming himself ever so 
briefly had shaken away the lethargy and resignation and 
restored his will to survive. He began to walk faster on feet 
that he could no longer feel. But the hill was treacherously 
steep; he was impeded by the snow and his own lack of 
strength. He didn't make it very far before he stumbled and 
fell forward. 
On his knees, unable to rise, Jonas tried a second time. 
His consciousness grasped at a wisp of another warm 
memory, and tried desperately to hold it there, to enlarge it, 
and pass it into Gabriel. His spirits and strength lifted with 
the momentary warmth and he stood. Again, Gabriel stirred 
against him as he began to climb. 

He hugged Gabriel and rubbed him briskly, warming 
him, to keep him alive. The wind was bitterly cold. The 
snow swirled, blurring his vision. But somewhere ahead, 
through the blinding storm, he knew there was warmth and 
light. 
Using his final strength, and a special knowledge that 
was deep inside him, Jonas found the sled that was waiting 
for them at the top of the hill. Numbly his hands fumbled 
for the rope. 
He settled himself on the sled and hugged Gabe close. 
The hill was steep but the snow was powdery and soft, and 
he knew that this time there would be no ice, no fall, no 
pain. Inside his freezing body, his heart surged with hope. 
They started down. 
Jonas felt himself losing consciousness and with his 
whole being willed himself to stay upright atop the sled, 
clutching Gabriel, keeping him safe. The runners sliced 
through the snow and the wind whipped at his face as they 
sped in a straight line through an incision that seemed to 
lead to the final destination, the place that he had always 
felt was waiting, the Elsewhere that held their future and 
their past. 
He forced his eyes open as they went downward, down-
ward, sliding, and all at once he could see lights, and he 
recognized them now. He knew they were shining through 
the windows of rooms, that they were the red, blue, and 
yellow lights that twinkled from trees in places where fam-
ilies created and kept memories, where they celebrated 
love. 
Downward, downward, faster and faster. Suddenly he 

