A Total-E-Bound Publication

www.total-e-bound.com

 
 
The Legend of Sleepy Hollow
ISBN # 978-1-78184-309-3
©Copyright Morticia Knight 2012
Cover Art by Posh Gosh ©Copyright May 2013
Edited by Eleanor Boyall
Total-E-Bound Publishing

Published in 2013 by Total-E-Bound Publishing, Think Tank, Ruston Way,
Lincoln, LN6 7FL, United Kingdom.
 

Warning:

 
This book contains sexually explicit content which is only suitable for
mature readers. This story has a heat rating of Total-e-burning and a
sexometer of 2.
 
This story contains 87 pages, additionally there is also a free excerpt at the
end of the book containing 6 pages.
 
 
 

OceanofPDF.com

HOLLOW

A Clandestine Classic

There is terror at every turn in the mysterious Sleepy Hollow—but there is
also plenty of lustful frolicking. Can three lovers thwart the legendary
Headless Horseman to be together forever?
Schoolmaster Ichabod Crane longs to meet someone that he and his lover,
Jonathan, can share their amorous talents with on a regular basis. In the
mysterious and secluded glen of Sleepy Hollow, Ichabod is enraptured by
the curvy coquette, Katrina Van Tassel, heiress to the Van Tassel Farm.
With visions of spending long nights consuming both his lady love with
Jonathan, and the spoils of the farm, Ichabod sets out to woo her heart away
from the town rowdy, Brom Bones.
Katrina knows a good thing when she sees it, and after witnessing what the
amply-endowed Ichabod has to offer, she turns away from the manly
affections of Brom Bones and his gang of friends. Instead she offers her
abundant prizes to Ichabod, with the promise of also enjoying his partner
Jonathan very soon.
However, it doesn’t seem soon will ever arrive when one night it appears
that the fabled Headless Horseman has carried away Katrina’s vigorous
schoolmaster. Forced to marry Brom Bones in order to keep her numerous
debaucheries from her father and the rest of the town, she soon discovers
that some legends aren’t always as they seem. When Jonathan finally
appears, he and Katrina devise a scheme to free her from Brom’s clutches—
one that calls upon the talents of the Legendary Headless Hessian. Will their
tit-for-tat plan unite the three lovers, or will the Horseman have the last
laugh?
 
OceanofPDF.com

Dedication

Thank you to Claire and Nicki at TEB for the wonderful opportunity to be a

part of this incredible collection of Clandestine Classics.

OceanofPDF.com

Chapter One

 
In the bosom of one of those spacious coves which indent the eastern

shore of the Hudson, at that broad expansion of the river denominated by
the ancient Dutch navigators the Tappan Zee, and where they always
prudently shortened sail and implored the protection of St Nicholas when
they crossed, there lies a small market town or rural port which by some is
called Greensburgh, but which is more generally and properly known by the
name of Tarry Town. This name was given—we are told—in former days,
by the good housewives of the adjacent country, from the inveterate
propensity of their husbands to linger about the village tavern on market
days. Be that as it may, I do not vouch for the fact, but merely advert to it
for the sake of being precise and authentic.

Not far from this village, perhaps about two miles, there is a little

valley or rather lap of land among high hills, which is one of the quietest
places in the whole world. A small brook glides through it with just murmur
enough to lull one to repose, and the occasional whistle of a quail or tapping
of a woodpecker is almost the only sound that ever breaks in upon the
uniform tranquillity.

I recollect that, when a stripling, my first exploit in squirrel-shooting

was in a grove of tall walnut-trees that shades one side of the valley. I had
wandered into it at noontime, when all nature is peculiarly quiet, and was
startled by the roar of my own gun as it broke the Sabbath stillness around
and was prolonged and reverberated by the angry echoes. If ever I should
wish for a retreat whither I might steal from the world and its distractions,
and dream quietly away the remnant of a troubled life, or perhaps meet
kindred spirits to whom my affections could forever be bound, I know of
none more promising than this little valley.

From the listless repose of the place and the peculiar character of its

inhabitants, who are descendants from the original Dutch settlers, this
sequestered glen has long been known by the name of Sleepy Hollow, and
its rustic lads are called the Sleepy Hollow Boys throughout all the
neighbouring country. A drowsy, dreamy influence seems to hang over the
land and to pervade the very atmosphere.

Some say that the place was bewitched by a High German doctor

during the early days of the settlement—others that an old Indian chief, the
prophet or wizard of his tribe, held his powwows there before the country
was discovered by Master Hendrick Hudson. Certain it is, the place still
continues under the sway of some witching power that holds a spell over
the minds of the good people, causing them to walk in a continual reverie.
They are given to all kinds of marvellous beliefs, are subject to trances and
visions, and frequently see strange sights and hear music and voices in the
air. The whole neighbourhood abounds with local tales, haunted spots, and
twilight superstitions. Stars shoot and meteors glare oftener across the
valley than in any other part of the country, and the nightmare, with her
whole ninefold, seems to make it the favourite scene of her gambols.

The dominant spirit, however, that haunts this enchanted region and

seems to be commander-in-chief of all the powers of the air is the apparition

of a figure on horseback without a head. It is said by some to be the ghost of
a Hessian trooper whose head had been carried away by a cannonball in
some nameless battle during the Revolutionary War, and who is ever and
anon seen by the country folk hurrying along in the gloom of night, as if on
the wings of the wind. His haunts are not confined to the valley, but extend
at times to the adjacent roads, and especially to the vicinity of a church at
no great distance. Indeed, certain of the most authentic historians of those
parts, who have been careful in collecting and collating the floating facts
concerning this spectre, allege that the body of the trooper having been
buried in the churchyard, the ghost rides forth to the scene of battle in
nightly quest of his head, and that the rushing speed with which he
sometimes passes along the Hollow, like a midnight blast, is owing to his
being belated and in a hurry to get back to the churchyard before daybreak.

Such is the general purport of this legendary superstition, which has

furnished materials for many a wild story in that region of shadows, and the
spectre is known at all the country firesides by the name of the Headless
Horseman of Sleepy Hollow.

It is remarkable that the visionary propensity I have mentioned is not

confined to the native inhabitants of the valley, but is unconsciously
imbibed by everyone who resides there for a time. However wide awake
they may have been before they entered that sleepy region, they are sure in
a little time to inhale the witching influence of the air, and begin to grow
imaginative, to dream dreams and see apparitions.

I mention this peaceful spot with all possible laud, for it is in such

little retired Dutch valleys, found here and there embosomed in the great
State of New York, that population, manners and customs remain fixed,
while the great torrent of migration and improvement which is making such
incessant changes in other parts of this restless country sweeps by them
unobserved. They are like those little nooks of still water which border a

rapid stream, where we may see the straw and bubble riding quietly at
anchor or slowly revolving in their mimic harbour, undisturbed by the rush
of the passing current. Though many years have elapsed since I trod the
drowsy shades of Sleepy Hollow, yet I question whether I should not still
find the same trees and the same families vegetating in its sheltered bosom.

In this by-place of nature there abided—in a remote period of

American history, that is to say some ten to thirty years since, who can say
for sure—a worthy wight of the name of Ichabod Crane, who sojourned or,
as he expressed it, “tarried” in Sleepy Hollow for the purpose of instructing
the children of the vicinity. He was a native of Connecticut, a State which
supplies the Union with pioneers for the mind as well as for the forest, and
sends forth yearly its legions of frontier woodmen and country
schoolmasters. Ichabod was anxious to discover a haven where he might
enjoy the freedom to express all of the enjoyments this life has to offer, for
nothing can be said to be as wondrous as those activities that delight the
senses, as well as the mind.

The cognomen of Crane was not inapplicable to his person. He was

tall, but exceedingly lank, with narrow shoulders, long arms and legs, hands
that dangled a mile out of his sleeves, feet that might have served for
shovels, and his whole frame most loosely hung together. His head was
small and flat at top, with huge ears, large green glassy eyes and a long
snipe nose, so that it looked like a weather-cock perched upon his spindle
neck to tell which way the wind blew. To see him striding along the profile
of a hill on a windy day, with his clothes bagging and fluttering about him,
one might have mistaken him for the genius of famine descending upon the
earth, or some scarecrow eloped from a cornfield.

Yet his form was not entirely displeasing, especially when one so

intimate as a lover might gaze upon Ichabod in his unclothed state. For
there he presented a most stupendous appendage, not readily spied beneath

his loose attire. He learnt whilst still a young lad that both ladies and
gentleman appreciated this generous attribute, and he became quite adept at
satisfying both genders, thus providing him with unusual advantages when
it came to both love and hospitality.

His schoolhouse was a low building of one large room, rudely

constructed of logs, the windows partly glazed, and partly patched with
leaves of old copybooks. It was most ingeniously secured at vacant hours
by a withe twisted in the handle of the door and stakes set against the
window shutters, so that though a thief might get in with perfect ease, he
would find some embarrassment in getting out—an idea most probably
borrowed by the architect, Yost Van Houten, from the mystery of an eelpot.
The schoolhouse stood in a rather lonely but pleasant situation, just at the
foot of a woody hill, with a brook running close by and a formidable birch-
tree growing at one end of it. From hence the low murmur of his pupils’
voices, conning over their lessons, might be heard in a drowsy summer’s
day like the hum of a beehive, interrupted now and then by the authoritative
voice of the master in the tone of menace or command, or peradventure by
the appalling sound of the birch as he urged some tardy loiterer along the
flowery path of knowledge. Truth to say, he was a conscientious man, and
ever bore in mind the golden maxim, ‘Spare the rod and spoil the child’.
Ichabod Crane’s scholars certainly were not spoiled.

I would not have it imagined however that he was one of those cruel

potentates of the school who joy in the smart of their subjects. On the
contrary, he administered justice with discrimination rather than severity,
taking the burden off the backs of the weak and laying it on those of the
strong. Your mere puny stripling that winced at the least flourish of the rod
was passed by with indulgence, but the claims of justice were satisfied by
inflicting a double portion on some little tough wrong-headed, broad-skirted
Dutch urchin, who sulked and swelled and grew dogged and sullen beneath

the birch. All this he called ‘doing his duty by their parents’, and he never
inflicted a chastisement without following it by the assurance, so
consolatory to the smarting urchin, that he would remember it and thank
him for it the longest day he had to live.

When school hours were over, he was even the companion and

playmate of the larger boys, and on holiday afternoons would convoy some
of the smaller ones home, who happened to have pretty sisters, or good
housewives for mothers, noted for the comforts of the cupboard. Indeed, it
behooved him to keep on good terms with his pupils. The revenue arising
from his school was small, and would have been scarcely sufficient to
furnish him with daily bread, for he was a huge feeder and though lank, had
the dilating powers of an anaconda. But to help out his maintenance, he
was, according to country custom in those parts, boarded and lodged at the
houses of the farmers whose children he instructed. With these he lived
successively a week at a time, thus going the rounds of the neighbourhood,
with all his worldly effects tied up in a cotton handkerchief.

That all this might not be too onerous on the purses of his rustic

patrons, who are apt to consider the costs of schooling a grievous burden
and schoolmasters as mere drones, he had various ways of rendering
himself both useful and agreeable. He assisted the farmers occasionally in
the lighter labours of their farms, helped to make hay, mended the fences,
took the horses to water, drove the cows from pasture and cut wood for the
winter fire. He laid aside too all the dominant dignity and absolute sway
with which he lorded it in his little empire, the school, and became
wonderfully gentle and ingratiating. He found favour in the eyes of the
mothers by petting the children, particularly the youngest, and like the lion
bold, which whilom so magnanimously the lamb did hold, he would sit with
a child on one knee and rock a cradle with his foot for whole hours together.
Whilst his more debauched appetites were not readily apparent, he was ever

on the lookout for the perfect combination of wanton lass and culinary
temptress, and trusted that his weekly traversing would lead him to his
ultimate prize.

In addition to his other vocations, he was the singing-master of the

neighbourhood and picked up many bright shillings by instructing the
young folks in psalmody. It was a matter of no little vanity to him on
Sundays to take his station in front of the church gallery with a band of
chosen singers, where—in his own mind—he completely carried away the
palm from the parson. Certain it is, his voice resounded far above all the
rest of the congregation, and there are peculiar quavers still to be heard in
that church, and which may even be heard half a mile off, quite to the
opposite side of the millpond, on a still Sunday morning, which are said to
be legitimately descended from the nose of Ichabod Crane. Thus by diverse
little makeshifts, in that ingenious way which is commonly denominated
‘by hook and by crook’, the worthy pedagogue got on tolerably enough, and
was thought, by all who understood nothing of the labour of headwork, to
have a wonderfully easy life of it.

The schoolmaster is generally a man of some importance in the

female circle of a rural neighbourhood, being considered a kind of idle,
gentlemanlike personage, of vastly superior taste and accomplishments to
the rough country swains, and indeed inferior in learning only to the parson.
His appearance, therefore, is apt to occasion some little stir at the tea-table
of a farmhouse, and the addition of a supernumerary dish of cakes or
sweetmeats, or peradventure the parade of a silver teapot.

Our man of letters, therefore, was peculiarly happy in the smiles of all

the country damsels. For it was among these sweet lasses where he hoped
his kindred spirit would emerge, for within Sleepy Hollow—true to its
moniker—there was a certain encouragement of an indulging in all the
senses, and a drowsy acceptance of those virtues that were perhaps less than

current morals might dictate. How he would figure among them in the
churchyard, between services on Sundays, gathering grapes for them from
the wild vines that overran the surrounding trees, reciting for their
amusement all the epitaphs on the tombstones, or sauntering with a whole
bevy of them along the banks of the adjacent millpond while the more
bashful country bumpkins hung sheepishly back, envying his superior
elegance and address.

From his half-itinerant life, also, he was a kind of travelling gazette,

carrying the whole budget of local gossip from house to house, so that his
appearance was always greeted with satisfaction. He was moreover
esteemed by the women as a man of great erudition, for he had read several
books quite through, and was a perfect master of Cotton Mather’s History of
New England Witchcraft, in which by the way he most firmly and potently
believed.

He was in fact an odd mixture of small shrewdness and simple

credulity. His appetite for the marvellous and his powers of digesting it
were equally extraordinary, and both had been increased by his residence in
this spell-bound region. No tale was too gross or monstrous for his
capacious swallow.

It was often his delight after his school was dismissed in the afternoon

to stretch himself on the rich bed of clover bordering the little brook that
whimpered by his schoolhouse, and there con over old Mather’s direful
tales until the gathering dusk of evening made the printed page a mere mist
before his eyes. Then, as he wended his way by swamp and stream and
awful woodland to the farmhouse where he happened to be quartered, every
sound of nature at that witching hour fluttered his excited imagination—the
moan of the whippoorwill from the hillside, the boding cry of the tree toad,
that harbinger of storm, the dreary hooting of the screech owl, or the sudden
rustling in the thicket of birds frightened from their roost.

The fireflies too, which sparkled most vividly in the darkest places,

now and then startled him, as one of uncommon brightness would stream
across his path. And if, by chance, a huge blockhead of a beetle came
winging his blundering flight against him, the poor varlet was ready to give
up the ghost with the idea that he was struck with a witch’s token. His only
resource on such occasions, either to drown thought or drive away evil
spirits, was to sing psalm tunes, and the good people of Sleepy Hollow as
they sat by their doors of an evening were often filled with awe at hearing
his nasal melody, ‘in linked sweetness long drawn out’, floating from the
distant hill or along the dusky road.

evenings with the old Dutch wives as they sat spinning by the fire, with a
row of apples roasting and spluttering along the hearth, and listen to their
marvellous tales of ghosts and goblins, and haunted fields, and haunted
brooks, and haunted bridges, and haunted houses, and particularly of the
headless horseman—or Galloping Hessian of the Hollow as they sometimes
called him. He would delight them equally by his anecdotes of witchcraft,
and of the direful omens and portentous sights and sounds in the air, which
prevailed in the earlier times of Connecticut, and would frighten them
woefully with speculations upon comets and shooting stars, and with the
alarming fact that the world did absolutely turn round, and that they were
half the time topsy-turvy!

But if there was a pleasure in all this, while snugly cuddling in the

chimney corner of a chamber that was all of a ruddy glow from the
crackling wood fire, and where of course no spectre dared to show its face,
it was dearly purchased by the terrors of his subsequent walk homewards.
What fearful shapes and shadows beset his path, amidst the dim and ghastly
glare of a snowy night! With what wistful look did he eye every trembling
ray of light streaming across the waste fields from some distant window!

How often was he appalled by some shrub covered with snow, which, like a
sheeted spectre, beset his very path! How often did he shrink with curdling
awe at the sound of his own steps on the frosty crust beneath his feet, and
dread to look over his shoulder, lest he should behold some uncouth being
tramping close behind him! And how often was he thrown into complete
dismay by some rushing blast, howling among the trees, in the idea that it
was the Galloping Hessian on one of his nightly scourings!

All these, however, were mere terrors of the night, phantoms of the

mind that walk in darkness, and though he had seen many spectres in his
time, and been more than once beset by Satan in diverse shapes, in his
lonely perambulations, yet daylight put an end to all these evils. He would
have passed a pleasant life of it, in despite of the Devil and all his works, if
his path had not been crossed by a being that causes more perplexity to
mortal man than ghosts, goblins and the whole race of witches put together,
and that was—a woman.

Among the musical disciples who assembled one evening in each

week to receive his instructions in psalmody was Katrina Van Tassel, the
daughter and only child of a substantial Dutch farmer. This was not your
average virginal maiden filled with romantic musings of chaste kisses and
gentle caresses, nor was she some prowling doxy looking to spread her legs
for a quick poke behind the haystacks. She was a blooming lass of fresh
eighteen—plump as a partridge, ripe and melting and rosy-cheeked as one
of her father’s peaches, and universally famed, not merely for her beauty,
but her vast expectations. She was withal a little of a coquette, as might be
perceived even in her dress, which was a mixture of ancient and modern
fashions, as most suited to set off her charms. She wore the ornaments of
pure yellow gold, which her great-great-grandmother had brought over from
Saardam, the tempting stomacher of the olden time and withal a
provokingly short petticoat, to display the prettiest foot and ankle in the

country round. This display gave the impression that she was something of
an adventurous sort, and that any playful suggestions would not be met with
shocked indignation and possible paternal recriminations, but more likely
with a slight blush to the cheek and an opening of the bodice.

Ichabod Crane had a soft and foolish heart towards the sex, as he did

to sex in general for that matter, and it is not to be wondered at that so
tempting a morsel soon found favour in his eyes, more especially after he
had visited her in her paternal mansion.

Old Baltus Van Tassel was a perfect picture of a thriving, contented,

liberal-hearted farmer. He seldom, it is true, sent either his eyes or his
thoughts beyond the boundaries of his own farm, but within those
everything was snug, happy and well-conditioned. He was satisfied with his
wealth, but not proud of it, and piqued himself upon the hearty abundance,
rather than the style in which he lived.

His stronghold was situated on the banks of the Hudson, in one of

those green, sheltered, fertile nooks in which the Dutch farmers are so fond
of nestling. A great elm tree spread its broad branches over it, at the foot of
which bubbled up a spring of the softest and sweetest water, in a little well
formed of a barrel, and then stole sparkling away through the grass to a
neighbouring brook that babbled along among alders and dwarf willows.

Hard by the farmhouse was a vast barn that might have served for a

church, every window and crevice of which seemed bursting forth with the
treasures of the farm. The flail was busily resounding within it from
morning to night, swallows and martins skimmed twittering about the
eaves, and rows of pigeons—some with one eye turned up, as if watching
the weather, some with their heads under their wings or buried in their
bosoms, and others swelling and cooing and bowing about their dames—
were enjoying the sunshine on the roof. Sleek unwieldy porkers were

grunting in the repose and abundance of their pens, from whence sallied
forth, now and then, troops of sucking pigs, as if to snuff the air.

convoying whole fleets of ducks. Regiments of turkeys were gobbling
through the farmyard, and Guinea fowls fretting about it like ill-tempered
housewives, with their peevish, discontented cry. Before the barn door
strutted the gallant cock, that pattern of a husband, a warrior and a fine
gentleman, clapping his burnished wings and crowing in the pride and
gladness of his heart—sometimes tearing up the earth with his feet, and
then generously calling his ever-hungry family of wives and children to
enjoy the rich morsel which he had discovered.

The pedagogue’s mouth watered as he looked upon this sumptuous

promise of luxurious winter fare. In his devouring mind’s eye, he pictured
to himself every roasting-pig running about with a pudding in his belly and
an apple in his mouth. The pigeons were snugly put to bed in a comfortable
pie and tucked in with a coverlet of crust. The geese were swimming in
their own gravy, and the ducks pairing cosily in dishes, like snug married
couples, with a decent competency of onion sauce. In the porkers he saw
carved out the future sleek side of bacon, and juicy relishing ham. Not a
turkey but he beheld daintily trussed up, with its gizzard under its wing and
peradventure a necklace of savoury sausages. And even bright chanticleer
himself lay sprawling on his back, in a side dish, with uplifted claws, as if
craving that quarter which his chivalrous spirit disdained to ask while
living.

As the enraptured Ichabod fancied all this, and as he rolled his great

green eyes over the fat meadowlands, the rich fields of wheat, of rye, of
buckwheat and Indian corn, and the orchards burdened with ruddy fruit,
which surrounded the warm tenement of Van Tassel, his heart yearned after
the damsel who was to inherit these domains. His imagination expanded

with the idea—how they might be readily turned into cash, and the money
invested in immense tracts of wild land and shingle palaces in the
wilderness. Nay, his busy fancy already realised his hopes, and presented to
him the blooming Katrina, splayed before him as he bore into her with his
generous length, her ample bosom jiggling heartily as she cried out his
name. Another thought, even more delicious, lingered there too, but it is yet
early into our tale to reveal such a wicked scene.

His next vision took him to where he and Katrina, with a whole

family of children, were mounted on the top of a wagon loaded with
household trumpery, with pots and kettles dangling beneath. He beheld
himself bestriding a pacing mare, with a colt at her heels, setting out for
Kentucky, Tennessee—or the Lord knows where!

When he entered the house, the conquest of his heart was complete. It

was one of those spacious farmhouses, with high-ridged but lowly sloping
roofs, built in the style handed down from the first Dutch settlers—the low
projecting eaves forming a piazza along the front, capable of being closed
up in bad weather. Under this were hung flails, harness, various utensils of
husbandry, and nets for fishing in the neighbouring river. Benches were
built along the sides for summer use, and a great spinning-wheel at one end
and a churn at the other showed the various uses to which this important
porch might be devoted.

From this piazza the wondering Ichabod entered the hall, which

formed the centre of the mansion and the place of usual residence. Here
rows of resplendent pewter, ranged on a long dresser, dazzled his eyes. In
one corner stood a huge bag of wool, ready to be spun—in another, a
quantity of linsey-woolsey just from the loom, ears of Indian corn and
strings of dried apples and peaches hung in gay festoons along the walls,
mingled with the gaud of red peppers. A door left ajar gave him a peep into
the best parlour, where the claw-footed chairs and dark mahogany tables

shone like mirrors. Andirons, with their accompanying shovel and tongs,
glistened from their covert of asparagus tops. Mock-oranges and conch-
shells decorated the mantelpiece. Strings of various-coloured birds eggs
were suspended above it. A great ostrich egg was hung from the centre of
the room, and a corner cupboard, knowingly left open, displayed immense
treasures of old silver and well-mended china.

From the moment Ichabod laid his eyes upon these regions of delight,

the peace of his mind was at an end, and his only study was how to gain the
affections of the peerless daughter of Van Tassel. In this enterprise,
however, he had more real difficulties than generally fell to the lot of a
knight-errant of yore, who seldom had anything but giants, enchanters, fiery
dragons and suchlike easily conquered adversaries to contend with and had
to make his way merely through gates of iron and brass and walls of
adamant to the castle keep where the lady of his heart was confined. All
which he achieved as easily as a man would carve his way to the centre of a
Christmas pie, and then the lady gave him her hand as a matter of course.

Ichabod, on the contrary, had to win his way to the heart of a country

coquette, beset with a labyrinth of whims and caprices, which were forever
presenting new difficulties and impediments. He had to encounter a host of
fearful adversaries of real flesh and blood, the numerous rustic admirers,
who beset every portal to her heart, keeping a watchful and angry eye upon
each other, but ready to fly out in the common cause against any new
competitor.

Among these, the most formidable was a burly, roaring, roystering

blade, of the name of Abraham or, according to the Dutch abbreviation,
Brom Van Brunt—the hero of the country round, which rang with his feats
of strength and hardihood. He was broad-shouldered and double-jointed,
with short curly black hair and a bluff but not unpleasant countenance,
having a mingled air of fun and arrogance. From his Herculean frame and

great powers of limb he had received the nickname of Brom Bones, by
which he was universally known.

He was famed for great knowledge and skill in horsemanship, being

as dexterous on horseback as a Tartar. He was foremost at all races and cock
fights, and with the ascendancy which bodily strength always acquires in
rustic life, was the umpire in all disputes, setting his hat on one side, and
giving his decisions with an air and tone that admitted of no gainsay or
appeal. He was always ready for either a fight or a frolic, but had more
mischief than ill-will in his composition as long as he got his way in all
things, and with all his overbearing roughness, there was a strong dash of
waggish good humour at bottom.

He had three or four boon companions who regarded him as their

model, and at the head of whom he scoured the country, attending every
scene of feud or merriment for miles round. In cold weather he was
distinguished by a fur cap, surmounted with a flaunting fox’s tail, and when
the folks at a country gathering descried this well-known crest at a distance,
whisking about among a squad of hard riders, they always stood by for a
squall. Sometimes his crew would be heard dashing along past the
farmhouses at midnight, with whoop and halloo, like a troop of Don
Cossacks, and the old dames, startled out of their sleep, would listen for a
moment till the hurry-scurry had clattered by, and then exclaim, “Ay, there
goes Brom Bones and his gang!” The neighbours looked upon him with a
mixture of awe, admiration and good-will, and when any madcap prank or
rustic brawl occurred in the vicinity, always shook their heads and
warranted Brom Bones was at the bottom of it.

This rantipole hero had for some time singled out the blooming

Katrina for the object of his uncouth gallantries, and though his amorous
toyings were something like the gentle caresses and endearments of a bear,
yet it was whispered that she did not altogether discourage his hopes. At

this point in our tale, it should be pointed out that the aforementioned
gatherings where gossip was enthusiastically exchanged were the true
lifeblood of the sewing circle community. Whilst ghosts, witches, goblins
and the gruesome Hessian were popular subjects to ponder upon, who was
rogering whom certainly held a respectable place among the married and
widowed women’s chatterings of the mysterious Hollow. There were those
who hinted that Katrina’s ability to take on not only Brom, but his entire
gang at once, went beyond the scandalous goings-on that were usually
tolerated in this remote village. But who can say how much truth can be had
from these careless whisperings?

Certain it is, Brom’s advances were signals for rival candidates to

retire, who felt no inclination to cross a lion in his amours. Insomuch that
when his horse was seen tied to Van Tassel’s paling on a Sunday night, a
sure sign that his master was courting, or as it is termed, ‘sparking’ within,
all other suitors passed by in despair, and carried the war into other quarters.

Such was the formidable rival with whom Ichabod Crane had to

contend, and considering all things, a stouter man than he would have
shrunk from the competition, and a wiser man would have despaired. He
had, however, a happy mixture of pliability and perseverance in his nature.
He was in form and spirit like a supple-jack—yielding but tough, though he
bent, he never broke, and though he bowed beneath the slightest pressure,
yet the moment it was away—jerk!—he was as erect, and carried his head
as high as ever.

To have taken the field openly against his rival would have been

madness, for he was not a man to be thwarted in his amours, any more than
that stormy lover, Achilles. Ichabod therefore made his advances in a quiet
and gently insinuating manner. Under cover of his character of singing-
master, he made frequent visits at the farmhouse. Not that he had anything

to apprehend from the meddlesome interference of parents, which is so
often a stumbling-block in the path of lovers.

better even than his pipe, and like a reasonable man and an excellent father,
let her have her way in everything. His notable little wife too had enough to
do to attend to her housekeeping and manage her poultry, for as she sagely
observed, ducks and geese are foolish things and must be looked after, but
girls can take care of themselves. Thus, while the busy dame bustled about
the house or plied her spinning-wheel at one end of the piazza, honest Balt
would sit smoking his evening pipe at the other, watching the achievements
of a little wooden warrior, who armed with a sword in each hand was most
valiantly fighting the wind on the pinnacle of the barn. In the meantime,
Ichabod would carry on his suit with the daughter by the side of the spring
under the great elm, or sauntering along in the twilight, that hour so
favourable to the lover’s eloquence.

After several visits that were meant to be more ingratiating towards

her than singing lessons, and after he had repeatedly cooed over her abilities
in the kitchen and awed over her proficiency with the knitting needle, he
asked again if he might walk with her at dusk so that they could enjoy the
cooling autumn air before the nights became too harsh for them to properly
enjoy. Katrina readily agreed to our pedagogue’s suggestion, this time even
offering to bring along a small coverlet in case they should wish to rest their
legs, and to keep from getting their clothing stained or dampened in the
grasses. This was all announced to her parents in a general manner, so that
they could be assured that the two lovers were engaging in all of the
expected and proper rituals.

“Ichabod, how is it that you have taken so long to suitably woo me?”

asked Katrina, once they had reached the other side of the barn, which was

set upon a hill behind the Van Tassel residence, and out of sight of her
father’s eye.

“Why, my dearest Katrina, I would never want you to believe of me

that I should be hasty or uncouth in how I present myself to you. But you
must know that your charms are the grandest I have ever encountered in my
travels, and there could never be another one of the fairer sex that I could
find more pleasing.”

“Those are wondrous words that you speak! How I long to believe

them true. But when I am with Brom, his enthusiasm for me extends
beyond dainties and doilies. He has manly talents that he shares with me,
ones that I never knew existed until but recently, and I wish to be wooed in
that manner going forward. Pray tell, do you judge me wicked for wanting
such things?”

“Aah, my sweet Katrina, all of God’s creatures are filled with desires

for His created pleasures. That you are able to revel in all of your senses
indicates to me that you are even more worthy of my suit! I would never
judge you or criticise your yearnings, as I hope you will not criticise mine.”

Katrina smiled at him with a most inviting gaze. “Then Ichabod, shall

we go to my special hideaway in the barn? There is an area in the loft that I
have claimed as my own, and as my father’s gout prevents him walking too
far—or climbing ladders—and my mother is too occupied with her
household duties, we shall be free to express our true feelings for one
another without fear of annoying interruptions.”

Ichabod nodded his head in joyful acquiescence, and gestured for the

comely lass to lead the way. He was secretly grateful that another man had
broken down the hallowed gates of Katrina’s maidenhood, because in his
experience the mere sight of his manhood elicited gasps of fear, and many
times a changing of the mind in untried ladies and inexperienced men.
Instead, he would have the advantage of comparison between he and Brom,

for he was sure no cock in the county could measure up to his glorious
offering.

Once Katrina had led the way to their private trysting area, she laid

down the coverlet she had so fortuitously brought along. Already in place
was a hanging lantern that Ichabod offered to ready for them. As he lit the
pewter lamp, the familiar ache of his shaft pushed against his breeches,
begging for release, for it had been far too long. Here he was, in such
proximity as he had dreamt about for some time—near the blossom and
heat that was Katrina.

hoisted herself upon her knees, and reached for the delicate laces of her
bodice. She pulled on a ribbon, then looked up at Ichabod from under her
feathery lashes and paused.

“Do you not wish to do the honours, my lusty gentleman? Or shall I

do all of the work to your pleasure?”

Aah, I have discovered even more of a treasure than I dared hope. The

saucy vixen allures in her every manner.

are about to bestow upon me, I wonder you might think me a rogue or a
scoundrel come to snatch your womanly prizes without your consent. I
would not it be so, for I want you to be certain of my true heart and
intentions towards you. I may crave your bosom, your cunny and what I am
sure is a lovely backside that I am desperate to finally gaze upon and caress,
but I wish to assure you that there is much, much more that I desire from
you.”

“Oh Ichabod, is it my heart that you speak of?” Katrina’s hands

lowered, and she settled back on her heels, a look of longing in her eyes.
“Because I have been holding it dear, lest I give it to the wrong man. Before
you arrived, Brom was the only one whom I could imagine sharing every

part of me, but now I am not so sure. For you have shown that you have
more tender leanings in the way of song and books and all of those things
that I find close to where my true heart lies. When I am with Brom, he says
and does the expected things, but I know he carries no real interest other
than what I can give him between my legs, and cook from the kitchen after
a hard day’s work in the fields.”

“Are you saying, my dearest heart, that I could be so privileged as to

be the one who captures your true love? Let me say to you now, that all you
have to do is ask, and mine is yours.”

“But this is so confusing!” Katrina looked away, as if she were

ashamed of the words she was about to speak. “I don’t understand. Brom
assured me that the only way he would ever consider taking me to wife
would be if I were to prove to him that I was capable of fulfilling all of his
needs, and to ascertain that my charms, once revealed to his eye, would be
of a pleasing nature to him. Yet here you are professing your true heart, and
I have but only revealed the upper swell of my bosom.”

so tricky in how he had stormed Katrina’s gates. “Lovely lass, whilst the
swell of your bosom would make even the oldest and most prudish man
stutter in awe, I do not make such demands of you. I only hope, based on
your declaration of how you wish to be wooed from this point forward, that
I could show you immense states of pleasure that you have yet to
experience, for even though I may not have the swarthy physique of the
bearish Brom, I think you will find me most pleasing in other ways.”

It was not Ichabod’s habit to be oblique in the phrases he uttered, but

he was still treading carefully in the manner in which he handled Katrina.
She might have bid farewell to her maiden days, but she was still a
coquettish young girl, and he knew that the more intriguingly he laid
himself before her, the more likely she would see that his suit was the

obvious choice. He determined that uncovering more information from her
before they engaged any further in their lustful adventure would naturally
give him an even stronger advantage. For there was one thing Katrina had
yet to discover in regards to his intentions, and it was quite an important
one.

“Are you teasing me, Ichabod? Do you find me so fickle that you

think I would crave the brawn of one man, and then snigger at the lack in
another? I have already confessed that true love is where I should place my
heart and have never uttered a word in regards to male physique, and yet
you hope to sway me thus?”

“Now, now, my sweeting, this is surely not the case. I only mention it

because I wanted to assure you that I could be pleasing to you in every area,
that I am the one man who can give you everything—my heart, my soul, my
daily attentions and all the physical delights you could ever crave.”

“Well, that is quite an assumption, for all I have ever told you is that

Brom and I have sampled one another. You have no way of knowing how
he tried me, or how I tried him, or…” At this point, she looked away, biting
her lip in a most succulent way, obviously worrying whether she should
reveal any more.

Ichabod scooted closer to the captivating damsel, and reached over to

put an arm around her waist, as she was now sitting fully upon the coverlet,
with her legs tucked beneath her skirts.

She fell against his lean, but strong chest, and buried her face in his

neck. “Oh, Ichabod, I fear I shall turn you away from me if I tell you any
more. Still, I have always sworn that I could only really give myself to the
man who knew and accepted me, so I must make this awful declaration to
you and beg your understanding.”

his elusive doe. “Now, Katrina, what did I say to you before? There is

naught that you have done in the quest to indulge your senses that could
ever hurt me, for I have already promised not to judge you in that way. So
tell me then, tell me this awful thing that you imagine will set us apart.”

“Once, as Brom was wooing me in the way that I have told you, he

brought some corn whisky which I have never before consumed. He
promised that it would make our lovemaking more pleasing, and that I
would feel ecstatic pleasures from his handlings, which I shall confess had
only been somewhat uncomfortable, and sometimes painful, prior to that.”

What an oaf, thought Ichabod, anger in his heart towards the would-

be swain. He has no skills when it comes to the proper preparation of a
maiden in her first throes of love. Now I do wish I had been her first—yet
this may ultimately play well into my hands.

“So I drank the nasty swill,” continued Katrina, “and it did warm me

in ways that were quite surprising. This time when his big rough hands
grabbed my breasts, and he bit on my nipples, I felt streaks of delight to the
very centre of my being. Now, his favourite way to take his pleasure from
me was to turn me onto my stomach, and then have me lift my knees, my
face buried in the blanket, my bottom to the sky. He typically held my head
down by the back of my neck, and then he would push his manhood into my
cunny at that angle, squatting just above me from behind. It would feel too
full for me, but the worst part was the rawness on my insides from his
abrasive thrusting. Yet this time, after the whisky, something happened
down there, and there was a delicious slickness that made it much more
pleasurable.

“He never really took very long, just a few grunts and he would

spend, but this time when he pulled his cock out, he kept his hand on the
back of my neck and told me not to move. I was feeling a bit addled
because something different had occurred, my cunny felt swollen and
heated, and as if there should be something more, but what, I couldn’t begin

to fathom. I knew that Brom was now kneeling in front of me, still holding
me down, placing his other hand on my shoulder as well. My bottom
remained wide-open to the air, and the soft breezes coming in through the
hayloft window were making my agonies worse, I could feel them caressing
my exposed openings. Such a feeling they elicited!

“I was longing in my core, wondering why I must stay in this

ridiculous position, when I heard a rustling behind me, near the top of the
loft ladder. In an instant my horrors were confirmed, for I could feel the
insistent push against my feminine hole of another man’s member! You may
wonder at this point if I cried out, or protested that this debauchery stop,
and so I must beg you now not to turn away from me, for I did not. My
pussy eagerly accepted the intrusion of this mystery lover, and clenched
around it with all the strength I possessed, aching for that unnameable
conclusion to be reached.”

Katrina buried her face in Ichabod’s chest again, and he anguished

over whether to prod her along, fearing he might push her away, but knew
there was only one way he could confess his own secrets, and that would be
upon her full disclosure.

“Sweet love, pray continue for I am not turning away. If this tale

informs me how I can better serve you as a man, then it is best told in its
completeness.”

“Love? You speak of this? Even as I tell of being tupped by a man

that I am not acquainted with, while my lover watches? What you must
think of me! And what you undoubtedly will think once you hear the rest.”

“How many times must I reassure you? I know that men’s decadent

ways are not commonly known to many young ladies, but you are a rare
jewel to be cherished and embraced for your willing and lusty desires. I
assure you, my fair damsel, that my feelings of love only increase as your
story advances.”

and fear no longer, and I shall chance a guess that your love shall be
increasing ten-fold in a manner of minutes. To continue, this cock also spent
inside me much too soon, and this one, whom I soon recognised as being
one of Brom’s regular gang, came over to where Brom still held me down,
and was discarding the sheepskin he had covered himself with so that I
wouldn’t get with child. As I now suspected, another cock was more than
willing to enter me and do its finest, and I knew I was ever so close to that
conclusion I craved. But it was not to be! Three able shafts had pumped
their life force into me, yet none was able to satisfy the need that was still
gnawing inside.

“Then a fourth contender thrust its way in, and this one I felt would

do the trick, for it was of a larger girth than the other three, and filled me in
such a glorious way that it placed a pressure on a certain area inside of me.
That was what it took, and Ichabod, there was an explosion inside my entire
being of a sort I never knew existed! I shook, and trembled, and cried out so
loud, Brom muffled my lips with his hands, lest my father or a farmhand
hear and come running to my aid.

“Once I was through, Brom told his gang to leave, and would not let

me up until they were gone. It seemed clear that he was still behaving as my
only suitor, even though three other cocks had seen their way inside me. I
chastised him for treating me as if I were a common harlot, but he informed
me that the only way I could truly please him would be if he could offer my
body to his closest friends when the mood took him. I was deeply insulted
at first, but then I realised from my own recent personal experience that it
would seem that men must not be able to perform long enough to give their
ladies’ pleasure, so it only seemed logical that I must couple with more than
one to achieve my end. I decided he was only thinking of me, and what
would suit me best were we to create a satisfying union. I pondered that it

explained why many a married woman was heard to say that they could
barely tolerate their husband’s ministrations in the marriage bed, for if they
are only sampling one cock—their husbands not being as generous as Brom
—then it must always be as unpleasant for them as it was for me the first
few times he took me.”

“Was it like that every time then, Katrina? I thank you for your honest

and detailed telling of this one tryst, but I have a very special and important
reason for wanting to know more. Please inform me if this is how you need
to be serviced, for I believe we shall be of an accord in this matter.”

what you have to say, so yes, I will tell you more, because truth be told, I
am spoilt for the common marriage bed. I no longer desire to have just one
cock, for I discovered upon subsequent matings, that I was able to gain my
release many times over, whereas Brom and his cohorts were only capable
of once.”

At Katrina’s last declaration, Ichabod giggled. “Once? Really? Oh,

you poor little lass.”

“Are you hinting that you can spend more than once in an eve?”

“Oh, there are many things that I am capable of that I doubt Brom has

ever even thought of trying. But please, I have rudely interrupted you, do go
on with your tale.”

“Well, Brom showed me that there are other things men and women

can do together in addition to the act that produces children. Especially
when there is more than one shaft to be had. The very next night, for I
begged for more of the same, he came back with his gang. This time, they
all gathered in the loft at one time, but he blindfolded me for he did not
want me to take a liking to any of his friends over him.

“First, I felt several hands undoing my blouses and pulling at my

skirts. Thick, rough fingers poked and prodded at my teats and my cunny,
grasping and fondling with no gentle caress. I was kneeling, and something
was pushed in my face, I felt it bump the corner of my lip. I was shocked to
discover upon the feeling of the velvety mushroom-shaped skin that it was
one of the cocks there that I thought was meant to service my pussy. Brom
ordered me—he was the only one who ever spoke—to open my mouth and
to suck the hard appendage. I thought I might gag, it seemed like such an
unnatural act, but as it thrust in and out of my mouth as though it were a
cunny, I could feel the wetness from my core begin to build again. I found
that licking its hard veiny length that also possessed the softest of surfaces
was a previously untried joy. Whilst this unknown member tupped my face,
the hands and fingers of Brom and his friends continued to play with my
body as if they were kneading dough for the stone oven.

“The emptiness left in my centre was palpable, and I yearned for one

of them to fill it. As though my thoughts had been spoken aloud, I was
lifted up by my hips so that I stood up on my knees, the man pumping into
my face hanging on roughly to my hair so that he wouldn’t lose purchase,
and I was reseated, but this time upon a ready cock. The man that I was
seated upon lifted my hips up and down, which was a challenge, as I was
facing away from him. I leant forward a little bit, and this helped him to
slam into me with enough force that it was pleasing to both of us.

“I could hear the voices of the men making low murmurs that

indicated their pleasure, and someone on either side of me, one I presume
was Brom for I heard his commands next, lifted my hands from where they
had been resting at my sides, and brought them up far enough so that they
could grasp the shafts of the ones standing there. I wasn’t sure what to do,
and I was a little irritated that these cocks were not being saved to plunder

my body, but Brom insisted that I grasp them tightly, whilst they thrust in
and out of my fists.

“I want to tell you, dearest Ichabod, that I was degraded and mortified

that these men were using me thus, but I would be telling you a falsehood.
The sensation of all of those hard members thrusting into me everywhere
was too glorious for words. I began to understand that there are other acts
that could bring me delight, not just the one. Now, the next part of my story
you may find hard to believe, for I did not think such a thing was possible.
But just as I could feel a strange pulsing in the shaft in my mouth, and I was
feeling a bit of terror that he would spend there, he pulled out. My pussy
was emptied, and my hands were left with nothing to hold.

“Brom then used his calloused hands to direct me on all fours—I was

beginning to be able to tell him from the others—and when I achieved the
position, he roughly pulled my knees further apart. I could feel a man
scooting underneath me, so that he assumed the normal position a woman
would on her back, and I was above him as though I were the man. Brom
lowered my hips so that I was impaled on the one that had the thick cock
from my first go ’round. I groaned with the sheer enjoyment of having my
cunny stretched and filled to capacity. But I didn’t realise at that point there
was still much more of me to fill.

“I was instructed by Brom to hold perfectly still, which was difficult

as every muscle in my centre screamed for me to ride the pole I was secured
on, and I felt him parting the cheeks of my bottom. Then the oddest thing
occurred, for he was using some type of grease and spreading it about on
my rosebud back there. I began to protest, and Brom told me to be still, that
this was going to be the best thing that ever happened to me. Remembering
once again the old women who complained of their husband’s inability in
the marriage bed, I followed his instructions, and waited anxiously for what
he might have planned.

“There was some more rubbing, and then there was a poke with the

very tip of his finger, and I knew that he was trying to gain entrance to a
part of me that had certainly never had anything put inside of it before. I
thought to protest that he really shouldn’t put his finger in there, but then I
remembered that my pussy had previously been bereft of any intrusions,
and obviously, it was meant for that very purpose, so why not this hole as
well?

“With a sudden pop it was in, and this was a very strange feeling

indeed. Why, Ichabod, I daresay you cannot imagine how strange it was.”

“Darling, darling girl, this is the most wonderful tale I have ever

heard, and it may surprise you that I do know of this feeling, and I am
carried right along with you as you regale me with the details. Please, do go
on.”

“Really? How can this be? Well, I shall finish my story, but then you

must tell me yours. I’ve always known there was something more to you
than Brom, I just haven’t been able to fathom what it is.

“So to continue, his finger slid its way in and out of my back hole,

and the desire to move upon his friend’s member was so great, I could
barely be contained. I began to whimper with my need, and Brom soothed
me, telling me that we were almost ready to begin. That was when he
removed his finger, and replaced it with a much larger intrusion. Although,
when I say larger, what I mean is that whilst it was certainly larger than a
finger, it was actually smaller in comparison to any of the other male
offerings present. I suspect this is why Brom chose to use me in that area,
since his smaller appendage would offer me less discomfort. I have to say, I
do appreciate how sensitive Brom has been with me in our debaucheries.”

Ichabod could not hold back a derisive snort at that remark, for as a

fellow member of the male species, he knew that sensitivity was the last
thing Brom was displaying toward Katrina, and was certain that only the

selfish need to come in a tighter orifice that accommodated his size-
challenged member drove his actions.

my honest rendering of the story.”

“Of course, my dearest, my apologies, please continue.”
“Once Brom had pushed his way into my bottom, I suddenly no

longer wanted to move. I felt over-stuffed and stretched to my capacity. It
hurt only a little, it was more of a slight burning sensation, but once they
both began to glide in and out of me in alternating rhythms, the heat in my
core came back to life. Oh, the wicked, wicked thrill! But there was still
more. Now a cock insisted itself upon my lips, and I greedily opened my
mouth to take it in. The hard members of three men were inside me at once,
riding me in every way imaginable, filling each hole I have to offer. Yet
there was still one more, and it was loath to be left out of the unrestrained
union. It pushed its way in, next to the one already there, into my sloppy
and swollen mouth. Two cocks at once pummelled me there, and I could
barely contain them. It mattered not that my ability to swallow them deep
was hindered, they pushed against one another, and slid upon my face and
tongue, sometimes one making its way past my throat where I would choke
a little upon it.

“My senses were never so alive, Ichabod! My body was a bundle of

awareness that would now only crave this type of abuse from that day
forward. Did I come, as Brom has called it? Oh yes, Ichabod, I came again
and again. And when the men in my mouth spent their seed, I greedily
lapped it up, never questioning for a moment if I should do such a thing.
Brom left his inside my body, explaining that my mouth and ass were the
two places it was safe not to use a covering. I relished the feel of it, and did
not protest.

“So now you know, my sweet schoolmaster, of all my depravity with

these men, and why I wonder if you will continue your suit, and truthfully,
if even you should.”

“Why should I not? I have already told you this tale only puts you in

higher regard to me. What other impediment could there be to our
happiness?”

“Isn’t it obvious, my dear Ichabod? For while I have great feelings in

my heart for you, I am filled with constant lusts that I am afraid only one
man will not be able to satisfy. It would not be fair to sweet, caring you!
Even though Brom does not possess your gentleness and intelligence of
mind, and I have sometimes yearned for more careful attention to be paid to
my body when we have played, he has one thing that you do not, three
additional cocks in case his does not satisfy me. I swear to you now—I am
ruined for anything else!”

At that, Katrina once again collapsed against Ichabod’s chest, this

time weeping softly, but he was not fretting over her words, for he had
advantages that she was not aware of yet.

“Hush, hush, my sweeting, this is not a lost cause.” He tipped up her

chin with one finger, and claimed her mouth with his, pushing his tongue
past her lips, and imbuing all of the passion he felt from the bawdy tale he
had just heard into the kiss. So far, they had only exchanged simple pecks
on the cheek, and it was now time to show Katrina why she would never
have to worry about being unsatisfied with him, or with the other man he
was about to tell her about.

Ichabod had planned all along to find a woman of Katrina’s ilk that he

could share with his longtime lover, a gentleman we shall call Jonathan for
now, it being a common name of the time. This Jonathan had been waiting
anxiously back in Connecticut for word from Crane that the dove they had
longed for could be found in the Hollow. Originally, it had been planned

that he would join Ichabod when he accepted his schoolmaster appointment,
but his law school duties could not be wrapped up in time. They swore to
stay in touch by post, and now that Ichabod had ascertained that Katrina
was amenable to such an arrangement, he was excited to inform his
paramour at once. However, with his cockles and manhood in such an
extreme state from the saucy tale that Katrina had just shared, and his desire
to prove to her that he was a more satisfying lover than Brom and his
cronies, letters could wait!

Ichabod pulled away from Katrina, and looked down into her wide

and trusting eyes. Yes, he loved her, and he knew Jonathan would be
hopelessly smitten when he finally viewed the sweet damsel, and was
informed of her adventures.

“Oh, don’t keep me in suspense Ichabod!” sighed Katrina. “What is

this account of yours that you have kept me in mystery about?”

“Well, my love, there are two parts to the matter. There is the tell, and

then there’s the show. First I must tell you that I have a very, very dear
friend who has been my boon companion for these last five years, and that
we have engaged in similar physical pursuits with young ladies, and I
daresay, one another.”

“I see, so you do understand the sensations I encountered. But only

one friend?” said Katrina in a demure manner.

“I assure you, angel, the trying of us together will go beyond any

acrobatics that Brom and his doltish gang could achieve. For one, Jonathan
and I spend as many as three times apiece in one go, and this is not a
braggard’s claim, but is the fair truth. And another thing to add to the
wonder of this, each time after we spend, our pikestaffs last longer in a
woman’s bodily embrace.”

Katrina gasped. “Why, if this is true, it would be like having six

members—or even more if the lasting is accurate. But where is this friend?

Why is he not here with you now? For I fear he may not find me pleasing
enough to try.”

Katrina looked down, once again playing the shy fawn.
“Oh, my precious dove! You mustn’t worry yourself, for I have

sampled many sweet young things with him over the years, and I know
exactly the type of damsel he craves. When I look upon you, it is as if you
were created for us from the beginning of all time. Please accept my word
that this is so.”

Katrina looked up at him again, cuddling a little closer. “I do so want

to believe you, my dearest Ichabod, but so far, all we have done is share
some stories and one deep kiss. How can I know if any of these glorious-
sounding delights can ever be mine?”

“That is the show that I spoke of. Will your parents be missing you

soon?”

Katrina giggled. “Oh my, no. They have long since retired. If you let

me scoot over to the other side of the loft, and peer out the window, I’m
quite sure all of the lights will be dimmed, with only one left on the porch
for our return.”

“I shall see my dear.” Ichabod let go of the winsome girl, and checked

to verify the truth of what she claimed. Once it was confirmed, he turned
back, and sat on his knees in front of her, caressing her cheek with the back
of one hand.

“Aah then, shall I infer that we are free to explore one another’s

charms until just before the five o’clock hour threatens to reveal the dawn?”

Katrina laughed. “You would collapse from the exhaustion of it! It

cannot be much past the eight o’clock hour now.”

“Is it that you believe you cannot take the exertions of my extensive

lovemaking? For my cock has been ready for you this entire evening, and I

am anxious to use it upon you in any way I can, over and over, to alleviate
your marriage bed concerns.”

Katrina’s eyes became wider. “I would never dare to question a man’s

insistence that he is right, so I will allow you to prove your point with me,
however you see fit.” She paused and cleared her throat a little. “And
you’re saying that I will be…delighted with the results?”

“Oh, my dear, I think from the moment you see just what I am able to

offer you, there cannot be any doubts. One more question before we begin
this test of my attributes, did Brom or his friends ever employ their tongues
in giving you pleasure?”

“You mean the suckling of my teats? Only Brom would, but he was

usually just pulling hard on them or sometimes he would nip them briefly.
They really were just anxious to poke me, why, I daresay the whole act with
all four of them was done in less than half the hour. Why do you ask?”

“Simply curious where I should start,” said Ichabod in a lower voice,

already able to tell that his physical advantages over Brom far exceeded
even his own belief. Brom may look the part of the virile stud to the casual
observer, but once Ichabod displayed his wares, and used his practised
tongue on the sweet Katrina, she would belong to him, body and soul. Then
once Jonathan entered the fray, well, she would not even be able to think of
Brom anymore.

“Remove your blouses for me, Katrina. I am going to teach you to

discover what it is that you desire, rather than having it thrust upon you like
the brutes who have abused you already.”

He could see the swell of her luscious bosom rising and falling at a

more rapid rate, and he felt assured that her growing desire was the cause.
She undid her laces and loosened her blouse so that she could slip it over
her head. Next came the one underneath, and she tugged at it as she had the
other from her stomacher, and cast it aside. Her voluptuous breasts were

now free before his eyes, and he practically salivated at the sight of them as
he would were they two juicy melons. A smattering of little freckles
decorated the valley between her generous mounds, and large peach-
coloured nipples danced before his eyes as she pushed her bosom together
with her upper arms.

“You are magnificent! Oh, at some time tonight I shall suckle those in

a way you have never known, long and lingering until you beg me to give
you release. But first, I want you to touch and squeeze them yourself, show
me what gratifies you.”

Katrina gasped. “What sort of request is this? After all of your

promises to show me with your cock and hands and tongue pleasures I have
never even dreamt of, and now you ask that I do the work myself?”

“You misunderstand, my anxious beauty. I only wish you to discover

what it is that gives you the most thrills, then you can reveal it to me so that
I can perform it on your body. I am not here to just take from you my
release without care for your own womanly needs. I am not like that bear
that has visited you with his friends, ordering you about, and making you go
along on their parade. I want to give you the type of delights a jewel such as
yourself deserves. Please, my sweet Katrina, caress your breasts, play with
your delicate nipples, show me if it is with softness or vigour I should
caress you, if I should tarry with them, or move to other expanses of your
delectable flesh.”

Katrina looked unsure, but hesitantly began to explore. As she

kneaded her mounds and moved to the nipples, a little moan escaped her
lips, and she closed her eyes, seemingly to allow herself to experience the
full sensation. She tugged lightly on the now erect points, and became more
enthusiastic as she appeared to be enjoying her own ministrations.

“Mmmm, yes, my little one, that’s nice. Your cheeks are flushing, and

I can see your hips beginning to move beneath your skirts and petticoats.

Keep going, but lie upon your back.”

She did as Ichabod asked, and he loosened his breeches, slipping

them off as well as discarding the rest of his clothing. He watched her every
move as he quickly undressed himself, his shaft rejoicing in being freed of
its restrictions.

“That’s it, my love, feel everything you are doing to yourself, keep

your eyes closed and just accept the pleasure.”

Ichabod was saving the great reveal of his hidden appendage for when

she was fully moistened, so that she would not experience any trepidation
on what it might do to her newly tried body. Now completely naked, he
crawled over to her, and lifted her skirts up, whilst she continued to lie on
her back and fondle herself. He fumbled through all of the fabric to find the
ties—this was his least favourite aspect of making love to a woman, men
were so much easier to disrobe—and she lifted her hips to help him along.
Once he had her completely bared, he lay on his stomach so that his head
was right between her lusciously fleshy widespread legs, and he revelled in
her sun-kissed strawberry hair, and the sweet feminine musk she was
exuding.

“Aaah, what a lovely view I have. Now sweetness, take one hand and

lower it down to your woman’s mound, and show me what it is you like
down there.”

Katrina stopped her sensual movements, and the touching of her

breasts. “I don’t know if I can, Ichabod. That seems too intimate, too
private. Why, your face is right there—I shall die of shame!”

Ichabod tsked her. “We’ve been through this, there is nothing to be

ashamed of. Now how can I ever know what it is you like if you don’t show
me? I have no idea if you want constant rapid stimulation, or light teasing
caresses, or alternating penetration and touch. I have taught you songs, and

I teach errant boys at the schoolhouse, but tonight, I am yours to teach in
the ways to satisfy you.”

few minutes, her little moans came back, and her hips were gyrating softly.
This time, she let one hand drift down her rounded stomach, until her
fingers were skimming her soft curls. She hesitantly reached a little further,
and used the middle finger to pull one side of her slit open, and then used
her index finger to lightly circle her little nub.

“Oh, Ichabod, please. I need you to be inside me.”
Ichabod chuckled. “Patience, girl. We have all night, and I will be

inside you soon enough.”

She continued to gently explore her outer lips with her other fingers,

wiggling her hips as she did so. Ichabod was rejoicing at the abundance of
juices this was creating in his wanton Katrina, for she would need the
lubrication for when he finally entered her. But first, he wished to show her
what other talents he possessed.

“Aah, that is so beautiful my dear. But I wish you to stop now so that

I can bring you to the first of many ends this glorious night.”

Katrina pulled her hand back, the other still fondling her heavy

breasts.

“Yes, darling, that’s it, use both of your hands to stimulate your tips,

and I shall minister to you down here.”

Ichabod scooted up even closer, teasing the sensitive skin on the

inside of Katrina’s thighs with his tongue, grasping her upper thighs with
his arms and holding her wide open, caressing her creamy flesh with his
long, moist tongue.

“Ohhhhh, oh, Ichabod, I have never felt such a thrill,” she softly

moaned. “But my little bud aches for you there, please, please…”

Her gyrations became more insistent, more lusty. Ichabod rubbed his

substantial proboscis around the outer fleshy lips of her woman’s centre,
inhaling her sweet aroma, whilst still licking and lightly nipping on the skin
at the apex of her thighs, hinting at what was to come.

“Aaah, Katrina, your scent would beckon to me from the outer

corners of this earth.”

his mouth, letting go of her breasts to clutch his upper arms that were
wrapped around her thighs, and pulling him closer.

“My eager lass, continue stimulating your teats, it will increase your

pleasures when I lap at your cunny.”

“Oh yes, please!” she responded, and did as he requested.
And so he dived in to her moist cunny, suckling each swollen lip, and

luxuriating in the feel and taste of her. She was now thrusting unabashedly
into his face, yanking at her nipples in a most exuberant manner, her cries
of ecstasy becoming louder and louder. Ichabod used the very tip of his
tongue on the head of her now extremely swollen nub. He ever-so-lightly
tormented her clit, sending the unrestrained Katrina into spasms of delight,
as she could hold back no longer.

Ichabod backed off from her sensitive bud, and kissed all around her

cunny, still not letting go of her legs, or retreating from her in any way.
Katrina lay limp on her back, panting in the aftermath of Ichabod’s
servicing of her pussy.

“Mmmm, such a responsive hussy, and I mean that in the most

complimentary of ways,” he cooed next to her folds. “I imagine I’ll be able
to wrest many more screaming culminations from you this night.”

Katrina was still breathing in a heavy manner, but was finally able to

respond, “Why, Ichabod, I should die first! I have never felt an intensity in

my being such as what your able tongue just produced. Pray tell you finish
inside me, for I am a fair woman, and then we pick up on the morrow.”

Ichabod only chuckled with his ability to win Katrina over so easily

obtained, but he would not let it rest there, for he feared his rival might hear
of her exertions with him, and duplicate—albeit lamely, Ichabod was sure—
and turn her head to him once more.

“Aah, my sweet, you have barely sampled my abilities, and I assure

you, there is so much more to be had. But you are overwhelmed by my
prowess, so I implore you to just lie there, relax, and I shall bring about
another fruition from your loins.”

“But Ichabod…”
“Shhh, darling, just relax, I shall even take over the pinching and

pulling of your lovely nipples, you need not do anything except to enjoy
what I am about to do to you.”

He felt Katrina’s body soften under his touch, and he could sense her

acquiescence to his attentions. Reaching up he flicked and fondled her large
nipples, bringing them back to their previously erect state. All the while he
did this, he continued his sweet kisses around her mound, rubbing his lips
back and forth in her silken curls. As he continued, her breathing began to
increase, and soon little moans were escaping her lips.

She is mine to control and delight. Such a wonderful discovery!
Removing one hand from the petting of her tits, he now brought it

down to part her outer lips for better access. Careful not to touch her overly-
sensitive nub just yet, he lapped at the labia instead, skimming back and
forth and all around, but never on, her still swollen bud. He delved deeper
with his mouth, and then his tongue poked its way into her delightful cunny
hole—its length unusually large such as his manhood.

little appendage as if it were the manhood from a lesser contender to

Ichabod. Her cream was flowing from her freely, and he used his index
finger to spread it further down to her back entrance. He wouldn’t typically
invade that area of a woman on his first try with her, but Katrina had
already confessed to enjoying that part of her body in a way he and
Jonathan were hardly ever able to convince a woman to attempt.

Massaging her little pink rosebud, he drew his mouth away from her

momentarily, so that he could reach into her cunny to cover his finger with
her moisture. All the while, he was using his free hand to caress her nipples
back and forth, and then he lowered his head to continue vigorously licking
her woman’s lips. He stimulated her puckered back hole some more, and
lightly pushed until his fingertip popped into her ass. Katrina jumped a
little, and he stilled.

“Are you all right, my dear? If you wish me to stop any act I am

performing on your heated flesh, I shall always bend to your will.”

“Oh no, my wonderful Ichabod, I was just startled. Please continue in

any manner you like.”

reached the knuckle of his hand. Then he began to slowly slide in and out.

“I am going to poke your bottom vigorously now, whilst I suckle and

flick your swollen bud with my tongue. I want you to tell me, Katrina, to
describe what you feel as I do this, I want to know every little detail.”

Ichabod dived into her pussy as he picked up the pace of rogering her

ass. Furiously, he licked and slurped, his finger moving at a speed no
manhood on the earth could ever expect to achieve.

Katrina cried out unintelligibly, and then, through gasps of air, tried to

articulate in the way Ichabod had requested. “Oh, glorious! Such heights
my body is reaching for, oh, oh, and the wicked intrusion of your finger in
my bottom, it is so wonderful, do it harder!” She gasped some more. “My
cunny, oh, I shall shatter into a million pieces!”

With that final declaration, she screamed at such a volume, Ichabod

really did worry should someone hear them and come to find out what was
occurring. But then he reminded himself that this was the Hollow, and how
many frightening and gruesome cries did one hear on an almost nightly
basis? Why, it was more likely that should anyone have an occasion to be
nearby, that instead of running towards the source of the disturbance, they
would make haste in the opposite direction—saving their terrifying
encounter of hearing the wail of a witch or tormented spirit for a knitting or
quilting frolic night as a story to share with all in attendance.

Katrina collapsed completely upon her final cries of release, and

Ichabod rested his head against the pillow of one soft thigh, her juices still
glistening upon his lips. His heavy bollocks were practically inside his body
—no easy feat—for his desire to spend had never been so great as it was
now. He resisted the urge to grab for his own staff, for since his new lover
had reached two completions, he would have to work her cunny even harder
to snatch a third.

“Was that to your satisfaction, sweeting?”
Katrina laughed as much as her depleted state would allow. “My dear,

amazing Ichabod, you have to ask? And you must think me but a fool to
have ever doubted your abilities in the ways of female pleasure! Pray,
forgive me, my love.”

Love! She speaks of love! Now for the finish of it.
“There is nothing to forgive, but I am not yet done.”
“Of course, Ichabod, I am not so selfish a woman that I would leave

you unattended. I only ask that you refrain from asking me to use my mouth
tonight, for you have wrung every last bit of strength from my being.”

“I ask nothing of you on this night, except to receive all of the bodily

delights that I bestow upon you. Now let me show you what it is that Brom,
nor any of his gang can never give to you.”

part of his anatomy that at times had put a stallion to shame.

Katrina gasped, and covered her mouth with her plump little hand.

With ever-widening eyes, she appeared to be rendered speechless. Finally
she found her voice and cried out, “Oh, by heaven’s mercies, save us!”

She seemingly couldn’t tear her eyes away from the stout log before

her, no doubt wondering that such a thing could even exist on a mere
mortal.

“Well, Katrina? Are there any doubts left that my male apparatus is of

a superior and unique quality?”

had no further speech to give, for it was obvious there was nothing more to
say about it. There was only the doing that was left, and that was what
Ichabod intended.

“Since I know our exertions have left you withered in might, I think it

best for this eve that you stay upon your back, and as before, I shall do all
of the work.”

She nodded, still wide-eyed, but made no protest.
Ichabod lifted her legs by the backs of her knees, and pulled up as

high as he could. When she grimaced a little, he paused and settled them in
the crooks of his elbows.

“I look forward to the continued extending of your limbs over time,

so that I might ply your cunny in the most numerous of ways.”

At this Katrina sighed, and he knew she was ready to receive his

enormous cock. Using one hand to position the bulbous head at her
opening, he lubricated it with the plentiful liquids still available, and then
gently urged it forward. Watching the abundant stretching that the entrance
of his member into a partner’s hole always produced was part of the thrill

for him. It was no less with Katrina, as he knew that she had newly been
used, and only with shafts of little consequence.

was still a tight fit, it took him only three or four pushes to seat himself
completely in her hole. She groaned with each push, and he watched her
face for signs of distress. Instead, he was pleased to view looks of rapture at
his male intrusion. He began to move at a leisurely pace, each thrust
opening her up a little more. Each time his shaft exited her feminine
opening, he wondered at the ability of the human body to accept such an
invasion, her pussy lips so expanded, yet still so yielding. Initially, she
didn’t move—which he had expected as a result of her sexual exhaustion—
but as he drove into her, testing the limits of her womb, her lusty instincts
took over, and she moved with him, meeting him at each push, now crying
out in what almost sounded like a mixture of pleasure and pain.

He leant over, her legs still caught in the crooks of his arms, and

kissed her sumptuous lips, biting the top and bottom, imagining that they
were the sweet little dainties she had offered him on so many occasions. His
lengthy tongue plundered her mouth and deepened the kiss. Katrina
clutched his shoulders, her nails digging in as the plunging of her cunny
increased. Spurred by the shared intimacy of their joining at both manhood
and pussy, as well as mouth to mouth, Ichabod feared he would spend much
too soon. He pulled back from her lips, and looked at the farm implements
that were scattered about to distract himself. Then he noticed some leather
ties, lying loose, and imagined the delightful ways he could truss Katrina up
in them when Jonathan arrived.

I mustn’t think of that! I will lose control of my seed before I have

given Katrina another resolution.

Reciting verses in his head that he taught in his schoolroom, Ichabod

was able to continue plunging into Katrina forcefully, then he fingered her

teats, awakening them once again. She was moaning, her head thrashing
from side to side, so he knew she was close. He sat up a little more, and
using one of his hands, he slipped it down her stomach to stimulate her bud
directly.

“Oh yes! Ichabod, that is wonderful!”
She met him with each furious pump, and her whimpers turned to

cries as he wiggled her nub relentlessly. At last, she screamed, I daresay
even louder than the previous time, which would undoubtedly frighten
away any passersby, I imagine even the Hessian himself if he were to hear
her.

As she slowed her movements, he removed his hand from her slit, and

concentrated on finding his release, for his cockles could wait no longer.
Since he had not bothered with a covering—something he found distasteful
—he needed to time his emissions perfectly so that there was no risk of a
child. Until he knew for sure he had secured her heart, he didn’t want to
chance the detestable Brom raising the product of his seed.

Forcing himself to wait, in addition to being so aroused by her lustful

tales, and then feasting on her cunny, all of these things had heightened his
excitement to a monumental level. He could only imagine the fountain that
would be bursting whence he reached his own climax. It was not long in the
coming, as they say, and he yanked his shaft out, pointing it to one side, not
wishing to soil the sweet Katrina with his semen.

Spent at last, he collapsed upon her soft body, careful not to crush her

in the doing. He kissed all around her face and hair, caressing her soft skin,
murmuring little nothings to her. Katrina sighed in perfect contentment.

“I feel so complete with you, Ichabod, now that I know what true

lovemaking is, and it is not the hasty gropings of young lads spurting their
lust within a mere few minutes! Tell me more about your gentleman lover

and if he shall do similar things to me. Will he only watch us? Or will he be
a participant as well?”

will be as though the three of us are of one accord, our mouths, hands and
sex organs all combining at once, I promise you, it will be like no other
experience you can ever hope to have.”

“Dearest Ichabod, tell me the truth, will Jonathan invade your

recesses as well as mine, and will you take his member into your mouth,
suckling it to completion as I did for Brom’s friends? Please tell me this is
so, for even though I cannot fathom the possibility, just the thought of it
brings more moisture to my cunny. Will the three of us truly debauch
together in this way?”

Ichabod had to admit to himself that just hearing her tell of it was

already bringing his cock back to life. If only Jonathan could be with them
now! “Yes, yes, lovely Katrina. It shall be just as I describe. Now, before I
roll you onto your side, and plunge into your soft folds once more, please
ease my poor mind and tell me that my heart is secure in your hands.”

“Oh Ichabod, how could you ever doubt me? Were ever I to look

upon another other than you or Jonathan after this glorious night, then let
me be struck down, for I do love you, Ichabod, more than I ever knew a
woman could.”

With this declaration from the coquettish Katrina, he now felt certain

that his suit was safe, and that all he had left to do was to obtain permission
from the genteel Baltus Van Tassel for her hand, and then summon Jonathan
to their marriage bed. He would find a way to make it appear respectable,
both he and his gentleman lover had grown adept over the years at hiding
their proclivities. Ichabod hugged his prize close to his chest, and kissed her
lush lips. As he pulled away from her mouth, he smiled a lascivious grin,
and pushed her to her side.

“Ichabod, I fear you shall wear me out this night, but I beg of you, do

not even consider stopping.”

“I shall not my dear, do not fret. Now lift the knee that is on your

uppermost side here, and bring it as close to your chest as possible. Mmmm,
yes, perfect access for both of your holes.”

 
True to his word, Ichabod swived the lass until just before the telling

of the dawn, leaving her sore and well-used, and with the knowledge in one
night of all of the skills of Aphrodite. He escorted her safely back to her
parents’ home, and bade her a brief farewell, planning to state his suit to her
father very soon. But first he must send word to Jonathan, for he knew his
lover was nearing the end of his studies, and surely the joyful news of his
female find would entice Jonathan to their side forthwith.

Wending his way down the path to the most recent dwelling where he

was making his home, he pondered all they had discussed throughout the
previous eve. Although still confident in his success against his rival, he
was a prudent man, and shied from declaring definitive conclusions when
there were still matters to be finalised. For whilst some may profess to
know the perfect way that a woman’s heart is secured, I profess not to know
how women’s hearts are wooed and won.

To me they have always been matters of riddle and admiration. Some

seem to have but one vulnerable point, or door of access, while others have
a thousand avenues, and may be captured in a thousand different ways. It is
a great triumph of skill to gain the former, but a still greater proof of
generalship to maintain possession of the latter, for man must battle for his
fortress at every door and window. He who wins a thousand common hearts
is therefore entitled to some renown, but he who keeps undisputed sway

over the heart of a coquette is indeed a hero. Certain it is, this was not the
case with the redoubtable Brom Bones, and from the moment Ichabod
Crane made his advances, the interests of the former evidently declined, his
horse was no longer seen tied to the palings on Sunday nights, and a deadly
feud gradually arose between him and the preceptor of Sleepy Hollow.

Brom, who had a degree of rough chivalry in his nature, would fain

have carried matters to open warfare and have settled their pretensions to
the lady, according to the mode of those most concise and simple reasoners,
the knights-errant of yore—by single combat. But Ichabod was too
conscious of the superior might of his adversary to enter the lists against
him. He had overheard a boast of Bones that he would double the
schoolmaster up, and lay him on a shelf of his own schoolhouse, and he was
too wary to give him an opportunity. There was something extremely
provoking in this obstinately pacific system. It left Brom no alternative but
to draw upon the funds of rustic waggery in his disposition, and to play off
boorish practical jokes upon his rival.

gang of rough riders, who were also left without now that Brom was no
longer able to make the luscious Katrina available to them and their cocks.
They harried his hitherto peaceful domains, smoked out his singing school
by stopping up the chimney, broke into the schoolhouse at night, in spite of
its formidable fastenings of withe and window stakes, and turned
everything topsy-turvy, so that the poor schoolmaster began to think all the
witches in the country held their meetings there. But what was still more
annoying, Brom took all opportunities of turning him into ridicule in
presence of his mistress, and had a scoundrel dog whom he taught to whine
in the most ludicrous manner, and introduced as a rival of Ichabod’s, to
instruct her in psalmody.

In this way matters went on for some time, without producing any

material effect on the relative situations of the contending powers. Ichabod
continued in his erotic ministrations of the eager Katrina whenever they
could meet privately, and she had proved to be a much more adept student
in the fine art of passion than she ever was in the craft of singing. He tried
not to acknowledge the jesting way in which he was abused by Brom and
his cohorts, for he knew it was out of crushing defeat that they performed.
So in all ways, Ichabod should have been jolly in his daily exertions, and
assured of impending success in the hand of Katrina. Yet no message on the
post had returned yet from Jonathan, and he was beginning to fill with
anxious dread that perhaps his lover had rejected him for another in
Connecticut, or dismissed his damsel—yet without word, how could he
know?

On a fine autumnal afternoon, Ichabod, in pensive mood, sat

enthroned on the lofty stool from whence he usually watched all the
concerns of his little literary realm. In his hand he swayed a ferule—that
sceptre of despotic power, the birch of justice reposed on three nails behind
the throne, a constant terror to evildoers—while on the desk before him
might be seen sundry contraband articles and prohibited weapons, detected
upon the persons of idle urchins, such as half-munched apples, popguns,
whirligigs, fly-cages, and whole legions of rampant little paper gamecocks.
Apparently there had been some appalling act of justice recently inflicted,
for his scholars were all busily intent upon their books, or slyly whispering
behind them with one eye kept upon the master, and a kind of buzzing
stillness reigned throughout the schoolroom.

It was suddenly interrupted by the appearance of a negro in tow-cloth

jacket and trousers, a round-crowned fragment of a hat, like the cap of
Mercury, and mounted on the back of a ragged, wild, half-broken colt,
which he managed with a rope by way of halter. He came clattering up to

the school door with an invitation to Ichabod to attend a merry-making or
“quilting frolic”, to be held that evening at Mynheer Van Tassel’s, and
having delivered his message with that air of importance and effort at fine
language which a negro is apt to display on petty embassies of the kind, he
dashed over the brook, and was seen scampering away up the Hollow, full
of the importance and hurry of his mission.

All was now bustle and hubbub in the late quiet schoolroom. The

scholars were hurried through their lessons without stopping at trifles, those
who were nimble skipped over half with impunity, and those who were
tardy had a smart application now and then in the rear to quicken their
speed or help them over a tall word. Books were flung aside without being
put away on the shelves, inkstands were overturned, benches thrown down,
and the whole school was turned loose an hour before the usual time,
bursting forth like a legion of young imps, yelping and racketing about the
green in joy at their early emancipation.

The gallant Ichabod now spent at least an extra half hour at his toilet,

brushing and furbishing up his best, and indeed only suit of rusty black, and
arranging his locks by a bit of broken looking-glass that hung up in the
schoolhouse. For he had decided that he could tarry no longer, tonight must
be the night that he secured Katrina’s hand from Baltus, with or without
word from Jonathan.

That he might make his appearance before his mistress in the true

style of a cavalier, he borrowed a horse from the farmer with whom he was
domiciliated, a choleric old Dutchman of the name of Hans Van Ripper, and
thus gallantly mounted, issued forth like a knight-errant in quest of
adventures. But it is meet I should, in the true spirit of romantic story, give
some account of the looks and equipments of my hero and his steed.

The animal he bestrode was a broken-down plough-horse that had

outlived almost everything but its viciousness. He was gaunt and shagged,

with a ewe neck and a head like a hammer, his rusty mane and tail were
tangled and knotted with burrs, one eye had lost its pupil and was glaring
and spectral, but the other had the gleam of a genuine devil in it. Still he
must have had fire and mettle in his day, if we may judge from the name he
bore of Gunpowder. He had in fact been a favourite steed of his master’s,
the choleric Van Ripper, who was a furious rider and had infused, very
probably, some of his own spirit into the animal, for old and broken-down
as he looked, there was more of the lurking devil in him than in any young
filly in the country.

stirrups, which brought his knees nearly up to the pommel of the saddle, his
sharp elbows stuck out like grasshoppers’, he carried his whip
perpendicularly in his hand, like a sceptre, and as his horse jogged on, the
motion of his arms was not unlike the flapping of a pair of wings. A small
wool hat rested on the top of his nose, for so his scanty strip of forehead
might be called, and the skirts of his black coat fluttered out almost to the
horse’s tail. Such was the appearance of Ichabod and his steed as they
shambled out of the gate of Hans Van Ripper, and it was altogether such an
apparition as is seldom to be met with in broad daylight.

It was, as I have said, a fine autumnal day, the sky was clear and

serene, and nature wore that rich and golden livery which we always
associate with the idea of abundance. The forests had put on their sober
brown and yellow, while some trees of the tenderer kind had been nipped by
the frosts into brilliant dyes of orange, purple and scarlet. Streaming files of
wild ducks began to make their appearance high in the air, the bark of the
squirrel might be heard from the groves of beech and hickory-nuts and the
pensive whistle of the quail at intervals from the neighbouring stubble field.

The small birds were taking their farewell banquets. In the fullness of

their revelry, they fluttered chirping and frolicking from bush to bush and

tree to tree, capricious from the very profusion and variety around them.
There was the honest cock robin, the favourite game of stripling sportsmen,
with its loud querulous note, and the twittering blackbirds flying in sable
clouds, and the golden-winged woodpecker with his crimson crest, his
broad black gorget and splendid plumage, and the cedar bird, with its red-
tipped wings and yellow-tipped tail and its little monteiro cap of feathers,
and the blue jay, that noisy coxcomb, in his gay light blue coat and white
underclothes, screaming and chattering, nodding and bobbing and bowing,
and pretending to be on good terms with every songster of the grove.

As Ichabod jogged slowly on his way, his eye, ever open to every

symptom of culinary abundance, ranged with delight over the treasures of
jolly autumn. On all sides he beheld vast store of apples, some hanging in
oppressive opulence on the trees, some gathered into baskets and barrels for
the market, others heaped up in rich piles for the cider-press. Farther on he
beheld great fields of Indian corn, with its golden ears peeping from their
leafy coverts and holding out the promise of cakes and hasty-pudding, and
the yellow pumpkins lying beneath them, turning up their fair round bellies
to the sun, and giving ample prospects of the most luxurious of pies. Anon
he passed the fragrant buckwheat fields breathing the odour of the beehive,
and as he beheld them, soft anticipations stole over his mind of dainty
slapjacks, well-buttered, and garnished with honey or treacle, by the
delicate little dimpled hand of Katrina Van Tassel.

Thus feeding his mind with many sweet thoughts and ‘sugared

suppositions’, he dreamt in that drowsy sort of way that one does when the
promise of complete contentment is on the horizon. For soon, he and the
lusty Katrina would have the blessing of her father, and even though he still
fretted over his long-time gentleman lover, he refused to give in to a dark
melancholy. Surely there was good reason for a delay in his
communications. So Ichabod instead gave himself over to the delectable

imaginings of the household the three of them would share once all was
finally decided. By day, there would be exquisite fare for them all to feast
upon, meats in rich sauces, roasted potatoes with honeyed fruits, and in the
eve, they would be tempted by cakes, creams and wines that could also be
used in their amorous explorations.

He journeyed along the sides of a range of hills which look out upon

some of the goodliest scenes of the mighty Hudson. The sun gradually
wheeled his broad disk down in the west. The wide bosom of the Tappan
Zee lay motionless and glassy, excepting that here and there a gentle
undulation waved and prolonged the blue shadow of the distant mountain.
A few amber clouds floated in the sky, without a breath of air to move
them. The horizon was of a fine golden tint, changing gradually into a pure
apple green, and from that into the deep blue of the mid-heaven. A slanting
ray lingered on the woody crests of the precipices that overhung some parts
of the river, giving greater depth to the dark grey and purple of their rocky
sides. A sloop was loitering in the distance, dropping slowly down with the
tide, her sail hanging uselessly against the mast, and as the reflection of the
sky gleamed along the still water, it seemed as if the vessel was suspended
in the air.

It was toward evening that Ichabod arrived at the castle of the Heer

Van Tassel, which he found thronged with the pride and flower of the
adjacent country. Old farmers, a spare leathern-faced race, in homespun
coats and breeches, blue stockings, huge shoes, and magnificent pewter
buckles. Their brisk, withered little dames, in close-crimped caps, long-
waisted short gowns, homespun petticoats, with scissors and pincushions,
and gay calico pockets hanging on the outside. Buxom lasses, almost as
antiquated as their mothers, excepting where a straw hat, a fine ribbon or
perhaps a white frock gave symptoms of city innovation. The sons, in short
square-skirted coats with rows of stupendous brass buttons, and their hair

generally queued in the fashion of the times, especially if they could
procure an eel-skin for the purpose, it being esteemed throughout the
country as a potent nourisher and strengthener of the hair.

Brom Bones, however, was the hero of the scene, having come to the

gathering on his favourite steed Daredevil, a creature, like himself, full of
mettle and mischief, and which no one but himself could manage. He was,
in fact, noted for preferring vicious animals, given to all kinds of tricks
which kept the rider in constant risk of his neck, for he held a tractable,
well-broken horse as unworthy of a lad of spirit.

Fain would I pause to dwell upon the world of charms that burst upon

the enraptured gaze of my hero as he entered the state parlour of Van
Tassel’s mansion. Not those of the bevy of buxom lasses, with their
luxurious display of red and white, but the ample charms of a genuine
Dutch country tea-table in the sumptuous time of autumn. Such heaped-up
platters of cakes of various and almost indescribable kinds, known only to
experienced Dutch housewives! There was the doughty doughnut, the
tender oly koek, and the crisp and crumbling cruller, sweet cakes and short
cakes, ginger cakes and honey cakes and the whole family of cakes. And
then there were apple pies and peach pies and pumpkin pies, besides slices
of ham and smoked beef, and moreover delectable dishes of preserved
plums, and peaches, and pears, and quinces, not to mention broiled shad and
roasted chickens, together with bowls of milk and cream, all mingled
higgledy-piggledy, pretty much as I have enumerated them, with the
motherly teapot sending up its clouds of vapour from the midst—Heaven
bless the mark! I want breath and time to discuss this banquet as it deserves,
and am too eager to get on with my story. Happily, Ichabod Crane was not
in so great a hurry as his historian, but did ample justice to every dainty.

He was a kind and thankful creature, whose heart dilated in

proportion as his skin was filled with good cheer, and whose spirits rose

with eating, as some men’s do with drink. He could not help, too, rolling his
large eyes round him as he ate, and chuckling with the possibility that he
might one day be lord of all this scene of almost unimaginable luxury and
splendour. Then, he thought, how soon he’d turn his back upon the old
schoolhouse, snap his fingers in the face of Hans Van Ripper and every
other niggardly patron, and kick any itinerant pedagogue out of doors that
should dare to call him comrade!

Old Baltus Van Tassel moved about among his guests with a face

dilated with content and good humour, round and jolly as the harvest moon.
His hospitable attentions were brief but expressive, being confined to a
shake of the hand, a slap on the shoulder, a loud laugh, and a pressing
invitation to fall to and help themselves.

And now the sound of the music from the common room, or hall,

summoned to the dance. The musician was an old grey-headed negro, who
had been the itinerant orchestra of the neighbourhood for more than half a
century. His instrument was as old and battered as himself. The greater part
of the time he scraped on two or three strings, accompanying every
movement of the bow with a motion of the head, bowing almost to the
ground, and stamping with his foot whenever a fresh couple were to start.

Ichabod prided himself upon his dancing as much as upon his vocal

powers. Not a limb, not a fibre about him was idle, and to have seen his
loosely hung frame in full motion and clattering about the room, you would
have thought St Vitus himself, that blessed patron of the dance, was figuring
before you in person. He was the admiration of all the negroes, who having
gathered, of all ages and sizes, from the farm and the neighbourhood, stood
forming a pyramid of shining black faces at every door and window, gazing
with delight at the scene, rolling their white eyeballs, and showing grinning
rows of ivory from ear to ear. How could the flogger of urchins be
otherwise than animated and joyous? The lady of his heart was his partner

in the dance, and smiling graciously in reply to all his amorous oglings,
while Brom Bones, sorely smitten with love and jealousy, sat brooding by
himself in one corner.

When the dance was at an end, Ichabod was attracted to a knot of the

sager folks, who, with Old Van Tassel, sat smoking at one end of the piazza,
gossiping over former times and drawing out long stories about the war.

This neighbourhood, at the time of which I am speaking, was one of

those highly favoured places which abound with chronicle and great men.
The British and American line had run near it during the war, it had,
therefore, been the scene of marauding and infested with refugees, cowboys
and all kinds of border chivalry. Just sufficient time had elapsed to enable
each storyteller to dress up his tale with a little becoming fiction, and in the
indistinctness of his recollection, to make himself the hero of every exploit.

There was the story of Doffue Martling, a large blue-bearded

Dutchman, who had nearly taken a British frigate with an old iron nine-
pounder from a mud breastwork, only that his gun burst at the sixth
discharge. And there was an old gentleman who shall be nameless, being
too rich a mynheer to be lightly mentioned, who, in the battle of White
Plains, being an excellent master of defence, parried a musket-ball with a
small sword, insomuch that he absolutely felt it whiz round the blade and
glance off at the hilt, in proof of which he was ready at any time to show the
sword, with the hilt a little bent. There were several more that had been
equally great in the field, not one of whom but was persuaded that he had a
considerable hand in bringing the war to a happy termination.

But all these were nothing to the tales of ghosts and apparitions that

succeeded. The neighbourhood is rich in legendary treasures of the kind.
Local tales and superstitions thrive best in these sheltered, long-settled
retreats, but are trampled underfoot by the shifting throng that forms the
population of most of our country places. Besides, there is no

encouragement for ghosts in most of our villages, for they have scarcely
had time to finish their first nap and turn themselves in their graves before
their surviving friends have travelled away from the neighbourhood, so that
when they turn out at night to walk their rounds they have no acquaintance
left to call upon. This is perhaps the reason why we so seldom hear of
ghosts except in our long-established Dutch communities.

The immediate cause however of the prevalence of supernatural

stories in these parts, was doubtless owing to the vicinity of Sleepy Hollow.
There was a contagion in the very air that blew from that haunted region, it
breathed forth an atmosphere of dreams and fancies infecting all the land.
Several of the Sleepy Hollow people were present at Van Tassel’s, and as
usual, were doling out their wild and wonderful legends. Many dismal tales
were told about funeral trains, and mourning cries and wailings heard and
seen about the great tree where the unfortunate Major André was taken, and
which stood in the neighbourhood. Some mention was made also of the
woman in white that haunted the dark glen at Raven Rock, and was often
heard to shriek on winter nights before a storm, having perished there in the
snow. The chief part of the stories, however, turned upon the favourite
spectre of Sleepy Hollow, the Headless Horseman, who had been heard
several times of late, patrolling the country, and it was said, tethered his
horse nightly among the graves in the churchyard.

The sequestered situation of this church seems always to have made it

a favourite haunt of troubled spirits. It stands on a knoll, surrounded by
locust-trees and lofty elms, from among which its decent, whitewashed
walls shine modestly forth, like Christian purity beaming through the
shades of retirement. A gentle slope descends from it to a silver sheet of
water, bordered by high trees, between which peeps may be caught at the
blue hills of the Hudson. To look upon its grass-grown yard where the

sunbeams seem to sleep so quietly, one would think that there at least the
dead might rest in peace.

On one side of the church extends a wide woody dell, along which

raves a large brook among broken rocks and trunks of fallen trees. Over a
deep black part of the stream, not far from the church, was formerly thrown
a wooden bridge. The road that led to it and the bridge itself were thickly
shaded by overhanging trees, which cast a gloom about it even in the
daytime, but occasioned a fearful darkness at night. Such was one of the
favourite haunts of the Headless Horseman, and the place where he was
most frequently encountered.

The tale was told of old Brouwer, a most heretical disbeliever in

ghosts, how he met the Horseman returning from his foray into Sleepy
Hollow, and was obliged to get up behind him—how they galloped over
bush and brake, over hill and swamp, until they reached the bridge—when
the Horseman suddenly turned into a skeleton, threw old Brouwer into the
brook, and sprang away over the tree-tops with a clap of thunder.

of Brom Bones, who made light of the Galloping Hessian as an arrant
jockey. He affirmed that on returning one night from the neighbouring
village of Sing Sing, he had been overtaken by this midnight trooper, that he
had offered to race with him for a bowl of punch, and should have won it
too, for Daredevil beat the goblin horse all hollow, but just as they came to
the church bridge, the Hessian bolted and vanished in a flash of fire.

All these tales, told in that drowsy undertone with which men talk in

the dark, the countenances of the listeners only now and then receiving a
casual gleam from the glare of a pipe, sank deep in the mind of Ichabod. He
repaid them in kind with large extracts from his invaluable author, Cotton
Mather, and added many marvellous events that had taken place in his

native State of Connecticut, and fearful sights which he had seen in his
nightly walks about Sleepy Hollow.

their families in their wagons, and were heard for some time rattling along
the hollow roads, and over the distant hills. Some of the damsels mounted
on pillions behind their favourite swains, and their light-hearted laughter,
mingling with the clatter of hoofs, echoed along the silent woodlands
sounding fainter and fainter until they gradually died away—and the late
scene of noise and frolic was all silent and deserted. Ichabod only lingered
behind, according to the custom of country lovers, to have a tête-à-tête with
the heiress, fully convinced that he was now on the high road to success.

For a brief time he could not find his lady fair, but at last she

appeared, and they made haste to their usual trysting place. What passed at
this interview I will not pretend to say, for in fact I do not know. That is to
say, it is not for us to know at this juncture in our tale. Something, however,
I fear me, must have gone wrong, for he certainly sallied forth, after no very
great interval, with an air quite desolate and chapfallen.

Oh, these women! These women! Could that girl have been playing

off any of her coquettish tricks? Was her encouragement of the poor
pedagogue all a mere sham to secure her conquest of his rival? Heaven only
knows, not I! Let it suffice to say, Ichabod stole forth with the air of one
who had been sacking a henroost, rather than a fair lady’s heart. Without
looking to the right or left to notice the scene of rural wealth on which he
had so often gloated, he went straight to the stable and with several hearty
cuffs and kicks roused his steed most uncourteously from the comfortable
quarters in which he was soundly sleeping, dreaming of mountains of corn
and oats, and whole valleys of timothy and clover.

It was the very witching time of night that Ichabod, heavy-hearted and

crestfallen, pursued his travels homewards along the sides of the lofty hills

which rise above Tarry Town and which he had traversed so cheerily in the
afternoon. The hour was as dismal as himself. Far below him the Tappan
Zee spread its dusky and indistinct waste of waters, with here and there the
tall mast of a sloop riding quietly at anchor under the land. In the dead hush
of midnight, he could even hear the barking of the watchdog from the
opposite shore of the Hudson, but it was so vague and faint as only to give
an idea of his distance from this faithful companion of man. Now and then
too, the long-drawn crowing of a cock, accidentally awakened, would sound
far, far off, from some farmhouse away among the hills—but it was like a
dreaming sound in his ear. No signs of life occurred near him, but
occasionally the melancholy chirp of a cricket, or perhaps the guttural
twang of a bullfrog from a neighbouring marsh, as if sleeping
uncomfortably and turning suddenly in his bed.

All the stories of ghosts and goblins that he had heard in the afternoon

now came crowding upon his recollection. The night grew darker and
darker, the stars seemed to sink deeper in the sky, and driving clouds
occasionally hid them from his sight. He had never felt so lonely and
dismal. He was, moreover, approaching the very place where many of the
scenes of the ghost stories had been laid. In the centre of the road stood an
enormous tulip-tree, which towered like a giant above all the other trees of
the neighbourhood, and formed a kind of landmark. Its limbs were gnarled
and fantastic, large enough to form trunks for ordinary trees, twisting down
almost to the earth, and rising again into the air. It was connected with the
tragical story of the unfortunate André, who had been taken prisoner hard
by, and was universally known by the name of Major André’s tree. The
common people regarded it with a mixture of respect and superstition,
partly out of sympathy for the fate of its ill-starred namesake, and partly
from the tales of strange sights and doleful lamentations told concerning it.

As Ichabod approached this fearful tree, he began to whistle. He

thought his whistle was answered, it was but a blast sweeping sharply
through the dry branches. As he approached a little nearer, he thought he
saw something white hanging in the midst of the tree. He paused and ceased
whistling but on looking more narrowly, perceived that it was a place where
the tree had been scathed by lightning and the white wood laid bare.
Suddenly he heard a groan—his teeth chattered, and his knees smote against
the saddle. It was but the rubbing of one huge bough upon another, as they
were swayed about by the breeze. He passed the tree in safety, but new
perils lay before him.

About two hundred yards from the tree, a small brook crossed the

road and ran into a marshy and thickly-wooded glen, known by the name of
Wiley’s Swamp. A few rough logs, laid side by side, served for a bridge
over this stream. On that side of the road where the brook entered the wood,
a group of oaks and chestnuts, matted thick with wild grape-vines, threw a
cavernous gloom over it. To pass this bridge was the severest trial. It was at
this identical spot that the unfortunate André was captured, and under the
covert of those chestnuts and vines were the sturdy yeomen concealed who
surprised him. This has ever since been considered a haunted stream, and
fearful are the feelings of the schoolboy who has to pass it alone after dark.

As he approached the stream, his heart began to thump. He

summoned up however all his resolution, gave his horse half a score of
kicks in the ribs, and attempted to dash briskly across the bridge. But
instead of starting forward, the perverse old animal made a lateral
movement, and ran broadside against the fence. Ichabod, whose fears
increased with the delay, jerked the reins on the other side, and kicked
lustily with the contrary foot. It was all in vain. His steed started, it is true,
but it was only to plunge to the opposite side of the road into a thicket of
brambles and alder bushes. The schoolmaster now bestowed both whip and

heel upon the starveling ribs of old Gunpowder, who dashed forward,
snuffling and snorting, but came to a stand just by the bridge with a
suddenness that had nearly sent his rider sprawling over his head.

Just at this moment a plashy tramp by the side of the bridge caught

the sensitive ear of Ichabod. In the dark shadow of the grove, on the margin
of the brook, he beheld something huge, misshapen and towering. It stirred
not, but seemed gathered up in the gloom, like some gigantic monster ready
to spring upon the traveller.

The hair of the affrighted pedagogue rose upon his head with terror.

What was to be done? To turn and fly was now too late, and besides, what
chance was there of escaping ghost or goblin, if such it was, which could
ride upon the wings of the wind? Summoning up, therefore, a show of
courage, he demanded in stammering accents, “Who are you?”

He received no reply. He repeated his demand in a still more agitated

voice. Still there was no answer. Once more he cudgelled the sides of the
inflexible Gunpowder, and shutting his eyes, broke forth with involuntary
fervour into a psalm tune. Just then the shadowy object of alarm put itself in
motion, and with a scramble and a bound stood at once in the middle of the
road.

Though the night was dark and dismal, yet the form of the unknown

might now in some degree be ascertained. He appeared to be a horseman of
large dimensions, and mounted on a black horse of powerful frame. He
made no offer of molestation or sociability, but kept aloof on one side of the
road, jogging along on the blind side of old Gunpowder, who had now got
over his fright and waywardness.

Ichabod, who had no relish for this strange midnight companion, and

bethought himself of the adventure of Brom Bones with the Galloping
Hessian, now quickened his steed in hopes of leaving him behind. The
stranger, however, quickened his horse to an equal pace. Ichabod pulled up,

and fell into a walk, thinking to lag behind—the other did the same. His
heart began to sink within him, he endeavoured to resume his psalm tune,
but his parched tongue clove to the roof of his mouth and he could not utter
a stave. There was something in the moody and dogged silence of this
pertinacious companion that was mysterious and appalling.

It was soon fearfully accounted for. On mounting a rising ground,

which brought the figure of his fellow-traveller in relief against the sky,
gigantic in height and muffled in a cloak, Ichabod was horror-struck on
perceiving that he was headless! But his horror was still more increased on
observing that the head which should have rested on his shoulders was
carried before him on the pommel of his saddle.

His terror rose to desperation, he rained a shower of kicks and blows

upon Gunpowder, hoping by a sudden movement to give his companion the
slip, but the spectre started full jump with him. Away then they dashed
through thick and thin, stones flying and sparks flashing at every bound.
Ichabod’s flimsy garments fluttered in the air as he stretched his long lank
body away over his horse’s head in the eagerness of his flight.

Gunpowder, who seemed possessed with a demon, instead of keeping up it,
made an opposite turn, and plunged headlong downhill to the left. This road
leads through a sandy hollow shaded by trees for about a quarter of a mile,
where it crosses the bridge famous in goblin story, and just beyond swells
the green knoll on which stands the whitewashed church.

As yet the panic of the steed had given his unskilful rider an apparent

advantage in the chase, but just as he had got halfway through the Hollow,
the girths of the saddle gave way and he felt it slipping from under him. He
seized it by the pommel and endeavoured to hold it firm, but in vain, and
had just time to save himself by clasping old Gunpowder round the neck,
when the saddle fell to the earth, and he heard it trampled underfoot by his

pursuer. For a moment the terror of Hans Van Ripper’s wrath passed across
his mind—for it was his Sunday saddle. But this was no time for petty fears,
the goblin was hard on his haunches, and—unskilful rider that he was—he
had much ado to maintain his seat, sometimes slipping on one side,
sometimes on another and sometimes jolted on the high ridge of his horse’s
backbone with a violence that he verily feared would cleave him asunder.

An opening in the trees now cheered him with the hopes that the

church bridge was at hand. The wavering reflection of a silver star in the
bosom of the brook told him that he was not mistaken. He saw the walls of
the church dimly glaring under the trees beyond. He recollected the place
where Brom Bones’ ghostly competitor had disappeared. If I can but reach
that bridge, thought Ichabod, I am safe. Just then he heard the black steed
panting and blowing close behind him. He even fancied that he felt his hot
breath. Another convulsive kick in the ribs, and old Gunpowder sprang
upon the bridge. He thundered over the resounding planks. He gained the
opposite side, and now Ichabod cast a look behind to see if his pursuer
should vanish, according to rule, in a flash of fire and brimstone. Just then
he saw the goblin rising in his stirrups, and in the very act of hurling his
head at him. Ichabod endeavoured to dodge the horrible missile, but too
late. It encountered his cranium with a tremendous crash—he was tumbled
headlong into the dust, and Gunpowder, the black steed and the goblin rider
passed by like a whirlwind.

The next morning the old horse was found without his saddle, and

with the bridle under his feet, soberly cropping the grass at his master’s
gate. Ichabod did not make his appearance at breakfast. Dinner-hour came,
but no Ichabod. The boys assembled at the schoolhouse, and strolled idly
about the banks of the brook, but no schoolmaster. Hans Van Ripper now
began to feel some uneasiness about the fate of poor Ichabod, and his
saddle. An inquiry was set on foot, and after diligent investigation they

came upon his traces. In one part of the road leading to the church was
found the saddle trampled in the dirt. The tracks of horses’ hoofs deeply
dented in the road, and evidently at furious speed, were traced to the bridge,
beyond which, on the bank of a broad part of the brook, where the water ran
deep and black, was found the hat of the unfortunate Ichabod, and close
beside it a shattered pumpkin.

be discovered. Hans Van Ripper as executor of his estate, examined the
bundle which contained all his worldly effects. They consisted of two shirts
and a half, two stocks for the neck, a pair or two of worsted stockings, an
old pair of corduroy small-clothes, a rusty razor, a book of psalm tunes full
of dog’s-ears, and a broken pitch-pipe. As to the books and furniture of the
schoolhouse, they belonged to the community, excepting Cotton Mather’s
History of Witchcraft, a New England Almanac, and a book of dreams and
fortune-telling, in which last was a sheet of foolscap much scribbled and
blotted in several fruitless attempts to make a copy of verses in honour of
the heiress of Van Tassel. These magic books and the poetic scrawl were
forthwith consigned to the flames by Hans Van Ripper, who, from that time
forward, determined to send his children no more to school, observing that
he never knew any good come of this same reading and writing. Whatever
money the schoolmaster possessed, and he had received his quarter’s pay
but a day or two before, he must have had about his person at the time of his
disappearance.

The mysterious event caused much speculation at the church on the

following Sunday. Knots of gazers and gossips were collected in the
churchyard, at the bridge and at the spot where the hat and pumpkin had
been found. The stories of Brouwer, of Bones, and a whole budget of others
were called to mind, and when they had diligently considered them all and
compared them with the symptoms of the present case, they shook their

heads, and came to the conclusion that Ichabod had been carried off by the
Galloping Hessian. As he was a bachelor, and in nobody’s debt, nobody
troubled his head any more about him, the school was removed to a
different quarter of the Hollow, and another pedagogue reigned in his stead.

It is true, an old farmer who had been down to New York on a visit

several years after, and from whom this account of the ghostly adventure
was received, brought home the intelligence that Ichabod Crane was still
alive—that he had left the neighbourhood partly through fear of the goblin
and Hans Van Ripper, and partly in mortification at having been suddenly
dismissed by the heiress, that he had changed his quarters to a distant part
of the country, had kept school and studied law at the same time, had been
admitted to the bar, turned politician, electioneered, written for the
newspapers and finally had been made a justice of the Ten Pound Court.
Brom Bones too, who, shortly after his rival’s disappearance conducted the
blooming Katrina in triumph to the altar, was observed to look exceedingly
knowing whenever the story of Ichabod was related, and always burst into a
hearty laugh at the mention of the pumpkin, which led some to suspect that
he knew more about the matter than he chose to tell. It is incredibly ironic
then, that a similar fate should befall the seemingly triumphant Brom Bones
but a few weeks after his successful suit in gaining the damsel Katrina’s
hand.

The old country wives however who are the best judges of these

matters, maintain to this day that Ichabod was spirited away by supernatural
means, and it is a favourite story often told about the neighbourhood round
the winter evening fire. The bridge became more than ever an object of
superstitious awe, and that may be the reason why the road has been altered
of late years, so as to approach the church by the border of the millpond.
The schoolhouse being deserted soon fell to decay, and was reported to be
haunted by the ghost of the unfortunate pedagogue, and the ploughboy,

loitering homeward of a still summer evening, has often fancied his voice at
a distance, chanting a melancholy psalm tune among the tranquil solitudes
of Sleepy Hollow.

 
The preceding tale is given almost in the precise words in which I

heard it related at a Corporation meeting at the ancient city of Manhattoes,
at which were present many of its sagest and most illustrious burghers. The
narrator was a pleasant, shabby, gentlemanly fellow in pepper-and-salt
clothes, with a sadly humorous face, and one whom one could easily
strongly suspect of being poor—he made such efforts to be entertaining.
When his story was concluded, there was much laughter and approbation,
particularly from two or three deputy aldermen, who had been asleep the
greater part of the time.

There was, however, one tall, dry-looking old gentleman with

beetling eyebrows who maintained a grave and rather severe face
throughout, now and then folding his arms, inclining his head, and looking
down upon the floor, as if turning a doubt over in his mind. He was one of
your wary men, who never laugh but upon good grounds—when they have
reason and law on their side. When the mirth of the rest of the company had
subsided, and silence was restored, he leaned one arm on the elbow of his
chair, and sticking the other akimbo, demanded, with a slight but
exceedingly sage motion of the head and contraction of the brow, what was
the moral of the story, and what it went to prove?

The storyteller, who was just putting a glass of wine to his lips, as a

refreshment after his toils, paused for a moment, looked at his inquirer with

an air of infinite deference, and lowering the glass slowly to the table,
observed that the story was intended most logically to prove—

“That there is no situation in life but has its advantages and pleasures

—provided we will but take a joke as we find it.

“That, therefore, he that runs races with goblin troopers is likely to

have rough riding of it.

heiress is a certain step to high preferment in the state.”

The cautious old gentleman knit his brows tenfold closer after this

explanation, being sorely puzzled by the ratiocination of the syllogism,
while, methought, the one in pepper-and-salt eyed him with something of a
triumphant leer. At length he observed that all this was very well, but still
he thought the story a little on the extravagant—there were one or two
points on which he had his doubts.

“Faith, sir,” replied the storyteller, “as to that matter, I don’t believe

one-half of it myself.”

 
If you haven’t guessed by now, dear reader, the narrator of this

amazing tale was my long-lost Ichabod, and I, Diedrich Knickerbocker, am
the gentleman lover known in the aforementioned account as ‘Jonathan’. I
am of an age now that I can no longer let the details of our time with the
winsome Katrina go unrecorded, lest she only be remembered as the
coquette of Sleepy Hollow, so I must add this to Ichabod’s first part of the
story.

Never has there been a more willing and luscious beauty than Katrina.

I daresay I am not exaggerating in the least, for both Ichabod and I had tried
many lovely ladies over the years before she crossed our path. To be more

accurate, as you well know, she crossed Ichabod’s path, and had I been able
to keep our appointment the night of the quilting frolic, things might have
gone differently. However, as it happened, with but a little trouble, and the
unknowing help of the dreadful Hessian, we were able to change what had
seemed to be a foregone conclusion. So indulge me if you will a little
further, as I take you back to the night when my schoolmaster met with our
future bride, only to discover some very disturbing news.

 
The lovers had made their way to the hayloft, and already Ichabod

could tell that something was worrying his sweet Katrina. Once they settled
in the loft, he reached for her, but shockingly, she pushed him away, and
turned her head from him.

“What is this? Are you not pleased to finally be alone with me this

eve? Have I done something to offend you, my sweeting?”

She shook her head slightly, biting her lip in that delicious way, and

took to weeping in her hands.

“Oh love, my love, may the heavens pour their wrath upon me if I

have done anything to hurt you—pray tell, what is it?” pleaded Ichabod.

At last, she stopped her weeping long enough to look at him, her face

wan and tear-streaked. “It is not you, my dearest. But I have the worst news
ever. Brom has reached the end of his patience, and is insisting upon my
hand.”

Ichabod laughed heartily at this pronouncement. “Oh, my love, you

had me so worried. Why, that is nothing! He cannot press his suit, when you
have made your choice.” At that, Ichabod took pause, for he had a sudden
twinge that maybe Katrina was tired of waiting for my ready and able prick

to service her, and had decided to jump over to Brom’s—and his gang’s—
side.

“If only it were that simple, my darling! You do not perceive the rest,

for he has determined that he will tell my father, the parson, and everyone
in the village who would be of a mind to cast me out, that I came to him and
his gang one night, fed them some witch’s potion, removed my clothing and
seduced them all into an orgy of physical sins! That I led them to abuse me,
and milked each one of their cocks with my mouth, and well, oh Ichabod—
it is too terrible!”

My lover became filled with seething rage that this swain Bones

would have the nerve to threaten his precious love. Why, the idea that he
would use her natural ability to be open and willing in all aspects of
lovemaking against her, when he was the very one who had initiated her
first—why, the whole situation was ghastly, and Ichabod was filled with so
much anger he could not see the solution for it.

“I swear to you, Katrina, I will not let him mistreat you in this way! I

had believed my dear Diedrich would have arrived by now, for surely if he
had, he would be able to see the answer clearly. I’m afraid my mind is too
cloudy with thundering fury to be able to set things to rights this very eve.
Pray, give me tonight to ponder on it, and I shall find a way out for you and
for us.”

She threw herself into his arms. “Oh, Ichabod, I knew you would help

me. But it is crucial my father never find out about any of my nocturnal
activities—either with you or Brom and his gang—for he would withhold
his inheritance, and I fear no one would want me then. The town may turn a
blind eye to lovers courting one another in an enthusiastic fashion, but the
sport I have engaged in with multiple swains is beyond even their
understanding.”

She looked pleadingly into Ichabod’s eyes, for it was always the

concern every young heiress had when playing for the right suitor. He
absorbed this bit of information, and found something very strange
happening to him. He didn’t care whether she had the fields and crops and
household amenities—none of that mattered to him so dear as her lovely
heart and body.

“For you, Katrina,” he said solemnly, “I will find a way so that you

may keep your inheritance. But if it should be ripped from you for any
reason, know that you shall always be my true love, and that we would still
find a way to be together.”

With this declaration, she kissed him deeply on the lips. He reached

down to her waist to pull her blouse loose, ready to feel the warmth of her
tight warm cunny on his cock, a blessing before he went on his way.
Suddenly, there was a rustle in the barn below, for though it was night-time,
there were still workers about, cleaning up after the party.

Katrina froze against his body and put her finger to her lips. They

clutched each other in their stillness, until at last the intruder left.

told me he had something to take care of, but that he would be back—even
if the hour were very late—to ask for my hand from my father. He said if I
protest, he will out with his story.”

“Ye gads! So soon he makes his move?” Ichabod was once again

filled with anger. I’m afraid a bit of it was directed at me, for I have always
been the one who can deduce the best strategies in any of life’s quandaries,
and I had not arrived yet as he had expected. Little did he know, there was
nothing for it, as I had not received his post until much later, it having been
delivered to the wrong residence. At that very moment I was on my way to
the Hollow, but I was half a day behind in my journey, due to the confusion.

Ripper’s. Possibly a message from Diedrich awaits, and that will inspire an
answer.”

Katrina slumped down on the hay. “I’m afraid I can’t see how. I fear

this is our last time together—oh, it is too much for me to bear!”

With that, she fell upon the hay, crying loudly. Ichabod was in such a

rage over her hurt and the cruel Brom Bones that he needed to quit the barn
and his lady before he did something they would all regret.

Leaning over her sobbing form, he clutched her shoulders and

promised, “My love, we will all be together, you will get your inheritance,
somehow it will all come to pass. I shall never give up on our love,
dearest.”

With that, he kissed the top of her head, gave her shoulders a squeeze,

and crept quietly down the ladder, in case another farm hand were present.

The next part you well know, for it was after leaving the despondent

Katrina that Ichabod supposedly met up with the legendary Hessian. As it
turns out, there is good reason that Brom Bones found Ichabod’s terrifying
adventure so hilarious, for it was he that wore the guise of the headless
horseman, and lobbed the giant pumpkin that knocked Ichabod out for quite
a few hours on the embankment.

Fortunately, it was I who found him, and with a gasp of fear, I turned

him over and found that whilst he was suffering from quite a lump on his
noggin, he was still breathing strongly. So I loaded him into my carriage,
took us back to Tarry Town where I rented a lodge, and nursed him back to
health. I had many worried nights when he called out in a feverish state,
muttering curses, swearing his love to Katrina, and yelling that the
horseman was nigh and that all should run for their lives. It got so bad that
at one point I agonised over whether he should ever be in his right mind

again. At last, one morning but two weeks from Thanksgiving, he awoke,
and was astonished to be in the strange room with me at this side.

“My God, Diedrich, I swear I must be in some sort of world in

between worlds, for I know not where I am, how I got here, how you came
to be by my side, and if any of my lascivious escapades with the lass
Katrina ever occurred. Pray tell me what in the devil’s name happened to
me?”

Of course, there was only my side in the telling, and I had to begin

my tale with why I was late and how I found him on the embankment, and
went from there. His story was ever more shocking, for he gave me all of
the amazing details of the previous month’s doings, the Horseman, and his
wooing of Katrina, including some very explicit tellings of what he had
engaged in with the lass. The intricacies of that part of his account were
causing my manhood to press most disagreeably against my pants, and I
wished that my lover, whom I’d been without for some time, were in a
better state to ease me of my discomforts.

Once his tale was complete, I was concerned that we might already be

too late to rightfully secure Katrina’s hand. It would seem from Ichabod’s
description of their final conversation together that Bones was determined
to push things to his favour as quickly as he could. I decided that the first
course of action should necessarily be to discover where we stood, and that
would mean that I should ride into Sleepy Hollow for the purpose of
enquiring about any possible tracts of land for sale, and see what I might
ascertain.

Ichabod demanded that I leave at once, but I was loath to abandon

him to fend for himself as he had just awakened from his injury. He was
most insistent, and was in such an agitated state, that I was certain my
staying would do him more harm than good. After securing provisions for
him, packing a satchel and gathering as much information to advance our

cause as I could, I set off for the Hollow, which was but a short distance
away.

I arrived late afternoon—just as the day’s sun was threatening to give

up on the horizon—so I thought it best to procure lodgings for the night. In
addition, innkeepers can be a very useful sort when it comes to obtaining as
much of the local town gossip as possible, and the withered old gentleman
who owned the one inn in the village was no different.

“I hear this valley is agreeable to a myriad of farming pursuits. I

myself am looking to purchase a small tract of land, perhaps even part of a
larger farm, to start my own humble concern. Are you aware of any
landowners nearby that have an abundance of good, farmable land?”

“Well thar, young sir, the most obvious place would be the Van Tassel

residence, his land be the best thar is. But ye don’t seem the farmin’ type, if
yer don’t mind me saying so, such a refined gentleman ye be. Still, I guess
we all have our dreams and wishes, but I don’t see that this weekend be a
fittin’ time to bother ol’ Baltus—that be Van Tassel himself—as he is
having a huge feast to celebrate the recent nuptials of his lovely daughter
Katrina.”

I daresay my heart sank into my stomach, and then fell out and hit the

tops of my shoes, for this was dreadful news indeed. Although it had
seemed to me that this was a high possibility, based on what Ichabod had
told me. The only next recourse, in my opinion, was to go to that very feast
under the pretence of land acquisition, and to find a moment alone with the
stunning coquette, to see whether the matter was worth pressing any further.
For while I dearly adored Ichabod, he was an emotional sort, and many
times would too easily allow his heart to be wrapped up in a lovely lady,
only to find that her interest didn’t extend any further than the tip of his
glorious manhood.

“Oh dear,” I replied to the crusty keep. “This is quite the dilemma, for

I must be back to my hometown early next week, so any business I attend to
must be done this weekend.”

The innkeeper snorted. “Obviously, ye are in the wrong spot if all yer

about is hurryin’ and scurryin’. Thar’s a reason it’s called Sleepy Hollow,
my fine sir. But as you wish, I’ll be glad to show ye the way on the
morrow.”

I slept little, for I confess I was anxious to finally gaze upon the

mythical creature known as Katrina, and found myself stroking my prick to
three releases as I recalled all of the wonderful scenarios Ichabod had
regaled me with. I thought of how he showed her the glories of orally
copulating one another at the same time, with her on top, straddling her
sweet pussy across his face, as she bobbed her head up and down on his
cock. The next scene I played in my mind was the one he had told me about
giving her a hearty spanking across his knee, whereupon he then laid her
over a sawhorse, and poked her quim from behind, so that he could drink in
the sight of her two ass cheeks, which he described as being “as plump and
pink as two roast hams jostling together”. The final scene was one I ached
so much to be a part of, and it renewed my interest in seeing the whole
matter with the newly appointed dame come to a favourable conclusion.

In this vision, Ichabod told me how he had finally convinced the

wavering Katrina to let him tie her up with leather straps he had found in
the barn. He swore to her that she would feel the most extreme pleasures as
she was restricted from being able to touch him, and could only experience
what he would do to her. Since she had heartily enjoyed every debauchery
they had engaged in so far, she told him that she couldn’t imagine this one
being anything less than spectacular. So Ichabod took the first tie, and
secured her wrists together at the top of the loft railing.

It was only about three feet high, so that allowed her to remain in a

sitting position, with her legs stretched out before her. Their exertions
together in the recent weeks had allowed her a certain flexibility she hadn’t
enjoyed in the past, so he was able to take each pretty little ankle and tie it
up to the railing as well. She was now spread wide as if forming the letter
‘V’, and it left both of the holes between her legs available for him to
plunder. As she had recently been bemoaning the lack of my available cock,
and wondering if she should get to have both holes ravished at the same
time ever again, Ichabod decided to give her what he felt was the next best
thing.

She had enjoyed the spanking, and so he now asked her if perhaps

some light flicks from his riding crop might please her. Having the audacity
to blush—spread as wide and tied up as she was—she nodded her head,
agreeing that “some tapping of my most sensitive areas, to ready me better
for your intrusion, would not be a bad idea”. An unabashedly naked
Ichabod, his giant staff proudly erect, took her at her word, and allowed his
crop to tease along her skin, the small leather loop at the end tickling the
insides of her thighs, arms and the mounds of her breasts. Soon, she was
moaning, and so he felt she was ready for a harsher treatment. He tap, tap,
tapped on her skin, still only hitting the areas of her flesh that had just been
caressed, careful to avoid the pointed peaks of peach-coloured nipples that
told of her arousal, or the moistening folds between her legs that were
unable to hide her pearl, as she was tied so open and vulnerable.

Not sure how much further he should go with his game, he went

ahead and gave her one sharp thwack on a nipple.

“Ooooh!” she cried out, but instead of asking him to stop, she closed

her eyes in what appeared to be rapture.

The next nipple received an identical sting from his instrument. This

time her cry was more like a pleasure moan, so he continued his play of

alternating from one nipple to the next, ever so slightly increasing the
intensity of his strike. Her head was thrashing from side to side, an action
he now recognised as her signal that he was doing the right thing. A few
drops of his seed came out of his shaft, and he presented them to her for the
licking. He found she became quite cross if he didn’t share them with her.

“Mmmm, Ichabod. It is so wonderful like this, I have no control.

Pray, tup my mouth whilst I am helpless in this way.”

It had not been part of his original plan, but Ichabod was a fair

gentleman, and wouldn’t dream of disappointing a lady’s wishes in any
way. Still holding the crop—for he was not done with it yet—he shoved his
cock past her lips, and held one side of her head. Soon, he was riding her
soft lips like a tiny cunny, for he was much too enormous to get more than
halfway in before she choked on him. They continued in this way awhile,
and he could see how hard she was pulling at the restrictions on her ankles
and wrists, desperate to grab his shaft, but unable to do anything but let her
mouth be a vessel for his plundering staff.

He pulled out, and wiped her swollen lips with his kiss. It was time to

sink deep in her folds, and gain his release. But he hadn’t forgotten two
important things, a part of her that still needed the sting of his whip, and her
sadness about not being serviced in both holes at once, as she had been with
Brom and his friends. It would be a poor substitute, but he would not allow
Brom to have any advantage over him in any way.

He stepped back a little, and teased her sensitised skin a bit more with

the end of the crop. Her heaving breasts and soaking pussy indicated how
ready she was to be invaded by his prick, so he drew the tool back, and
flicked it right upon her nub.

“Aaah!” He knew this startled her, and he waited for her to admonish

him. But, as one had come to expect from the lusty beauty, she did no such

thing. “Oh yes, Ichabod, how terrible and wonderful that was! You must do
it again before you thrust into my cunny.”

Again, Ichabod would never dream of denying his lady fair a thing, so

he obliged by cracking it down on her swollen button three more times,
each strike eliciting animal sounds he had never heard from his damsel
before, with her jerking against the tightening restraints. Finally, he could
wait no longer, so he dropped to his knees between her legs, turned the crop
around and played with it in the juices her pussy was freely producing, her
arousal in such a high state. As soon as it was lubricated well enough, he
used a finger to bring more out of her channel, and spread the moisture
around her puckering back hole. It was there he placed the instrument’s
handle, and pushed against her entrance until it popped right in. Slowly, he
moved the object in and out of her ass, testing whether she could handle its
rigid configuration.

As if to answer him, she moaned, “Oh yes, Ichabod, you are a genius

to think of using this on me. Please tell me I shall be plundered with your
cock at the same time?”

one side, thence allowing his manhood free access to her slit. He easily
seated himself in her, all the way to his bollocks, and continued to ram her
bottom with the crop handle, whilst pumping her cunny vigorously with his
cock. I confess, my own hand was keeping an enthusiastic pace as I
imagined Katrina’s large bouncing tits and both of her holes being violated
whilst she was secured to the loft railing. I thought I might expire from the
mere thought of it, and my final culmination of the evening produced a
copious amount of seed.

With the help of my hand, I was well and truly exhausted, so I quickly

fell to slumber. When I awoke to a fog-enveloped day, I was ready to tackle
the tricky business of both finding—and gaining—a private moment with

Katrina. The innkeeper was good as his word in showing me the way to Van
Tassel’s, and after a hearty breakfast of a slice of ham and roasted potatoes,
I was on my way.

As I rode along the path leading to Katrina’s family abode, I could see

how easily one could become hypnotised by the rolling hills, abundant
foliage, babbling brooks and the mists that clung close to the earth, as if
veiling some dark and foreboding secret. There were the noises from the
woods that Ichabod had described as well, and it became obvious why the
people of this hollow had so readily embraced the notion of ghosts and
goblins freely roaming about. I shivered a little from the morning cold, and
fancied that it might also be someone walking over my grave.

Ridiculous! There’s no point in getting myself worked up. This is how

Ichabod likely got himself in such a mess. He probably became so hysterical
that he fell off his horse, hit his head upon a rock, and dreamt the rest.
Headless Horseman indeed. Stuff of nonsense.

When I neared the edge of the valley, a great hill rose before me, and

there was a turn from the path that obviously led to the great Baltus Van
Tassel residence. I could see many carriages and horses as well as several
on foot strolling up that turnoff to the grand house, coming over the fields
or on the path headed towards me, with the barn just behind and to the right
of it. The sight of the very place where all of my lover’s erotic explorations
took place caused my cock to twitch in my pants. Oh, had I been able to
enjoy them both together even one time! But I refused to despair just yet, as
there was still the smallest of hopes that we could prevail.

I nodded to the curious revellers, tipping my hat to the ladies, who

were now taking their places alongside me, each of us headed for the same
destination. Being a stranger played against my strategy of going unnoticed,
for it was clear that each and every citizen was aware of exactly who was

who in this little village. My only hope was to be as congenial as possible,
and keep to my goals, never engaging in too much personal conversation.

A few hundred feet from the entrance to the house, it was already

getting quite crowded, so I jumped down from my faithful black gelding,
Barrister, and tied him to a post nearby. I continued to smile benignly at my
strange audience, and passed by several huddled in intimate conversation,
as they no doubt whispered to one another on the supposed identity of my
own person.

Somehow in my soul, I knew that I would recognise the legendary

Katrina from the first moment I laid eyes upon her. Not surprisingly, I was
correct, having heard endless rapturous descriptions from the besotted
Ichabod in both letters and words, so there could be no mistaking such a
magnificent creature. There she stood at one end of the room, and I was
sure that I wasn’t mistaking her visage, yet she seemed wistful and forlorn
—not at all the flittering, fluttering creature that had been so faithfully
described to me. But her lovely eyes and mouth, tumbling strawberry hair,
creamy skin and overflowing bosom brought me to the indisputable
conclusion that this was indeed the coquette to whom Ichabod had lost his
heart.

I watched her from afar, even as others still watched me, and when I

saw an older man draw near her, I moved in closer to ascertain if this was
her father, the old man Baltus. I heard her imploring him regarding
something, and he returned her pleadings with a declaration I could not
discern. The telling phrase was uttered however when she cried out in
irritation, “Oh father, you understand nothing!” and she pushed past him
and through what looked like the back part of the house.

As soon as she left, I saw a large swarthy young lad, who gave the

impression of being more like an ox that had somehow transformed itself
into human form. He sidled up to the father, and looked to be ready to chase

after the disturbed lady, but old Baltus laid a hand on the lad’s arm, and
seemed to be counselling him to leave her be.

idea that perhaps she had run off out the back toward the barn to get away
from the gathering. Without permitting any time to elapse, and potentially
allowing me to return to logical sense, I retreated out the front from whence
I came, and carefully avoided any more prying eyes, for at this point, the
guests seemed to have either lost interest in me, or gained interest in the
feast that had been piled on the large banquet table inside the Van Tassel
residence.

I rounded the corner of the house, taking care that others—either

inside or out—did not spy my movements. I saw a skirt, the colour of
lavender, just like I had seen on Katrina, disappear behind the back of the
barn, and I made my move hastily—but holding to the edges of the woods
—finally coming to the barn a more lengthy, yet likely safer route.

The figure of Katrina was no longer to be seen outside the barn, and

as I crept in through the door, I was careful to ensure that if she was in
there, she would be completely alone. Remaining as silent as I could along
the hay-strewn floor, I looked about the darkened structure, and upon
hearing a slight rustling above me, I dared to call out.

“Katrina? Are you in here? I come on Ichabod’s account.”
At the last I heard a gasp above me.
A woman’s whispered voice drifted down to me, “What do you know

of Ichabod? I was told that he was whisked away by the Headless
Horseman but last week!”

“Aah, but that is where you are wrong, lovely Katrina, for I was the

only one who did any whisking in the case of Ichabod, and if you were but
to lean over the railing from where you are”—I had to keep my voice from
stuttering here, for the idea of Katrina, the railing and myself all in one

space was enough to make even the least potent man tremble—“you would
observe that I indeed still possess my head.”

her luscious hair framing her face and hanging over the side of said railing.

“Does this mean…could it be…you are Diedrich?”
At this I had no choice but to remove my hat and take a deep bow.

Ichabod had been correct, there was something about her that just captured
you. It was her beauty, yes, her seeming innocence, certainly, but there was
also something about her that led you to believe that she must be a wood
nymph sent to capture and hold you fast in her wanton clutches. I was now
nearly as smitten as poor broken-headed Ichabod. I became determined at
that very second that we would have our prize no matter what, and share her
warmth between us.

“Diedrich, come up here this instant, I must hear word of my dearest

Ichabod. Quickly now—Brom could appear at any moment, and then we
would both be the worse for it.”

At the mention of Brom, I had a twinge of concern, but at that

moment my manhood was directing all of my thought, and all I could think
of was to be near the feminine scent of the fabled Katrina. I climbed the
ladder, and once my head had cleared the top and I was but three feet from
this literal woman of my dreams, I paused to drink in the sight of her.

“Mmmm, Katrina, I must say, you are much beyond the words of

Ichabod in the seeing, even though he praised you so highly I did not dare
believe such a lovely creature could possibly exist. Yet here you are before
me, more magnificent than even he said.”

She bowed her head shyly, and I thought I might faint, fall off the

ladder and match my male lover in bumps on the head. Oh—what a vixen
she was, so sweet and tempting! But I had serious business to attend to, and
needed to be swift about it.

She perched on her knees, her hands folded in her lap rather primly.

I’m sure she must have wondered through all of her and Ichabod’s raunchy
doings what I was about—if I were truly real—and here I finally was before
her. I climbed into the loft, and sat back on my heels as well.

“It is wonderful to finally meet you, Diedrich, and I will confess, you

are as handsome as Ichabod claimed. But pray tell, is my dear Ichabod safe?
Why is he not here with you?”

“Katrina, lass, please be assured that he was most desperate to be here

with you, but as he feared that your nuptials to Brom had already taken
place, he did not want to be seen nearby. He has a mind of still securing you
with us, and I advised it would be best if I were to come here under a
pretence, so that we could all conspire on how to achieve our mutual
happiness.”

Katrina looked troubled and frowned at my words. “But there is no

solution that I can see for us. I could run away, but the disgrace to my
parents would be devastating, and I would be mournful if I could never see
them again. What could possibly be changed now—when it is clearly too
late?”

I had to admit to myself that whilst I am generally clever, and that

scheming is one of my favourite pursuits, a ready answer to Katrina’s
troubled enquiries did not present itself. I needed more information on her
circumstances, and how Ichabod actually ended up in the ditch.

“Tell me, Katrina, what exactly were you told regarding Ichabod’s

disappearance?”

“Well, it is quite odd. The very night I found out that Brom was

planning on asking for my hand—and had threatened me with disgrace if I
didn’t agree—we were having a grand quilting frolic here. Many stories of a
sinister nature that are familiar to anyone who has spent time in the Hollow
were shared at the party, including one from Brom regarding the Headless

Horseman. After the party, and after Ichabod had left me weeping here, it
would appear from all accounts that he was stolen by the very horseman
Brom had spoken of at the party. When I asked him about that, he wouldn’t
give me a clear answer, he just kept reminding me that now there was no
reason to refuse him my hand, and that we should be married forthwith.”

“Yes, that is quite the coincidence. Well, I am here to tell you, fair

Katrina, that Ichabod did meet up with a horseman that evening, but I am
not convinced that it was actually the headless one that you speak of. Tell
me all you know about this legend.”

the more I listened, the more I was convinced that it was Brom or one of his
gang who had actually been behind the evil doing. But I needed to be sure.

“My lady, I have an idea.”
Katrina looked at me hopefully, a light shining in her beautiful blue

eyes that almost threw me off my train of thought. I proceeded to outline the
first part of my plan. If it could be ascertained that Brom had indeed been
the one to perpetrate the pumpkin-bashing upon Ichabod, then I was sure
that I could use my lover’s obsessive knowledge of Cotton Mather’s
witchcraft books—and the other superstitious fol-de-rol that he was so fond
of—to perpetrate a most wonderful scheme.

I determined that we had tarried far too long in the barn, and that soon

the lady Katrina’s new groom would come searching for her, any fatherly
considerations being cast aside.

“My dearest Katrina, I need you to get Brom drunk on as much

whisky as you can, and then have him tell you all about the night Ichabod
went missing. Do you think you can do that?”

She laughed. “Why, that is no challenge at all. The bigger one would

be that he wouldn’t become sodden with drink. I will do as you ask, but
what do you hope to discover?”

“That your newly wedded groom was masking himself as the

horseman that night. Whether he intended Ichabod lasting harm, or just a
good scare, I can’t say. But I will tell you, I did have a fear that Ichabod
might never come back to us. Where can I meet you three days hence?”

Katrina looked more troubled than ever. “I’ve always known that he’s

an awful brute—but to try and injure someone—or worse—it’s too terrible
to conceive! Yes, I will do as you say, and I will meet you at a place in the
woods near the old scarecrow.”

Katrina gave me all the details, and we agreed to meet at an early time

of the morning, when Brom was usually still in his cups. If she wasn’t there
within the hour, then I would try again the next day until we were able to
connect. Before I took my leave of her, I took a chance on one thing.

“Sweet lady, there is a favour I wish to ask of you. I would like to

taste your delicious mouth so that I can hold on to the dream of future
revelry between the three of us. Would you grant me this request?”

She responded by leaning forward and placing her hands on my

shoulders. Parting her mouth, she closed her eyes and then moved in closer
to me. I was completely mesmerised by her proximity and the promise that
her pouty moistened lips offered. Her tiny pink tongue peeked out from
between her pearly teeth, and I groaned. Scooping her onto my lap, I
crushed my mouth against hers and took possession of her with my tongue.
I thrust it inside and let it dance with hers until I felt her go limp in my arms
—I presume from the intensity of my kiss.

At last, I pulled away, for I could not allow myself to be tempted into

any further action at this juncture. My cock was so hardened and
uncomfortable, I doubted my ability to safely exit via the ladder. She sighed
in my arms.

if I cannot have both you and Ichabod in my bed.”

“Alas, Katrina, I will expire as well. Until three days from now.”
I waited until she had made her exit, and then I sneaked away, riding

Barrister out of town and back to Ichabod where I would share my news
and plot our next move.

 
Upon returning to Tarry Town, I was relieved to find Ichabod in a

much better state of health. However, my lover’s always volatile emotions
were unleashed when I told him first of Brom securing Katrina’s hand at the
altar, that he was probably the horseman who had thumped him that night
and finally of my good fortune of holding and kissing the lady fair.

“That evil, evil beast! The very idea of him even touching her tender

flesh is revolting enough, but that he would come after me in such a fashion
is not to be forgiven. Why, he mocks the very legend of the Hessian by his
actions, it’s a wonder the Horseman doesn’t take his own vengeance upon
him!”

And that, dear readers, is how my greatest scheme was born. I had

always been the crafty one, and Ichabod the sensitive one—yet here he had
unknowingly spawned a grand idea for saving Katrina from Brom’s
clutches!

The plan, from my viewpoint, was clear, and must be undertaken

immediately. My lover and I shared the exact way of it in between sessions
of physical love. We had missed each other’s embrace greatly and whilst he
brought me to fevered culminations over and over, he regaled me with
further utterances of his passions with Katrina. Once I was most agreeably
sated, I yearned for the days to pass so that I could share the plot with her,
and get it underway.

At last the time arrived, and I was fortunate that she showed up on the

very first day of our arrangement. It was still dark, and no rooster had
crowed the dawn as of yet. Immediately upon her arrival, she conveyed that
she had indeed been able to get Brom to confess to his ghastly deed. It was
too perfect, and so the next step was ready to be unleashed. We went over
the entire plan, and I gave her the things she would need to help accomplish
her end. All that was left was to pray that Brom was as dense as he
appeared to be, and from what I had gathered so far, very little prayer would
be required.

more lest it raise any suspicions once the course of our scheme took hold,
so I camped further down the road, out of sight of the Hollow, hidden deep
in the woods. I was aided by Katrina in this regard, as she’d grown up there,
and knew the areas that no one ever disturbed due to the very superstitious
nature of the place.

The result of the first part of our intrigue was shared by Katrina when

we met the next morning. It all began when I gave her the book Ichabod had
entrusted to me. It came from his collection of legends, magic and other
occult writings. The volume entrusted to our plot was entitled Spirit Curses
from Beyond, and it provided just the type of information that we were
certain the doltish Brom would absorb and act upon. For years I had
patiently tolerated my lover’s propensity for stories and legends of
hauntings, witches and ghosts, but never had I been so grateful for his vast
knowledge than when we were fighting to be with our lovely lass.

Katrina related to me the very next morning that she had placed the

volume upon the kitchen table, and opened it to a certain page that
described how one can provoke the wrath of a spirit to the point of
becoming cursed. Since this book had never before been in the little cottage
on the Van Tassel lands that the newlyweds shared in their perceived

wedded bliss, it was hoped that Brom would notice the unusual tome.
However, one had to take into account that the young brute was more
interested in drink, filling his belly, Katrina’s cunny and hunting more than
he was in good reading, so it befell the lady fair to point out to him how odd
it was that such a volume should be present in their home.

“When did you acquire this strange book, Brom, and what should

cause you to want to read about such things?” she asked of him innocently.

Rubbing his eyes awake as she served him a mug of coffee, hot cakes

with molasses, sausage links and a tot of cider, he frowned at the offending
book on his breakfast table. “I acquired? Why in heavens would I acquire a
book of all things?”

“Brom, don’t tease me. We are the only two souls who reside here,

and I certainly didn’t acquire it. Here, let me see what it says, for it is
opened to this one section. I had assumed you were reading late last night,
and left it open here to pick up again on the morrow.”

Brom grunted, and began digging into the mound of food Katrina had

prepared.

Katrina made a hellish gasping sound, and Brom choked a bit on his

cakes.

“What are you on about, woman? Can’t a man enjoy his meal without

feminine cries interrupting him?”

Katrina gave him her most concerned and frightened look. “Oh,

Brom, I fear for you, for us! What have you done?”

She could see the brute was becoming angry, but she stood fast in her

playacting. Finally, curiosity won over his repast, and he grabbed the
volume from her. Haltingly—for he had certainly never had as strict and
commanding a pedagogue guiding him in reading such as Ichabod—he read
from the open pages. “Whomsoever dabbles in the crafting of raising
ghosts, goblins or spirits shall become cursed by that entity to the point of

madness, and even unto death. For seeking out the dead is considered the
sure path to the devil, and extreme care should be taken to never endeavour
such a deed. The mocking or jesting of the diseased…”

“Deceased, Brom,” said Katrina impatiently.
“That’s what I said, diseased. Why would I mock the diseased?”
“No, the word is deceased. It means a dead person.” She tried her

very hardest not to sound cross with him, and to maintain her frightened
stance, but the man was very trying in all ways.

Brom frowned and retorted angrily, “I know that. Now cease

interrupting me. Let’s see, right, even the mocking or jesting of the
deceased can be cause for the spirit to return from beyond and haunt the
jester. Even worse, if the ridiculed entity is of an evil nature, there can be no
telling what horrors may befall the one who acted without regard to the
sanctity of the dead.”

Brom slammed the book shut, and tossed it back on the table. “So?

What’s that got to do with me?” He continued his morning feast, and
Katrina resisted the urge to hurl the book at his head.

one halfway to his mouth with a forkful of cakes and molasses—and said,
“My dearest husband, don’t you see? You confessed to me the other eve
about pretending to be the Hessian, and chasing Ichabod away because of
how heartsick you were for me. That would be mocking the legend of the
Headless Horseman! And this cursed book—why—where did it come
from? How did it get here if you were truly not the one to acquire it?”

Brom sat frozen in mid bite, mouth hanging open, the hand that held

his fork clutched by a suitably terrified Katrina. He frowned, seemingly lost
in thought. She released her grip and Brom slowly set his food back down
on the plate. “Let me see that thing again.” She handed him the book, and
just as they all had hoped, he became lost in it, to the point that his coffee

cooled, the molasses hardened, and his sausages shrivelled up. The only
thing that did not go to waste was the cider, for which he asked for seconds,
then thirds.

Katrina went about her business of cleaning up from the morning’s

food preparations, and stole a glance here and there at Brom who was now
only interested in devouring the contents of the tome. He finally set it down
as the sun was rising higher in the sky, at which point he mumbled
something and left without his customary sloppy buss on her cheek, and
forceful grab of her buttocks.

Each morning we would meet, and Katrina would report on the

progress of our doings. After the first day, she left it open at a different page
where there was written yet another dire warning. When Brom accused her
of being the one who had left it out, she swore that she had actually thrown
it away, fearing the contents. This time, Brom threw it in the fire to ensure
that it was properly disposed of. Anticipating, even upon hoping, that he
would perform that very act, I gave her another exact copy from the many I
had brought with me. The next morning when Brom awoke to find the book
open to yet another damning passage, his bellow was so loud it could be
heard all across Van Tassel’s lands.

One of the farm hands working in the outer fields came to his aid,

believing him to be injured somehow. Upon hearing Brom’s disjointed tale,
and ranting about books that appear out of nowhere even after they have
been burned, the man hastily made his retreat, fearing that some sort of
madness had overtaken the new groom. When our lady fair reported the
progress of our intrigue the next morning, I determined it was time to move
to the next phase.

The following evening after Brom’s ravings to the farm hand—which

were now circulating all over the valley, the villagers always hungry for a
new story—Katrina feigned a headache that she might retire early. At this

juncture, the brute who had pretended to be a malevolent horseman was lost
in his own thoughts, and waved her away without a glance.

I wish I could have been inside their cosy cottage to see the

expressions as they crept across the increasingly alarmed Brom’s face, but I
was only able to hear the end result from Katrina the next day. You see, I
was much too involved in being the Headless Horseman myself, who just so
happened to be paying a visit to the mocker of spirits, the one and only
Brom Bones.

I can impart to you however just how mad the dear Brom appeared to

be as he came running from their honeymoon home, screaming and cursing
at me and poor Barrister, who was not used to all of this commotion. He
conveniently reared up as Bones halted and shook his fist, yelling out,
“Begone, devil! Never return here!”

Since I dared not answer in voice, I had a little message prepared for

Master Bones, wrapped about a rock and tied with string. I hurled it at his
head—as much in settlement for Ichabod’s lump as anything else—where it
thumped him heartily enough to facilitate my getaway.

The contents of my missive—or should I say the Horseman’s—were

thus. ‘You shall forever be cursed by me, unless you leave these lands
forever, and never return!’

Katrina watched through the bedroom curtains to see his response as

he rubbed his sore head and read the note. Muttering more curses to
himself, and gesturing wildly, he burst back into the cottage. She came
downstairs, pretending to have just woken to find him there.

“My dear husband, where have you been all this eve? I waited up as

long as I could, but when you had not returned for supper, and the hour
grew so late, I’m afraid I could keep my eyes open no further.”

Brom stopped short, and slammed his fist on the table. “What the

devil are you blathering about? I’ve been here this entire time, ever since

the sun dipped low, and there was no more work to be done in your father’s
precious fields. I am sick of this whole farm—I wish to hunt again—to do a
man’s work. And now, now I am being taunted by an addled wife and a
cursed Horseman!”

Katrina made to weep at his harsh words. “Oh Brom, whatever do

you mean? I thought you were happy here with me on my father’s quiet
farm. I’m just so confused as to why you did not come home this entire
evening.”

“Quit speaking nonsense, Katrina, I have been here since the stew and

corn muffins you served for supper.”

certainly didn’t serve a stew, but if you are hungry now I can make you a
hasty pudding, or reheat the roast chicken I had actually prepared for your
return from the fields.”

Katrina was careful to ensure that her entreaties were done with

nothing but the most loving concern for her muddled husband.

“But I…this makes no sense. Well, surely you heard the Horseman

just now?”

She gasped and put a hand to her mouth, running to the kitchen

window. “Where? Oh God save us, where is the Horseman? I don’t see
him!”

Brom looked down, running a hand through his hair. “He was here,

you must have heard him, he…wait! Here—feel this lump on my head, and
look at this note he tossed at me, tied to a rock. This is the proof of it!”

Katrina obliged him, and felt the knot on the back of his head. Then

she took the note—and though she could see the words as clear as the
daytime—she kept with our scheme by answering, “Yes, there is a lump,
you must have banged your head hard. But there’s nothing but an empty
piece of paper here. I see no writing.”

He snatched the paper back from her.
“Don’t be daft, of course there’s writing here. It’s the Horseman

threatening to curse me unless I leave these lands!”

Katrina dropped her face into her hands.
“What?” demanded Brom. “What are you wailing about now?”
She looked up and placed one hand tenderly on his arm. “Oh my poor,

poor husband, I fear you are not in your proper senses. First you tell me
there’s a book of spirit curses here, and now that you are getting written
messages from beyond. Oh, what shall we do! What if they take you away
to one of those lunatic asylums in the city? What shall I do?”

With that declaration, Brom had a most distressed look upon his face,

and our fair lady knew that we were very close to succeeding in our plan.

The farm hand had done an excellent job of imparting the ravings of

the newly wedded Brom Bones to every villager that he knew, who then did
their duty by passing along the story to everyone they knew. As most of
these tales tend to go, it became even more fantastic with the repeated
telling, and soon, most of the citizens of the typically friendly Sleepy
Hollow muttered prayers and hurried to the other side of the street should
they encounter the hapless Bones walking about. Even his gang that had so
faithfully participated in the debaucheries with his blushing bride made
excuses as to why they could no longer come to the farm.

But the most important element still needed to be finalised. The lady

herself needed to play her part to its fullest outcome. With that in mind,
Katrina attended a small quilting frolic at her parents’ home—small only
because half of the town was now scared of the horseman possibly lurking
about the Van Tassel farm, and most of the rest were sure that Baltus had an
insane man for a son-in-law. Neither of these conditions made for much
frivolity. Still, the Van Tassels had the best frolics to be had, with a hearty
feast guaranteed to be provided, and it seemed a shame to some to let

vengeful ghosts and a lunatic brute separate them from an excellent banquet
and the promise of the latest gossip.

This very evening would be tricky indeed, as it would be the final nail

in Brom’s figurative coffin if we could all play our parts correctly. We
devised prior to the party that Katrina was to tell Brom that she had seen
Ichabod over at the barn in their old trysting place right at the height of the
feast, and that she was frightened that he had come for revenge. Once Brom
headed there, I would make my final appearance as the Horseman, this time
wielding Ichabod’s whip—which was typically saved for other, more
interesting pursuits—and shouting in a menacing voice for him to leave.
Katrina was to ensure that no one left the party, or strayed near the barn
whilst I completed this undertaking.

At the appointed time, she passed along the message, and the buffoon

quickly complied, whispering to her that Ichabod must be behind the whole
thing, and he would do away with him once and for all, “As I should have
from the start”. Katrina told me later that the anger in his voice and his
declaration of harm toward Ichabod had made her shudder for both him and
for me, and she had worried that maybe we might have gone too far. I never
considered this, for all I could dwell upon was the sweet reward that
awaited us at the end of our sport.

Everyone was laughing at the frolic, even though it was a small party,

and all were light-hearted, music was played, and of the thirty or so
gathered, at least ten were dancing about the main room, whilst the rest
enjoyed ales and ciders. A loud crash sounded, instantly bringing everyone
to a halt to stare at the front door where the crazed Brom stood, pointing at
Katrina.

“Vile woman! The Horseman has come for your flesh, he just told me

—and there is no Ichabod, you lying wench!”

Everyone gasped, and Katrina fainted, her part in the denouement of

Brom’s undoing firmly established. Several ladies attended to her, fanning
her and rubbing her wrists, even as Brom continued to rage. “You’re all
trying to drive me insane, but you are the lunatics! The Horseman can have
her, you can all have her! I’ve had enough of this wretched farm, this dreary
town, and especially old man Baltus. You can have your devil whoring
daughter back, for I shall never return!”

With that, he knocked over a table that had been filled most

delightfully with sweetmeats and dainties to the floor, accompanied by
more cries and gasps from the witnesses of this dreadful event. As soon as
Brom completed his dramatic exit, Katrina made to stir from her supposed
unconscious state. She fluttered her eyelids, raised her hand to her forehead,
and looked about the room with a dazed look upon her face.

Old man Baltus ran to the aid of his daughter, and took her plump

little fingers into his large mitt of a hand. “My dearest one, I’m afraid your
husband has gone quite mad. I fear he may leave the Hollow for good. He
has abandoned you!”

Never one to shy from her integral part in our scheme in any way,

Katrina fainted once more, and the ladies wept for the poor forsaken bride
of Sleepy Hollow.

 
Katrina waited a year, so that it would appear proper when she took

her final leave of Sleepy Hollow to be with us. No one had heard one word
from Brom Bones, and several whispered he most likely ended up in the
New York Lunatic Asylum. I should mention however, that the three of us
did not wait at all. She informed her parents that she wished to stay in her
honeymoon cottage in case her “dear, dear husband should return”, and

wanting nothing but the best for their discarded daughter, they complied
with her wishes.

The most excellent thing about this cottage was that it was at the edge

of the woods, and on the other side of the hill from the barn and Van Tassel
residence, where it enjoyed its own special privacy. Ichabod and I were able
to join our lovely lass several times a month, and we would practise all of
the wicked deeds she begged from us, and make plans for when we could
all finally live together.

One evening, I made a special request of my two lovers, for I had

dreamt of it from the moment I first saw the barn on the hill, and Ichabod
told me his tales of Katrina.

“Ichabod, did you bring your whip with you—the one I used on the

last night as the Horseman?”

I was clearing the plates from our most enjoyable supper of roast

pheasant and corn relish, and Ichabod was on the settee, one hand roaming
down the front of Katrina’s bodice, and the other licking his fingers from
the candied fruits she had served. He stopped sucking his digits long
enough to answer me. “Why yes, Diedrich, I did. What dirty little activities
did you have in mind for tonight?”

Katrina giggled, and as always, I knew our wanton lady was ready for

anything. “I feel somewhat left out,” I lamented, “For I never had the
opportunity to try either one of you in the hay loft. Do you think it safe we
repair there this night, with your parents out of town?”

Ichabod removed his hand from Katrina’s bosom, and she whimpered.

“Oh, my teats were pebbled for you, and now my cunny is wet for you both.
Why stop?”

She suckled one of the sticky fingers Ichabod presented her, and he

groaned.

“Yes, really, Diedrich. I have no objections to taking our lady right

here.”

I approached them both, and leant to kiss each one languorously,

hoping to convey that we had the next few days to lazily indulge in all
manner of physical delights. “Yes Ichabod, we shall take Katrina here,
there, everywhere we can. But give me the gift of this request tonight, for I
was deprived of the doing that which I have only heard tell of.”

I took the hand of each one, and pulled them from the sofa. “I shall

bring some cider and a coverlet. Ichabod, wherever your whip is, make sure
you have it with you.”

the beginnings of spring. I had waited all of the freezing winter whilst we
confined our lovemaking to the cottage near the fire, and I was anxious to
finally bring my fantasy to life. Ichabod grabbed his satchel that contained
his whip and I knew not what else, and I grabbed the other provisions.
Katrina became the temptress by undoing the laces of her outer blouse, and
letting it fall open, allowing her bosom to burst out of the inner restraints of
her clothing. Then she laughed, and ran up the hill towards the barn, leading
the way with her lantern.

At last, I was inside the barn and heading to the hayloft where I had

only been once before, and shared but a kiss with the sumptuous lass. My
cock was straining so much against my pants, I felt as though I was a young
lad, meeting with a hoyden for my first carnal adventure. I grinned at
Ichabod as he was about to follow Katrina up the ladder, and was so
overcome in my excitement for this moment that I grabbed the back of his
neck, turned his face toward me, and shoved my tongue in his candied
mouth. I licked around the inside, tasting the sweetness there, and bit his
lower lip as I retreated.

then use the very whip that brought about the exit of that brute that dared
ever to touch her precious flesh.”

Ichabod grabbed the bulge in my pants, and I gasped, so excited that I

was at the point of pain. “Yes, Diedrich, we are lucky indeed to have her
between us.”

By the time we had cleared the top of the ladder, Katrina’s ample

breasts were exposed to our eyes, her peachy nipples at a hard peak. All that
she had left to divest herself of were her undergarments, and she did so
slowly and saucily, creating more discomfort for my crotch. I could tell this
would not do for what I had planned, wanting to take my time with her tied
up to the railing and taking her downstairs as well where I could tie her to a
post and whip her. I would not last in this condition.

“My dearest lovers, I’m afraid I need a quick release in order to

facilitate this evening’s games more effectively.”

Both Ichabod and I were still near the top of the ladder standing in the

loft, and Katrina—now completely nude—crawled over to us. She looked
up at Ichabod and winked. He dropped to his knees, and they began to pull
at the opening of my pants. Katrina tugged them down to my ankles, whilst
Ichabod cupped my bollocks with his long fingers, teasing and tickling the
underside in the way he knew I loved so well. He then presented my pulsing
staff to Katrina, and she sucked it into her mouth greedily, taking it all the
way in.

I suppose for the sake of clarification only, I should mention that

whilst I am not short changed in the manhood department, my cock did not
present as much of a challenge as Ichabod’s gargantuan member did. She
suckled me in a hungry manner, pulling at my shaft with her hot moist
mouth, sending delicious shivers up my spine. Ichabod replaced his hands
with his mouth on my testicles, and sucked each in one at a time, licking

them boisterously. As I was already in a fevered state before they began,
their lusty mouths on both cock and balls simultaneously afforded me no
chance to resist, and I spent my seed down the lovely Katrina’s throat.

I fell to my knees in thanks to them both. I kissed each one in

succession, my fingers entwined in their hair, tasting first my salt, then my
musk on their tongues.

see our lady tied to the railing in the way you described to me upon your
first description of her attributes.”

“Oh yes, Diedrich, that was one of my most treasured experiences.

But will you be at the ready for me so soon?”

“Have no worries, you must know me better by now! I wish to take a

moment and get your sweet cunny ready by servicing you with my tongue,
as you have so ably serviced me with yours. I’m sure Ichabod would love to
join me?”

“Of course,” he replied, “I would never refuse the nectar from

Katrina, but first let’s tie her up, and I shall sample the pebbled teats she
displays so proudly.”

We tied her up, wrists to the railing, her delicate ankles spread wide

and anchored to the top as before, and she moaned as if already anticipating
the pleasure we would be showering upon her body. Once she was secured,
I wasted no time in removing the vestiges of my clothing, and Ichabod
followed suit. With the three of us completely naked, I knelt before her
quim spread wide and vulnerable, and kissed up her inner thighs until I
reached her soft ginger curls, and already creamed folds. The very tip of my
tongue gently teased its way past her outer lips, anxious to taste the luscious
nub hidden there.

restraints. Ichabod had been fondling her gorgeous bosom, fingering her

teats, pulling and pinching now and again. She squirmed against the ties as
we tortured her with our carnal attentions, unable to do anything except take
whatever pleasure we gave her. I could feel my staff coming to attention,
and whilst I enjoyed nothing more than penetrating her ass as Ichabod
plundered her cunny, I couldn’t see how the deed could be accomplished in
this position. Loath to untie her however, as she looked so enticing, I
determined that Ichabod should do the honours in her pussy, and I would
take him from behind. This way, I could gaze into her lovely face when she
reached her culmination.

Her moans were increasing, for Ichabod was suckling her breasts

most vigorously, giving each one equal attention, sometimes squeezing
them so tightly together, he was able to suck both large nipples into his
mouth at once to lick them. As he continued that, I was lapping her pussy
and exploring her back pink hole that was available to my seeking tongue.
Sensing she might be near completion, I backed off so that Ichabod could
enter her moist quim.

I whispered my intentions in his ear, and he groaned. “Do you have

some grease for my ass? If not, check my satchel.”

Even though I found that Ichabod could be a little scattered when it

came to everyday banalities, in the area of erotic acts, he was never
unprepared. I found the required substance, and prepared his rear entrance
to receive me. Whilst I lubricated his ass, pressing a moistened finger in and
out of his hole, he presented his member to Katrina so that she could take as
much as she could in her pretty mouth. My shaft was at complete attention
now—the working of Ichabod’s entrance with my digit and the sight of
Katrina’s lush lips wrapped around his cock doing wonders to rejuvenate
me.

He pulled out of her mouth and entered her cunny with one quick

thrust which she was finally able to take, as she was soaking wet. He held

himself deep inside her, and I spread one of his rear cheeks aside to position
my own aching member at his hole. I applied some more grease to my cock,
and pushed it past his tight entrance. This was always my favourite moment
of our love together, when the three of us were initially joined, the supreme
contentment of either filling or being filled.

Our movements began slowly, Ichabod rearing back from Katrina’s

quim, and meeting my shaft up to my very bollocks. Then he plunged back
into her sweet pussy, and I pulled out from him, ready to thrust even harder
the next time his ass met my cock. I kissed the back of his neck, and the
tops of his shoulders, whilst reaching around him to grasp the jiggling
breasts of the squirming Katrina—completely helpless in her fetters.
Ichabod dipped his head to plunder her mouth with his tongue, then turned
it to the side towards me so that I could have a turn tonguing him. Then the
three of us compressed ourselves together for a three-way kiss, something
that we had recently added to our now extensive repertoire of carnal
activities.

must be dying for his first release of the evening, so I bit his earlobe and
growled, “Take your pleasure, my love, unload in her now.” I had finally
managed to convince Ichabod that even though he found coverings
unpleasant, the joys of spending inside Katrina were worth it.

With a loud guttural moan, he did as I requested, hammering into her

forcefully, and she responded by crying out her release. They both stilled,
and I waited for their heavy breathing to subside, as well as for my
manhood to shrink to a less uncomfortable girth. I did not want to risk
accidentally spurting whilst pulling my sensitive head out of Ichabod’s back
hole as it tightened around me.

I parted from Ichabod, and he from our lady. He proceeded to untie

her from her bonds. I was more anxious than ever to get my next

culmination with her tied to a standing position in the main part of the barn.
Oh, there were so many harnesses we could use, so many restraints
available to us, but I only wished for a simple wrist tie, with her arms above
her head, then I would use Ichabod’s long whip on her. After that, well, I
needed to see where my cock directed me.

We hurried to the downstairs, and I brought Ichabod’s satchel with

me. There were many posts in the area near the stalls, but I determined I
wanted to use one of the beams about eight feet above our heads in the main
area of the barn. It was the perfect height for the mischief I had in mind, so
I directed Katrina below it, swung some woven fibre rope over the top and
let it hang down, whereupon I tightly wrapped the tails around Katrina’s
wrists, so that she was held almost on her toes and reaching up over her
head.

“Oh Diedrich, you are so naughty tonight. Please, do more wicked

things to me.”

“Do not distress yourself, my winsome lass, you shall receive as

much wickedness upon your flesh as you can handle. I don’t believe
Ichabod ever used this whip on you?”

They both shook their heads, but Katrina added with a giggle, “At

least not in the traditional way.”

I smiled, remembering the tale Ichabod had shared. But as she had not

been struck with it yet I hastened to warn her, “If it becomes too much for
your tender skin, you must tell me to stop, understand?”

She nodded, her eyes becoming wider—in fear or anticipation, I was

not entirely sure. I kissed her deeply, and caressed the full, soft body that I
had grown to crave more than my own daily sustenance. I reached between
her thighs, and felt the copious moisture in her slit. “I want you to make
more of that,” I whispered into her ear. Then I turned to Ichabod and kissed
him before moving behind Katrina, where I reared my arm back and

allowed the whip to crack upon her generous backside. I was careful to
allow only the tip to sting her, so that she would not be marked
permanently, or hit too harshly. My aim was to excite the three of us, but
not to harm my sweet love.

“Oh Diedrich, it is so different from the crop! The sting is sharper,

and the wake is longer-lasting.”

“Are you asking me to stop?”
“No dearest, try me some more, and I pray you administer its sting in

other areas as well.”

I looked to Ichabod who was lost in rapture at the sight of our display,

and grasping his own manhood, anxiously stroking it, no doubt wanting to
be ready for another plundering of Katrina’s body. My own member was
feeling the ache once more, and I was grateful I had taken one release
earlier, or I would never have lasted to this point.

I readied to strike the other cheek, and she took in a sharp breath, yet

still did not ask me to stop. I landed another sting, and another, alternating
on her buttocks each time. She was beginning to whimper, so I paused to
lovingly caress her bottom, careful to be extra light in my touch where the
whip had raised small welts.

“Are you not going to do your worst to the other side of my body?”

she sighed.

Now it was my turn to intake my breath, for I wasn’t sure I dared use

such a harsh instrument on such a sensitive part of her body. Not wishing to
ever deny our lusty beauty anything she ever desired, I walked to the front
of her, and positioned the whip carefully, so that I would land my next blow
upon one of her large nipples. My strike was swift and accurate, and she
cried out loudly.

“Oh, suckle it, quickly, someone please!”

hardened shaft, and she moaned gratefully.

“I have been too harsh, darling girl.” For I was feeling a measure of

guilt due to her loud cry.

“Oh no, no Diedrich, do not take it that way, for this is pure bliss.

Ichabod, stand back, that he may do the other one, and then you can soothe
that one too.”

I did as she requested, and I have to admit that the sight of her being

whipped, and then Ichabod ministering to her punished nipples, was
creating a cauldron of tension in my groin. I repeated the same act on each
teat once more, then I could wait no longer to feel her inner heat wrapped
around me. I fished around for a covering from Ichabod’s satchel as he
continued to lick her lovingly.

“My dear man, let us press her soft body between us whilst she is still

trussed up in this position. If you would go behind her, than I can position
myself in front.”

requested. Grasping her waist with both hands, I squatted as she opened her
legs wide, then thrust into her pussy, letting out a grateful sigh as I did.
Fortunately, we had engaged in so many nocturnal deeds that Katrina had
become quite adept at accommodating our members wherever they might
choose to lodge themselves. So when Ichabod readied to invade her back
channel, it was not the first time she had been violated so, and not only
could she handle it, she was now in the habit of requesting it.

We executed her favourite position, which was to penetrate from both

sides and thrust into her at the same time so that she could have the fullest
sensation possible. There was also the added benefit that Ichabod and I
could feel the heads and the underside of each of our cocks inside Katrina,
so that the act truly joined the three of us at once. We continued this way at

a fevered pace with Katrina shrieking her orgasms over and over, until I
could take it no longer. We were all kissing and thrusting, hips pumping,
bodies sweating, and I spent so violently, I thought my legs would give way
beneath me. Then I felt the pulse of Ichabod’s manhood, and my thoughts
ran to how I loved that feeling when he was in my ass.

To tell you the truth, were I to describe every act that occurred over

the years between the three of us, it would fill a thousand books. Never
could I have dreamt of a more magnificent threesome of love than that
which existed between Ichabod, Katrina and I. Had I been completely
honest with myself, I might have realised that something that perfect
couldn’t go on forever, and so there came a time when after we had moved
to Kentucky, as Ichabod had always dreamt of, we found ourselves in a
most grievous situation. The relative ease we had been able to carry on as a
trio in the privacy of the Hollow amongst Katrina’s oblivious parents, and
subsequently in the cosmopolitan cities of the East, could not be achieved in
the new frontier.

Alas, more than ten years after the very night I first whipped Katrina

as she was trussed up in the barn, and two babes had been born to us—a
boy who bore a striking resemblance to Ichabod, all long arms and legs, and
a lovely girl with my colouring—we found ourselves the object of
suspicion. My love for my two partners was so overwhelming that the mere
thought of anything bad happening to them, or the rest of our family, caused
me to make a very painful decision. I determined to leave, and without
telling them, I stole away in the night, only a brief note left as a final
homage to our miraculous time together.

For two years I worked at setting up a successful law practice in New

York, and it was one fateful evening, gathering for a spot of brandy and a
cigar, that a pepper-and-salt-clothed gentleman, the man I had known for
years as my lover, showed up at my club telling a most fantastic tale. I

wouldn’t have believed it either had I not lived the events with him, and of
course, with our dearest Katrina. Yes, I wrote every bit of his part of the tale
down, and now I have added my part to it. I am happy to report, dear
readers, that after I left the club that night, my lover caught up with me, and
pulled me into an alley. We exchanged a long deep kiss, and I felt tears at
the corners of my eyes, for I had previously shut all manner of feelings
down, lest I break apart from the hurt of it all.

His lips finally stilled, and he pulled away.
“She’s here too. We are at the Hotel Lexington down the street. I’ve

let the room next to ours for you.”

“The children?”
“They are visiting their grandparents, who were grateful to finally get

to meet them.”

“Did they not wonder at your reappearance?”
“I did receive quite a few stares and gasps, but I care not. Our only

goal was to find a way back to you, Diedrich.”

“How did you find me?”
“I know you fancy yourself the great puzzle-solver, but maybe I’ve

picked up a few of your tricks over the years. I surmised you would set up a
law practice, most likely in a large city, and so I checked everywhere in the
East, and now here I find you in New York City. Why, I have an
appointment tomorrow for a teaching position.”

“But haven’t you always dreamt of the open spaces, of vast fields in

the country? How could you ever be happy here in the city?”

“I will be happy wherever you are, my dearest Diedrich. Neither

Katrina or I can live without you, and the children miss you terribly, they
are anxious to know what happened to Uncle Diedrich.”

I admit that my tears flowed freely at this point. As I have said,

Ichabod has always been the one to indulge freely in his emotions, but I was

overcome, and humbled by his sacrifice so that our family could be
together.

“Ichabod, your hair is going white. I was hardly able to contain my shock
when you entered the room tonight.”

“It is the stress of being without the one who completes us. Come

back to us, we can make it work—we must for all of our sanity.”

And so I returned to Ichabod, Katrina and our children, for how could

I not? You have my tale, and the one before it, so now it is up to you to
decide—as my colleague at the club did that night long ago—whether you
believe but the half of it. If no other part of our words ring true for you, then
let the part that you do deem to be the truth be in regards to the fair Katrina,
for never was there a more luscious damsel in all of the lands.

 
D. K.
 
 
 
 
 

Also available from Total-E-Bound Publishing:

Morticia Knight

where he was sitting in the two-storey condo he and his lover Emilio
shared.

“It’s not a thing, love, it’s a disembodied voice,” replied Emilio, ever

patient with his headstrong partner. “And you know trying to understand
those EVPs is not always possible. Never mind the ghost voices, quit
torturing yourself and call her.”

Martin considered Emilio, a sweet, smouldering young man of mixed

European heritage. Just hitting his mid-twenties, Emilio was all olive skin,
thick dark hair and a tight wiry body, one that could get into the most
outrageous positions when so inclined. And inclined he was. Emilio had
been raised in Italy, Portugal, and had attended university in Britain. He’d
eventually followed his parents to Northern California, and Martin was
grateful that he had. He may never have met him otherwise. And Sophie
would never have been crushed.

That thought made him sigh, and Emilio looked quizzically at him.
“Sorry. I was just wondering how Sophie was doing,” he said

sheepishly. He knew that it wasn’t generally thought of as cool to mention a

past lover to a new one, but their situation was a little unusual. He had
never intended to actually leave Sophie. It had always been meant that the
three of them would be together. But sometimes things didn’t work out the
way you wanted.

Emilio came over and sat down on the floor next to Martin. “It’s been

almost a year. She’s an intelligent woman who cares about her work and her
clients. She’ll listen to the problems these people are having, and she’ll
come around. She can’t hate you forever.”

Martin snickered. “Oh, I’m willing to bet forever isn’t nearly long

enough.”

shop, ‘Oddly Enough—Uniques and Collectables’. He specialised in
obscure and bizarre antiques and collectables. For instance, he carried
things such as a two-headed mummified goat, Victorian medical equipment
and medicine bottles, paper ephemera from freak shows, elixir bottles of
wild sideshow cures, a chair made of human skulls—,essentially anything
out of the ordinary. Sophie, a delicate blonde woman who only stood five
foot two and was twenty-two when they met, had wandered into his shop
one day looking for antique tarot decks. It turned out that she was a spiritual
medium and empath, abilities that had been in her family for years.

He didn’t take her too seriously at first. As much as he enjoyed the

wild stuff he carried in his shop, he wasn’t one to believe in ghosts, spirits,
or anything of that sort. It was all trickery or sleight of hand in his elevated
opinion. Sophie’s translucent skin, pale blue eyes and soft voice had drawn
him in at first. But it was her kindness and open heart that had kept him.
Eventually, she took him with her on investigations where her help was
needed. Many of the paranormal investigators in Petaluma, and all of the
other surrounding San Francisco suburbs, knew of her and requested her
services.

Initially, he’d gone along as a lark, a way to spend more time with his

lovely Sophie. However, he’d soon become convinced. Being with her and
witnessing so many weird and wonderful paranormal happenings had
changed his outlook forever. She had changed him as well. He’d fallen
deeply in love, and had wanted to spend forever with this amazing woman.
He’d then become wrapped up in paranormal investigating, and it had all
seemed to be a perfect combination between her, the ghost hunting and his
shop. They’d come to be known locally as a team.

Then Emilio showed up. He’d been recommended to them through

another investigative team, because of all of the specialised equipment he
had designed and built. Emilio had an incredibly creative mind, and all
three of them had immediately clicked.

They’d all spent many hours together, but there had been times when

Sophie had long nights with several private consultations, and Emilio and
Martin had worked alone on some new gadget, or had been analysing
material from a recent haunt. One evening, the desire that had been brewing
just beneath the surface between them had turned into something too
powerful to stop. It had seemed only natural to make love to his best friend,
but he should have discussed it with Sophie first, and made his first time
with Emilio her first time too. Martin would always regret the night that had
forever broken Sophie’s trust, but what was done was done. The one thing
he’d never been able to say to her, though, was that he had never wanted her
to leave. Martin wanted them both, and both of them together. Emilio had
been enthusiastic about the idea, even confessing in bed that very first night
that he’d been hot for Sophie all along, that she was unlike any other
woman he had ever encountered.

“If unicorns existed in human form, they would be like Sophie,” he

had said.

It was such an ‘Emilio’ thing to say. He had that same open spirit that

Sophie had. In some ways, Martin felt he was the odd man out, and that
Sophie and Emilio were really more suited to one another. Unfortunately,
neither of them were with Sophie, for she had broken apart when she’d
caught Martin with Emilio that night. He had planned to confess to her
about it, then tell her about Emilio’s feelings for her as well. However, he
had never even got close to getting that far in the conversation. She had
stormed out and had refused to talk to him since.

Martin still received calls to investigate places, based on his

reputation when he was with Sophie, but it wasn’t the same. Her stunning
intuitiveness and ability to commune with departed spirits had been
impossible to replace. They had brought in a couple of so-called psychics
and mediums a few times, but they had been next to useless. Sophie was the
real deal.

“Martin, lover, you are agonising over this woman. Please call her.

Maybe now she will let you talk, let you explain.”

Martin looked into Emilio’s dark eyes. He was being so sincere, not at

all jealous or hurt that Martin so obviously still loved another person.
Martin could feel his body stirring. Emilio was sitting cross-legged on the
floor facing him. He reached over and placed a hand gently on Emilio’s
cheek, and leaned in to kiss his full sensual lips. Taking the top lip first and
suckling it, he then let it go to take the luscious bottom one into his mouth.
Finally, he plunged his tongue in, deepening the kiss, and letting Emilio
know that he wanted him.

Martin lowered his hand and brought the other up so he could encircle

Emilio’s torso to draw him closer. Emilio was now in Martin’s lap. They
held each other close, hugging and squeezing, their tongues caught in a
dance that urged them on to more sexual heat. Rolling over on top of

Emilio, Martin felt the possessiveness that always made his cock so hard
when he was with the smaller man.

“I want you in my mouth,” he growled in Emilio’s ear. “Get your

fucking clothes off.”

Emilio laughed lightly, struggling to get out from under Martin’s

strong embrace. “Lover, you are going to crush me. Give me more room.”

Martin moved a little to the side, just enough to give Emilio space to

wriggle out of his jeans and the tight T-shirt that hugged his lithe body so
well, but not enough to scamper away. Once Emilio had his thong pulled
just far enough to expose the thick shaft nestled in silky black curls, Martin
pushed him back on to the floor, pinned Emilio’s wrists to his side, and
gobbled the young man’s penis into his mouth. Martin loved Emilio’s
aroma. It was rich and sweet, unlike anything he’d encountered. Even
before Sophie, he had always been with both genders. He identified himself
as bi-sexual, and his relationships were based completely on his feelings,
having nothing to do with gender.

Martin moved his mouth greedily up and down Emilio’s dick, pausing

occasionally to suck the tip, making Emilio cry out and whip his head from
side to side. Martin loved being in control of Emilio’s desire. He knew
exactly what to do to him, and how to do it. As Emilio got into a heavy
rhythm of thrusting up to meet Martin’s skilled mouth, Martin abruptly let
go of his delicious cock, moved to one side, and rolled Emilio over on his
stomach.

“Aaah, you’re trying to kill me,” objected Emilio. “I am so hard, this

floor is so cold, and now my guys are being smashed.”

“I don’t think you’re going to mind,” said Martin as he repositioned

himself over Emilio again.

cheeks, and yanked them open roughly. A low guttural moan escaped from

Emilio as Martin dived in, licking furiously at Emilio’s puckered hole,
squeezing the cheeks in his hands. He pushed with his tongue against the
back entrance, and was able to easily breach it. He wiggled around in
Emilio’s ass for a while, using his hands to travel up and down Emilio’s
smooth body, wanting to just bury himself inside this sexy man as far as he
could go.

It was time for his cock to pay a visit there, the strain on his balls

becoming too much for him to handle, his dick uncomfortable in the
tightness of his jeans.

He removed his tongue and pulled Emilio up by his waist onto his

knees as Emilio kicked his thong away. “The couch,” was all he could
manage to say, his need to fuck so overwhelming.

“Show me how you want me,” purred Emilio in his tantalising accent

—not quite Italian, not quite British, but all Emilio.

 Emilio stood, his alluring cock bobbing up and down as he walked,

and Martin grabbed a fistful of Emilio’s thick dark locks, pushing him
towards the arm of their couch. Martin loved the twinkle in his eyes and the
little smile Emilio always had when they were in the middle of their love-
play. He bent him forcefully over the side of the couch, Emilio holding onto
a cushion, his knees bent slightly as he relaxed over the piece of furniture.

“Don’t move!” yelled Martin, heading for their bedroom. “I want to

see that nice smooth ass when I come back in.”

When Martin returned with a jar of lube, he saw Emilio had done just

as he was told. In the middle of their spacious condo living room, their eight
foot, navy blue velvet,couch set the stage for the rest of the room. There
was the entertainment centre on one end, a computer desk to the side—with
all of their fancy digital equipment—and a mission-style, oak end tables and
coffee table. But the most glorious thing in the entire room was Emilio’s

naked form bent over the large couch, ready to accept Martin’s long dick up
the ass.

Martin approached him and dug a generous amount of goo from the

jar. After putting it down, he rubbed some on his dick and the rest on
Emilio’s anus, being sure to finger some inside his ass as well. He
positioned the head of his cock on the spot he had just been eating up and
plunged in, not giving Emilio any time to prepare just ramming him balls
deep. Martin watched as Emilio clutched the couch cushions harder as he
was being battered against the piece of furniture. He was fucking him so
hard the heavy sofa began to slide and scrape a little across the floor.

Martin cried out as he shot his load into Emilio, grasping the smaller

man’s hips to give himself purchase. He felt the orgasm go to his head and
was dizzy with the euphoria of it. Still jerking and spasming slightly, he
gradually released his hold on Emilio and allowed his heavy breathing to
become lighter and steadier. But he wasn’t done yet.

Pulling his cock free of the man’s asshole, he grabbed one of the

many large throw pillows they had strewn about the couch and tossed it on
the floor. Then he lounged against it and considered Emilio, who was still
limply draped across the arm of the sofa. Emilio’s sweet smile shone at him,
and Martin was dying to give his lover release.

“Come here, gorgeous. Jerk yourself off in my mouth.”
Emilio lifted himself up, and Martin saw him cringing a little, most

likely from being rammed as he had been in such an awkward position. He
sauntered over to Martin who was leaning back, ready for his lover. Emilio
stood over him, stroking his still-hard erection. Martin used one hand to cup
Emilio’s ball sacs and gently caressed each one in turn as Emilio
masturbated himself harder and faster up and down his thick cock. Emilio
was jacking himself frantically, and Martin knew his lover was close to
coming. He lifted himself up closer to Emilio’s prick, closed his eyes and

opened his mouth. As Emilio yelled out his orgasm, warm cum splashed on
his face and Martin tasted the salty sweetness in his mouth.

“Yes, oh God, yes, baby!”
Emilio sank to his knees on the large pillow next to Martin and wiped

some of his spunk off of Martin’s cheek. Emilio deep-kissed him and
Martin knew that Emilio was tasting himself in his mouth.

Martin realised he was very lucky to have Emilio, and he never wanted him
to doubt it.

“I love you,” he said, “with all my heart. I hope you know that.”
“I do, lover, but you have quite a big heart. I know you have room for

someone else. Someone I still think you should give a call.”

Martin hugged Emilio close to him. It was too late with Sophie.
Wasn’t it?

The Night Jordan Came

Set Ablaze

OceanofPDF.com

www.total-e-bound.com

erotic romance titles and discover pure quality

at Total-E-Bound.

