“IT MAY BE THE MOST IMPORTANT WORK OF ITS

KIND BY AN AMERICAN SINCE WORLD WAR II.”

—Chicago Tribune

THE CLOSING OF THE AMERICAN MIND

Allan Bloom

“Commands one’s attention and concentrates one’s mind more
effectively than any other book I can think of in the past ﬁve years.”

—Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, The New York Times

“A penetrating look at the state of modern American society . . . ﬁlled to
overﬂowing with trenchant insights into American life. . . . Required
reading for every thoughtful citizen concerned with the decline of
American society. . . . It will challenge you to think.”

—The New American

“Essential reading for anyone concerned with the state of liberal
education in this society.”

—The New York Times Book Review

“Important and controversial . . . could—and should—serve as a major
resource in the effort to rethink the very nature and purpose of
American higher education.”

—San Francisco Chronicle Book Review

“Every chapter, if not every page, offers something delightful, something
puzzling, something outrageous.”

—St. Louis Post-Dispatch

“Elegant, passionate, wide-ranging. . . . His prose is rhapsodic,
compelling, personal and reassuring. He writes from a deep love of
history and intellectual tradition.”

—Los Angeles Times Book Review

“Graceful and grave . . . a serious-minded, sinewy and wise work.”

—Virginia Pilot & The Ledger-Star

“Has the density of ﬁction, the sting of satire, the lucidity of
philosophy . . . all the compact ﬂuidity and dazzle of Emerson’s essays.”

—The Christian Science Monitor Book Review

Failed Democracy and

Impoverished the Souls of

Today’s Students

Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster eBook.

Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books

from Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at

eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

Contents

Foreword by Saul Bellow
Preface
Introduction: Our Virtue

PART ONE. STUDENTS

The Clean Slate
Books
Music
Relationships

Self-Centeredness
Equality
Race
Sex
Separateness
Divorce
Love
Eros

PART TWO. NIHILISM, AMERICAN STYLE

The German Connection
Two Revolutions and Two States of Nature
The Self
Creativity
Culture
Values
The Nietzscheanization of the Left or Vice Versa
Our Ignorance

PART THREE. THE UNIVERSITY

From Socrates’ Apology to Heidegger’s Rektoratsrede

Tocqueville on Democratic Intellectual Life
The Relation Between Thought and Civil Society
The Philosophic Experience

The Enlightenment Transformation
Swift’s Doubts
Rousseau’s Radicalization and the German University

The Sixties
The Student and the University

Liberal Education
The Decomposition of the University
The Disciplines
Conclusion

Afterword
About the Author
Index

To My Students

Foreword

Professor Bloom has his own way of doing things. Writing about the
higher education in America, he does not observe the forms, manners
and ceremonies of what is called (usually by itself) the community of
scholars. Yet his credentials are irreproachable. He is the author of an
excellent book on Shakespeare’s politics, and has translated Plato’s
Republic and Rousseau’s Emile. It will be difﬁcult for nettled colleagues
to wave him away, and many will want to do just that, for he is shrewd
and mettlesome, as well as learned, and a great observer of what
Mencken would call, when he was being mean, “the higher learning.”

But Professor Bloom is neither a debunker nor a satirist, and his

conception of seriousness carries him far beyond the positions of
academia. He is not addressing himself primarily to the professors. They
are welcome to listen—and they will listen because they come under
heavy ﬁre—but he places himself in a larger community, invoking
Socrates, Plato, Machiavelli, Rousseau and Kant more often than he
does our contemporaries: “The real community of man, in the midst of
all the self-contradictory simulacra of community, is the community of
those who seek the truth, of the potential knowers … of all men to the
extent they desire to know. But in fact, this includes only a few, the true
friends, as Plato was to Aristotle at the very moment they were
disagreeing about the nature of the good. … They were absolutely one
soul as they looked at the problem. This, according to Plato, is the only
real friendship, the only real common good. It is here that the contact
people so desperately seek is to be found. … This is the meaning of the
riddle of the improbable philosopher-kings. They have a true
community that is exemplary for all the other communities.”

A style of this sort will seem to modern readers marred by classical

stiffness—“Truth,” “Knowers,” “the Good,” “Man”—but we can by no
means deny that behind our objection to such language is a guilty
consciousness of the ﬂimsiness, and not infrequently the trashiness, of
our modern talk about “values.”

The sentences above are taken from the conclusion of Bloom’s book.

Parting from his readers, he is at his most earnest. He writes in a
different vein when he is discussing the power of professional

economists, the separation of modern science from the “natural
philosophy” that preceded it, the phenomenon called “cultural
relativism,” or the real, the bottom-line, signiﬁcance of an M.B.A.
degree. He often ﬂashes out provocatively and wickedly. Speaking of the
place of the humanities in the universities, he calls them a “submerged
old Atlantis,” to which we turn again to try to “ﬁnd ourselves now that
everybody else has given up.” “The humanities are like the great old
Paris Flea Market where, amidst masses of junk, people with a good eye
found cast away treasures. …” Or else, “They are like a refugee camp
where all the geniuses driven out of their jobs and countries by
unfriendly regimes are idling: … The other two divisions of the
university have no use for the past …” When he is not busy with the
nature of the Good, he can hit, with the best (or should I say the worst)
of them, very hard. As a scholar he intends to enlighten us, and as a
writer he has learned from Aristophanes and other models that
enlightenment should also be enjoyable. To me, this is not the book of a
professor, but that of a thinker who is willing to take the risks more
frequently taken by writers. It is risky in a book of ideas to speak in one’s
own voice, but it reminds us that the sources of the truest truths are
inevitably profoundly personal. Bloom tells us: “Throughout this book I
have referred to Plato’s Republic, which is for me the book on
education, because it really explains to me what I experience as a man
and a teacher.” Academics, even those describing themselves as
existentialists, very seldom offer themselves publicly and frankly as
individuals, as persons. So Professor Bloom is a front-line ﬁghter in the
mental wars of our times, and as such, singularly congenial to me. (If he
can be personal, I see no reason why I should remain the anonymous
commentator.)

In his concluding pages, Bloom tells of a student who, after a reading

of the Symposium, said that it was hard today to imagine the magic
Athenian atmosphere, “in which friendly men, educated, lively, on a
footing of equality, civilized but natural, came together and told
wonderful stories about the meaning of their longing. But [adds Bloom]
such experiences are always accessible. Actually, this playful discussion
took place in the midst of a terrible war that Athens was destined to lose,
and Aristophanes and Socrates at least could foresee that this meant the
decline of Greek civilization. But they were not given to culture despair,
and in these terrible political circumstances, their abandon to the joy of

nature proved the viability of what is best in man, independent of
accidents, of circumstance. We feel ourselves too dependent on history
and culture…. What is essential about … any of the Platonic dialogues
is reproducible in almost all times and places…. This thinking might be
what it is all for. That’s where we are beginning to fail. But it is right
under our noses, improbable but always present.”

I take this statement very seriously and am greatly moved by it, seeing

in it the seed from which my life grew. For as a Midwesterner, the son of
immigrant parents, I recognized at an early age that I was called upon to
decide for myself to what extent my Jewish origins, my surroundings
(the accidental circumstances of Chicago), my schooling, were to be
allowed to determine the course of my life. I did not intend to be wholly
dependent on history and culture. Full dependency must mean that I
was done for. The commonest teaching of the civilized world in our
time can be stated simply: “Tell me where you come from and I will tell
you what you are.” There was not a chance in the world that Chicago,
with the agreement of my eagerly Americanizing extended family,
would make me in its image. Before I was capable of thinking clearly,
my resistance to its material weight took the form of obstinacy. I
couldn’t say why I would not allow myself to become the product of an
environment. But gainfulness, utility, prudence, business, had no hold
on me. My mother wanted me to be a ﬁddler or, failing that, a rabbi. I
had my choice between playing dinner music at the Palmer House or
presiding over a synagogue. In traditional orthodox families small boys
were taught to translate Genesis and Exodus, so I might easily have gone
on to the rabbinate if the great world, the world of the streets, had not
been so seductive. Besides, a life of pious observance was not for me.
Anyway, I had begun at an early age to read widely, and I was quickly
carried away from the ancient religion. Reluctantly, my father allowed
me at seventeen to enter the university, where I was an enthusiastic
(wildly excited) but erratic and contrary student. If I signed up for
Economics 201, I was sure to spend all my time reading Ibsen and
Shaw. Registering for a poetry course, I was soon bored by meters and
stanzas, and shifted my attention to Kropotkin’s Memoirs of a
Revolutionist and Lenin’s What Is to Be Done? My tastes and habits were
those of a writer. I preferred to read poetry on my own without the
beneﬁt of lectures on the caesura. To rest my book-strained eyes I played
pool and Ping-Pong at the men’s club.

I was soon aware that in the view of advanced European thinkers, the

cultural expectations of a young man from Chicago, that center of
brutal materialism, were bound to be disappointed. Put together the
slaughterhouses, the steel mills, the freight yards, the primitive
bungalows of the industrial villages that comprised the city, the gloom of
the ﬁnancial district, the ballparks and prizeﬁghts, the machine
politicians, the prohibition gang wars, and you had a solid cover of
“Social-Darwinist” darkness, impenetrable by the rays of culture.
Hopeless, in the judgment of highly reﬁned Englishmen, Frenchmen,
Germans and Italians, the spokesmen for art in its most advanced
modern forms. For some of these foreign observers, America had many
advantages over Europe, it was more productive, more energetic, more
free, largely immune from pathogenic politics and ruinous wars, but as
far as art was concerned it would be better, as Wyndham Lewis put it, to
have been born an Eskimo than a Minnesota Presbyterian who wanted
to be a painter. Civilized Europeans, often exceptionally free from the
class prejudices of their own countries, were able conveniently to lodge
their not fully mastered biases in the free-for-all U.S.A. What no one was
able to foresee was that all civilized countries were destined to descend
to a common cosmopolitanism and that the lamentable weakening of
the older branches of civilization would open fresh opportunities and
free us from our dependency on history and culture—a concealed
beneﬁt of decline. There would be barbarous manifestations certainly,
but there would be also the possibility of new kinds of independence.

In this regard I ﬁnd myself, as Americans have taken to saying,

between a rock and a hard place. European observers sometimes classify
me as a hybrid curiosity, neither fully American nor satisfactorily
European, stuffed with references to the philosophers, the historians,
and poets I had consumed higgledy-piggledy, in my Midwestern lair. I
am of course, an autodidact, as modern writers always are. That spirited
newcomer, the nineteenth-century novelist, guessed, ventured,
conjectured daringly. Independent intelligence made its synthesis.
Balzac declared, “The world belongs to me because I understand it.”
Professor Bloom’s book makes me fear that the book of the world, so
richly studied by autodidacts, is being closed by the “learned” who are
raising walls of opinions to shut the world out.

From a different standpoint, American readers sometimes object to a

highbrow airs, and appear to put on the dog. I readily concede that here
and there I am probably hard to read, and I am likely to become harder
as the illiteracy of the public increases. It is never an easy task to take
the mental measure of your readers. There are things that people should
know if they are to read books at all, and out of respect for them, or to
save appearances, one is apt to assume more familiarity on their part
with the history of the twentieth century than is objectively justiﬁed.
Besides, a certain psychic unity is always taken for granted by writers.
“Others are in essence like me and I am basically like them, give or take
a few minor differences.” A piece of writing is an offering. You bring it to
the altar and hope it will be accepted. You pray at least that rejection
will not throw you into a rage and turn you into a Cain. Perhaps naively,
you produce your favorite treasures and pile them in an indiscriminate
heap. Those who do not recognize their value now may do so later. And
you do not always feel that you are writing for any of your
contemporaries. It may well be that your true readers are not here as yet
and that your books will cause them to materialize.

There are times when I enjoy making fun of the educated American.

Herzog, for instance, was meant to be a comic novel: a Ph.D. from a
good American university falls apart when his wife leaves him for
another man. He is taken by an epistolary ﬁt and writes grieving, biting,
ironic and rambunctious letters not only to his friends and
acquaintances, but also to the great men, the giants of thought, who
formed his mind. What is he to do in this moment of crisis, pull
Aristotle or Spinoza from the shelf and storm through the pages looking
for consolation and advice? The stricken man, as he tries to put himself
together again, interpret his experience, make sense of life, becomes
clearly aware of the preposterousness of such an effort. “What this
country needs,” he writes at last, surrendering to the absurdity of his
state, “is a good ﬁve-cent synthesis.” Here he echoes Mr. Marshall,
Woodrow Wilson’s Vice President, who had said at about the time of the
Great War, “What this country needs is a good ﬁve-cent cigar.” Certain
readers of Herzog complained the book was difﬁcult. Much as they
might have sympathized with the unhappy and comical history
professor, they were occasionally put off by his long and erudite letters.
Some felt that they were being asked to sit for a difﬁcult exam in a
survey course in intellectual history and thought it mean of me to
mingle sympathy and wit with obscurity and pedantry.

But I was making fun of pedantry!
The reply: “If that was your purpose, you didn’t altogether succeed.

Some of your readers thought you were setting up a challenge,
something resembling an obstacle course, or an egghead crossword
puzzle for members of MENSA.” A few may have been ﬂattered, while
others resented being tested. People reserve their best thinking for their
professional specialties and, next in line, for serious matters confronting
the alert citizen—economics, politics, the disposal of nuclear waste, etc.
The day’s work done, they want to be entertained. They can’t see why
their entertainment should not simply be entertaining, and in some
ways I agree, for I myself, in reading Montaigne as I sometimes do, am
tempted to skip his long citations from the classics, which put my high
school Latin under some strain, and it is not amusing to send oneself
back to high school.

To ﬁnish with Herzog, I meant the novel to show how little strength

“higher education” had to offer a troubled man. In the end he is aware
that he has had no education in the conduct of life (at the university
who was there to teach him how to deal with his erotic needs, with
women, with family matters?) and he returns, in the language of games,
to square one—or as I put it to myself while writing the book, to some
primal point of balance. Herzog’s confusion is barbarous. Well, what
else can it be? But there is one point at which, assisted by his comic
sense, he is able to hold fast. In the greatest confusion there is still an
open channel to the soul. It may be difﬁcult to ﬁnd because by midlife it
is overgrown, and some of the wildest thickets that surround it grow out
of what we describe as our education. But the channel is always there,
and it is our business to keep it open, to have access to the deepest part
of ourselves—to that part of us which is conscious of a higher
consciousness, by means of which we make ﬁnal judgments and put
everything together. The independence of this consciousness, which has
the strength to be immune to the noise of history and the distractions of
our immediate surroundings, is what the life struggle is all about. The
soul has to ﬁnd and hold its ground against hostile forces, sometimes
embodied in ideas which frequently deny its very existence, and which
indeed often seem to be trying to annul it altogether.

Romantic poets and other edifying theorists of the nineteenth century

had it wrong—poets and novelists will never be the legislators and
teachers of mankind. That poets—artists—should give new eyes to

human beings, inducing them to view the world differently, converting
them from ﬁxed modes of experience, is ambition enough, if one must
offer a purposive account of the artist’s project. What makes that project
singularly difﬁcult is the disheartening expansion of trained ignorance
and bad thought. For to put the matter at its baldest, we live in a
thought-world, and the thinking has gone very bad indeed. Therefore
the artist, whether or not he views himself as an intellectual, is involved
in thought-struggles. Thinking alone will never cure what ails him, and
any artist should be grateful for a naive grace which puts him beyond
the need to reason elaborately. For me, the university has been the place
of divestiture where I am able to ﬁnd help in the laborious task of
discarding bad thought. It was at the university that I began to work
through the modern ideologies, Capitalist as well as Marxist, and the
psychologies, the social and historical theories, as well as the
philosophies (logical positivism, naturalism, existentialism, etc.).
Shedding superﬂuities so that my mental body could recover its ability
to breathe, and protecting the root-simplicities of being, I have never
viewed the university as a sanctuary or shelter from “the outer world.”
Life in a strictly academic village, in isolation from a great turbulent
city, would have been a torment to me. So I have never been, as a
“radical” Central European novelist recently called me, a “campus
writer.” Rather, I have trained myself to pick up the endless variations on
radical and right-wing themes so that I have become able (not an
enviable skill) to detect the untreated sewage odors of a century of
revolutionary rhetoric or, from another direction, to identify in Gore
Vidal’s recent outburst of “original” geopolitics nothing other than the
Hearst Sunday Supplement theme of the “Yellow Peril,” the odor of
which is no more pleasant now than it was in the thirties. There is
nothing at all new in the ﬁery posturing of these agitational and
“activist” writers. If they were able to come up with something of their
own, the universities would not hold their monopoly on the intellectual
life.

The heart of Professor Bloom’s argument is that the university, in a

society ruled by public opinion, was to have been an island of
intellectual freedom where all views were investigated without
restriction. Liberal democracy in its generosity made this possible, but
by consenting to play an active or “positive,” a participatory role in
society, the university has become inundated and saturated with the

backﬂow of society’s “problems.” Preoccupied with questions of Health,
Sex, Race, War, academics make their reputations and their fortunes
and the university has become society’s conceptual warehouse of often
harmful inﬂuences. Any proposed reforms of liberal education which
might bring the university into conﬂict with the whole of the U.S.A. are
unthinkable. Increasingly, the people “inside” are identical in their
appetites and motives with the people “outside” the university. This is
what I take Bloom to be saying, and if he were making a polemical
statement merely it would be easy enough to set aside. What makes it
formidably serious is the accurate historical background accompanying
the argument. He explains with an admirable command of political
theory how all this came to be, how modern democracy originated, what
Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau and the other philosophers of
enlightenment intended, and how their intentions succeeded or failed.

The heat of the dispute between Left and Right has grown so ﬁerce

in the last decade that the habits of civilized discourse have suffered a
scorching. Antagonists seem no longer to listen to one another. It would
be a pity if intelligent adversaries were not to read Professor Bloom’s
book with disinterested attention. It makes an important statement and
deserves careful study. What it provides, whether or not one agrees with
its conclusions, is an indispensable guide for discussion, not a mere
skimming of the tradition, but a completely articulated, historically
accurate summary, a trustworthy resumé of the development of the
higher mental life in the democratic U.S.A.

SAUL BELLOW

Preface

This essay—a meditation on the state of our souls, particularly those of
the young, and their education—is written from the perspective of a
teacher. Such a perspective, although it has grave limitations and is
accompanied by dangerous temptations, is a privileged one. The
teacher, particularly the teacher dedicated to liberal education, must
constantly try to look toward the goal of human completeness and back
at the natures of his students here and now, ever seeking to understand
the former and to assess the capacities of the latter to approach it.
Attention to the young, knowing what their hungers are and what they
can digest, is the essence of the craft. One must spy out and elicit those
hungers. For there is no real education that does not respond to felt
need; anything else acquired is triﬂing display. What each generation is
can be best discovered in its relation to the permanent concerns of
mankind. This in turn can best be discovered in each generation’s tastes,
amusements, and especially angers (this is above all true in an age that
prides itself on calm self-awareness). Particularly revealing are the
various impostors whose business it is to appeal to the young. These
culture peddlers have the strongest of motives for ﬁnding out the
appetites of the young—so they are useful guides into the labyrinths of
the spirit of the times.

The teacher’s standpoint is not arbitrary. It is neither simply

dependent on what students think they want or happen to be in this
place or time, nor is it imposed on him by the demands of a particular
society or the vagaries of the market. Although much effort has been
expended in trying to prove that the teacher is always the agent of such
forces, in fact he is, willy-nilly, guided by the awareness, or the
divination, that there is a human nature, and that assisting its fulﬁllment
is his task. He does not come to this by way of abstractions or
complicated reasoning. He sees it in the eyes of his students. Those
students are only potential, but potential points beyond itself; and this is
the source of the hope, almost always disappointed but ever renascent,
that man is not just a creature of accident, chained to and formed by the
particular cave in which he is born. Midwifery—i.e., the delivery of real
babies of which not the midwife but nature is the cause—describes

teaching more adequately than does the word socialization. The birth of
a robust child, independent of the midwife, is the teacher’s true joy, a
pleasure far more effective in motivating him than any disinterested
moral duty would be, his primary experience of a contemplation more
satisfying than any action. No real teacher can doubt that his task is to
assist his pupil to fulﬁll human nature against all the deforming forces of
convention and prejudice. The vision of what that nature is may be
clouded, the teacher may be more or less limited, but his activity is
solicited by something beyond him that at the same time provides him
with a standard for judging his students’ capacity and achievement.
Moreover there is no real teacher who in practice does not believe in
the existence of the soul, or in a magic that acts on it through speech.
The soul, so the teacher must think, may at the outset of education
require extrinsic rewards and punishments to motivate its activity; but in
the end that activity is its own reward and is self-sufﬁcient.

These are the reasons that help to explain the perversity of an adult

who prefers the company of youths to that of grownups. He prefers the
promising “might be” to the defective “is.” Such an adult is subject to
many temptations—particularly vanity and the desire to propagandize
rather than teach—and the very activity brings with it the danger of
preferring teaching to knowing, of adapting oneself to what the students
can or want to learn, of knowing oneself only by one’s students.

Thus, teaching can be a threat to philosophy because philosophizing

is a solitary quest, and he who pursues it must never look to an
audience. But it is too much to ask that teachers be philosophers, and a
bit of attachment to one’s audience is almost inevitable. And if it is well
resisted, the very vice can turn into something of a virtue and encourage
philosophizing. Fascination with one’s students leads to an awareness of
the various kinds of soul and their various capacities for truth and error
as well as learning. Such experience is a condition of investigating the
question, “What is man?,” in relation to his highest aspirations as
opposed to his low and common needs.

A liberal education means precisely helping students to pose this

question to themselves, to become aware that the answer is neither
obvious nor simply unavailable, and that there is no serious life in
which this question is not a continuous concern. Despite all the efforts
to pervert it (a few of which will be discussed in this book), the question
that every young person asks, “Who am I?,” the powerful urge to follow

the Delphic command, “Know thyself,” which is born in each of us,
means in the ﬁrst place “What is man?” And in our chronic lack of
certainty, this comes down to knowing the alternative answers and
thinking about them. Liberal education provides access to these
alternatives, many of which go against the grain of our nature or our
times. The liberally educated person is one who is able to resist the easy
and preferred answers, not because he is obstinate but because he knows
others worthy of consideration. Although it is foolish to believe that
book learning is anything like the whole of education, it is always
necessary, particularly in ages when there is a poverty of living examples
of the possible high human types. And book learning is most of what a
teacher can give—properly administered in an atmosphere in which its
relation to life is plausible. Life will happen to his students. The most he
can hope is that what he might give will inform life. Most students will
be content with what our present considers relevant; others will have a
spirit of enthusiasm that subsides as family and ambition provide them
with other objects of interest; a small number will spend their lives in an
effort to be autonomous. It is for these last, especially, that liberal
education exists. They become the models for the use of the noblest
human faculties and hence are benefactors to all of us, more for what
they are than for what they do. Without their presence (and, one should
add, without their being respectable), no society—no matter how rich or
comfortable, no matter how technically adept or full of tender
sentiments—can be called civilized.

From the teacher’s standpoint, thus understood, I have for more than

thirty years, with the most intense interest, watched and listened to
students. What they bring to their higher education, in passions,
curiosities, longings, and especially previous experience, has changed;
and there-with the task of educating them has changed. In this book I
am attempting to make a contribution to understanding this generation.
I am not moralizing; I no more want to be Jeremiah than Pollyanna.
More than anything else, this book is to be taken as a report from the
front. The reader can judge for himself the gravity of our situation.
Every age has its problems, and I do not claim that things were
wonderful in the past. I am describing our present situation and do not
intend any comparison with the past to be used as grounds for
congratulating or blaming ourselves but only for the sake of clarifying
what counts for us and what is special in our situation.

A word about my “sample” in this study. It consists of thousands of

students of comparatively high intelligence, materially and spiritually
free to do pretty much what they want with the few years of college they
are privileged to have—in short, the kind of young persons who
populate the twenty or thirty best universities. There are other kinds of
students whom circumstances of one sort or another prevent from
having the freedom required to pursue a liberal education. They have
their own needs and may very well have very different characters from
those I describe here. My sample, whatever its limits, has the advantage
of concentrating on those who are most likely to take advantage of a
liberal education and to have the greatest moral and intellectual effect
on the nation. It is sometimes said that these advantaged youths have
less need of our attention and resources, that they already have enough.
But they, above all, most need education, inasmuch as the greatest
talents are most difﬁcult to perfect, and the more complex the nature
the more susceptible it is to perversion.

There is no need to prove the importance of education; but it should

be remarked that for modern nations, which have founded themselves
on reason in its various uses more than did any nations in the past, a
crisis in the university, the home of reason, is perhaps the profoundest
crisis they face.

This book has concentrated my mind on the experiences of a lifetime

of teaching. Because my career has been an unusually happy one,
gratitude is the leading sentiment evoked in reviewing it. My
acknowledgments, therefore, reﬂect contributions to that total
experience rather than to this particular book. So above all, I must thank
all the students to whom I have had the privilege of teaching classic texts
for more than thirty years, especially those I came to know well and
from whom I learned so much about the questions discussed here.

Among them are those old students, now very independent thinkers

and friends, who have told me of their experiences and observations and
helped me interpret mine: Christopher J. Bruell, Hillel G. Fradkin,
James H. Nichols, Jr., Clifford Orwin, Thomas L. Pangle, Abram N.
Shulsky, Nathan and Susan Tarcov. David S. Bolotin, in particular,
responded to my thesis and in turn persuaded me of its seriousness. All
of them contributed to and tempered my enthusiasms, each in his own
special way. Michael Z. Wu has assisted me enormously with his sharp
insight and criticism.

Among my colleagues with whom I share conversation and students,

I want to make mention of Saul Bellow and Werner J. Dannhauser. The
former, with his special generosity, entered into my thoughts and
encouraged me in paths I had never before taken; the latter, my
intellectual companion throughout my adult life, undertook as usual to
read my manuscript and gave me the beneﬁt of his penetration and
honesty.

In the preparation of the manuscript, Judy Chernick, Terese Denov,

and Erica Aronson worked as loyal friends with total reliability, making
the most boring phases in the production of a book seem exciting. I have
been particularly happy in my editors, Robert Asahina, of Simon and
Schuster, and Bernard de Fallois, of Editions Julliard, who pushed me to
write the book and then spent more time working on it than I could
have imagined. The Earhart Foundation and the John M. Olin
Foundation have supported me as teacher and scholar for a long time,
and I am very grateful to their ofﬁcers.

Finally, I want to express my admiration for Allan P. Sindler, who has

been for me the model of the selﬂess university man. His lifelong
behavior proves that the enterprise is still possible and worthwhile.

I must say, and not only pro forma, that my mention of these persons

in no way implies that they endorse my views.

ALLAN BLOOM

Chicago, May 1986

Introduction:

Our Virtue

There is one thing a professor can be absolutely certain of: almost every
student entering the university believes, or says he believes, that truth is
relative. If this belief is put to the test, one can count on the students’
reaction: they will be uncomprehending. That anyone should regard the
proposition as not self-evident astonishes them, as though he were
calling into question 2 + 2 = 4. These are things you don’t think about.
The students’ backgrounds are as various as America can provide. Some
are religious, some atheists; some are to the Left, some to the Right;
some intend to be scientists, some humanists or professionals or
businessmen; some are poor, some rich. They are uniﬁed only in their
relativism and in their allegiance to equality. And the two are related in
a moral intention. The relativity of truth is not a theoretical insight but a
moral postulate, the condition of a free society, or so they see it. They
have all been equipped with this framework early on, and it is the
modern replacement for the inalienable natural rights that used to be
the traditional American grounds for a free society. That it is a moral
issue for students is revealed by the character of their response when
challenged—a combination of disbelief and indignation: “Are you an
absolutist?,” the only alternative they know, uttered in the same tone as
“Are you a monarchist?” or “Do you really believe in witches?” This
latter leads into the indignation, for someone who believes in witches
might well be a witch-hunter or a Salem judge. The danger they have
been taught to fear from absolutism is not error but intolerance.
Relativism is necessary to openness; and this is the virtue, the only
virtue, which all primary education for more than ﬁfty years has
dedicated itself to inculcating. Openness—and the relativism that makes
it the only plausible stance in the face of various claims to truth and
various ways of life and kinds of human beings—is the great insight of
our times. The true believer is the real danger. The study of history and
of culture teaches that all the world was mad in the past; men always
thought they were right, and that led to wars, persecutions, slavery,
xenophobia, racism, and chauvinism. The point is not to correct the
mistakes and really be right; rather it is not to think you are right at all.

The students, of course, cannot defend their opinion. It is something

with which they have been indoctrinated. The best they can do is point
out all the opinions and cultures there are and have been. What right,
they ask, do I or anyone else have to say one is better than the others? If
I pose the routine questions designed to confute them and make them
think, such as, “If you had been a British administrator in India, would
you have let the natives under your governance burn the widow at the
funeral of a man who had died?,” they either remain silent or reply that
the British should never have been there in the ﬁrst place. It is not that
they know very much about other nations, or about their own. The
purpose of their education is not to make them scholars but to provide
them with a moral virtue—openness.

Every educational system has a moral goal that it tries to attain and

that informs its curriculum. It wants to produce a certain kind of human
being. This intention is more or less explicit, more or less a result of
reﬂection; but even the neutral subjects, like reading and writing and
arithmetic, take their place in a vision of the educated person. In some
nations the goal was the pious person, in others the warlike, in others
the industrious. Always important is the political regime, which needs
citizens who are in accord with its fundamental principle. Aristocracies
want gentlemen, oligarchies men who respect and pursue money, and
democracies lovers of equality. Democratic education, whether it admits
it or not, wants and needs to produce men and women who have the
tastes, knowledge, and character supportive of a democratic regime.
Over the history of our republic, there have obviously been changes of
opinion as to what kind of man is best for our regime. We began with
the model of the rational and industrious man, who was honest,
respected the laws, and was dedicated to the family (his own family—
what has in its decay been dubbed the nuclear family). Above all he was
to know the rights doctrine; the Constitution, which embodied it; and
American history, which presented and celebrated the founding of a
nation “conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all
men are created equal.” A powerful attachment to the letter and the
spirit of the Declaration of Independence gently conveyed, appealing to
each man’s reason, was the goal of the education of democratic man.
This called for something very different from the kinds of attachment
required for traditional communities where myth and passion as well as
severe discipline, authority, and the extended family produced an

instinctive, unqualiﬁed, even fanatic patriotism, unlike the reﬂected,
rational, calm, even self-interested loyalty—not so much to the country
but to the form of government and its rational principles—required in
the United States. This was an entirely new experiment in politics, and
with it came a new education. This education has evolved in the last
half-century from the education of democratic man to the education of
the democratic personality.

The palpable difference between these two can easily be found in the

changed understanding of what it means to be an American. The old
view was that, by recognizing and accepting man’s natural rights, men
found a fundamental basis of unity and sameness. Class, race, religion,
national origin or culture all disappear or become dim when bathed in
the light of natural rights, which give men common interests and make
them truly brothers. The immigrant had to put behind him the claims
of the Old World in favor of a new and easily acquired education. This
did not necessarily mean abandoning old daily habits or religions, but it
did mean subordinating them to new principles. There was a tendency,
if not a necessity, to homogenize nature itself.

The recent education of openness has rejected all that. It pays no

attention to natural rights or the historical origins of our regime, which
are now thought to have been essentially ﬂawed and regressive. It is
progressive and forward-looking. It does not demand fundamental
agreement or the abandonment of old or new beliefs in favor of the
natural ones. It is open to all kinds of men, all kinds of life-styles, all
ideologies. There is no enemy other than the man who is not open to
everything. But when there are no shared goals or vision of the public
good, is the social contract any longer possible?

in the direction of indiscriminate freedom. Hobbes and Locke, and the
American Founders following them, intended to palliate extreme
beliefs, particularly religious beliefs, which lead to civil strife. The
members of sects had to obey the laws and be loyal to the Constitution;
if they did so, others had to leave them alone, however distasteful their
beliefs might be. In order to make this arrangement work, there was a
conscious, if covert, effort to weaken religious beliefs, partly by assigning
—as a result of a great epistemological effort—religion to the realm of
opinion as opposed to knowledge. But the right to freedom of religion
belonged to the realm of knowledge. Such rights are not matters of

opinion. No weakness of conviction was desired here. All to the
contrary, the sphere of rights was to be the arena of moral passion in a
democracy.

It was possible to expand the space exempt from legitimate social and

political regulation only by contracting the claims to moral and political
knowledge. The insatiable appetite for freedom to live as one pleases
thrives on this aspect of modern democratic thought. In the end it
begins to appear that full freedom can be attained only when there is no
such knowledge at all. The effective way to defang the oppressors is to
persuade them they are ignorant of the good. The inﬂamed sensitivity
induced by radicalized democratic theory ﬁnally experiences any limit
as arbitrary and tyrannical. There are no absolutes; freedom is absolute.
Of course the result is that, on the one hand, the argument justifying
freedom disappears and, on the other, all beliefs begin to have the
attenuated character that was initially supposed to be limited to religious
belief.

The gradual movement away from rights to openness was apparent,

for example, when Oliver Wendell Holmes renounced seeking for a
principle to determine which speech or conduct is not tolerable in a
democratic society and invoked instead an imprecise and practically
meaningless standard—clear and present danger—which to all intents
and purposes makes the preservation of public order the only common
good. Behind his opinion there was an optimistic view about progress,
one in which the complete decay of democratic principle and a collapse
into barbarism are impossible and in which the truth unaided always
triumphs in the marketplace of ideas. This optimism had not been
shared by the Founders, who insisted that the principles of democratic
government must be returned to and consulted even though the
consequences might be harsh for certain points of view, some merely
tolerated and not respected, others forbidden outright. To their way of
thinking there should be no tolerance for the intolerant. The notion that
there should be no limitation on free expression unless it can be shown
to be a clear and present danger would have made it impossible for
Lincoln to insist that there could be no compromise with the principle
of equality, that it did not depend on the people’s choice or election but
is the condition of their having elections in the ﬁrst place, that popular
sovereignty on the question of black slavery was impermissible even if it

would enable us to avoid the clear and present danger of a bloody civil
war.

partly through a theoretical critique, partly because of a political
rebellion against nature’s last constraints. Civic education turned away
from concentrating on the Founding to concentrating on openness
based on history and social science. There was even a general tendency
to debunk the Founding, to prove the beginnings were ﬂawed in order to
license a greater openness to the new. What began in Charles Beard’s
Marxism and Carl Becker’s historicism became routine. We are used to
hearing the Founders charged with being racists, murderers of Indians,
representatives of class interests. I asked my ﬁrst history professor in the
university, a very famous scholar, whether the picture he gave us of
George Washington did not have the effect of making us despise our
regime. “Not at all,” he said, “it doesn’t depend on individuals but on
our having good democratic values.” To which I rejoined, “But you just
showed us that Washington was only using those values to further the
class interests of the Virginia squirearchy.” He got angry, and that was
the end of it. He was comforted by a gentle assurance that the values of
democracy are part of the movement of history and did not require his
elucidation or defense. He could carry on his historical studies with the
moral certitude that they would lead to greater openness and hence
more democracy. The lessons of fascism and the vulnerability of
democracy, which we had all just experienced, had no effect on him.

Liberalism without natural rights, the kind that we knew from John

Stuart Mill and John Dewey, taught us that the only danger confronting
us is being closed to the emergent, the new, the manifestations of
progress. No attention had to be paid to the fundamental principles or
the moral virtues that inclined men to live according to them. To use
language now popular, civic culture was neglected. And this turn in
liberalism is what prepared us for cultural relativism and the fact-value
distinction, which seemed to carry that viewpoint further and give it
greater intellectual weight.

History and social science are used in a variety of ways to overcome

prejudice. We should not be ethnocentric, a term drawn from
anthropology, which tells us more about the meaning of openness. We
should not think our way is better than others. The intention is not so
much to teach the students about other times and places as to make

them aware of the fact that their preferences are only that—accidents of
their time and place. Their beliefs do not entitle them as individuals, or
collectively as a nation, to think they are superior to anyone else. John
Rawls is almost a parody of this tendency, writing hundreds of pages to
persuade men, and proposing a scheme of government that would force
them, not to despise anyone. In A Theory of Justice, he writes that the
physicist or the poet should not look down on the man who spends his
life counting blades of grass or performing any other frivolous or corrupt
activity. Indeed, he should be esteemed, since esteem from others, as
opposed to self-esteem, is a basic need of all men. So indiscriminateness
is a moral imperative because its opposite is discrimination. This folly
means that men are not permitted to seek for the natural human good
and admire it when found, for such discovery is coeval with the
discovery of the bad and contempt for it. Instinct and intellect must be
suppressed by education. The natural soul is to be replaced with an
artiﬁcial one.

At the root of this change in morals was the presence in the United

States of men and women of a great variety of nations, religions, and
races, and the fact that many were badly treated because they belonged
to these groups. Franklin Roosevelt declared that we want “a society
which leaves no one out.” Although the natural rights inherent in our
regime are perfectly adequate to the solution of this problem, provided
these outsiders adhere to them (i.e., they become insiders by adhering to
them), this did not satisfy the thinkers who inﬂuenced our educators, for
the right to vote and the other political rights did not automatically
produce social acceptance. The equal protection of the laws did not
protect a man from contempt and hatred as a Jew, an Italian, or a Black.

The reaction to this problem was, in the ﬁrst place, resistance to the

notion that outsiders had to give up their “cultural” individuality and
make themselves into that universal, abstract being who participates in
natural rights or else be doomed to an existence on the fringe; in the
second place, anger at the majority who imposed a “cultural” life on the
nation to which the Constitution is indifferent. Openness was designed
to provide a respectable place for these “groups” or “minorities”—to
wrest respect from those who were not disposed to give it—and to
weaken the sense of superiority of the dominant majority (more recently
dubbed WASPs, a name the success of which shows something of the
success of sociology in reinterpreting the national consciousness). That

dominant majority gave the country a dominant culture with its
traditions, its literature, its tastes, its special claim to know and supervise
the language, and its Protestant religions. Much of the intellectual
machinery of twentieth-century American political thought and social
science was constructed for the purposes of making an assault on that
majority. It treated the founding principles as impediments and tried to
overcome the other strand of our political heritage, majoritarianism, in
favor of a nation of minorities and groups each following its own beliefs
and inclinations. In particular, the intellectual minority expected to
enhance its status, presenting itself as the defender and spokesman of all
the others.

This reversal of the founding intention with respect to minorities is

most striking. For the Founders, minorities are in general bad things,
mostly identical to factions, selﬁsh groups who have no concern as such
for the common good. Unlike older political thinkers, they entertained
no hopes of suppressing factions and educating a united or
homogeneous citizenry. Instead they constructed an elaborate
machinery to contain factions in such a way that they would cancel one
another and allow for the pursuit of the common good. The good is still
the guiding consideration in their thought, although it is arrived at, less
directly than in classical political thought, by tolerating faction. The
Founders wished to achieve a national majority concerning the
fundamental rights and then prevent that majority from using its power
to overturn those fundamental rights. In twentieth-century social
science, however, the common good disappears and along with it the
negative view of minorities. The very idea of majority—now understood
to be selﬁsh interest—is done away with in order to protect the
minorities. This breaks the delicate balance between majority and
minority in Constitutional thought. In such a perspective, where there is
no common good, minorities are no longer problematic, and the
protection of them emerges as the central function of government.
Where this leads is apparent in, for example, Robert Dahl’s A Preface to
Democratic Theory. Groups or individuals who really care, as opposed to
those who have lukewarm feelings, deserve special attention or special
rights for their “intensity” or “commitment,” the new political
validation, which replaces reason. The Founding Fathers wished to
reduce and defang fanaticism, whereas Dahl encourages it.

The appeal of the minority formula was enormous for all kinds of

people, reactionary and progressive, all those who in the twenties and
thirties still did not accept the political solution imposed by the
Constitution. The reactionaries did not like the suppression of class
privilege and religious establishment. For a variety of reasons they
simply did not accept equality. Southerners knew full well that the
Constitution’s heart was a moral commitment to equality and hence
condemned segregation of blacks. The Constitution was not just a set of
rules of government but implied a moral order that was to be enforced
throughout the entire Union. Yet the inﬂuence, which has not been
sufﬁciently noted, of Southern writers and historians on the American
view of their history has been powerful. They were remarkably
successful in characterizing their “peculiar institution” as part of a
charming diversity and individuality of culture to which the
Constitution was worse than indifferent. The ideal of openness, lack of
ethnocentricity, is just what they needed for a modern defense of their
way of life against all the intrusions of outsiders who claimed equal
rights with the folks back home. The Southerners’ romantic
characterization of the alleged failings of the Constitution, and their
hostility to “mass society” with its technology, its money-grubbing way of
life, egoistic individuals and concomitant destruction of community,
organic and rooted, appealed to malcontents of all political colorations.
The New Left in the sixties expressed exactly the same ideology that had
been developed to protect the South from the threat to its practices
posed by the Constitutional rights and the Federal Government’s power
to enforce them. It is the old alliance of Right and Left against liberal
democracy, parodied as “bourgeois society.”

The progressives of the twenties and thirties did not like the

Constitutional protection of private property or the restraints on majority
will and on living as one pleased. For them, equality had not gone far
enough. Stalinists also found the deﬁnition of democracy as openness
useful. The Constitution clashed too violently with the theory and
practice of the Soviet Union. But if democracy means open-endedness,
and respect for other cultures prevents doctrinaire, natural-rights-based
condemnation of the Soviet reality, then someday their ways may
become ours. I remember my grade-school history textbook, newly
printed on ﬁne glossy paper, showing intriguing pictures of collective
farms where farmers worked and lived together without the proﬁt

motive. (Children cannot understand the issues, but they are easy to
propagandize.) This was very different from our way of life, but we were
not to be closed to it, to react to it merely on the basis of our cultural
prejudices.

Sexual adventurers like Margaret Mead and others who found

America too narrow told us that not only must we know other cultures
and learn to respect them, but we could also proﬁt from them. We could
follow their lead and loosen up, liberating ourselves from the opinion
that our taboos are anything other than social constraints. We could go
to the bazaar of cultures and ﬁnd reinforcement for inclinations that are
repressed by puritanical guilt feelings. All such teachers of openness had
either no interest in or were actively hostile to the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitution.

The civil rights movement provides a good example of this change in

thought. In its early days almost all the signiﬁcant leaders, in spite of
tactical and temperamental differences, relied on the Declaration of
Independence and the Constitution. They could charge whites not only
with the most monstrous injustices but also with contradicting their own
most sacred principles. The blacks were the true Americans in
demanding the equality that belongs to them as human beings by
natural and political right. This stance implied a ﬁrm conviction of the
truth of the principles of natural right and of their fundamental efﬁcacy
within the Constitutional tradition, which, although tarnished, tends in
the long run toward fulﬁlling those principles. They therefore worked
through Congress, the Presidency, and, above all, the Judiciary. By
contrast, the Black Power movement that supplanted the older civil
rights movement—leaving aside both its excesses and its very
understandable emphasis on self-respect and refusal to beg for
acceptance—had at its core the view that the Constitutional tradition
was always corrupt and was constructed as a defense of slavery. Its
demand was for black identity, not universal rights. Not rights but power
counted. It insisted on respect for blacks as blacks, not as human beings
simply.

yellows, Catholics, Protestants, or Jews. It guarantees the protection of
the rights of individual human beings. This has not proved to be
enough, however, to what is perhaps by now a majority of Americans.

The upshot of all this for the education of young Americans is that

they know much less about American history and those who were held
to be its heroes. This was one of the few things that they used to come to
college with that had something to do with their lives. Nothing has
taken its place except a smattering of facts learned about other nations
or cultures and a few social science formulas. None of this means much,
partly because little attention has been paid to what is required in order
truly to convey the spirit of other places and other times to young
people, or for that matter to anyone, partly because the students see no
relevance in any of it to the lives they are going to lead or to their
prevailing passions. It is the rarest of occurrences to ﬁnd a youngster
who has been infused by this education with a longing to know all about
China or the Romans or the Jews.

All to the contrary. There is an indifference to such things, for

relativism has extinguished the real motive of education, the search for a
good life. Young Americans have less and less knowledge of and interest
in foreign places. In the past there were many students who actually
knew something about and loved England, France, Germany, or Italy,
for they dreamed of living there or thought their lives would be made
more interesting by assimilating their languages and literatures. Such
students have almost disappeared, replaced at most by students who are
interested in the political problems of Third World countries and in
helping them to modernize, with due respect to their old cultures, of
course. This is not learning from others but condescension and a
disguised form of a new imperialism. It is the Peace Corps mentality,
which is not a spur to learning but to a secularized version of doing good
works.

Actually openness results in American conformism—out there in the

rest of the world is a drab diversity that teaches only that values are
relative, whereas here we can create all the life-styles we want. Our
openness means we do not need others. Thus what is advertised as a
great opening is a great closing. No longer is there a hope that there are
great wise men in other places and times who can reveal the truth about
life—except for the few remaining young people who look for a quick
ﬁx from a guru. Gone is the real historical sense of a Machiavelli who
wrested a few hours from each busy day in which “to don regal and
courtly garments, enter the courts of the ancients and speak with them.”

None of this concerns those who promote the new curriculum. The

point is to propagandize acceptance of different ways, and indifference
to their real content is as good a means as any. It was not necessarily the
best of times in America when Catholics and Protestants were
suspicious of and hated one another; but at least they were taking their
beliefs seriously, and the more or less satisfactory accommodations they
worked out were not simply the result of apathy about the state of their
souls. Practically all that young Americans have today is an insubstantial
awareness that there are many cultures, accompanied by a saccharine
moral drawn from that awareness: We should all get along. Why ﬁght?
In 1980, during the crisis with Iran, the mother of one of the hostages
expressed our current educational principles very well. She went to Iran
to beg for her son’s release, against the express wishes of the government
of her country, the very week a rescue of the hostages was attempted.
She justiﬁed her conduct by explaining that a mother has a right to try
to save her son and also to learn a new culture. These are two basic
rights, and her trip enabled her to kill two birds with one stone.

Actually the problem of cultural difference could have been faced

more easily here in America forty years ago. When I was in college, a
young Mississippian was lodged in my dormitory room for a few days
during a visit of the University of Virginia debating team, of which he
was a member. It was my ﬁrst meeting with an intelligent, educated
Southerner. He explained the inferiority of blacks to me, the reasons for
Jim Crow, and how all that was a part of a unique way of life. He was an
attractive, lively, amiable, healthy youngster. I, however, was horriﬁed by
him because I was still ethnocentric. I took my Northern beliefs to be
universal. The “different strokes for different folks” philosophy had not
yet taken full hold. Fortunately the homogenization of American
culture that has occurred since that enables us to avoid such nasty
confrontations. Only obviously pathological lower-class types now hold
the racist views of my young visitor. Southerners helped to fashion our
theoretical view of culture, but the Southern culture they intended to
defend disappeared.

One of the techniques of opening young people up is to require a

college course in a non-Western culture. Although many of the persons
teaching such courses are real scholars and lovers of the areas they study,
in every case I have seen this requirement—when there are so many
other things that can and should be learned but are not required, when

philosophy and religion are no longer required—has a demagogic
intention. The point is to force students to recognize that there are other
ways of thinking and that Western ways are not better. It is again not the
content that counts but the lesson to be drawn. Such requirements are
part of the effort to establish a world community and train its member—
the person devoid of prejudice. But if the students were really to learn
something of the minds of any of these non-Western cultures—which
they do not—they would ﬁnd that each and every one of these cultures
is ethnocentric. All of them think their way is the best way, and all
others are inferior. Herodotus tells us that the Persians thought that they
were the best, that those nations bordering on them were next best, that
those nations bordering on the nations bordering on them were third
best, and so on, their worth declining as the concentric circles were
farther from the Persian center. This is the very deﬁnition of
ethnocentrism. Something like this is as ubiquitous as the prohibition
against incest between mother and son.

Only in the Western nations, i.e., those inﬂuenced by Greek

philosophy, is there some willingness to doubt the identiﬁcation of the
good with one’s own way. One should conclude from the study of non-
Western cultures that not only to prefer one’s own way but to believe it
best, superior to all others, is primary and even natural—exactly the
opposite of what is intended by requiring students to study these
cultures. What we are really doing is applying a Western prejudice—
which we covertly take to indicate the superiority of our culture—and
deforming the evidence of those other cultures to attest to its validity.
The scientiﬁc study of other cultures is almost exclusively a Western
phenomenon, and in its origin was obviously connected with the search
for new and better ways, or at least for validation of the hope that our
own culture really is the better way, a validation for which there is no
felt need in other cultures. If we are to learn from those cultures, we
must wonder whether such scientiﬁc study is a good idea. Consistency
would seem to require professors of openness to respect the
ethnocentrism or closedness they ﬁnd everywhere else. However, in
attacking ethnocentrism, what they actually do is to assert unawares the
superiority of their scientiﬁc understanding and the inferiority of the
other cultures which do not recognize it at the same time that they
reject all such claims to superiority. They both afﬁrm and deny the
goodness of their science. They face a problem akin to that faced by

Pascal in the conﬂict between reason and revelation, without the
intellectual intransigence that forced him to abandon science in favor of
faith.

The reason for the non-Western closedness, or ethnocentrism, is

clear. Men must love and be loyal to their families and their peoples in
order to preserve them. Only if they think their own things are good can
they rest content with them. A father must prefer his child to other
children, a citizen his country to others. That is why there are myths—
to justify these attachments. And a man needs a place and opinions by
which to orient himself. This is strongly asserted by those who talk about
the importance of roots. The problem of getting along with outsiders is
secondary to, and sometimes in conﬂict with, having an inside, a
people, a culture, a way of life. A very great narrowness is not
incompatible with the health of an individual or a people, whereas with
great openness it is hard to avoid decomposition. The ﬁrm binding of
the good with one’s own, the refusal to see a distinction between the
two, a vision of the cosmos that has a special place for one’s people,
seem to be conditions of culture. This is what really follows from the
study of non-Western cultures proposed for undergraduates. It points
them back to passionate attachment to their own and away from the
science which liberates them from it. Science now appears as a threat to
culture and a dangerous uprooting charm. In short, they are lost in a no-
man’s-land between the goodness of knowing and the goodness of
culture, where they have been placed by their teachers who no longer
have the resources to guide them. Help must be sought elsewhere.

Greek philosophers were the ﬁrst men we know to address the

problem of ethnocentrism. Distinctions between the good and one’s
own, between nature and convention, between the just and the legal are
the signs of this movement of thought. They related the good to the
fulﬁllment of the whole natural human potential and were aware that
few, if any, of the nations of men had ways that allowed such fulﬁllment.
They were open to the good. They had to use the good, which was not
their own, to judge their own. This was a dangerous business because it
tended to weaken wholehearted attachment to their own, hence to
weaken their peoples as well as to expose themselves to the anger of
family, friends, and countrymen. Loyalty versus quest for the good
introduced an unresolvable tension into life. But the awareness of the

good as such and the desire to possess it are priceless humanizing
acquisitions.

This is the sound motive contained, along with many other less

sound ones, in openness as we understand it. Men cannot remain
content with what is given them by their culture if they are to be fully
human. This is what Plato meant to show by the image of the cave in
the Republic and by representing us as prisoners in it. A culture is a
cave. He did not suggest going around to other cultures as a solution to
the limitations of the cave. Nature should be the standard by which we
judge our own lives and the lives of peoples. That is why philosophy, not
history or anthropology, is the most important human science. Only
dogmatic assurance that thought is culture-bound, that there is no
nature, is what makes our educators so certain that the only way to
escape the limitations of our time and place is to study other cultures.
History and anthropology were understood by the Greeks to be useful
only in discovering what the past and other peoples had to contribute to
the discovery of nature. Historians and anthropologists were to put
peoples and their conventions to the test, as Socrates did individuals,
and go beyond them. These scientists were superior to their subjects
because they saw a problem where others refused to see one, and they
were engaged in the quest to solve it. They wanted to be able to evaluate
themselves and others.

This point of view, particularly the need to know nature in order to

have a standard, is uncomfortably buried beneath our human sciences,
whether they like it or not, and accounts for the ambiguities and
contradictions I have been pointing out. They want to make us culture-
beings with the instruments that were invented to liberate us from
culture. Openness used to be the virtue that permitted us to seek the
good by using reason. It now means accepting everything and denying
reason’s power. The unrestrained and thoughtless pursuit of openness,
without recognizing the inherent political, social, or cultural problem of
openness as the goal of nature, has rendered openness meaningless.
Cultural relativism destroys both one’s own and the good. What is most
characteristic of the West is science, particularly understood as the quest
to know nature and the consequent denigration of convention—i.e.,
culture or the West understood as a culture—in favor of what is
accessible to all men as men through their common and distinctive
faculty, reason. Science’s latest attempts to grasp the human situation—

cultural relativism, historicism, the fact-value distinction—are the
suicide of science. Culture, hence closedness, reigns supreme.
Openness to closedness is what we teach.

Cultural relativism succeeds in destroying the West’s universal or

intellectually imperialistic claims, leaving it to be just another culture.
So there is equality in the republic of cultures. Unfortunately the West is
deﬁned by its need for justiﬁcation of its ways or values, by its need for
discovery of nature, by its need for philosophy and science. This is its
cultural imperative. Deprived of that, it will collapse. The United States
is one of the highest and most extreme achievements of the rational
quest for the good life according to nature. What makes its political
structure possible is the use of the rational principles of natural right to
found a people, thus uniting the good with one’s own. Or, to put it
otherwise, the regime established here promised untrammeled freedom
to reason—not to everything indiscriminately, but to reason, the
essential freedom that justiﬁes the other freedoms, and on the basis of
which, and for the sake of which, much deviance is also tolerated. An
openness that denies the special claim of reason bursts the mainspring
keeping the mechanism of this regime in motion. And this regime,
contrary to all claims to the contrary, was founded to overcome
ethnocentrism, which is in no sense a discovery of social science.

It is important to emphasize that the lesson the students are drawing

from their studies is simply untrue. History and the study of cultures do
not teach or prove that values or cultures are relative. All to the contrary,
that is a philosophical premise that we now bring to our study of them.
This premise is unproven and dogmatically asserted for what are largely
political reasons. History and culture are interpreted in the light of it,
and then are said to prove the premise. Yet the fact that there have been
different opinions about good and bad in different times and places in
no way proves that none is true or superior to others. To say that it does
so prove is as absurd as to say that the diversity of points of view
expressed in a college bull session proves there is no truth. On the face
of it, the difference of opinion would seem to raise the question as to
which is true or right rather than to banish it. The natural reaction is to
try to resolve the difference, to examine the claims and reasons for each
opinion.

Only the unhistorical and inhuman belief that opinions are held for

no reason would prevent the undertaking of such an exciting activity.

Men and nations always think they have reasons, and it could be
understood to be historians’ and social scientists’ most important
responsibility to make explicit and test those reasons. It was always
known that there were many and conﬂicting opinions about the good,
and nations embodying each of them. Herodotus was at least as aware as
we are of the rich diversity of cultures. But he took that observation to be
an invitation to investigate all of them to see what was good and bad
about each and ﬁnd out what he could learn about good and bad from
them. Modern relativists take that same observation as proof that such
investigation is impossible and that we must be respectful of them all.
Thus students, and the rest of us, are deprived of the primary excitement
derived from the discovery of diversity, the impulse of Odysseus, who,
according to Dante, traveled the world to see the virtues and vices of
men. History and anthropology cannot provide the answers, but they
can provide the material on which judgment can work.

I know that men are likely to bring what are only their prejudices to

the judgment of alien peoples. Avoiding that is one of the main purposes
of education. But trying to prevent it by removing the authority of men’s
reason is to render ineffective the instrument that can correct their
prejudices. True openness is the accompaniment of the desire to know,
hence of the awareness of ignorance. To deny the possibility of knowing
good and bad is to suppress true openness. A proper historical attitude
would lead one to doubt the truth of historicism (the view that all
thought is essentially related to and cannot transcend its own time) and
treat it as a peculiarity of contemporary history. Historicism and cultural
relativism actually are a means to avoid testing our own prejudices and
asking, for example, whether men are really equal or whether that
opinion is merely a democratic prejudice.

One might well wonder whether our historical and anthropological

wisdom is not just a disguised and rather muddled version of the
Romantic dilemma that seemed so compelling and tragic at the
beginning of the nineteenth century and produced a longing for the
distant past or exotic new lands and an art to satisfy that longing. As the
heirs of science, so the argument goes, we know more than did the
peoples of other times and places with their unscientiﬁc prejudices and
illusions, but they were, or are, happier. This dilemma is expressed in
the distinction between naive and sentimental art. Lévi-Strauss is an
unwilling witness to my hypothesis. With a half-digested Rousseauism,

he thinks the best culture is to be found at that moment when men have
left the state of nature and live together in simple communities, without
real private property or the explosion of amour-propre. Such a view
requires science, which in turn requires developed and corrupted
society, in order to emerge. Science is itself one of the modiﬁcations of
amour-propre, the love of inequality. So this view simultaneously
produces melancholy about science. But the dilemma seems so
compelling only if we are certain that we know so much, which depends
on science. Abandon that certainty, and we might be willing to test the
beliefs of those happier peoples in order to see if they know something
we do not know. Maybe Homer’s genius was not so naive as Schiller
thought it was. If we abandon this pride in our knowledge, which
presents itself as humility, the discussion takes on a new dimension.
Then we could go in one of two directions: abandonment of science, or
the reestablishment of the theoretical life as both possible and itself
productive of self-sufﬁcient happiness. The Romantic posture is a way of
not facing these extremes that masquerades as heroic endurance. Our
shuttling back and forth between science and culture is a trivialized
spin-off from that posture.

Thus there are two kinds of openness, the openness of indifference—

promoted with the twin purposes of humbling our intellectual pride and
letting us be whatever we want to be, just as long as we don’t want to be
knowers—and the openness that invites us to the quest for knowledge
and certitude, for which history and the various cultures provide a
brilliant array of examples for examination. This second kind of
openness encourages the desire that animates and makes interesting
every serious student—“I want to know what is good for me, what will
make me happy”—while the former stunts that desire.

Openness, as currently conceived, is a way of making surrender to

whatever is most powerful, or worship of vulgar success, look principled.
It is historicism’s ruse to remove all resistance to history, which in our
day means public opinion, a day when public opinion already rules.
How often I have heard the abandonment of requirements to learn
languages or philosophy or science lauded as a progress of openness.
Here is where the two kinds of openness clash. To be open to knowing,
there are certain kinds of things one must know which most people
don’t want to bother to learn and which appear boring and irrelevant.
Even the life of reason is often unappealing; and useless knowledge, i.e.,

knowledge that is not obviously useful for a career, has no place in the
student’s vision of the curriculum. So the university that stands
intransigently for humane learning must necessarily look closed and
rigid. If openness means to “go with the ﬂow,” it is necessarily an
accommodation to the present. That present is so closed to doubt about
so many things impeding the progress of its principles that unqualiﬁed
openness to it would mean forgetting the despised alternatives to it,
knowledge of which makes us aware of what is doubtful in it. True
openness means closedness to all the charms that make us comfortable
with the present.

When I was a young teacher at Cornell, I once had a debate about

education with a professor of psychology. He said that it was his function
to get rid of prejudices in his students. He knocked them down like
tenpins. I began to wonder what he replaced those prejudices with. He
did not seem to have much of an idea of what the opposite of a
prejudice might be. He reminded me of the little boy who gravely
informed me when I was four that there is no Santa Claus, who wanted
me to bathe in the brilliant light of truth. Did this professor know what
those prejudices meant for the students and what effect being deprived
of them would have? Did he believe that there are truths that could
guide their lives as did their prejudices? Had he considered how to give
students the love of the truth necessary to seek unprejudiced beliefs, or
would he render them passive, disconsolate, indifferent, and subject to
authorities like himself, or the best of contemporary thought? My
informant about Santa Claus was just showing off, proving his
superiority to me. He had not created the Santa Claus that had to be
there in order to be refuted. Think of all we learn about the world from
men’s belief in Santa Clauses, and all that we learn about the soul from
those who believe in them. By contrast, merely methodological excision
from the soul of the imagination that projects Gods and heroes onto the
wall of the cave does not promote knowledge of the soul; it only
lobotomizes it, cripples its powers.

personally tried to teach my students prejudices, since nowadays—with
the general success of his method—they had learned to doubt beliefs
even before they believed in anything. Without people like me, he
would be out of business. Descartes had a whole wonderful world of old
beliefs, of prescientiﬁc experience and articulations of the order of

things, beliefs ﬁrmly and even fanatically held, before he even began his
systematic and radical doubt. One has to have the experience of really
believing before one can have the thrill of liberation. So I proposed a
division of labor in which I would help to grow the ﬂowers in the ﬁeld
and he could mow them down.

Prejudices, strong prejudices, are visions about the way things are.

They are divinations of the order of the whole of things, and hence the
road to a knowledge of that whole is by way of erroneous opinions about
it. Error is indeed our enemy, but it alone points to the truth and
therefore deserves our respectful treatment. The mind that has no
prejudices at the outset is empty. It can only have been constituted by a
method that is unaware of how difﬁcult it is to recognize that a prejudice
is a prejudice. Only Socrates knew, after a lifetime of unceasing labor,
that he was ignorant. Now every high-school student knows that. How
did it become so easy? What accounts for our amazing progress? Could
it be that our experience has been so impoverished by our various
methods, of which openness is only the latest, that there is nothing
substantial enough left there to resist criticism, and we therefore have
no world left of which to be really ignorant? Have we so simpliﬁed the
soul that it is no longer difﬁcult to explain? To an eye of dogmatic
skepticism, nature herself, in all her lush profusion of expressions, might
appear to be a prejudice. In her place we put a gray network of critical
concepts, which were invented to interpret nature’s phenomena but
which strangled them and therewith destroyed their own raison d’être.
Perhaps it is our ﬁrst task to resuscitate those phenomena so that we may
again have a world to which we can put our questions and be able to
philosophize. This seems to me to be our educational challenge.

PART ONE

STUDENTS

THE CLEAN SLATE

I used to think that young Americans began whatever education they
were to get at the age of eighteen, that their early lives were spiritually
empty and that they arrived at the university clean slates unaware of
their deeper selves and the world beyond their superﬁcial experience.
The contrast between them and their European counterparts was set in
high relief in the European novels and movies into which we were
initiated at the university. The Europeans got most of the culture they
were going to get from their homes and their public schools, lyceés, or
gymnasiums, where their souls were incorporated into their speciﬁc
literary traditions, which in turn expressed, and even founded, their
traditions as peoples. It was not simply or primarily that these European
schoolchildren had a vastly more sophisticated knowledge of the human
heart than we were accustomed to in the young or, for that matter, the
old. It was that their self-knowledge was mediated by their book learning
and that their ambitions were formed as much by models ﬁrst
experienced in books as in everyday life. Their books had a substantial
existence in everyday life and constituted much of what their society as a
whole looked up to. It was commonplace for children of what they
called good families to ﬁll their imaginations with hopes of serious
literary or philosophic careers, as do ours with hopes of careers in
entertainment or business. All this was given to them early on, and by
the time they were in their late teens it was part of the equipment of
their souls, a lens through which they saw everything and which would
affect all their later learning and experience. They went to the university
to specialize.

Young Americans seemed, in comparison, to be natural savages when

they came to the university. They had hardly heard the names of the
writers who were the daily fare of their counterparts across the Atlantic,
let alone took it into their heads that they could have a relationship to
them. “What’s Hecuba to him or he to Hecuba?” They belonged to the
whole world, using their reason to see the things all men have in
common, to solve the problems of survival, all the time innocently and
unaware trampling on the altars sacred to the diverse peoples and
nations of the earth who believe themselves constituted by their

particular gods and heroes rather than by the common currency of the
body. This American intellectual obtuseness could seem horrifying and
barbarous, a stunting of full humanity, an incapacity to experience the
beautiful, an utter lack of engagement in the civilization’s ongoing
discourse.

But for me, and for many better observers, this constituted a large

part of the charm of American students. Very often natural curiosity and
love of knowing appeared to come into their own in the ﬁrst ﬂush of
maturity. Without traditional constraints or encouragements, without
society’s rewards and punishments, without snobbism or exclusivity,
some Americans discovered that they had a boundless thirst for
signiﬁcant awareness, that their souls had spaces of which they were
unaware and which cried out for furnishing. European students whom I
taught always knew all about Rousseau and Kant, but such writers had
been drummed into them from childhood and, in the new world after
the war, they had become routine, as much a part of childhood’s
limitations as short pants, no longer a source of inspiration. So these
students became suckers for the new, the experimental. But for
Americans the works of the great writers could be the bright sunlit
uplands where they could ﬁnd the outside, the authentic liberation for
which this essay is a plea. The old was new for these American students,
and in that they were right, for every important old insight is perennially
fresh. It is possible that Americans would always lack the immediate,
rooted link to the philosophic and artistic achievements that appear to
be part of the growth of particular cultures. But their approach to these
works bespoke a free choice and the potential for man as man,
regardless of time, place, station or wealth, to participate in what is
highest. It would be a sad commentary on the human condition if the
brotherhood of man is founded on what is lowest in him, while the
higher cultivation required unbridgeably separate “cultures.” The
American disposition gave witness to an optimistic belief that the two
universalities, of the body and of the soul, are possible, that access to the
best is not dependent on chance. Young Americans, that is, some young
Americans, gave promise of a continuing vitality for the tradition
because they did not take it to be tradition.

The enchanting prospect provided by the American student was

particularly powerful when I ﬁrst started teaching good undergraduates
in this country in the years just after Sputnik. In 1965 I wrote:

different in outlook from its teachers. I am referring to the good
students in the better colleges and universities, those to whom a
liberal education is primarily directed and who are the objects of
a training which presupposes the best possible material. These
young people have never experienced the anxieties about simple
physical well-being that their parents experienced during the
depression. They have been raised in comfort and with the
expectation of ever increasing comfort. Hence they are largely
indifferent to it; they are not proud of having acquired it and
have not occupied themselves with the petty and sometimes
deforming concerns necessary to its acquisition. And, because
they do not particularly care about it, they are more willing to
give it up in the name of grand ideals; as a matter of fact, they
are eager to do so in the hope of proving that they are not
attached to it and are open to higher callings. In short, these
students are a kind of democratic version of an aristocracy. The
unbroken prosperity of the last twenty years gives them the
conﬁdence that they can always make a living. So they are ready
to undertake any career or adventure if it can be made to appear
serious. The ties of tradition, family, and ﬁnancial responsibility
are weak. And, along with all this, goes an open, generous
character. They tend to be excellent students and extremely
grateful for anything they learn. A look at this special group tends
to favor a hopeful prognosis for the country’s moral and
intellectual health.
 

There was, at that moment, a spiritual yearning, a powerful tension of
the soul which made the university atmosphere electric. The Soviets’
beating us into space shocked the nation and, for a moment, leveling
education was set back on its heels. There seemed to be no time for that
nonsense. Survival itself depended on better education for the best
people. External necessity injected into the easygoing educational world
the urgency that should always be there. Money and standards emerged
in the twinkling of an eye. The goal was to produce scientiﬁc
technicians who would save us from being at the mercy of tyrants. The
high schools concentrated on math and physics, and there was honor

and the promise of great futures for those who excelled in them. The
Scholastic Aptitude Test became authoritative. Intellectual effort
became a national pastime. The mere exercise of unused and ﬂabby
muscles is salutary, and the national effort both trained and inspired the
mind. The students were better, more highly motivated.

Then I began to notice strange things. For example, for the ﬁrst time,

American students were really learning languages. And there were the
signs of an incipient longing for something else. Science had been
oversold. The true scientiﬁc vocation is very rare, and in the high
schools it was presented in technical and uninspired fashion. The
students apparently learned what they were asked to learn, but boredom
was not wholly compensated for by great expectations. The new mental
activity and desire for achievement had not quite found their objects. I
observed that many of the best students’ dedication to science was very
thin. The great theoretical difﬁculty of modern natural science—that it
cannot explain why it is good—was having its practical effect. The why
question was coming close to the surface. As a result, although the sole
interest of the public ofﬁcials was in natural science, social science and
the humanities also began to proﬁt (inasmuch as the universities could
not avoid saying they counted too). A little liberal learning easily
attracted many of the most gifted away from natural science. They felt
the alternatives had been hidden from them. And, once in the
university, they could, this being a free country, change their minds
about their interests when they discovered that there is something in
addition to science. It was a tense moment, full of cravings that lacked
clearly perceived goals.

I was convinced in the early sixties that what was wanted was a liberal

education to give such students the wherewithal to examine their lives
and survey their potential. This was the one thing the universities were
unequipped and unwilling to offer them. The students’ wandering and
wayward energies ﬁnally found a political outlet. By the mid-sixties
universities were offering them every concession other than education,
but appeasement failed and soon the whole experiment in excellence
was washed away, leaving not a trace. The various liberations wasted that
marvelous energy and tension, leaving the students’ souls exhausted and
ﬂaccid, capable of calculating, but not of passionate insight.

It may very well be that I was wrong, that what was building up in the

early sixties was only a ﬁnal assault on the last remaining inhibitions,

that the appearance of intellectual longing was really only a version of
the most powerful of modern longings—for the overcoming of necessity,
tension, and conﬂict, a resting of the soul from its eternal travail. I still
think, however, that there was much of true intellectual longing, and it
only ended in relaxation as a result of our wasted opportunities.

But the students who have succeeded that generation of the late

ﬁfties and early sixties, when the culture leeches, professional and
amateur, began their great spiritual bleeding, have induced me to
wonder whether my conviction—the old Great Books conviction—was
correct. That conviction was that nature is the only thing that counts in
education, that the human desire to know is permanent, that all it really
needs is the proper nourishment, and that education is merely putting
the feast on the table. At the very best, it is clear to me now that nature
needs the cooperation of convention, just as man’s art is needed to
found the political order that is the condition of his natural
completeness. At worst, I fear that spiritual entropy or an evaporation of
the soul’s boiling blood is taking place, a fear that Nietzsche thought
justiﬁed and made the center of all his thought. He argued that the
spirit’s bow was being unbent and risked being permanently unstrung.
Its activity, he believed, comes from culture, and the decay of culture
meant not only the decay of man in this culture but the decay of man
simply. This is the crisis he tried to face resolutely: the very existence of
man as man, as a noble being, depended on him and on men like him
—so he thought. He may not have been right, but his case looks
stronger all the time. At all events, the impression of natural savagery
that Americans used to make was deceptive. It was only relative to the
impression made by the Europeans. Today’s select students know so
much less, are so much more cut off from the tradition, are so much
slacker intellectually, that they make their predecessors look like
prodigies of culture. The soil is ever thinner, and I doubt whether it can
now sustain the taller growths.

Consider by contrast the education that still persists, in very

attenuated form, in France. To overstate only a bit, there are two writers
who between them shape and set the limits to the minds of educated
Frenchmen. Every Frenchman is born, or at least early on becomes,
Cartesian or Pascalian. (Something similar could be said about
Shakespeare as educator of the English, Goethe of the Germans, and
Dante and Machiavelli of the Italians.) Descartes and Pascal are

national authors, and they tell the French people what their alternatives
are, and afford a peculiar and powerful perspective on life’s perennial
problems. They weave the fabric of souls. On my last trip to France I
heard a waiter call one of his fellow waiters “a Cartesian.” It was not
pretentiousness; he was just referring to what was for him a type. It is not
so much that the French get principles from these sources; rather they
produce a cast of mind. Descartes and Pascal represent a choice
between reason and revelation, science and piety, the choice from
which everything else follows. One or the other of these total visions
almost always presents itself to the minds of Frenchmen when they
think about themselves and their problems. These great opponents
whom no synthesis can unite—the opposition between bon sens and
faith against all odds—set in motion a dualism that we recognize when
we speak both of French clarity and of French passion. No country has
had such a persistent and irreconcilable quarrel between the secular and
the religious as France, where the two parties ﬁnd no common ground,
where the aspirations of citizens who share the same country have such
different senses about the meaning of life. Shakespeare provided a
mediation of these two poles for the English, but no one succeeded in
doing it for the French, although Rousseau, a Swiss, made a noble
attempt. Both Enlightenment and Catholic thought have found their
special home in France for more than three centuries. Descartes and
Pascal gave accounts for the French of the West’s common faith,
Christianity, and at the same time situated them with respect to that
other, more distant, source of inspiration, Greece. The succeeding
generations of writers who began from the Descartes-Pascal tension
developed and varied their themes, and the essential spiritual
experiences are repeated in Voltaire, Montesquieu, Constant, Balzac
and Zola, on the one hand, and Malebranche, Chateaubriand, De
Maistre, Baudelaire, Proust and Céline, on the other, each aware of the
others and carrying on a dialogue with or confronting his opposite
number.

It was, therefore, very French of Tocqueville to say that the

Americans’ method of thought was Cartesian without their ever having
read Descartes, and to wonder whether they could understand a Pascal
or produce one. America was not for him a people with a book. A
Frenchman was a creature of sentiments informed by a literary tradition,
while an American was a man of rational principles. These principles

were ﬁrst elaborated, of course, by writers but were such, as Kant said
about his own moral philosophy, as to express what every well-brought-
up child knows. Reciprocal recognition of rights needs little training, no
philosophy, and abstracts from all differences of national character.
Americans were, in effect, told that they could be whatever they wanted
to be or happened to be as long as they recognized that the same applied
to all other men and they were willing to support and defend the
government that guaranteed that dispensation. It is possible to become
an American in a day. And this is not to make light of what it means to
be an American. The cooperation of natural passion and natural reason
deﬁes the ancient maxims that insisted that a city be like an organic
unity, generated by the motherland, with a citizen’s relation to it like a
leaf’s to a tree. It is, however, impossible, or it was until only yesterday,
to become a Frenchman, for a Frenchman is a complex harmony, or
dissonance, of historic echoes, from birth on. The French language,
which the French used to learn very well, did not exist for the sake of
conveying information, for communicating men’s common needs; it
was indistinguishable from a historical consciousness. Frenchness is
deﬁned by participation in this language, its literature and the entire
range of effects it produces. Somehow the legalistic arguments about
rights do not touch the privilege conveyed by participation in it. In
America there are in principle no real outsiders, while in France persons
who, although citizens, are marginal to this tradition, for example, Jews,
have always had to think hard about what it is they belong to. In France,
the Jew’s relation to what is constitutively French is a great and complex
literary theme. The response to the issue is not universal and causes the
development of an interesting spectrum of human types. A Jew in
America, by contrast, is as American as anyone; and if he is singled out
or treated differently, unconditional outrage is the appropriate response.

The lack of American equivalents to Descartes, Rascal, or, for that

matter, Montaigne, Rabelais, Racine, Montesquieu and Rousseau is not
a question of quality, but of whether there are any writers who are
necessary to building our spiritual ediﬁce, whom one must have read, or
rather lived with, to be called educated, and who are the interpreters
and even makers of our national life. One can think of American writers
and writings that should be read and frequently are read; but, to the
extent that Americans are readers, the whole world is their bookshelf;
there has not been the deep necessity to absorb their own country’s

writings that citizens of other nations experience. A phenomenon like
Wagner’s Gesamtkunstwerk, a high work of art which is intended to be
wholly German, of Germans, for Germans and by Germans, and is an
expression of collective consciousness, is inconceivable to Americans.
And it is astonishing how little a Frenchman knows, or has a feeling for,
things that are not French. But to Americans, Homer, Virgil, Dante,
Shakespeare, Goethe belong to everyone or to “civilization.” And
perhaps they do, in the long run. But this was not the view of Greeks,
Romans, Italians, Englishmen and Germans, or of the Jews with their
book that belonged to them, that told their story, and embodied, so to
speak, their instinct. Americans believe in equal access. Mortimer
Adler’s business genius recognized this and made a roaring commercial
success out of the Great Books. He was not even concerned about the
translations he used, let alone about learning languages. Most writers in
older lands despaired of being understood by those who had not lived
their language. Heidegger, who desperately tried to maintain and
revitalize this view, thought that “Language is the house of Being,” that
it is the height of superﬁciality to suppose that translation is even
possible.

Yet my early experience of American simplicity had persuaded me

that we were right, that we could begin with nothing, that uncultivated
nature sufﬁced. I had not, however, paid sufﬁcient attention to what
students actually used to bring with them, the education that was once
in the air that helped launch them. Most students could be counted on
to know the Bible, that ubiquitous source of the older traditions. In
America it was not ﬁltered through great national interpreters, but
approached directly in the manner of early Protestantism, every man his
own interpreter. The Bible was thus a mirror of that indifference to
national cultures inherent in the American method. Most students also
participated in a remarkably uniﬁed and explicit political tradition that
possesses one writing known to everyone and probably believed by most,
the Declaration of Independence.

of the longest uninterrupted political traditions of any nation in the
world. What is more, that tradition is unambiguous; its meaning is
articulated 
in 
simple, 
rational 
speech 
that 
is 
immediately

comprehensible and powerfully persuasive to all normal human beings.
America tells one story: the unbroken, ineluctable progress of freedom

and equality. From its ﬁrst settlers and its political foundings on, there
has been no dispute that freedom and equality are the essence of justice
for us. No one serious or notable has stood outside this consensus. You
had to be a crank or a buffoon (e.g., Henry Adams or H. L. Mencken,
respectively) to get attention as a nonbeliever in the democracy. All
signiﬁcant political disputes have been about the meaning of freedom
and equality, not about their rightness. Nowhere else is there a tradition
or a culture whose message is so distinct and unequivocal—certainly not
in France, Italy, Germany, or even England. There the greatest events
and the greatest men speak for monarchy and aristocracy as well as for
democracy, for established religion as well as for tolerance, for
patriotism that takes primacy over liberty, for privilege that takes
primacy over equality of right. Belonging to one of these peoples may be
explained as a sentiment, an attachment to one’s own, akin to the
attachment to father and mother, but Frenchness, Englishness,
Germanness remain, nonetheless, ineffable. Everybody can, however,
articulate what Americanness is. And that Americanness generated a
race of heroes—Franklin, Washington, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lincoln
and so on—all of whom contributed to equality. Our imagination is not
turned toward a Joan of Arc, a Louis XIV or a Napoleon who
counterbalance our equivalent of 1789. Our heroes and the language of
the Declaration contribute to a national reverence for our Constitution,
also a unique phenomenon. All this is material for self-consciousness
and provides a superior moral signiﬁcance to humdrum lives as well as
something to study.

But the unity, grandeur and attendant folklore of the founding

heritage was attacked from so many directions in the last half-century
that it gradually disappeared from daily life and from textbooks. It all
began to seem like Washington and the cherry tree—not the sort of
thing to teach children seriously. What is inﬂuential in the higher
intellectual circles always ends up in the schools. The leading ideas of
the Declaration began to be understood as eighteenth-century myths or
ideologies. Historicism, in Carl Becker’s version (The Declaration of
Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas, 1922), both cast
doubt on the truth of the natural rights teaching and optimistically
promised that it would provide a substitute. Similarly Dewey’s
pragmatism—the method of science as the method of democracy,
individual growth without limits, especially natural limits—saw the past

as radically imperfect and regarded our history as irrelevant or as a
hindrance to rational analysis of our present. Then there was Marxist
debunking of the Charles Beard variety, trying to demonstrate that there
was no public spirit, only private concern for property, in the Founding
Fathers, thus weakening our convictions of the truth or superiority of
American principles and our heroes (An Economic Interpretation of the
Constitution, 1913). Then the Southern historians and writers avenged
the victory of the antislavery Union by providing low motives for the
North (incorporating European critiques of commerce and technology)
and idealizing the South’s way of life. Finally, in curious harmony with
the Southerners, the radicals in the civil rights movement succeeded in
promoting a popular conviction that the Founding was, and the
American principles are, racist. The bad conscience they promoted
killed off the one continuing bit of popular culture that celebrated the
national story—the Western.

Thus, openness has driven out the local deities, leaving only the

speechless, meaningless country. There is no immediate, sensual
experience of the nation’s meaning or its project, which would provide
the basis for adult reﬂection on regimes and statesmanship. Students
now arrive at the university ignorant and cynical about our political
heritage, lacking the wherewithal to be either inspired by it or seriously
critical of it.

The other element of fundamental primary learning that has

disappeared is religion. As the respect for the Sacred—the latest fad—
has soared, real religion and knowledge of the Bible have diminished to
the vanishing point. The gods never walked very tall in our political life
or in our schools. The Lord’s Prayer we mumbled in grade school when
I was a child affected us less than the Pledge of Allegiance we also
recited. It was the home—and the houses of worship related to it—
where religion lived. The holy days and the common language and set
of references that permeated most households constituted a large part of
the family bond and gave it a substantial content. Moses and the Tables
of the Law, Jesus and his preaching of brotherly love, had an
imaginative existence. Passages from the Psalms and the Gospels echoed
in children’s heads. Attending church or synagogue, praying at the table,
were a way of life, inseparable from the moral education that was
supposed to be the family’s special responsibility in this democracy.
Actually, the moral teaching was the religious teaching. There was no

abstract doctrine. The things one was supposed to do, the sense that the
world supported them and punished disobedience, were all incarnated
in the Biblical stories. The loss of the gripping inner life vouchsafed
those who were nurtured by the Bible must be primarily attributed not
to our schools or political life, but to the family, which, with all its rights
to privacy, has proved unable to maintain any content of its own. The
dreariness of the family’s spiritual landscape passes belief. It is as
monochrome and unrelated to those who pass through it as are the
barren steppes frequented by nomads who take their mere subsistence
and move on. The delicate fabric of the civilization into which the
successive generations are woven has unraveled, and children are raised,
not educated.

I am speaking here not of the unhappy, broken homes that are such a

prominent part of American life, but the relatively happy ones, where
husband and wife like each other and care about their children, very
often unselﬁshly devoting the best parts of their lives to them. But they
have nothing to give their children in the way of a vision of the world, of
high models of action or profound sense of connection with others. The
family requires the most delicate mixture of nature and convention, of
human and divine, to subsist and perform its function. Its base is merely
bodily reproduction, but its purpose is the formation of civilized human
beings. In teaching a language and providing names for all things, it
transmits an interpretation of the order of the whole of things. It feeds
on books, in which the little polity—the family—believes, which tell
about right and wrong, good and bad and explain why they are so. The
family requires a certain authority and wisdom about the ways of the
heavens and of men. The parents must have knowledge of what has
happened in the past, and prescriptions for what ought to be, in order to
resist the philistinism or the wickedness of the present. Ritual and
ceremony are now often said to be necessary for the family, and they are
now lacking. The family, however, has to be a sacred unity believing in
the permanence of what it teaches, if its ritual and ceremony are to
express and transmit the wonder of the moral law, which it alone is
capable of transmitting and which makes it special in a world devoted to
the humanly, all too humanly, useful. When that belief disappears, as it
has, the family has, at best, a transitory togetherness. People sup
together, play together, travel together, but they do not think together.
Hardly any homes have any intellectual life whatsoever, let alone one

that informs the vital interests of life. Educational TV marks the high
tide for family intellectual life.

The cause of this decay of the family’s traditional role as the

transmitter of tradition is the same as that of the decay of the
humanities: nobody believes that the old books do, or even could,
contain the truth. So books have become, at best, “culture,” i.e., boring.
As Tocqueville put it, in a democracy tradition is nothing more than
information. With the “information explosion,” tradition has become
superﬂuous. As soon as tradition has come to be recognized as tradition,
it is dead, something to which lip service is paid in the vain hope of
edifying the kids. In the United States, practically speaking, the Bible
was the only common culture, one that united simple and sophisticated,
rich and poor, young and old, and—as the very model for a vision of the
order of the whole of things, as well as the key to the rest of Western art,
the greatest works of which were in one way or another responsive to the
Bible—provided access to the seriousness of books. With its gradual and
inevitable disappearance, the very idea of such a total book and the
possibility and necessity of world-explanation is disappearing. And
fathers and mothers have lost the idea that the highest aspiration they
might have for their children is for them to be wise—as priests, prophets
or philosophers are wise. Specialized competence and success are all
that they can imagine. Contrary to what is commonly thought, without
the book even the idea of the order of the whole is lost.

Parents do not have the legal or moral authority they had in the Old

World. They lack self-conﬁdence as educators of their children,
generously believing that they will be better than their parents, not only
in well-being, but in moral, bodily and intellectual virtue. There is
always a more or less open belief in progress, which means the past
appears poor and contemptible. The future, which is open-ended,
cannot be prescribed to by parents, and it eclipses the past which they
know to be inferior.

Along with the constant newness of everything and the ceaseless

moving from place to place, ﬁrst radio, then television, have assaulted
and overturned the privacy of the home, the real American privacy,
which permitted the development of a higher and more independent
life within democratic society. Parents can no longer control the
atmosphere of the home and have even lost the will to do so. With great
subtlety and energy, television enters not only the room, but also the

tastes of old and young alike, appealing to the immediately pleasant and
subverting whatever does not conform to it. Nietzsche said the
newspaper had replaced the prayer in the life of the modern bourgeois,
meaning that the busy, the cheap, the ephemeral, had usurped all that
remained of the eternal in his daily life. Now television has replaced the
newspaper. It is not so much the low quality of the fare provided that is
troubling. It is much more the difﬁculty of imagining any order of taste,
any way of life with pleasures and learning that naturally ﬁt the lives of
the family’s members, keeping itself distinct from the popular culture
and resisting the visions of what is admirable and interesting with which
they are bombarded from within the household itself.

The improved education of the vastly expanded middle class in the

last half-century has also weakened the family’s authority. Almost
everyone in the middle class has a college degree, and most have an
advanced degree of some kind. Those of us who can look back to the
humble stations of our parents or grandparents, who never saw the
inside of an institution of higher learning, can have cause for self-
congratulation. But—inevitably but—the impression that our general
populace is better educated depends on an ambiguity in the meaning of
the word education, or a fudging of the distinction between liberal and
technical education. A highly trained computer specialist need not have
had any more learning about morals, politics or religion than the most
ignorant of persons. All to the contrary, his narrow education, with the
prejudices and the pride accompanying it, and its literature which
comes to be and passes away in a day and uncritically accepts the
premises of current wisdom, can cut him off from the liberal learning
that simpler folk used to absorb from a variety of traditional sources. It is
not evident to me that someone whose regular reading consists of Time,
Playboy and Scientiﬁc American has any profounder wisdom about the
world than the rural schoolboy of yore with his McGuffey’s reader.
When a youngster like Lincoln sought to educate himself, the
immediately available obvious things for him to learn were the Bible,
Shakespeare and Euclid. Was he really worse off than those who try to
ﬁnd their way through the technical smorgasbord of the current school
system, with its utter inability to distinguish between important and
unimportant in any way other than by the demands of the market?

My grandparents were ignorant people by our standards, and my

grandfather held only lowly jobs. But their home was spiritually rich

because all the things done in it, not only what was speciﬁcally ritual,
found their origin in the Bible’s commandments, and their explanation
in the Bible’s stories and the commentaries on them, and had their
imaginative counterparts in the deeds of the myriad of exemplary
heroes. My grandparents found reasons for the existence of their family
and the fulﬁllment of their duties in serious writings, and they
interpreted their special sufferings with respect to a great and ennobling
past. Their simple faith and practices linked them to great scholars and
thinkers who dealt with the same material, not from outside or from an
alien perspective, but believing as they did, while simply going deeper
and providing guidance. There was a respect for real learning, because it
had a felt connection with their lives. This is what a community and a
history mean, a common experience inviting high and low into a single
body of belief.

I do not believe that my generation, my cousins who have been

educated in the American way, all of whom are M.D.s or Ph.D.s, have
any comparable learning. When they talk about heaven and earth, the
relations between men and women, parents and children, the human
condition, I hear nothing but cliches, superﬁcialities, the material of
satire. I am not saying anything so trite as that life is fuller when people
have myths to live by. I mean rather that a life based on the Book is
closer to the truth, that it provides the material for deeper research in
and access to the real nature of things. Without the great revelations,
epics and philosophies as part of our natural vision, there is nothing to
see out there, and eventually little left inside. The Bible is not the only
means to furnish a mind, but without a book of similar gravity, read with
the gravity of the potential believer, it will remain unfurnished.

The moral education that is today supposed to be the great

responsibility of the family cannot exist if it cannot present to the
imagination of the young a vision of a moral cosmos and of the rewards
and punishments for good and evil, sublime speeches that accompany
and interpret deeds, protagonists and antagonists in the drama of moral
choice, a sense of the stakes involved in such choice, and the despair
that results when the world is “disenchanted.” Otherwise, education
becomes the vain attempt to give children “values.” Beyond the fact that
parents do not know what they believe, and surely do not have the self-
conﬁdence to tell their children much more than that they want them
to be happy and fulﬁll whatever potential they may have, values are

such pallid things. What are they and how are they communicated? The
courses in “value-clariﬁcation” springing up in schools are supposed to
provide models for parents and get children to talk about abortion,
sexism or the arms race, issues the signiﬁcance of which they cannot
possibly understand. Such education is little more than propaganda,
and propaganda that does not work, because the opinions or values
arrived at are will-o’-the-wisps, insubstantial, without ground in
experience or passion, which are the bases of moral reasoning. Such
“values” will inevitably change as public opinion changes. The new
moral education has none of the genius that engenders moral instinct or
second nature, the prerequisite not only of character but also of thought.
Actually, the family’s moral training now comes down to inculcating the
bare minima of social behavior, not lying or stealing, and produces
university students who can say nothing more about the ground of their
moral action than “If I did that to him, he could do it to me”—an
explanation which does not even satisfy those who utter it.

This gradual stilling of the old political and religious echoes in the

souls of the young accounts for the difference between the students I
knew at the beginning of my teaching career and those I face now. The
loss of the books has made them narrower and ﬂatter. Narrower because
they lack what is most necessary, a real basis for discontent with the
present and awareness that there are alternatives to it. They are both
more contented with what is and despairing of ever escaping from it.
The longing for the beyond has been attenuated. The very models of
admiration and contempt have vanished. Flatter, because without
interpretations of things, without the poetry or the imagination’s activity,
their souls are like minors, not of nature, but of what is around. The
reﬁnement of the mind’s eye that permits it to see the delicate
distinctions among men, among their deeds and their motives, and
constitutes real taste, is impossible without the assistance of literature in
the grand style.

So there is less soil in which university teaching can take root, less of

the enthusiasm and curiosity of young Glaucon in Plato’s Republic,
whose eros makes him imagine that there are splendid satisfactions in
store for him about which he does not wish to be fooled and for
knowledge of which he seeks a teacher. It is much more difﬁcult today
to attach the classic books to any experience or felt need the students
have.

BOOKS

I have begun to wonder whether the experience of the greatest texts
from early childhood is not a prerequisite for a concern throughout life
for them and for lesser but important literature. The soul’s longing, its
intolerable irritation under the constraints of the conditional and
limited, may very well require encouragement at the outset. At all
events, whatever the cause, our students have lost the practice of and the
taste for reading. They have not learned how to read, nor do they have
the expectation of delight or improvement from reading. They are
“authentic,” 
as 
against 
the 
immediately 
preceding 
university

generations, in having few cultural pretensions and in refusing
hypocritical ritual bows to high culture.

When I ﬁrst noticed the decline in reading during the late sixties, I

began asking my large introductory classes, and any other group of
younger students to which I spoke, what books really count for them.
Most are silent, puzzled by the question. The notion of books as
companions is foreign to them. Justice Black with his tattered copy of
the Constitution in his pocket at all times is not an example that would
mean much to them. There is no printed word to which they look for
counsel, inspiration or joy. Sometimes one student will say “the Bible.”
(He learned it at home, and his Biblical studies are not usually
continued at the university.) There is always a girl who mentions Ayn
Rand’s The Fountainhead, a book, although hardly literature, which,
with its sub-Nietzschean assertiveness, excites somewhat eccentric
youngsters to a new way of life. A few students mention recent books
that struck them and supported their own self-interpretation, like The
Catcher in the Rye. (Theirs is usually the most genuine response and
also shows a felt need for help in self-interpretation. But it is an
uneducated response. Teachers should take advantage of the need
expressed in it to show such students that better writers can help them
more.) After such sessions I am pursued by a student or two who wants
to make it clear that he or she is really inﬂuenced by books, not just by
one or two but by many. Then he recites a list of classics he may have
grazed in high school.

Imagine such a young person walking through the Louvre or the

Ufﬁzi, and you can immediately grasp the condition of his soul. In his
innocence of the stories of Biblical and Greek or Roman antiquity,
Raphael, Leonardo, Michelangelo, Rembrandt and all the others can
say nothing to him. All he sees are colors and forms—modern art. In
short, like almost everything else in his spiritual life, the paintings and
statues are abstract. No matter what much of modern wisdom asserts,
these artists counted on immediate recognition of their subjects and,
what is more, on their having a powerful meaning for their viewers. The
works were the fulﬁllment of those meanings, giving them a sensuous
reality and hence completing them. Without those meanings, and
without their being something essential to the viewer as a moral,
political and religious being, the works lose their essence. It is not
merely the tradition that is lost when the voice of civilization elaborated
over millennia has been stilled in this way. It is being itself that vanishes
beyond the dissolving horizon. One of the most ﬂattering things that
ever happened to me as a teacher occurred when I received a postcard
from a very good student on his ﬁrst visit to Italy, who wrote, “You are
not a professor of political philosophy but a travel agent.” Nothing could
have better expressed my intention as an educator. He thought I had
prepared him to see. Then he could begin thinking for himself with
something to think about. The real sensation of the Florence in which
Machiavelli is believable is worth all the formulas of metaphysics ten
times over. Education in our times must try to ﬁnd whatever there is in
students that might yearn for completion, and to reconstruct the
learning that would enable them autonomously to seek that completion.

In a less grandiose vein, students today have nothing like the Dickens

who gave so many of us the unforgettable Pecksniffs, Micawbers, Pips,
with which we sharpened our vision, allowing us some subtlety in our
distinction of human types. It is a complex set of experiences that
enables one to say so simply, “He is a Scrooge.” Without literature, no
such observations are possible and the ﬁne art of comparison is lost. The
psychological obtuseness of our students is appalling, because they have
only pop psychology to tell them what people are like, and the range of
their motives. As the awareness that we owed almost exclusively to
literary genius falters, people become more alike, for want of knowing
they can be otherwise. What poor substitutes for real diversity are the

wild rainbows of dyed hair and other external differences that tell the
observer nothing about what is inside.

Lack of education simply results in students’ seeking for

enlightenment wherever it is readily available, without being able to
distinguish between the sublime and trash, insight and propaganda. For
the most part students turn to the movies, ready prey to interested
moralisms such as the depictions of Gandhi or Thomas More—largely
designed to further passing political movements and to appeal to
simplistic needs for greatness—or to insinuating ﬂattery of their secret
aspirations and vices, giving them a sense of signiﬁcance. Kramer vs.
Kramer may be up-to-date about divorces and sex roles, but anyone who
does not have Anna Karenina or The Red and the Black as part of his
viewing equipment cannot sense what might be lacking, or the
difference between an honest presentation and an exercise in
consciousness-raising, trashy sentimentality and elevated sentiment. As
ﬁlms have emancipated themselves from the literary tyranny under
which they suffered and which gave them a bad conscience, the ones
with serious pretensions have become intolerably ignorant and
manipulative. The distance from the contemporary and its high
seriousness that students most need in order not to indulge their petty
desires and to discover what is most serious about themselves cannot be
found in the cinema, which now only knows the present. Thus, the
failure to read good books both enfeebles the vision and strengthens our
most fatal tendency—the belief that the here and now is all there is.

The only way to counteract this tendency is to intervene most

vigorously in the education of those few who come to the university with
a strong urge for un je ne sais quoi, who fear that they may fail to
discover it, and that the cultivation of their minds is required for the
success of their quest. We are long past the age when a whole tradition
could be stored up in all students, to be fruitfully used later by some.
Only those who are willing to take risks and are ready to believe the
implausible are now ﬁt for a bookish adventure. The desire must come
from within. People do what they want, and now the most needful
things appear so implausible to them that it is hopeless to attempt
universal reform. Teachers of writing in state universities, among the
noblest and most despised laborers in the academy, have told me that
they cannot teach writing to students who do not read, and that it is
practically impossible to get them to read, let alone like it. This is where

high schools have failed most, ﬁlled with teachers who are products of
the sixties and reﬂecting the pallor of university-level humanities. The
old teachers who loved Shakespeare or Austen or Donne, and whose
only reward for teaching was the perpetuation of their taste, have all but
disappeared.

The latest enemy of the vitality of classic texts is feminism. The

struggles against elitism and racism in the sixties and seventies had little
direct effect on students’ relations to books. The democratization of the
university helped dismantle its structure and caused it to lose its focus.
But the activists had no special quarrel with the classic texts, and they
were even a bit infected by their Frankfurt School masters’ habit of
parading their intimacy with high culture. Radicals had at an earlier
stage of egalitarianism already dealt with the monarchic, aristocratic and
antidemocratic character of most literary classics by no longer paying
attention to their manifest political content. Literary criticism
concentrated on the private, the intimate, the feelings, thoughts and
relations of individuals, while reducing to the status of a literary
convention of the past the fact that the heroes of many classic works
were soldiers and statesmen engaged in ruling and faced with political
problems. Shakespeare, as he has been read for most of this century,
does not constitute a threat to egalitarian right thinking. And as for
racism, it just did not play a role in the classic literature, at least in the
forms in which we are concerned about it today, and no great work of
literature is ordinarily considered racist.

But all literature up to today is sexist. The Muses never sang to the

poets about liberated women. It’s the same old chanson from the Bible
and Homer through Joyce and Proust. And this is particularly grave for
literature, since the love interest was most of what remained in the
classics after politics was purged in the academy, and was also what drew
students to reading them. These books appealed to eros while educating
it. So activism has been directed against the content of books. The latest
translation of Biblical text—sponsored by the National Council of the
Churches of Christ—suppresses gender references to God, so that
future generations will not have to grapple with the fact that God was
once a sexist. But this technique has only limited applicability. Another
tactic is to expunge the most offensive authors—for example, Rousseau
—from the education of the young or to include feminist responses in
college courses, pointing out the distorting prejudices, and using the

books only as evidence of the misunderstanding of woman’s nature and
the history of injustice to it. Moreover, the great female characters can
be used as examples of the various ways women have coped with their
enslavement to the sexual role. But never, never, must a student be
attracted to those old ways and take them as models for him or herself.
However, all this effort is wasted. Students cannot imagine that the old
literature could teach them anything about the relations they want to
have or will be permitted to have. So they are indifferent.

Having heard over a period of years the same kinds of responses to

my question about favorite books, I began to ask students who their
heroes are. Again, there is usually silence, and most frequently nothing
follows. Why should anyone have heroes? One should be oneself and
not form oneself in an alien mold. Here positive ideology supports
them: their lack of hero-worship is a sign of maturity. They posit their
own values. They have turned into a channel ﬁrst established in the
Republic by Socrates, who liberated himself from Achilles, and picked
up in earnest by Rousseau in Emile. Following on Rousseau, Tolstoy
depicts Prince Andrei in War and Peace, who was educated in Plutarch
and is alienated from himself by his admiration for Napoleon. But we
tend to forget that Andrei is a very noble man indeed and that his heroic
longings give him a splendor of soul that dwarfs the petty, vain, self-
regarding concerns of the bourgeoisie that surrounds him. Only a
combination of natural sentiment and unity with the spirit of Russia and
its history can, for Tolstoy, produce human beings superior to Andrei,
and even they are only ambiguously superior. But in America we have
only the bourgeoisie, and the love of the heroic is one of the few
counterpoises available to us. In us the contempt for the heroic is only
an extension of the perversion of the democratic principle that denies
greatness and wants everyone to feel comfortable in his skin without
having to suffer unpleasant comparisons. Students have not the slightest
notion of what an achievement it is to free oneself from public guidance
and ﬁnd resources for guidance within oneself. From what source
within themselves would they draw the goals they think they set for
themselves? Liberation from the heroic only means that they have no
resource whatsoever against conformity to the current “role models.”
They are constantly thinking of themselves in terms of ﬁxed standards
that they did not make. Instead of being overwhelmed by Cyrus,
Theseus, Moses or Romulus, they unconsciously act out the roles of the

doctors, lawyers, businessmen or TV personalities around them. One
can only pity young people without admirations they can respect or
avow, who are artiﬁcially restrained from the enthusiasm for great virtue.

In encouraging this deformity, democratic relativism joins a branch

of conservatism that is impressed by the dangerous political
consequences of idealism. These conservatives want young people to
know that this tawdry old world cannot respond to their demands for
perfection. In the choice between the somewhat arbitrarily distinguished
realism and idealism, a sensible person would want to be both, or
neither. But, momentarily accepting a distinction I reject, idealism as it
is commonly conceived should have primacy in an education, for man
is a being who must take his orientation by his possible perfection. To
attempt to suppress this most natural of all inclinations because of
possible abuses is, almost literally, to throw out the baby with the bath.
Utopianism is, as Plato taught us at the outset, the ﬁre with which we
must play because it is the only way we can ﬁnd out what we are. We
need to criticize false understandings of Utopia, but the easy way out
provided by realism is deadly. As it now stands, students have powerful
images of what a perfect body is and pursue it incessantly. But deprived
of literary guidance, they no longer have any image of a perfect soul,
and hence do not long to have one. They do not even imagine that
there is such a thing.

Following on what I learned from this second question, I began

asking a third: Who do you think is evil? To this one there is an
immediate response: Hitler. (Stalin is hardly mentioned.) After him,
who else? Up until a couple of years ago, a few students said Nixon, but
he has been forgotten and at the same time is being rehabilitated. And
there it stops. They have no idea of evil; they doubt its existence. Hitler
is just another abstraction, an item to ﬁll up an empty category.
Although they live in a world in which the most terrible deeds are being
performed and they see brutal crime in the streets, they turn aside.
Perhaps they believe that evil deeds are performed by persons who, if
they got the proper therapy, would not do them again—that there are
evil deeds, not evil people. There is no Inferno in this comedy. Thus,
the most common student view lacks an awareness of the depths as well
as the heights, and hence lacks gravity.

MUSIC

Though students do not have books, they most emphatically do have
music. Nothing is more singular about this generation than its addiction
to music. This is the age of music and the states of soul that accompany
it. To ﬁnd a rival to this enthusiasm, one would have to go back at least a
century to Germany and the passion for Wagner’s operas. They had the
religious sense that Wagner was creating the meaning of life and that
they were not merely listening to his works but experiencing that
meaning. Today, a very large proportion of young people between the
ages of ten and twenty live for music. It is their passion; nothing else
excites them as it does; they cannot take seriously anything alien to
music. When they are in school and with their families, they are longing
to plug themselves back into their music. Nothing surrounding them—
school, family, church—has anything to do with their musical world. At
best that ordinary life is neutral, but mostly it is an impediment, drained
of vital content, even a thing to be rebelled against. Of course, the
enthusiasm for Wagner was limited to a small class, could be indulged
only rarely and only in a few places, and had to wait on the composer’s
slow output. The music of the new votaries, on the other hand, knows
neither class nor nation. It is available twenty-four hours a day,
everywhere. There is the stereo in the home, in the car; there are
concerts; there are music videos, with special channels exclusively
devoted to them, on the air nonstop; there are the Walkmans so that no
place—not public transportation, not the library—prevents students
from communing with the Muse, even while studying. And, above all,
the musical soil has become tropically rich. No need to wait for one
unpredictable genius. Now there are many geniuses, producing all the
time, two new ones rising to take the place of every fallen hero. There is
no dearth of the new and the startling.

The power of music in the soul—described to Jessica marvelously by

Lorenzo in the Merchant of Venice—has been recovered after a long
period of desuetude. And it is rock music alone that has effected this
restoration. Classical music is dead among the young. This assertion
will, I know, be hotly disputed by many who, unwilling to admit tidal
changes, can point to the proliferation on campuses of classes in

classical music appreciation and practice, as well as performance groups
of all kinds. Their presence is undeniable, but they involve not more
than 5 to 10 percent of the students. Classical music is now a special
taste, like Greek language or pre-Columbian archeology, not a common
culture of reciprocal communication and psychological shorthand.
Thirty years ago, most middle-class families made some of the old
European music a part of the home, partly because they liked it, partly
because they thought it was good for the kids. University students
usually had some early emotive association with Beethoven, Chopin
and Brahms, which was a permanent part of their makeup and to which
they were likely to respond throughout their lives. This was probably the
only regularly recognizable class distinction between educated and
uneducated in America. Many, or even most, of the young people of
that generation also swung with Benny Goodman, but with an element
of self-consciousness—to be hip, to prove they weren’t snobs, to show
solidarity with the democratic ideal of a pop culture out of which would
grow a new high culture. So there remained a class distinction between
high and low, although private taste was beginning to create doubts
about whether one really liked the high very much. But all that has
changed. Rock music is as unquestioned and unproblematic as the air
the students breathe, and very few have any acquaintance at all with
classical music. This is a constant surprise to me. And one of the strange
aspects of my relations with good students I come to know well is that I
frequently introduce them to Mozart. This is a pleasure for me,
inasmuch as it is always pleasant to give people gifts that please them. It
is interesting to see whether and in what ways their studies are
complemented by such music. But this is something utterly new to me
as a teacher; formerly my students usually knew much more classical
music than I did.

Music was not all that important for the generation of students

preceding the current one. The romanticism that had dominated serious
music 
since 
Beethoven 
appealed 
to 
reﬁnements—perhaps

overreﬁnements—of sentiments that are hardly to be found in the
contemporary world. The lives people lead or wish to lead and their
prevailing passions are of a different sort than those of the highly
educated German and French bourgeoisie, who were avidly reading
Rousseau and Baudelaire, Goethe and Heine, for their spiritual
satisfaction. The music that had been designed to produce, as well as to

please, such exquisite sensibilities had a very tenuous relation to
American lives of any kind. So romantic musical culture in America had
had for a long time the character of a veneer, as easily susceptible to
ridicule as were Margaret Dumont’s displays of coquettish chasteness, so
aptly exploited by Groucho Marx in A Night At The Opera. I noticed
this when I ﬁrst started teaching and lived in a house for gifted students.
The “good” ones studied their physics and then listened to classical
music. The students who did not ﬁt so easily into the groove, some of
them just vulgar and restive under the cultural tyranny, but some of
them also serious, were looking for things that really responded to their
needs. Almost always they responded to the beat of the newly emerging
rock music. They were a bit ashamed of their taste, for it was not
respectable. But I instinctively sided with this second group, with real, if
coarse, feelings as opposed to artiﬁcial and dead ones. Then their
musical sans-culotteism won the revolution and reigns unabashed today.
No classical music has been produced that can speak to this generation.

Symptomatic of this change is how seriously students now take the

famous passages on musical education in Plato’s Republic. In the past,
students, good liberals that they always are, were indignant at the
censorship of poetry, as a threat to free inquiry. But they were really
thinking of science and politics. They hardly paid attention to the
discussion of music itself and, to the extent that they even thought about
it, were really puzzled by Plato’s devoting time to rhythm and melody in
a serious treatise on political philosophy. Their experience of music was
as an entertainment, a matter of indifference to political and moral life.
Students today, on the contrary, know exactly why Plato takes music so
seriously. They know it affects life very profoundly and are indignant
because Plato seems to want to rob them of their most intimate pleasure.
They are drawn into argument with Plato about the experience of
music, and the dispute centers on how to evaluate it and deal with it.
This encounter not only helps to illuminate the phenomenon of
contemporary music, but also provides a model of how contemporary
students can proﬁtably engage with a classic text. The very fact of their
fury shows how much Plato threatens what is dear and intimate to them.
They are little able to defend their experience, which had seemed
unquestionable until questioned, and it is most resistant to cool analysis.
Yet if a student can—and this is most difﬁcult and unusual—draw back,
get a critical distance on what he clings to, come to doubt the ultimate

value of what he loves, he has taken the ﬁrst and most difﬁcult step
toward the philosophic conversion. Indignation is the soul’s defense
against the wound of doubt about its own; it reorders the cosmos to
support the justice of its cause. It justiﬁes putting Socrates to death.
Recognizing indignation for what it is constitutes knowledge of the soul,
and is thus an experience more philosophic than the study of
mathematics. It is Plato’s teaching that music, by its nature,
encompasses all that is today most resistent to philosophy. So it may well
be that through the thicket of our greatest corruption runs the path to
awareness of the oldest truths.

Plato’s teaching about music is, put simply, that rhythm and melody,

accompanied by dance, are the barbarous expression of the soul.
Barbarous, not animal. Music is the medium of the human soul in its
most ecstatic condition of wonder and terror. Nietzsche, who in large
measure agrees with Plato’s analysis, says in The Birth of Tragedy (not to
be forgotten is the rest of the title, Out of the Spirit of Music) that a
mixture of cruelty and coarse sensuality characterized this state, which
of course was religious, in the service of gods. Music is the soul’s
primitive and primary speech and it is alogon, without articulate speech
or reason. It is not only not reasonable, it is hostile to reason. Even when
articulate speech is added, it is utterly subordinate to and determined by
the music and the passions it expresses.

Civilization or, to say the same thing, education is the taming or

domestication of the soul’s raw passions—not suppressing or excising
them, which would deprive the soul of its energy—but forming and
informing them as art. The goal of harmonizing the enthusiastic part of
the soul with what develops later, the rational part, is perhaps impossible
to attain. But without it, man can never be whole. Music, or poetry,
which is what music becomes as reason emerges, always involves a
delicate balance between passion and reason, and, even in its highest
and most developed forms—religious, warlike and erotic—that balance
is always tipped, if ever so slightly, toward the passionate. Music, as
everyone experiences, provides an unquestionable justiﬁcation and a
fulﬁlling pleasure for the activities it accompanies: the soldier who hears
the marching band is enthralled and reassured; the religious man is
exalted in his prayer by the sound of the organ in the church; and the
lover is carried away and his conscience stilled by the romantic guitar.
Armed with music, man can damn rational doubt. Out of the music

emerge the gods that suit it, and they educate men by their example and
their commandments.

Plato’s Socrates disciplines the ecstasies and thereby provides little

consolation or hope to men. According to the Socratic formula, the
lyrics—speech and, hence, reason—must determine the music—
harmony and rhythm. Pure music can never endure this constraint.
Students are not in a position to know the pleasures of reason; they can
only see it as a disciplinary and repressive parent. But they do see, in the
case of Plato, that that parent has ﬁgured out what they are up to. Plato
teaches that, in order to take the spiritual temperature of an individual
or a society, one must “mark the music.” To Plato and Nietzsche, the
history of music is a series of attempts to give form and beauty to the
dark, chaotic, premonitory forces in the soul—to make them serve a
higher purpose, an ideal, to give man’s duties a fullness. Bach’s religious
intentions and Beethoven’s revolutionary and humane ones are clear
enough examples. Such cultivation of the soul uses the passions and
satisﬁes them while sublimating them and giving them an artistic unity.
A man whose noblest activities are accompanied by a music that
expresses them while providing a pleasure extending from the lowest
bodily to the highest spiritual, is whole, and there is no tension in him
between the pleasant and the good. By contrast a man whose business
life is prosaic and unmusical and whose leisure is made up of coarse,
intense entertainments, is divided, and each side of his existence is
undermined by the other.

Hence, for those who are interested in psychological health, music is

at the center of education, both for giving the passions their due and for
preparing the soul for the unhampered use of reason. The centrality of
such education was recognized by all the ancient educators. It is hardly
noticed today that in Aristotle’s Politics the most important passages
about the best regime concern musical education, or that the Poetics is
an appendix to the Politics. Classical philosophy did not censor the
singers. It persuaded them. And it gave them a goal, one that was
understood by them, until only yesterday. But those who do not notice
the role of music in Aristotle and despise it in Plato went to school with
Hobbes, Locke and Smith, where such considerations have become
unnecessary. The triumphant Enlightenment rationalism thought that it
had discovered other ways to deal with the irrational part of the soul,
and that reason needed less support from it. Only in those great critics of

Enlightenment and rationalism, Rousseau and Nietzsche, does music
return, and they were the most musical of philosophers. Both thought
that the passions—and along with them their ministerial arts—had
become thin under the rule of reason and that, therefore, man himself
and what he sees in the world have become correspondingly thin. They
wanted to cultivate the enthusiastic states of the soul and to re-
experience the Corybantic possession deemed a pathology by Plato.
Nietzsche, particularly, sought to tap again the irrational sources of
vitality, to replenish our dried-up stream from barbaric sources, and thus
encouraged the Dionysian and the music derivative from it.

This is the signiﬁcance of rock music. I do not suggest that it has any

high intellectual sources. But it has risen to its current heights in the
education of the young on the ashes of classical music, and in an
atmosphere in which there is no intellectual resistance to attempts to
tap the rawest passions. Modern-day rationalists, such as economists, are
indifferent to it and what it represents. The irrationalists are all for it.
There is no need to fear that “the blond beasts” are going to come forth
from the bland souls of our adolescents. But rock music has one appeal
only, a barbaric appeal, to sexual desire—not love, not eros, but sexual
desire undeveloped and untutored. It acknowledges the ﬁrst emanations
of children’s emerging sensuality and addresses them seriously, eliciting
them and legitimating them, not as little sprouts that must be carefully
tended in order to grow into gorgeous ﬂowers, but as the real thing.
Rock gives children, on a silver platter, with all the public authority of
the entertainment industry, everything their parents always used to tell
them they had to wait for until they grew up and would understand
later.

is why Ravel’s Bolero is the one piece of classical music that is
commonly known and liked by them. In alliance with some real art and
a lot of pseudo-art, an enormous industry cultivates the taste for the
orgiastic state of feeling connected with sex, providing a constant ﬂood
of fresh material for voracious appetites. Never was there an art form
directed so exclusively to children.

Ministering to and according with the arousing and cathartic music,

the lyrics celebrate puppy love as well as polymorphous attractions, and
fortify them against traditional ridicule and shame. The words implicitly
and explicitly describe bodily acts that satisfy sexual desire and treat

them as its only natural and routine culmination for children who do
not yet have the slightest imagination of love, marriage or family. This
has a much more powerful effect than does pornography on youngsters,
who have no need to watch others do grossly what they can so easily do
themselves. Voyeurism is for old perverts; active sexual relations are for
the young. All they need is encouragement.

The inevitable corollary of such sexual interest is rebellion against

the parental authority that represses it. Selﬁshness thus becomes
indignation and then transforms itself into morality. The sexual
revolution must overthrow all the forces of domination, the enemies of
nature and happiness. From love comes hate, masquerading as social
reform. A worldview is balanced on the sexual fulcrum. What were once
unconscious or half-conscious childish resentments become the new
Scripture. And then comes the longing for the classless, prejudice-free,
conﬂictless, universal society that necessarily results from liberated
consciousness—“We Are the World,” a pubescent version of Alle
Menschen werden Brüder, the fulﬁllment of which has been inhibited by
the political equivalents of Mom and Dad. These are the three great
lyrical themes: sex, hate and a smarmy, hypocritical version of brotherly
love. Such polluted sources issue in a muddy stream where only
monsters can swim. A glance at the videos that project images on the
wall of Plato’s cave since MTV took it over sufﬁces to prove this. Hitler’s
image recurs frequently enough in exciting contexts to give one pause.
Nothing noble, sublime, profound, delicate, tasteful or even decent can
ﬁnd a place in such tableaux. There is room only for the intense,
changing, crude and immediate, which Tocqueville warned us would be
the character of democratic art, combined with a pervasiveness,
importance and content beyond Tocqueville’s wildest imagination.

Picture a thirteen-year-old boy sitting in the living room of his family

home doing his math assignment while wearing his Walkman
headphones or watching MTV. He enjoys the liberties hard won over
centuries by the alliance of philosophic genius and political heroism,
consecrated by the blood of martyrs; he is provided with comfort and
leisure by the most productive economy ever known to mankind;
science has penetrated the secrets of nature in order to provide him with
the marvelous, lifelike electronic sound and image reproduction he is
enjoying. And in what does progress culminate? A pubescent child
whose body throbs with orgasmic rhythms; whose feelings are made

articulate in hymns to the joys of onanism or the killing of parents;
whose ambition is to win fame and wealth in imitating the drag-queen
who makes the music. In short, life is made into a nonstop,
commercially prepackaged masturbational fantasy.

This description may seem exaggerated, but only because some

would prefer to regard it as such. The continuing exposure to rock
music is a reality, not one conﬁned to a particular class or type of child.
One need only ask ﬁrst-year university students what music they listen
to, how much of it and what it means to them, in order to discover that
the phenomenon is universal in America, that it begins in adolescence
or a bit before and continues through the college years. It is the youth
culture and, as I have so often insisted, there is now no other
countervailing nourishment for the spirit. Some of this culture’s power
comes from the fact that it is so loud. It makes conversation impossible,
so that much of friendship must be without the shared speech that
Aristotle asserts is the essence of friendship and the only true common
ground. With rock, illusions of shared feelings, bodily contact and
grunted formulas, which are supposed to contain so much meaning
beyond speech, are the basis of association. None of this contradicts
going about the business of life, attending classes and doing the
assignments for them. But the meaningful inner life is with the music.

This phenomenon is both astounding and indigestible, and is hardly

noticed, routine and habitual. But it is of historic proportions that a
society’s best young and their best energies should be so occupied.
People of future civilizations will wonder at this and ﬁnd it as
incomprehensible as we do the caste system, witch-burning, harems,
cannibalism and gladiatorial combats. It may well be that a society’s
greatest madness seems normal to itself. The child I described has
parents who have sacriﬁced to provide him with a good life and who
have a great stake in his future happiness. They cannot believe that the
musical vocation will contribute very much to that happiness. But there
is nothing they can do about it. The family spiritual void has left the
ﬁeld open to rock music, and they cannot possibly forbid their children
to listen to it. It is everywhere; all children listen to it; forbidding it
would simply cause them to lose their children’s affection and
obedience. When they turn on the television, they will see President
Reagan warmly grasping the daintily proffered gloved hand of Michael
Jackson and praising him enthusiastically. Better to set the faculty of

denial in motion—avoid noticing what the words say, assume the kid
will get over it. If he has early sex, that won’t get in the way of his having
stable relationships later. His drug use will certainly stop at pot. School
is providing real values. And popular historicism provides the ﬁnal
salvation: there are new life-styles for new situations, and the older
generation is there not to impose its values but to help the younger one
to ﬁnd its own. TV, which compared to music plays a comparatively
small role in the formation of young people’s character and taste, is a
consensus monster—the Right monitors its content for sex, the Left for
violence, and many other interested sects for many other things. But the
music has hardly been touched, and what efforts have been made are
both ineffectual and misguided about the nature and extent of the
problem.

The result is nothing less than parents’ loss of control over their

children’s moral education at a time when no one else is seriously
concerned with it. This has been achieved by an alliance between the
strange young males who have the gift of divining the mob’s emergent
wishes—our versions of Thrasymachus, Socrates’ rhetorical adversary—
and the record-company executives, the new robber barons, who mine
gold out of rock. They discovered a few years back that children are one
of the few groups in the country with considerable disposable income,
in the form of allowances. Their parents spend all they have providing
for the kids. Appealing to them over their parents’ heads, creating a
world of delight for them, constitutes one of the richest markets in the
postwar world. The rock business is perfect capitalism, supplying to
demand and helping to create it. It has all the moral dignity of drug
trafﬁcking, but it was so totally new and unexpected that nobody
thought to control it, and now it is too late. Progress may be made
against cigarette smoking because our absence of standards or our
relativism does not extend to matters of bodily health. In all other things
the market determines the value. (Yoko Ono is among America’s small
group of billionaires, along with oil and computer magnates, her late
husband having produced and sold a commodity of worth comparable
to theirs.) Rock is very big business, bigger than the movies, bigger than
professional sports, bigger than television, and this accounts for much of
the respectability of the music business. It is difﬁcult to adjust our vision
to the changes in the economy and to see what is really important.
McDonald’s now has more employees than U.S. Steel, and likewise the

purveyors of junk food for the soul have supplanted what still seem to be
more basic callings.

Gaulle gave Brigitte Bardot one of France’s highest honors. I could not
understand this, but it turned out that she, along with Peugeot, was
France’s biggest export item. As Western nations became more
prosperous, leisure, which had been put off for several centuries in favor
of the pursuit of property, the means to leisure, ﬁnally began to be of
primary concern. But, in the meantime, any notion of the serious life of
leisure, as well as men’s taste and capacity to live it, had disappeared.
Leisure became entertainment. The end for which they had labored for
so long has turned out to be amusement, a justiﬁed conclusion if the
means justify the ends. The music business is peculiar only in that it
caters almost exclusively to children, treating legally and naturally
imperfect human beings as though they were ready to enjoy the ﬁnal or
complete satisfaction. It perhaps thus reveals the nature of all our
entertainment and our loss of a clear view of what adulthood or maturity
is, and our incapacity to conceive ends. The emptiness of values results
in the acceptance of the natural facts as the ends. In this case infantile
sexuality is the end, and I suspect that, in the absence of other ends,
many adults have come to agree that it is.

It is interesting to note that the Left, which prides itself on its critical

approach to “late capitalism” and is unrelenting and unsparing in its
analysis of our other cultural phenomena, has in general given rock
music a free ride. Abstracting from the capitalist element in which it
ﬂourishes, they regard it as a people’s art, coming from beneath the
bourgeoisie’s layers of cultural repression. Its antinomianism and its
longing for a world without constraint might seem to be the clarion of
the proletarian revolution, and Marxists certainly do see that rock music
dissolves the beliefs and morals necessary for liberal society and would
approve of it for that alone. But the harmony between the young
intellectual Left and rock is probably profounder than that. Herbert
Marcuse appealed to university students in the sixties with a
combination of Marx and Freud. In Eros and Civilization and One
Dimensional Man he promised that the overcoming of capitalism and
its false consciousness will result in a society where the greatest
satisfactions are sexual, of a sort that the bourgeois moralist Freud called
polymorphous and infantile. Rock music touches the same chord in the

young. Free sexual expression, anarchism, mining of the irrational
unconscious and giving it free rein are what they have in common. The
high intellectual life I shall describe in Part Two and the low rock world
are partners in the same entertainment enterprise. They must both be
interpreted as parts of the cultural fabric of late capitalism. Their success
comes from the bourgeois’ need to feel that he is not bourgeois, to have
undangerous experiments with the unlimited. He is willing to pay dearly
for them. The Left is better interpreted by Nietzsche than by Marx. The
critical theory of late capitalism is at once late capitalism’s subtlest and
crudest expression. Anti-bourgeois ire is the opiate of the Last Man.

This strong stimulant, which Nietzsche called Nihiline, was for a

very long time, almost ﬁfteen years, epitomized in a single ﬁgure, Mick
Jagger. A shrewd, middle-class boy, he played the possessed lower-class
demon and teen-aged satyr up until he was forty, with one eye on the
mobs of children of both sexes whom he stimulated to a sensual frenzy
and the other eye winking at the unerotic, commercially motivated
adults who handled the money. In his act he was male and female,
heterosexual and homosexual; unencumbered by modesty, he could
enter everyone’s dreams, promising to do everything with everyone; and,
above all, he legitimated drugs, which were the real thrill that parents
and policemen conspired to deny his youthful audience. He was beyond
the law, moral and political, and thumbed his nose at it. Along with all
this, there were nasty little appeals to the suppressed inclinations toward
sexism, racism and violence, indulgence in which is not now publicly
respectable. Nevertheless, he managed not to appear to contradict the
rock ideal of a universal classless society founded on love, with the
distinction between brotherly and bodily blurred. He was the hero and
the model for countless young persons in universities, as well as
elsewhere. I discovered that students who boasted of having no heroes
secretly had a passion to be like Mick Jagger, to live his life, have his
fame. They were ashamed to admit this in a university, although I am
not certain that the reason has anything to do with a higher standard of
taste. It is probably that they are not supposed to have heroes. Rock
music itself and talking about it with inﬁnite seriousness are perfectly
respectable. It has proved to be the ultimate leveler of intellectual
snobbism. But it is not respectable to think of it as providing weak and
ordinary persons with a fashionable behavior, the imitation of which will
make others esteem them and boost their own self-esteem. Unaware and

unwillingly, however, Mick Jagger played the role in their lives that
Napoleon played in the lives of ordinary young Frenchmen throughout
the nineteenth century. Everyone else was so boring and unable to
charm youthful passions. Jagger caught on.

In the last couple of years, Jagger has begun to fade. Whether

Michael Jackson, Prince or Boy George can take his place is uncertain.
They are even weirder than he is, and one wonders what new strata of
taste they have discovered. Although each differs from the others, the
essential character of musical entertainment is not changing. There is
only a constant search for variations on the theme. And this gutter
phenomenon is apparently the fulﬁllment of the promise made by so
much psychology and literature that our weak and exhausted Western
civilization would ﬁnd refreshment in the true source, the unconscious,
which appeared to the late romantic imagination to be identical to
Africa, the dark and unexplored continent. Now all has been explored;
light has been cast everywhere; the unconscious has been made
conscious, the repressed expressed. And what have we found? Not
creative devils, but show business glitz. Mick Jagger tarting it up on the
stage is all that we brought back from the voyage to the underworld.

My concern here is not with the moral effects of this music—

whether it leads to sex, violence or drugs. The issue here is its effect on
education, and I believe it ruins the imagination of young people and
makes it very difﬁcult for them to have a passionate relationship to the
art and thought that are the substance of liberal education. The ﬁrst
sensuous experiences are decisive in determining the taste for the whole
of life, and they are the link between the animal and spiritual in us. The
period of nascent sensuality has always been used for sublimation, in the
sense of making sublime, for attaching youthful inclinations and
longings to music, pictures and stories that provide the transition to the
fulﬁllment of the human duties and the enjoyment of the human
pleasures. Lessing, speaking of Greek sculpture, said “beautiful men
made beautiful statues, and the city had beautiful statues in part to
thank for beautiful citizens.” This formula encapsulates the
fundamental principle of the esthetic education of man. Young men
and women were attracted by the beauty of heroes whose very bodies
expressed their nobility. The deeper understanding of the meaning of
nobility comes later, but is prepared for by the sensuous experience and
is actually contained in it. What the senses long for as well as what

reason later sees as good are thereby not at tension with one another.
Education is not sermonizing to children against their instincts and
pleasures, but providing a natural continuity between what they feel and
what they can and should be. But this is a lost art. Now we have come to
exactly the opposite point. Rock music encourages passions and provides
models that have no relation to any life the young people who go to
universities can possibly lead, or to the kinds of admiration encouraged
by liberal studies. Without the cooperation of the sentiments, anything
other than technical education is a dead letter.

Rock music provides premature ecstasy and, in this respect, is like the

drugs with which it is allied. It artiﬁcially induces the exaltation
naturally attached to the completion of the greatest endeavors—victory
in a just war, consummated love, artistic creation, religious devotion and
discovery of the truth. Without effort, without talent, without virtue,
without exercise of the faculties, anyone and everyone is accorded the
equal right to the enjoyment of their fruits. In my experience, students
who have had a serious ﬂing with drugs—and gotten over it—ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to have enthusiasms or great expectations. It is as though the
color has been drained out of their lives and they see everything in black
and white. The pleasure they experienced in the beginning was so
intense that they no longer look for it at the end, or as the end. They
may function perfectly well, but dryly, routinely. Their energy has been
sapped, and they do not expect their life’s activity to produce anything
but a living, whereas liberal education is supposed to encourage the
belief that the good life is the pleasant life and that the best life is the
most pleasant life. I suspect that the rock addiction, particularly in the
absence of strong counterattractions, has an effect similar to that of
drugs. The students will get over this music, or at least the exclusive
passion for it. But they will do so in the same way Freud says that men
accept the reality principle—as something harsh, grim and essentially
unattractive, a mere necessity. These students will assiduously study
economics or the professions and the Michael Jackson costume will slip
off to reveal a Brooks Brothers suit beneath. They will want to get ahead
and live comfortably. But this life is as empty and false as the one they
left behind. The choice is not between quick ﬁxes and dull calculation.
This is what liberal education is meant to show them. But as long as
they have the Walkman on, they cannot hear what the great tradition

has to say. And, after its prolonged use, when they take it off, they ﬁnd
they are deaf.

RELATIONSHIPS

Self-Centeredness

Students these days are, in general, nice. I choose the word carefully.
They are not particularly moral or noble. Such niceness is a facet of
democratic character when times are good. Neither war nor tyranny nor
want has hardened them or made demands on them. The wounds and
rivalries caused by class distinction have disappeared along with any
strong sense of class (as it once existed in universities in America and as
it still does, poisonously, in England). Students are free of most
constraints, and their families make sacriﬁces for them without asking
for much in the way of obedience or respect. Religion and national
origin have almost no noticeable effect on their social life or their career
prospects. Although few really believe in “the system,” they do not have
any burning sentiment that injustice is being done to them. The drugs
and the sex once thought to be forbidden are available in the quantities
required for sensible use. A few radical feminists still feel the old-time
religion, but most of the women are comfortably assured that not much
stands in the way of their careers. There is an atmosphere of easy
familiarity with their elders, and even of the kind of respect of free
young people for them that Tocqueville asserted equality encourages.
Above all, there are none of the longings, romantic or otherwise, that
used to make bourgeois society, or society in general, repugnant to the
young. The impossible dreams of the sixties proved to be quite possible
within the loosened fabric of American life. Students these days are
pleasant, friendly and, if not great-souled, at least not particularly mean-
spirited. Their primary preoccupation is themselves, understood in the
narrowest sense.

I had a revelatory experience when I chatted quite frankly one

evening with a group of bright students at an Ivy League college where I
was a visiting professor for a short time. I had succeeded in establishing
a certain common ground with them in class, for serious reading of
Plato frequently has the effect of making students speak, at least for the
moment, outside of their conventions. We had a farewell picnic and the
atmosphere 
was 
easy 
and 
conducive 
to 
candor. 
Somewhat

disingenuously I introduced some themes into the conversation about
which I was eager to know the current state of opinion. I had been
primed for this encounter by a conversation I had had the previous
evening at a dinner with members of the faculty and the administration.
The wife of one of the high ofﬁcials told me of her son’s activities. He
had a law degree, but, she said, he and his friends had little ambition
and had moved from one thing to another. She did not seem to be very
distressed by his behavior—perhaps even a bit proud of it—a modern
parent willing to believe in the superiority of the younger generation to
her own, especially when the former is most disrespectful of the latter’s
standards. So I asked her why she thought they behaved this way. She
responded ﬁrmly, quietly and without hesitation, “Fear of nuclear war.”

This prompted me to ask my group of students whether they were

frightened of nuclear war. The response was a universal, somewhat
embarrassed giggle. They knew what their daily thoughts were about,
and those thoughts had hardly anything to do with public questions.
And they also knew that there are a great many right-thinking adults
who expect them to use the nuclear threat as an excuse for demanding a
transformation of the world political order and who also want to
produce their maimed souls in evidence against our politicians’ mad
pursuit of the “arms race.” Students today—and I have now asked the
question over and over again—are morally unpretentious, and they look
at themselves with irony when it comes to the big moral questions.
Some look back with nostalgia at students of the sixties as persons who
believed in something. The prospect of being drafted to ﬁght in
Vietnam was really frightening. But youngsters today are, with few
exceptions, no more taken in by the psychological quacks who explain
their apathy with respect to nuclear war as “denial,” who enlist science
in the service of proving that there are causes without effects, than was
the American public by a President who tried to persuade it that he sat
around discussing nuclear war with his little daughter. Their concerns
lie elsewhere. There is, indeed, a certain listlessness about them, an
absence of a broad view of the future, but it is as plausible to attribute
that to the lack of a frontier to conquer in the American West, or the
death of God, as to fear of nuclear war.

It is difﬁcult to say just why this generation tends to be so honest in

comparison with the preceding one. And, of course, there are plenty of
public posturers among them, as is evident from the vote of the student

body at Brown (an institution that was at the forefront of dismantling
liberal education in the sixties), which demanded that cyanide be made
available by the university in case of nuclear attack. This was a
“statement” telling us all about the torment to which we subject young
people. But the great majority of students, although they as much as
anyone want to think well of themselves, are aware that they are busy
with their own careers and their relationships. There is a certain rhetoric
of self-fulﬁllment that gives a patina of glamor to this life, but they can
see that there is nothing particularly noble about it. Survivalism has
taken the place of heroism as the admired quality. This turning in on
themselves is not, as some would have it, a return to normalcy after the
hectic fever of the sixties, nor is it preternatural selﬁshness. It is a new
degree of isolation that leaves young people with no alternative to
looking inward. The things that almost naturally elicit attention to
broader concerns are simply not present. Starvation in Ethiopia, mass
murder in Cambodia, as well as nuclear war, are all real calamities
worthy of attention. But they are not immediate, not organically
connected to students’ lives. The affairs of daily life rarely involve
concern for a larger community in such a way as to make the public and
private merge in one’s thought. It is not merely that one is free to
participate or not to participate, that there is no need to do so, but that
everything militates against one’s doing so. Tocqueville describes the tip
of the iceberg of advanced egalitarianism when he discusses the
difﬁculty that a man without family lands, or a family tradition for whose
continuation he is responsible, will have in avoiding individualism and
seeing himself as an integral part of a past and a future, rather than as an
anonymous atom in a merely changing continuum. The modern
economic principle that private vice makes public virtue has penetrated
all aspects of daily life in such a way that there seems to be no reason to
be a conscious part of civic existence. As Saul Bellow has put it, public
virtue is a kind of ghost town into which anyone can move and declare
himself sheriff.

Country, religion, family, ideas of civilization, all the sentimental and

historical forces that stood between cosmic inﬁnity and the individual,
providing some notion of a place within the whole, have been
rationalized and have lost their compelling force. America is
experienced not as a common project but as a framework within which
people are only individuals, where they are left alone. To the extent that

there is a project, it is to put those who are said to be disadvantaged in a
position to live as they please too. The advanced Left talks about self-
fulﬁllment; the Right, in its most popular form, is Libertarian, i.e., the
right-wing form of the Left, in favor of everybody’s living as he pleases.
The only forms of intrusion on the private-life characteristic of liberal
democracies—taxes and military service—are not now present in
student life. If there is an inherent political impulse in man, it is
certainly being frustrated. But this impulse has already been so
attenuated by modernity that it is hardly experienced.

Students may indeed feel a sense of impotence, a sense that they

have little or no inﬂuence over the collective life, but essentially they
live comfortably within the administrative state that has replaced
politics. Nuclear war is indeed a frightening prospect, but only when it
appears imminent does it cross their minds. Even such a powerful,
concerted effort as the nuclear-freeze commotion, with its attendant
entertainments like The Day After, has nothing to do with the lives
students lead and is little more than a distraction. Very few of them are
destined for a political life; and if they do actually enter politics, it is by
accident, and does not follow from their early training or expectations.
In the universities about which I am speaking, there are almost no
students born of families that have inherited the privilege and
responsibility of public service, for almost no such families remain.
Neither duty nor pleasure involves students with the political, and our
lives exhibit in the extreme what Burke and Tocqueville said about the
disappearance of citizens and statesmen. The petty personal interests of
youth—“making it,” ﬁnding a place for oneself—persevere throughout
life. The honesty of this generation of students causes them to laugh
when asked to act as though they were powerful agents in world history.
They know the truth of Tocqueville’s dictum that “in democratic
societies, each citizen is habitually busy with the contemplation of a
very petty object, which is himself,” a contemplation now intensiﬁed by
a greater indifference to the past and the loss of a national view of the
future. The only common project engaging the youthful imagination is
the exploration of space, which everyone knows to be empty.

The resulting inevitable individualism, endemic to our regime, has

been reinforced by another unintended and unexpected development,
the decline of the family, which was the intermediary between
individual and society, providing quasi-natural attachments beyond the

individual, that gave men and women unqualiﬁed concern for at least
some others and created an entirely different relation to society from
that which the isolated individual has. Parents, husbands, wives and
children are hostages to the community. They palliate indifference to it
and provide a material stake in its future. This is not quite instinctive
love of country, but it is love of country for love of one’s own. It is the
gentle form of patriotism, one that ﬂows most easily out of self-interest,
without the demand for much self-denial. The decay of the family
means that community would require extreme self-abnegation in an era
when there is no good reason for anything but self-indulgence.

Apart from the fact that many students have experienced the divorce

of their parents and are informed by statistics that there is a strong
possibility of divorce in their futures, they hardly have an expectation
that they will have to care for their parents or any other blood relatives,
or that they will even see much of them as they grow older. Social
security, retirement funds and health insurance for old people free their
children from even having to give them ﬁnancial support, let alone
taking them into their own homes to live. When a child goes away to
college, it is really the beginning of the end of his vital connection with
his family, though he scarcely realizes it at the time. Parents have little
authority over their children when they leave home, and the children
are forced to look outward and forward. They are not coldhearted; the
substance of their interests merely lies elsewhere. Spiritually, the family
was pretty empty, anyway, and new objects ﬁll their ﬁeld of vision as the
old ones fade. American geography plays a role in this separation. This
is a large country, and people are very mobile, particularly since World
War II and the expansion of air travel. Practically no student knows
where he is going to live when he has completed his education. Very
likely it will be far away from his parents and his birthplace. In Canada
or France, by contrast, even if the same fundamental cultural winds are
blowing, people have almost no place to go. For an English-speaking
Canadian born in Toronto there is, practically speaking, only Vancouver
as an attractive alternative, and for a Parisian there is no alternative
whatsoever. The unlimited, or dissolving, horizon, which is the hallmark
of our age, is in these places somewhat less visible. People are not really
more rooted in them, but they are stuck. Hence they continue to see
their relatives and all the people they grew up with. Their landscape is
unchanging. But a young American really begins all over again, and

everything is open. He can live in the North, South, East or West, in the
city, the suburbs, or the country—who knows which? There are
arguments for each, and he is absolutely unconstrained in his choice.
The accidents of where he ﬁnds a job and of variable inclination are
likely to take him far away from all he has been connected with, and he
is psychically prepared for this. His investments in his past and those
who peopled it are necessarily limited.

This indeterminate or open-ended future and the lack of a binding

past mean that the souls of young people are in a condition like that of
the ﬁrst men in the state of nature—spiritually unclad, unconnected,
isolated, with no inherited or unconditional connection with anything
or anyone. They can be anything they want to be, but they have no
particular reason to want to be anything in particular. Not only are they
free to decide their place, but they are also free to decide whether they
will believe in God or be atheists, or leave their options open by being
agnostic; whether they will be straight or gay, or, again, keep their
options open; whether they will marry and whether they will stay
married; whether they will have children—and so on endlessly. There is
no necessity, no morality, no social pressure, no sacriﬁce to be made that
militates going in or turning away from any of these directions, and there
are desires pointing toward each, with mutually contradictory arguments
to buttress them. The young are exaggerated versions of Plato’s
description of the young in democracies:

 
[The democratic youth] lives along day by day, gratifying the
desire that occurs to him, at one time drinking and listening to
the ﬂute, at another downing water and reducing, now practicing
gymnastic, and again idling and neglecting everything; and
sometimes spending his time as though he were occupied with
philosophy. Often he engages in politics and, jumping up, says
and does whatever chances to come to him; and if he admires
any soldiers, he turns in that direction; and if it’s moneymakers,
in that one, and there is neither order nor necessity in his life,
but calling it sweet, free and blessed, he follows it throughout.
(Republic, 561c-d)
 
Why are we surprised that such unfurnished persons should be

preoccupied principally with themselves and with ﬁnding means to

avoid permanent free fall? No wonder that the one novel that remains
continuously popular with students is Camus’s The Stranger.

Equality

In addition to their self-ironical niceness, the other striking quality of

these students is their egalitarianism. Whatever their politics, they
believe that all men—and women—are created equal and have equal
rights. It is more than a belief, it is an instinct, felt in their bones.
Whenever they meet anyone, considerations of sex, color, religion,
family, money, nationality, play no role in their reactions. The very
understanding that such considerations once really counted for
something has departed; it belongs to mythology. This may seem
surprising inasmuch as there is such interest in roots, ethnicity and the
sacred—the things that once separated men. But it is precisely because
they are no longer real that they fascinate. A real Italian immigrant in
1920 did not worry about ethnicity. He had it, and although he was an
American, his life was by necessity and choice Italian, and he lived with
Italians. His grandson at Harvard today might wish to recover Italianness
—the social disadvantages of which his father struggled to shake off—
but his friends will be the individuals he likes, willy-nilly, not because of
his Italian origin but as a result of the common features of American
life. His sexual attractions, and hence his marriage, will not be
inﬂuenced by his national origin or even by his traditional Catholicism.
And this will not be because he is attracted by opposites or is trying to
join the establishment. It is simply because such things do not really
count now, even if there is a conscious effort to make them count.
There is no society out there that will banish him for marrying out of
order, or even parents who will object very strenuously. He is not in any
important way looked on as an Italian by his peers. Even if students
have gone to parochial schools, where they were religiously and in effect
ethnically segregated, the general culture usually prevails, and when
they enter the university they almost immediately ﬁnd themselves
associating primarily with those who were formerly outsiders to them.
They simply drop their cultural baggage. There is none of the solemnity
of the interfaith or interethnic get-togethers I knew as a child, where
people who felt themselves to be very different and who were quite often
both prejudiced and victims of prejudice, pointed piously to the

brotherhood of man. These kids just do not have prejudices against
anyone. Whether this is because man has been reduced to a naked
animal without any of the trappings of civilization that differentiate him,
or because we have recognized our essential humankindness, is a matter
of interpretation. But the fact is that everyone is an individual—if not
very individual—in our major universities. They are all just persons.
Being human is enough for what is important. It does not occur to
students to think that any of the things that classically divided people,
even in egalitarian America, should keep them away from anyone else.

Thus Harvard, Yale and Princeton are not what they used to be—the

last resorts of aristocratic sentiment within the democracy. The
differentiations based on old family or old wealth have vanished. The
old wounds that used to be inﬂicted by the clubbable on the
unclubbable, in our muted version of the English class system, have
healed because the clubs are not anything to be cared about seriously.
All this began after World War II, with the GI Bill. College was for
everyone. And the top universities gradually abandoned preference for
the children of their alumni and the exclusion of outsiders, especially
Jews. Academic records and tests became the criterion for selection.
New kinds of preference—particularly for blacks—replaced the old
ones, which were class preserving, whereas these are class destroying.
Now the student bodies of all the major universities are pretty much
alike, drawn from the best applicants, with “good” meaning good at the
academic disciplines. There is hardly a Harvard man or a Yale man any
more. No longer do any universities have the vocation of producing
gentlemen as well as scholars. Snobbism of the old sort is dead. Of
course students are, no matter what they say, proud to be at one of these
select universities. They are distinguished by it. But they believe, and
they are probably right, that they are there not because of anything other
than natural talent and hard work at their earlier studies. To the extent
that their parents’ wealth may have contributed to their excelling in high
school whereas poorer children were disadvantaged, they believe this to
be a social injustice. But they are not very much bothered, at least not so
far as whites are concerned, for the country is largely middle class now,
and scholarship aid is easily available for those unable to pay. They see
around them students who come from all kinds of families. Very few feel
themselves culturally deprived, outsiders looking resentfully in at the
privileged whose society is closed to them. Nor are there social climbers,

for there is no vision of a high society into which to climb. Similarly,
there are no longer schools of thought, as there always used to be, that
despise democracy and equality. Again, World War II ﬁnished all that.
All the students are egalitarian meritocrats, who believe each individual
should be allowed to develop his special—and unequal—talents without
reference to race, sex, religion, family, wealth or national origin. This is
the only form of justice they know, and they cannot even imagine that
there could be any substantial argument in favor of aristocracy or
monarchy. These were inexplicable follies of the past.

Again, although the difference between girls and boys still has a

living meaning—unlike the difference between Jew and Catholic,
German and Irish, old family and new family, which are mere
memories of their parents’ day and do not constitute differences in
present way of life—students take women’s equality in education, their
legitimate pursuit of exactly the same careers as men and their equal
and often superior performance in them, completely in stride. There are
no jokes, no self-consciousness, in short, no awareness that this state of
affairs is any less normal in human history than is breathing. None of
their beliefs result from principle, a project, an effort. They are pure
feeling, a way of life, the actualization of the democratic dream of each
man taken as man, the essential, abstracted from everything else. Except
no abstraction is taking place. Contrary to fashionable opinion,
universities are melting pots, no matter what may be true of the rest of
society. Ethnicity is no more important a fact than tall or short, black-
haired or blond. What these young people have in common inﬁnitely
outweighs what separates them. The quest for traditions and rituals both
proves my point and may teach something about the price paid for this
homogenization. The lack of prejudice is a result of students’ failing to
see differences and of the gradual eradication of differences. When
students talk about one another, one almost never hears them saying
things that divide others into groups or kinds. They always speak about
the individual. The sensitivity to national character, sometimes known
as stereotyping, has disappeared.

Race

The one eccentric element in this portrait, the one failure—a

hope—is the relation between blacks and whites. White and black
students do not in general become real friends with one another. Here
the gulf of difference has proved unbridgeable. The forgetting of race in
the university, which was predicted and conﬁdently expected when the
barriers were let down, has not occurred. There is now a large black
presence in major universities, frequently equivalent to their proportion
in the general population. But they have, by and large, proved
indigestible. Most keep to themselves. White students act as though
their relations with black students were just as immediate and unself-
conscious as with others (including Orientals). But although the words
are right, the music is off-key. Here there is an atmosphere of right-
thinking, principle and project—of effort rather than instinct. The
automatic character of current student camaraderie is absent; and the
really intimate attachment that knows no barriers stops here. The
programmatic brotherhood of the sixties did not culminate in
integration but veered off toward black separation. White students feel
uncomfortable about this and do not like to talk about it. This is not the
way things are supposed to be. It does not ﬁt their prevailing view that
human beings are all pretty much alike, and that friendship is another
aspect of equal opportunity. They pretend not to notice the segregated
tables in dining halls where no white student would comfortably sit
down. This is only one of the more visible aspects of a prevailing
segregation in the real life of universities—which includes separation in
housing and in areas of study, particularly noticeable in the paucity of
blacks in theoretical sciences and humanities. The universities are
formally integrated, and blacks and whites are used to seeing each other.
But the substantial human contact, indifferent to race, soul to soul, that
prevails in all other aspects of student life simply does not usually exist
between the two races. There are exceptions, perfectly integrated black
students, but they are rare and in a difﬁcult position.

I do not believe this somber situation is the fault of the white

students, who are rather straightforward in such matters and frequently
embarrassingly eager to prove their liberal credentials in the one area
where Americans are especially sensitive to a history of past injustice.
These students have made the adjustment, without missing a beat, to a
variety of religions and nationalities, the integration of Orientals and the
change in women’s aspirations and roles. It would require a great deal of
proof to persuade me that they remain subtly racist. Although

preferential treatment of blacks goes against a deep-seated conviction
that equal rights belong to individuals and are color-blind, white
students have been willing by and large to talk themselves into
accepting afﬁrmative action as a temporary measure on the way to
equality. Still this makes them uncomfortable because, although they
are very used to propaganda and to the imposition of new moralities on
them, in daily life they like to act as they think and feel. And they do not
think that black is beautiful any more than they think white is beautiful,
and they do not think that a student who is not qualiﬁed is qualiﬁed. So
the tendency among white students is to suppress the whole question,
act as though it were not there, and associate with the minority of blacks
who want to be associated with and forget the rest. They cannot befriend
blacks as blacks, and the heady days of a common purpose are gone.
The discriminatory laws are ancient history, and there are large numbers
of blacks in the universities. There is nothing more that white students
can do to make great changes in their relations to black students.

Thus, just at the moment when everyone else has become a “person,”

blacks have become blacks. I am not speaking about doctrine, although
there was much doctrine at the beginning, but about feeling. “They
stick together” was a phrase often used in the past by the prejudiced
about this or that distinctive group, but it has become true, by and large,
of the black students. In general, the expectation of anything other than
routine contact in classes or at campus jobs—usually quite polite—has
vanished. This is peculiar inasmuch as race is less spiritually substantial
than religion, and also inasmuch as integration was both the goal and
the practice of blacks in universities prior to the late sixties, when
numbers were smaller and human difﬁculties greater. Further, it is
peculiar in that blacks seem to be the only group that has picked up
“ethnicity”—the discovery or the creation of the sixties—in an
instinctive way. At the same time, there has been a progressive
abandonment on their part of belief or interest in a distinctive black
“culture.” Blacks are not sharing a special positive intellectual or moral
experience; they partake fully in the common culture, with the same
goals and tastes as everyone else, but they are doing it by themselves.
They continue to have the inward sentiments of separateness caused by
exclusion when it no longer effectively exists. The heat is under the pot,
but they do not melt as have all other groups.

There are obviously some good reasons for this, and it is the right of

any part of the large community in a pluralistic society to separate itself.
But the movement of the blacks goes counter not only to that of the rest
of society, and tends to put them at odds with it, but also to their own
noblest claims and traditions in this country. And it is connected with a
dangerous severing of the races in the intellectual world, where there
can be no justiﬁcation for separatism and where the ideal of common
humanity must prevail. The confrontations and indignations of the
political realm have become ﬁrmly ﬁxed in the university. For this the
university’s loss of conviction in its universalizing mission must bear a
part of the blame. Since the end of World War II there was in most
major universities an effort—ever increasing in intensity—to educate
more blacks, in the sincere American belief that education is good and
the inclusion of blacks at the highest levels of intellectual achievement
would be decisive in the resolving the American dilemma. Practically
nobody hesitated, and there were private discussions about whether, at
least in the beginning, standards should not be informally lowered for
talented but deprived blacks in order to help them catch up. Decent
men took different sides on this question, some believing that blacks, for
the sake of the example they were to set and for their own self-respect,
should be held to the highest standards of achievement, others believing
that gains would be incremental over generations. No person of
goodwill doubted that one way or another it would work out, that what
had happened with respect to religion and nationality would also
happen with race. At the peak of the civil rights movement there was a
sense of urgency about enrolling greater numbers of blacks in order to
prove the absence of discrimination. A sign of the times was the
reappearance of pictures on applications so that blacks could be
identiﬁed, whereas pictures had been banished a decade previously so
that blacks could not be identiﬁed. High school records and
standardized tests began to be criticized as insufﬁcient guides to real
talent. But the goal was unchanged—to educate black students as any
student is educated and to evaluate them according to the same
standards. Everyone was still integrationist. The belief was that
insufﬁcient energy had been devoted to the recruitment of talented
black students. Cornell, where I taught for several years, was one of
many institutions that announced great increases in goals for enrollment
of blacks. The president, adding a characteristic twist, also announced

that not only would it seek blacks, but that it would ﬁnd them not
among privileged blacks but in the inner cities. At the beginning of the
1967 academic year there were many more blacks on campus and, of
course, in order to get so many, particularly poor blacks, standards of
admission had silently and drastically been altered. Nothing had been
done to prepare these students for the great intellectual and social
challenges awaiting them in the university. Cornell now had a large
number of students who were manifestly unqualiﬁed and unprepared,
and therefore it faced an inevitable choice: fail most of them or pass
them without their having learned. Moralism and press relations made
the former intolerable; the latter was only partially possible (it required
consenting faculty and employers after college who expected and would
accept incompetence) and was unbearably shameful to black students
and university alike. It really meant that blacks would be recognizably
second-class citizens.

Black power, which hit the universities like a tidal wave at just that

moment, provided a third way. Integrationism was just an ideology for
whites and Uncle Toms. Who says that what universities teach is the
truth rather than just the myths necessary to support the system of
domination? Black students are second-class not because they are
academically poor but because they are being forced to imitate white
culture. Relativism and Marxism made some of this claim believable.
And the discomfort of the times made it more so. Blacks were to be
proud, and from them the university could learn its failings. Such a
perspective was decidedly attractive to the kids who were the victims of
the university’s manipulations. Courses in black studies and black
English, and many other such concessions, became the way out. It was
hopefully assumed that these would not fundamentally transform the
university or the educational goals of black students. They were merely
supposed to be an enrichment. But this was really a cop-out, and the
license for a new segregationism that would allow the white impresarios
to escape from the corner they had painted themselves into. The way
was opened for black students to live and study the black experience, to
be comfortable, rather than be constrained by the learning accessible to
man as man.

When the black students at Cornell became aware that they could

intimidate the university and that they were not just students but
negotiating partners in the process of determining what an education is,

they demanded the dismissal of the tough-minded, old-style
integrationist black woman who was assistant dean of students. In short
order the administration complied with this demand. From that
moment on, the various conciliatory arrangements with which we are
now so familiar came into being.

The black studies programs largely failed because what was serious in

them did not interest the students, and the rest was unproﬁtable hokum.
So the university curriculum returned to a debilitated normalcy. But a
kind of black domain, not quite institutional, but accepted, a shadow of
the university life, was created: permanent quotas in admission,
preference in ﬁnancial assistance, racially motivated hiring of faculty,
difﬁculty in giving blacks failing marks, and an organized system of
grievance and feeling aggrieved. And everywhere hypocrisy, contempt-
producing lies about what is going on and how the whole scheme is
working. This little black empire has gained its legitimacy from the
alleged racism surrounding it and from which it defends its subjects. Its
visible manifestations are to be found in those separate tables in the
dining halls, which reproduce the separate facilities of the Jim Crow
South. At Cornell and elsewhere, the black militants had to threaten—
and to do—bodily harm to black students with independent inclinations
in order to found this system. Now the system is routine. For the
majority of black students, going to the university is therefore a different
experience from that of the other students, and the product of the
education is also different. The black student who wishes to be just a
student and to avoid allegiance to the black group has to pay a terriﬁc
price, because he is judged negatively by his black peers and because his
behavior is atypical in the eyes of whites. White students have silently
and unconsciously adjusted to a group presence of blacks, and they must
readjust for a black who does not deﬁne himself by the group. He is
painfully conscious that many whites, well-meaning ones, judge him by
special standards. All this is daunting. The university’s acquiescence in
the interference with its primary responsibility of providing educational
opportunity to those capable of education should be a heavy burden on
its collective conscience.

Afﬁrmative action now institutionalizes the worst aspects of

separatism. The fact is that the average black student’s achievements do
not equal those of the average white student in the good universities,
and everybody knows it. It is also a fact that the university degree of a

black student is also tainted, and employers look on it with suspicion, or
become guilty accomplices in the toleration of incompetence. The
worst part of all this is that the black students, most of whom avidly
support this system, hate its consequences. A disposition composed of
equal parts of shame and resentment has settled on many black students
who are beneﬁciaries of preferential treatment. They do not like the
notion that whites are in the position to do them favors. They believe
that everyone doubts their merit, their capacity for equal achievement.
Their successes become questionable in their own eyes. Those who are
good students fear that they are equated with those who are not, that
their hard-won credentials are not credible. They are the victims of a
stereotype, but one that has been chosen by black leadership. Those
who are not good students, but have the same advantages as those who
are, want to protect their position but are haunted by the sense of not
deserving it. This gives them a powerful incentive to avoid close
associations with whites, who might be better qualiﬁed than they are and
who might be looking down on them. Better to stick together, so these
subtle but painful difﬁculties will not arise. It is no surprise that
extremist black politics now gets a kind of support among middle and
upper-class blacks unheard of in the past. The common source that
united the races at the peaks in the past has been polluted. Reason
cannot accommodate the claims of any kind of power whatever, and
democratic society cannot accept any principle of achievement other
than merit. White students, as I have said, do not really believe in the
justice of afﬁrmative action, do not wish to deal with the facts, and turn
without mentioning it to their all-white—or, rather, because there are
now so many Orientals, non-black—society. Afﬁrmative action (quotas),
at least in universities, is the source of what I fear is a long-term
deterioration of the relations between the races in America.

Sex

unintellectual and anti-intellectual people, where ideas are at best
means to ends, America is actually nothing but a great stage on which
theories have been played as tragedy and comedy. This is a regime
founded by philosophers and their students. All the recalcitrant matter
of the historical is gave way here before the practical and philosophical

ought to be, as the raw natural givens of this wild continent meekly
submitted to the yoke of theoretical science. Other peoples were
autochthonous, deriving guidance from the gods of their various places.
When they too decided to follow the principles we pioneered, they
hobbled along awkwardly, unable to extricate themselves gracefully from
their pasts. Our story is the majestic and triumphant march of the
principles of freedom and equality, giving meaning to all that we have
done or are doing. There are almost no accidents; everything that
happens among us is a consequence of one or both of our principles—a
triumph over some opposition to them, a discovery of a fresh meaning in
them, a dispute about which of the two has primacy, etc.

Now we have arrived at one of the ultimate acts in our drama, the

informing and reforming of our most intimate private lives by our
principles. Sex and its consequences—love, marriage and family—have
ﬁnally become the theme of the national project, and here the problem
of nature, always present but always repressed in the reconstruction of
man demanded by freedom and equality, becomes insistent. In order to
intuit the meaning of equality, we have no need for the wild imaginative
genius of Aristophanes, who in The Assembly of Women contrives the old
hags entitled by law to sexual satisfaction from handsome young males,
or of Plato, who in the Republic prescribed naked exercises for men and
women together. We only have to look around us, if we have eyes to see.

The change in sexual relations, which now provide an unending

challenge to human ingenuity, came over us in two successive waves in
the last two decades. The ﬁrst was the sexual revolution; the second,
feminism. The sexual revolution marched under the banner of freedom;
feminism under that of equality. Although they went arm in arm for a
while, their differences eventually put them at odds with each other, as
Tocqueville said freedom and equality would always be. This is manifest
in the squabble over pornography, which pits liberated sexual desire
against feminist resentment about stereotyping. We are presented with
the amusing spectacle of pornography clad in armor borrowed from the
heroic struggles for freedom of speech, and using Miltonic rhetoric,
doing battle with feminism, newly draped in the robes of community
morality, using arguments associated with conservatives who defend
traditional sex roles, and also defying an authoritative tradition in which
it was taboo to suggest any relation between what a person reads and
sees and his sexual practices. In the background stand the liberals,

wringing their hands in confusion because they wish to favor both sides
and cannot.

and of undeniable natural impulse against our puritanical heritage,
society’s conventions and repressions, bolstered by Biblical myths about
original sin. From the early sixties on there was a gradual testing of the
limits on sexual expression, and they melted away or had already
disappeared without anybody’s having noticed it. The disapproval of
parents and teachers of youngsters’ sleeping or living together was easily
overcome. The moral inhibitions, the fear of disease, the risk of
pregnancy, the family and social consequences of premarital intercourse
and the difﬁculty of ﬁnding places in which to have it—everything that
stood in its way suddenly was no longer there. Students, particularly the
girls, were no longer ashamed to give public evidence of sexual
attraction or of its fulﬁllment. The kind of cohabitations that were
dangerous in the twenties, and risqué or bohemian in the thirties and
forties, became as normal as membership in the Girl Scouts. I say
“particularly” girls because young men were always supposed to be
eager for immediate gratiﬁcation, whereas young women, inspired by
modesty, were supposed to resist it. It was a modiﬁcation or phasing out
of female modesty that made the new arrangements possible. Since,
however, modesty was supposed to be mere convention or habit, no
effort was required to overcome it. This emancipation had in its
intention and its effect the accentuation of the difference between the
sexes. Making love was to be the primary activity, so men and women
were to be more emphatically male and female. Of course, homosexuals
were also liberated, but for the great mass of people, being free and
natural meant achieving heterosexual satisfactions, opposite sexes made
for each other.

The immediate promise of sexual liberation was, simply, happiness

understood as the release of energies that had been stored up over
millennia during the dark night of repression, in a great continuous
Bacchanalia. However, the lion roaring behind the door of the closet
turned out, when that door was opened, to be a little, domesticated cat.
In fact, seen from a long historical perspective, sexual liberation might
be interpreted as the recognition that sexual passion is no longer
dangerous in us, and that it is safer to give it free course than to risk
rebellion by restraining it. I once asked a class how it could be that not

too long ago parents would have said, “Never darken our door again,” to
wayward daughters, whereas now they rarely protest when boyfriends
sleep over in their homes. A very nice, very normal, young woman
responded, “Because it’s no big deal.” That says it all. This
passionlessness is the most striking effect, or revelation, of the sexual
revolution, and it makes the younger generation more or less
incomprehensible to older folks.

In all this, the sexual revolution was precisely what it said it was—a

liberation. But some of the harshness of nature asserted itself beneath
the shattered conventions: the young were more apt to proﬁt from the
revolution than the old, the beautiful more than the ugly. The old veil
of discretion had had the effect of making these raw and ill-distributed
natural advantages less important in life and marriage. But now there
was little attempt to apply egalitarian justice in these matters, as did
Aristophanes’ older Athenian women who, because of their very
repulsiveness, had a right to enjoy handsome young men before
beautiful young women did. The undemocratic aspects of free sex were
compensated for in our harmless and mildly ridiculous way: “Beauty is
in the eye of the beholder” was preached more vigorously than formerly;
the cosmetics industry had a big boom; and education and therapy in
the style of Masters and Johnson, promising great orgasms to every
subscriber, became common. My favorite was a course in sex for the
elderly given at a local YMCA and advertised over the radio with the
slogan “Use It or Lose It.” These were the days when pornography
slipped its leash.

Feminism, on the other hand, was, to the extent it presented itself as

liberation, much more a liberation from nature than from convention or
society. Therefore it was grimmer, unerotic, more of an abstract project,
and required not so much the abolition of law but the institution of law
and political activism. Instinct did not sufﬁce. The negative sentiment of
imprisonment was there, but what was wanted, as Freud suggested, was
unclear. The programmatic language shifted from “living naturally”
(with reference to very deﬁnite bodily functions) to vaguer terms such as
“self-deﬁnition,” “self-fulﬁllment,” “establishing priorities,” “fashioning a
lifestyle,” etc. The women’s movement is not founded on nature.
Although feminism sees the position of women as a result of nurture and
not nature, its crucial contention is that biology should not be destiny,
and biology is surely natural. It is not self-evident, although it may be

true, that women’s roles were always determined by human relations of
domination, like those underlying slavery. This thesis requires
interpretation and argument, and is not afﬁrmed by the bodily desires of
all concerned, as was the sexual revolution. Moreover, it is very often
asserted that science’s conquest of nature—in the form of the pill and
labor-saving devices—has made woman’s emancipation from the home
possible. It is certain that feminism has brought with it an unrelenting
process of consciousness-raising and changing that begins in what is
probably a permanent human inclination and is surely a modern one—
the longing for the unlimited, the unconstrained. It ends, as do many
modern movements that seek abstract justice, in forgetting nature and
using force to refashion human beings to secure that justice.

Feminism is in accord with and encourages many elements of the

sexual revolution, but uses them to different ends. Libertinism allows for
what even Rousseau called the greatest pleasure. But in making sex easy,
it can trivialize, de-eroticize and demystify sexual relations. A woman
who can easily satisfy her desires and does not invest her emotions in
exclusive relationships is liberated from the psychological tyranny of
men, to do more important things. Feminism acted as a depressant on
the Bacchanalian mood of the sexual revolution, as nakedness in Plato’s
Republic led not to great indulgences but to an unromantic regulation
and manipulation of sexual desire for public purposes. Just as smoking
and drinking overcame puritanical condemnation only to ﬁnd
themselves, after a brief moment of freedom, under equally moralistic
attacks in the name not of God but of the more respectable and
powerful names of health and safety, so sex had a short day in the sun
before it had to be reined in to accommodate the feminist sensibility. As
a people, we are good not at gratifying ourselves but at delaying
gratiﬁcation for the sake of projects which promise future good. In this
case the project is overcoming what is variously called male dominance,
machismo, phallocracy, patriarchy, etc., to which men and their female
collaborators seem very attached, inasmuch as so many machines of war
must be mounted against them.

in sexism. Women are made into objects, they are raped by their
husbands as well as by strangers, they are sexually harassed by professors
and employers at school and at work, and their children, whom they
leave in day-care centers in order to pursue their careers, are sexually

abused by teachers. All these crimes must be legislated against and
punished. What sensitive male can avoid realizing how dangerous his
sexual passion is? Is there perhaps really original sin? Men had failed to
read the ﬁne print in the Emancipation Proclamation. The new
interference with sexual desire is more comprehensive, more intense,
more difﬁcult to escape than the older conventions, the grip of which
was so recently relaxed. The July 14 of the sexual revolution was really
only a day between the overthrow of the Ancien Régime and the onset
of the Terror. The new reign of virtue, accompanied by relentless
propaganda on radio and television and in the press, has its own
catechism, inducing an examination of the conscience and the inmost
sentiments for traces of possessiveness, jealousy, protectiveness—all
those things men used to feel for women. There are, of course, a
multitude of properly indignant censors equipped with loudspeakers and
inquisitional tribunals.

Central to the feminist project is the suppression of modesty, in

which the sexual revolution played a critical preparatory role, just as
capitalism, in the Marxist scheme, prepared the way for socialism by
tearing the sacred veils from the charade of feudal chivalry. The sexual
revolution, however, wanted men and women to get together bodily,
while feminism wanted them to be able easily to get along separately.
Modesty in the old dispensation was the female virtue, because it
governed the powerful desire that related men to women, providing a
gratiﬁcation in harmony with the procreation and rearing of children,
the risk and responsibility of which fell naturally—that is, biologically—
on women. Although modesty impeded sexual intercourse, its result was
to make such gratiﬁcation central to a serious life and to enhance the
delicate interplay between the sexes, which makes acquiescence of the
will as important as possession of the body. Diminution or suppression
of modesty certainly makes attaining the end of desire easier—which
was the intention of the sexual revolution—but it also dismantles the
structure of involvement and attachment, reducing sex to the thing-in-
itself. This is where feminism enters.

Female modesty extends sexual differentiation from the sexual act to

the whole of life. It makes men and women always men and women.
The consciousness of directedness toward one another, and its
attractions and inhibitions, inform every common deed. As long as
modesty operates, men and women together are never just lawyers or

pilots together. They have something else, always potentially very
important, in common—ultimate ends, or as they say, “life goals.” Is
winning this case or landing this plane what is most important, or is it
love and family? As lawyers or pilots, men and women are the same,
subservient to the one goal. As lovers or parents they are very different,
but inwardly related by sharing the naturally given end of continuing
the species. Yet their working together immediately poses the questions
of “roles” and, hence, “priorities,” in a way that men working together or
women working together does not. Modesty is a constant reminder of
their peculiar relatedness and its outer forms and inner sentiments,
which impede the self’s free creation or capitalism’s technical division of
labor. It is a voice constantly repeating that a man and a woman have a
work to do together that is far different from that found in the
marketplace, and of a far greater importance.

This is why modesty is the ﬁrst sacriﬁce demanded by Socrates in

Plato’s Republic for the establishment of a city where women have the
same education, live the same lives and do the same jobs as men. If the
difference between men and women is not to determine their ends, if it
is not to be more signiﬁcant than the difference between bald men and
men with hair, then they must strip and exercise naked together just as
Greek men did. With some qualiﬁcations, feminists praise this passage
in Plato and look upon it as prescient, for it culminates in an absolute
liberation of women from the subjection of marriage and childbearing
and-rearing, which become no more important than any other necessary
and momentary biological event. Socrates provides birth control,
abortion and day-care centers, as well as marriages that last a day or a
night and have as their only end the production of sound new citizens to
replenish the city’s stock, cared for by the city. He even adds infanticide
to the list of conveniences available. A woman will probably have to
spend no more time and effort on children’s business than a man would
in curing a case of the measles. Only then can women be thought to be
naturally ﬁt to do the same things as men. Socrates’ radicalism extends
to the relation of parent and child. The citizens are not to know their
own children, for, if they were to love them above others, then the
means that brought them into being, the intercourse of this man and
this woman, would be judged to be of special signiﬁcance. Then we
would be back to the private family and the kinds of relatedness peculiar
to it.

Socrates’ proposal especially refers to one of the most problematic

cases for those who seek equal treatment for women—the military.
These citizens are warriors, and he argues that just as women can be
liberated from subjection to men and take their places alongside them,
men must be liberated from their special concern for women. A man
must have no more compunction about killing the advancing female
enemy than the male, and he must be no more protective of the heroine
ﬁghting on his right side than of the hero on his left. Equal opportunity
and equal risk. The only concern is the common good, and the only
relationship is to the community, bypassing the intermediate
relationships that tend to take on a life of their own and were formerly
thought to have natural roots in sexual attraction and love of one’s own
children. Socrates consciously rips asunder the delicate web of relations
among human beings woven out of their sexual nature. Without it, the
isolation of individuals is inevitable. He makes explicit how equal
treatment of women necessitates the removal of meaning from the old
kind of sexual relations—whether they were founded on nature or
convention—and a consequent loss of the human connections that
resulted from them which he replaces with the common good of the
city.

In this light we can discern the outlines of what has been going on

recently among us. Conservatives who have been heartened by the latest
developments within the women’s movement are mistaken if they think
that they and the movement are on common ground. Certainly both
sides are against pornography. But the feminists are against it because it
is a reminiscence of the old love relationship, which involved
differentiated sexual roles—roles now interpreted as bondage and
domination. Pornography demystiﬁes that relationship, leaving the
merely sexual component of male-female relationships without their
erotic, romantic, moral and ideal accompaniments. It caters to and
encourages the longing men have for women and its unrestrained if
impoverished satisfaction. This is what feminist anti-pornographers are
against—not the debasement of sentiment or the threat to the family.
That is why they exempt homosexual pornography from censorship. It is
by deﬁnition not an accomplice to the domination of females by males
and even helps to undermine it. Actually, feminists favor the
demystifying role of pornography. It unmasks the true nature of the old
relationships. Their purpose is not to remystify the worn-out systems but

to push on toward the realm of freedom. They are not for a return to the
old romances, Brief Encounter, for example, which gave charm to love
in the old way. They know that is dead, and they are now wiping up the
last desperate, untutored, semicriminal traces of a kind of desire that no
longer has a place in the world.

It is one thing, however, to want to prevent women from being

ravished and brutalized because modesty and purity should be respected
and their weakness protected by responsible males, and quite another to
protect them from male desire altogether so that they can live as they
please. Feminism makes use of conservative moralism to further its own
ends. This is akin to, and actually part of, the fatal old alliance between
traditional conservatives and radicals, which has had such far-reaching
effects for more than a century. They had nothing in common but their
hatred of capitalism, the conservatives looking back to the revival of
throne and altar in the various European nations, and to piety, the
radicals looking forward to the universal, homogeneous society and to
freedom—reactionaries and progressives united against the present.
They feed off the inner contradictions of the bourgeoisie. Of course
fundamentalists and feminists can collaborate to pass local ordinances
banning smut, but the feminists do so to demonstrate their political
clout in furthering their campaign against “bourgeois rights,” which are,
sad to say, enjoyed by people who want to see dirty movies or buy
equipment to act out comically distorted fantasies. It is doubtful whether
the fundamentalists gain much from this deal, because it guarantees the
victory of a surging moral force that is “antifamily and antilife.” See how
they do together on the abortion issue! People who watch pornography,
on the other hand, are always at least a little ashamed and unwilling to
defend it as such. At best, they sound a weak and uncertain trumpet for
the sanctity of the Constitution and the First Amendment, of which they
hope to be perceived as defenders. They pose no threat in principle to
anything.

Similarly, some conservatives are heartened by recent feminist

discussion about the differences between men and women and about
the special fulﬁllment of “parenting,” forbidden subjects at earlier stages
of the movement, when equal rights was the primary theme. However,
this discussion has really only been made possible by the success of
those earlier stages. There may indeed be a feminine nature or self, but
it has been deﬁnitively shaken loose from its teleological moorings. The

feminine nature is not in any reciprocal relation to the male nature, and
they do not deﬁne one another. The male and female sexual organs
themselves now have no more evident purposiveness than do white and
black skin, are no more naturally pointed toward one another than white
master and black slave, or so the legend goes. Women do have different
physical structures, but they can make of them what they will—without
paying a price. The feminine nature is a mystery to be worked out on its
own, which can now be done because the male claim to it has been
overcome. The fact that there is today a more afﬁrmative disposition
toward childbearing does not imply that there is any natural impulse or
compulsion to establish anything like a traditional fatherhood to
complement motherhood. The children are to be had on the female’s
terms, with or without fathers, who are not to get in the way of the
mother’s free development. Children have always been, and still are,
more the mother’s anyway. Ninety per cent or more of children of
divorced parents stay with their mothers, whose preeminent stake in
children has been enhanced by feminist demands and by a consequent
easy rationalization of male irresponsibility. So we have reproduction
without family—if family includes the presence of a male who has any
kind of a deﬁnite function. The return to motherhood as a feminist ideal
is only possible because feminism has triumphed over the family as it
was once known, and women’s freedom will not be limited by it. None
of this means returning to family values or even bodes particularly well
for the family as an institution, although it does mean that women have
become freer to come to terms with the complexity of their situation.

The uneasy bedfellowship of the sexual revolution and feminism

produced an odd tension in which all the moral restraints governing
nature disappeared, but so did nature. The exhilaration of liberation has
evaporated, however, for it is unclear what exactly was liberated or
whether new and more onerous responsibilities have not been placed on
us. And this is where we return to the students, for whom everything is
new. They are not sure what they feel for one another and are without
guidance about what to do with whatever they may feel.

The students of whom I am speaking are aware of all the sexual

alternatives, and have been from very early on in their lives, and they
feel that all sexual acts which do not involve real harm to others are licit.
They do not think they should feel guilt or shame about sex. They have
had sex education in school, of “the biological facts, let them decide the

values for themselves” variety, if not “the options and orientations”
variety. They have lived in a world where the most explicit discussions
and depictions of sex are all around them. They have had little fear of
venereal disease.1 Birth-control devices and ready abortion have been
available to them since puberty. For the great majority, sexual
intercourse was a normal part of their lives prior to college, and there
was no fear of social stigma or even much parental opposition. Girls
have had less supervision in their relations with boys than at any time in
history. They are not precisely pagan, but there is an easy familiarity
with others’ bodies and less inhibition about using their own for a broad
range of erotic purposes. There is no special value placed on virginity in
oneself or in one’s partners. It is expected that there were others before
and, incredibly to older folks, this does not seem to bother them, even
though it provides a ground for predictions about the future. They are
not promiscuous or given to orgies or casual sex, as it used to be
understood. In general, they have one connection at a time, but most
have had several serially. They are used to coed dormitories. Many live
together, almost always without expectation of marriage. It is just a
convenient arrangement. They are not couples in the sense of having
simulacra of marriage or a way of life different from that of other
students not presently so attached. They are roommates, which is what
they call themselves, with sex and utilities included in the rent. Every
single obstacle to sexual relationships between young unmarried persons
has disappeared, and these relationships are routine. To strangers from
another planet, what would be the most striking thing is that sexual
passion no longer includes the illusion of eternity.

Men and women are now used to living in exactly the same way and

studying exactly the same things and having exactly the same career
expectations. No man would think of ridiculing a female premed or
prelaw student, or believe that these are ﬁelds not proper for women, or
assert that a woman should put family before career. The law schools
and medical schools are full of women, and their numbers are
beginning to approach their proportion in the general population.
There is very little ideology or militant feminism in most of the women,
because they do not need it. The strident voices are present, and they
get attention in the university newspapers and in student governments.
But, again, the battle here has been won. Women students do not
generally feel discriminated against or despised for their professional

aspirations. The economy will absorb them, and they have rising
expectations. They do not need the protection of NOW any more than
do women in general, who see they are doing at least as well with
Reagan as they did with Carter. Academically, students are comfortably
unisexual; they revert to dual sexuality only for the sex act. Sex no longer
has any political agenda in universities except among homosexuals, who
are not yet quite satisﬁed with their situation. But the fact that there is
an open homosexual presence, with rights at least formally recognized
by university authorities and almost all students, tells us much about
current university life.

Students today understandably believe that they are the beneﬁciaries

of progress. They have a certain benign contempt for their parents,
particularly for their poor mothers, who were sexually inexperienced
and had no profession to be taken as seriously as their fathers’. Superior
sexual experience was always one of the palpable advantages that
parents and teachers had over youngsters who were eager to penetrate
the mysteries of life. But this is no longer the case, nor do students
believe it to be so. They quietly smile at professors who try to shock
them or talk explicitly about the facts of life in the way once so effective
in enticing more innocent generations of students to pay attention to the
words of their elders. Freud and D. H. Lawrence are very old hat. Better
not to try.

Even less do students expect to learn anything about their situation

from old literature, which from the Garden of Eden on made coupling
a very dark and complicated business. On reﬂection, today’s students
wonder what all the fuss was about. Many think their older brothers and
sisters discovered sex, as we now know it to be, in the sixties. I was
impressed by students who, in a course on Rousseau’s Confessions, were
astounded to learn that he had lived with a woman out of wedlock in
the eighteenth century. Where could he have gotten the idea?

There is, of course, literature that affects a generation profoundly but

has no interest at all for the next generation because its central theme
proved ephemeral, whereas the greatest literature addresses the
permanent problems of man. Ibsen’s Ghosts, for example, lost all its
force for young people when syphilis ceased to be a threat. Aristotle
teaches that pity for the plight of others requires that the same thing
could happen to us. Now, however, the same things that used to happen
to people, at least in the relations between the sexes, do not happen to

students anymore. And one must begin to wonder whether there is any
permanent literature for them, because there do not seem to them to be
permanent problems for them. As I have suggested earlier, this is the
ﬁrst fully historical or historicized generation, not only in theory but also
in practice, and the result is not the cultivation of the vastest sympathies
for long ago and far away, but rather an exclusive interest in themselves.
Anna Karenina and Madame Bovary are adulteresses, but the cosmos no
longer rebels at their deed. Anna’s son today would probably have been
awarded to her in the amicable divorce arrangements of the Karenins.
All the romantic novels with their depictions of highly differentiated
men and women, their steamy, sublimated sensuality and their
insistence on the sacredness of the marriage bond just do not speak to
any reality that concerns today’s young people. Neither do Romeo and
Juliet, who must struggle against parental opposition, Othello and his
jealousy, or Miranda’s carefully guarded innocence. Saint Augustine, as
a seminarian told me, had sexual hang-ups. And let us not speak of the
Bible, every no in which is now a yes. With the possible exception of
Oedipus, they are all gone, and they departed in the company of
modesty.

When young people today have crushing problems in what used to

be called sexual relationships, they cannot trace them back to any moral
ambiguity in man’s sexual nature. That was, of course, what was
erroneously done in the past.

Separateness

Civilization has seemingly led us around full circle, back to the state

of nature taught to us by the founding fathers of modern thought. But
now it is present not in rhetoric but in reality. Those who ﬁrst taught the
state of nature proposed it as a hypothesis. Liberated from all the
conventional attachments to religion, country and family that men
actually did have, how would they live and how would they freely
reconstruct those attachments? It was an experiment designed to make
people recognize what they really care about and engage their loyalties
on the basis of this caring. But a young person today, to exaggerate only
a little, actually begins de novo, without the givens or imperatives that he
would have had only yesterday. His country demands little of him and
provides well for him, his religion is a matter of absolutely free choice

and—this is what is really fresh—so are his sexual involvements. He can
now choose, but he ﬁnds he no longer has a sufﬁcient motive for choice
that is more than whim, that is binding. Reconstruction is proving
impossible.

The state of nature should culminate in a contract, which constitutes

a society out of individuals. A contract requires not only a common
interest between the contracting parties but also an authority to enforce
its fulﬁllment by them. In the absence of the former, there is no
relationship; in the absence of the latter, there can be no trust, only
difﬁdence. In the state of nature concerning friendships and love today,
there is doubt about both, and the result is a longing for the vanished
common ground, called roots, without the means to recover it, and
timidity and self-protectiveness in associations guaranteed by neither
nature nor convention. The pervasive feeling that love and friendship
are groundless, perhaps the most notable aspect of the current feeling of
groundlessness, has caused them to give way to the much vaguer and
more personal idea of commitment, that choice in the void whose cause
resides only in the will or the self. The young want to make
commitments, which constitute the meaning of life, because love and
nature do not sufﬁce. This is what they talk about, but they are haunted
by the awareness that the talk does not mean very much and that
commitments are lighter than air.

At the origins of modern natural rights teachings, freedom and

equality were political principles intended to bring both justice and
effectiveness to the relationships of ruling and being ruled, which in the
conventional order were constituted by pretended rights of strength,
wealth, tradition, age and birth. The relations of king and subject,
master and slave, lord and vassal, patrician and pleb, rich and poor, were
revealed to be purely manmade and hence not morally binding, apart
from the consent of the parties to them, which became the only source
of political legitimacy. Civil society was to be reconstructed on the
natural ground of man’s common humanity. Then it would appear that
all relationships or relatedness within civil society would also depend on
the free consent of individuals. Yet the relationships between man and
woman, parent and child, are less doubtfully natural and less arguably
conventional than the relations between rulers and ruled, especially as
they are understood by modern natural rights teachings. They cannot be
understood simply as contractual relationships, as resulting from acts of

human freedom, since they would thereby lose their character and
dissolve. Instead they seem to constrain that freedom, to argue against
the free arrangements of consent dominant in the political order. But it
is difﬁcult to argue that nature both does and does not prescribe certain
relations in civil society. The radical transformation of the relations
between men and women and parents and children was the inevitable
consequence of the success of the new politics of consent.

It might be said, with some exaggeration, that the ﬁrst state-of-nature

teachers paid little attention to the natural teleology of sex because they
were primarily concerned with analyzing away the false appearances of
teleology in the existing political arrangements. (I mean by teleology
nothing but the evident, everyday observation and sense of
purposiveness, which may be only illusory, but which ordinarily guides
human life, the kind everyone sees in the reproductive process.) Hobbes
and Locke marshaled their great talents to explode myths of rulership
that protected corrupt and selﬁsh regimes, such as Menenius’ tale:

 
There was a time when all the body’s members
Rebelled against the belly; thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I’ the midst o’ the body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labor with the rest; where the other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answered …
To the discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most ﬁtly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you …
‘True is it, my incorporate friends,’ quoth he,
‘That I receive the general food at ﬁrst
Which you do live upon; and ﬁt it is,
Because I am the storehouse and the shop
Of the whole body. But, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o’ the brain;

And, through the cranks and ofﬁces of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live. And …
… though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the ﬂour of all,
And leave me but the bran….
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members; for, examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o’ the common, you shall ﬁnd
No public beneﬁt which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you,
And no way from yourselves.

(Shakespeare, Coriolanus, 1. 95-156)

In the place of such an “organic” tale they provided a rational account
of legitimacy that made each individual the judge of his own best
interests and gave him the right to choose rulers who were bound to
protect him, abstracting from the habits of thought and feeling that
permitted patricians under the colors of the common good to make use
of plebs for their own greedy purposes. Hobbes and Locke gave the
plebs equal rights to selﬁshness. The ruled are not directed by nature to
the rulers any more than the rulers naturally care only for the good of
the ruled. Rulers and ruled can consciously craft a compact by which
the separate interests of each are protected. But they are never one,
sharing the same highest end, like the organs in Menenius’ body. There
is no body politic, only individuals who have come together voluntarily
and can separate voluntarily without maiming themselves.

Hobbes and Locke supposed that, although the political order would

be constituted out of individuals, the subpolitical units would remain
largely unaffected. Indeed, they counted on the family, as an
intermediate between individual and the state, partially to replace what
was being lost in passionate attachment to the polity. The immediate
and reliable love of one’s own property, wife and children can more
effectively counterpoise purely individual selﬁshness than does the

distant and abstract love of country. Moreover, concern for the safety of
one’s family is a powerful reason for loyalty to the state, which protects
them. The nation as a community of families is a formula that until
recently worked very well in the United States. However, it is very
questionable whether this solution is viable over the very long run,
because there are two contrary views of nature present here. And, as the
political philosophers have always taught, the one that is authoritative in
the political regime will ultimately inform its parts. In the social
contract view, nature has nothing to say about relationships and rank
order; in the older view, which is part and parcel of ancient political
philosophy, nature is prescriptive. Are the relations between men and
women and parents and children determined by natural impulse or are
they the product of choice and consent? In Aristotle’s Politics, the
subpolitical or prepolitical family relations point to the necessity of
political rule and are perfected by it, whereas in the state-of-nature
teachings, political rule is derived entirely from the need for protection
of individuals, bypassing their social relations completely. Are we
dealing with political actors or with men and women? In the former
case, persons are free to construct whatever relations they please with
one another; in the latter, prior to any choice, a preexisting frame largely
determines the relations of men and women.

There are three classic images of the polity that clarify this issue. The

ﬁrst is the ship of state, which is one thing if it is to be forever at sea, and
quite another if it is to reach port and the passengers go their separate
ways. They think about one another and their relationships on the ship
very differently in the two cases. The former case is the ancient city; the
latter, the modern state. The other two images are the herd and the
hive, which oppose each other. The herd may need a shepherd, but
each of the animals is grazing for itself and can easily be separated from
the herd. In the hive, by contrast, there are workers, drones and a queen;
there is a division of labor and a product toward which they all work in
common; separation from the hive is extinction. The herd is modern,
the hive ancient. Of course, neither image is an accurate description of
human society. Men are neither atoms nor parts of a body. But this is
why there have to be such images, since for the brutes these things are
not a matter for discussion or deliberation. Man is ambiguous. In the
tightest communities, at least since the days of Odysseus, there is
something in man that wants out and senses that his development is

stunted by being just a part of a whole, rather than a whole itself. And in
the freest and most independent situations men long for unconditional
attachments. The tension between freedom and attachment, and
attempts to achieve the impossible union of the two, are the permanent
condition of man. But in modern political regimes, where rights
precede duties, freedom deﬁnitely has primacy over community, family
and even nature.

The spirit of this choice must inevitably penetrate into all the details

of life. The ambiguity of man is well illustrated in the sexual passion
and the sentiments that accompany it. Sex may be treated as a pleasure
out of which men and women may make what they will, its promptings
followed or rejected, its forms matters of taste, its importance or
unimportance in life decided freely by individuals. As such, at least
according to thinkers like Hobbes and Locke, it would have to give
precedence to objective natural necessity, to the imperatives of self-love
or self-preservation. Or sex can be immediately constitutive of a whole
law of life, to which self-preservation is subordinated and in which love,
marriage and the rearing of infants is the most important business. It
cannot be both. The direction in which we have been going is obvious.

Now, it is not entirely correct to say that mankind at large is able to

treat sex as a matter of free choice, one which initially does not obligate
us to others. In a world where the natural basis of sexual differentiation
has crumbled, this choice is readily available to men, but less so to
women. Man in the state of nature, either in the ﬁrst one or the one we
have now, can walk away from a sexual encounter and never give it
another thought. But a woman may have a child, and in fact, as
becomes ever clearer, may want to have a child. Sex can be an
indifferent thing for men, but it really cannot quite be so for women.
This is what might be called the female drama. Modernity promised
that all human beings would be treated equally. Women took that
promise seriously and rebelled against the old order. But as they have
succeeded, men have also been liberated from their old constraints. And
women, now liberated and with equal careers, nevertheless ﬁnd they
still desire to have children, but have no basis for claiming that men
should share their desire for children or assume a responsibility for
them. So nature weighs more heavily on women. In the old order they
were subordinated and dependent on men; in the new order they are
isolated, needing men, but not able to count on them, and hampered in

the free development of their individuality. The promise of modernity is
not really fulﬁlled for women.

The decay of the natural ground for the family relationships was

largely unanticipated and unprepared for in the early modern thinkers.
But they did suggest a certain reform of the family, reﬂecting the
movement away from the constraints of duty, toward reliance on those
elements of the family that could be understood to ﬂow out of free
expressions of personal sentiment. In Locke, paternal authority is turned
into parental authority, a rejection of a father’s divine or natural right to
rule and to rule permanently, in favor of a father’s and a mother’s right
to care for their children as long as they need care, for the sake of the
children’s freedom—which the child will immediately recognize, when
he reaches majority, to have been for his own beneﬁt. There is nothing
left of the reverence toward the father as the symbol of the divine on
earth, the unquestioned bearer of authority. Rather, sons and daughters
will calculate that they have beneﬁted from their parents’ care, which
prepared them for the freedom they enjoy, and they will be grateful,
although they have no reciprocal duty, except insofar as they wish to
leave behind a plausible model for the conduct of their own children
toward them. They may, if they please, obey their father in order to
inherit his estate, if he has one, which he can dispose of as he pleases.
From the point of view of the children, the family retains its validity on
the basis of modern principles, and Locke prepares the way for the
democratic family, so movingly described by Tocqueville in Democracy
in America.

So far, so good. The children are reconciled to the family. But the

problem, it seems to me, is in the motive of the parents to care for their
children. The children can say to their parents: “You are strong, and we
are weak. Use your strength to help us. You are rich, and we are poor.
Spend your money on us. You are wise, and we are ignorant. Teach us.”
But why should mother and rather want to do so much, involving so
much sacriﬁce without any reward? Perhaps parental care is a duty, or
family life has great joys. But neither of these is a conclusive reason
when rights and individual autonomy hold sway. The children have
unconditional need for and receive unquestionable beneﬁts from the
parents; the same cannot be asserted about parents.

Locke believed, and the events of our time seem to conﬁrm his

belief, that women have an instinctive attachment to children that

cannot be explained as self-interest or calculation. The attachment of
mother and child is perhaps the only undeniable natural social bond. It
is not always effective, and it can, with effort, be suppressed, but it is
always a force. And this is what we see today. But what about the father?
Maybe he loves imagining his own eternity through the generations
stemming from him. But this is only an act of imagination, one that can
be attenuated by other concerns and calculations, as well as by his losing
faith in the continuation of his name for very long in the shifting
conditions of democracy. Of necessity, therefore, it was understood to be
the woman’s job to get and hold the man by her charms and wiles
because, by nature, nothing else would induce him to give up his
freedom in favor of the heavy duties of family. But women no longer
wish to do this, and they, with justice, consider it unfair according to the
principles governing us. So the cement that bound the family together
crumbled. It is not the children who break away; it is the parents who
abandon them. Women are no longer willing to make unconditional
and perpetual commitments on unequal terms, and, no matter what
they hope, nothing can effectively make most men share equally the
responsibilities of childbearing and child-rearing. The divorce rate is
only the most striking symptom of this breakdown.

None of this results from the sixties, or from the appeal to masculine

vanity begun by advertisers in the ﬁfties, or from any other superﬁcial,
pop-culture events. More than two hundred years ago Rousseau saw
with alarm the seeds of the breakdown of the family in liberal society,
and he dedicated much of his genius to trying to correct it. He found
that the critical connection between man and woman was being broken
by individualism, and focused his efforts, theoretical and practical, on
encouraging passionate romantic love in them. He wanted to rebuild
and reinforce that connection, previously encumbered by now
discredited religious and civil regulation, on modern grounds of desire
and consent. He retraced the picture of nature that had become a
palimpsest under the abrasion of modern criticism, and he enticed men
and women into admiring its ideological ordering, speciﬁcally the
complementarity between the two sexes, which mesh and set the
machine of life in motion, each differing from and needing the other,
from the depths of the body to the heights of the soul. He set utter
abandon to the sentiments and imaginations of idealized love against
calculation of individual interest. Rousseau inspired a whole genre of

novelistic and poetic literature that lived feverishly for over a century,
coexisting with the writings of the Benthams and the Mills who were
earnestly at work homogenizing the sexes. His undertaking had the
heaviest signiﬁcance because human community was at risk. In essence
he was persuading women freely to be different from men and to take
on the burden of entering a positive contract with the family, as opposed
to a negative, individual, self-protective contract with the state.
Tocqueville picked up this theme, described the absolute differentiation
of husband’s and wife’s functions and ways of life in the American
family, and attributed the success of American democracy to its women,
who freely choose their lot. This he contrasted to the disorder, nay,
chaos, of Europe, which he attributed to a misunderstanding or
misapplication of the principle of equality—only an abstraction when
not informed by nature’s imperatives.

This whole effort failed and now arouses either women’s anger, as an

attempt to take from them rights guaranteed to all human beings, or
their indifference, as irrelevant in a time when women do exactly the
same things as men and face the same difﬁculties in ensuring their
independence. Rousseau, Tocqueville and all the others now have only
historical signiﬁcance and at most provide us with a serious alternative
perspective for analyzing our situation. Romantic love is now as alien to
us as knight-errantry, and young men are no more likely to court a
woman than to wear a suit of armor, not only because it is not ﬁtting,
but because it would be offensive to women. As a student exclaimed to
me, with approval of his fellows, “What do you expect me to do? Play a
guitar under some girl’s window?” Such a thing seemed as absurd to
him as swallowing goldﬁsh.

But the parents of this same young man, it turned out, were divorced.

He strongly, if incoherently, expressed his distress and performed the
now ritualistic incantation for roots. Here Rousseau is most helpful, for
he honestly exposed the nerve of that incantation, whereas the
discussion of roots is an evasion. There is a passage in Emile, his
educational novel, which keeps coming back to me as I look at my
students. It occurs in the context of the teacher’s arrangements with the
parents of the pupil whose total education he is undertaking, and in the
absence of any organic relation between husbands and wives and
parents and children after having passed through the solvent of modern
theory and practice:

 
I would even want the pupil and the governor to regard
themselves as so inseparable that the lot of each in life is always a
common object for them. As soon as they envisage from afar
their separation, as soon as they foresee the moment which is
going to make them strangers to one another, they are already
strangers. Each sets up his own little separate system; and both
engrossed by the time they will no longer be together, stay only
reluctantly. (Emile, p. 53, ed. Bloom, Basic Books, 1979)
 

That is it. Everyone has “his own little separate system.” The aptest
description I can ﬁnd for the state of students’ souls is the psychology of
separateness.

inasmuch as people today must plan to be whole and self-sufﬁcient, and
cannot risk interdependence. Imagination compels everyone to look
forward to the day of separation in order to see how he will do. The
energies people should use in the common enterprise are exhausted in
preparation for independence. What would, in the case of union, be a
building stone becomes a stumbling block on the path to secession. The
goals of those who are together naturally and necessarily must become a
common good; what one must live with can be accepted. But there is no
common good for those who are to separate. The presence of choice
already changes the character of relatedness. And the more separation
there is, the more there will be. Death of a parent, child, husband, wife
or friend is always a possibility and sometimes a fact, but separation is
something very different because it is an intentional rebuff to the
demand for reciprocity of attachment which is the heart of these
relations. People can continue to live while related to the dead beloved;
they cannot continue to be related to a living beloved who no longer
loves or wishes to be loved. This continual shifting of the sands in our
desert—separation from places, persons, beliefs—produces the psychic
state of nature where reserve and timidity are the prevailing dispositions.
We are social solitaries.

Divorce

The most visible sign of our increasing separateness and, in its turn,

the cause of ever greater separateness is divorce. It has a deep inﬂuence
on our universities because more and more of the students are products
of it, and they not only have problems themselves but also affect other
students and the general atmosphere. Divorce in America is the most
palpable indication that people are not made to live together, and that,
although they want and need to create a general will out of the
particular wills, those particular wills constantly reassert themselves.
There is a quest, but ever more hopeless, for arrangements and ways of
putting the broken pieces back together. The task is equivalent to
squaring the circle, because everyone loves himself most but wants
others to love him more than they love themselves. Such is particularly
the demand of children, against which parents are now rebelling. In the
absence of a common good or common object, as Rousseau puts it, the
disintegration of society into particular wills is inevitable. Selﬁshness in
this case is not a moral vice or a sin but a natural necessity. The “Me
generation” and “narcissism” are merely descriptions, not causes. The
solitary savage in the state of nature cannot be blamed for thinking
primarily of himself, nor can a person who lives in a world where the
primacy of self-concern is only too evident in the most fundamental
institutions, where the original selﬁshness of the state of nature remains,
where concern for the common good is hypocritical, and where
morality seems to be squarely on the side of selﬁshness. Or, to put it
otherwise, the concern with self-development, self-expression, or growth,
which ﬂourished as a result of the optimistic faith in a pre-established
harmony between such a concern and society or community, has
gradually revealed itself to be inimical to community. A young person’s
qualiﬁed or conditional attachment to divorced parents merely
reciprocates what he necessarily sees as their conditional attachment to
him, and is entirely different from the classic problem of loyalty to
families, or other institutions, which were clearly dedicated to their
members. In the past, such breaking away was sometimes necessary but
always morally problematic. Today it is normal, and this is another
reason why the classic literature is alien to so many of our young, for it is
largely concerned with liberation from real claims—like family, faith, or
country—whereas now the movement is in the opposite direction, a
search for claims on oneself that have some validity. Children who have

gone to the school of conditional relationships should be expected to
view the world in the light of what they learned there.

Children may be told over and over again that their parents have a

right to their own lives, that they will enjoy quality time instead of
quantity time, that they are really loved by their parents even after
divorce, but children do not believe any of this. They think they have a
right to total attention and believe their parents must live for them.
There is no explaining otherwise to them, and anything less inevitably
produces indignation and an inextirpable sense of injustice. To children,
the voluntary separation of parents seems worse than their death
precisely because it is voluntary. The capaciousness of wills, their lack of
directedness to the common good, the fact that they could be otherwise
but are not—these are the real source of the war of all against all.
Children learn a fear of enslavement to the wills of others, along with a
need to dominate those wills, in the context of the family, the one place
where they are supposed to learn the opposite. Of course, many families
are unhappy. But that is irrelevant. The important lesson that the family
taught was the existence of the only unbreakable bond, for better or for
worse, between human beings.

The decomposition of this bond is surely America’s most urgent

social problem. But nobody even tries to do anything about it. The tide
seems to be irresistible. Among the many items on the agenda of those
promoting America’s moral regeneration, I never ﬁnd marriage and
divorce. The last time anyone in public ofﬁce took a crack at anything
like this issue was when Jimmy Carter urged Federal civil servants living
together out of wedlock to get married. Meanwhile, the ﬁrst
conservative President elected in a half-century is a divorced man, and
his Secretary of Health and Human Services, the public ofﬁcer most
closely connected with family matters, said she took heart from his
example during her own well-publicized divorce.

A university teacher of liberal arts cannot help confronting special

handicaps, a slight deformity of the spirit, in the students, ever more
numerous, whose parents are divorced. I do not have the slightest doubt
that they do as well as others in all kinds of specialized subjects, but I
ﬁnd they are not as open to the serious study of philosophy and
literature as some other students are. I would guess this is because they
are less eager to look into the meaning of their lives, or to risk shaking
their received opinions. In order to live with the chaos of their

experience, they tend to have rigid frameworks about what is right and
wrong and how they ought to live. They are full of desperate platitudes
about self-determination, respect for other people’s rights and decisions,
the need to work out one’s individual values and commitments, etc. All
this is a thin veneer over boundless seas of rage, doubt and fear.

Young people habitually are able to jettison their habits of belief for

an exciting idea. They have little to lose. Although this is not really
philosophy, because they are not aware of how high the stakes are, in
this period of their lives they can experiment with the unconventional
and acquire deeper habits of belief and some learning to go along with
them. But children of divorced parents often lack this intellectual daring
because they lack the natural youthful conﬁdence in the future. Fear of
both isolation and attachment clouds their prospects. A large measure of
their enthusiasm has been extinguished and replaced by self-
protectiveness. Similarly, their open conﬁdence in friendship as part of
the newly discovered search for the good is somewhat stunted. The
Glauconian eros for the discovery of nature has suffered more damage in
them than in most. Such students can make their disarray in the cosmos
the theme of their reﬂection and study. But it is a grim and dangerous
business, and more than any students I have known, they evoke pity.
They are indeed victims.

An additional factor in the state of these students’ souls is the fact that

they have undergone therapy. They have been told how to feel and what
to think about themselves by psychologists who are paid by their parents
to make everything work out as painlessly as possible for the parents, as
part of no-fault divorce. If ever there was a conﬂict of interest, this is it.
There are big bucks for therapists in divorce, since the divorces are eager
to get back to persecuting the wretches who smoke or to ending the
arms race or to saving “civilization as we know it” Meanwhile,
psychologists provide much of the ideology justifying divorce—e.g., that
it is worse for kids to stay in stressful homes (thus motivating the
potential escapees—that is, the parents—to make it as unpleasant as
possible there). Psychologists are the sworn enemies of guilt. And they
have an artiﬁcial language for the artiﬁcial feelings with which they
equip children. But it unfortunately does not permit such children to
get a ﬁrm grip on anything. Of course, not every psychologist who deals
with these matters simply plays the tune called by those who pay the
piper, but the givens of the market and the capacity for self-deception,

called creativity, surely inﬂuence such therapy. After all, parents can
shop around for a psychologist just as some Catholics used to shop for a
confessor. When these students arrive at the university, they are not only
reeling from the destructive effects of the overturning of faith and the
ambiguity of loyalty that result from divorce, but deafened by self-serving
lies and hypocrisies expressed in a pseudoscientiﬁc jargon. Modern
psychology at its best has a questionable understanding of the soul. It has
no place for the natural superiority of the philosophic life, and no
understanding of education. So children who are impregnated with that
psychology live in a sub-basement and have a long climb just to get back
up to the cave, or the world of common sense, which is the proper
beginning for their ascent toward wisdom. They do not have conﬁdence
in what they feel or what they see, and they have an ideology that
provides not a reason but a rationalization for their timidity.

These students are the symbols of the intellectual-political problems

of our time. They represent in extreme form the spiritual vortex set in
motion by loss of contact with other human beings and with the natural
order. But all students are affected, in the most practical everyday way,
unaware that their situation is peculiar, because their education does
not give them perspective on it.

Love

The best point of entry into the very special world inhabited by

today’s students is the astonishing fact that they usually do not, in what
were once called love affairs, say, “I love you,” and never, “I’ll always
love you.” One student told me that, of course, he says “I love you,” to
girlfriends, “when we are breaking up.” It is the clean and easy break—
no damage, no fault—at which they are adept. This is understood to be
morality, respect for other persons’ freedom.

Perhaps young people do not say “I love you” because they are

honest. They do not experience love—too familiar with sex to confuse it
with love, too preoccupied with their own fates to be victimized by love’s
mad self-forgetting, the last of the genuine fanaticisms. Then there is
distaste for love’s fatal historical baggage—sex roles, making women into
possessions and objects without respect for their self-determination.
Young people today are afraid of making commitments, and the point is
that love is commitment, and much more. Commitment is a word

invented in our abstract modernity to signify the absence of any real
motives in the soul for moral dedication. Commitment is gratuitous,
motiveless, because the real passions are all low and selﬁsh. One may be
sexually attracted, but that does not, so people think, provide any
sufﬁcient motive for real and lasting concern for another. Young people,
and not only young people, have studied and practiced a crippled eros
that can no longer take wing, and does not contain within it the longing
for eternity and the divination of one’s relatedness to being. They are
practical Kantians: whatever is tainted with lust or pleasure cannot be
moral. However, they have not discovered the pure morality. It remains
an empty category used to discredit all substantial inclinations that were
once moralizing. Too much emphasis on authenticity has made it
impossible to trust one’s instincts, and too much seriousness about sex
has made it impossible to take sex seriously. Young men and women
distrust eroticism too much to think it a sufﬁcient pointer toward a way
of life. The burdens implied in and blessed by eros are only burdens
without it. It is not cowardice to avoid taking on responsibilities that
have no charm even in anticipation.

When marriage occurs it does not usually seem to result from a

decision and a conscious will to take on its responsibilities. The couple
have lived together for a long time, and by an almost imperceptible
process, they ﬁnd themselves married, as much out of convenience as
passion, as much negatively as positively (not really expecting to do
much better, since they have looked around and seen how imperfect all
ﬁts seem to be). Among the educated, marriage these days seems to be
best acquired, as Macaulay said about the British Empire, in a ﬁt of
absence of mind.

Part of the inability to make sexual commitments results from an

ideology of the feelings. Young people are always telling me such
reasonable things about jealousy and possessiveness and even their
dreams about the future. But as to dreams about the future with a
partner, they have none. That would be to impose a rigid, authoritarian
pattern on the future, which should emerge spontaneously. This means
they can foresee no future, or that the one they would naturally foresee
is forbidden them by current piety, as sexist. Similarly, why should a
man or a woman be jealous if his or her partner has sexual relations with
someone else? A serious person today does not want to force the feelings
of others. The same goes for possessiveness. When I hear such things, all

so sensible and in harmony with a liberal society, I feel that I am in the
presence of robots. This ideology only works for people who have had
no experience of the feelings, have never loved, have abstracted from
the texture of life. These prodigies of reason need never fear Othello’s
fate. Kill for love! What can that mean? It may very well be that their
apatheia is a suppression of feeling, anxiety about getting hurt. But it
might also be the real thing. People may, having digested the
incompatibility of ends, have developed a new kind of soul. None of the
sexual possibilities students have actualized was unknown to me. But
their lack of passion, of hope, of despair, of a sense of the twinship of
love and death, is incomprehensible to me. When I see a young couple
who have lived together throughout their college years leave each other
with a handshake and move out into life, I am struck dumb.

Students do not date anymore. Dating was the petriﬁed skeleton of

courtship. They live in herds or packs with no more sexual
differentiation than any herds have when not in heat. Human beings
can, of course, engage in sexual intercourse at any time. But today there
are none of the conventions invented by civilization to take the place of
heat, to guide mating, and perhaps to channel it. Nobody is sure who is
to make the advances, whether there are to be a pursuer and a pursued,
what the event is to mean. They have to improvise, for roles are banned,
and a man pays a high price for misjudging his partner’s attitude. The
act takes place but it does not separate the couple from the ﬂock, to
which they immediately return as they were before, undifferentiated.

It is easier for men to get gratiﬁcation than it used to be, and many

men have the advantage of being pursued. Certainly they do not have to
make all kinds of efforts and pay all kinds of attention, as men once did.
There is an easy familiarity. But at least some of these advantages for
men are offset by nervousness about their sexual performance. In the
past a man could think he was doing a wonderful thing for a woman,
and expect to be admired for what he brought. But that was before he
could be pretty sure that he was being compared and judged, which is
daunting. And certain aspects of the undeniably male biology
sometimes make it difﬁcult for him to perform and cause him to prefer
being the one to express the desire.

Women are still pleased by their freedom and their capacity to chart

an independent course for themselves. But they frequently suspect that
they are being used, that in the long run they may need men more than

men need them, and that they cannot expect much from the feckless
contemporary male. They despise what men used to think women had
to offer (that is partly why it is now offered so freely), but they are
dogged by doubt whether men are very impressed by what they are now
offering instead. Distrust suffuses the apparently easy commerce
between the sexes. There is an awful lot of breaking up, surely
disagreeable, though nothing earthshaking. Exam time is a great
moment for students to separate. They are under too much stress and
too busy to put up with much trouble from a relationship.

“Relationships,” not love affairs, are what they have. Love suggests

something wonderful, exciting, positive and ﬁrmly seated in the
passions. A relationship is gray, amorphous, suggestive of a project,
without a given content, and tentative. You work at a relationship,
whereas love takes care of itself. In a relationship the difﬁculties come
ﬁrst, and there is a search for common grounds. Love presents illusions
of perfection to the imagination and is forgetful of all the natural ﬁssures
in human connection. About relationships there is ceaseless anxious
talk, the kind one cannot help overhearing in student hangouts or
restaurants frequented by men and women who are “involved” with one
another, the kind of obsessive prattle so marvelously captured in old
Nichols and May routines or Woody Allen ﬁlms. In one Nichols and
May bit, a couple who have just slept together for the ﬁrst time, assert
with all the emptiness of doubt, “We are going to have a relationship.”
This insight was typical of the University of Chicago in the ﬁfties, of The
Lonely Crowd. The only mistake was to encourage the belief that by
becoming more “inner-directed,” going farther down the path of the
isolated self, people will be less lonely. The problem, however, is not
that people are not authentic enough, but that they have no common
object, no common good, no natural complementarity. Selves, of
course, have no relation to anything but themselves, and this is why
“communication” is their problem. Gregariousness, like that of the
animals in the herd, is admitted by all. Grazing together side by side and
rubbing against one another are the given, but there is a desire and a
necessity to have something more, to make the transition from the herd
to the hive, where there is real interconnection. Hence, the hive—
community, roots, extended family—is much praised, but no one is
willing to transform his indeterminate self into an all too determinate
worker, drone or queen, to submit to the rank-ordering and division of

labor necessary to any whole that is more than just a heap of discrete
parts. Selves want to be wholes, but have lately also taken to longing to
be parts. This is the reason why conversation about relationships
remains so vacuous, abstract and unprogrammatic, with its whole
content stored in a bottle labeled “commitment.” It is also why there is
so much talk about phenomena like “bonding.” In the absence of any
connectedness in their souls, human beings seek reassurance in fruitless
analogy to mechanisms found in brutes. But this will not work because
human attachment always has an element of deliberate choice, denied
by such analogy. One need only compare the countless novels and
movies about male bonding with Aristotle’s discussion of friendship in
the Ethics. Friendship, like its related phenomenon, love, is no longer
within our ken because both require notions of soul and nature that, for
a mixture of theoretical and political reasons, we cannot even consider.

The reliance on relationships is a self-delusion because it is founded

on an inner contradiction. Relations between the sexes have always been
difﬁcult, and that is why so much of our literature is about men and
women quarreling. There is certainly legitimate ground to doubt their
suitability for each other given the spectrum—from the harem to Plato’s
Republic—of imaginable and actually existing relations between them,
whether nature acted the stepmother or God botched the creation by an
afterthought, as some Romantics believed. That man is not made to be
alone is all very well, but who is made to live with him? This is why
men and women hesitated before marriage, and courtship was thought
necessary to ﬁnd out whether the couple was compatible, and perhaps
to give them basic training in compatibility. No one wanted to be stuck
forever with an impossible partner. But, for all that, they knew pretty
much what they wanted from one another. The question was whether
they could get it (whereas our question today is much more what is
wanted). A man was to make a living and protect his wife and children,
and a woman was to provide for the domestic economy, particularly in
caring for husband and children. Frequently this did not work out very
well for one or both of the partners, because they either were not good at
their functions or were not eager to perform them. In order to assure the
proper ordering of things, the transvestite women in Shakespeare, like
Portia and Rosalind, are forced to masquerade as men because the real
men are inadequate and need to be corrected. This happens only in
comedies; when there are no such intrepid women, the situation turns

into tragedy. But the assumption of male garb observes the proprieties or
conventions. Men should be doing what the impersonating women are
doing; and when the women have set things right, they become women
again and submit to the men, albeit with a tactful, ironical
consciousness that they are at least partially playacting in order to
preserve a viable order. The arrangement implicit in marriage, even if it
is only conventional, tells those who enter into it what to expect and
what the satisfactions are supposed to be. Very simply, the family is a sort
of miniature body politic in which the husband’s will is the will of the
whole. The woman can inﬂuence her husband’s will, and it is supposed
to be informed by love of wife and children.

Now all of this has simply disintegrated. It does not exist, nor is it

considered good that it should. But nothing certain has taken its place.
Neither men nor women have any idea what they are getting into
anymore, or, rather, they have reason to fear the worst. There are two
equal wills, and no mediating principle to link them and no tribunal of
last resort. What is more, neither of the wills is certain of itself. This is
where the “ordering of priorities” comes in, particularly with women,
who have not yet decided which comes ﬁrst, career or children. People
are no longer raised to think they ought to regard marriage as the
primary goal and responsibility, and their uncertainty is mightily
reinforced by the divorce statistics, which imply that putting all of one’s
psychological eggs in the marriage basket is a poor risk. The goals and
wills of men and women have become like parallel lines, and it requires
a Lobachevskyan imagination to hope they may meet.

The inharmoniousness of ﬁnal ends ﬁnds its most concrete

expression in the female career, which is now precisely the same as the
male career. There are two equal careers in almost every household
composed of educated persons under thirty-ﬁve. And those careers are
not mere means to family ends. They are personal fulﬁllments. In this
nomadic country it is more than likely that one of the partners will be
forced, or have the opportunity, to take a job in a city other than the one
where his or her spouse works. What to do? They can stay together with
one partner sacriﬁcing his career to the other, they can commute, or
they can separate. None of these solutions is satisfactory. More
important, what is going to happen is unpredictable. Is it the marriage
or the career that will count most? Women’s careers today are
qualitatively different from what they were up to twenty years ago, and

such conﬂict is now inevitable. The result is that both marriage and
career are devalued.

For a long time middle-class women, with the encouragement of

their husbands, had been pursuing careers. It was thought they had a
right to cultivate their higher talents instead of being household
drudges. Implicit in this was, of course, the view that the bourgeois
professions indeed offered an opportunity to fulﬁll the human potential,
while family and particularly the woman’s work involved in it were
merely in the realm of necessity, limited and limiting. Serious men of
good conscience believed that they must allow their wives to develop
themselves. But, with rare exceptions, both parties still took it for
granted that the family was the woman’s responsibility and that, in the
case of potential conﬂict, she would subordinate or give up her career. It
was not quite serious, and she usually knew it. This arrangement was
ultimately untenable, and it was clear in which way the balance would
tip. Couples agreed that the household was not spiritually fulﬁlling for
women and that women have equal rights. The notion of a domestic life
appropriate to women had become incredible. Why should not women
take their careers as seriously as men take theirs, and have them be
taken as seriously by men? Terriﬁc resentment at the injustice done to
women under the prevailing understanding of justice found its
expression in demands seen as perfectly legitimate by both men and
women, that men weaken the attachment to their careers, that they
share equally in the household and the care of the children. Women’s
abandonment of the female persona was reinforced by the persona’s
abandoning them. Economic changes made it desirable and necessary
that women work; lowering of infant mortality rates meant that women
had to have fewer pregnancies; greater longevity and better health
meant that women devoted a much smaller portion of their lives to
having and rearing children; and the altered relationships within the
family meant that they were less likely to ﬁnd continuing occupation
with their children and their children’s children. At forty-ﬁve they were
ﬁnding themselves with nothing to do, and forty more years to do it in.
Their formative career years had been lost, and they were, hence,
unable to compete with men. A woman who now wanted to be a
woman in the old sense would ﬁnd it very difﬁcult to do so, even if she
were to brave the hostile public opinion. In all of these ways the feminist

case is very strong indeed. But, though the terms of marriage had been
radically altered, no new ones were deﬁned.

The feminist response that justice requires equal sharing of all

domestic responsibility by men and women is not a solution, but only a
compromise, an attenuation of men’s dedication to their careers and of
women’s to family, with arguably an enrichment in diversity of both
parties but just as arguably a fragmentation of their lives. The question
of who goes with whom in the case of jobs in different cities is
unresolved and is, whatever may be said about it, a festering sore, a
source of suspicion and resentment, and the potential for war.
Moreover, this compromise does not decide anything about the care of
the children. Are both parents going to care more about their careers
than about the children? Previously children at least had the
unqualiﬁed dedication of one person, the woman, for whom their care
was the most important thing in life. Is half the attention of two the
same as the whole attention of one? Is this not a formula for neglecting
children? Under such arrangements the family is not a unity, and
marriage is an unattractive struggle that is easy to get out of, especially
for men.

And here is where the whole business turns nasty. The souls of men

—their ambitious, warlike, protective, possessive character—must be
dismantled in order to liberate women from their domination.
Machismo—the polemical description of maleness or spiritedness,
which was the central natural passion in men’s souls in the psychology
of the ancients, the passion of attachment and loyalty—was the villain,
the source of the difference between the sexes. The feminists were only
completing a job begun by Hobbes in his project of taming the harsh
elements in the soul. With machismo discredited, the positive task is to
make men caring, sensitive, even nurturing, to ﬁt the restructured
family. Thus once again men must be re-educated according to an
abstract project. They must accept the “feminine elements” in their
nature. A host of Dustin Hoffman and Meryl Streep types invade the
schools, popular psychology, TV and the movies, making the project
respectable. Men tend to undergo this re-education somewhat sullenly
but studiously, in order to avoid the opprobrium of the sexist label and
to keep peace with their wives and girlfriends. And it is indeed possible
to soften men. But to make them “care” is another thing, and the
project must inevitably fail.

It must fail because in an age of individualism, persons of either sex

cannot be forced to be public-spirited, particularly by those who are
becoming less so. Further, caring is either a passion or a virtue, not a
description like “sensitive.” A virtue governs a passion, as moderation
governs lust, or courage governs fear. But what passion does caring
govern? One might say possessiveness, but possessiveness is not to be
governed these days—it is to be rooted out. What is wanted is an
antidote to natural selﬁshness, but wishes do not give birth to horses,
however much abstract moralism may demand them. The old moral
order, however imperfect it may have been, at least moved toward the
virtues by way of the passions. If men were self-concerned, that order
tried to expand the scope of self-concern to include others, rather than
commanding men to cease being concerned with themselves. To
attempt the latter is both tyrannical and ineffective. A true political or
social order requires the soul to be like a Gothic cathedral, with selﬁsh
stresses and strains helping to hold it up. Abstract moralism condemns
certain keystones, removes them, and then blames both the nature of
the stones and the structure when it collapses. The failure of agriculture
in socialist collective farming is the best political example of this. An
imaginary motive takes the place of a real one, and when the imaginary
motive fails to produce the real effect, those who have not been
motivated by it are blamed and persecuted. In family questions,
inasmuch as men were understood to be so strongly motivated by
property, an older wisdom tried to attach concern for the family to that
motive: the man was allowed and encouraged to regard his family as his
property, so he would care for the former as he would instinctively care
for the latter. This was effective, although it obviously had disadvantages
from the point of view of justice. When wives and children come to the
husband and father and say, “We are not your property; we are ends in
ourselves and demand to be treated as such,” the anonymous observer
cannot help being impressed. But the difﬁculty comes when wives and
children further demand that the man continue to care for them as
before, just when they are giving an example of caring for themselves.
They object to the father’s ﬂawed motive and ask that it be miraculously
replaced by a pure one, of which they wish to make use for their own
ends. The father will almost inevitably constrict his quest for property,
cease being a father and become a mere man again, rather than turning
into a providential God, as others ask him to be. What is so intolerable

about the Republic, as Plato shows, is the demand that men give up their
land, their money, their wives, their children, for the sake of the public
good, their concern for which had previously been buttressed by these
lower attachments. The hope is to have a happy city made up entirely of
unhappy men. Similar demands are made today in an age of slack
morality and self-indulgence. Plato taught that, however laudable justice
may be, one cannot expect prodigies of virtue from ordinary people.
Better a real city tainted by selﬁsh motives than one that cannot exist,
except in speech, and that promotes real tyranny.

I am not arguing here that the old family arrangements were good or

that we should or could go back to them. I am only insisting that we not
cloud our vision to such an extent that we believe that there are viable
substitutes for them just because we want or need them. The peculiar
attachment of mothers for their children existed, and in some degree
still exists, whether it was the product of nature or nurture. That fathers
should have exactly the same kind of attachment is much less evident.
We can insist on it, but if nature does not cooperate, all our efforts will
have been in vain. Biology forces women to take maternity leaves. Law
can enjoin men to take paternity leaves, but it cannot make them have
the desired sentiments. Only the rankest ideologue could fail to see the
difference between the two kinds of leave, and the contrived and
somewhat ridiculous character of the latter. Law may prescribe that the
male nipples be made equal to the female ones, but they still will not
give milk. Female attachment to children is to be at least partly replaced
with promissory notes on male attachment. Will they be redeemed? Or
won’t everyone set up his own little separate psychological banking
system?

Similarly, women, due to the unreliability of men, have had to

provide the means for their own independence. This has simply given
men the excuse for being even less concerned with women’s well-being.
A dependent, weak woman is indeed vulnerable and puts herself at
men’s mercy. But that appeal did inﬂuence a lot of men a lot of the
time. The cure now prescribed for male irresponsibility is to make them
more irresponsible. And a woman who can be independent of men has
much less motive to entice a man into taking care of her and her
children. In the same vein, I heard a female lieutenant-colonel on the
radio explaining that the only thing standing in the way of woman’s full
equality in the military is male protectiveness. So, do away with it! Yet

male protectiveness, based on masculine pride, and desire to gain the
glory for defending a blushing woman’s honor and life, was a form of
relatedness, as well as a way of sublimating selﬁshness. These days, why
should a man risk his life protecting a karate champion who knows just
what part of the male anatomy to go after in defending herself? What
substitute is there for the forms of relatedness that are dismantled in the
name of the new justice?

All our reforms have helped strip the teeth of our gears, which can

therefore no longer mesh. They spin idly, side by side, unable to set the
social machine in motion. It is at this exercise in futility that young
people must look when thinking about their future. Women are pleased
by their successes, their new opportunities, their agenda, their moral
superiority. But underneath everything lies the more or less conscious
awareness that they are still dual beings by nature, capable of doing most
things men do and also wanting to have children. They may hope
otherwise, but they fully expect to pursue careers, to have to pursue
careers, while caring for children alone. And what they expect and plan
for is likely to happen. The men have none of the current ideological
advantages of the women, but they can opt out without too much cost.
In their relations with women they have little to say; convinced of the
injustice of the old order, for which they were responsible, and
practically incapable of changing the direction of the juggernaut, they
wait to hear what is wanted, try to adjust but are ready to take off in an
instant. They want relationships, but the situation is so unclear. They
anticipate a huge investment of emotional energy that is just as likely as
not to end in bankruptcy, to a sacriﬁce of their career goals without any
clarity about what reward they will reap, other than a vague
togetherness. Meanwhile, one of the strongest, oldest motives for
marriage is no longer operative. Men can now easily enjoy the sex that
previously could only be had in marriage. It is strange that the tiredest
and stupidest bromide mothers and fathers preached to their daughters
—“He won’t respect you or marry you if you give him what he wants too
easily”—turns out to be the truest and most probing analysis of the
current situation. Women can say they do not care, that they want men
to have the right motives or none at all, but everyone, and they best of
all, knows that they are being, at most, only half truthful with
themselves.

Eros

This is the campus sexual scene. Relativism in theory and lack of

relatedness in practice make students unable to think about or look into
their futures, and they shrivel up within the conﬁnes of the present and
material I. They are willing to mutter the prescribed catechism, the
substitute for thought, which promises them salvation, but there is little
faith. As a very intelligent student said to me, “We are all obsessively
going to the well, but we always come up dry.” The rhetoric of the
campus gays only conﬁrms this. After all the demands and the
complaints against the existing order—“Don’t discriminate against us;
don’t legislate morality; don’t put a policeman in every bedroom;
respect our orientation”—they fall back into the empty talk about
ﬁnding life-styles. There is not, and cannot be, anything more speciﬁc.
All relationships have been homogenized in their indeterminacy.

The eroticism of our students is lame. It is not the divine madness

Socrates praised; or the enticing awareness of incompleteness and the
quest to overcome it; or nature’s grace, which permits a partial being to
recover his wholeness in the embrace of another, or a temporal being to
long for eternity in the perpetuity of his seed; or the hope that all men
will remember his deeds; or his contemplation of perfection. Eroticism
is a discomfort, but one that in itself promises relief and afﬁrms the
goodness of things. It is the proof, subjective but incontrovertible, of
man’s relatedness, imperfect though it may be, to others and to the
whole of nature. Wonder, the source of both poetry and philosophy, is
its characteristic expression. Eros demands daring from its votaries and
provides a good reason for it This longing for completeness is the
longing for education, and the study of it is education. Socrates’
knowledge of ignorance is identical with his perfect knowledge of
erotics. The longing for his conversations with which he infected his
companions, and which was intensiﬁed after his death and has endured
throughout the centuries, proved him to have been both the neediest
and most grasping of lovers, and the richest and most giving of beloveds.
The sex lives of our students and their reﬂection on them disarm such
longing and make it incomprehensible to them. Reduction has robbed
eros of its divinatory powers. Because they do not trust it, students have
no reverence for themselves. There is almost no remaining link visible

to them between what they learn in sex education and Plato’s
Symposium.

Yet only from such dangerous heights can our situation be seen in

proper perspective. The fact that this perspective is no longer credible is
the measure of our crisis. When we recognize the Phaedrus and the
Symposium as interpreting our experiences, we can be sure that we are
having those experiences in their fullness, and that we have the
minimum of education. Rousseau, the founder of the most potent of
reductionist teachings about eros, said that the Symposium is always the
book of lovers. Are we lovers anymore? This is my way of putting the
educational question of our times.

In all species other than man, when an animal reaches puberty, it is

all that it will ever be. This stage is the clear end toward which all of its
growth and learning is directed. The animal’s activity is reproduction. It
lives on this plateau until it starts downhill. Only in man is puberty just
the beginning. The greater and more interesting part of his learning,
moral and intellectual, comes afterward, and in civilized man is
incorporated into his erotic desire. His taste and hence his choices are
determined during this “sentimental education.” It is as though his
learning were for the sake of his sexuality. Reciprocally, much of the
energy for that learning obviously comes from his sexuality. Nobody
takes human children who have reached puberty to be adults. We
properly sense that there is a long road to adulthood, the condition in
which they are able to govern themselves and be true mothers and
fathers. This road is the serious part of education, where animal
sexuality becomes human sexuality, where instinct gives way in man to
choice with regard to the true, the good and the beautiful. Puberty does
not provide man, as it does other animals, with all that he needs to leave
behind others of his kind. This means that the animal part of his
sexuality is intertwined in the most complex way with the higher
reaches of his soul, which must inform the desires with its insight, and
that the most delicate part of education is to keep the two in harmony.

I cannot pretend that I understand very much of this mystery, but

knowing that I do not know keeps me attentive to, and far from the
current simpliﬁcations of, the phenomena of this aspect of our nature
that links the highest and the lowest in us. I believe that the most
interesting students are those who have not settled the sexual problem,
who are still young, even look young for their age, who think there is

much to look forward to and much they must yet grow up to, fresh and
naive, excited by the mysteries to which they have not yet been fully
initiated. There are some who are men and women at the age of sixteen,
who have nothing more to learn about the erotic. They are adult in the
sense that they will no longer change very much. They may become
competent specialists, but they are ﬂat-souled. The world is for them
what it presents itself to the senses to be; it is unadorned by imagination
and devoid of ideals. This ﬂat soul is what the sexual wisdom of our time
conspires to make universal.

The easy sex of teen-agers snips the golden thread linking eros to

education. And popularized Freud ﬁnishes it for good by putting the
seal of science on an unerotic understanding of sex. A youngster whose
sexual longings consciously or unconsciously inform his studies has a
very different set of experiences from one in whom such motives are not
active. A trip to Florence or to Athens is one thing for a young man who
hopes to meet his Beatrice on the Ponte Santa Trinità or his Socrates in
the Agora, and quite another for one who goes without such aching
need. The latter is only a tourist, the former is looking for completion.
Flaubert, a great expert on the fate of longing in the modern world,
sends his awestruck Emma Bovary to a ball at the estate of decadent
aristocrats where she sees:

 
… at the head of the table, alone among all of these men and
women, bent over, his full plate with his napkin knotted around
his neck like a child, an old man ate, letting drops of gravy
trickle from his mouth. He had bloodshot eyes and wore a little
pigtail fastened with a black ribbon. It was the Marquis’ father-
in-law, the old Duc de Laverdière, the former favorite of the
Comte d’Artois at the time of the hunts at the Vaudreuil home of
the Marquis de Conﬂans, and who had been, it was said, the
lover of Queen Marie-Antoinette between M. de Coigny and M.
de Lauzun. He had led a wild life of debauch, full of duels,
wagers, abducted women, had devoured his fortune and terriﬁed
his whole family. A domestic, behind his chair, speaking loudly
into his ear, named the dishes for him to which he pointed while
stuttering. And constantly Emma’s eyes, of their own accord,
returned to this old man with drooping lips as to something

extraordinary and august. He had lived at court and slept in the
bed of queens.
 

Others see only a repulsive old man, but Emma sees the ancien régime.
Her vision is truer, for there once really was an ancien régime, and in it
there were great lovers. The constricted present cannot teach it to us
without the longing that makes us dissatisﬁed with the present. Such
longing is what students most need, because the great remains of the
tradition have grown senile in our care. Imagination is required to
restore their youth, beauty and vitality, and then experience their
inspiration.

The student who made fun of playing the guitar under a girl’s

window will never read or write poetry under her inﬂuence. His
defective eros cannot provide his soul with images of the beautiful, and
it will remain coarse and slack. It is not that he will fail to adorn or
idealize the world; it is that he will not see what is there.

A signiﬁcant number of students used to arrive at the university

physically and spiritually virginal, expecting to lose their innocence
there. Their lust was mixed into everything they thought and did. They
were painfully aware that they wanted something but were not quite
sure exactly what it was, what form it would take and what it all meant
The range of satisfactions intimated by their desire moved from
prostitutes to Plato, and back, from the criminal to the sublime. Above
all they looked for instruction. Practically everything they read in the
humanities and social sciences might be a source of learning about their
pain, and a path to its healing. This powerful tension, this literal lust for
knowledge, was what a teacher could see in the eyes of those who
ﬂattered him by giving such evidence of their need for him. His own
satisfaction was promised by having something with which to feed their
hunger, an overﬂow to bestow on their emptiness. His joy was in hearing
the ecstatic “Oh, yes!” as he dished up Shakespeare and Hegel to
minister to their need. Pimp and midwife really described him well. The
itch for what appeared to be only sexual intercourse was the material
manifestation of the Delphic oracle’s command, which is but a
reminder of the most fundamental human desire, to “know thyself.”

Sated with easy, clinical and sterile satisfactions of body and soul, the

students arriving at the university today hardly walk on the enchanted
ground they once did. They pass by the ruins without imagining what

was once there. Spiritually detumescent, they do not seek wholeness in
the university. These most productive years of learning, the time when
Alcibiades was growing his ﬁrst beard, are wasted because of artiﬁcial
precociousness and a sophistic wisdom acquired in high school. The
real moment for sexual education goes by, and hardly anybody has an
idea of what it would be.

Reciprocally, the university does not see itself as ministering to such

needs and does not believe the mummies on display in its museum can
speak to the visitors or, honors, go home to live with them. The
humanists are old maid librarians. As I reﬂect on it, the last fertile
moment when student and university made a match was the ﬂing with
Freud during the forties and ﬁfties. He advertised a real psychology, a
version of the age-old investigation of the soul’s phenomena adjusted to
the palate of modern man. Today one can hardly imagine the
excitement. What a thrill it was when my ﬁrst college girlfriend told me
that the university’s bell tower was a phallic symbol. This was a real mix
of my secret obsessions and the high seriousness I expected to get from
the university. High school was never like this. It was hard to tell
whether the meaning of it all was that I was about to lose my virginity or
to penetrate the mysteries of being. An admirable confusion. At last
everything was out on the table. The dirty things had disappeared from
the philosophy of the mind, and Freud promised to restore the soul and
take seriously what happened in it. He fancied himself a new and truer
Plato and allowed us to praise Plato again as Freud’s precursor.

But it turned out to be psychology without the psyche, i.e., without

the soul. Freud just did not give a satisfying account of all the things we
experience. Everything higher had to be a repression of something
lower, and a symbol of something else rather than itself. The best a
Freudian vision could do for man’s real intellectual longings was Death
in Venice, clearly not a very rich row to hoe for the ﬁner spirits. Aristotle
said that man has two peaks, each accompanied by intense pleasure:
sexual intercourse and thinking. The human soul is a kind of ellipse or
hyperbola, and its phenomena are spread between its two foci,
displaying their tropical variety and ambiguity. Freud saw only one focus
in the soul, the same one as the brutes have, and had to explain all
psychology’s higher phenomena by society’s repression or other such
versions of the Indian rope trick. He really did not believe in the soul,
but in the body, along with its passive instrument of consciousness, the

mind. This blunted his vision of the higher phenomena, as is apparent
from his crude observations about art and philosophy. It was not merely
sexual satisfaction students were seeking, whether they were aware of it
or not, but knowledge of themselves, and Freud did not provide it.
People found that Freud’s “know thyself” led them to the couch, where
they emptied their tank of the compressed fuel, which was intended to
power them on their ﬂight from opinion to knowledge. “Know thyself”
did not mean to Freud knowing man’s place within the order of the
whole of things. It is long since that academic psychology has had any
appeal for students who have a philosophic urge. Freudian psychology
has become a big business and entered into the mainstream of public
life with a status equal to that of engineering and banking. But it has no
more intellectual appeal than do they. We must look elsewhere for
ourselves.

1 It remains to be seen what effect AIDS will have. The wave of publicity about herpes a couple
of years ago had almost no discernible psychological fallout.

PART TWO

NIHILISM,
AMERICAN

STYLE

THE GERMAN CONNECTION

When President Ronald Reagan called the Soviet Union “the evil
empire,” right-thinking persons joined in an angry chorus of protest
against such provocative rhetoric. At other times Mr. Reagan has said
that the United States and the Soviet Union “have different values”
(italics added), an assertion that those same persons greet at worst with
silence and frequently with approval. I believe he thought he was saying
the same thing in both instances, and the different reaction to his
different words introduces us to the most important and most
astonishing phenomenon of our time, all the more astonishing in being
almost unnoticed: there is now an entirely new language of good and
evil, originating in an attempt to get “beyond good and evil” and
preventing us from talking with any conviction about good and evil
anymore. Even those who deplore our current moral condition do so in
the very language that exempliﬁes that condition.

The new language is that of value relativism, and it constitutes a

change in our view of things moral and political as great as the one that
took place when Christianity replaced Greek and Roman paganism. A
new language always reﬂects a new point of view, and the gradual,
unconscious popularization of new words, or of old words used in new
ways, is a sure sign of a profound change in people’s articulation of the
world. When bishops, a generation after Hobbes’s death, almost
naturally spoke the language of the state of nature, contract and rights, it
was clear that he had defeated the ecclesiastical authorities, who were
no longer able to understand themselves as they once had. It was
henceforward inevitable that the modern archbishops of Canterbury
would have no more in common with the ancient ones than does the
second Elizabeth with the ﬁrst.

What was offensive to contemporary ears in President Reagan’s use of

the word “evil” was its cultural arrogance, the presumption that he, and
America, know what is good; its closedness to the dignity of other ways of
life; its implicit contempt for those who do not share our ways. The
political corollary is that he is not open to negotiation. The opposition
between good and evil is not negotiable and is a cause of war. Those
who are interested in “conﬂict resolution” ﬁnd it much easier to reduce

the tension between values than the tension between good and evil.
Values are insubstantial stuff, existing primarily in the imagination,
while death is real. The term “value,” meaning the radical subjectivity of
all belief about good and evil, serves the easygoing quest for comfortable
self-preservation.

Value relativism can be taken to be a great release from the perpetual

tyranny of good and evil, with their cargo of shame and guilt, and the
endless efforts that the pursuit of the one and the avoidance of the other
enjoin. Intractable good and evil cause inﬁnite distress—like war and
sexual repression—which is almost instantly relieved when more
ﬂexible values are introduced. One need not feel bad about or
uncomfortable with oneself when just a little value adjustment is
necessary. And this longing to shuck off constraints and have one
peaceful, happy world is the ﬁrst of the afﬁnities between our real
American world and that of German philosophy in its most advanced
form, given expression by the critics of the President’s speech.

But there is a second side to the coin. Persons deeply committed to

values are admired. Their intense belief, their caring or concern, their
believing in something, is the proof of autonomy, freedom and
creativity. Such persons are the contrary of easygoing, and they have
standards, all the more worthy because they are not received from
tradition, and are not based on a reality all can see, or derived from thin
rationalizing conﬁned to calculation about material interests. The
heroic and artistic types dedicate themselves to ideals of their own
making. They are the antibourgeois. Value here serves those who are
looking for fresh inspiration, for new beliefs about good and evil at least
as powerful as the old ones that have been disenchanted, demystiﬁed,
demythologized by scientiﬁc reason. This interpretation seems to say
that dying for values is the noblest of acts and that the old realism or
objectivism led to weak attachments to one’s goals. Nature is indifferent
to good and evil; man’s interpretations prescribe a law of life to nature.

Thus our use of the value language leads us in two opposite

directions—to follow the line of least resistance, and to adopt strong
poses and fanatic resolutions. But these are merely different deductions
from a common premise. Values are not discovered by reason, and it is
fruitless to seek them, to ﬁnd the truth or the good life. The quest begun
by Odysseus and continued over three millennia has come to an end
with the observation that there is nothing to seek. This alleged fact was

announced by Nietzsche just over a century ago when he said, “Cod is
dead.” Good and evil now for the ﬁrst time appeared as values, of which
there have been a thousand and one, none rationally or objectively
preferable to any other. The salutary illusion about the existence of good
and evil has been deﬁnitively dispelled. For Nietzsche this was an
unparalleled catastrophe; it meant the decomposition of culture and the
loss of human aspiration. The Socratic “examined” life was no longer
possible or desirable. It was—itself unexamined, and if there was any
possibility of a human life in the future it must begin from the naive
capacity to live an unexamined life. The philosophic way of life had
become simply poisonous. In short, Nietzsche with the utmost gravity
told modern man that he was free-falling in the abyss of nihilism.
Perhaps after having lived through this terrible experience, drunk it to
the dregs, people might hope for a fresh era of value creation, the
emergence of new gods.

Modern democracy was, of course, the target of Nietzsche’s criticism.

Its rationalism and its egalitarianism are the contrary of creativity. Its
daily life is for him the civilized reanimalization of man. Nobody really
believes in anything anymore, and everyone spends his life in frenzied
work and frenzied play so as not to face the fact, not to look into the
abyss. Nietzsche’s call to revolt against liberal democracy is more
powerful and more radical than is Marx’s. And Nietzsche adds that the
Left, socialism, is not the opposite of the special kind of Right that is
capitalism, but is its fulﬁllment. The Left means equality, the Right
inequality. Nietzsche’s call is from the Right, but a new Right
transcending capitalism and socialism, which are the powers moving in
the world.

modern democratic or egalitarian man ﬁnd much that is attractive in
Nietzsche’s understanding of things. It is the sign of the strength of
equality, and of the failure of Nietzsche’s war against it, that he is now
far better known and really inﬂuential on the Left than on the Right.

toward the extraordinary, not the ordinary, the unequal, not the equal.
But the democratic man requires ﬂattery, like any ruler, and the earliest
versions of democratic theory did not provide it. They justiﬁed
democracy as the regime in which very ordinary people were protected
in their attempt to achieve very ordinary and common goals. It was also

the regime dominated by public opinion, where the common
denominator set the rule for everyone. Democracy presented itself as
decent mediocrity as over against the splendid corruption of older
regimes. But it is quite another thing to have a regime in which all the
citizens can be thought to be at least potentially autonomous, creating
values for themselves. A value-creating man is a plausible substitute for a
good man, and some such substitute becomes practically inevitable in
pop relativism, since very few persons can think of themselves as just
nothing. The respectable and accessible nobility of man is to be found
not in the quest for or discovery of the good life, but in creating one’s
own “life-style,” of which there is not just one but many possible, none
comparable to another. He who has a “life-style” is in competition with,
and hence inferior to, no one, and because he has one he can
command his own esteem and that of others.

All this has become everyday fare in the United States, and the most

popular schools of psychology and their therapies take value positing as
the standard of healthy personality. Woody Allen’s comedy is nothing
but a set of variations on the theme of the man who does not have a real
“self” or “identity,” and feels superior to the inauthentically self-satisﬁed
people because he is conscious of his situation and at the same time
inferior to them because they are “adjusted.” This borrowed psychology
turns into a textbook in Zelig, which is the story of an “other-directed”
man, as opposed to an “inner-directed” man, terms popularized in the
1950s by David Riesman’s The Lonely Crowd, borrowed by him from his
analyst, Erich Fromm, who himself absorbed them (e.g., innige Mensch)
from a really serious thinker, Nietzsche’s heir, Martin Heidegger. I was
astounded to see how doctrinaire Woody Allen is, and how normal his
way of looking at things—which has immediate roots in the most
profound German philosophy—has become in the American
entertainment market. One of the links between Germany and the
United States, the psychologist Bruno Bettelheim, actually plays a
cameo role in Zelig.

Zelig is a man who literally becomes whoever or whatever is

expected of him—a Republican when with the rich; a gangster when
with Maﬁosi; black, Chinese or female, when with blacks, Chinese or
females. He is nothing in himself, just a collection of roles prescribed by
others. He inevitably enters into psychiatric treatment, where we learn
that he was once “tradition-directed,” i.e., from a family of silly, dancing

rabbinic Jews. “Tradition-directed” means to be guided by old values,
received from old beliefs, usually religious, which give a man a role that
he takes to be more than a role and a place in the world. It goes without
saying that a return to that old mode of adjustment and apparent health
is neither possible nor desirable. One is supposed to laugh at the
dancing Jew, although it is not clear whether from the point of view of
alienation or health. It is sure that the Jew is a pariah, Max Weber’s
category given special notoriety by Hannah Arendt, here meaning
interesting only as an outsider who has a special insight into the insider,
but whose Jewishness has no merit in itself. His value is deﬁned by the
world currently of interest to him. His health is restored when he
becomes “inner-directed,” when he follows his real instincts and sets his
own values. When Zelig hears people say that it is a nice day, when it
manifestly is, he responds that it is not a nice day. So he is immediately
clapped back into a mental institution by those whom he previously
tried to imitate and with whose opinions he is now at war. This is the
way society imposes its values on the creator. At the end he gets around,
on his own, to reading Moby Dick, which he had previously discussed
without having read, in order to impress people. His health is a mixture
of petulance and facile, self-conscious smugness.

Woody Allen’s haunted comedy diagnoses our ills as stemming from

value relativism, for which the cure is value positing. And his great
strength is in depicting the self-conscious role-player, never quite at
home in his role, interesting because he is trying so hard to be like the
others, who are ridiculous because they are unaware of their emptiness.
But Allen is tasteless and superﬁcial in playing with his Jewishness,
which apparently has no inner dignity for him. And where he fails
completely is in his presentation of the healthy inner-directed man, who
is neither funny nor interesting. This is the ﬁgure against which the
others are understood and judged, as misers are ridiculous only
compared to the man who knows the real value of money. But Allen’s
inner-directed man is simply empty or nonexistent, forcing one to
wonder how profound his creator’s understanding can be. Here is where
we confront the nothing, but it is not clear that Allen knows it. Inner-
directedness is an egalitarian promise that enables us easily to despise
and ridicule “the bourgeois” we actually see around us. This is all
terribly lightweight and disappointing, for it really tries to assure us that
the agonies of the nihilism we are living are just neuroses that can be

cured by a little therapy and by a little stiffening of our backs. Erich
Fromm’s Escape from Freedom is just Dale Carnegie with a bit of
middle-European cultural whipped cream on top. Get rid of capitalist
alienation and Puritan repression, and all will be well as each man
chooses for himself. But Woody Allen really has nothing to tell us about
inner-directedness. Nor does Riesman nor, going further back, does
Fromm. One has to get to Heidegger to learn something of all the grim
facts of what inner-directedness might really mean. Allen is never nearly
as funny as was Kafka, who really took the problem seriously, without
the propagandistic reassurance that Left progressivism would solve it.
Zelig has a ﬂirtation with Hitler—whose appeal, it almost goes without
saying, is to “other-directed persons,” or to use an equivalent expression
popularized by another German psychosociologist, Theodore Adorno, to
“authoritarian personalities”2—but is rescued by his psychiatricus ex
machina. (Flirtation with Stalin never needs explanation in this
intellectual universe.) Woody Allen helps to make us feel comfortable
with nihilism, to Americanize it. I’m O.K., thou art O.K. too, if we agree
to be a bit haunted together.

In politics, in entertainment, in religion, everywhere, we ﬁnd the

language connected with Nietzsche’s value revolution, a language
necessitated by a new perspective on the things of most concern to us.
Words such as “charisma,” “life-style,” “commitment,” “identity” and
many others, all of which can easily be traced to Nietzsche, are now
practically American slang, although they, and the things to which they
refer, would have been incomprehensible to our fathers, not to speak of
our Founding Fathers. A few years ago I chatted with a taxi driver in
Atlanta who told me he had just gotten out of prison, where he served
time for peddling dope. Happily he had undergone “therapy.” I asked
him what kind. He responded, “All kinds—depth-psychology,
transactional analysis, but what I liked best was Gestalt.” Some of the
German ideas did not even require English words to become the
language of the people. What an extraordinary thing it is that high-class
talk from what was the peak of Western intellectual life, in Germany,
has become as natural as chewing gum on American streets. It indeed
had its effect on this taxi driver. He said that he had found his identity
and learned to like himself. A generation earlier he would have found
God and learned to despise himself as a sinner. The problem lay with
his sense of self, not with any original sin or devils in him. We have here

the peculiarly American way of digesting Continental despair. It is
nihilism with a happy ending.

peculiar interest to me because I have watched it occur during my own
intellectual lifetime, and I feel a little like someone who knew
Napoleon when he was six. I have seen value relativism and its
concomitants grow greater in the land than anyone imagined. Who in
1920 would have believed that Max Weber’s technical sociological
terminology would someday be the everyday language of the United
States, the land of the Philistines, itself in the meantime become the
most powerful nation in the world? The self-understanding of hippies,
yippies, yuppies, panthers, prelates and presidents has unconsciously
been formed by German thought of a half-century earlier; Herbert
Marcuse’s accent has been turned into a Middle Western twang; the
echt Deutsch label has been replaced by a Made in America label; and
the new American life-style has become a Disneyland version of the
Weimar Republic for the whole family. So my studies have led me
ineluctably back to the half-hidden and thrilling origins of all this,
providing me a standpoint from which I look in both directions, forward
to our evolving American life and backward to the profound
philosophical reﬂection that broke with and then buried the philosophic
tradition, with the most ambiguous intellectual, moral and political
consequences. Knowledge of this fascinating intellectual history is
required in order to understand ourselves and provide ourselves with
real alternatives—if only intellectual historians could be persuaded that
the intellect has an effect on history, that, as Nietzsche said, “the greatest
deeds are thoughts,” that “the world revolves around the inventors of
new values, revolves silently.” Nietzsche was such an inventor, and we
are still revolving around him, although rather squeakily. This is our
scene, and the spectacle consists in how his views have been trivialized
by democratic man desirous of tricking himself out in borrowed ﬁnery,
in how democracy has been corrupted by alien views and alien tastes.

I got my ﬁrst look at this scene at the midpoint of its development,

when American university life was being revolutionized by German
thought, which was still the preserve of earnest intellectuals. When I
came to the University of Chicago in the mid-forties, just after the war,
terms like “value judgment” were fresh, conﬁned to an elite and
promising special insight. There were great expectations in the social

sciences that a new era was beginning in which man and society would
be understood better than they had ever been understood before. The
academic character of the philosophy departments, with their tired and
tiresome methodology and positivism, had caused people interested in
the perennial and live questions about man to migrate to the social
sciences. There were two writers who dominated and generated real
enthusiasm—Freud and Weber. Marx was revered but, as had been true
for a long time, was little read and did not provide inspiration for
dealing with the problems really facing us. Although it is even now still
insufﬁciently appreciated, Freud and Weber were both thinkers who
were profoundly inﬂuenced by Nietzsche, as is obvious to anyone who
knows Nietzsche and knows what was going on in the German-speaking
world in the late nineteenth century. In a strange way they divided up
Nietzsche’s psychological and social concerns between them. Freud
concentrated on the id, or unconscious, the sexual as the motor of the
most interesting spiritual phenomena, and the related ideas of
sublimation and neurosis. Weber was most concerned with the problem
of values, the role of religion in their formation, and community.
Together Freud and Weber are the immediate source of most of the
language with which we are so familiar.

Everyone knew that they were German thinkers, and that the

professors teaching them were a mix of German refugees from Hitler
and of Americans who had either studied in Germany prior to Hitler or
who had learned from these emigrés. It was not problematic to any of
them that these ideas were German. Freud and Weber were part of that
great pre-Hitlerian German classical tradition, which everyone
respected. Nietzsche himself was not at that time very respectable
because his thought seemed to have some discomﬁting relation to
fascism, and many of those who had favored Nietzsche in the Anglo-
Saxon world (where he had had his greatest direct inﬂuence on artists,
most notably, of course, Ezra Pound) had not been sufﬁciently alert to
the dangers of fascism and anti-Semitism (although Nietzsche himself
was the very opposite of an anti-Semite). The fact that German thought
had taken an antirational and antiliberal turn with Nietzsche, and even
more so with Heidegger, was evident. But this was simply repressed, and
a blind eye was turned to their inﬂuence on their contemporaries. There
were some superﬁcial attempts to blame Hegel, Fichte and Nietzsche
for what happened in Germany, but the German classical tradition in

general, as well as German historicism, remained in favor, and the
special stars in our ﬁrmament were either treated as spinoffs from them
or as having been generated spontaneously. The trouble with Weimar
was simply that the bad guys won.

tend to be philosophic and did not dig back into the sources of the new
language and categories they were using. They thought that these were
scientiﬁc discoveries like any others, which were to be used in order to
make further discoveries. They were very much addicted to abstractions
and generalizations, as Tocqueville predicted they would be. They
believed in scientiﬁc progress and appeared (there may have been an
element of boasting and self-irony in this) to be convinced that they
were on the verge of a historic breakthrough in the social sciences,
equivalent to that scored in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in
the natural sciences by Galileo, Kepler, Descartes and Newton, which
would make earlier social science as irrelevant as was Ptolemy after
Copernicus. These teachers were literally inebriated by the unconscious
and values. And they were also sure that scientiﬁc progress would be
related to social and political progress. All were either Marxists or New
Deal liberals. The war against the Right had been won domestically at
the polls, and in foreign affairs on the battleﬁeld. The decisive question
of principle had been resolved. Equality and the welfare state were now
a part of the order of things, and what remained was to complete the
democratic project. Psychotherapy would make individuals happy, as
sociology would improve societies.

I do not believe any of these professors noticed the darker side of

Freud and Weber, let alone the Nietzsche-Heidegger extremism lying
somewhere beneath the surface. Or rather, if they did notice, they found
it of autobiographical rather than scientiﬁc interest. It is amazing to me
that the irrational source of all conscious life in Freud, and the relativity
of all values in Weber, did not pose a problem for them and their
optimism about science. Freud was very dubious about the future of
civilization and the role of reason in the life of man. He certainly was
not a convinced advocate of democracy or equality. And Weber, much
more thoughtful than Freud about science, morals and politics, lived in
an atmosphere of permanent tragedy. His science was formulated as a
doubtful dare against the chaos of things, and values certainly lay
beyond its limits. This is what the very precarious, not to say imaginary,

distinction between facts and values meant. Reason in politics leads to
the inhumanity of bureaucracy. Weber found it impossible to prefer
rational politics to the politics of irrational commitment; he believed
that reason and science themselves were value commitments like any
other commitments, incapable of asserting their own goodness, thus
having lost what had always been most distinctive in them. Politics
required dangerous and uncontrollable semireligious value positing, and
Weber was witnessing a struggle of the gods for possession of man and
society, the results of which were unpredictable. Calculating reason
would end up in dried-up, heartless and soulless administration of things
without community-forming and sustaining values; feeling would lead
to selﬁsh indulgence in superﬁcial pleasures; political commitment
would likely foster fanaticism, and it was questionable whether there was
enough value-positing energy left in man. Everything was up in the air,
and there was no theodicy to sustain him in his travail. Weber, along
with many others in Germany under Nietzsche’s inﬂuence, saw that all
that we care for was threatened by his insight and that we were without
intellectual or moral resources to govern the outcome. We require
values, which in turn require a peculiar human creativity that is drying
up and in any event has no cosmic support. Scientiﬁc analysis itself
concludes that reason is powerless, while dissolving the protective
horizon within which men can value. None of this is peculiar to Weber
or comes simply from his distressed personality, which he had at least
partly because of the bleak perspective that lay before him. There is no
doubt that value relativism, if it is true and it is believed in, takes one
into very dark regions of the soul and very dangerous political
experiments. But on enchanted American ground the tragic sense has
little place, and the early proponents of the new social science gaily
accepted the value insight, sure that their values were just ﬁne, and went
ahead with science. Compare the character and concerns of Talcott
Parsons with those of Max Weber and you have the measure of the
distance between the Continent and us. In Parsons you see the
routinization of Weber. It was not until the sixties that the value insight
began to have its true effects in the United States, as it had had in
Germany thirty or forty years earlier. Suddenly a new generation that
had not lived off inherited value fat, that had been educated in
philosophic and scientiﬁc indifference to good and evil, came on the

scene representing value commitment and taught their elders a most
unpleasant lesson.

The image of this astonishing Americanization of the German pathos

can be seen in the smiling face of Louis Armstrong as he belts out the
words of his great hit “Mack the Knife.” As most American intellectuals
know, it is a translation of the song “Mackie Messer” from The
Threepenny Opera, a monument of Weimar Republic popular culture,
written by two heroes of the artistic Left, Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill.
There is a strange nostalgia among many of the American intelligentsia
for this moment just prior to Hitler’s coming to power, and Lotte Lenya’s
rendition of this song has long stood with Marlene Dietrich’s singing
“Ich bin von Kopf bis Fuss auf Liebe eingestellt” in the Blue Angel as the
symbol of a charming, neurotic, sexy, decadent longing for some hazy
fulﬁllment not quite present to the consciousness. Less known to our
intelligentsia is an aphorism in Nietzsche’s Thus Spake Zarathustra, a
book well known to Brecht, entitled “On the Pale Criminal,” which tells
the story of a neurotic murderer, eerily resembling Raskolnikov in Crime
and Punishment, who does not know, cannot know, that he committed
murder out of a motive as legitimate as any other and useful in many
important situations, but delegitimized in our paciﬁc times: he lusted
after “the joy of the knife.” This scenario for “Mack the Knife” is the
beginning of the supra-moral attitude of expectancy, waiting to see what
the volcano of the id will spew forth, which appealed to Weimar and its
American admirers. Everything is all right as long as it is not fascism!
With Armstrong taking Lenya’s place, as Mai Britt took Dietrich’s, it is
all mass-marketed and the message becomes less dangerous, although
no less corrupt. All awareness of foreignness disappears. It is thought to
be folk culture, all-American, part of the American century, just as “stay
loose” (as opposed to uptight) is supposed to have been an insight of
rock music and not a translation of Heidegger’s Gelassenheit. The
historical sense and the distance on our times, the only advantages of
Weimar nostalgia, are gone, and American self-satisfaction—the sense
that the scene is ours, that we have nothing important to learn about life
from the past—is served.

This image can be seen in our intellectual history, if only one

substitutes Mary McCarthy for Louis Armstrong and Hannah Arendt for
Lotte Lenya, or David Riesman for Armstrong and Erich Fromm for
Lenya, and so on through the honor roll of American intellectuals. Our

stars are singing a song they do not understand, translated from a
German original and having a huge popular success with unknown but
wide-ranging consequences, as something of the original message
touches something in American souls. But behind it all, the master
lyricists are Nietzsche and Heidegger.

In short, after the war, while America was sending out its blue jeans

to unite the young of all nations, a concrete form of democratic
universalism that has had liberalizing effects on many enslaved nations,
it was importing a clothing of German fabrication for its souls, which
clashed with all that and cast doubt on the Americanization of the world
on which we had embarked, thinking it was good and in conformity
with the rights of man. Our intellectual skyline has been altered by
German thinkers even more radically than has our physical skyline by
German architects.3

My insistence on the Germanness of all this is intended not as a

know-nothing response to foreign inﬂuence, the search for a German
intellectual under every bed, but to heighten awareness of where we
must look if we are to understand what we are saying and thinking, for
we are in danger of forgetting. The great inﬂuence of a nation with a
powerful intellectual life over less well endowed nations, even if the
armies of the latter are very powerful, is not rare in human experience.
The most obvious cases are the inﬂuence of Greece on Rome and of
France on Germany and Russia. But it is precisely the differences
between these two cases and the example of Germany and the United
States that makes the latter so problematic for us. Greek and French
philosophy were universalistic in intention and fact. They appealed to
the use of a faculty potentially possessed by all men everywhere and at
all times. The proper noun in Greek philosophy is only an inessential
tag, as it is in French Enlightenment. (The same is true of Italian
Renaissance, a rebirth that is proof of the accidental character of nations
and of the universality of Greek thinkers.) The good life and the just
regime they taught knew no limits of race, nation, religion or climate.
This relation to man as man was the very deﬁnition of philosophy. We
are aware of this when we speak of science, and no one seriously talks of
German, Italian or English physics. And when we Americans speak
seriously about politics, we mean that our principles of freedom and
equality and the rights based on them are rational and everywhere

applicable. World War II was really an educational project undertaken
to force those who did not accept these principles to do so.

But German philosophy after Hegel cast doubt on them, and there

was some relationship between German politics and German thought
Historicism has taught that the mind is essentially related to history or
culture. Germanness is, according to later German philosophers, an
essential part of them. For Nietzsche and those inﬂuenced by him,
values are the products of folk minds and have relevance only to those
minds. The possibility of translation itself, as I have mentioned, is
doubted by Heidegger. For him the Latin translations of the Greek
philosophical terms are superﬁcial and do not convey the essence of the
translated text. German thought tended not toward liberation from one’s
own culture, as did earlier thought, but toward reconstituting the
rootedness in one’s own, which has been shattered by cosmopolitanism,
philosophical and political. We are like the millionaire in The Ghost
(Geist) Goes West who brings a castle from brooding Scotland to sunny
Florida and adds canals and gondolas for “local color.” We chose a
system of thought that, like some wines, does not travel; we chose a way
of looking at things that could never be ours and had as its starting point
dislike of us and our goals. The United States was held to be a
nonculture, a collection of castoffs from real cultures, seeking only
comfortable self-preservation in a regime dedicated to superﬁcial
cosmopolitanism in thought and deed. Our desire for the German
things was proof we could not understand them. The decisive character
of peoples and their values that was decreed by historicism of all kinds,
but particularly by Nietzsche’s radical historicism, makes the German
case the opposite of the Greek one. The difference can be seen in the
way Cicero treats Socrates as opposed to the way Nietzsche does. For
Cicero, Socrates is a friend and contemporary; for Nietzsche he is an
enemy and an ancient. Given our country’s extreme Enlightenment
universalism, nothing could be more unwelcome to Nietzsche and
Heidegger than our embrace.

question that is dealt with by never being raised. The social sciences
have dealt with Nazism as a psychopathology, a result of authoritarian or
other-directed personalities, a case for psychiatrists, as presented by
Woody Allen. Social science denies that thought, especially serious
thought, even the very thought at its own root, could have had anything

to do with Hitler’s success. But the Weimar Republic, so attractive in its
left-wing version to Americans, also contained intelligent persons who
were attracted, at least in the beginning, to fascism, for reasons very like
those motivating the Left ideologues, reﬂections on autonomy and value
creation. Once one plunges into the abyss, there is no assurance
whatsoever that equality, democracy or socialism will be found on the
other side. At very best, self-determination is indeterminate. But the
conditions of value creation, particularly its authoritative and religious
or charismatic character, would seem to militate against democratic
rationalism. The sacred roots of community are contrary to the rights of
individuals and liberal tolerance. The new religiosity connected with
community and culture inﬂuenced people who look at things from the
perspective of creativity to lean toward the Right. On the Left there was
only an assertion that Marx would, after his revolution, produce exactly
what Nietzsche promised, while on the Right there was meditation on
what we know of the conditions of creativity. I shall not comment on the
Nazi period of the now de-Naziﬁed Heidegger, other than to remark
that the ever more open recognition that he was the most interesting
thinker of our century, formerly chastely displaced in admiration for his
various proxies, gives evidence that we are playing with ﬁre. His interest
in new gods led him, as it did Nietzsche, in his teaching to honor
immoderation over moderation and to ridicule morality. Both helped to
constitute that ambiguous Weimar atmosphere in which liberals looked
like simpletons and anything was possible for people who sang of the joy
of the knife in cabarets. Decent people became used to hearing things
about which they would have in the past been horriﬁed to think, and
which would not have been allowed public expression. An extreme
outcome in the struggle between Right and Left in Weimar was
inevitable.

The great mystery is the kinship of all this to American souls that

were not prepared by education or historical experience for it. Pierre
Hassner once asked whether the fantastic success of Freud in America
was due simply to the fact that so many of his disciples took refuge from
Hitler there and were very effective propagandists, or whether there was
some special need for him in a country he did not much care for. As a
Chicago boy, I was always particularly struck by the fact that Marshall
Field III, the scion of the great merchandising family, the archetypical
success story of what Weberians call the Protestant Ethic, was

psychoanalyzed by Gregory Zilboorg, one of the earliest inﬂuential
Freudians in the United States, and emerged as an ardent supporter of
left-wing causes who lost fortunes on fellow-traveling newspapers. There
was evidently much more going on in the store’s basement than we had
suspected. Was there something that the American self-understanding
had not sufﬁciently recognized or satisﬁed?

Once Americans had become convinced that there is indeed a

basement to which psychiatrists have the key, their orientation became
that of the self, the mysterious, free, unlimited center of our being. All
our beliefs issue from it and have no other validation. Although nihilism
and its accompanying existential despair are hardly anything but a pose
for Americans, as the language derived from nihilism has become a part
of their educations and insinuated itself into their daily lives, they
pursue happiness in ways determined by that language. There is a whole
arsenal of terms for talking about nothing—caring, self-fulﬁllment,
expanding consciousness, and so on, almost indeﬁnitely. Nothing
determinate, nothing that has a referent, as we saw in Allen and
Riesman. There is a straining to say something, a search for an
inwardness that one knows one has, but it is still a cause without an
effect. The inner seems to have no relation to the outer. The outer is
dissolved and becomes formless in the light of the inner, and the inner
is a will-o’-the-wisp, or pure emptiness. No wonder the mere sound of
the Existentialists’ Nothing or the Hegelians’ Negation has an appeal to
contemporary ears. American nihilism is a mood, a mood of moodiness,
a vague disquiet. It is nihilism without the abyss.

Nihilism as a state of soul is revealed not so much in the lack of ﬁrm

beliefs but in a chaos of the instincts or passions. People no longer
believe in a natural hierarchy of the soul’s varied and conﬂicting
inclinations, and the traditions that provided a substitute for nature have
crumbled. The soul becomes a stage for a repertory company that
changes plays regularly—sometimes a tragedy, sometimes a comedy;
one day love, another day politics, and ﬁnally religion; now
cosmopolitanism, and again rooted loyalty; the city or the country;
individualism or community; sentimentality or brutality. And there is
neither principle nor will to impose a rank order on all of these. All ages
and places, all races and all cultures can play on this stage. Nietzsche
believed that the wild costume ball of the passions was both the
disadvantage and the advantage of late modernity. The evident

disadvantage is the decomposition of unity or “personality,” which in the
long run will lead to psychic entropy. The advantage hoped for is that
the richness and tension present in the modern soul might be the basis
for comprehensive new worldviews that would take seriously what had
previously been consigned to a spiritual ashcan. This richness,
according to Nietzsche, consisted largely in thousands of years of
inherited and now unsatisﬁed religious longing. But this possible
advantage does not exist for young Americans, because their poor
education has impoverished their longings, and they are hardly aware of
the great pasts that Nietzsche was thinking of and had within himself.
What they do have now is an unordered tangle of rather ordinary
passions, running through their consciousnesses like a monochrome
kaleidoscope. They are egotists, not in a vicious way, not in the way of
those who know the good, just or noble, and selﬁshly reject them, but
because the ego is all there is in present theory, in what they are taught.

We are a bit like savages who, having been discovered and

evangelized by missionaries, have converted to Christianity without
having experienced all that came before and after the revelation. The
fact that most of us never would have heard of Oedipus if it were not for
Freud should make us aware that we are almost utterly dependent on
our German missionaries or intermediaries for our knowledge of
Greece, Rome, Judaism and Christianity; that, however profound that
knowledge may be, theirs is only one interpretation; and that we have
only been told as much as they thought we needed to know. It is an
urgent business for one who seeks self-awareness to think through the
meaning of the intellectual dependency that has led us to such an
impasse. The following explanatory dictionary of our current language is
meant to be a small contribution to that undertaking.

2 Exactly the same point, but without Allen’s saving wit, is stressed by Bertolucci in The
Conformist.

3 Mies van der Rohe too was a ﬁgure around Chicago before he really got his chance to build,
and the Bauhaus was another product of Weimar, closely allied with the currents of thought I
have been describing.

TWO REVOLUTIONS AND TWO

STATES OF NATURE

The discovery of the soul’s basement, exploration into it, and attraction
to its dark contents have long been Continental specialties. Obscure
longings and search for the elusive grounds of all things are pervasive
themes of nineteenth- and twentieth-century French, German, and
(prior to the revolution) Russian literature. Continental “depth” was
thought by intellectuals to be opposed to American “superﬁciality.”
American souls were, so to speak, constructed without a basement, more
reconciled to this world and not addicted to looking beyond it, not
haunted by a sense of the groundlessness of their experience. Thus,
when Americans became able to afford the luxury of indulging in
Continental literature, as in Continental cuisine, we had to wonder
whether their appetite was real and how they would digest the fare.

The issue between the Continent and us can be summed up by the

word “bourgeois.” The new man of the new democratic political regime
has been labeled bourgeois by Continental philosophers and artists for
more than two hundred years. This originally meant a diminished,
egotistical, materialistic being without grandeur or beauty of soul, and it
has maintained that negative sense—best known to Americans because
of Marx—up to our day. Yet long after Nietzsche claimed the theme had
already become boring, Continental thinkers have been obsessed with
bourgeois man as representing the worst and most contemptible failure
of modernity, which must at all costs be overcome. Nihilism in its most
palpable sense means that the bourgeois has won, that the future, all
foreseeable futures, belong to him, that all heights above him and all
depths beneath him are illusory and that life is not worth living on these
terms. It is the announcement that all the alternatives or correctives—
for example, idealism, romanticism, historicism, and Marxism—have
failed. Americans, on the other hand, have generally believed that the
modern democratic project is being fulﬁlled in their country, can be
fulﬁlled elsewhere, and that that project is good. They do not naturally
apply the term “bourgeois” to themselves, or to anyone else for that
matter. They do like to call themselves middle class, but that does not
carry with it any determinate spiritual content. It is rather a good thing

to be. If there is a failure here, it is that there are poor people. The term
“middle class” does not have any of the many opposites that bourgeois
has, such as aristocrat, saint, hero, or artist—all good—except perhaps
for proletarian or socialist. The spirit is at home, if not entirely satisﬁed,
in America.

Modernity is constituted by the political regimes founded on

freedom and equality, hence on the consent of the governed, and made
possible by a new science of nature that masters and conquers nature,
providing prosperity and health. This was a self-conscious philosophical
project, the greatest transformation of man’s relations with his fellows
and with nature ever effected. The American Revolution instituted this
system of government for Americans, who in general were satisﬁed with
the result and had a pretty clear view of what they had done. The
questions of political principle and of right had been solved once and
for all. No further revolution would be necessary, if revolution means
changing of the fundamental principles of legitimacy, in accordance
with reason and the natural order of things, and requiring armed
combat against those who adhere to old orders and their unjust forms of
rule. Revolution, a new word in the political vocabulary, which ﬁrst
referred to the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in England, made in the
name of very much the same principles as ours, is akin to the movement
of the sun from night to day.

The French Revolution, called a new dawn by Kant, was a much

greater event than the American Revolution in the eyes of the world at
that time because it concerned one of the two great powers in it, the
veritable school of Europe, with one of the oldest and most civilized
peoples. It was fought and won for freedom and equality, as were the
English and American revolutions. It would seem to have completed the
irresistible triumph of modern philosophy’s project and to give a ﬁnal
proof of the theodicy of liberty and equality. But, unlike its predecessors,
it gave birth to a dazzling array of interpretations and set off reactions in
all directions that have not yet exhausted the impulse it lent to them.
The Right—in its only serious meaning, the party opposed to equality
(not economic equality but equality of rights)—at ﬁrst wanted to undo
the Revolution in the name of Throne and Altar, and this reaction
probably breathed its last only with Francisco Franco in 1975. Another
form of the Right, as it were a progressive Right, wanted to create and
impose a new kind of inequality, a new European or German

aristocracy, on the world, and it was blasted out of existence in Berlin in
1945. The Left, which intended to complete the Revolution by
abolishing private property, is still quite alive but has never succeeded in
doing so in those nations, particularly France, most inﬂuenced by the
French Revolution. It was the Center, the bourgeois solution, which in
the long run won out, but after so many regrets and so many
disappointed aspirations, in France, Germany, Austria, Belgium, Italy,
Spain and Portugal, as it had in England and the United States. The last
really great bourgeois-haters died at about the same time: Sartre, De
Gaulle, and Heidegger. (Americans are not sufﬁciently aware that hatred
of the bourgeois is at least as much a thing of the Right as of the Left.)
One can expect a certain literary afterglow, since bourgeois-baiting is
almost a reﬂex among writers and is unlearned with great difﬁculty, as
was proved when so many kept at it even though there were Nazis and
Communists around who might have merited their attention. In order to
keep that ﬂame alive, many literary persons interpreted Hitler as a
bourgeois phenomenon, an interpretation that they have made stick by
force of repetition.

We may now have run out of the new revolutions, and the new

metaphysics required to justify them, which were intended to rectify the
French Revolution’s perceived failures; but the reconciliation with reality
is more fatigued than enthusiastic. I use the word “perceived” because,
on the basis of the variety of readings of the French Revolution—by
monarchists, Catholics, liberals, socialists, Robespierreans, Bonapartists
—which were not idle academic exercises but life-forming and action-
engendering, Nietzsche concluded that there was no text here but only
interpretation. This observation is the foundation of the currently
popular view that there is no is but only perspectives on becoming, that
the perception is as much reality as there is, that things are what they are
perceived to be. This view is, of course, allied with the notion that man
is a value-creating, not a good-discovering, being. It is not surprising to
ﬁnd its source at least partially in the greatest events of modern politics.

The misunderstanding between America and the Continent is that

where Americans saw a solution, Continentals saw a problem. The
American Revolution produced a clear and uniﬁed historical reality; the
French Revolution, a series of questions and problems. Americans have
tended to look at the French Revolution with indulgence. It represented
the good things, akin to ours, but did not succeed in providing a stable

institutional framework for them. A large segment of intellectual
opinion on the Continent, the most inﬂuential segment,4 regarded the
French Revolution as a failure not because it was not successful in
establishing a liberal democracy but because it had been entirely too
successful in producing the liberal democratic type of man—i.e., the
bourgeois—and giving his class, the bourgeoisie, power in society. Even
so pro-American and pro-liberal a writer as Tocqueville, who understood
the French difﬁculty to be indeed its incapacity to adapt to liberal
institutions, was melancholy about the prospects for a fully human life
within them.

Americans found little to charm them in the ancien régime in

France. Its throne and altar were the very reality of, respectively, the
unjust inequality and the prejudice that the American regime was
intended to replace in the world. America, they believed, would
succeed in its project with relative ease because we began here with the
equality of conditions. Americans did not have to kill a king, displace an
aristocracy that would stay around and cause trouble, or disestablish a
church and perhaps abolish it. But the need to do all this, plus the
presence of the Parisian mob, which could not accept the rule of law,
prevented the French from attaining the reasonable consensus required
for orderly democratic government.

But another view of these events dominated public discussion on the

Continent. To some Europeans, the Americans represented an
intolerable narrowing of the human horizon, and the price paid for their
decent order and prosperity was too high. The French aristocracy had a
nobility, brilliance and taste that contrasted sharply with the pettiness
and grayness of liberal society’s commercial life and motives. The loss of
what that aristocracy represented would impoverish the world. More
important, the religion that was dismantled could be thought to express
the depth and seriousness of life. If the noble and the sacred cannot ﬁnd
serious expression in democracy, its choiceworthiness becomes
questionable. These are the arguments, the special pleading of the
reactionaries, the disinherited of the ancien régime.

More serious for us are the arguments of the revolutionaries who

accepted our principles of freedom and equality. Many believed that we
had not thought through these cherished ideals. Can equality really only
mean equal opportunity for unequal talents to acquire property? Should
shrewdness at acquisition be better rewarded than moral goodness? Can

private property and equality sit so easily together when even Plato
required communism among equals? Communism or socialism never
really made much headway against the respect for private property in
the United States. Locke’s deﬁnition of property suited, and still suits,
our tempers perfectly, and Rousseau’s critique of it made almost no
impression here, although it was and remains very potent in Europe.
And freedom for us meant merely acting as one pleases, restricted only
by the minimum demands of social existence. We had not adequately
understood what really setting laws for ourselves required, nor had we
gone beyond the merely negative freedom of satisfying brutish
impulsion. As for religion, the domesticated churches in America
preserved the superstition of Christianity, overcoming of which was
perhaps the key to liberating man. Should a good regime be atheistic, or
should it have a civil religion? And, ﬁnally, what in the world can we do
with the Napoleonic—heroic ambition and military glory—other than
ignore or debunk it?

Such were the questions raised on the slaughter-bench of History by

the French Revolution, questions that we were not eager to hear. They
provided the material for a century of serious philosophy on the
Continent, to which the spirit of philosophy had repaired from England.
Even Mill, the heir of utilitarianism, which was a still narrower and
more self-satisﬁed version of earlier liberal thought, had to turn to a
German thinker, Humboldt, for the notion of spontaneity, to give an
attractive modern account of the essence of liberty and protect it from
the dangers of the tyranny of the majority. Philosophy begins, it seems,
in the confrontation with the fundamental political alternatives. Of the
truly great philosophers since the French Revolution, only Kant was a
friend of liberal democracy. And he felt constrained to reinterpret it in
ways that made it both unrecognizable and unattractive to us. He
developed a new epistemology that makes freedom possible when the
science of nature is deterministic, a new morality that makes the dignity
of man possible when human nature is understood to be composed of
selﬁsh natural appetities, and a new esthetics that saves the beautiful and
the sublime from mere subjectivity. None of this concerned the earlier
egalitarian thought of the founders of liberalism.

What was acted out in the American and French Revolutions had

been thought out beforehand in the writings of Locke and Rousseau,
the scenarists for the drama of modern politics. These Columbuses of

the mind—Thomas Hobbes led the way, but Locke and Rousseau
followed and were considered more reliable reporters—explored the
newly discovered territory called the state of nature, where our
forefathers all once dwelled, and brought the important news that by
nature all men are free and equal, and that they have rights to life,
liberty and the pursuit of property. This is the kind of information that
causes revolutions because it pulls the magic carpet out from under the
feet of kings and nobles. Locke and Rousseau agreed on these basics,
which became the ﬁrm foundation of modern politics. Where they
disagreed, the major conﬂicts within modernity were to occur. Locke
was the great practical success; the new English and American regimes
founded themselves according to his instructions. Rousseau, probably
the greatest literary success of all time, inspired all the later attempts in
thought and deed, private and public, to alter, correct or escape from
the fatality of Locke’s complete victory.

It is now fashionable to deny that there ever was a state of nature. We

are like aristocrats who do not care to know that our ancestors were once
savages who, motivated only by fear of death and scarcity, killed one
another in quarrels over acorns. But we continue to live off the capital
passed on to us by these rejected predecessors. Everyone believes in
freedom and equality and the rights consequent to them. These were,
however, brought to civil society from the state of nature; in the absence
of any other ground for them, they must be just as mythical as the tale of
the state of nature told by the unreliable travelers. Instructed by the new
natural science that provided their compass, they went to the origin and
not to the end, as did the older political philosophers. Socrates imagined
a shining city in speech; Hobbes discovered an isolated individual whose
life was “mean, nasty, brutish and short” This opens up a very different
perspective on what one wants and hopes for from politics. Prudence
points not toward regimes dedicated to the cultivation of rare and
difﬁcult, if not impossible, virtues, but toward a good police force to
protect men from one another and allow them to preserve themselves as
well as possible. Hobbes, Locke and Rousseau all found that one way or
another nature led men to war, and that civil society’s purpose was not to
cooperate with a natural tendency in man toward perfection but to
make peace where nature’s imperfection causes war.

The reports from the state of nature mixed bad news and good news.

Eden; the Eldorado of the spirit turned out to be both desert and jungle.
Man was not provided for at the beginning, and his current state is not a
result of his sin, but of nature’s miserliness. He is on his own. God
neither looks after him nor punishes him. Nature’s indifference to
justice is a terrible bereavement for man. He must care for himself
without the hope that good men have always had: that there is a price to
be paid for crime, that the wicked will suffer. But it is also a great
liberation—from God’s tutelage, from the claims of kings, nobles and
priests, and from guilt or bad conscience. The greatest hopes are dashed,
but some of the worst terrors and inner enslavements are dispelled.

Unprotectedness, nakedness, unsuccored suffering and the awfulness

of death are the prospects that man without illusions must face. But,
looking at things from the point of view of already established society,
man can be proud of himself. He has progressed, and by his own efforts.
He can think well of himself. And now, possessing the truth, he can be
even freer to be himself and improve his situation. He can freely make
governments that, untrammeled by mythical duties and titles to rule,
serve his interests. The explorations of Hobbes, Locke and Rousseau of
the origins made possible a new beginning in theory, a project for the
reconstruction of politics, just as the exploration and discovery of the
New World promised a new beginning in practice. The two new
beginnings coincided and produced, among other wonders, the United
States.

From his reﬂection on the state of nature, Locke drew the formula of

Enlightenment, with its particular combination of natural and political
science. Its starting point is the untrammeled use of reason. In this he
simply follows the oldest opinions of the philosophers. Freedom for man
consists in ordering his life according to what he can see for himself
through his most distinctive faculty, liberated from the force of tyrants
and the authority of lies, i.e., myths. Through unaided reason, man as
man, as opposed to the man of this place or time, nation or religion, can
know the causes of things, can know nature for himself. Autonomy does
not mean, as is now generally thought, the fateful, groundless decision
in the void, but governing oneself according to the real. There must be
an outside for the inside to have meaning.

So thought Locke and his philosophic predecessors and successors.

What distinguished Enlightenment from earlier philosophy was its
intention to extend to all men what had been the preserve of only a few:

the life lived according to reason. It was not “idealism” or “optimism”
that motivated these philosophers but a new science, a “method,” and
allied with them, a new political science. A clear and distinct
mathematical science of the movement of bodies, discovered by the use
of a simple method readily understood by ordinary men, could make the
knowledge of nature accessible to them, if not provide them with the
genius to discover that knowledge. The various mythic or poetic views of
the whole that set the horizons for the nations of man, and within which
the philosophers had always lived alone and misunderstood, would be
dispensed with, and the fundamental difference in perspective between
scientist and nonscientist overcome. Further, if man himself is taken out
of the shadows of the kingdom of darkness and examined in the light of
science, he sees that by nature he belongs to the realm of bodies in
motion, and that he, like all other bodies, wishes to preserve his motion,
that is, his life. Every man has a powerful fear of death, that corresponds
to the way of nature. Critical, scientiﬁc, methodical examination of the
other ends prescribed for man can show that they belong to the realm of
the imagination, of false opinion, or derive from this primary end. Such
critical examination, of which all men are capable if given guidance by
philosophers, and which is supported by powerful inclinations in all
men, results in a salutary unity of purpose and a useful simpliﬁcation of
the human problem: vulnerable man must seek the means to his
preservation. Since this is what all men really want, whatever
arrangements help them get food, clothing, shelter, health and, above
all, protection from one another will, if they are properly educated, win
their consent and their loyalty.

Once the world has been purged of ghosts or spirits, it reveals to us

that the critical problem is scarcity. Nature is a stepmother who has left
us unprovided for. But this means we need have no gratitude. When we
revered nature, we were poor. Since there was not enough, we had to
take from one another; and as a result of this competition, there was
inevitably war, the greatest threat to life. But if, instead of ﬁghting one
another, we band together and make war on our stepmother, who keeps
her riches from us, we can at the same time provide for ourselves and
end our strife. The conquest of nature, which is made possible by the
insight of science and by the power it produces, is the key to the
political. The old commandment that we love our brothers made
impossible demands on us, demands against nature, while doing

nothing to provide for real needs. What is required is not brotherly love
or faith, hope and charity, but self-interested rational labor. The man
who contributes most to relieving human misery is the one who
produces most, and the surest way of getting him to do so is not by
exhorting him, but by rewarding him most handsomely to sacriﬁce
present pleasure for the sake of future beneﬁt, or to assure avoidance of
pain through the power so gained. From the point of view of man’s well-
being and security, what is needed is not men who practice the
Christian virtues or those of Aristotle, but rational (capable of
calculating their interest) and industrious men. Their opposite numbers
are not the vicious, wicked or sinful, but the quarrelsome and the idle.
This may include priests and nobles as well as those who most obviously
spring to mind.

This scheme provides the structure for the key term of liberal

democracy, the most successful and useful political notion of our world:
rights. Government exists to protect the product of men’s labor, their
property, and therewith life and liberty. The notion that man possesses
inalienable natural rights, that they belong to him as an individual prior,
both in time and in sanctity, to any civil society, and that civil societies
exist for and acquire their legitimacy from ensuring those rights, is an
invention of modern philosophy. Rights, like the other terms discussed
in this chapter, are new in modernity, not a part of the common-sense
language of politics or of classical political philosophy. Hobbes initiated
the notion of rights, and it was given its greatest respectability by Locke.
Unlike the other terms, however, we understand rights perfectly and
have immediate access to the thought underlying them. The others are
alien, problematic; and to understand them requires a great effort that, I
am arguing, we do not make. But rights are ours. They constitute our
being; we live them; they are our common sense. Right is not the
opposite of wrong, but of duty. It is a part of, or the essence of, freedom.
It begins from man’s cherished passion to live, and to live as painlessly as
possible. An analysis of universal needs and their relation to nature as a
whole demonstrates that this passion is not merely an imagination. It
can be called a right and converted into a term of political relevance
when a man is fully conscious of what he needs most, recognizes that he
is threatened by others and that they are threatened by him. The spring
that makes the social machinery tick is this recognition, which generates
the calculation that, if he agrees to respect the life, liberty and property

of others (for which he has no natural respect), they can be induced to
reciprocate. This is the foundation of rights, a new kind of morality
solidly grounded in self-interest.

To say, “I’ve got my rights,” is as instinctive with Americans as

breathing, so clear and evident is this way of looking at things. It
signiﬁes the rules of the game, within which men play peacefully, the
necessity of which they see and accept, and the infringement of which
arouses moral indignation. It is our only principle of justice. From our
knowledge of our rights ﬂows our acceptance of the duties to the
community that protects them. Righteousness means for us respect for
equal rights equally guaranteed by the force of government. Everyone in
the world today speaks of rights, even the communists, the heirs of Marx,
who ridiculed “bourgeois rights” as a sham and in whose thought there
is no place for rights. But almost every thoughtful observer knows that it
is in the United States that the idea of rights has penetrated most deeply
into the bloodstream of its citizens and accounts for their unusual lack
of servility. Without it we would have nothing, only chaotic selﬁshness;
and it is the interested source of a certain disinterestedness. We feel
people’s interests should be respected.

This scheme represented a radical break with the old ways of looking

at the political problem. In the past it was thought that man is a dual
being, one part of him concerned with the common good, the other
with private interests. To make politics work, man, it was thought, has to
overcome the selﬁsh part of himself, to tyrannize over the merely
private, to be virtuous. Locke and his immediate predecessors taught
that no part of man is naturally directed to the common good and that
the old way was both excessively harsh and ineffective, that it went
against the grain. They experimented with using private interest for
public interest, putting natural freedom ahead of austere virtue. Self-
interest is hostile to the common good, but enlightened self-interest is
not. And this is the best key to the meaning of enlightenment. Man’s
reason can be made to see his vulnerability and to anticipate future
scarcity. This rational awareness of the future and its dangers is enough
to set the passions in motion. In the past men were members of
communities by divine commandment and by attachments akin to the
blood ties that constitute the family. They were, to use Rousseau’s
phrase, “denatured.” Their loyalties were fanatic and repressive of their
natures. Clear reasoning wiped that slate clean in order to inscribe on it

contracts calmly made with expectation of proﬁt involving the kinds of
relations found in business. Calculated work is the sum of the whole
affair. Thomas Watson said it all with the motto he placed on the walls
of his ofﬁces and factories: “Think”; for he was addressing himself to
men who were already working.

Americans are Lockeans: recognizing that work is necessary (no

longing for a nonexistent Eden), and will produce well-being; following
their natural inclinations moderately, not because they possess the virtue
of moderation but because their passions are balanced and they
recognize the reasonableness of that; respecting the rights of others so
that theirs will be respected; obeying the law because they made it in
their own interest. From the point of view of God or heroes, all this is
not very inspiring. But for the poor, the weak, the oppressed—the
overwhelming majority of mankind—it is the promise of salvation. As
Leo Strauss put it, the moderns “built on low but solid ground.”

Rousseau believed that Hobbes and Locke did not go far enough,

that they had not reached the Indies of the spirit, although they thought
they had. They found exactly what they set out to look for: a natural
man whose naturalness consisted in having just those qualities necessary
to constitute society. It was too simple to be true.

absolute whole which is relative only to itself or its kind. Civil
man is only a fractional unity dependent on the denominator;
his value is determined by his relation to the whole, which is the
social body….

He who in the civil order wants to preserve the primacy of the

sentiments of nature does not know what he wants. Always in
contradiction with himself, always ﬂoating between his
inclinations and his duties, he will never be either man or
citizen. He will be good neither for himself nor for others. He
will be one of these men of our days: a Frenchman, an
Englishman, a bourgeois. He will be nothing. (Emile, pp. 39-40,
ed. Bloom, Basic Books,
 
It was Locke who wanted to preserve the primacy of the sentiments of

nature in the civil order, and the result of his mistake is the bourgeois.
Rousseau invented the term in its modern sense, and with it we ﬁnd

ourselves at the great source of modern intellectual life. The
comprehensiveness and subtlety of his analysis of the phenomenon left
nothing new to be said about it, and the Right and the Left forever after
accepted his description of modern man as simply true, while the
Center was impressed, intimidated, and put on the defensive by it. So
persuasive was Rousseau that he destroyed the self-conﬁdence of the
Enlightenment at the moment of its triumph.

It must not be forgotten that Rousseau begins his critique from

fundamental agreements with Locke, whom he greatly admired, about
the animal man. Man is by nature a solitary being, concerned only with
his preservation and his comfort. Rousseau, moreover, agrees that man
makes civil society by contract, for the sake of his preservation. He
disagrees with Locke that self-interest, however understood, is in any
automatic harmony with what civil society needs and demands. If
Rousseau is right, man’s reason, calculating his best interest, will not
lead him to wish to be a good citizen, a law-abiding citizen. He will
either be himself, or he will be a citizen, or he will try to be both and be
neither. In other words, enlightenment is not enough to establish
society, and even tends to dissolve it.

The road from the state of nature was very long, and nature is distant

from us now. A self-sufﬁcient, solitary being must have undergone many
changes to become a needy, social one. On the way, the goal of
happiness was exchanged for the pursuit of safety and comfort, the
means of achieving happiness. Civil society is surely superior to a
condition of scarcity and universal war. All this artiﬁce, however,
preserves a being who no longer knows what he is, who is so absorbed
with existing that he has forgotten his reason for existing, who in the
event of actually attaining full security and perfect comfort has no
notion of what to do. Progress culminates in the recognition that life is
meaningless. Hobbes was surely right to look for the most powerful
sentiments in man, those that exist independently of opinion and are
always a part of man. But fear of death, however powerful it may be and
however useful it may be as a motive for seeking peace and, hence, law
with teeth in it, cannot be the fundamental experience. It presupposes
an even more fundamental one: that life is good. The deepest
experience is the pleasant sentiment of existence. The idle, savage man
can enjoy that sentiment. The busy bourgeois cannot, with his hard

work and his concern with dealing with others rather than being
himself.

may be laboring to master it, but the reason for mastering nature comes
from nature. The fear of death on which Hobbes relied, and which is
also decisive for Locke, insists on the negative experience of nature and
obliterates the positive experience presupposed by it. This positive
experience is somehow still active in us; we are full of vague
dissatisfactions in our forgetfulness, but our minds must make an
enormous effort to ﬁnd the natural sweetness of life in its fullness. The
way back is at least as long as the one that brought us here. For Hobbes
and Locke nature is near and unattractive, and man’s movement into
society was easy and unambiguously good. For Rousseau nature is
distant and attractive, and the movement was hard and divided man. Just
when nature seemed to have been ﬁnally cast out or overcome in us,
Rousseau gave birth to an overwhelming longing for it in us. Our lost
wholeness is there. One is reminded of Plato’s Symposium, but there the
longing for wholeness was directed toward knowledge of the ideas, of the
ends. In Rousseau longing is, in its initial expression, for the enjoyment
of the primitive feelings, found at the origins in the state of nature. Plato
would have united with Rousseau against the bourgeois in his insistence
on the essential humanness of longing for the good, as opposed to
careful avoidance of the bad. Neither longing nor enthusiasm belongs to
the bourgeois. The story of philosophy and the arts under Rousseau’s
inﬂuence has been the search for, or fabrication of, plausible objects of
longing to counter bourgeois well-being and self-satisfaction. Part of that
story has been the bourgeois’ effort to acquire the culture of longing as
part of its self-satisfaction.

The opposition between nature and society is Rousseau’s

interpretation of the cause of the dividedness of man. He ﬁnds that the
bourgeois experiences this dividedness in conﬂict between self-love and
love of others, inclination and duty, sincerity and hypocrisy, being
oneself and being alienated. This opposition between nature and society
pervades all modern discussion of the human problem. Hobbes and
Locke made the distinction in order to overcome all the tensions caused
in man by the demands of virtue, and then to make wholeness easy for
him. They thought that they had reduced the distance between
inclination and duty by deriving all duty from inclination; Rousseau

argued that, if anything, they had increased that distance. He thus
restored the older, pre-modern sense of the dividedness of man and
hence of the complexity of his attainment of happiness, the pursuit of
which liberal society guarantees him while making its attainment
impossible. But the restoration takes place on very different grounds, as
can be seen in the fact that in the past men traced the tension to the
irreconcilable demands of body and soul, not of nature and society. This
too opens up a rich ﬁeld for reﬂection on Rousseau’s originality. The
blame shifts, and the focus of the perennial quest for unity is altered.
Man was born whole, and it is at least conceivable that he become
whole once again. Hope and despair of a kind not permitted by the
body-soul distinction arise. What one is to think of oneself and one’s
desires changes. The correctives range from revolution to therapy, but
there is little place for the confessional or for mortiﬁcation of the ﬂesh.
Rousseau’s Confessions were, in opposition to those of Augustine,
intended to show that he was born good, that the body’s desires are
good, that there is no original sin. Man’s nature has been maimed by a
long history; and now he must live in society, for which he is not suited
and which makes impossible demands on him. There is either an
uneasy acquiescence to the present or the attempt in one way or another
to return to the past, or the search for a creative synthesis of the two
poles, nature and society.

These are the essence of the social and political thought of the

nineteenth and twentieth centuries that took off from Rousseau’s
critique of liberalism. The nature-society distinction is more than
familiar to all of us. We know it best from Freud, in whose account of
the unconscious is to be found lost nature, as well as the whole harsh
history that took us out of nature; in whose account of the neuroses one
sees the effects of civilization’s demands on us; and in whose account of
the reality principle one recognizes grim adjustment to bourgeois
society. The easy solution to man’s dividedness in early modern thought
is rejected, but a solution is still expected. The search for solutions, easy
or difﬁcult, to problems is the stamp of modernity, while antiquity
treated the fundamental tensions as permanent.

The ﬁrst reaction to the self’s maladaptation to society, its

recalcitrance to the rationality of preservation and property, is the
attempt to recover the self’s pristine state, to live according to its ﬁrst
inclinations, to “get in touch with one’s feelings,” to live naturally,

simply, without society’s artiﬁcially generated desires, dependencies,
hypocrisies. The side of Rousseau’s thought that arouses nostalgia for
nature came to the United States early on, in the life and writings of
Thoreau. Recently, joined to many other movements, it came to full
ﬂower and found a wide public. Anarchism in one form or another is an
expression of this longing, which arises as soon as politics and laws are
understood to be repressions, perhaps necessary, but nonetheless
repressions of our inclinations rather than perfections of them or modes
of satisfying them. For the ﬁrst time in the history of political
philosophy, no natural impulse is thought to lead toward civil society, or
to ﬁnd its satisfaction within it. Yet those who ﬁrst drew the distinction
between nature and society (which obviously means society is
completely of human making, not in any way natural), thought that the
preference would be immediately and without hesitation for society. As
a matter of fact, the distinction was made in order to emphasize how
desirable civil society is, how fragile man’s existence naturally is, and
thus to extinguish those passions based on imagining that protection
comes from nature or God, that rebel against civil society. Man, if he is
sensible, separates himself from nature and becomes its master and
conqueror. This was and still is the prevailing belief of liberal
democracies, with their peace, gentleness, prosperity, productivity and
applied science, particularly medical science.

All of this was held to be a great advance over the brutish natural

condition. Locke said that “a day-laborer in England is better clothed,
housed, and fed than a king in America,” meaning an Indian chief. But
Tocqueville notes that there is nevertheless something impressive about
the American king. Perhaps the savage gains something in the
comparison if pride, independence, contempt for death, freedom from
anxiety about the future and other such qualities are taken into
consideration. From the point of view of this savage, nature begins to
look good rather than bad. Nature that excludes man and his corrupting
hand becomes an object of respect. It gives guidance where previously
there was only man’s whim. The old view that cities are properly the
peaks of nature is never considered and is barely comprehensible. The
city is cut loose from nature and is a product only of man’s art. Very
different values can be attached to cities, but both sides begin from the
same premise. Now there are two competing views about man’s relation
to nature, both founded on the modern distinction between nature and

society. Nature is the raw material of man’s freedom from harsh
necessity, or else man is the polluter of nature. Nature in both cases
means dead nature, or nature without man and untouched by man—
mountains, forests, lakes and rivers.

Our nation, a great stage for the acting out of great thoughts, presents

the classic confrontation between Locke’s views of the state of nature
and Rousseau’s criticism of them. On the one hand you have the farmer
who never looked at America’s trees, ﬁelds and streams with a romantic
eye. The trees are to be felled, to make clearings, build houses and heat
them; the ﬁelds are to be tilled to produce more food, or mined for
whatever is necessary to make machines run; the streams are there to be
used as waterways for transporting food, or as sources of power. On the
other hand there is the Sierra Club, which is dedicated to preventing
such violations of nature from going any further, and certainly seems to
regret what was already done. More interesting is the coexistence of
these opposing sentiments in the most advanced minds of our day.
Nature is raw material, worthless without the mixture of human labor;
yet nature is also the highest and most sacred thing. The same people
who struggle to save the snail-darter bless the pill, worry about hunting
deer and defend abortion. Reverence for nature, mastery of nature—
whichever is convenient. The principle of contradiction has been
repealed.

This is the direct result of the two state-of-nature teachings. Locke’s is

responsible for our institutions, justiﬁes our absorption with private
property and the free market, and gives us our sense of right. Rousseau’s
lies behind the most prevalent views of what life is about and how to
seek healing for our wounds. The former teaches that adjustment to
civil society is almost automatic; the latter that such adjustment is very
difﬁcult indeed and requires all kinds of intermediaries between it and
lost nature. The two outstanding intellectual types of our day represent
these two teachings. The crisp, positive, efﬁcient, no-nonsense
economist is the Lockean; the deep, brooding, somber psychoanalyst is
the Rousseauan. In principle their positions are incompatible, but
easygoing America provides them with a modus vivendi. Economists tell
us how to make money; psychiatrists give us a place to spend it.

4 Thinkers like Tocqueville who, in a qualiﬁed way, supported the American solution, are little
read or cared for in France; and Montesquieu, that Frenchman who is closest to the English and

American tradition of political philosophy and most inﬂuenced the American Founders, is the
one of France’s truly great writers who least affects French consciousness.

THE SELF

The domain now supervised by psychiatrists, as well as other specialists
in the deeper understanding of man, is the self. It is another one of the
discoveries made in the state of nature, perhaps the most important
because it reveals what we really are. We are selves, and everything we
do is to satisfy or fulﬁll our selves. Locke was one of the early thinkers, if
not the earliest, to use the word in its modern sense. From the very
beginning it has been difﬁcult to deﬁne; and as Woody Allen helped
teach us, it has become ever more difﬁcult to do so. We are suffering
from a three-hundred-year-long identity crisis. We go back and back,
ever farther, hunting the self as it retreats into the forest, just a step
ahead of us. Although disquieting, this may, from the point of view of its
latest interpretation, be the essence of the self: mysterious, ineffable,
indeﬁnable, unlimited, creative, known only by its deeds; in short, like
God, of whom it is the impious mirror image. Above all, it is individual,
unique; it is me, not some distant man in general or man-in-himself. As
Ivan Ilyich in Tolstoy’s story explains, the “All men are mortal” in the
famous syllogism that guarantees Socrates’ death cannot apply to this
Ivan Ilyich who had a striped leather ball when he was a child.
Everyone knows that the particular as particular escapes the grasp of
reason, the form of which is the general or the universal. To sum up, the
self is the modern substitute for the soul.

All of this goes back to that audacious innovator Machiavelli, who

spoke admiringly of men who cared more for their fatherland than for
the salvation of their souls. The higher demands made on men by the
soul inevitably lead them to neglect this world in favor of the other
world. Millennia of philosophizing about the soul had resulted in no
certitude about it, while those who pretended to know it, the priests,
held power or inﬂuenced it, and corrupted politics as a result. Princes
were rendered ineffective by their own or their subjects’ opinions about
the salvation of their souls, while men slaughtered each other wholesale
because of differences of such opinion. The care of the soul crippled
men in the conduct of their lives.

Machiavelli dared men literally to forget about their souls and the

possibility of eternal damnation, to do so in theory as well as in practice,

as did those men whom he praised. Hobbes, among others, took him up
on the dare with a very new interpretation of the old Delphic inscription
“Know thyself!,” which Socrates had interpreted as an exhortation to
philosophize, and Freud was to interpret as an invitation to
psychoanalysis. Freud was unknowingly following in the line of Hobbes,
who said that each man should look to what he feels—feels, not thinks;
he, not another. Self is more feeling than reason, and is in the ﬁrst place
deﬁned as the contrary of other. “Be yourself.” Astonishingly, Hobbes is
the ﬁrst propagandist for bohemia and preacher of sincerity or
authenticity. No wanderings to the ends of the universe on the wings of
imagination, no metaphysical foundations, no soul ordering things as
well as men. Man is perhaps a stranger in nature. But he is something
and can get his bearings by his most powerful passions. “Feel!,” Hobbes
said. In particular you should imagine how you feel when another man
holds a gun to your temple and threatens to shoot you. That
concentrates all of the self in a single point, tells us what counts. At that
moment one is a real self, not a false consciousness, not alienated by
opinions of the church, the state or the public. This experience helps
much more to “set priorities” than does any knowledge of the soul or
any of its alleged emanations such as conscience.

Throughout the whole tradition, religious and philosophic, man had

two concerns, the care of his body and the care of his soul, expressed in
the opposition between desire and virtue. In principle he was supposed
to long to be all virtue, to break free from the chains of bodily desire.
Wholeness would be happiness; but it is not possible, at least in this life.
Machiavelli turned things upside down. Happiness is indeed wholeness,
so let’s try the wholeness available to us in this life. The tradition viewed
man as the incomprehensible and self-contradictory union of two
substances, body and soul. Man cannot be conceived as body only. But
if the function of whatever is not body in him is to cooperate in the
satisfaction of bodily desire, then man’s dividedness is overcome. Simple
virtue is not possible, and love of virtue is only an imagination, a kind of
perversion of desire effected by society’s (i.e., others’) demands on us.
But simple desire is possible.

This absoluteness of desire uninhibited by thoughts of virtue is what

is found in the state of nature. It represents the turn in philosophy away
from trying to tame or perfect desire by virtue, and toward ﬁnding out
what one’s desire is and living according to it. This is largely

accomplished by criticizing virtue, which covers and corrupts desire.
Our desire becomes a kind of oracle we consult; it is now the last word,
while in the past it was the questionable and dangerous part of us. This
unity of man in desire is fraught with theoretical difﬁculties, but it is, as
we 
would 
say, 
existentially 
persuasive 
because, 
unlike 
the

incomprehensible and self-contradictory union of body and soul, it is
afﬁrmed by powerful experiences, such as fear of violent death, that do
not require abstract reasonings or exhortations.

Hobbes blazed the trail to the self, which has grown into the highway

of a ubiquitous psychology without the psyche (soul). But he, like
Locke, did not develop the psychology of the self in its fullness, just as
neither went very deeply into the state of nature, because the solution
seemed to be on the surface. Once the old virtues were refuted—the
piety of the religious or the honor of the nobles—Hobbes and Locke
assumed that most men would immediately agree that their self-
preservative desires are real, that they come from within and take
primacy over any other desire. The true self is not only good for
individuals but provides a basis for consensus not provided by religions
or philosophies. Locke’s substitute for the virtuous man, the rational and
industrious one, is the perfect expression of this solution. It is not an
ethic or a morality of a Protestant or any other kind of believer, but a
frank admission of enlightened selﬁshness (selﬁshness that has learned
from modern philosophy which goals are real and which imaginary), or
self-interest rightly understood. Locke develops the opposite, the idle
and the quarrelsome man—who, we see, may be the priest or the noble
(i.e., pretenders to a higher morality)—to debunk virtue in a less
provocative way than Hobbes did. Locke’s, rational and industrious man
partakes, as a prototype, of the charm of the sincere man who acts as he
thinks and, without fraudulent pieties, seeks his own good. Beneath his
selﬁshness, of course, lies an expectation that it conduces more to the
good of others than does moralism. The taste of the sincere expresses
itself more in blame of Tartufferie than in praise of virtue.

Terror in the face of death, an immediate and overwhelming

subjective experience of the self and what counts most for it, and the
imperative following from this experience that death must be avoided,
were conﬁrmed by the new natural philosophy which sees in nature
only bodies in motion, bodies blindly conserving their motion by the
necessity of inertia. All higher purposiveness in nature, which might

have been consulted by men’s reason and used to limit human passion,
has disappeared. Nature tells us nothing about man speciﬁcally and
provides no imperatives for his conduct. But man can be seen to behave
as all other bodies behave, and the imaginary constraints on his
following his powerful inclinations—constraints which would cause
him to behave differently from natural bodies—vanish. Irrational
passion and rational science cooperate in a new way to establish natural
law: Pursue peace. Man’s passionate subjectivity gives assent to the
premises of natural philosophy—nay, takes them as its principles of
action—and philosophy ﬁnds that that assent accords with nature. Man
remains somehow a part of nature, but in a different and much more
problematic way than in, say, Aristotle’s philosophy, where soul is at the
center and what is highest in man is akin to what is highest in nature, or
where soul is nature. Man is really only a part and not the microcosm.
Nature has no rank order or hierarchy of being, nor does the self.

Lockean natural man, who is really identical to his civil man, whose

concern with comfortable self-preservation makes him law-abiding and
productive, is not all that natural. Rousseau quickly pointed out that
Locke, in his eagerness to ﬁnd a simple or automatic solution to the
political problem, made nature do much more than he had a right to
expect a mechanical, nonteleological nature to do. Natural man would
be brutish, hardly distinguishable from any of the other animals,
unsociable and neither industrious nor rational, but, instead, idle and
nonrational, motivated exclusively by feelings or sentiments. Having cut
off the higher aspirations of man, those connected with the soul,
Hobbes and Locke hoped to ﬁnd a ﬂoor beneath him, which Rousseau
removed. Man tumbled down into what I have called the basement,
which now appears bottomless. And there, down below, Rousseau
discovered all the complexity in man that, in the days before
Machiavelli, was up on high. Locke had illegitimately selected those
parts of man he needed for his social contract and suppressed all the
rest, a theoretically unsatisfactory procedure and a practically costly one.
The bourgeois is the measure of the price paid, he who most of all
cannot afford to look to his real self, who denies the existence of the
thinly boarded-over basement in him, who is most made over for the
purposes of a society that does not even promise him perfection or
salvation but merely buys him off. Rousseau explodes the simplistic

harmoniousness between nature and society that seems to be the
American premise.

one not easily achieved, requiring both study and effort. The existence
of such a natural ground has become doubtful, and it is here that the
abyss opened up. But it was Rousseau who founded the modern
psychology of the self in its fullness, with its unending search for what is
really underneath the surface of rationality and civility, its new ways of
reaching the unconscious, and its unending task of constituting some
kind of healthy harmony between above and below.

Rousseau’s intransigence set the stage for a separation of man from

nature. He was perfectly willing to go along with the modern scientiﬁc
understanding that a brutish being is true man. But nature cannot
satisfactorily account for his difference from the other brutes, for his
movement from nature to society, for his history. Descartes, playing his
part in the dismantling of the soul, had reduced nature to extension,
leaving out of it only the ego that observes extension. Man is, in
everything but his consciousness, part of extension. Yet how he is a man,
a unity, what came to be called a self, is utterly mysterious. This
experienced whole, a combination of extension and ego, seems
inexplicable or groundless. Body, or atoms in motion, passions, and
reason are some kind of unity, but one that stands outside of the grasp of
natural science. Locke appears to have invented the self to provide unity
in continuity for the ceaseless temporal succession of sense impressions
that would disappear into nothingness if there were no place to hold
them. We can know everything in nature except that which knows
nature. To the extent that man is a piece of nature, he disappears. The
self gradually separates itself from nature, and its phenomena must be
treated separately. Descartes’ ego, in appearance invulnerable and
godlike in its calm and isolation, turns out to be the tip of an iceberg
ﬂoating in a fathomless and turbulent sea called the id, consciousness
an epiphenomenon of the unconscious. Man is self, that now seems
clear. But what is self?

important for us to know the unbearably complicated story behind it if
we are to abandon ourselves to it. One thing is certain: if this psychology
is to be believed, it came to us belatedly, in order to treat the parts of
man which had been so long neglected in our liberal society, and it

opens up a Pandora’s box, ourselves. Like Iago it tells us, “I never found
a man who knew how to love himself.” Modern psychology has this in
common with what was always a popular opinion, fathered by
Machiavelli—that selﬁshness is somehow good. Man is self, and the self
must be selﬁsh. What is new is that we are told to look more deeply into
the self, that we assumed too easily that we know it and have access to it.

The ambiguity of human life always requires that there be

distinctions between good and bad, in one form or another. The great
change is that a good man used to be the one who cares for others, as
opposed to the man who cares exclusively for himself. Now the good
man is the one who knows how to care for himself, as opposed to the
man who does not. This is most obvious in the political realm. For
Aristotle, good regimes have rulers dedicated to the common good,
while bad ones have rulers who use their positions to further their
private interest. For Locke and Montesquieu there is no such
distinction. A good regime has the proper institutional structures for
satisfying while containing the selﬁsh men who make it up, while a bad
one does not succeed in doing this. Selﬁshness is presupposed; men are
not assumed to be as they ought to be, but as they are. Psychology has
distinctions only between good and bad forms of selﬁshness, like
Rousseau’s deliciously candid distinction between amour de soi and
amour-propre, untranslatable into English because we would have to use
self-love for both terms.

For us the most revealing and delightful distinction—because it is so

unconscious of its wickedness—is between inner-directed and other-
directed, with the former taken to be unqualiﬁedly good. Of course, we
are told, the healthy inner-directed person will really care for others. To
which I can only respond: If you can believe that, you can believe
anything. Rousseau knew much better.

The psychology of the self has succeeded so well that it is now the

instinct of most of us to turn for a cure for our ills back within ourselves
rather than to the nature of things. Socrates too thought that living
according to the opinions of others was an illness. But he did not urge
men to look for a source for producing their own unique opinions, or
criticize them for being conformists. His measure of health was not
sincerity, authenticity or any of the other necessarily vague criteria for
distinguishing a healthy self. The truth is the one thing most needful;
and conforming to nature is quite different from conforming to law,

convention or opinion. Socrates spent his life discussing with other men
and with himself opinions about what virtue is, what justice is, what
piety is, rejecting those opinions that cannot be supported or are self-
contradictory, investigating further those that seem stronger. Access to
the nature of things is by way of thinking about what men say about
them. Socrates was always among the Athenians but was not quite one
of them, apparently never made uncomfortable by the fact that they did
not trust him. He was neither solitary nor citizen. Rousseau, a ﬁgure of
similar stature in the new tradition, was distressed by the hatred of
mankind, and was both, at least in speech, the perfect citizen and the
complete solitary. He was torn between the extremes, and there was no
middle ground. Although a very great reasoner, his preferred means of
learning about himself were the reverie, the dream, the old memory, a
stream of associations unhampered by rational control. In order to know
such an amorphous being as man, Rousseau himself and his particular
history are, in his view, more important than is Socrates’ quest for man
in general or man in himself. The difference is made apparent by
comparing the image of Socrates talking to two young men about the
best regime, with the image of Rousseau, lying on his back on a raft
ﬂoating on a gently undulating lake, sensing his existence.

CREATIVITY

The very expression dignity of man, even when Pico della Mirandola
coined it in the ﬁfteenth century, had a blasphemous ring to it. Man as
man had not been understood to be particularly digniﬁed. God had
dignity, and whatever dignity man had was because he was made in
God’s image (as well as from dust) or because he was the rational animal
whose reason could grasp the whole of nature and hence was akin to
that whole. But now the dignity of man has neither of those supports;
and the phrase means that man is the highest of the beings, an assertion
emphatically denied by both Aristotle and the Bible. Man is elevated
and alone. If this is to be plausible, man must be free—not in the sense
of ancient philosophy, according to which a free man is one who
participates in a regime where he rules as well as is ruled; nor in the
sense of Hobbes and Locke, according to whom a free man is one who
can follow his reason without having to obey God or man—but free in a
much grander sense, that of legislating to himself and to nature, hence
without guidance from nature.

The complement to and explanation of this view of freedom is

creativity. We have become so accustomed to this word that it has no
more effect on us than the most banal Fourth of July oratory. As a matter
of fact, it has become our Fourth of July oratory. But when it was ﬁrst
used for man, it had the odor of blasphemy and paradox. God alone had
been called a creator; and this was the miracle of miracles, beyond
causality, a denial of the premise of all reason, ex nihilo nihil ﬁt. What
deﬁnes man is no longer his reason, which is but a tool for his
preservation, but his art, for in art man can be said to be creative. There
he brings order to chaos. The greatest men are not the knowers but the
artists, the Homers, Dantes, Raphaels and Beethovens. Art is not
imitation of nature but liberation from nature. A man who can generate
visions of a cosmos and ideals by which to live is a genius, a mysterious,
demonic being. Such a man’s greatest work of art is himself. He who
can take his person, a chaos of impressions and desires, a thing whose
very unity is doubtful, and give it order and unity, is a personality. All of
this results from the free activity of his spirit and his will. He contains in
himself the elements of the legislator and the prophet, and has a deeper

grasp of the true character of things than the contemplatives,
philosophers, and scientists, who take the given order as permanent and
fail to understand man. Such is the restoration of the ancient greatness
of man against scientiﬁc egalitarianism, but how different he now looks!
All this new language is a measure of the difference; and reﬂection on
how the Greeks would translate and articulate the phenomena it
describes is the task of a lifetime, which would pay rich rewards in self-
understanding.

The vocabulary of self, culture, and creativity pretty much sums up

the effects of what Rousseau began. It expresses the dissatisfactions with
the scientiﬁc and political solutions of the Enlightenment. It turns
around the understanding of what nature is. Somehow nature was
always that by which men oriented themselves. However, no inﬂuential
thinker has tried to return to the pre-Enlightenment understanding of
nature, the so-called teleolgical view, in which nature is the fullness in
its own kind that each of the beings strives to attain. The reaction to
nature viewed as matter in motion, which can be conquered for the sake
of man’s needs, was twofold: a return to the notion that nature is good,
but only the brute nature of the ﬁelds, forests, mountains and streams in
which beasts live contentedly; or a transcendence of nature altogether in
the direction of creativity. The latter solution conquered the Continent,
and came from Germany to England by way of men like Coleridge and
Carlyle. Very few thinkers were consistent or took seriously the full
meaning of this revolution in thought. Hegel is the greatest exception.
But everyone was affected by it, and its inﬂuence ran across the entire
political spectrum, from Right to Left. Marxism as well as conservatism
as we know them are unthinkable without what Rousseau did.

A small but illuminating example of the pervasiveness of anti-

Enlightenment thought today is how scientists themselves have taken to
styling themselves as “creative.” But nothing could be more contrary to
the spirit of science than the opinion that the scientist fabricates rather
than discovers his results. Scientists are to a man against creationism,
recognizing rightly that, if there is anything to it, their science is wrong
and useless. But they fail to see that creativity has exactly the same
consequences. Either nature has a lawful order or it does not; either
there can be miracles or there cannot. Scientists do not prove that there
are no miracles, they assume it; without this assumption there is no
science. It is easy today to deny God’s creativity as a thing of the

benighted past, overcome by science, but man’s creativity, a thing much
more improbable and nothing but an imitation of God’s, exercises a
strange attraction. In honoring it, the scientists’ opinions are not the
results of science or of any serious reﬂection on science. They are
merely conforming to democratic public opinion, which has, unawares,
been captured by Romantic notions adapted to ﬂatter it (every man a
creator). The artist, not the scientist, has become the admired human
type; and science senses that it must assimilate itself to that type in order
to retain its respectability intact. When every man was understood to be
essentially a reasoner, the scientist could be understood to be a
perfection of what all men wanted to be. That was Enlightenment’s way
of establishing the centrality of science and making it admired. This
change in self-description shows how the Zeitgeist has altered and how
science, instead of standing outside of it and liberating men from it, has
been incorporated into it. The theoretical life has lost its status. Now the
scientist scrambles to recover his position as the perfection of what all
men want to be; but what all men want to be has changed, undermining
the natural harmony between science and society.

Some may consider this labeling trivial, akin to C. P. Snow’s calling

science a “culture.” Science may appear creative only because we forget
what creativity really means and take it to be cleverness at proposing
hypotheses, ﬁnding proofs or inventing experiments. From this
perspective, science is unaffected, and we have just another example of
the pollution of language. But this form of pollution, although less
feared than the other kind, is really more deadly. It is the intellectual
disorder of our age. The use of insigniﬁcant speech entails loss of clarity
about what science and art are, weakening both in an impossible
synthesis of opposites appealing to a society that wants to be told that it
enjoys all good things. There is here a sinister loss of conﬁdence in the
idea of science, if not its detailed practice, the idea which was at the
foundation of democratic society and the absolute in a relativized world.
These scientists know not what they do. Philosophy, despised and
rejected by positive science, has its revenge when it is vulgarized into
coarse public opinion and intimidates that science.

So the effects of Rousseau and his followers are everywhere around

us, in the bloodstream of public opinion. Of course the use of words like
“creativity” and “personality” does not mean that those who use them
understand the thought that made their use necessary, let alone agree

with it. The language has been trivialized. Words that were meant to
describe and encourage Beethoven and Goethe are now applied to
every schoolchild. It is in the nature of democracy to deny no one access
to good things. If those things are really not accessible to all, then the
tendency is to deny the fact—simply to proclaim, for example, that what
is not art is art. There is in American society a mad rush to distinguish
oneself, and, as soon as something has been accepted as distinguishing,
to package it in such a way that everyone can feel included. Creativity
and personality were intended to be terms of distinction. They were, as a
matter of fact, intended to be the distinctions appropriate to egalitarian
society, in which all distinction is threatened. The leveling of these
distinctions through familiarity merely encourages self-satisfaction. Now
that they belong to everyone, they can be said to mean nothing, both in
common parlance and in the social science disciplines that use them as
“concepts.” They have no speciﬁc content, are a kind of opiate of the
masses. They do, however, provide a focus for all the dissatisfactions that
any life anywhere and at any time provides, particularly those fostered in
a democratic society. Creativity and personality take the place of older
words like virtue, industry, rationality and character, affect our
judgments, provide us with educational goals. They are the bourgeois’
way of not being bourgeois. Hence they are sources of snobbishness and
pretentiousness alien to our real virtues. We have a lot of good engineers
but very few good artists. All the honor, however, goes to the latter, or
rather, one should say, those who stand in for the latter in the eyes of the
many. The real artists don’t need this kind of support and are instead
weakened by it. The moneymaker is not the most appetizing personality,
but he is far preferable to the intellectual phony.

Thus what was intended as an elevation of taste and morality has

merely become grist for our mill while sapping the mill’s foundation.
This was not the only result in Europe, where creativity had at times an
inspiring effect and where the notion had more to feed off of. Even
there, as we shall soon see, the balance sheet is arguably negative. But
here I can see no beneﬁts. And now the mother-word itself—culture—
has also become part of empty talk, its original imprecision now carried
to the point of pathology. Anthropologists can’t deﬁne it although they
are sure there is such a thing. Artists have no vision of the sublime, but
they know culture (i.e., what they do) has a right to the honor and
support of civil society. Sociologists and the disseminators of their views,

the journalists of all descriptions, call everything a culture—the drug
culture, the rock culture, the street-gang culture, and so on endlessly
and without discrimination. Failure of culture is now culture. This is
how the heroic response to the French Revolution fared when it
immigrated to America. Our country is still a melting pot.

CULTURE

The interesting response to the nature-society tension, much more
fertile than the return to, or nostalgia for, nature, can be summed up by
the word “culture.” It seems to mean something high, profound,
respectable—a thing before which we bow. It joins nature as a standard
for the judgment of men and their deeds but has even greater dignity. It
is almost never used pejoratively, as are “society,” “state,” “nation” or
even “civilization,” terms for which culture is gradually substituted, or
whose legitimacy is underwritten by culture. Culture is the unity of
man’s brutish nature and all the arts and sciences he acquired in his
movement from the state of nature to civil society. Culture restores the
lost wholeness of ﬁrst man on a higher level, where his faculties can be
fully developed without contradiction between the desires of nature and
the moral imperatives of his social life.

“Culture” in the modern sense was ﬁrst used by Immanuel Kant,

who was thinking of Rousseau when he employed it, particularly about
what Rousseau said of the bourgeois. The bourgeois is selﬁsh, but
without the purity and simplicity of natural selﬁshness. He makes
contracts hoping to get the better of those with whom he contracts. His
faithfulness to others and his obedience to law are founded on
expectation of gain: “Honesty is the best policy.” Thus he corrupts
morality, the essence of which is to exist for its own sake. The bourgeois
satisﬁes neither extreme, nature or morality. The moral demand is
merely an abstract ideal if it asks for what nature cannot give. Brutish
selﬁshness would be preferable to sham morality.

The progress of culture provides the link between inclination and

duty. Kant uses the education of sexual desire as an example. Naturally
man has the desire to have sexual intercourse and hence to procreate.
But he has no desire to care for his children or educate them, even
though the growth of their faculties requires prolonged maintenance
and training. So the family is necessary. But natural desire does not
point to the family. Desire is promiscuous and inclines man toward
freedom. So desire is repressed. Man is commanded to abandon his
desire. He is punished for it. Myths are created that haunt him, make
him feel guilty and persuade him that he is sinful because of his natural

desires. Marriage constrains both parties, and faithless deeds as well as
desires habitually accompany it. In spite of all of society’s machinery,
untamed desire is always there. It is natural. It can be pushed down, but
never completely, and it always has its revenge in one way or another.

A man in this condition can never be happy. But a man who is

deeply in love with a woman both desires and, for the moment at least,
really cares for another. If this latter condition can be made permanent,
desire and morality practically coincide. The free choice of marriage
and the capacity to stick to it, not merely outwardly but also inwardly, is
a proof of culture, of desire informed by civility. It is also the proof of
human freedom, of the overcoming of nature for the sake of morality,
without making man unhappy. The exclusive preference for one person
whose attraction is founded on ideas of beauty and virtue unknown to
natural man makes sex sublime or sublimates it. This is love, and love
seeks expression in poetry and music. Thus sublimated, sexual desire
culminates in art. The children who are love’s products make reﬂection
about education necessary. And the family, its rights and its duties, its
legal basis and its protection, ﬁnally connect what was once an isolated
individual, concerned only with himself, to politics. Love, family and
politics, which previously divided man and trapped him, can now be
ordered in such a way as to fulﬁll and enhance natural desire and can
therefore be unambiguously afﬁrmed by the will. He is his own master
again, but social or related to other men without being alienated by
them. He is neither promiscuous nor repressed, because his sexual
passion is fully expressed and satisﬁed. Both the world of nature and that
of society are fulﬁlled. His intellectual acquisitions are not just extrinsic
adornments but harmoniously serve and enrich his life. Such is the
ideal of culture so far as sexual matters are concerned. Something of the
kind must occur in all the aspects of man’s life in order to produce a
personality, the fully cultured human being.

This Rousseauan-Kantian vision is in essential agreement with the

Enlightenment view of what is natural in man. But for the ﬁrst time
within philosophy, something other and higher than nature is found in
man.

It should be noted that sex is a theme hardly mentioned in the

thought underlying the American Founding. There it is all preservation,
not procreation, because fear is more powerful than love, and men
prefer their lives to their pleasures. This subordination or taming of the

sexual and everything connected with it made it easier for society to
satisfy nature’s most powerful demands. The rehabilitation of sex made
society’s task more difﬁcult and placed different demands on it. The
primacy given to the sexual instinct in later modern thought as opposed
to the preservative instinct among the early moderns accounts for much
of the drama of our intellectual life, and for the varying expectations
from social life. We are back to our economist and psychiatrist.

But what is the relation between Kant’s use of the word culture and

ours? It seems there are two different current uses that, while distinct,
are linked. First, culture is almost identical to people or nation, as in
French culture, German culture, Iranian culture, etc. Second, culture
refers to art, music, literature, educational television, certain kinds of
movies—in short, everything that is uplifting and edifying, as opposed to
commerce. The link is that culture is what makes possible, on a high
level, the rich social life that constitutes a people, their customs, styles,
tastes, festivals, rituals, gods—all that binds individuals into a group with
roots, a community in which they think and will generally, with the
people a moral unity, and the individual united within himself. A
culture is a work of art, of which the ﬁne arts are the sublime expression.
From this point of view, liberal democracies look like disorderly markets
to which individuals bring their produce in the morning and from
which they return in the evening to enjoy privately what they have
purchased with the proceeds of their sales. In culture, on the other
hand, the individuals are formed by the collectivity as are the members
of the chorus of a Greek drama. A Charles de Gaulle or, for that matter,
an Alexander Solzhenitsyn sees the United States as a mere aggregate of
individuals, a dumping ground for the refuse from other places, devoted
to consuming; in short, no culture.

Culture as art is the peak expression of man’s creativity, his capacity

to break out of nature’s narrow bonds, and hence out of the degrading
interpretation of man in modern natural and political science. Culture
founds the dignity of man. Culture as a form of community is the fabric
of relations in which the self ﬁnds its diverse and elaborate expression. It
is the house of the self, but also its product. It is profounder than the
modern state, which deals only with man’s bodily needs and tends to
degenerate into mere economy. Such a state is not a forum in which
man can act without deforming himself. This is why in the better circles
it always seems in poor taste to speak of love of country, while devotion

to Western, or even American, culture is perfectly respectable. Culture
restores “the unity in art and life” of the ancient polis.

The only element of the polis absent from culture is politics. For the

ancients the soul of the city was the regime, the arrangements of and
participation in ofﬁces, deliberation about the just and the common
good, choices about war and peace, the making of laws. Rational choice
on the part of citizens who were statesmen was understood to be the
center of communal life and the cause of everything else. The polis was
deﬁned by its regime. Nothing of the kind is to be found in culture, and
just what deﬁnes a culture is extremely difﬁcult to discern. Today we are
interested in Greek culture, not Athenian politics. Thucydides’ version
of Pericles’ Funeral Oration is taken to be an archetypical expression of
that culture, a splendid evocation—in the context of a religious
ceremony—of Athenian love of beauty and wisdom. This interpretation
makes some sense; but it is nonetheless a misreading; it is supposed to
enrich us but it only conﬁrms us in our prejudices, typical of our utter
dependence on German interpretations of Greek things. Actually
Pericles says nothing about the gods, or the poetry, history, sculpture or
philosophy of which we think. He praises Athens’ regime and ﬁnds
beauty in its political achievement—its regime, and particularly its
tyrannically held empire. The Athenians are the political heroes who
surpass those in Homer, and the arts are implicitly understood to be
imitations and adornments of that heroism. But we ﬁnd what we look
for, and do not see any of this. A Pericles thus interpreted would be too
superﬁcial for us.

The disappearance of politics is one of the most salient aspects of

modern thought and has much to do with our political practice. Politics
tends to disappear either into the subpolitical (economics) or what
claims to be higher than politics (culture)—both of which escape the
architectonic art, the statesman’s prudence. Politics in the older sense
encompassed and held together these two extremes. This opposition
between economy and culture is but another formulation of the dualism
in contemporary American intellectual life that keeps recurring in these
pages and is their unifying theme.

The source can be found in one of the most remarkable passages in

Rousseau’s works, which marks the break with early modern statecraft
and was decisive in the development of the idea of culture. It is his
chapter on the Legislator in The Social Contract (II, 7). Rousseau

directed men’s attention back to the ancient polis as a corrective to the
Enlightenment political teaching. Unlike many of those who came after
him, he was hardheadedly political and saw statesmen’s deeds as central
to the life of a people. And it is precisely the very conditions for the
existence of a people that Rousseau accuses his immediate predecessors
of having misunderstood or ignored. Individual self-interest is not
sufﬁcient to establish a common good, he insists, but without it,
political life is impossible, and men will be morally contemptible. The
founder of a regime must ﬁrst make a people to which the regime will
belong. A people will not automatically result from individual men’s
enlightenment about their self-interest. A political deed is necessary.
The legislator must

 
so to speak change human nature, transform each individual,
who by himself is a perfect and solitary whole, into a part of a
greater whole from which that individual as it were gets his life
and his being; weaken man’s constitution to strengthen it;
substitute a partial and moral existence for the physical and
independent existence which we have all received from nature.
He must, in a word, take man’s own forces away from him in
order to give him forces which are foreign to him and which he
cannot use without the help of others. The more the natural
forces are dead and annihilated, the greater and more lasting the
acquired ones, thus the founding is solider and more perfect;
such that if each citizen is nothing, can do nothing, except by all
the others, and the force acquired by the whole is equal or
superior to the sum of the natural forces of all the individuals,
one can say that the legislation is at the highest point of
perfection it can attain.
 

Rousseau with characteristic and refreshing frankness underlines the
corporate character of the community and what is required to achieve it
as over against the abstract individualism popularized by the
Enlightenment. In elaborating the scheme Rousseau even puts in the
popular festivals and all that. This complex nervous system constructed
by the legislator is exactly what we call culture. Or rather, culture is the
effect of the legislation without the legislator, without the political
intention.

Rousseau’s theoretical frankness, or harshness, about legislation put

off succeeding generations of thinkers, who nonetheless wanted the
results of that harshness, i.e., community. Or, more likely, Robespierre’s
practical harshness and the failure of his attempt at legislation scared off
moderate observers. Changing human nature seems a brutal, nasty,
tyrannical thing to do. So, instead, it began to be denied that there is
such a thing as human nature. Rather, man grows and grows into
culture; cultures are, as is obvious from the word, growths. Man is a
culture being, not a natural being. What man has from nature is nothing
compared to what he has acquired from culture. A culture, like the
language that accompanies and expresses it, is a set of mere accidents
that add up to a coherent meaning constitutive of man. Nature is
gradually banished from the study of man; and the state of nature is
understood to have been a myth, even though the notion of culture is
inconceivable without the prior elaboration of the state of nature. The
primacy of the acquired over the natural in man’s humanity is the
ground of the idea of culture; and that idea is bound up with the idea of
history, understood not as the investigation into man’s deeds but as a
dimension of reality, of man’s being. The very fact of movement from
the state of nature to the civil state shows that there is history and that it
is more important than nature. In Rousseau the tension between nature
and the political order is maintained, and the legislator has to force the
two into a kind of harmony. History is a union of the two in which each
disappears.

Now, Rousseau, for all the adaptations made by the legislator, in

order for his legislation to suit particular times and places, was still
pursuing the same universal goal as were the thinkers of the
Enlightenment: to secure the equal natural rights of all men within civil
society. He simply argued that Hobbes and Locke did not succeed in
doing so, that self-interest is not enough to found political morality on.
The political solution was more complicated and demanding. Kant,
who invented culture as part of a historical teaching, also had a similar
universal goal. Although natural rights had become human rights in his
teaching, those rights were the same ones, founded on a new basis; and
the historical process he discerned in Rousseau’s teaching moved toward
the effective establishment of those rights in civil society. Universality
and rationality were the hallmarks of all these teachings. But very
quickly culture—which was for Kant and, speaking anachronistically,

for Rousseau, singular—became cultures. That there were Englishmen,
Frenchmen, Germans and Chinese was clear. That there is a
cosmopolitan culture, either existing or coming into being, is unclear.
The various unions of nature with the acquisitions of civilization are
rare and difﬁcult enough; that they should tend to the same end is
improbable; we should cherish these creations and be happy that there
is any culture at all. A charm was discovered in this diversity. Rousseau
introduced rootedness as a condition of attaining the simple rational
human goal. His historicist and romantic successors argued that such a
goal undermined rootedness; rootedness became the goal.

Here again we live with two contradictory understandings of what

counts for man. One tells us that what is important is what all men have
in common; the other that what men have in common is low, while
what they have from separate cultures gives them their depth and their
interest. Both agree that life, liberty, and the pursuit of property, i.e., the
interests of health and preservation, are what men share. The difference
between them is the weight they give to being French or Chinese,
Jewish or Catholic, or the rank order of these particular cultures in
relation to the natural needs of the body. One is cosmopolitan, the other
is particularistic. Human rights are connected with one school, respect
for cultures with the other. Sometimes the United States is attacked for
failing to promote human rights; sometimes for wanting to impose “the
American way of life” on all people without respect for their cultures. To
the extent that it does the latter, the United States does so in the name
of self-evident truths that apply to the good of all men. But its critics
argue that there are no such truths, that they are prejudices of American
culture. On the other hand, the Ayatollah was initially supported by
some here because he represented true Iranian culture. Now he is
attacked for violating human rights. What he does is in the name of
Islam. His critics insist that there are universal principles that limit the
rights of Islam. When the critics of the U.S. in the name of culture, and
of the Ayatollah in the name of human rights, are the same persons,
which they often are, they are persons who want to eat their cake and
have it, too.

Why, it might be asked, can’t there be a respect for both human

rights and culture? Simply because a culture itself generates its own way
of life and principles, particularly its highest ones, with no authority
above it. If there were such an authority, the unique way of life born of

its principle would be undermined. The idea of culture was adopted
precisely because it offered an alternative to what was understood to be
the shallow and dehumanizing universality of rights based on our
animal nature. The folk mind takes the place of reason. There is a
continuing war between the universality of the Enlightenment and the
particularity that resulted from the teachings of Enlightenment’s critics.
Their criticism appealed to all the old attachments to family, country
and God that were uprooted by Enlightenment, and gave them a new
interpretation and a new pathos. Such criticism provided a philosophic
basis for resisting philosophy.

The question is whether reasonings really take the place of instincts,

whether arguments about the value of tradition or roots can substitute
for immediate passions, whether this whole interpretation is not just a
reaction unequal to the task of stemming a tide of egalitarian,
calculating individualism, which the critics themselves share, and the
privileges of which they would be loath to renounce. When one hears
newly divorced persons extolling the extended family, unaware of all the
sacred bonds and ancestral tyranny that it required in order to exist, it is
easy to see what they think is missing from their lives, but hard to
believe they are aware of what they would have to sacriﬁce to achieve it.
When one hears men and women proclaiming that they must preserve
their culture, one cannot help wondering whether this artiﬁcial notion
can really take the place of the God and country for which they once
would have been willing to die.

The “new ethnicity” or “roots” is just another manifestation of the

concern with particularity, evidence not only of the real problems of
community in modern mass societies but also of the superﬁciality of the
response to it, as well as the lack of awareness of the fundamental
conﬂict between liberal society and culture. This attempt to preserve old
cultures in the New World is superﬁcial because it ignores the fact that
real differences among men are based on real differences in
fundamental beliefs about good and evil, about what is highest, about
God. Differences of dress or food are either of no interest or are
secondary expressions of deeper beliefs. The “ethnic” differences we see
in the United States are but decaying reminiscences of old differences
that caused our ancestors to kill one another. The animating principle,
their soul, has disappeared from them. The ethnic festivals are just
superﬁcial displays of clothes, dances and foods from the old country.

One has to be quite ignorant of the splendid “cultural” past in order to
be impressed or charmed by these insipid folkloric manifestations
(which, by the way, unite the meanings of culture—people and art).
And the blessing given the whole notion of cultural diversity in the
United States by the culture movement has contributed to the
intensiﬁcation and legitimization of group politics, along with a
corresponding decay of belief that the individual rights enunciated in
the Declaration of Independence are anything more than dated
rhetoric.

The idea of culture was established in an attempt to ﬁnd the dignity

of man within the context of modern science. That science was
materialistic, hence reductionist, and deterministic. Man can have no
dignity if his status is not special, if he is not essentially different from
the brutes. There must be something else in man to account for the
fullness of his being and prevent political and economic arrangements
that presuppose his brutishness from reducing him to it. Those who
attempted to establish the dignity of man did not hope or try to
transform the new natural science. It was a question of coexistence.
They invented dualisms with which we still live—nature-freedom,
nature-art, science-creativity, natural science-humanities—in which the
latter term of the pair is supposed to be of higher dignity, but the
groundedness of which has always turned out to be problematic.
Freedom is a postulate, a possibility in Kant, not a demonstration; and
that remains the difﬁculty. Culture, although it claims to be
comprehensive, to include all of man’s higher activities, does not really
include natural science, which did not need the notion, which was
doing just ﬁne in the older democratic arrangement it had helped to
found, and by which it was encouraged. Psychology today includes an
important school for which man is nothing other than a brute, e.g., B. F.
Skinner’s behavioralism; another in which the fact that man is an
animal practically disappears, e.g., Jacques Lacan’s existential analysis;
and various incoherent mixtures, e.g., Freud’s psychoanalytic theory,
which wants to found itself on biology and at the same time to account
for spiritual phenomena, to the detriment of both. In general, everyone
wants to be scientiﬁc and at the same time to respect the dignity of man.

VALUES

We have come back to the point where we began, where values take the
place of good and evil. But now we have made at least a hasty tour of the
intellectual experiences connected with modern politics that made such
a response compelling. How it looked to thoughtful Germans is most
revealingly expressed in a famous passage by Max Weber, about God,
science and the irrational:

 
Finally, although a naive optimism may have celebrated science
—that is, the technique of the mastery of life founded on science
—as the path which would lead to happiness, I believe I can
leave this entire question aside in light of the annihilating
critique which Nietzsche has made of “the last men” who “have
discovered happiness.” Who, then, still believes in this, with the
exception of a few big babies in university chairs or in editorial
ofﬁces? (Science as a Vocation)
 
So penetrating and well informed an observer as Weber could say in

1919 that the scientiﬁc spirit at the heart of Western democracy was
dead for all serious men and that Nietzsche had killed it, or had at least
given it the coup de grâce. The presentation of “the last man” in Thus
Spake Zarathustra was so decisive that the old-style Enlightenment
rationalism need not even be discussed anymore; and, Weber implies,
all future discussion or study must proceed with the certainty that the
perspective was a “naive” failure. Reason cannot establish values, and its
belief that it can is the stupidest and most pernicious illusion.

This means, simply, that almost all Americans at that time, thinking

Americans in particular, were “big babies” and remained so, long after
the Continent had grown up. One need only think of John Dewey to
recognize that he ﬁts Weber’s description to a T, and then remember
what his inﬂuence here once was. And not only Dewey, but everyone
from the beginning of our regime, especially those who said, “We hold
these truths to be self-evident,” shared the rationalist dream. Weber’s
statement is so important because he as much as or more than anyone
brought us into contact with the most advanced Continental criticisms

of liberal democracy, and was the intermediary between Nietzsche and
us Americans who were the most recalcitrant to his insight, perhaps
because according to it we represent the worst or most hopeless and are
therefore loath to see ourselves in that mirror. A very dark view of the
future has been superimposed on our incorrigible optimism. We are
children playing with adult toys. They have proved too much for us to
handle. But, in our defense, we are probably not the only ones for
whom they are too much.

Weber points us toward Nietzsche as the common source for serious

thinkers of the twentieth century. He also tells us what the single
fundamental issue is: the relation between reason, or science, and the
human good. When he speaks of happiness and the last man, he does
not mean that the last man is unhappy, but that his happiness is
nauseating. An experience of profound contempt is necessary in order to
grasp our situation, and our capacity for contempt is vanishing. Weber’s
science presupposes this experience, which we would call subjective.
After having encountered it in Nietzsche, he spent the greater part of his
scholarly life studying religion in order to understand the
noncontemptible, those who esteem or revere and are therefore not self-
satisﬁed, those who have values or, to say the same thing, have gods, in
particular those who create gods or found religions. From Nietzsche he
learned that religion, or the sacred, is the most important human
phenomenon, and his further study of it was made from Nietzsche’s
unorthodox perspective.

“God is dead,” Nietzsche proclaimed. But he did not say this on a

note of triumph, in the style of earlier atheism—the tyrant has been
overthrown and man is now free. Rather he said it in the anguished
tones of the most powerful and delicate piety deprived of its proper
object. Man, who loved and needed God, has lost his Father and Savior
without possibility of resurrection. The joy of liberation one ﬁnds in
Marx has turned into terror at man’s unprotectedness. Honesty compels
serious men, on examination of their consciences, to admit that the old
faith is no longer compelling. It is the very peak of Christian virtue that
demands the sacriﬁce of Christianity, the greatest sacriﬁce a Christian
can make. Enlightenment killed God; but like Macbeth, the men of the
Enlightenment did not know that the cosmos would rebel at the deed,
and the world become “a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing.” Nietzsche replaces easygoing or self-satisﬁed

atheism with agonized atheism, suffering its human consequences.
Longing to believe, along with intransigent refusal to satisfy that
longing, is, according to him, the profound response to our entire
spiritual condition. Marx denied the existence of God but turned over
all His functions to History, which is inevitably directed to a goal
fulﬁlling of man and which takes the place of Providence. One might as
well be a Christian if one is so naive. Prior to Nietzsche, all those who
taught that man is a historical being presented his history as in one way
or another progressive. After Nietzsche, a characteristic formula for
describing our history is “the decline of the West.”

Nietzsche surveyed and summed up the contradictory strands of

modern thought and concluded that victorious rationalism is unable to
rule in culture or soul, that it cannot defend itself theoretically and that
its human consequences are intolerable. This constitutes a crisis of the
West, for everywhere in the West, for the ﬁrst time ever, all regimes are
founded on reason. Human founders, looking only to universal
principles of natural justice recognizable by all men through their
unaided reason, established governments on the basis of the consent of
the governed, without appeal to revelation or tradition. But reason has
also discerned that all previous cultures were founded by and on gods or
belief in gods. Only if the new regimes are enormous successes, able to
rival the creative genius and splendor of other cultures, could reason’s
rational foundings be equal or superior to the kinds of foundings that
reason knows were made elsewhere. But such equality or superiority is
highly questionable; therefore reason recognizes its own inadequacy.
There must be religion, and reason cannot found religions.

This was already implicit in the ﬁrst wave of criticism of

Enlightenment. Rousseau said a civil religion is necessary to society, and
the legislator has to appear draped in the colors of religion. Tocqueville
concentrated on the centrality of religion to America. With the failure of
Robespierre’s kind of civil religion, there was a continuing effort to
promote a revised or liberal Christianity, inspired by Rousseau’s
Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar. The very idea of culture was a
way of preserving something like religion without talking about it.
Culture is a synthesis of reason and religion, attempting to hide the
sharp distinction between the two poles.

Nietzsche examines the patient, observes that the treatment was not

successful, and pronounces God dead. Now there cannot be religion;

but inasmuch as man needs culture, the religious impulse remains. No
religion but religiosity. This suffuses Nietzsche’s analysis of modernity,
and, unnoticed, it underlies the contemporary categories of psychology
and sociology. He brought the religious question back to the center of
philosophy. The critical standpoint from which to view modern culture
is its essential atheism; and that more repulsive successor of the
bourgeois, the last man, is the product of egalitarian, rationalist, socialist
atheism.

Thus the novel aspect of the crisis of the West is that it is identical

with a crisis of philosophy. Reading Thucydides shows us that the
decline of Greece was purely political, that what we call intellectual
history is of little importance for understanding it. Old regimes had
traditional roots; but philosophy and science took over as rulers in
modernity, and purely theoretical problems have decisive political
effects. One cannot imagine modern political history without a
discussion of Locke, Rousseau and Marx. Theoretical implausibility and
decrepitude are, as everyone knows, at the heart of the Soviet Union’s
malaise. And the Free World is not far behind. Nietzsche is the
profoundest, clearest, most powerful diagnostician of the disease. He
argues that there is an inner necessity for us to abandon reason on
rational grounds—that therefore our regime is doomed.

The disenchantment of God and nature necessitated a new

description of good and evil. To adapt a formula of Plato about the gods,
we do not love a thing because it is good, it is good because we love it. It
is our decision to esteem that makes something estimable. Man is the
esteeming being, the one capable of reverence and self-contempt, “the
beast with red cheeks.” Nietzsche claimed to have seen that the objects
of men’s reverence in no sense compel that reverence; frequently the
objects do not even exist. Their qualities are projections of what is most
powerful in man and serve to satisfy his strongest needs or desires. Good
and evil are what make it possible for men to live and act. The character
of their judgments of good and evil shows what they are.

To put it simply, Nietzsche says that modern man is losing, or has

lost, the capacity to value, and therewith his humanity. Self-satisfaction,
the desire to be adjusted, the comfortable solution to his problems, the
whole program of the welfare state, are the signs of the incapacity to
look up toward the heaven of man’s possible perfection or self-
overcoming. But the surest sign is the way we use the word “value,” and

in this Nietzsche not only diagnosed the disease but exacerbated it. He
intended to point out to men the danger they are in, the awesome task
they face of protecting and enhancing their humanity. As he understood
it, men in our current decrepitude could take it easy if they believed
God, nature or history provides values. Such belief was salutary as long
as the objectiﬁed creations of man were still noble and vital. But in the
present exhaustion of the old values, men must be brought to the abyss,
terriﬁed by their danger and nauseated by what could become of them,
in order to make them aware of their responsibility for their fate. They
must turn within themselves and reconstitute the conditions of their
creativity in order to generate values. The self must be a tense bow. It
must struggle with opposites rather than harmonize them, rather than
turn the tension over to the great instruments of last manhood—the
skilled bow unbenders and Jesuits of our days, the psychiatrists, who, in
the same spirit and as part of the same conspiracy of modernity as the
peace virtuosos, reduce conﬂict. Chaos, the war of opposites, is, as we
know from the Bible, the condition of creativity, which must be
mastered by the creator. The self must also bring forth arrows out of its
longing. Bow and arrow, both belonging to man, can shoot a star into
the heavens to guide man. Stripping away the illusions about values was
required, so Nietzsche thought, by our situation, to disenchant all
misleading hopes of comfort or consolation, thereby to ﬁll the few
creators with awe and the awareness that everything depends on them.
Nihilism is a dangerous but a necessary and a possibly salutary stage in
human history. In it man faces his true situation. It can break him,
reduce him to despair and spiritual or bodily suicide. But it can hearten
him to a reconstruction of a world of meaning. Nietzsche’s works are a
glorious exhibition of the soul of a man who might, if anybody can, be
called creative. They constitute the profoundest statement about
creativity, by a man who had a burning need to understand it.

Nietzsche was ineluctably led to meditation on the coming to be of

God—on God-creation—for God is the highest value, on which the
others depend. God is not creative, for God is not. But God as made by
man reﬂects what man is, unbeknownst to himself. God is said to have
made the world of concern to us out of nothing; so man makes
something, God, out of nothing. The faith in God and the belief in
miracles are closer to the truth than any scientiﬁc explanation, which
has to overlook or explain away the creative in man. Moses,

overpowered by the obscure drives within him, went to the peak of Sinai
and brought back tables of values; these values had a necessity, a
substantiality more compelling than health or wealth. They were the
core of life. There are other possible tables of values—one thousand and
one, according to Zarathustra—but these were the ones that made this
people what it was and gave it a life-style, a unity of inner experience
and outer expression or form. There is no prescription for creating the
myths that constitute a people, no standardized test that can predict the
man who will create them or determine which myths will work or are
appropriate. There is the matter and the maker, like stone and sculptor;
but in this case the sculptor is not only the efﬁcient cause but the formal
and ﬁnal cause as well. There is nothing that underlies the myth, no
substance, no cause. No search for the cause of values, either in the
rational quest for knowledge of good and evil or in, for example, their
economic determinants, can result in an accurate account of them.
Only an openness to the psychological phenomena of creativity can
bring any clarity.

This psychology cannot be like Freud’s, which, beginning from

Nietzsche’s understanding of the unconscious, ﬁnds causes of creativity
that blur the difference between a Raphael and a ﬁnger painter.
Everything is in that difference, which necessarily escapes our science.
The unconscious is a great mystery; it is the truth of God, and it—the id
—is as unfathomable as was God. Freud accepted the unconscious, and
then tried to give it perfect clarity by means of science. But the id
produces science. It can produce many sciences. Freud’s procedure is
like trying to determine God’s essence or nature from what he created.
God could have created an inﬁnity of worlds. If he had been limited to
this one, he would not have been creative or free.

Understanding all of this is necessary if one is to understand

creativity. The id is the source; it is elusive and unfathomable and
produces world interpretations. Yet natural scientists, among whom
Freud wished to be counted, do not take any of this seriously. Biologists
cannot even account for consciousness within their science, let alone
the unconscious. So psychologists like Freud are in an impossible
halfway house between science, which does not admit the existence of
the phenomena he wishes to explain, and the unconscious, which is
outside the jurisdiction of science. It is a choice, so Nietzsche
compellingly insists, between science and psychology. Psychology is by

that very fact the winner, since science is the product of the psyche.
Scientists themselves are gradually being affected by this choice.
Perhaps science is only a product of our culture, which we know is no
better than any other. Is science true? One sees a bit of decay around the
edges of its good conscience, formerly so robust. Books like Thomas
Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions are popular symptoms of
this condition.

This is where what I called the bottomless or fathomless self, the last

version of the self, makes its appearance. Id, Nietzsche named it. The id
mocks the ego when a man says, “It occurred to me.” The sovereign
consciousness waits on something down below, which sends up its food
for thought. The difference between this version and the others is that
they began from a common experience, more or less immediately
accessible, 
that 
all 
men 
share, 
which 
establishes, 
if 
only

intersubjectively, a common humanity that can be called human
nature. Fear of violent death and desire for comfortable self-preservation
were the ﬁrst stop on the way down. Everybody knows them, and we can
recognize one another in them. The next stop was the sweet sentiment
of existence, no longer immediately accessible to civilized man but
recoverable by him. When under its spell, we can with certainty say to
ourselves, “This is what I really am, what I live for,” with the further
conviction that the same must be so for all other men. This, allied with
a vague, generalized compassion, makes us a species and can give us
guidance. At the next stop there turns out to be no stop, and the descent
is breathtaking. If one ﬁnds anything at all, it is strictly one’s own, what
Nietzsche calls one’s fatum, a stubborn, strong ass that has nothing to
say for itself other than that it is. One ﬁnds, at best, oneself; and it is
incommunicable and isolates each from all others, rather than uniting
them. Only the rarest individuals ﬁnd their own stopping point from
which they can move the world. They are, literally, profound.

Though the values, the horizons, the tables of good and evil that

originate in the self cannot be said to be true or false, cannot be derived
from the common feeling of mankind or justiﬁed by the universal
standards of reason, they are not equal, contrary to what vulgar teachers
of value theory believe. Nietzsche, and all those serious persons who in
one way or another accepted his insight, held that inequality among
men is proved by the fact that there is no common experience
accessible in principle to all. Such distinctions as authentic-inauthentic,

profound-superﬁcial, creator-created replace true and false. The
individual value of one man becomes the polestar for many others
whose own experience provides them with no guidance. The rarest of
men is the creator, and all other men need and follow him.

Authentic values are those by which a life can be lived, which can

form a people that produces great deeds and thoughts. Moses, Jesus,
Homer, Buddha: these are the creators, the men who formed horizons,
the founders of Jewish, Christian, Greek, Chinese, and Japanese
culture. It is not the truth of their thought that distinguished them, but
its capacity to generate culture. A value is only a value if it is life-
preserving and life-enhancing. The quasi-totality of men’s values consists
of more or less pale carbon copies of the originator’s values.
Egalitarianism means conformism, because it gives power to the sterile
who can only make use of old values, other men’s ready-made values,
which are not alive and to which their promoters are not committed.
Egalitarianism is founded on reason, which denies creativity. Everything
in Nietzsche is an attack on rational egalitarianism, and shows what
twaddle the habitual talk about values is these days—and how
astonishing is Nietzsche’s respectability on the Left.

Since values are not rational and not grounded in the natures of

those subject to them, they must be imposed. They must defeat
opposing values. Rational persuasion cannot make them believed, so
struggle is necessary. Producing values and believing in them are acts of
the will. Lack of will, not lack of understanding, becomes the crucial
defect. Commitment is the moral virtue because it indicates the
seriousness of the agent. Commitment is the equivalent of faith when
the living God has been supplanted by self-provided values. It is Pascal’s
wager, no longer on God’s existence but on one’s capacity to believe in
oneself and the goals one has set for oneself. Commitment values the
values and makes them valuable. Not love of truth but intellectual
honesty characterizes the proper state of mind. Since there is no truth in
the values, and what truth there is about life is not lovable, the hallmark
of the authentic self is consulting one’s oracle while facing up to what
one is and what one experiences. Decisions, not deliberations, are the
movers of deeds. One cannot know or plan the future. One must will it.
There is no program. The great revolutionary must destroy the past and
open up the future for the free play of creativity. Politics are
revolutionary; but unlike the Glorious Revolution, the American

Revolution, the French Revolution or the Russian Revolution, the new
revolutions should be unprogrammatic. They are to be made by
intellectually honest, committed, strong-willed, creative men. Nietzsche
was not a fascist; but this project inspired fascist rhetoric, which looked
to the revitalization of old cultures or the foundation of new ones, as
opposed to the rational, rootless cosmopolitanism of the revolutions of
the Left.

Nietzsche was a cultural relativist, and he saw what that means—war,

great cruelty rather than great compassion. War is the fundamental
phenomenon on which peace can sometimes be forced, but always in
the most precarious way. Liberal democracies do not ﬁght wars with one
another because they see the same human nature and the same rights
applicable everywhere and to everyone. Cultures ﬁght wars with one
another. They must do so because values can only be asserted or posited
by overcoming others, not by reasoning with them. Cultures have
different perceptions, which determine what the world is. They cannot
come to terms. There is no communication about the highest things.
(Communication is the substitute for understanding when there is no
common world men share, to which they can refer when they
misunderstand one another. From the isolation of the closed systems of
self and culture, there are attempts to “get in contact,” and “failures of
communication.” How individuals and cultures can “relate” to one
another is altogether a mysterious business.) Culture means a war
against chaos and a war against other cultures. The very idea of culture
carries with it a value: man needs culture and must do what is necessary
to create and maintain cultures. There is no place for a theoretical man
to stand. To live, to have any inner substance, a man must have values,
must be committed, or engagé. Therefore a cultural relativist must care
for culture more than truth, and ﬁght for culture while knowing it is not
true.

This is somehow impossible, and Nietzsche struggled with the

problem throughout his career, perhaps without a satisfactory resolution.
But he knew that the scientiﬁc view is deadly to culture, and that the
political or moral cultural relativist of the ordinary sort is doomed to
have no culture. Cultural relativism, as opposed to relativism simply,
teaches the need to believe while undermining belief.

Nietzsche appears to have taken over the idea of culture from his

his point of view, the only framework within which to account for what
is speciﬁcally human in man. Man is pure becoming, unlike any other
being in nature; and it is in culture that he becomes something that
transcends nature and has no other mode of existence and no other
support than a particular culture. The actuality of plants and the other
animals is contained in their potentialities; but this is not true of man, as
is indicated by the many cultural ﬂowers, essentially unlike, produced
from the same seed, man. Nietzsche’s contribution was to draw with
perfect intransigence the consequences of that idea and try to live with
them. If there are many cultures, unsolicited by one perfect or complete
culture in which man is man, simply—without preﬁx such as Greek,
Chinese, Christian, Buddhist (i.e., if Plato’s Republic, outlining the one
best regime, is simply a myth, a work of Plato’s imagination), then the
very word “man” is a paradox. There are as many kinds of man as there
are cultures, without any perspective from which man can be spoken of
in the singular. This is true not only of his habits, customs, rituals,
fashions, but above all of his mind. There must be as many different
kinds of mind as there are cultures. If the mind itself is not included
among the things that are relative to cultures, the observations of
cultural relativism are trivial and have always been accepted. Yet
everyone likes cultural relativism but wants to exempt what concerns
him. The physicist wants to save his atoms; the historian, his events; the
moralist, his values. But they are all equally relative. If there is an escape
for one truth from the ﬂux, then there is in principle no reason why
many truths are not beyond it; and then the ﬂux, becoming, change,
history or what have you is not what is fundamental, but rather, being,
the immutable principle of science and philosophy.

It is Nietzsche’s merit that he was aware that to philosophize is

radically problematic in the cultural, historicist dispensation. He
recognized the terrible intellectual and moral risks involved. At the
center of his every thought was the question “How is it possible to do
what I am doing?” He tried to apply to his own thought the teachings of
cultural relativism. This practically nobody else does. For example,
Freud says that men are motivated by desire for sex and power, but he
did not apply those motives to explain his own science or his own
scientiﬁc activity. But if he can be a true scientist, i.e., motivated by love
of the truth, so can other men, and his description of their motives is
thus mortally ﬂawed. Or if he is motivated by sex or power, he is not a

scientist, and his science is only one means among many possible to
attain those ends. This contradiction runs throughout the natural and
social sciences. They give an account of things that cannot possibly
explain the conduct of their practitioners. The highly ethical economist
who speaks only about gain, the public-spirited political scientist who
sees only group interest, the physicist who signs petitions in favor of
freedom while recognizing only unfreedom—mathematical law
governing moved matter—in the universe are symptomatic of the
difﬁculty of providing a self-explanation for science and a ground for the
theoretical life, which has dogged the life of the mind since early
modernity but has become particularly acute with cultural relativism.
Nietzsche, in response to this difﬁculty, self-consciously made dangerous
experiments with his own philosophy, treating its source as the will to
power instead of the will to truth.

Nietzsche’s new beginning in philosophy starts from the observation

that a shared sense of the sacred is the surest way to recognize a culture,
and the key to understanding it and all of its facets. Hegel made this
clear in his philosophy of history, and he had found the same awareness
in Herodotus’ studies of various peoples, Greek and barbarian. What a
people bows before tells us what it is. But Hegel made a mistake; he
believed there could be a thoroughly rational God, one who conciliated
the demands of culture and those of science. Yet somehow he also saw
that this was not so when he said that the owl of Minerva ﬂies at dusk,
meaning that only when a culture is over can it be understood. Hegel’s
moment of understanding of the West coincided with its end. The West
had been demythologized and had lost its power to inspire and its view
of the future. Therefore, it is evident that its myths are what animates a
culture, and the makers of myths are the makers of cultures and of man.
They are superior to philosophers, who only study and analyze what the
poets make. Hegel admits that poetry has lost its prophetic power but
consoles himself with the belief that philosophy will sufﬁce.

The artists whom Nietzsche saw around him, those whose gifts were

the greatest, attested to this loss. They were what he called decadents,
not because they lacked talent or their art was not impressive, but
because 
their 
works 
were 
laments 
of 
artistic 
impotence,

characterizations of an ugly world that the poets believe they cannot
inﬂuence. Immediately after the French Revolution there had been a
stupendous artistic effervescence, and poets thought they could again be

the legislators of mankind. The vocation provided for the artists in the
new philosophy of culture heartened them, and a new classic age was
born. Idealism and romanticism appeared to have carved out a place for
the sublime in the order of things. But within a generation or two the
mood had noticeably soured, and artists began to represent the romantic
visions as a groundless hoax. Men like Baudelaire and Flaubert turned
away from the public and made the moralism and romantic enthusiasm
of their immediate predecessors look foolish. Adulteries without love,
sins without punishment or redemption became the more authentic
themes of art. The world had been disenchanted. Baudelaire presented
sinning man as in the Christian vision, but without hope of God’s
salvation, piercing pious fraudulence, hypocrite lecteur. And Flaubert
drowned in a venomous hatred of the bourgeoisie, which had
conquered. Culture was just fodder for its vanity. The great dualisms
had collapsed; and art, creativity and freedom had been swallowed up
by determinism and petty self-interest. In his greatest creation, M.
Homais, the pharmacist, Flaubert encapsulated everything that
modernity was and is to be. Homais represents the spirit of science,
progress, liberalism, anticlericalism. He lives carefully with an eye to
health. His education contains the best that has been thought and said.
He knows everything that ever happened. He knows that Christianity
helped to free the slaves, but that it has outlived its historical usefulness.
History existed to produce him, the man without prejudices. He is at
home with everything, and nothing is beyond his grasp. He is a
journalist, disseminating knowledge for the enlightenment of the
masses. Compassion is his moral theme. And all this is nothing but petty
amour-propre. Society exists to give him honor and self-esteem. Culture
is his. There are no proper heroes to depict nor audiences to inspire.
They are all one way or another in business. Emma Bovary is Homais’
foil. She can only dream of a world and men who do not and cannot
exist. In this sober world she is nothing but a fool. She, like the modern
artist, is pure longing with no possible goal. Her only triumph and her
only free act is suicide.

Nietzsche ﬁnds these decadents, pessimists or protonihilists

revelatory, as he does the fakers of great deeds and passions who are the
reverse side of the coin, in particular Wagner. He has contempt for the
former, not because they lack honesty or because their characterization
of the world around them is inaccurate, but because they know that

once there were gods and heroes and that they were the products of
poetic imagination—which means that poetic imagination can make
them again—yet do not have the courage or the resolve themselves to
create. Therefore they are hopeless. They alone can still long; but they
are secret believers in the Christian God or, at least, in the Christian
worldview and cannot believe in the really new. They are afraid to set
sail on stormy, uncharted seas. Only Dostoyevski has a vitality of soul,
proof against decadence. His unconscious, ﬁltered through a Christian
conscience, expresses itself in forbidden desires, crimes, acts of self-
abasement, sentimentality and brutality; but he is alive and struggling
and proves the continuing health of the animal and all that is in ferment
down under.

The artist is the most interesting of all phenomena, for he represents

creativity, the deﬁnition of man. His unconscious is full of monsters and
dreams. It provides the pictures to consciousness, which takes them as
given and as “world,” and rationalizes them. Rationality is only the
activity of providing good reasons for what has no reason or is
unreasonable. We do what we do out of a fate that is our individuality,
but we have to explain and communicate. This latter is the function of
consciousness; and when it has been provided with a rich store by the
unconscious, its activity is fruitful, and the illusion of its sufﬁciency is
even salutary. But when it has chopped up and chewed over its
inheritance, as mathematical physics has now done, there are not
enough nourishing plants left whole. Consciousness now requires
replenishment.

Thus Nietzsche opened up the great terrain explored by modern

artists, psychologists and anthropologists, searching for refreshment for
our exhausted culture in the depths of the darkest unconscious or
darkest Africa. Not all that Nietzsche asserted is plausible, but its charm
is undeniable. He went to the end of the road with Rousseau, and
beyond. The side of modernity that is less interesting to Americans,
which seeks less for political solutions than for understanding and
satisfaction of man in his fullness or completeness, ﬁnds its profoundest
statement in Nietzsche, who represents the culmination of that second
state of nature. Above all he was a friend of artists, who were the ﬁrst to
recognize him when he was disreputable among academics; and among
them his inﬂuence was clearly most fertile. One need only think of
Rilke, Yeats, Proust and Joyce. The greatest philosophic tribute to him is

Heidegger’s book Nietzsche, the most important part of which is entitled
“The Will to Power as Art.”

Nietzsche restored something like the soul to our understanding of

man by providing a supplement to the ﬂat, dry screen of consciousness,
which with pure intellect looks at the rest of man as something alien, a
bundle of affects of matter, like any other object of physics, chemistry
and biology. The unconscious replaces all the irrational things—above
all divine madness and eros—which were part of the old soul and had
lost signiﬁcance in modernity. It provides a link between consciousness
and nature as a whole, restoring therewith the unity of man. Nietzsche
made psychology, as the most important study, possible again; and
everything of interest in psychology during the last century—not only
psychoanalysis but also Gestalt, phenomenology, and existentialism—
took place within the conﬁnes of the spiritual continent he discovered.
But the difference between the self and the soul remains great because
of the change in the status of reason. The reconstitution of man in
Nietzsche required the sacriﬁce of reason, which Enlightenment,
whatever its failings, kept at the center. For all the charms of Nietzsche
and all that he says to hearten a lover of the soul, he is further away from
Plato in this crucial respect than was Descartes or Locke.

Nietzsche’s psychology concerns the impulse toward God, for in that

impulse the self arrays and displays all its powers; and his inﬂuence
brought a new burst of religious interest, if not religion, to the
intellectual world. God is myth, Nietzsche taught. Myths are made by
poets. This is just what Plato says in the Republic, and for him it is
equivalent to a declaration of war between philosophy and poetry. The
aim of philosophy is to substitute truth for myth (which by its very
deﬁnition is falsehood, a fact too often forgotten in our post-Nietzschean
fascination with myth). Since myths are there ﬁrst and give men their
ﬁrst opinions, philosophy means a critical destruction of myth in favor of
truth for the sake of freedom and living naturally. Socrates, as depicted
in the Platonic dialogues, questioning and confuting the received
opinions, is the model of the philosophic life; and his death at the hands
of his countrymen for not believing in their myths epitomizes the risks
of philosophy. Nietzsche drew precisely the opposite conclusion from
the same facts about myth. There is no nature and no such freedom.
The philosopher must do the contrary of what Socrates did. So
Nietzsche is the ﬁrst philosopher ever to have attacked Socrates,

because Socrates’ life is not the model life, but a corrupt and monstrous
one lacking in all nobility. The tragic life, which Socrates defused and
purged, is the serious life. The new philosopher is the ally of the poets
and their savior, or philosophy is itself the highest kind of poetry.
Philosophy in the old mode demythologizes and demystiﬁes. It has no
sense of the sacred; and by disenchanting the world and uprooting man,
it leads into a void. The revelation that philosophy ﬁnds nothingness at
the end of its quest informs the new philosopher that mythmaking must
be his central concern in order to make a world.

The transfusion of this religious mythmaking or value-positing

interpretation of social and political experience into the American
bloodstream was in large measure effected by Max Weber’s language.
His success here is, I am tempted to say, miraculous. A good example is
his invention, the Protestant Ethic. I read his book of that name in my
ﬁrst social-science course at the University of Chicago when I was being
initiated into the modern mysteries. This course was a survey of social-
science “classics,” among which was also Marx—not only the
Communist Manifesto but also goodly chunks of Capital. Of course,
neither Locke nor Smith, the ofﬁcial spokesmen for “capitalism,” who
might very well even be considered its founders, was on the list, because
we were dealing with thinkers whom a contemporary social scientist
could take seriously. Marx explained the emergence of capitalism as a
historical necessity, in no one’s control, the result of class conﬂict over
material property relations. For him Protestantism was just an ideology
reﬂecting capitalist control of the means of production. I did not see,
and I am not sure that my teachers saw, that, if Weber was right, Marx—
his economics and his revolution, in short, Marxism and the kinds of
moral sympathies it inevitably engenders—was ﬁnished. Weber
purported to demonstrate that there was no such material necessity, that
men’s “worldviews” or “values” determine their history, spirit
compelling matter rather than the other way around. This has the effect
of restoring the older view that individual men count for something, that
there is human freedom and the need for leadership. Weber said it was
Calvin’s charisma and the vision allied to it, routinized by his followers,
that was decisive for the development of capitalism. But how different
Weber’s charismatic leader is from the rational statesmen looked to by
Locke, Montesquieu, Smith and the Federalist. They strive for ends
grasped by reason and self-evidently grounded in nature. No values, no

creative visions are required for them to see what all reasonable men
should see—that hard work is required to have sober, secure and
prosperous freedom. Marx is arguably closer to the core of their belief in
that respect; although men, according to him, are in the grip of the
historical process, that process itself is rational and has as its end the
rational freedom of man. Man remains, somehow, the rational animal.

Weber, on the other hand, denies the rationality of the “values”

posited by the Calvinists; they are “decisions,” not “deliberations,”
imposed on a chaotic world by powerful personalities, “worldviews” or
“world-interpretations” with no foundation other than the selves of the
Protestants. Those “values” made the world what it was for the
Protestants. They are acts that are primarily of the will, and constitute
the self and the world at the same time. Such acts must be
unreasonable; they are based on nothing. In a chaotic universe, reason is
unreasonable because self-contradiction is inevitable. The prophet
becomes the pure model of the statesman—with very radical
consequences. This was something new in American social science and
should have, but did not, make it clear that a new kind of causality—
entirely different from that known to natural science—had entered the
scene.

In spite of this, the Weberian language and the interpretation of the

world it brings with it have caught on like wildﬁre. I have read about the
Japanese Protestant ethic, the Jewish Protestant ethic. The manifest
absurdity of such locutions appears to have struck some, so now “work
ethic” is gradually replacing “Protestant ethic,” but this is merely an
adjustment and barely disguises the point of view that still remains
underneath it. Those interested in the free market do not seem to
recognize, when they use this language, that they are admitting that
their “rational” system needs a moral supplement in order to work, and
that this morality is not itself rational—or at least the choice of it is not
rational, as they understand reason. Delay of gratiﬁcation may make
sense for the system as a whole, but is it unarguably good for the
individual? Is increase of wealth self-evidently superior to poverty for a
Christian? If the work ethic is just one choice among many equally valid
choices, then the free-market system itself is also just one choice among
many. So proponents of the free market should not be surprised when
they see that what was once generally agreed upon no longer compels
belief. One has to go back to Locke and Adam Smith in a serious way,

not just for a set of quotes, to ﬁnd arguments for the rational moral basis
of liberal society. This they no longer do; and because they have lost the
habit of reading serious philosophic books or of considering them really
essential, they probably could not do so. When the liberal, or what came
to be called the utilitarian, teaching became dominant, as is the case
with most victorious causes, good arguments became less necessary; and
the original good arguments, which were difﬁcult, were replaced by
plausible simpliﬁcations—or by nothing. The history of liberal thought
since Locke and Smith has been one of almost unbroken decline in
philosophic substance. When the liberal economic thought or way of
life was manifestly threatened, its proponents, in order to defend it, took
whatever came to hand. A religion must, it seems, be invented for the
sole purpose of defending capitalism, whereas the earliest philosophers
associated with it thought that religion must, at least, be weakened in
order to establish it. And religion, contrary to containing capitalism’s
propensities, as Tocqueville thought it should do, is now intended to
encourage them.

It goes without saying that Weber never for a moment considered

whether Calvin might actually have had a revelation from God—which
would certainly change the looks of things. Weber’s atheism was
dogmatic, but he was not interested in proving that Calvin was a
charlatan or a madman. He rather preferred to believe in the
authenticity of Calvin and other such founding ﬁgures as representing
peak psychological types who can live and act in the world, who know
how to take responsibility, who have an inner sureness or commitment.
The religious experience is the thing, not God. The old quarrel between
reason and revelation is a matter of indifference, because both sides
were wrong, had faulty self-understandings. However, revelation teaches
us what man is and needs. Men like Calvin are the value producers and
hence the models for action in history. We cannot believe in the ground
(God) of their experience, but that experience is critical. We are not
interested in ﬁnding out how they understood themselves but rather in
searching in the self for the mysterious substitute for their ground. We
cannot have, and do not want to have, their peculiar illusions; but we do
want values and commitments. The result of this atheistic religiosity is
the mysterious musings and language of Weber and many others (think
of Sartre) about belief and action, which culminate in something very
different from what either religious leaders or rational statesmen ever

said or did. It fuses the two kinds of men, but with greater weight given
to the former, to the necessity of faith and all that goes with it. The
intellectual apparatus accompanying this analysis tends to obscure the
alternatives to it, particularly the rational alternatives.

As a result there is a continuous skewing of the historical perspective

toward religious explanations. Secularization is the wonderful
mechanism by which religion becomes nonreligion. Marxism is
secularized Christianity; so is democracy; so is utopianism; so are
human rights. Everything connected with valuing must come from
religion. One need not investigate anything else, because Christianity is
the necessary and sufﬁcient condition of our history. This makes it
impossible to take Hobbes or Locke seriously as causes of that history,
because we know that superﬁcial reason cannot found values and that
these thinkers were unconsciously transmitting the values of the
Protestant ethic. Reason transmits, routinizes, normalizes; it does not
create. Therefore Weber gives short shrift to the rational side of our
tradition. Philosophy’s claims are ignored; religious claims are revered.
Dogmatic atheism culminates in the paradoxical conclusion that
religion is the only thing that counts.

Out of this “worldview” issues the gaudy religious word “charisma,”

which has had such fateful political consequences while becoming one
of the most tiresome buzzwords in America. In Chicago there is a
Charisma Cleaners, and every street gang leader is called “charismatic.”
In America charisma is not just a description but something good that
has to do with leadership. It even seems to confer an extralegal title to
leadership by virtue of “something special” inhering in the leader.
Although Weber was thinking of Moses and Buddha, or of Napoleon,
the gang leader formally suits his deﬁnition of charisma. Weber sought
to make a place in politics for things that political legalism excludes and
that claim to have a title to attention although they are not founded on
reason or consent—the only titles to rule in liberal democracy. It is not
to be wondered at, then, that all the demagogic appetites frustrated by
our constitutional system should latch on to a word that appears to
legitimize and to ﬂatter them. Moreover, democratic individualism does
not ofﬁcially provide much of a place for leaders in a regime where
everyone is supposed to be his own master. Charisma both justiﬁes
leaders and excuses followers. The very word gives a positive twist to
rabble-rousing qualities and activities treated as negative in our

constitutional tradition. And its vagueness makes it a tool for frauds and
advertising men adept at manipulating images.

Charisma, as Weber knew perfectly well, is God-given grace, which

confers leadership through God’s sanction. In keeping with his analysis
in the Protestant Ethic, he treats the self’s value-positing as the human
truth of God-given grace. His account of it appears to be merely
descriptive, but it becomes prescriptive. In passages deeply inﬂuenced
by Nietzsche, he analyzes the state as a relation of domination of man
by man, founded on legitimate violence—that is, violence that is
considered to be legitimate. Men inwardly accept being dominated if
they have certain beliefs. There is no more foundation to legitimacy
than the inner justiﬁcation the dominated make to themselves in order
to accept the violence of those who dominate them. These justiﬁcations
are, according to Weber, of three kinds: traditional, rational, and
charismatic. Some men submit because that is the way it has always
been; others consent to obey competent civil servants who follow
rationally established rules; and others are enchanted by the
extraordinary grace of an individual. Of the three, charismatic
legitimacy is the most important. No matter what conservatives may
think, traditions had a beginning that was not traditional. They had a
founder who was not a conservative or a traditionalist. The fundamental
values informing that tradition were his creation. The tradition is the
continuing half-life of the charmed moment when a happy few could
live on the heights of inspiration with the creator. Tradition adjusts that
inspiration to the ordinary, universal motives of man, such as greed and
vanity; it routinizes the charisma. It is what it is because of that original
impulse. So charisma is the condition of both the charismatic and the
traditional legitimacies. It is also the splendid form of legitimacy. The
rational is not informed by charisma, and the civil servants—bureaucrats
—are therefore unable to make real decisions or take responsibility.
They cannot, as we would say, determine the broad outlines of policy or,
put more classically, establish ends. Mere competence can only serve
already established goals and decide according to the established rules.
It must be at least supplemented by charismatic leadership in order to
be pointed in the right, or any, direction. So again charisma comes out
on top. Value creation, the activity that writes the table of laws by which
a people is constituted and lives, is, as Nietzsche tells, the nut in the
shell of existence.

holy writ for hosts of intellectuals. They were, as Weber recognized, not
only an academic exercise. They expressed his vision of the crisis of the
twentieth century. This is a case where the alleged facts also spoke the
values. The tradition-based regimes had exhausted their impulse and
were on their way to extinction. The ones based on rationality were
simply becoming the administration for “the last man,” the intolerable
negative pole. Imperative, then, was a stab at some form of charismatic
leadership in order to revitalize the politics of the West. The whole
undertaking rested on the assurance that Nietzsche was right that the
last man is also the worst possible man, or more generally that his
critique of reason was correct.

The problem with charismatic politics is that it is almost impossible

to deﬁne. There may be examples of it in the past, but they are
inimitable. If politics is like art styles (a thought picked up in Weber’s
invention of the term “life-style”), nothing can be prescribed to it
beforehand. There are no ﬁxed principles and no program of action. All
that one can say is “Be yourself!”; “Be original!”; “Let go!” or something
of the kind. Charisma is a formula for extremism and immoderation.
Moreover, the leader must have followers, so there is every temptation
for him to act out his role as they deﬁne it. And, ﬁnally, genuine
charisma is so difﬁcult to judge. Persuasive tests for the genuineness of
the charismatic leader, whose grace comes from God, were notoriously
hard to come by. The leader whose grace emanates from the much
more enigmatic self proves practically impossible to test. The modern
situation as diagnosed by Weber requires radical remedies, and the
charismatic leader is such a prescription.

Just over the horizon, when Weber wrote, lay Hitler. He was a leader,

Führer, who was certainly neither traditional nor rational-bureaucratic.
He was the mad, horrible parody of the charismatic leader—the
demagogue—hoped for by Weber. Hitler proved to the satisfaction of
most, if not all, that the last man is not the worst of all; and his example
should have, although it has not, turned the political imagination away
from experiments in that direction. Weber was a good man of decent
political instincts who would never have had anything but disgust at and
contempt for Hitler. What he wanted was a moderate corrective to the
ills of German politics—about the same as De Gaulle brought to
French politics. But when one ventures out into the vast spaces opened

up by Nietzsche, it is hard to set limits. Measure and moderation are the
real aliens there. Weber was just one of many serious persons who were
affected by Nietzsche and popularized him without believing in the
extremism that Nietzsche himself asserted is the result of positioning
oneself beyond good and evil. The open-ended future contains many
surprises, and all these followers of Nietzsche prepared the way by
helping to jettison good and evil along with reason, without assurance of
what the alternatives might be. Weber is of particular interest to us
because he was the chosen apostle for the American promised land. It is
not only the popularity of the heavily freighted language he bequeathed
us that is surprising, but also the persistence among supposedly serious
persons of his articulation of the political phenomena. Hitler did not
cause a rethinking of politics here or in Europe. All to the contrary—it
was while we were ﬁghting him that the thought that had preceded him
in Europe conquered here. That thought, which gave him at least some
encouragement and did nothing to prepare us to understand him,
remains dominant.

During the thirties some German Social Democrats became aware

that Hitler, as well as Stalin, just would not ﬁt Weber’s terms of analysis,
which they had previously used; and they began to employ “totalitarian”
to describe them. Whether this is a sufﬁcient corrective to Weber’s
narrowly conceived political science is questionable. But “charismatic”
did indeed ﬁt Hitler, unless charismatic necessarily means something
good—a favorable value judgment. I suspect that those who abandoned
Weber in this way did so because they could not face how wrong he had
been, or the possibility that the thought they had embraced and
propagated might have helped to support fascism. Hannah Arendt gave
perhaps unconscious witness to my suggestion, in her book Eichmann in
Jerusalem, where she used the now celebrated phrase “the banality of
evil,” to describe Eichmann. It is not difﬁcult to discern the
“routinization of charisma” under this thin disguise. Hitler, then, must
have been charismatic. After Hitler, everybody scurried back under the
protective cover of morality, but practically no one turned to serious
thought about good and evil. Otherwise our President, or the pope, for
that matter, would not be talking about values.

This entire language, as I have tried to show, implies that the

religious is the source of everything political, social and personal; and it
still conveys something like that. But it has done nothing to reestablish

religion—which puts us in a pretty pickle. We reject by the fact of our
categories the rationalism that is the basis of our way of life, without
having anything to substitute for it. As the religious essence has
gradually become a thin, putrid gas spread out through our whole
atmosphere, it has gradually become respectable to speak of it under the
marvelously portentous name the sacred. At the beginning of the
German invasion of the United States, there was a kind of scientiﬁc
contempt in universities for the uncleanness of religion. It might be
studied in a scholarly way, as part of the past that we had succeeded in
overcoming, but a believer was somehow benighted or ill. The new
social science was supposed to take the place of morally and religiously
polluted teachings just as Galileo, Copernicus, Newton, et al., had,
according to the popular mythology, founded a natural science that
crushed the superstitions of the Dark Ages. The Enlightenment, or
Marxist, spirit still pervaded the land; and religion vs. science was equal
to prejudice vs. truth. Social scientists simply did not see that their new
tools were based on thought that did not accept the orthodox
dichotomies, that not only were the European thinkers looking for
something akin to religious actors on the political scene but that the
new mind itself, or the self, had at least as much in common with
Pascal’s outlook as it did with that of Descartes or Locke. The sacred—as
the central phenomenon of the self, unrecognizable to scientiﬁc
consciousness and trampled underfoot by ignorant passers-by who had
lost the religious instinct—was, from the outset of the value teaching,
taken seriously by thinkers in Germany. That was because they
understood what “value” really means. It has taken the softening of all
convictions and the blurring of all distinctions for the sacred to be
thought to be undangerous and to come into its own here.

Of course, as we use it, it has no more in common with God than

does value with the Ten Commandments, commitment with faith,
charisma with Moses, or life-style with Jerusalem or Athens. The sacred
turns out to be a need, like food or sex; and in a well-ordered
community, it must get its satisfactions like the other needs. In our
earlier free-thinking enthusiasm, we tended to neglect it. A bit of ritual
is a good thing; sacred space5 along with some tradition must be
provided for, as a generation ago culture was thought to be a useful
supplement. The disproportion between what all these words really
mean and what they mean to us is repulsive. We are made to believe

that we have everything. Our old atheism had a better grasp of religion
than does this new respect for the sacred. Atheists took religion seriously
and recognized that it is a real force, costs something and requires
difﬁcult choices. These sociologists who talk so facilely about the sacred
are like a man who keeps a toothless old circus lion around the house in
order to experience the thrills of the jungle.

5 Note how space—used to mean one’s apartment, workshop, ofﬁce or whatever—has become a
trendy word.

THE NIETZSCHEANIZATION OF

THE LEFT OR VICE VERSA

I have spoken little of Marx and referred to few of his terms so far,
although the whole world is divided into two parts, one of which traces
its intellectual lineage back to Locke and the other to Marx, and the
latter is much readier to acknowledge its parent than is the former. But
this relative neglect is inevitable when one begins with the souls of
young Americans, for Marx does not speak to them, and the so-called
Marxist teachers who attempt to inﬂuence them do not use Marxist
language. To put it crudely, Marx has become boring—and not only to
American youngsters. In some backwaters, grim autodidacts may still
thrill to the rhetoric of “Workers of the world …” while Third World
presidents of one-party states focus their resentments by invoking the
authority of Marx. But in the centers where people keep up-to-date and
ideologies are made, Marx has been dead for a long time. The
Manifesto seems naive. Capital just does not persuade its readers that it
is the truth about economics or about the inevitable future of man, and
therefore worth the hard work it demands to be digested. A few brilliant
essays still charm but are not enough on which to found a worldview.
The intellectual death of their eponymous hero has not stopped much
of the Left from continuing to call itself Marxist, for he represents the
poor in their perennial struggle against the rich, and their demand for
more equality than liberal societies provide. But beyond that, the Left’s
nourishment comes from elsewhere. Nothing in Marx resonates in souls
furnished by Sartre, Camus, Kafka, Dostoyevski, Nietzsche and
Heidegger. Rousseau can still overpower where Marx falls ﬂat.

As an illustration of what has happened to Marx’s inﬂuence, consider

ideology, one of the few terms of his that has anything like the popular
currency of Weber’s terms. (I will discuss the American use of dialectic
later.)

In Marx, ideology meant the false system of thought elaborated by

the ruling class to justify its rule in the eyes of the ruled, while hiding its
real selﬁsh motives. Ideology was sharply distinguished in Marx from
science, which is what Marx’s system is—i.e., the truth based on
disinterested awareness of historical necessity. In Communist society

there will be no ideology. “The pure mind,” to use Nietzsche’s
formulation, still exists in Marx’s thought, as it had in all philosophy—
the possibility of knowing the ways things are, an intellectual capacity
irreducible to anything else. Ideology is a term of contempt; it must be
seen through in order to be seen for what it is. Its meaning is not in itself
but requires translation back into the underlying reality of which it is a
misleading representation. The man without ideology, the one
possessing science, can look to the economic infrastructure and see that
Plato’s political philosophy, which teaches that the wise should rule, is
only a rationalization for the aristocrats’ position in a slave economy; or
that Hobbes’s political philosophy, which teaches man’s freedom in the
state of nature and the resulting war of all against all, is only the cover
for the political arrangements suitable for the rising bourgeoisie. This
point of view provides the foundation for intellectual history, which tells
the story behind the story. Instead of looking at Plato and Hobbes for
information about what courage is—a subject important to us—we
should see how their deﬁnitions of courage suited those who controlled
the means of production.

But what applies to Plato and Hobbes cannot apply to Marx;

otherwise the very assertion that these thinkers were economically
determined would be itself a deception, simply the ideology for the new
exploiters Marx happens to serve. The interpretation would self-destruct.
He would not know what to look for in the thinkers who were inevitably
and unconsciously in the grip of the historical process, for he would be
in the same condition as they were. There are certainly historical
preconditions of Marx’s science; but they do not detract from the truth
of his insight, which is therefore a kind of absolute moment in history
that no further history can alter. This truth is the warrant for revolution,
and the moral equivalent of the natural rights that warranted the
American Revolution. Without it all the killing is unjust and frivolous.

However, by 1905, Lenin was speaking of Marxism as an ideology,

which means that it too can make no claim to truth. In less than half a
century Marx’s absolute had been relativized. The implausibility—on
which Nietzsche insisted in his radical historicism—of the absolute
moment and of a standpoint outside history had become commonly
acknowledged and made Marx a fossil. This was the beginning of the
inner rot that has ﬁnally made Marxism unbelievable to anyone who
thinks. Marxism itself became ideology. The historicization of Marx’s

thought, the turning of his method against him, now looked like the
resolute taking of a stand within the universal ﬂux, the sign of the
creative man, a deﬁance of the meaninglessness of things—that is, it
looked this way to those who had fallen under Nietzsche’s spell. A
parody of this new look is to be found in the person of Sartre, who had
all those wonderful experiences of nothingness, the abyss, nausea,
commitment without ground—the result of which was, almost without
fail, support of the Party line.

Ideology today, in popular speech, is, in the ﬁrst place, generally

understood to be a good and necessary thing—unless it is bourgeois
ideology. The evolution of the term was made possible by the
abandonment, encouraged by Nietzsche, of the distinction between true
and false in political and moral matters. Men and societies need myths,
not science, by which to live. In short, ideology became identical to
values, and that is why it belongs on the honor roll of terms by which we
live. If we examine Weber’s three forms of legitimacy—tradition, reason
and charisma—which cause men to accept a domination by other men
founded on violence, we see immediately that we would call them
ideologies, as well as values. Weber, of course, meant that all societies or
communities of human beings require such violent domination—as the
only way order emerges from chaos in a world with no ordering force in
it other than man’s creative spirituality—while Marxists still vaguely
hope for a world where there are values without domination. This is all
that remains of their Marxism, and they can and do fellow-travel with
the Nietzscheans a goodly bout de chemin. One sees their plight in the
fact that ideology no longer has its old partner, science, in their thought,
but stands in lonely grandeur.

Moreover, ideology is no longer very distinctly tied to economics, nor

is it simply determined. It has been cut loose from necessity’s apron
strings in creativity’s realm. Rational causality just does not, since
Nietzsche, seem sufﬁcient to explain the historically unique event or
thought. Capitalist ideology is now instinctively taken to be something
more like the Protestant ethic than what is described in Capital. When
one talks to Marxists these days and asks them to explain philosophers or
artists in terms of objective economic conditions, they smile
contemptuously and respond, “That is vulgar Marxism,” as if to ask,
“Where have you been for the last seventy-ﬁve years?” No one likes to be
considered vulgar, so people tend to fall back into embarrassed silence.

Vulgar Marxism is, of course, Marxism. Nonvulgar Marxism is
Nietzsche, Weber, Freud, Heidegger, as well as the host of later Leftists
who drank at their trough—such as Lukacs, Kojève, Benjamin,
Merleau-Ponty and Sartre—and hoped to enroll them in the class
struggle. To do this, they had to jettison that embarrassing economic
determinism. The game is surely up when Marxists start talking about
“the sacred.”

Very early in this century the effects of the encounter with Nietzsche

began to be felt within Marxism. An example is the signiﬁcance of
revolution. Revolution and the violence that accompanies it are, as we
have seen, justiﬁed in modern political philosophy and provide the most
arresting spectacles of modern political history. Revolution took the
place of rebellion, faction, or civil war, all of which are obviously bad
things, while revolution is the best and greatest event—ofﬁcially and in
the popular imagination of Englishmen, Americans, Frenchmen and
Russians. Germany was the only one of the great powers not to have had
one, and Marxism was partly invented to provide a bigger and better
revolution for Germany, the natural fulﬁllment of German philosophy,
as French philosophy culminated in the French Revolution. Of course,
the spilling of blood is involved in revolution, proof of men’s preferring
liberty to life. But great amounts of blood were not required, and the
violence was not thought to be good in itself. The old regime was
tottering and needed a push; behind it were the developed conditions
for the new order, an order fully justiﬁed by nature, reason and history.

More recently, however, this has changed. The violence has a certain

charm of its own, the joy of the knife. It proves decision or commitment.
The new order is not waiting, but has to be imposed by the will of man;
it is supported by nothing but the will. Will has become the key word,
both Right and Left. In the past it was, to be sure, thought that will is
necessary but secondary—that the cause came ﬁrst. Nietzsche
formulated the new way most provocatively when he said, “A good war
makes sacred every cause.” The causes have no status; they are values. It
is the positing that is essential. The transformation of violence from a
means to at least a kind of end helps to show the difference, and the
link, between Marxism and Fascism. Georges Sorel, the author of
Reﬂections on Violence, was a man of the Left who inﬂuenced
Mussolini. The crucial thought goes back to Nietzsche by way of
Bergson: If creativity presupposes chaos—hence strife and overcoming

—and man is now creating an order of peace in which there is no strife,
is successfully rationalizing the world, the conditions for creativity, i.e.,
humanity, will be destroyed. Therefore chaos must be willed, as against
the peace and order of socialism. Marx himself recognized that man’s
historical greatness and progress came from contradictions he had to
struggle to overcome. If, as Marx promises, there are to be no more
contradictions after the revolution, will there be man? Older
revolutionaries were willing peace, prosperity, harmony and reason, i.e.,
the last man. The newer breed wills chaos. Hardly anyone swallowed
what Nietzsche prescribed whole, but the argument was infectious. It
surely was impressive to Italian and German intellectuals in whose eyes
the Fascist and Nazi “movements” found favor. Self-assertion, not justice
or a clear view of the future, was the crucial element.

now silly expression got its force), concern or what have you become the
new virtues. The new revolutionary charm became evident in the U.S.
in the sixties, much to the distaste of old Marxists. There is also
something of this in the current sympathy for terrorists, because “they
care.” I have seen young people, and older people too, who are good
democratic liberals, lovers of peace and gentleness, struck dumb with
admiration for individuals threatening or using the most terrible
violence for the slightest and tawdriest reasons. They have a sneaking
suspicion that they are face to face with men of real commitment, which
they themselves lack. And commitment, not truth, is believed to be what
counts. Trotsky’s and Mao’s correction of Marx in calling for
“permanent revolution” takes account of this thirst for the act of
revolution, and its appeal lies therein. The radical students of the sixties
called themselves “the movement,” unaware that this was also the
language used by young Nazis in the thirties and was the name of a
Nazi journal, Die Bewegung. Movement takes the place of progress,
which has a deﬁnite direction, a good direction, and is a force that
controls men. Progress was what the old revolutions were evidence of.
Movement has none of this naive, moralistic nonsense in it. Motion
rather than ﬁxity is our condition—but motion without any content or
goal not imposed on it by man’s will. Revolution in our times is a
mixture of what it was earlier thought to be and what André Gide called
a gratuitous act, represented in one of his novels by the unprovoked and
unmotivated murder of a stranger on a train.

The continuing effort of the mutant breed of Marxists has been to

derationalize Marx and turn Nietzsche into a leftist. Nietzsche’s colossal
political failure is attested to by the facts that the Right, which was his
only hope that his teaching would have its proper effect, has utterly
disappeared, and he himself was tainted in its ugly last gasp, while today
virtually every Nietzschean, as well as Heideggerian, is a leftist. Georg
Lukacs, the most prominent Marxist intellectual of this century, set the
ball rolling. As a young man in Germany, he frequented the circle of
Stefan George as well as that of Max Weber and was aware of the power
of the things being discussed there about history and culture. This
affected his later work and made him take a look back toward the much
richer Hegel, who, for older Marxists, had been simply superseded by
Marx.6

The mature Marx had almost nothing to say about art, music,

literature or education, or about what the life of man would be when
the yoke of oppression was lifted. His early “humanistic” writings were
looked to by some for the inspiration lacking in the later ones, but they
turned out to be thin and derivative stuff. Since the Nietzscheans spoke
so marvelously well about all these things, why not just appropriate what
they said? So they took over “the last man,” whom they identiﬁed with
Marx’s bourgeois, and “the superman,” whom they identiﬁed with the
victorious proletarian after the revolution. The diminution of man and
the impoverishment of his spiritual life as inimitably described by
Nietzsche strengthened Marx’s position, if one just believed that
somehow or other capitalism was the cause of “the last man” and that,
with capitalism removed, new energies would be released. Radical
egalitarism is the cure for the evils of egalitarianism so marvelously
portrayed by Nietzsche.

To take another example: Freud talked about interesting things not

found anywhere in Marx. The whole psychology of the unconscious was
completely alien to Marx, as was its inner motor, eros. None of this
could be incorporated directly into Marx. But if Freud’s interpretation of
the cause of neuroses and his treatment of the maladjusted could itself
be interpreted as bourgeois errors that serve enslavement to the capitalist
control of the means of production, then Marx would move in on the
Freudian scene. What Freud said were permanent contradictions
between human nature and society could be set in motion dialectically,
and in a socialist society there would be no need for the repression that

causes neuroses. So Freud was neatly enrolled in the Marxist legions,
adding to the charm of economics that of eros, and thereby providing a
solution to the problem of what men are going to do after the revolution
—a problem left unsolved by Marx. This is what we ﬁnd in Marcuse
and many others, who simply do not talk about the difﬁculty posed by
the contradiction between Marx’s fundamental principles and those of
Freud. Two powerful systems are served up in a single package. Freud is
the really meaty part of the concoction. Marx provides a generalized
assurance that capitalism is indeed at fault and that the problems can be
solved by more equality and more freedom, that the liberated people
will possess all the virtues.

“The last man” interpretation of the bourgeois is reinforced by a

certain ambiguity in the meaning of the word “bourgeois.” Bourgeois is
associated in the popular consciousness, especially in America, with
Marx. But there is also the bourgeois as the enemy of the artists. The
capitalist and the philistine bourgeois are supposed to be the same, but
Marx presents only the economic side, assuming, without adequate
warrant, that it can account for both the moral and esthetic deformities
of the bourgeois described by the artists, and for the artists themselves.
Doubt that this treatment of the bourgeois and the artist really works is
one of the prime motives of those attracted to Nietzsche, whose central
theme is the artist. As I have said many times and in many ways, most of
the great European novelists and poets of the last two hundred years
were men of the Right; and Nietzsche is in that respect merely their
complement. For them the problem was in one way or another equality,
which has no place for genius. Thus they are the exact opposite of Marx.
But somehow he who says he hates the bourgeoisie can be seen to be a
friend of the Left. Therefore when the Left got the idea of embracing
Nietzsche, it got, along with him, all the authority of the nineteenth-
and twentieth-century literary tradition. Goethe and Flaubert and Yeats
hated the bourgeosie—so Marx was right: these writers simply had not
recognized that the bourgeosie could be overcome by the proletariat.
And Nietzsche, taken from the correct angle, can be said to be a
proponent of the Revolution. When one reads the early Partisan Review,
edited entirely by leftists, one sees its unlimited enthusiasm for Joyce
and Proust, whom they were introducing to this country, apparently in
the opinion that they represented the art of the socialist future, although
these artists thought the future of art lay in the opposite direction.

The later Marxists in Germany were haunted by the idea of culture,

repelled by the vulgarity of the bourgeoisie, and perhaps wondering
whether they could still write out a blank check to culture in the
socialist future. They wanted to preserve past greatness, of which they
were much more conscious than their predecessors. Their Marxism had
really shrunk back within the conﬁnes of the traditional hatred of the
bourgeois, plus a vague hope that the proletariat would bring about
cultural renewal or refreshment. One can easily see this in Adorno. But
it is also easy to see that in Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, too, the bourgeois
is the real concern. The working-class Marxists still thought about
surplus value and other such authentic Marxist concerns. The
intellectuals were obsessed by culture and, as Leszek Kolakowski has so
aptly pointed out, found themselves without a proletariat. This is why
the students of the sixties were so welcome to many of them. But so
were they to Heidegger. They reminded him of something.

It is well to point out, in addition, that as prosperity increased, the

poor began to become embourgeoisé. Instead of an increase in class
consciousness and strife, there was a decrease. One could foresee a time,
at least in the developed countries, when everybody would be a
bourgeois. So another prop was knocked out from under Marxism. The
issue is not really rich and poor but vulgarity. Marxists were coming
perilously close to the notion that egalitarian man as such is bourgeois,
and that they must join him or become culture snobs. Only an
absolutely unsubstantiated dogma that the bourgeois worker is just an
illness of our economic system and a product of false consciousness
keeps them from saying, as did Tocqueville, that this is the nature of
democracy and that you must accept it or rebel against it. Any such
rebellion would not be Marx’s revolution. One might be tempted to
assert that these advanced Marxists are just too cultured for egalitarian
society. They only avoid that recognition by calling it bourgeois.

In general, sophisticated Marxism became cultural criticism of life in

the Western democracies. For obvious reasons it generally stayed away
from serious discussion of the Soviet Union. Some of that criticism was
profound, some of it superﬁcial and petulant. But none of it came from
Marx or a Marxist perspective. It was, and is, Nietzschean, variations on
our way of life as that of “the last man.” If we look again at that
psychology so inﬂuential in America of which I spoke in the beginning
of this chapter, we are now in a position to see that tradition-directed,

other-directed and inner-directed are just slight modiﬁcations of Weber’s
three kinds of legitimacy, with other-directed (read bourgeois) derived
from economic or bureaucratic rationality guided by the demands of the
market or public opinion, and inner-directed identical to charismatic, to
the value-giving self. Weber’s prophet is replaced by the socialist,
egalitarian individual. There is not a single element of Marx in any of
this, other than the absolutely unsubstantiated assertion that the socialist
is the self-legislator. Discussion of the inner-directed man is empty.
There are no examples that can be pointed to. Weber at least provided
some examples, even though his deﬁnition may have been problematic.
One wonders whether Weber’s contention that the value giver is an
aristocrat of the spirit is less plausible than that of those who say that just
anyone is, if he has the right therapist, or if a socialist society is
constructed for him. This egalitarian transformation of Weber permitted
anyone who is not to the left to be diagnosed as mentally ill. Left critics
of psychoanalysis called it a tool of bourgeois conformism; one wonders,
however, whether the critics are not manipulators of psychological
therapy in the service of Left conformism. Adorno’s meretricious
fabrication of the authoritarian and democratic personality types has
exactly the same sources as the inner-directed-other-directed typology,
and the same sinister implications.

So Nietzsche came to America. His conversion to the Left was easily

accepted here as genuine, because Americans cannot believe that any
really intelligent and good person does not at bottom share the Will
Rogers Weltanschauung, “I never met a man I didn’t like.” Nietzsche’s
naturalization was accomplished in many waves: some of us went to
Europe to ﬁnd him; he came with the emigrès; and most recently
professors of comparative literature have gotten heavily into the import
business, getting their goods from Paris, where deconstructing Nietzsche
and Heidegger and reconstructing them on the Left has been the
principal philosophical métier since the Liberation. From this last
source Heidegger and Neitzsche now come under their own names,
treading on the red carpet rolled out for them by their earlier envoys.
Academic 
psychology, 
sociology, 
comparative 
literature 
and

anthropology have been dominated by them for a long time. But their
passage from the academy to the marketplace is the real story. A
language developed to explain to knowers how bad we are has been
adopted by us to declare to the world how interesting we are. Somehow

the goods got damaged in transit. Marcuse began in Germany in the
twenties by being something of a serious Hegel scholar. He ended up
here writing trashy culture criticism with a heavy sex interest in One
Dimensional Man and other well-known books. In the Soviet Union,
instead of the philosopher-king they got the ideologist tyrant; in the
United States the culture critic became the voice of Woodstock.

6 Anyone wishing to see this now popular mixture of Marx with Hegel and Nietzsche-Heidegger
in a philosophically serious expression must turn to the works of Alexandre Kojève, the most
intelligent Marxist of the twentieth century. He was forced to treat Marx as a mere intellectual
who disseminated with a few changes the thought of the real philosopher, Hegel. Moreover,
Kojève faced “the last man” question squarely: Marxists, i.e., rationalists, must live with “the last
man.” He is the result of rational history, Kojève agrees with Nietzsche. Only mystiﬁers of one
kind or another, promoting wild, irrational negativity, could, he thought, avoid this conclusion.
Merleau-Ponty and Sartre were strongly inﬂuenced by him and took his hint.

OUR IGNORANCE

In reﬂecting on the language about which I have just written, the
thought behind it and the way it has been received in America, I am
reminded of one of my teachers, who wrote a Ten Commandments for
Americans that began, “I am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of
the house of the European tyrants into my own land, America: Relax!”
As we have seen, these words we have half digested are the distillations
of great questions that must be faced if one is to live a serious life:
reason-revelation, freedom-necessity, democracy-aristocracy, good-evil,
body-soul, self-other, city-man, eternity-time, being-nothing. Our
condition of doubt makes us aware of alternatives but has not until
recently given us the means to resolve our doubt about the primacy of
any of the alternatives. A serious life means being fully aware of the
alternatives, thinking about them with all the intensity one brings to
bear on life-and-death questions, in full recognition that every choice is
a great risk with necessary consequences that are hard to bear. That is
what tragic literature is about. It articulates all the noble things men
want and perhaps need and shows how unbearable it is when it appears
that they cannot coexist harmoniously. One need only remember what
the choice between believing in God or rejecting Him used to entail for
those who faced it. Or, to use a lesser but equally relevant example,
think of Tocqueville, one of the rarest ﬂowers of the old French
aristocracy, choosing equality over the splendor of aristocracy because
he believed it to be juster, even though it would never be salubrious for
a Pascal, a man who consumed himself in the contemplation of God’s
existence, and even though the absence of such intransigent
confrontation with the grounds of all things would impoverish the life of
man and diminish his seriousness. These are real choices, possible only
for one who faces real questions.

We, on the other hand, have taken these words, which point toward a

rich lode of serious questions, and treated them as though they were
answers, in order to avoid confronting them ourselves. They are not
Sphinxlike riddles to which we must play the daring Oedipus, but facts
behind which we need not go and which structure the world of concern
to us. What has existentialism done to being-nothing for us? Or value to

good-evil; history to eternity-time; creativity to freedom-necessity; the
sacred to reason-revelation? The old tragic conﬂicts reappear newly
labeled as assurances: “I’m OK, you’re OK.” Choice is all the rage these
days, but it does not mean what it used to mean. In a free society where
people are free—responsible—who can consistently not be “pro-
choice”? However, when the word still had some shape and consistency,
a difﬁcult choice meant to accept difﬁcult consequences in the form of
suffering, disapproval of others, ostracism, punishment and guilt.
Without this, choice was believed to have no signiﬁcance. Accepting the
consequences for afﬁrming what really counts is what gives Antigone
her nobility; unwillingness to do so is what makes her sister Ismene less
admirable. Now, when we speak of the right to choice, we mean that
there are no necessary consequences, that disapproval is only prejudice
and guilt only a neurosis. Political activism and psychiatry can handle it.
In this optic Hester Prynne and Anna Karenina are not ennobling
exemplars of the intractability of human problems and the signiﬁcance
of choice, but victims whose sufferings are no longer necessary in our
enlightened age of heightened consciousness. America has no-fault
automobile accidents, no-fault divorces, and it is moving with the aid of
modern philosophy toward no-fault choices.

Conﬂict is the evil we most want to avoid, among nations, among

individuals and within ourselves. Nietzsche sought with his value
philosophy to restore the harsh conﬂicts for which men were willing to
die, to restore the tragic sense of life, at a moment when nature had
been domesticated and men become tame. That value philosophy was
used in America for exactly the opposite purpose—to promote conﬂict-
resolution, bargaining, harmony. If it is only a difference of values, then
conciliation is possible. We must respect values, but they must not get in
the way of peace.7 Thus Nietzsche contributed to what he was trying to
cure. Conﬂict, the condition of creativity for Nietzsche, is for us a cry
for therapy. I keep thinking of my Atlanta taxi driver and his Gestalt
therapy. Kant argued that men are equal in dignity because of their
capacity for moral choice. It is the business of society to provide the
conditions for such choice and esteem for those who achieve it. With
the intermediary of value relativism, we have been able to simplify the
formula to: Men are equal in dignity. Our business is to distribute
esteem equally. Rawls’s A Theory of Justice is the instruction manual for
such distribution. Kant’s theory of justice makes it possible to

understand Anna Karenina as a signiﬁcant expression of our situation;
Rawls’s does the same for Fear of Flying.

the word “dialectic”—in our sense, the Marxist sense—for, beginning in
opposites it ends in synthesis, all charms and temptations united in
harmony. In philosophy and morals the hardest and most essential rule
is “You can’t eat your cake and have it too,” but dialectic overcomes this
rule. Socratic dialectic takes place in speech and, although drawn
forward by the search for synthesis, always culminates in doubt.
Socrates’ last word was that he knew that he knew nothing. Marx’s
dialectic takes place in deed and culminates in the classless society,
which also puts an end to theoretical conﬂicts, now known as ideologies.
Historical dialectic provides an absolute ground and happy resolution
for our relative life-styles. Marx’s formula that “Mankind never sets
problems for itself which it cannot solve” suits one side of our national
temper. Roosevelt said much the same thing when he announced, “We
have nothing to fear but fear itself.” This optimism is a national strength
and is connected with our original project of mastering of nature. But
that project itself is not unproblematic and makes sense only when kept
within limits. One of these is the sanctity of human nature. It must not
be mastered. Roosevelt’s dictum is nonsense when blown up into cosmic
proportions. Human nature must not be altered in order to have a
problem-free world. Man is not just a problem-solving being, as
behaviorists would wish us to believe, but a problem-recognizing and -
accepting being.

Marx’s appeal does, nonetheless, touch us close to home as the

fulﬁllment of what we set out to do—solve problems that God and
nature had previously seemed to make insoluble, and earlier men had
made a virtue of living with. Man has always had to come to terms with
God, love and death. They made it impossible to be perfectly at home
on earth. But America is coming to terms with them in new ways. God
was slowly executed here; it took two hundred years, but local
theologians tell us He is now dead. His place has been taken by the
sacred. Love was put to death by psychologists. Its place has been taken
by sex and meaningful relationships. That has taken only about seventy-
ﬁve years. It should not be surprising that a new science, thanatology, or
death with dignity, is on the way to putting death to death. Coming to
terms with the terror of death, Socrates’ long and arduous education,

learning how to die, will no longer be necessary. For death isn’t what it
used to be. What will take its place is not yet clear. Engels had a
divination of what is needed when he said that the classless society
would last, if not forever, a very long time. This reminds us of Dottore
Dulcamare in The Elixir of Love, who says that he is known throughout
the whole universe—and elsewhere. All one has to do is forget about
eternity or blur the distinction between it and temporality; then the most
intractable of man’s problems will have been resolved. On Sunday
mornings educated men used to be harangued about death and eternity,
made to give them a bit of attention. This is not a danger to be run in
doing battle with the Sunday New York Times. Forgetting, in a variety of
subtle forms, is one of our primary modes of problem-solving. We are
learning to “feel comfortable” with God, love and even death.

inﬂuence of Thomas Mann’s Death in Venice on American
consciousness. The story was enormously popular with generations of
university students, for it seemed to express the mysteries and sufferings
of sophisticated Europeans. It ﬁt in with our preoccupation of Freud
and with the artist; its homosexual theme attracted curiosity, and much
more than curiosity in some, at a time when imagination had little to
feed on so far as forbidden themes were concerned. It was a little like a
compendium of the best that was being said around the turn of the
century. In Death in Venice, with what I believe to be a rather heavy
Freudian hand, Mann analyzes the favorite subject and hero of poets
and novelists since the invention of culture—the artist, that is, himself.
The setting and the action of the story suggest the decline of the West;
and the decay and demise of its hero, Aschenbach, teach the failure of
sublimation, the shakiness and hollowness of his cultural superstructure.
Underlying it all are hidden drives, primal, untamed, which are the real
motives of his higher endeavor. Awareness of this undermines his life
work without providing any acceptable alternatives. Much of this is a
gloss on Mann’s famous statement in Tonio Kröger that “the artist is a
bourgeois with a guilty conscience,” which I take to mean that he was
experiencing all the post-romantic doubts about the artist’s ground or his
access to the sublime, that he thought the reality is the bourgeois, but
that the artist’s troubled conscience leads him somewhere out above,
from the point of view of morals, and somewhere down below, from the
point of view of motives. Aschenbach is a writer, an heir to the German

tradition, but clearly not the spiritual aristocrat Goethe was. His self-
possession is based on lack of self-knowledge. In Venice he touches the
roots, ﬁnds out what he really wants; but there is nothing noble or even
tolerable he can do with his awareness. He withers away horribly, ﬁnally
dying of the plague afﬂicting that beautiful but decadent city. The
Freudian view of sublimation, as opposed to the Nietzschean, is that
there is a ﬁxed goal of sexuality, a natural reality toward which it is
pointed. Accordingly, civilized behavior rests on that foundation, is a
secondary satisfaction and, hence, really not choiceworthy if the primary
satisfaction were available. Freud’s account of sexuality cannot help
making the careful observer regret civilization and long for direct sexual
satisfaction. Nietzsche, on the other hand, thought that writing a poem
could be as primary an erotic act as sexual intercourse. There is no ﬁxed
nature, just different levels of spirituality. From this point of view,
Aschenbach represents both romanticism in its longing for lost nature
and scientism in its bleak characterization of nature, with the addition of
post-Nietzschean pathos. But Death in Venice does deal with the theme
common to Freud and Nietzsche—the relation of sexual sublimation to
culture. The coming to awareness of the infrastructure of culture is
deadly to culture, and Mann is depicting the crisis of a civilization.
Sublimation has lost its creative or molding power, and now there is
desiccated culture and besmirched nature.

But I do not think this was how it was received by Americans. They

were titillated and really took it as an early manifesto of the sexual-
liberation movement. Even the most distinguished talents, or especially
the most distinguished talents, suffer from these obscure longings
repressed by society. There is nothing so bad about them; and people
should not be intimidated by public opinion, should learn to accept
themselves. They have nothing to fear but fear itself. In short,
Aschenbach is a man aching to “come out of the closet.” There may
have been a bit of this in Mann, the need to be open about repressed
desires, which, because of the climate of his time, had to come out in
tragic garb, lacerating themselves, weeping and wailing. Surely Gide’s
Nietzscheanism was motivated largely by this. In order to be sexually
liberated, so Gide seems to think, we must be supermen, beyond good
and evil. He latches on to Nietzsche’s immoralism for the sake of
leveling bourgeois sexual morals, using a cannon to kill a gnat.
Nietzsche would have had nothing but contempt for this. The man who

said all greatness requires “semen in the blood” would not have
sympathized with men obsessed by sexual repression, who could not
make something sublime out of their eroticism, who longed for
“natural” satisfaction and public approval to boot. To Nietzsche, Gide
would have appeared to be a bourgeois in nihilistic drag. To the extent
that such self-expression might have been Mann’s intention, it would
have been the sign of his own decadence, his creative impotence and
desire to escape responsibility in aimless creature, as opposed to creator,
pleasures.

The sexual interpretations of art and religion so powerfully made by

Nietzsche, and less powerfully but more popularly made by Freud, had
a corrupting effect on Americans. They noticed the sublime less than
the sex in sexual sublimation. What in Nietzsche was intended to lead
to the heights was used here to debunk the heights in favor of present
desire. Any explanation of the higher in terms of the lower has that
tendency, especially in a democracy, where there is envy of what makes
special claims, and the good is supposed to be accessible to all. And this
is one of the deep reasons why Freud found such an immediate
audience in America. For all of the Continental sturm und drang, he
believed in nature, and nature as Locke taught it, animal nature. He just
added sex to work to compose his formula for healthy living—“love and
work”—for he really could not explain love. This is what we were raised
to believe. It accords with science rather than relying, as does Nietzsche,
on poetic vapors. There is a solid ground, one that appeals to our native
empiricism, in his interpretation of what eros really wants. Moreover,
science rather than poetry is our preferred means of talking about the
obscene. All this, plus the promise of some kind of satisfaction of our
desires and relief from our miseries, made Freud a winner from the
outset, the most accessible of all the great Continentals. He provided
the license for the centrality of sex in public life, which is so
characteristic of our day. He ultimately seemed too moralistic, not open
enough. But all one had to do was imagine new social structures that
demanded less repression for their functioning. This was where Marx
was useful. Or one could simply forget about the problems concerning
the relation between eros and culture, or else posit a natural harmony
between the two. Freud, riding the crest of a wave of German
philosophy, enabled Americans to think the satisfaction of their sexual

desires was the most important element of happiness. He provided
rationalization for instinct, although this was surely not his intention.

Sex immigrated to the United States with the special status given

those who make scientiﬁc and literary contributions to our culture. But
when it got here, it behaved just like everything else American. Gone
was the plaintive tone, the poetry, the justiﬁcation based on civilization’s
dependence on sublimation. Just as we had cut away the camouﬂage
disguising economic needs—such as the Parthenon and Chartres—in
order to concentrate efﬁciently on those needs themselves, so we
demystiﬁed sexual desires, seeing them for what they really are, in order
to satisfy them more efﬁciently. This brought into the Lockean world
the second focus of human nature, the one concentrated on by
Rousseau and those he inﬂuenced. The basic rights are “life, liberty, and
the pursuit of property and sex.” “Give us your poor, your sexually
starved….” Freud made it possible to consider sexual repression a
medical complaint, and therefore endowed it with the prestige
automatically enjoyed by anything having to do with health in a nation
devoted to self-preservation. There is a tendency to neglect Rousseau’s
reminder that one does not die from not satisfying this hunger, and that
even great seducers’ lusts can be calmed by the certainty of the death
penalty. Thus we demystify economy and sexuality, satisfying their
primary demands, taking away what our philosophy tells us is their
creative impulse, and then we complain we have no culture. We can
always go to the opera between ofﬁce and bed. In the Soviet Union they
are dependent on operas from the bad old days, because tyranny
prevents artistic expression; we are dependent on the same operas,
because the thirsts that produced artistic need have been slaked. I
cannot forget the Amherst freshman who asked in naive and good-
natured bewilderment, “Should we go back to sublimation?” To the
sugar-free diet substitute, as it were. This is what happened in America
to the sublime, in all of the subtle meanings given to it from Rousseau
and Kant to Nietzsche and Freud. I was charmed by the lad’s candor but
could not regard him as a serious candidate for culture. Because we
have come to take the unnecessary to be necessary, we have lost all
sense of necessity, either natural or cultural.

The crucial step was taken, however, when sex as life-style came on

the scene. Up until then there was a certain rough-and-ready natural set
of guidelines for sex. In the old America it was taken for granted that sex

had a teleology—reproduction—and was treated as a means to this end.
Everything not conducive to this is useless and even dangerous, to be
forgotten or controlled by law, disapproval, conscience and, yes, reason.
Freud had the effect of shaking sex loose from this deﬁnite connection.
It is a force without an end, capable of serving many functions; and its
wild, diffuse energies must be given some form if a person is to be
happy. But Freud’s real naturalism, underlying the explosive
indeterminateness that he borrowed from Nietzsche, and the
imperatives of health and the integrated personality provided limitations
and a structure for legitimate sexual expression. There is no place in
Freud for the satisfaction of the kinds of desire to which Mann gives
voice in Death in Venice. They are explained and cured by Freud but
not accepted on their own terms. In Mann they are somehow
premonitory and like cries of the damned plunging into nothingness.
Such desires search for signiﬁcance—perhaps this is the case with
everything erotic—but nothing in the world can give it to them. These
desires are certainly not satisﬁed with the transfer of their cases from the
tribunal of the judge and the priest to that of the doctor, or with being
explained away. People can readily accept reductionism in everything
except what most concerns them. Neither bourgeois society nor natural
science has a place for the nonreproductive aspect of sex. With the
slackening of bourgeois austerity and the concomitant emancipation of
the harmless pleasures, a certain tolerance of harmless sex came into
fashion. But this was not enough, because nobody really wants his
dearest desires to be put in the same category as itching and scratching.

In America, especially, there is always a need for moral justiﬁcation.

Life-style—an expression that came out of the same school of thought as
sublimation and was actually understood to be the product of
sublimation, but had never been associated with it in America because
of the division of labor that had Freud specializing in sublimation and
Weber in life-style—turned out to be a godsend. “Life-style” justiﬁes any
way of life, as does “value” any opinion. It does away with the natural
structure of the world, which is only raw material for the stylist’s artistic
hand. The very expression makes all moralisms and naturalisms stop
short at the limit of the sacred ground, aware of their limits and
respectful of creativity. Moreover, with our curious mixture of traditions,
life-styles are accorded rights, so defense of them is a moral cause,
justifying the sweet passions of indignation at the violators of human

rights, against whom these tastes, before they became life-styles, were so
politically and psychologically defenseless. Now they can call upon all
the lovers of human rights throughout the world to join in their defense,
for the threat to any group’s rights is a threat to them all. Sadomasochists
and Solidarity are bound together in the common cause of human
rights, their fates depending on the success of the crusade in their favor.
Sex is no longer an activity but a cause. In the past there was a
respectable place for marginality, bohemia. But it had to justify its
unorthodox practices by its intellectual and artistic achievement. Life-
style is so much freer, easier, more authentic and democratic. No
attention has to be paid to content.

Life-style was ﬁrst popularized here to describe and make acceptable

the lives of people who do attractive things that are frowned upon by
society. It was identical to counterculture. Two great expressions in the
American usage, draped in the authority lent by their philosophic
genealogy, provided moral warrant for people to live exactly as they
please. Counterculture, of course, enjoyed the dignity attaching to
culture, and was intended as a reproach to the bourgeois excuse for a
culture we see around us. What actually goes on in a counterculture or
a life-style—whether it is ennobling or debasing—makes no difference.
No one is forced to think through his practices. It is impossible to do so.
Whatever you are, whoever you are, is the good. All this is testimony to
the amazing power, about which Tocqueville speaks, of abstractions in a
democratic society. The mere words change everything. It is also a
commentary on our moralism. What begins in a search if not precisely
for selﬁsh pleasure—historians of the future will not look back on us as a
race of hedonists who knew how to “enjoy,” in spite of all of our talk
about it—then at least for avoidance of and release from suffering or
distress, transmogriﬁed into a life-style and a right, becomes the ground
of moral superiority. The comfortable, unconstrained life is morality.

One can see this in so many domains across the whole political

spectrum. Self-serving is expressed as, and really believed to be,
disinterested principle. When one looks at the earnest, middle-class
proponents of birth control, abortion and easy divorce—with their social
concern, their humorless self-conﬁdence and masses of statistics—one
cannot help thinking that all this serves them very well. This is not to
deny the reality of the problems presented by too many children for the
poor, the terrible consequences of rapes and battered wives. However,

none of those problems really belongs to the middle classes, who are not
reproducing themselves, are rarely raped or battered, but who are the
best-rewarded beneﬁciaries of what they themselves propose. If one of
their proposals entailed a sacriﬁce of freedom or pleasure for them or
their class, they would be more morally plausible. As it is, all their
proposals contribute to their own capacity to choose, in the
contemporary sense of choice. Motives that could easily be so ﬂawed
should not be, but are, the basis for moral smugness. In this case, as in
so many others, making sexual relations easy becomes identical to
morality. I fear that the most self-righteous of Americans nowadays are
precisely those who have most to gain from what they preach. This is
made all the more distasteful when their weapons are constructed out of
philosophic teachings the intentions of which are the opposite of theirs.

on what has happened in America since such literature ﬁrst attracted
our attention, is his use of Plato. As Aschenbach becomes more and
more obsessed by the boy on the beach, quotations from the Phaedrus,
one of Plato’s dialogues on love, keep coming into his head, expressing
what he gradually and with honor recognizes is the character of his
attraction. Plato had been incorporated into the German tradition, and
the Phaedrus was probably one of the things Aschenbach was supposed
to have read as a schoolboy while learning Greek. But its content,
discourses on the love of a man for a boy, was not supposed to affect
him. The dialogue, like so much that was in the German education, was
another scrap of “culture,” of historical information, which had not
become a part of a vital, coherent whole. This is symptomatic of the
deadness of Aschenbach’s own cultural activity. Suddenly this scrap
erupts into meaning, pointing the way down into the abyss of repressed
desire. It is as a dream; and if you are a Freudian, you have keys for
unlocking the meanings of dreams. Raw, physically unacceptable facts,
inhabitants of the unconscious, express themselves in hidden ways,
gaining covert satisfaction that way. They fasten themselves on
consciously acceptable material, which then no longer really means
what it seems to mean. It now does and does not express the true
meaning. Plato’s respectable dialogue is the intermediary between
Aschenbach’s good conscience and his carnality. Plato found a way of
expressing and beautifying, of sublimating, perverse sexuality. So the
story presents it. There is no indication that Mann thought one could

learn much directly from Plato about eros. One could learn something
by applying Freud’s insights to Plato and seeing how desire ﬁnds
rationalizations for itself. Plato was vile body for scientiﬁc dissection.
Mann was too caught up by the novelty of the Freudian teaching to
doubt whether sublimation can really account for the psychic
phenomena it claims to explain. He was doctrinaire, or he was sure we
know better than did older thinkers. They are mythologists.

Freud and Plato agree about the pervasiveness of eroticism in

everything human. But there the similarity ends. Anyone who wished to
lay aside his assurance about the superiority of modern psychology
might ﬁnd in Plato a richer explanation of the diversity of erotic
expression, which so bafﬂes us and has driven us to our present
nonsense. He would see there a rewarding articulation of the
possibilities and impossibilities of the fulﬁllment of erotic desires. Plato
both enchants and disenchants eros, and we need both. At least in
Mann the tradition in which we could refresh ourselves is present, if not
exactly alive. With what he gives us we might embark on our own
journey and ﬁnd more interesting prey than is an Aschenbach. But in
America that slender thread, which was already almost stretched to its
limit in Mann, has broken. We have no more contact with the tradition.
Eros is an obsession, but there is no thought about it, and no possibility
of thought about it, because we now take what were only interpretations
of our souls to be facts about them. Eros gradually becomes meaningless
and low; and there is nothing good for man which is not informed by
thought and afﬁrmed by real choice, which means choice instructed by
deliberation. Saul Bellow has described his own intention as “the
rediscovery of the magic of the world under the debris of modern ideas.”
That gray net of abstraction, used to cover the world in order to simplify
and explain it in a way that is pleasing to us, has become the world in
our eyes. The only way to see the phenomena, rather than sterile
distillations of them, to experience them in their ambiguity again, would
be to have available alternate visions, a diversity of profound opinions.
But our ideas have made it difﬁcult to have such experiences in
practice, and impossible in theory. How does a youngster who sees
sublimation where Plato saw divination learn from Plato, let alone think
Plato can speak to him? Souls artiﬁcially constituted by a new kind of
education live in a world transformed by man’s artiﬁce and believe that
all values are relative and determined by the private economic or sexual

drives of those who hold them. How are they to recover the primary
natural experience?

the words on the imposing list in this section, a large part of the
population would be silenced. Technical discourse would continue; but
all that concerns right and wrong, happiness, the way we ought to live,
would become quite difﬁcult to express. These words are there where
thoughts should be, and their disappearance would reveal the void. The
exercise would be an excellent one, for it might start people thinking
about what they really believe, about what lies behind the formulas.
Would “living exactly as I please” be speakable as a substitute for “life-
style”? Would “my opinion” do for “values”? “My prejudices” for my
“ideology”? Could “rabble-rousing” or “simply divine” stand in for
“charisma”? Each of the standard words seems substantial and
respectable. They appear to justify one’s tastes and deeds, and human
beings need to have such justiﬁcation, no matter what they may say. We
have to have reasons for what we do. It is the sign of our humanity and
our possibility of community. I have never met a person who says, “I
believe what I believe; these are just my values.” There are always
arguments. Nazis had them; Communists have them. Thieves and
pimps have them. There may be some people who don’t feel they have
to make a case for themselves, but they must be either tramps or
philosophers.

However, these words are not reasons, nor were they intended to be

reasons. All to the contrary, they were meant to show that our deep
human need to know what we are doing and to be good cannot be
satisﬁed. By some miracle these very terms became our justiﬁcation:
nihilism as moralism. It is not the immorality of relativism that I ﬁnd
appalling. What is astounding and degrading is the dogmatism with
which we accept such relativism, and our easygoing lack of concern
about what that means for our lives. The one writer who does not appeal
at all to Americans—who offers nothing for our Marxist, Freudian,
feminist, deconstructionist, or structuralist critics to mangle, who
provides no poses, sentimentalities or bromides that appeal to our young
—is Louis-Ferdinand Céline, who best expresses how life looks to a man
facing up to what we believe or don’t believe. He is a far more talented
artist and penetrating observer than the much more popular Mann or
Camus. Robinson, the hero he admires in Journey to the End of the

Night, is an utterly selﬁsh liar, cheat, murderer for pay. Why does
Ferdinand admire him? Partly for his honesty, but mostly because he
allows himself to be shot and killed by his girlfriend rather than tell her
he loves her. He believes in something, which Ferdinand is unable to
do. American students are repelled, horriﬁed by this novel, and turn
away from it in disgust. If it could be force-fed to them, it might motivate
them to reconsider, to regard it as urgent to think through their
premises, to make their implicit nihilism explicit and examine it
seriously. As an image of our current intellectual condition, I keep being
reminded of the newsreel pictures of Frenchmen splashing happily in
the water at the seashore, enjoying the paid annual vacations legislated
by Léon Blum’s Popular Front government. It was 1936, the same year
Hitler was permitted to occupy the Rhineland. All our big causes
amount to that kind of vacation.

What is so paradoxical is that our language is the product of the

extraordinary thought and philosophical greatness at which this cursory
and superﬁcial survey has done nothing more than hint. There is a
lifetime and more of study here, which would turn our impoverishing
certitudes into humanizing doubts. To return to the reasons behind our
language and weigh them against the reasons for other language would
in itself liberate us. I have tried to provide the outline of an archeology
of our souls as they are. We are like ignorant shepherds living on a site
where great civilizations once ﬂourished. The shepherds play with the
fragments that pop up to the surface, having no notion of the beautiful
structures of which they were once a part. All that is necessary is a
careful excavation to provide them with life-enhancing models. We
need history, not to tell us what happened, or to explain the past, but to
make the past alive so that it can explain us and make a future possible.
This is our educational crisis and opportunity. Western rationalism has
culminated in a rejection of reason. Is this result necessary?

Many will say that my reports of the decisive inﬂuence of

Continental, particularly German, philosophy on us are false or
exaggerated and that, even if it were true that all this language comes
from the source to which I attribute it, language does not have such
effects. But the language is all around us. Its sources are also
undeniable, as is the thought that produced the language. We know how
the language was popularized. I need only think of my Amherst student
or my Atlanta taxi driver to be persuaded that the categories of the mind

determine the perceptions. If we can believe that Calvinist “worldviews”
made capitalism, we can also credit the possibility that the overpowering
visions of German philosophers are preparing the tyranny of the future.

I must reiterate that Rousseau, Kant, Hegel and Nietzsche are

thinkers of the very highest order. This is, in fact, precisely my point. We
must relearn what this means and also that there are others who belong
in the same rank.

7 Nietzsche said that distrusting one’s neighbor would be regarded as madness by last men, and
they would go voluntarily to the madhouse if they suffered from it. Think of the use of the word
“paranoid” today!

PART THREE

THE UNIVERSITY

FROM SOCRATES’ APOLOGY TO
HEIDEGGER’S REKTORATSREDE

When I was ﬁfteen years old I saw the University of Chicago for the ﬁrst
time and somehow sensed that I had discovered my life. I had never
before seen, or at least had not noticed, buildings that were evidently
dedicated to a higher purpose, not to necessity or utility, not merely to
shelter or manufacture or trade, but to something that might be an end
in itself. The Middle West was not known for the splendor of its houses
of worship or its monuments to political glory. There was little visible
reminiscence of the spiritual heights with which to solicit the
imagination or the admiration of young people. The longing for I knew
not what suddenly found a response in the world outside.

It was, surely, the fake Gothic buildings. In the course of my

education I have learned that they were fake, and that Gothic is not
really my taste. But they pointed toward a road of learning that leads to
the meeting place of the greats. There one ﬁnds examples of a sort not
likely to be seen around one, without which one could neither
recognize one’s own capacities nor know how wonderful it is to belong
to the species. This imitation of styles of faraway lands and ages showed
an awareness of lack of, and a respect for, the substance expressed by
those styles. These buildings were a bow to the contemplative life by a
nation addicted more than any other to the active life. The pseudo-
Gothic was much ridiculed, and nobody builds like that anymore. It is
not authentic, not an expression of what we are, so it was said. To me it
was and remains an expression of what we are. One wonders whether
the culture critics had as good an instinct about our spiritual needs as
the vulgar rich who paid for the buildings. This nation’s impulse is
toward the future, and tradition seems more of a shackle to it than an
inspiration. Reminiscences and warnings from the past are our only
monitor as we careen along our path. Those despised millionaires who
set up a university in the midst of a city that seems devoted only to the
American goals paid tribute to what they had neglected, whether it was
out of a sense of what they themselves had missed, or out of bad
conscience about what their lives were exclusively devoted to, or to
satisfy the vanity of having their names attached to the enterprise. (What

feeds a man’s vanity teaches as much about him as anything.) Education
was an American thing, and not only technical education.

For me the promise of these buildings was fully kept. From the

moment I became a student there, it seemed plausible to spend all my
time thinking about what I am, a theme that was interesting to me but
had never appeared a proper or possible subject of study. In high school
I had seen many of the older boys and girls go off to the state university
to become doctors, lawyers, social workers, teachers, the whole variety of
professions respectable in the little world in which I lived. The
university was part of growing up, but it was not looked forward to as a
transforming experience—nor was it so in fact. No one believed that
there were serious ends of which we had not heard, or that there was a
way of studying our ends and determining their rank order. In short,
philosophy was only a word, and literature a form of entertainment. Our
high schools and the atmosphere around them put us in this frame of
mind. But a great university presented another kind of atmosphere,
announcing that there are questions that ought to be addressed by
everyone but are not asked in ordinary life or expected to be answered
there. It provided an atmosphere of free inquiry, and therefore excluded
what is not conducive to or is inimical to such inquiry. It made a
distinction between what is important and not important. It protected
the tradition, not because tradition is tradition but because tradition
provides models of discussion on a uniquely high level. It contained
marvels and made possible friendships consisting in shared experiences
of those marvels. Most of all there was the presence of some
authentically great thinkers who gave living proof of the existence of the
theoretical life and whose motives could not easily be reduced to any of
the baser ones people delight in thinking universal. They had authority,
not based on power, money or family, but on natural gifts that properly
compel respect. The relations among them and between them and
students were the revelation of a community in which there is a true
common good. In a nation founded on reason, the university was the
temple of the regime, dedicated to the purest use of reason and evoking
the kind of reverence appropriate to an association of free and equal
human beings.

The years have taught me that much of this existed only in my

youthful and enthusiastic imagination, but not so much as one might
suppose. The institutions were much more ambiguous than I could

have suspected, and they have proved much frailer when caught in
contrary winds than it seemed they would be. But I did see real thinkers
who opened up new worlds for me. The substance of my being has been
informed by the books I learned to care for. They accompany me every
minute of every day of my life, making me see much more and be much
more than I could have seen or been if fortune had not put me into a
great university at one of its greatest moments. I have had teachers and
students such as dreams are made on. And most of all I have friends
with whom I can share thinking about what friendship is, with whom
there is a touching of souls and in whom works that common good of
which I have just spoken. All of this is, of course, mixed with the
weaknesses and uglinesses that life necessarily contains. None of it
cancels the low in man. But it informs even that low. None of my
disappointments with the university—which is after all only a vehicle for
contents in principle separable from it—has ever made me doubt that
the life it gave me was anything other than the best one available to me.
Never did I think that the university was properly ministerial to the
society around it. Rather I thought and think that society is ministerial to
the university, and I bless a society that tolerates and supports an eternal
childhood for some, a childhood whose playfulness can in turn be a
blessing to society. Falling in love with the idea of the university is not a
folly, for only by means of it is one able to see what can be. Without it,
all these wonderful results of the theoretical life collapse back into the
primal slime from which they cannot re-emerge. The facile economic
and psychological debunking of the theoretical life cannot do away with
its irreducible beauties. But such debunking can obscure them, and has.

Tocqueville on Democratic Intellectual Life

Tocqueville taught me the importance of the university to

democratic society. His noble book, Democracy in America, gave voice
to my inchoate sentiments. His portrait of the “Intellectual Life of the
Americans” is the mirror in which we can see ourselves. But, because
the broader perspective he brings is alien, we do not immediately
recognize ourselves. In my experience, students at ﬁrst are bored by
Tocqueville’s account of the American mind, but, if they are really made
to pay attention, they are ﬁnally riveted and alarmed by it. No one likes
to believe that what he can see is limited by circumstances, no matter

how easily he recognizes this fact in others. Tocqueville shows how a
democratic regime causes a particular intellectual bent which, if not
actively corrected, distorts the mind’s vision.

The great democratic danger, according to Tocqueville, is

enslavement to public opinion. The claim of democracy is that every
man decides for himself. The use of one’s natural faculties to determine
for oneself what is true and false and good and bad is the American
philosophic method. Democracy liberates from tradition, which in
other kinds of regimes determines the judgment. Prejudices of religion,
class and family are leveled, not only in principle but also in fact,
because none of their representatives has an intellectual authority.
Equal political right makes it impossible for church or aristocracy to
establish the bastions from which they can affect men’s opinions.
Churchmen, for whom divine revelation is the standard, aristocrats in
whom the reverences for antiquity are powerful, fathers who always tend
to prefer the rights of the ancestral to those of reason, are all displaced in
favor of the equal individual. Even if men seek authority, they cannot
ﬁnd it where they used to ﬁnd it in other regimes. Thus the external
impediments to the free exercise of reason have been removed in
democracy. Men are actually on their own in comparison to what they
were in other regimes and with respect to the usual sources of opinion.
This promotes a measure of reason. However, since very few people
school themselves in the use of reason beyond the calculation of self-
interest encouraged by the regime, they need help on a vast number of
issues—in fact, all issues, inasmuch as everything is opened up to fresh
and independent judgment—for the consideration of which they have
neither time nor capacity. Even the self-interest about which they
calculate—the ends—may become doubtful. Some kind of authority is
often necessary for most men and is necessary, at least sometimes, for all
men. In the absence of anything else to which to turn, the common
beliefs of most men are almost always what will determine judgment.
This is just where tradition used to be most valuable. Without being
seduced by its undemocratic and antirational mystique, tradition does
provide a counterpoise to and a repair from the merely current, and
contains the petriﬁed remains of old wisdom (along with much that is
not wisdom). The active presence of a tradition in a man’s soul gives
him a resource against the ephemeral, the kind of resource that only the
wise can ﬁnd simply within themselves. The paradoxical result of the

liberation of reason is greater reliance on public opinion for guidance, a
weakening of independence.

Altogether, reason is exposed at the center of the stage. Although

every man in democracy thinks himself individually the equal of every
other man, this makes it difﬁcult to resist the collectivity of equal men. If
all opinions are equal, then the majority of opinions, on the
psychological analogy of politics, should hold sway. It is very well to say
that each should follow his own opinion, but since consensus is required
for social and political life, accommodation is necessary. So, unless
there is some strong ground for opposition to majority opinion, it
inevitably prevails. This is the really dangerous form of the tyranny of
the majority, not the kind that actively persecutes minorities but the
kind that breaks the inner will to resist because there is no qualiﬁed
source of nonconforming principles and no sense of superior right. The
majority is all there is. What the majority decides is the only tribunal. It
is not so much its power that intimidates but its semblance of justice.
Tocqueville found that Americans talked very much about individual
right but that there was a real monotony of thought and that vigorous
independence of mind was rare. Even those who appear to be free-
thinkers really look to a constituency and expect one day to be part of a
majority. They are creatures of public opinion as much as are
conformists—actors of nonconformism in the theater of the conformists
who admire and applaud nonconformity of certain kinds, the kinds that
radicalize the already dominant opinions.

Reason’s exposedness in the rational regime is exacerbated by the

absence of class in the old sense, based on principles or convictions of
right. There is a general agreement about the most fundamental
political principles, and therefore doubts about them have no status. In
aristocracies there was also the party of the people, but in democracy
there is no aristocratic party. This means that there is no protection for
the opponents of the governing principles as well as no respectability for
them. There were in the past also parties representing ecclesiastical
interests against those of monarchs or aristocrats. These too provided a
place for dissenting opinions to ﬂourish. In the heat of our political
squabbles we tend to lose sight of the fact that our differences of
principle are very small, compared to those over which men used to
ﬁght. The only quarrel in our history that really involved fundamental
differences about fundamental principles was over slavery. But even the

proponents of slavery hardly dared assert that some human beings are
made by nature to serve other human beings, as did Aristotle; they had
to deny the humanity of the blacks. Besides, that question was really
already settled with the Declaration of Independence. Black slavery was
an aberration that had to be extinguished, not a permanent feature of
our national life. Not only slavery, but aristocracy, monarchy and
theocracy were laid to rest by the Declaration and the Constitution.
This was very good for our domestic tranquility, but not very
encouraging for theoretical doubts about triumphant equality. Not only
were the old questions of political theorizing held to have been
deﬁnitively answered, but the resources that nourished diversity
concerning them were removed. Democratic conscience and the simple
need to survive combine to suppress doubt. The kinds of questions that
Tocqueville put to America—the answers to which allowed him to
afﬁrm the justice of equality more reasonably and more positively than
most of us can do—came out of an experience that we cannot have: his
direct experience of an alternative regime and temper of soul—
aristocracy. If we cannot in any way have access to something like that
experience, our understanding of the range of human possibilities is
impoverished, and our capacity to assess our strengths and weaknesses is
diminished.

To make that range of possibilities accessible, to overcome the

regime’s tendency to discourage appreciation of important alternatives,
the university must come to the aid of unprotected and timid reason.
The university is the place where inquiry and philosophic openness
come into their own. It is intended to encourage the noninstrumental
use of reason for its own sake, to provide the atmosphere where the
moral and physical superiority of the dominant will not intimidate
philosophic doubt. And it preserves the treasury of great deeds, great
men and great thoughts required to nourish that doubt.

Freedom of the mind requires not only, or not even especially, the

absence of legal constraints but the presence of alternative thoughts.
The most successful tyranny is not the one that uses force to assure
uniformity but the one that removes the awareness of other possibilities,
that makes it seem inconceivable that other ways are viable, that
removes the sense that there is an outside. It is not feelings or
commitments that will render a man free, but thoughts, reasoned
thoughts. Feelings are largely formed and informed by convention. Real

differences come from difference in thought and fundamental principle.
Much in democracy conduces to the assault on awareness of difference.

In the ﬁrst place, as with all regimes, there is what might be called an

ofﬁcial interpretation of the past that makes it appear defective or just a
step on the way to the present regime. An example of this is the
interpretation of Rome and the Roman empire in Augustine’s City of
God. Rome is not forgotten, but it is remembered only through the lens
of victorious Christianity and therefore poses no challenge to it.

Second, sycophancy toward those who hold power is a fact in every

regime, and especially in a democracy, where, unlike tyranny, there is
an accepted principle of legitimacy that breaks the inner will to resist,
and where, as I have said, there is no legitimate power other than the
people to which a man can turn. Repugnance at the power of the
people, at the fact that the popular taste should rule in all arenas of life,
is very rare in a modern democracy. One of the intellectual charms of
Marxism is that it explains the injustice or philistinism of the people in
such a way as to exculpate the people, who are said to be manipulated
by corrupt elites. Thus a Marxist is able to criticize the present without
isolating himself from present and future. Almost no one wants to face
the possibility that “bourgeois vulgarity” might really be the nature of
the people, always and everywhere. Flattery of the people and incapacity
to resist public opinion are the democratic vices, particularly among
writers, artists, journalists and anyone else who is dependent on an
audience. Hostility and excessive contempt for the people is the vice of
aristocracies, and is hardly our problem. Aristocracies hate and fear
demagogues most of all, while democracies in their pure form hate and
fear “elitists” most of all, because they are unjust, i.e., they do not accept
the leading principle of justice in those regimes. Hence each regime
discounts those who are most likely to recognize and compensate for its
political and intellectual propensities, while it admires those who
encourage them. But, to repeat, this tendency is more acute in
democracy because of the absence of a nondemocratic class. In every
regime there is a people; there is not necessarily any other class.

Third, the democratic concentration on the useful, on the solution of

what are believed by the populace at large to be the most pressing
problems, makes theoretical distance seem not only useless but
immoral. When there is poverty, disease and war, who can claim the
right to idle in Epicurean gardens, asking questions that have already

been answered and keeping a distance where commitment is
demanded? The for-its-own-sake is alien to the modern democratic
spirit, particularly in matters intellectual. Whenever there is a crunch,
democratic men devoted to thought have a crisis of conscience, have to
ﬁnd a way to interpret their endeavors by the standard of utility, or
otherwise tend to abandon or deform them. This tendency is enhanced
by the fact that in egalitarian society practically nobody has a really
grand opinion of himself, or has been nurtured in a sense of special right
and a proud contempt for the merely necessary. Aristotle’s great-souled
man, who loves beautiful and useless things, is not a democratic type.
Such a man loves honor but despises it because he knows he deserves
better, whereas democratic vanity deﬁnes itself by the honors it seeks
and can get. The lover of beautiful and useless things is far from being a
philosopher—at least as far as is the lover of the useful, who is likely to
be more reasonable—but he has the advantage of despising many of the
same things the philosopher does and is likely to admire the philosopher
for his very uselessness, as an adornment. Great and unusual
undertakings are more natural to him than to the lover of the useful,
and he believes in and reveres motives that are denied existence by
utilitarian psychology. He can take for granted the things that are the
ends of most men’s strivings—money and status. He is free, and must
look for other fulﬁllments, unless he spends, as in the democratic view
he should do, his life helping others to get what he already has.
Knowing as fulﬁllment in itself rather than as task required for other
fulﬁllments is immediately intelligible to him. Finality as opposed to
instrumentality, and happiness as opposed to the pursuit of happiness,
appeal to the aristocratic temperament. All of this is salutary for the
intellectual life, and none of it is endemic to democracy.

Thus the mere announcement of the rule of reason does not create

the conditions for the full exercise of rationality, and in removing the
impediments to it some of its supports are also dismantled. Reason is
only one part of the soul’s economy and requires a balance of the other
parts in order to function properly. The issue is whether the passions are
its servitors, or whether it is the handmaiden of the passions. The latter
interpretation, which is Hobbes’s, plays an important role in the
development of modern democracy and is a depreciation as well as an
appreciation of reason. Older, more traditional orders that do not
encourage the free play of reason contain elements reminiscent of the

nobler, philosophic interpretation of reason and help to prevent its
degradation. Those elements are connected with the piety that prevails
in such orders. They convey a certain reverence for the higher, a respect
for the contemplative life, understood as contemplation of God and the
peak of devotion, and a cleaving to eternal beings that mitigates
absorption in the merely pressing or current. These are images of
philosophic magniﬁcence—which, it must be stressed, are distortions of
the original, and can be its bitterest enemies, but which preserve the
order of the cosmos and of the soul from which philosophy begins.
Tocqueville describes this marvelously well in his moving account of
Pascal, whom he evidently regards as the most perfect of men. The
possibility of such a human type, the theoretical type, is, according to
Tocqueville, most threatened in democracy, and it must be vigorously
defended if humanity is not to be grievously impoverished. Much of the
theoretical reﬂection that ﬂourishes in modern democracy could be
interpreted as egalitarian resentment against the higher type represented
by Pascal, denigrating it, deforming it and interpreting it out of
existence. Marxism and Freudianism reduce his motives to those all
men have. Historicism denies him access to eternity. Value theory makes
his reasoning irrelevant. If he were to appear, our eyes would be blind to
his superiority, and we would be spared the discomfort it would cause
us.

It is to prevent or cure this peculiar democratic blindness that the

university may be said to exist in a democracy, not for the sake of
establishing an aristocracy but for the sake of democracy and for the
sake of preserving the freedom of the mind—certainly one of the most
important freedoms—for some individuals within it. The successful
university is the proof that a society can be devoted to the well-being of
all, without stunting human potential or imprisoning the mind to the
goals of the regime. The deepest intellectual weakness of democracy is
its lack of taste or gift for the theoretical life. All our Nobel prizes and
the like do nothing to gainsay Tocqueville’s appraisal in this regard. The
issue is not whether we possess intelligence but whether we are adept at
reﬂection of the broadest and deepest kind. We need constant reminders
of our deﬁciency, now more than in the past. The great European
universities used to act as our intellectual conscience, but with their
decline, we are on our own. Nothing prevents us from thinking too well
of ourselves. It is necessary that there be an unpopular institution in our

midst that sets clarity above well-being or compassion, that resists our
powerful urges and temptations, that is free of all snobbism but has
standards. Those standards are in the ﬁrst place accessible to us from the
best of the past, although they must be such as to admit of the new, if it
actually meets those standards. If nothing new does meet them, it is not
a disaster. The ages of great spiritual fertility are rare and provide
nourishment for other less fertile ones. What would be a disaster would
be to lose the inspiration of those ages and have nothing to replace it
with. This would make it even more unlikely that the rarest talents
could ﬁnd expression among us. The Bible and Homer exercised their
inﬂuence for thousands of years, preserved in the mainstream or in
backwaters, hardly ever being surpassed in power, without becoming
irrelevant because they did not suit the temper of the times or the spirit
of a regime. They provided the way out as well as the model for reform.

The university’s task is thus well deﬁned, if not easy to carry out or

even keep in mind. It is, in the ﬁrst place, always to maintain the
permanent questions front and center. This it does primarily by
preserving—by keeping alive—the works of those who best addressed
these questions. In the Middle Ages, Aristotle was very much present in
the minds of the leading elements of society. He was used as an
authority almost on a level with the Church Fathers and was assimilated
to them. This was, of course, an abuse of Aristotle, who thought that
authority is the contrary of philosophy. His own teaching ought always
to be approached with questions and doubts, not faith. The essence of
philosophy is the abandonment of all authority in favor of individual
human reason. Nevertheless, Aristotle was there, his moderate and
sensible views had an effect on the world, and he could be a guide to
those who came to have philosophic doubt. In our time, freedom from
authority and the independence of reason are commonplaces. Aristotle,
however, instead of being properly used—now that we have the proper
disposition—has to all intents and purposes disappeared. We would
hardly be able to use Aristotle, as did Hegel, to grasp the character of
modernity. Instead we are more and more restricted to the narrow
experience of the here and now, with a consequent loss of perspective.
The disappearance of Aristotle has much less to do with his intrinsic
qualities than with a political distaste for him, joined with the lack of
intellectual discipline that results from a sense of self-sufﬁciency. Reason
has become a prejudice for us. Rousseau noted that in his time many

men were liberals who a century earlier would have been religious
fanatics. He concluded that they were not really reasonable, but, rather,
conformists. Reason transformed into prejudice is the worst form of
prejudice, because reason is the only instrument for liberation from
prejudice. The most important function of the university in an age of
reason is to protect reason from itself, by being the model of true
openness.

Hence, without having the answers, the university knows what

openness is and knows the questions. It also knows the regime within
which it lives, and the kinds of threats this regime poses to its activity. In
a democracy it risks less by opposing the emergent, the changing and
the ephemeral than by embracing them, because the society is already
open to them, without monitoring what it accepts or sufﬁciently
respecting the old. There the university risks less by having
intransigently high standards than by trying to be too inclusive, because
the society tends to blur standards in the name of equality. It also risks
less by concentrating on the heroic than by looking to the
commonplace, because the society levels. In an aristocracy the
university would probably have to go in a direction opposite to the one
taken in a democracy in order to liberate reason. But in an aristocracy
the university is a less important institution than in a democratic society,
because there are other centers for the life of the mind, whereas in a
democracy there is practically no other center, practically no way of life,
calling or profession, that requires or encourages or even permits
cultivation. This is increasingly the case in the late twentieth century.
The university as an institution must compensate for what individuals
lack in a democracy and must encourage its members to participate in
its spirit. As the repository of the regime’s own highest faculty and
principle, it must have a strong sense of its importance outside the
system of equal individuality. It must be contemptuous of public
opinion because it has within it the source of autonomy—the quest for
and even discovery of the truth according to nature. It must concentrate
on philosophy, theology, the literary classics, and on those scientists like
Newton, Descartes, and Leibniz who have the most comprehensive
scientiﬁc vision and a sense of the relation of what they do to the order
of the whole of things. These must help preserve what is most likely to
be neglected in a democracy. They are not dogmatisms but precisely the
opposite: what is necessary to ﬁght dogmatism. The university must

resist the temptation to try to do everything for society. The university is
only one interest among many and must always keep its eye on that
interest for fear of compromising it in the desire to be more useful, more
relevant, more popular.

The university’s task is illustrated by two tendencies of the

democratic mind to which Tocqueville points. One is abstractness.
Because there is no tradition and men need guidance, general theories
that are produced in a day and not properly grounded in experience, but
seem to explain things and are useful crutches for ﬁnding one’s way in a
complicated world, have currency. Marxism, Freudianism, economism,
behavioralism, etc., are examples of this tendency, and there are great
rewards for those who purvey them. The very universality of democracy
and the sameness of man presupposed by it encourage this tendency
and make the mind’s eye less sensitive to differences. All the terms
discussed in Part Two are evidences of this abstractness, simulacra of
thought and experience, hardly better than slogans, which take the
place of reﬂection. In aristocracies men take the experiences of their
nations as unique and superior and tend not to generalize, but rather to
forget the natural community of men and the universality of thought.
But they do really pay attention to their experiences, to the diversity of
phenomena that is homogenized by abstract “mind-sets.” This is another
thing the democratic university must learn from aristocracies. Our
temptation is to prefer the shiny new theory to the fully cognized
experience. Even our famous empiricism is more of a theory than an
openness to experience. Producing theories is not theorizing, or a sign of
the theoretical life. Concreteness, not abstractness, is the hallmark of
philosophy. All interesting generalization must proceed from the richest
awareness of what is to be explained, but the tendency to abstractness
leads to simplifying the phenomena in order more easily to deal with
them.

If, for example, one sees only gain as a motive in men’s actions, then

it is easy to explain them. One simply abstracts from what is really there.
After a while one notices nothing other than the postulated motives. To
the extent that men begin to believe in the theory, they no longer
believe that there are other motives in themselves. And when social
policy is based on such a theory, ﬁnally one succeeds in producing men
who ﬁt the theory. When this is occurring or has occurred, what is most
needed is the capacity to recover the original nature of man and his

motives, to see what does not ﬁt the theory. Hobbes’s mercenary account
of the virtues, which won out in psychology, needs to be contrasted with
Aristotle’s account, which preserves the independent nobility of the
virtues. Hobbes was thinking of Aristotle, which we never do, when he
developed his teaching. In order to restore what was really a debate, and
thereby restore the phenomenon man, one must read Aristotle and
Hobbes together and look at what each saw in man. Then one has the
material on which to reﬂect. For modern men who live in a world
transformed by abstractions and who have themselves been transformed
by abstractions, the only way to experience man again is by thinking
these abstractions through with the help of thinkers who did not share
them and who can lead us to experiences that are difﬁcult or impossible
to have without their help.

deterministic explanations of events to those that see them as results of
human deliberation and choice. Tocqueville explains this tendency as a
consequence of the impotence of the individual in egalitarian society.
Curiously, in democracy, the freest of societies, men turn out to be more
willing to accept doctrines that tell them that they are determined, that
is, not free. No one by himself seems to be able, or have the right, to
control events, which appear to be moved by impersonal forces. In
aristocracies, on the other hand, individuals born to high position have
too great a sense of their control over what they appear to command, are
sure of their freedom and despise everything that might seem to
determine them. Neither the aristocratic nor democratic sentiment
about the causes of events is simply adequate. In a democracy where
men already think they are weak, they are too open to theories that
teach that they are weak, which, by making individuals think that
controlling action is impossible, have the effect of weakening them
further. The antidote is again the classic, the heroic—Homer, Plutarch.
At the outset they appear hopelessly naive to us. But it is our
sophisticated naiveté that makes us think that. Churchill was inspired by
his ancestor Marlborough, and his conﬁdence in his own action is
inconceivable without the encouragement provided by that model.
Marlborough said that Shakespeare was essential to his education. And
Shakespeare learned a large part of what he knew about statesmanship
from Plutarch. This is the intellectual genealogy of modern heroes. The
democratic revolution of the mind extinguishes such old family lines

and replaces them with decision-making theory, in which there is no
category for statesmanship, let alone heroes.

need not concern itself with providing its students with experiences that
are available in democratic society. They will have them in any event. It
must provide them with experiences they cannot have there.
Tocqueville did not believe that the old writers were perfect, but he
believed that they could best make us aware of our imperfections, which
is what counts for us.

The universities never performed this function very well. Now they

have practically ceased trying.

The Relation Between Thought and Civil Society

Although universities go back very far, the university as we know it, in

its content and its aim, is the product of the Enlightenment. To
enlighten is to bring light where there had previously been darkness, to
replace opinion, i.e., superstition, by scientiﬁc knowledge of nature,
beginning from phenomena available to all men and ending in rational
demonstration possible for all men. All things must be investigated and
understood by reason, i.e., science or philosophy (the distinction
between the two is of recent origin, coming to currency only in the
nineteenth century). Knowledge of the nature of all things is
Enlightenment’s goal. The past was characterized not by ignorance but
by false opinions. Men always had opinions about everything, but those
opinions were without ground and indemonstrable. Yet they governed
the nations of men and were authoritative. Thus the problem of
Enlightenment is not merely discovery of the truth but the conﬂict
between the truth and the beliefs of men, which are incorporated into
the law. Enlightenment begins from the tension between what men are
compelled to believe by city and religion, on the one hand, and the
quest for scientiﬁc truth on the other. To think and speak doubts about,
let alone to propose substitutes for, the fundamental opinions was
forbidden by every regime previously known to man. Doing so was
thought to be, and in fact was, disloyal and impious.

Of course, the men of the Enlightenment were not the ﬁrst to

recognize this tension. It had existed and been known to exist since
science emerged in Greece sometime between the eighth and sixth

centuries B.C. Enlightenment thinkers were aware that there had been
surpassingly great philosophers, mathematicians, astronomers and
political scientists from that time on, who had suffered persecutions and
been compelled to live on the fringes of society. The innovation of the
Enlightenment was the attempt to reduce that tension and to alter the
philosopher’s relation to civil society. The learned society and the
university, the publicly respected and supported communities of
scientists—setting their own rules, pursuing knowledge according to the
inner dictates of science, as opposed to civil or ecclesiastical authority,
communicating freely among themselves—are the visible signs of that
innovation. The earlier thinkers accepted the tension and lived
accordingly. Their knowledge was essentially for themselves, and they
had a private life very different from their public life. They were
themselves concerned with getting from the darkness to the light.
Enlightenment was a daring attempt to shine that light on all men,
partly for the sake of all men, partly for the sake of the progress of
science. The success of this attempt depended on scientists’ freedom to
associate with and speak to one another. And freedom could be won
only if the rulers believed that the scientists were not a threat to them.
Enlightenment was not only, or perhaps not even primarily, a scientiﬁc
project but a political one. It began from the premise that the rulers
could be educated, a premise not held by the Enlightenment’s ancient
brethren.

This project was a conspiracy, as d’Alembert said in the Preliminary

Discourse 
of 
l’Encyclopédie, 
the 
premier 
document 
of 
the

Enlightenment. It had to be, for, in order to have rulers who are
reasonable, many of the old rulers had to be replaced, in particular all
those whose authority rested upon revelation. The priests were the
enemies, for they rejected the claim of reason and based politics and
morals on sacred text and ecclesiastical authorities. The philosophers
appeared to deny the very existence of God, or at least of the Christian
God. The old order was founded on Christianity, and free use of reason
simply could not be permitted within it, since reason accepts no
authority above itself and is necessarily subversive. There was a public
struggle for the right to rule; for, in spite of the modest demeanor of the
philosophers, they at the very least require rulers who are favorable to
them, who have chosen reason. The right to freedom of thought is a

political right, and for it to exist, there must be a political order that
accepts that right.

science is good for society, in order to persuade the most powerful
element of society and thus guarantee the protection of that pursuit. In a
simple formula, it had to be shown that the progress of knowledge was
parallel to political progress. This is by no means a self-evident
proposition, as anyone who has read Rousseau’s Discourse on the Arts
and Sciences, a powerful attack on it, knows. But it is the leading
principle of Enlightenment and the ultimate ground of the prejudice
that most people have in favor of freedom of thought and inquiry. I say
prejudice because the reasons have almost been forgotten, and other
kinds of thought hostile to freedom of thought are current. The old
order offered roots and salvation, and the very latest thought is marked
by nostalgia for that old order. The Enlightenment thinkers proposed a
political science that could be used by founders, such as in America, in
establishing principles and arrangements for a sounder and more
efﬁcient politics, and a natural science that could master nature in order
to satisfy men’s needs. These promises are what make reason not only
acceptable within civil society but even central to it. A society based on
reason needs those who reason best. The scientists were to be the most
respected of men, taking the place of kings and prelates, because they
are the evident sources of the good things for life, liberty and the pursuit
of property. It was not precisely replacing one faith by another, because
the new science, if it cannot be practiced by just anyone, can be
understood by anyone, if he is trained in its method, and knowledge of
the rights and duties of man requires the use of his reason.

The Enlightenment was a daring enterprise. Its goal was to

reconstitute political and intellectual life totally under the supervision of
philosophy and science. No conqueror, prophet or founder ever had a
broader vision, and none had more stunning success. There is
practically no contemporary regime that is not somehow a result of
Enlightenment, and the best of the modern regimes—liberal democracy
—is entirely its product. And throughout the world all men and all
regimes are dependent on and recognize the science popularized by the
Enlightenment. The Enlightenment inexorably defeated all opponents
it targeted at the outset, particularly the priests and all that depends on
them, by a long process of education that taught men, as Machiavelli

put it, about “the things of this world.” One need only read Adam
Smith’s Wealth of Nations, Book V, on education, to see how the reform
of universities, particularly the overcoming of the theological inﬂuence,
was essential to the emergence of modern political economy and the
regime founded on it. Thus the academies and universities are the core
of liberal democracy, its foundation, the repository of its animating
principles and the continuing source of the knowledge and education
keeping the machinery of the regime in motion.

The regime of equality and liberty, of the rights of man, is the regime

of reason. The free university exists only in liberal democracy, and
liberal democracies exist only where there are free universities. Marxists
are right to say that the “bourgeois university” is essentially related to
“bourgeois society,” but not in the sense they intend. The university does
not defend that society because the university merely reﬂects its
interests, but because the balance of forces within this kind of society is
such as most to need, respect and, hence, protect, freedom of thought.
Earlier associations of thinkers were under theological-political
supervision by unquestioned right. Fascism rejected reason and
controlled the universities. When Hitler came to power, Karl Schmitt
said, “Today Hegel died in Germany.” Hegel was arguably the greatest
university man there ever was. And communism asserts that the people,
under the guise of the vanguard party, has become rational, so that the
university no longer needs a special status—i.e., it can be controlled by
the Party. Only in liberal democracy is the primacy of reason accepted,
even though its citizenry is not understood to be simply and always
reasonable. It assures a special status for the university, an exemption
from the ordinary moral and political limitations on what can be
thought and said in civil society. The university is not the beneﬁciary of
the freedom of thought accorded to all the members of society. All to
the contrary, in the original project of modern society, the general
freedom of thought was believed to be desirable in order to support the
kind of thought proper to philosophers and scientists, which alone
strictly deserves the name of “thought.” At the outset the primary
freedom was freedom of thought, both because reason is the highest
faculty and because it is most necessary to the good society. Hobbes,
Descartes, Spinoza, Bacon, Locke and Newton had to be free to think
and propagate what they learned if there was to be a new kind of society,
a new dispensation for mankind.

has gradually been eroded, and there hardly remains an awareness of
what it means. There is barely a difference recognized in popular and
even university consciousness between academic freedom and job
security guaranteed by government, business or unions. It has become
assimilated to the economic system and looks like self-interest of a kind
that is sometimes approved of and sometimes disapproved of. The rights
of science are now not distinguishable from the rights of thought in
general, of any description whatsoever. Freedom of speech has given
way to freedom of expression, in which the obscene gesture enjoys the
same protected status as demonstrative discourse. It is all very
wonderful; everything has become free, and no invidious distinctions
need to be made. But it is too good to be true. All that has really
happened is that reason has been knocked off its perch, is less
inﬂuential and more vulnerable as it joins the crowd of less worthy
claims to the attention and support of civil society. The semitheoretical
attacks of Right and Left on the university and its knowledge, the
increased demands made on it by society, the enormous expansion of
higher education, have combined to obscure what is most important
about the university.

The original intention of the reformed academies and universities

was to provide a publicly respectable place—and a means of support—
for theoretical men, of whom at best there are only a few in any nation,
to meet, exchange their thoughts and train young persons in the ways of
science. The academies and universities were to be engines in the
progress of science. The right that reformers attempted to establish was
for scientists to be unhindered in the use of their reason, in the areas in
which they are competent, to solve the problems posed by nature.
Reason and competence are to be underlined here. “Intellectual
honesty,” “commitment” and that kind of thing have nothing to do with
the university, belong in the arenas of religious and political struggle,
only get in the way of the university’s activity, and open it to suspicion
and criticism of which it has no need. Freedom of thought and freedom
of speech were proposed in theory, and in the practice of serious
political reformers, in order to encourage the still voice of reason in a
world that had always been dominated by fanaticisms and interests. How
freedom of thought and speech came to mean the special
encouragement and protection of fanaticism and interests is another of

those miracles connected with the decay of the ideal of the rational
political order. The authors of The Federalist hoped their scheme of
government would result in the preponderance of reason and rational
men in the United States. They were not particularly concerned with
protecting eccentric or mad opinions or life-styles. Such protection,
which we now often regard as the Founders’ central intention, is only an
incidental result of the protection of reason, and it loses plausibility if
reason is rejected. These authors did not respect the many religious sects
or desire diversity for its own sake. The existence of many sects was
permitted only to prevent the emergence of a single dominant one.

The moment of the Enlightenment’s success seems also to have been

the beginning of its decay. The obscuring of its intention as a result of its
democratization is symptomatic of the inner difﬁculties of its project.
That project entailed freedom for the rare theoretical men to engage in
rational inquiry in the small number of disciplines that treat the ﬁrst
principles of all things. This requires an atmosphere where the voice of
reason is not drowned by the loud voices of the various “commitments”
prevailing in political life. Knowledge is the goal; competence and
reason are required of those who pursue it. The disciplines are
philosophy, mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology and the science of
man, meaning a political science that discerns the nature of man and
the ends of government. This is the academy. Dependent on it are a
number of applied sciences—particularly engineering, medicine and
law—that are lower in dignity and derivative in knowledge, but produce
the fruits of science that beneﬁt the unscientiﬁc and make them
respectful of science. Thus the advantage of the knowers, who want to
pursue knowledge, and that of those who do not know, those who want
to pursue their well-being, are served simultaneously, establishing a
harmony between them. And thus the age-old gulf separating the wise
from those who hold power is bridged, and the problem of the wise in
civil society is solved. The project was a unity reﬂecting the unity of the
intelligible order of nature, its parts organized according to the order of
the parts of the whole, joined together ﬁnally in a survey of the
articulated whole made by the culminating science—philosophy.

This project has lost its unity and is in crisis. Reason is unable to

establish its unity, to decide what should be in it, to divide up the
intellectual labor. It ﬂoats without compass or rudder.

If the university is indeed the product of the Enlightenment and is its

visible presence in modern democracy, and if Enlightenment was a
political project that undertook to alter the age-old character of the
relation between wisdom and power, knowledge and society, it might be
suspected that the crisis of knowledge that has become politically useful
—i.e., the crisis of the university—and the crisis of liberal democracy,
the political order dependent on knowledge, have something to do with
the new relationship between the two promoted by Enlightenment.

I have included among the Enlightenment philosophers men like

Machiavelli, Bacon, Montaigne, Hobbes, Descartes, Spinoza and
Locke, along with the eighteenth-century thinkers like Montesquieu,
Diderot and Voltaire, whose teachings are usually held to constitute the
Enlightenment, because these latter were quite explicit about their debt
to the originators of what the Enlightenment was in large measure only
popularizing. The men of the Enlightenment proper were the ﬁrst
whose teachings were addressed not only, or primarily, to other
philosophers or potential philosophers of the same rank, and who were
concerned not only with those who understand but also with changing
the opinions of mankind at large. Enlightenment was the ﬁrst
philosophically inspired “movement,” a theoretical school that is a
political force at the same time. The very word Enlightenment conveys
this mixture of elements, as does Marxism, whereas Platonism and
Epicureanism refer strictly to theories—which may have had this or that
effect but whose essence is only theoretical. Although Plato and Aristotle
had political philosophies, there is no regime to which one can point as
a Platonic or an Aristotelian regime, in the sense that either thinker had
founded the movement or party that actually established the regime.
But Enlightenment is certainly responsible for liberal democracy, as is
Marxism for communism. Intellectual historians have frequently been
too impressed by these recent events in philosophy and politics to
recognize how recent they are, that they constitute a new phenomenon
in both domains, and that what is most profound and interesting about
Enlightenment is its radical and self-conscious break with the
philosophical tradition in the mode and degree of its political activity.

The Enlightenment thinkers understood themselves to be making a

most daring innovation: according to Machiavelli, modern philosophy
was to be politically effective, while Plato and Aristotle, and all the

ancients who followed them since Socrates founded political philosophy
were politically ineffective. Machiavelli claimed that he taught the
effective truth, and he and practically all those who followed him
endeavored to be politically effective. Machiavelli follows Callicles in
Plato’s Gorgias, who ridicules Socrates for being unable to defend
himself, to avert insults or slaps in the face. The vulnerability of the
philosopher would seem to be the starting place for the new reﬂection
and the renewal of philosophy. This may seem trivial to many today, but
the entire philosophic tradition, ancient and modern, took the relation
of mind to society as the most fruitful beginning point for understanding
the human situation. Certainly the ﬁrst philosophy of which we have a
full account begins with the trial and execution of the philosopher. And
Machiavelli, the inspirer of the great philosophical systems of
modernity, starts from this vulnerability of reason within the political
order and makes it his business to correct it.

Some might say it was not concern with the fate of philosophers but

the wish, in Bacon’s phrase, to ease man’s estate that motivated the
modern thinkers. This, however, comes down to the same thing—a
criticism of the ancient philosophers for their impotence, and a
reﬂection on the relation of knowledge to civil society. The ancients
were always praising virtue, but men were not made more virtuous as a
result. Everywhere there were rotten regimes, tyrants persecuting
peoples, rich exploiting poor, nobles keeping down commoners, men
insufﬁciently protected by laws or arms, etc. Wise men saw clearly what
was wrong in all this, but their wisdom did not generate power to do
anything about it. The new philosophy claimed to have discovered the
means to reform society and to secure the theoretical life. If the two
purposes were not identical, they were intended to be complementary.

It must be remembered that this was a dispute within philosophy and

that there was an agreement among the parties to it about what
philosophy is. The moderns looked to and disagreed with the Greek
philosophers and their heirs, the Roman philosophers. But they shared
the view that philosophy, and with it what we call science, came to be in
Greece and had never, so far as is known, come to be elsewhere.
Philosophy is the rational account of the whole, or of nature. Nature is a
notion that itself is of Greek origin and requisite to science. The
principle of contradiction guided the discourse of all, and the moderns
presented reasoned arguments against those of their predecessors with

whom they disagreed. The moderns simply took over a large part of
ancient astronomy and mathematics. And they, above all, agreed that
the philosophic life is the highest life. Their quarrel is not like the
differences between Moses and Socrates, or Jesus and Lucretius, where
there is no common universe of discourse, but more like the differences
between Newton and Einstein. It is a struggle for the possession of
rationalism by rationalists. This fact is lost sight of, partly because
scholasticism, the use of Aristotle by the Roman Catholic Church, was
the phantom of philosophy within the old order that was violently
attacked by the modern philosophers, more out of antitheological ire
than by dislike of ancient philosophy. Another reason why the essential
agreement between ancients and moderns is no longer clear is the
modern science of intellectual history, which tends to see all differences
of opinion as differences of “worldview,” which blurs the distinction
between disagreements founded on reason and those founded on faith.

The very term Enlightenment is connected with Plato’s most

powerful image about the relation between thinker and society, the
cave. In the Republic, Socrates presents men as prisoners in a dark cave,
bound and forced to look at a wall against which are projected images
that they take to be the beings and that are for them the only reality.
Freedom for man means escaping the bonds, civil society’s conventions,
leaving the cave and going up to where the sun illuminates the beings
and seeing them as they really are. Contemplating them is at once
freedom, truth and the greatest pleasure. Socrates’ presentation is meant
to show that we begin from deceptions, or myths, but that it is possible
to aspire to a nonconventional world, to nature, by the use of reason.
The false opinions can be corrected, and their inner contradictions
impel thoughtful men to seek the truth. Education is the movement
from darkness to light. Reason projected on to the beings about which at
ﬁrst we only darkly opine produces enlightenment.

The moderns accepted that reason can comprehend the beings, that

there is a light to which science aspires. The entire difference between
ancients and moderns concerns the cave, or nonmetaphorically, the
relation between knowledge and civil society. Socrates never suggests
that, even in the unlikely event that philosophers should be kings and
possess absolute wisdom, the nature of the cave could be altered or that
a civil society, a people, a dēmos, could do without false opinions. The
philosophers who returned to the cave would recognize that what others

take to be reality is only image, but they could not make any but the
happy few able to see the beings as they really are. They would guide
the city reasonably, but in their absence the city would revert to
unreason. Or to put it in another way, the unwise could not recognize
the wise. Men like Bacon and Descartes, by contrast, thought that it was
possible to make all men reasonable, to change what had always and
everywhere been the case. Enlightenment meant to shine the light of
being in the cave and forever to dim the images on the wall. Then there
would be unity between the people and the philosopher. The whole
issue turns on whether the cave is intractable, as Plato thought, or can
be changed by a new kind of education, as the greatest philosophic
ﬁgures of the seventeenth and eighteenth century taught.

As Plato tells us, Socrates was charged with impiety, of not holding

the same gods the city held, and he was found guilty. Plato always
presents Socrates as the archetypical philosopher. The events of
Socrates’ life, the problems he faced, represent what the philosopher as
such must face. The Apology tells us that the political problem for the
philosopher is the gods. It makes clear that the images on the wall of the
cave about which men will not brook contradiction represent the gods.
Socrates’ reaction to the accusation is not to assert the right of academic
freedom to pursue investigations into the things in the heavens and
under the earth. He accepts the city’s right to demand his belief. His
defense, not very convincing, is that he is not a subversive. He asserts the
great dignity of philosophy and tries as much as possible to reduce the
gap between it and good citizenship. In other words, he temporizes or is
insincere. His defense cannot be characterized as “intellectually honest”
and is not quite to contemporary taste. He only wants to be left alone as
much as possible, but is fully aware that a man who doubts what every
good citizen is supposed to know and spends his life sitting around
talking about virtue, rather than doing virtuous deeds, comes into
conﬂict with the city. Characteristically, Socrates lives with the essential
conﬂicts and illustrates them, rather than trying to abolish them. In the
Republic he attempts to unite citizenship with philosophy. The only
possible solution is for philosophers to rule, so there would be no
opposition between the city’s commands and what philosophy requires,
or between power and wisdom. But this outline of a solution is ironic
and impossible. It only serves to show what one must live with. The
regime of philosopher-kings is usually ridiculed and regarded as

totalitarian, but it contains much of what we really want. Practically
everyone wants reason to rule, and no one thinks a man like Socrates
should be ruled by inferiors or have to adjust what he thinks to them.
What the Republic actually teaches is that none of this is possible and
that our situation requires both much compromise and much
intransigence, great risks and few hopes. The important thing is not
speaking one’s own mind, but ﬁnding a way to have one’s own mind.

Contrary to common opinion, it is Enlightenment that was intent on

philosophers’ ruling, taking Socrates’ ironies seriously. If they did not
have the title of king, their political schemes were, all the same,
designed to be put into practice. And they were put into practice, not by
begging princes to listen to them but by philosophy’s generating
sufﬁcient power to force princes to give way. The rule of philosophy is
recognized in the insistence that regimes be constructed to protect the
rights of man. The anger we experience on reading Socrates’ censorship
of the poets is unself-conscious, if we agree, as we willy-nilly do, that
children must be taught the scientiﬁc method prior to any claims of the
imagination on their belief or conduct. Enlightenment education really
does what Socrates only tentatively proposes. Socrates, at least, tries to
preserve poetry, whereas Enlightenment is almost indifferent to its fate.
The fact that we think there should be poetry classes as well as
education in reasoning helps us to miss the point: What happens to
poetic imagination when the soul has been subjected to a rigorous
discipline that resists poetry’s greatest charms? The Enlightenment
thinkers were very clear on this point. There is no discontinuity in the
tradition about it. They were simply solving the problem to the
advantage of reason, as Socrates wished it could be solved but thought it
could not. Enlightenment is Socrates respected and free to study what
he wants, and thereby it is civil society reconstituted. In the Apology,
Socrates, who lives in thousandfold poverty because he neither works
nor has inherited, proposes with ultimate insolence that he be fed at
public expense at city hall. But what is the modern university, with its
pay and tenure, other than a free lunch for philosophy and scientists?

Moreover, the Enlightenment’s explicit effort to remove the religious

passion from politics, resulting in distinctions like that between church
and state, is motivated by the wish to prevent the highest principle in
political life from being hostile to reason. This is the intention in the
Republic of Socrates’ reform of the stories about the gods told by the

poets. Nothing that denies the principle of contradiction is allowed to be
authoritative, for that is the reef against which Socrates foundered. But
Socrates did not think that church and state could be separated. He
would have treated both terms as artiﬁcial. The gods are believed to be
the founders of every city and are its most important beings. He would
not have dared to banish them in defense of himself.

The Enlightenment thinkers took on his case and carried on a war

against the continuing threat to science posed by ﬁrst causes that are
irrational or beyond reason. The gradual but never perfect success of
that war turns the desire to be reasonable into the right to be reasonable,
into academic freedom. In the process, political life was rebuilt in ways
that have proved intolerable to many statesmen and thinkers, and have
gradually led to the reintroduction of religion and the irrational in new
and often terrifying guises. This is what Socrates would have feared.

But here I am only indicating the unity of the tradition, that

Enlightenment is an attempt to give political status to what Socrates
represents. The academy and the university are the institutions that
incorporate the Socratic spirit more or less well. Yet the existence of
these institutions underlines at the same time how they differ from
Socrates, who founded no institutions and had only friends. And the
attacks on these institutions made ﬁrst by Rousseau and then by
Nietzsche are attacks on Socratic rationalism made in a Socratic spirit.
The history of Western thought and learning can be encapsulated in the
fate of Socrates, beginning with Plato defending him, passing through
the Enlightenment institutionalizing him, and ending with Nietzsche
accusing on him. The cherishing, for two and a half millennia, of the
memory of this man, who was put to death by the city for
philosophizing, ends with his spiritual execution in the name of culture
at the hands of the latest of the great philosophers. Both city and culture
are authorized by the sacred.

The meditation on Socrates is the inspiring theme of philosophy

from Plato and Aristotle, through Farabi and Maimonides, Machiavelli,
Bacon, Descartes, Spinoza, Locke, Rousseau and Hegel, to Nietzsche
and Heidegger. Socrates is the complementary man whose enigmatic
being leads to reﬂection on the nature of the knowers.

The Philosophic Experience

The character of the experience Socrates represents is important

because it is the soul of the university. That experience and the relation
to civil society of those who have it—which is the general formula for
the problem of the university—is the continuous theme of Plato’s and
Xenophon’s writings, which give us a ﬂesh-and-blood Socrates,
presenting the ambiguous material for judging him ourselves, showing
us how such a man lives, the questions he raises, the different kinds of
friends he has, his relations to the rulers, the laws and the gods, and the
effects he has on the world around him. This forces us to ask, for
example, what inﬂuence Socrates’ humiliation of the political men had
on the young Alcibiades, who was destined to become prominent
among them. Socrates was not the ﬁrst philosopher to have collided
with the city, but he is the ﬁrst to have beneﬁted from a dramatic, poetic
representation of his way of life, which placed him among the heroes
and permitted, or rather necessitated, reﬂection not only about what he
taught but also about the man himself and how he ﬁtted into the city.
This rich drama of the early philosopher who came to the attention of
the city because he was a philosopher, presents all the questions of
freedom of thought from all the angles, without any kind of
doctrinairism, and hence provides us with a fresh view of the
importance and also of the difﬁculties of such freedom. From the
Republic, which really takes seriously only the demands of knowledge,
to the Laws, which gives full attention to the competing demands of
political life, Socrates as perfecter and as dissolver of the community
reveals all the facets of his activity. The difﬁculty he and the other
philosophers contend with from the law is not to be confounded with
society’s prejudice against outsiders, dissenters or nonconformists but is,
at least apparently, a result of an essential opposition between the two
highest claims on a man’s loyalty—his community and his reason. That
opposition can only be overcome if the state is rational, as in Hegel, or if
reason is abandoned, as in Nietzsche. However that may be, we have a
record, unparalleled in its detail and depth, of this ﬁrst appearance of
philosophy, and we can apprehend the natural, or at least primitive,
responses to it, prior to philosophy’s effect on the world. This provides a
view of the beginning at a time when we may be witnessing the end,
partly because we no longer know that beginning.

The poetry written about Socrates by Plato and Xenophon is already

in the defensive mode, a rehabilitation of the condemned man. The

ﬁrst statement of the city’s reaction to Socrates is made by Aristophanes.
What luck Socrates had! Not only did he command the pens of Plato
and Xenophon; he also was the central ﬁgure of the greatest work of the
consummate genius of comedy. The Clouds often arouses indignation in
those who care little for Socrates but think serious matters are not
laughing matters. Socrates’ fate and Aristophanes’ possible contribution
to it trouble them. But Socrates was probably not of their persuasion. He
laughed and joked on the day of his death. He and Aristophanes share a
certain levity. Aristophanes does present a ridiculous Socrates and takes
the point of view of the vulgar, to whom Socrates does look ridiculous.
But Aristophanes also ridicules the vulgar. Reading him we, indeed,
laugh at the wise as do the ignorant, but we also laugh at the ignorant as
do the wise. Above all we laugh at the anger of the ignorant against the
wise.

The Socrates of The Clouds is a man who despises what other people

care about and cares about what they despise. He spends his life
investigating nature, worrying about gnats and stars, denying the
existence of the gods because they are not to be found in nature. His
maps have only a tiny dot where Athens looms large to its citizens. Law
and convention (nomos) mean nothing to him, because they are not
natural but manmade. His companions are pale-faced young men
totally devoid of common sense. In this academy, which has established
itself in the free atmosphere of Athens, these eccentrics carry on their
activities without appearing to be other than harmless cranks. They are
poor, without any ﬁxed means of support. Socrates receives gifts and
apparently countenances minor thefts, literally to keep body and soul
together. There is no morality, but they are not vicious people, because
their only concern is their studies. Socrates is utterly indifferent to honor
or luxury.

Aristophanes recaptures for us the absurdity of a grown man who

spends his time thinking about gnats’ anuses. We have been too
persuaded of the utility of science to perceive how far the scientist’s
perspective is from that of a gentleman, how shocking and petty the
scientist’s interests appear to a man who is concerned with war and
peace, justice, freedom and glory. If science is just for curiosity’s sake,
which is what theoretical men believe, it is nonsense, and immoral
nonsense, from the viewpoint of practical men. The world loses its
proportions. Only Swift has rivalled Aristophanes in picturing the

comedy of science. His description of a woman’s breast seen through a
microscope shows what science means, not in order to denigrate science
but to make clear the harsh disproportion between the world most men
cling to and the one inhabited by theoretical men.

scientist appears to the nonscientist. He can only hint at the dignity of
what the scientist does. His Socrates is not individualized; he is not the
Socrates we know. He is a member of the species philosopher, student of
nature, particularly of astronomy. The ﬁrst known member of this
species was Thales. He was the ﬁrst man to have seen the cause of, and
to predict, an eclipse of the sun. This means he ﬁgured out that the
heavens move in regular ways that accord with mathematical reasoning.
He was able to reason from visible effects to invisible causes and
speculate about the intelligible order of nature as a whole. He at that
moment became aware that his mind was in accord with the principles
of nature, that he was the microcosm.

This moment contains many elements: satisfaction at having solved a

problem; pleasure in using his faculties; fullness of pride, more
complete than that of any conqueror, for he surveys and possesses all;
certitude drawn from within himself, requiring no authorities; self-
sufﬁciency, not depending, for the fulﬁllment of what is highest in
himself, on other men or opinions or on accidents such as birth or
election to power, on anything that can be taken from him; a happiness
that has no admixture of illusion or hope but is full of actuality. But
perhaps most important for Thales was seeing that the poetic or
mythical accounts of eclipses are false. They are not, as men believed
prior to the advent of science, a sign from the gods. Eclipses are beyond
the power of the gods. They belong to nature. One need not fear the
gods. The theoretical experience is one of liberation, not only negatively
—freeing the thinker from fear of the gods—but also positively,
simultaneously a discovery of the best way of life. Maimonides describes
the experience of the philosophic use of reason as follows: “This then
will be a key permitting one to enter places the gates to which were
locked. And when these gates are opened and these places are entered
into, the soul will ﬁnd rest therein, the eyes will be delighted, and the
bodies will be eased of their toil and of their labor.” What had previously
been checked in man’s soul comes into full play. Freedom from the
myths and their insistence that piety is best permits man to see that

knowing is best, the end for which everything else is done, the only end
that without self-contradiction can be said to be ﬁnal. The important
theoretical experience leads necessarily toward the ﬁrst principles of all
things and includes an awareness of the good. Man as man, regardless of
nation, birth or wealth, is capable of this experience. And it is the only
thing men surely have spiritually in common: the demonstrations of
science come from within man, and they are the same for all men.
When I think the Pythagorean theorem, I know that what is in me at
that moment is precisely the same as what is within anyone else who is
thinking that theorem. Every other supposedly common experience is at
best ambiguous.

Some of this experience still remains within the contemporary

natural sciences, and it has a fugitive existence within the humanities.
The unity of it all is hardly anywhere to be found or appreciated because
philosophy hardly exists today. But it was always understood by
philosophers, because they share the experience and are able to
recognize it in others. This sense of community is more important for
them than any disagreements about the ﬁnal things. Philosophy is not a
doctrine but a way of life, so the philosophers, for all the differences in
their teachings, have more in common with one another than with
anyone else, even their own followers. Plato saw this in Parmenides,
Aristotle in Plato, Bacon in Aristotle, Descartes in Bacon, Locke in
Descartes and Newton, and so on.

The tiny band of men who participate fully in this way of life are the

soul of the university. This is true in historical fact as well as in
principle. Universities came to be where men were inspired by the
philosophers’ teachings and examples. Philosophy and its demonstration
of the rational contemplative life, made possible and, more or less
consciously, animated scholarship and the individual sciences. When
those examples lost their vitality or were overwhelmed by men who had
no experience of them, the universities decayed or were destroyed. This,
strictly, is barbarism and darkness. I do not mean that philosophers were
ordinarily present in universities any more than prophets or saints are
ordinarily present in houses of worship. But because those houses of
worship are dedicated to the spirit of the prophets and saints, they are
different from other houses. They can undertake many functions not
central to that spirit, but they remain what they are because of what they
look up to, and everything they do is informed by that reverence. But if

the faith disappears, if the experiences reported by the prophets and
saints become unbelievable or matters of indifference, the temple is no
longer a temple, no matter how much activity of various kinds goes on
in it. It gradually withers and at best remains a monument, the inner life
of which is alien to the tourists who pass idly through it. Although the
comparison is not entirely appropriate, the university is also informed by
the spirit, which very few men can fully share, of men who are absent,
but it must preserve respect for them. It can admit almost anyone, but
only if he or she looks up to and can have an inkling of the dignity of
what is going on in it. It is itself always in danger of losing contact with
its animating principle, of representing something it no longer possesses.
Although it may seem wildly implausible that this group of rare
individuals should be the center of what really counts for the university,
this was recognized in the universities until only yesterday. It was, for
example, well known in the nineteenth-century German university,
which was the last great model for the American university. However
bad universities may have been, however extraneous accretions may
have weighed them down, there was always a divination that an Aristotle
or a Newton was what they were all about.

The philosophic life is not the university. Until the nineteenth

century most philosophers had nothing to do with universities, and
perhaps the greatest abhorred them. One cannot imagine Socrates as a
professor, for reasons that are worthy of our attention. But Socrates is of
the essence of the university. It exists to preserve and further what he
represents. In effect, it hardly does so anymore. But more important is
the fact that as a result of Enlightenment, philosophers and philosophy
came to inhabit the universities exclusively, abandoning their old habits
and haunts. There they have become vulnerable in new ways and thus
risk extinction. The classical philosophers would not, for very good
reasons, have taken this risk. Understanding these reasons is invaluable
for our peculiar predicament.

Although the philosophic experience is understood by the

philosophers to be what is uniquely human, the very deﬁnition of man,
the dignity and charm of philosophy have not always or generally been
popularly recognized. This is not the case with the other claimants to
the throne, the prophet or the saint, the hero or the statesman, the poet
or the artist, whose claims, if not always accepted, are generally
recognized to be serious. They were always present, apparently coeval

with civil society, whereas philosophers appeared late on the scene and
had to make their way. And this has something to do with the problem,
but it may be symptom rather than cause. I doubt that the people have
much greater access to the typical experiences of prophets, kings and
poets than to those of the philosophers. Great imagination, inspiration,
intrepidity in the pursuit of glory are further from the ordinary lives of
ordinary men than is the experience of reasoning found in the practical
arts in daily use, like farming, building, shoemaking, and which is
despised by the higher men. Socrates always has to remind his
aristocratic interlocutors of these crafts and uses them as models of the
knowledge aristocrats lack. But this may indicate part of the difﬁculty:
the people want something higher, something exalted, to admire. And
certainly Socrates’ person, at ﬁrst sight anyway, does not provide such an
object of admiration, as Aristophanes’ comedy makes abundantly clear.
Moreover, and more important, the prophets, kings and poets are clearly
benefactors of mankind at large, providing men with salvation,
protection, prosperity, myths and entertainment. They are the noble
bulwarks of civil society, and men tend to regard as good what does good
to them. Philosophy does no such good. All to the contrary, it is austere
and somewhat sad because it takes away many of men’s fondest hopes. It
certainly does nothing to console men in their sorrows and their
unending vulnerability. Instead it points to their unprotectedness and
nature’s indifference to their individual fates. Socrates is old, ugly, poor,
of no family, without prestige or power in the city, and babbles about
Ether’s taking Zeus’s place.

The kings praised by poetry and illustrated in sculpture are

ambiguous. On the one hand they seem to exist for their own sake,
beauty in which we do not participate and to which we look up. On the
other hand, they are in our service—ruling us, curing us, perhaps
punishing us, but for our sakes, teaching us, pleasing us. Achilles is
perfection, what most men can only dream about being, and is therefore
their superior and properly their master. But he is also their warrior
protector, who in order to save Greece overcomes the fear of death that
other men cannot overcome. All the heroes are in the business of taking
care of and ﬂattering men, the dēmos, receiving admiration and glory as
their pay. In some sense they are ﬁctions of civil society, whose ends they
serve. Not that they do not do the deeds for which they are praised, but
the goodness of those deeds is measured, alas, by utility, by the greatest

good of the greatest number. The statesman possesses virtues that are
supposed to be good in themselves; but he is measured by his success in
preserving the people. Those virtues are means to the end of
preservation, i.e., the good life is subordinate to and in the service of
mere life. If the theoretical life is a good way of life, it cannot, at least in
its most authentic expression, be, or seriously be understood to be, in
the city’s service. It therefore has an almost impossible public relations
problem. Socrates hints at this in his Apology when, ridiculously—since
he was never angry and since he distinguished himself as a soldier
exclusively in retreats—he likens himself to Achilles.

The defenselessness of philosophy in the city is what Aristophanes

points out and ridicules. He, the poet, has much sympathy with the
philosopher’s wisdom but prides himself on not being so foolish. He can
take care of himself, win prizes from and be paid by the people. His
stance is that of the wise guy in the face of the wise man; he is city
smart. He warns the philosophers and proves prophetic in comically
portraying the city’s vengeance. The generation of great men who
followed Socrates, including Plato, Xenophon and Isocrates, took the
warning very much to heart. Philosophy, they recognized, is weak,
precisely because it is new, not necessary, not a participant in the city’s
power. It is threatened and is a threat to all the beliefs that tie the city
together and unite the other high types—priests, poets and statesmen—
against philosophy. So Socrates’ successors gathered all their strength
and made a heroic effort to save and protect philosophy.

Socrates in Aristophanes’ story minded his own business, was the

subject of rumor and ridicule, until a father who was in debt because of
his son’s prodigality wanted to free himself of his obligations. Socrates’
atheism was the right prescription for him, insofar as it meant that he
need not fear Zeus’s thunderbolt if he broke the law, if he perjured
himself. The law is revealed to be merely manmade, and hence there is
no witness to his misdeeds if he can escape the attention of other men.
Philosophy liberates this foolish old man. His son, too, is liberated, but
with the unexpected consequence that he loses reverence for his father
and his mother, who are no longer under divine protection. This the
father cannot stand and returns to his belief in the gods, who it turns out
protect the family as well as the city. In a rage he burns down Socrates’
school.

Aristophanes was prescient. The actual charges against Socrates were

corrupting the youth and impiety, with the implication that the latter is
the deepest cause of the former. And whatever scholars may say about
the injustice of Aristophanes’ or Athens’ charges, the evidence supports
those charges. In the Republic, for example, marriages are short-term
affairs arranged only for reproduction, the family is dissolved, wise sons
rule over and can discipline unwise fathers, and the prohibitions against
incest are, to say the least, relaxed. The reverence for antiquity is
replaced by reason, and the rule of fathers and the ancestral are
disputed. This follows immediately from Socrates’ procedures, and it
entered into the bloodstream of the West, one of the innumerable
effects of philosophy that, for better or worse, are to be found only there.
Angry fathers are one of the constituencies mortally hostile to Socrates,
who was not trying to achieve this result, or to reform the family. His
example and the standards of judgment he invoked simply led to it.

Socrates collided not with culture, society or economy but with the

law—which means with a political fact. The law is coercive. The
human things impinge on the philosophers in the form of political
demands. What philosophers need to survive is not anthropology,
sociology or economics, but political science. Thus without any need for
sophisticated reasons, political science was the ﬁrst human science or
science of human things that had to be founded, and remained the only
one until sometime in the eighteenth century. The stark recognition
that he depended on the city, that as he looked up to the heavens he lost
his footing on the ground, compelled the philosopher to pay attention to
politics, to develop a philosophic politics, a party, as it were, to go along
with the other parties, democratic, oligarchic, aristocratic and
monarchic, that are always present. He founded the truth party. Ancient
political philosophy was almost entirely in the service of philosophy, of
making the world safer for philosophy.

Moreover, the law against which Socrates collided was the one

concerning the gods. In its most interesting expression the law is the
divine law. The city is sacred, it is a theological-political entity. (This is,
by the way, why the Theological-Political Treatise is for Spinoza the book
about politics.) The problem for the philosophers is primarily religion.
The philosophers must come to terms with its authoritative presence in
the city. Socrates in the Apology makes some suggestions as to how the
philosopher must behave. He must deny that he is an atheist, although

he remains ambiguous as to the character of his belief. Any careful
reading of the Apology makes clear that Socrates never says he believes
in the gods of the city. But he does try to make himself appear to be a
sign sent from the gods, commanded to do what he does by the Delphic
god. Nonetheless he is condemned.

He states his problem succinctly in explaining his way of life to his

jurors:

 
If I tell you that I would be disobeying the god and on that
account it is impossible for me to keep quiet, you won’t be
persuaded by me, taking it that I am ironizing. And if I tell you
that it is the greatest good for a human being to have discussions
everyday about virtue and the other things you hear me talking
about, examining myself and others, and that the unexamined
life is not livable for a human being, you will be even less
persuaded.
 

The people recognize Socrates’ irony, his talking down to them, and see
how implausible his religious claims are. His irony appears as irony and
is therefore not successful. But the truth, unadorned by the Delphic
cover, is incomprehensible, corresponding to no experience his
audience has. He would be closer to success in sticking to his ﬁrst story.
One can from this very description analyze the political situation. There
are three groups of men: most do not understand him, are hostile to
him, and vote for his condemnation; a smaller but not inconsiderable
group also do not understand Socrates but glimpse something noble in
him, are sympathetic to him and vote for his acquittal; ﬁnally, a very
small group knows what he means when he says the greatest good for a
human being is talking about—not practicing—virtue (unless talking
about virtue is practicing it). The last group is politically inconsiderable.
Therefore the whole hope for the political salvation of philosophy rests
with the friendliness of the second group, good citizens and ordinarily
pious, but somehow open.

And it was to such men, the gentlemen, that philosophy made its

rhetorical appeal for almost two thousand years. When they ruled, the
climate for philosophy was more or less salubrious. When the people,
the dēmos, ruled, religious fanaticism or vulgar utility made things
much less receptive to philosophy. Tyrants might be attracted to

philosophers, either out of genuine curiosity or the desire to adorn
themselves, but they are the most unreliable of allies. All of this rests on
a psychological analysis that was forced on the philosophers, who had
previously not paid much attention to men or their souls. They observed
that the most powerful passion of most men is fear of death. Very few
men are capable of coming to terms with their own extinction. It is not
so much stupidity that closes men to philosophy but love of their own,
particularly love of their own lives, but also love of their own children
and their own cities. It is the hardest task of all to face the lack of cosmic
support for what we care about. Socrates, therefore, deﬁnes the task of
philosophy as “learning how to die.” Various kinds of self-forgetting,
usually accompanied by illusions and myths, make it possible to live
without the intransigent facing of death—in the sense of always thinking
about it and what it means for life and the things dear in life—which is
characteristic of a serious life. Individuals demand signiﬁcance for this
individual life, which is so subject to accident. Most human beings and
all cities require the unscientiﬁc mixture of general and particular,
necessity and chance, nature and convention. It is just this mixture that
the philosopher cannot accept and which he separates into its
constituent parts. He applies what he sees in nature to his own life. “As
are the generations of leaves, so are the generations of men,”—a somber
lesson that is only compensated for by the intense pleasure
accompanying insight. Without that pleasure, which so few have, it
would be intolerable. The philosopher, to the extent that he really only
enjoys thinking and loves the truth, cannot be disabused. He cherishes
no illusion that can crumble. If he is comic, at least he is absolutely
immune to tragedy. Nonphilosophic men love the truth only as long as
it does not conﬂict with what they cherish—self, family, country, fame,
love. When it does conﬂict, they hate the truth and regard as a monster
the man who does not care for these noble things, who proves they are
ephemeral and treats them as such. The gods are the guarantors of the
unity of nature and convention dear to most men, which philosophy can
only dissolve. The enmity between science and mankind at large is,
therefore, not an accident.

This hostile relationship between the prevailing passions of the

philosopher and those of the dēmos was taken by the philosophers to be
permanent, for human nature is unchanging. As long as there are men,
they will be motivated by fear of death. This passion is primarily what

constitutes the cave, a horizon within which hope seems justiﬁed.
Serving the community that lives in the cave, risking one’s life for what
preserves life, is honored. Vulgar morality is the code of this selﬁsh
collectivity, and whatever steps outside its circle is the object of moral
indignation. And moral indignation, not ordinary selﬁshness or
sensuality, is the greatest danger to the thinker. The fear that the gods
who protect the city will be angered and withdraw their protection
induces ecstasies of terror in men and makes them wildly vindictive
against those who transgress the divine law. In the Apology, Socrates
explains why he, such a good citizen, stayed out of Athens’ political life.
When he presided in the Council he refused to put to the vote—and
was overridden—a motion to put to death the commanders of Athens’
greatest naval victory because they had prudently refused to try to pick
up the bodies of their dead from the water due to a storm that
endangered the living. But divine law required the recovery of the
bodies, and moral rage insisted on capital punishment for the
commanders. Mere prudence cannot override the sacred. Socrates’
philosophy has more in common with that prudence than it does with
the popular moral fervor, which also caused his death, essentially for
putting the prudent above the sacred. This fervor Socrates took to be the
substrate of civil society, which would always in the end overpower and
deform reason in civil society. Thus there are two possibilities: the
philosopher must rule absolutely, or he, “like a man in a storm when
dust and rain are blown about by the wind, stands aside under a little
wall.” There is no third way, or it belongs only to the intellectual, who
attempts to inﬂuence and ends up in the power of the would-be
inﬂuenced. He enhances their power and adapts his thought to their
ends.

The philosopher wants to know things as they are. He loves the truth.

That is an intellectual virtue. He does not love to tell the truth. That is a
moral virtue. Presumably he would prefer not to practice deception; but
if it is a condition of his survival, he has no objection to it. The hopes of
changing mankind almost always end up in changing not mankind but
one’s thought. Reformers may often be intransigent or extreme in deed,
but they are rarely intransigent in thought, for they have to be relevant.
But the man who ﬁts most easily into the conventions and is least
constrained by struggle with them has more freedom for thought. The
real radicalism of ancient thought is covered over by its moderation in

political deed, and this misleads many modern scholars. The ancients
had no tenure to protect them and wanted to avoid the prostitution to
which those who have to live off their wits are prone. There is no moral
order protecting philosophers or ensuring that truth will win out in the
long, or the short, run.

So philosophers engaged in a gentle art of deception. There is no

leaving civil society, no matter what Thoreau may have thought. But
they cannot avoid being noticed. They are different. Therefore
philosophers allied themselves with the gentlemen, making themselves
useful to them, never quite revealing themselves to them, strengthening
their gentleness and openness by reforming their education. Why are
the gentlemen more open than the people? Because they have money
and hence leisure and can appreciate the beautiful and useless. And
because they despise necessity. Nietzsche said with some good reason
that ancient gentlemen despised eating and sexual intercourse because
these acts are forced on them by their animal nature, and they had the
pride of the free. And although they tend to be reverent, they can be
irreverent, and certainly are less prone to religious fanaticism than the
many, because they are less in the grip of fear.

Aristotle in his Ethics shows how the philosopher appears as the ally

of the gentlemen, speaking to them about the noble deeds that are their
specialty (not his). All he apparently does is clarify for them what they
already practice. But he makes slight changes that point toward
philosophy. Piety is not even included in the list of the individual
virtues. And shame, a quality of the noble and a great enemy of reason,
is mentioned only in order to be banished from the canon. The virtuous
man has nothing to be ashamed of, says Aristotle—an observation that
ﬁts Socrates’ view of himself but is not typical of gentlemen. And
gradually Aristotle turns his readers’ attention to the theoretical life, not
by seriously theorizing with them but by pointing to the direction in
which it lies. He makes it godlike and the completion of their own
incompleteness, which they used to achieve by admiring Achilles and
revering the Olympian gods. Now they admire the theoretical men who
contemplate a thinking god. It is an open question whether the
gentleman grasped the essence of philosophy less accurately in this way
than does the modern man who respects the scientist because he
provides him with useful things.

Similarly in his Poetics, Aristotle explains to gentlemanly lovers of the

theater what tragedy is and what they get from it. But here too he
changes things a bit. The poet is not, as Homer presents himself,
inspired by the Muses but is an imitator of nature, i.e., of the same thing
the philosophers study, and hence does not depict a world alien to the
one studied by philosophy, or one that results from causes in conﬂict
with those admitted by science. Aristotle explicitly connects poetry with
philosophy. And the end, the ﬁnal cause, of tragedy is said to be the
purgation of pity and fear, the two passions that combined lead to
enthusiasm, religious possession or fanaticism. Socrates had attacked the
poets for appealing to those passions that make men ecstatic from terror
at what they can suffer and their unprotectedness in their suffering. It is
just here, according to Socrates, that reason should be invoked, to face
the necessary, to remind men of the order in things that exists in spite of
the accidents that happen to them individually. Pity and fear cry out for
satisfaction, for attention, for being taken seriously. Above all, the world
men incline to see is full of benevolent and malevolent deities who take
their cases seriously. Poetry to succeed must speak to these passions,
which are more powerful than reason in almost all men. Because poetry
needs an audience it is, in Socrates’ view, too friendly to the enemies of
reason. The philosopher has less need to enter into the wishes of the
many or, as the wise of our time would put it, into the drama of history,
or to be engagé. This is why Socrates heightens the enmity between
philosophy and poetry.

Aristotle, actually following Socrates’ lead, suggests that the poet can

be the doctor of mortals who are so mad as to insist they should be
immortal. The poet, not the philosopher, can treat the passions that are
dangerous to philosophy, which Socrates had to his great cost ignored.
He can arouse these passions in order to ﬂush them out of the soul,
leaving the patients more relaxed and calmer, more willing to listen to
reason. Aristotle tells the poets they should present heroes who deserve
their fates, whose sad ends are plausibly attributable to a ﬂaw in their
characters. Their suffering, while pitiable, is not promiscuous, a
reproach to the moral order, or the lack of one, in the world. The effect
of such drama would be to make men gentle and believers in the
coherence of the world, in the rational relation of cause and effect.
They are not made reasonable by this but are saved from hatred of
reason and more disposed to accept it. Aristotle does not attempt to

make scientists out of gentlemen, but he tempers their prevailing
passions in such a way as to make them friends of philosophy. Socrates
does much the same thing in the Apology when he addresses those who
voted for his acquittal and tells them myths that tend to make death
seem less terrible. The tales are not true, but they reinforce the
gentleness that kept them from fearing and hence condemning
Socrates. Socrates criticizes poetry in order to encourage it to be an ally
of the philosophers instead of the priests.

Thus philosophy’s response to the hostility of civil society is an

educational endeavor, rather more poetic or rhetorical than
philosophic, the purpose of which is to temper the passions of
gentlemen’s souls, softening the hard passions such as anger, and
hardening the soft ones such as pity. The model for all such efforts is the
dialogues of Plato, which together rival the Iliad and the Odyssey, or
even the Gospels, introducing a new hero who excites admiration and
imitation. To introduce a new hero, a new taste has to be established,
and the taste for Socrates is unique, counter to all previous tastes. Plato
turns the personage of The Clouds into one of those civilization-
constituting ﬁgures like Moses, Jesus or Achilles, who have a greater
reality in men’s souls than do their own ﬂesh-and-blood contemporaries.
As Achilles is said to have formed Alexander the Great; Alexander,
Caesar; and Caesar, Napoleon—reaching out to one another from the
peaks across the valleys—so Socrates is the teacher of philosophers in an
unbroken chain for two and a half millennia, extending from generation
to generation through all the epochal changes. Plato insured this
inﬂuence, not by reproducing Socrates’ philosophy, in the manner of
Aristotle or Kant, but by representing his action, more in the manner of
Sophocles, Aristophanes, Dante and Shakespeare. Socrates is made to
touch the prevailing passion of each of the different kinds of soul in
such a way as appear to be divinatory of their longings and necessary to
their self-understanding. There are dialogues that touch the pious; some
move the ambitious and the idealistic; others excite the erotic and still
others the warriors and the politicians; some speak to-the poets, others to
the mathematicians; lovers of money are no more forgotten than are
lovers of honor. There is hardly anyone who is not made indignant by
one aspect or another of Socrates’ discourse, but there is also hardly
anyone who is not moved and heartened by other aspects. Socrates
stated the case for all human types better than they could have stated it

for themselves. (He, of course, also stated the problem with each of
those types and their aspirations.) Plato demonstrates the need for
Socrates and in so doing makes the need felt in his readers. It is not only
Alcibiades who felt incomplete without Socrates.

In almost no case was there a total conversion of a man. Certainly

none is ever depicted in the dialogues. Plato himself, and a few others,
were converted to philosophy, and their self-discovery was possible
because Socrates was more or less tolerated in Athens. The toleration of
philosophy requires its being thought to serve powerful elements in
society without actually becoming their servant. The philosopher must
come to terms with the deepest prejudices of men always, and of the
men of his time. The one thing he cannot change and will not try to
change is their fear of death and the whole superstructure of beliefs and
institutions that make death bearable, ward it off or deny it. The
essential difference between the philosopher and all other men is his
facing of death or his relation to eternity. He obviously does not deny
that many men die resolutely or calmly. It is relatively easy to die well.
The question is how one lives, and only the philosopher does not need
opinions that falsify the signiﬁcance of things in order to endure them.
He alone mixes the reality of death—its inevitability and our
dependence on fortune for what little life we have—into every thought
and deed and is thus able to live while honestly seeking perfect clarity.
He is, therefore, necessarily in the most fundamental tension with
everyone except his own kind. He relates to all the others ironically, i.e.,
with sympathy and a playful distance. Changing the character of his
relationship to them is impossible because the disproportion between
him and them is ﬁrmly rooted in nature. Thus, he has no expectation of
essential progress. Toleration, not right, is the best he can hope for, and
he is kept vigilant by the awareness of the basic fragility of his situation
and that of philosophy.

Socrates allies himself with those who are powerful in the city and at

the same time fascinated or charmed by him. But the charm only
endures so long as he does not confront their most important concerns.
Crito, the family man, thinks of Socrates as a good family man. Laches,
the soldier, thinks of Socrates as a good soldier. Those who get angry at
Socrates and accuse him always see something the more gently disposed
miss. Thrasymachus sees that Socrates does not respect the city. He sees
the truth about Socrates, but he cannot, at least in the beginning,

appreciate him. The others appreciate him, but partly because they are
blind to what is most important to him. This provides the model for the
political tactics followed by the philosophers from Plato up to
Machiavelli. None was primarily political, for there was a deﬁnite limit
on what one could expect from politics, and it was essential not to make
the pursuit of the truth dependent on what is politically relevant. Politics
was a serious study to the extent that one learned about the soul from it.
But the practical politics of all the philosophers, no matter how great
their theoretical differences, were the same. They practiced an art of
writing that appealed to the prevailing moral taste of the regime in
which they found themselves, but which could lead some astute readers
outside of it to the Elysian Fields where the philosophers meet to talk.
They frequently became the interpreters of the traditions of their
nations, subtly altering them to make them open to philosophy and
philosophers. They were always suspect, but they also always had their
well-placed friends.

For this reason the form and content of the writings of men like

Plato, Cicero, Farabi and Maimonides appear very different, while their
inner teachings may be to all intents and purposes the same. Each had a
different beginning point, a different cave, from which he had to ascend
to the light and to which he had to return. Thus they appeared to be
“relevant” without forming their minds to the prejudices of the day. This
protected them from the necessity or the temptation to conform to what
is most powerful. Classical philosophy was amazingly robust and
survived changes as great as are imaginable, such as that from paganism
to the revealed Biblical religions. Marsilius of Padua was as Aristotelian
as was Aristotle, proving that the problems are permanent but their
expressions are changing. We moderns think that a comparatively minor
change, like that wrought by the French Revolution, necessitates new
thought. The ancients held that a man must never let himself be
overcome by events unless those events taught something essentially
new. They were more intent than were any men before or since on
preserving the freedom of the mind. This was their legacy to the
university. They, however, never let the principle become a dogma and
never counted on its having any other ground than their wits. They were
ever mindful of the responsibilities and the risks of their enterprise.

In sum, the ancient philosophers were to a man proponents of

aristocratic politics, but not for the reasons intellectual historians are

wont to ascribe to them. They were aristocratic in the higher sense of
the word, because they thought reason should rule, and only
philosophers are fully devoted to reason. But this is just a theoretical
argument, since philosophers never really do rule. They were
aristocratic in the vulgar sense, favoring the power of those possessing
old wealth, because such men are more likely to grasp the nobility of
philosophy as an end itself, if not to understand it. Most simply, they
have the money for an education and time to take it seriously. Only
technology, with its attendant problems, makes universal education
possible, and therefore opens the prospect of a different kind of
relationship of philosophy to politics.

The Enlightenment Transformation

The thinkers of the Enlightenment, as I have said, reproached all

earlier philosophers for their powerlessness to help men and themselves.
The Republic’s formula, that power and wisdom must coincide if evils
are ever to cease in the cities, is the perfect expression of what the
Enlighteners meant. The necessary unity of power and wisdom is only a
coincidence for the ancients, i.e., dependent on chance completely out
of the philosopher’s control. Knowledge is not in itself power, and
though it is not in itself vulnerable to power, those who seek it and
possess it most certainly are. Therefore the great virtue for the
philosophers in their political deeds was moderation. They were utterly
dependent on the prejudices of the powerful and had to treat them most
delicately. They subjected themselves to a ﬁerce discipline of
detachment from public opinion. Although they inevitably had to try to
inﬂuence political life in their favor, they never seriously thought of
themselves as founders or lawgivers. The mixture of unwise power and
powerless wisdom, in the ancients’ view, would always end up with
power strengthened and wisdom compromised. He who ﬂirts with
power, Socrates said, will be compelled to lie with it.

The uncompromisable difference that separates the philosophers

from all others concerns death and dying. No way of life other than the
philosophic can digest the truth about death. Whatever the illusion that
supports ways of life and regimes other than the philosophic one, the
philosopher is its enemy. There can never be a meeting of minds on this
question, as both ancients and moderns agreed. It seemed only natural

to the ancients to ﬁnd their allies among the vulgarly courageous, i.e.,
those willing to face death with endurance and even intrepidity,
although they required unfounded beliefs about the noble, which made
them forget about the good. They share the common ground with the
philosophers on which something higher than mere life rests. But they
have no good reason for their sacriﬁce. Achilles’ laments and complaints
about why he must die for the Greeks and for his friend are very
different from Socrates’ arguments and the reasoning that underlies
them for accepting death—because he is old, because it is inevitable,
and because it costs him almost nothing and might be useful to
philosophy. Anger characterizes Achilles; calculation, Socrates.
Whatever sympathy there might be between the two kinds of men is
founded, to speak anachronistically, on Achilles’ misunderstanding
Socrates.

The extraordinary device contrived by the new philosophy that

produces harmony between philosophy and politics was to exchange
one misunderstanding for another. All men fear death and passionately
wish to avoid it. Even the heroes who despised it do so against a
background of fear, which is primary. Only religious fanatics who
believe certainly in a better life after death march gaily to death. If,
instead of depending on the rare natures who have a noble attitude
toward death, which goes against nature’s grain, philosophy could
without destroying itself play the demagogue’s role—i.e., appeal to the
passion that all men have and that is most powerful—it could share in
and make use of the power. Rather than ﬁghting what appears to be
human nature, by cooperating with it philosophy could control it. In
short, if philosophy should be revealed to man not as his moral
preceptor but as his collaborator in his fondest dreams, the philosopher
could supplant priest, politician and poet in the affection of the
multitude. This is what Machiavelli meant when he blamed the old
writers for building imaginary principalities and republics that neglect
how men actually live in favor of how they ought to live. He counsels
writers to accommodate themselves to the dominant passions instead of
exhorting men to practice virtues that they rarely perfect, whose
goodness for the individuals who practice them is questionable, and the
preachings of which are boring to everyone concerned. In a word, turn
philosophy into a benefactor, and it will be thought to be good and will
enjoy the power accruing to benefactors.

Philosophy can be used to conquer fortune, so Machiavelli

announced. It was, of course, fortune—chance—that made it
impossible for philosophers to rule, according to Plato. Fortune governs
the relations between power and wisdom, which means that men
cannot be counted on to consent to the rule of the wise, and the wise
are not strong enough to force them to do so. The conquest of fortune
meant for Machiavelli that thought and thinkers could compel and
guarantee the consent of men. If this is possible, then the ancient
philosophers’ moderation looks like timidity. Daring in the political
arena becomes the new disposition of the philosophers. Danton’s “de
l’audace, encore de l’audace, toujours de l’audace,” is but a pale, merely
political, duplicate of Machiavelli’s original call to battle. Bacon’s
assertion that the goal of science is to “ease man’s estate,” Descartes’
assertion that science will make man “master and possessor of nature,”
and the commonplace that science is the conquest of nature are
offsprings of Machiavelli’s revolution and constitute the political face
adopted by modern philosophy.

The strategy adopted for the assault on the old regime had two parts

—one belonging to natural science and the other to political science.
First, Descartes proposed that the humble doctor, one of Socrates’
ordinary examples of a reasonable artisan, lacking in the political or
religious splendor that brings men to the center of the human stage,
could, if science were to increase his power to heal a thousandfold,
promise enough—if not eternity, at least an ever-increasing longevity—
to gain men’s attachment and disenchant the priest. Then, Hobbes
proposed that if another humble type, the policeman, who protects men
against those who administer violent death, could be made effective in a
new political order based on fear of violent death, founded by a new
kind of political scientist who addresses the passions in a new way, he
could ward off the real dangers for men who had been made to look
those dangers in the face and thereby away from fear of invisible powers
and their ministers. Doctor and policeman, enhanced by the application
of science to their endeavors, were to be the foundations of a wholly new
political undertaking. If the pursuit of health and safety were to absorb
men and they were led to recognize the connection between their
preservation and science, the harmony between theory and practice
would be established. The actual rulers, after a couple of centuries of
astute propaganda directing popular passions against throne and altar,

would in the long run be constrained by their subjects and would have
to enact the scientists’ project. The scientists would, to use Harvey
Mansﬁeld’s formula, be the hidden rulers. The ends pursued by
politicians and the means they use would be determined by
philosophers. Scientists would be free and get support, and scientiﬁc
progress would be identical to political progress so conceived.

The scientists in this system belong to a world order of scientists, for

national loyalties and customs are irrelevant to them as scientists. They
are cosmopolitan. Gradually the political orders would have to be
transformed, so that no particularity remains in the way of reason’s
operations or produces conﬂict between the scientist’s loyalty to country
and his loyalty to truth. There is only one science. It is the same
everywhere and produces the same results everywhere. Similarly, there
can, in principle, be only one legitimate political order, founded by, on,
and for science. There may well remain individual nations with old but
decaying traditions stemming from special experiences in the past, and
attachment to them may tug at the scientists’ cosmopolitanism. But the
nations must all gradually become similar. They must respect the rights
of man.

This doctrine of rights is the clear and certain rational teaching about

justice that was intended to take the place of the ancient teachings,
which were “like castles built on sand.” In fact, rights are nothing other
than the fundamental passions, experienced by all men, to which the
new science appeals and which it emancipates from the constraints
imposed on them by specious reasoning and fear of divine punishment.
These passions are what science can serve. If these passions, given by
nature, are what men have permission—a “right”—to seek satisfaction
for, the partnership of science and society is formed. Civil society then
sets as its sole goal that satisfaction—life, liberty and the pursuit of
property—and men consent to obey the civil authority because it
reﬂects their wants. Government becomes more solid and surer, now
based on passions rather than virtues, rights rather than duties. These
life-preserving passions act as the premises of moral and political
reasoning, the form of which is as follows: “If I desire to preserve myself,
then I must seek peace. If I seek peace, then … etc.” On the basis of
such evident and deeply felt premises, men’s allegiance to government
can be a matter of reason rather than passionate faith. Such imperatives
are the very opposite extreme from those enunciated in the Ten

Commandments, which provide no reasons for obeying their
injunctions and do not afﬁrm fundamental passions but inhibit them.
Men now owe their clarity about their ends to reasoners. They obey on
rational grounds the law that protects them. And they respect, and
demand that the government respect, the scientists who most of all can,
by the higher use of reason, understand and tame hostile nature,
including human nature. Government becomes the intermediary
between the scientists and the people.

The rights teachings established the framework and the atmosphere

for the modern university. A regime founded on the inclinations of its
members is one where freedom, rightly understood, is primary. And the
right to know immediately follows from the right to pursue one’s own
preservation, and to be the judge of the means to that preservation. And
the right to know, of those who desire to know and can know, has a
special status. The universities ﬂourished because they were perceived
to serve society as it wants to be served, not as Socrates served it or
Thales failed to serve it. Thus it is indeed true that there is a special
kinship between the liberal university and liberal democracy, not
because the professors are the running dogs of the “system,” but because
this is the only regime where the powerful are persuaded that letting the
professors do what they want is good. Without this “liberal” framework,
the rights that professors claim for themselves are meaningless. The very
notion of rights was ﬁrst enunciated by the founders of liberalism, and
its only home is in liberal society, in both theory and practice.

All of this meant that the philosophers switched parties from the

aristocratic to the democratic. The people, who were by deﬁnition
uneducated and the seat of prejudice, could be educated, if the
meaning of education were changed from experience of things beautiful
to enlightened self-interest. The aristocrats, with their pride, their love of
glory, their sense that they are born with the right to rule, now appear to
be impediments to the rule of reason. The new philosophers dedicated
themselves to reducing the aristocrats back into the commons, removing
their psychological underpinnings and denigrating their tastes. This turn
to the people can be understood as an appreciation of their decent
desire for equality and willingness to contract not to do injustice in
return for not suffering injustice, as opposed to the nobles’ rejection of
equality and willingness to risk suffering injustice in order to be ﬁrst. Or
it can be understood as a hardheaded strategy adopted in order to make

use of the people’s power. In this the modern philosophers imitated the
ancient tyrants who found it easier to satisfy the people than the nobles
who dared to rival them. No one has a naturally privileged position
other than the knowers.

from Right to Left. The emergence of a Right and a Left was a
consequence of this turn to political activism, away from political
accommodationism. The Left is the vehicle of modern philosophy and
the Right is the opposition, largely religious, to it. Center is only the old
liberalism, when a schism occurs in the philosophical party at the end of
the eighteenth century, and a more radical egalitarianism threatens the
project of science from within. Left means the transformation of society
by Enlightenment, a possibility either not envisaged, or rejected, by all
older thinkers. In modernity it is possible for there to be a right-wing
philosopher, i.e., one who opposes the philosophic attempt to
rationalize society; but in antiquity all philosophers had the same
practical politics, inasmuch as none believed it feasible or salutary to
change the relations between rich and poor in a fundamental or
permanently progressive way. Democratic politics with a moral and
intellectual foundation which commands the suffrage of the wise is
strictly a modern invention, part and parcel of Enlightenment broadly
conceived.

The philosophers, however, had no illusions about democracy. As I

mentioned, they knew they were substituting one kind of
misunderstanding for another. The gentleman thought that philosophic
equanimity in the face of death comes from gentlemanly or heroic
courage exercised for the sake of the noble. The man of the people, on
the other hand, takes the philosopher’s reasonableness about avoiding
death to be a product of the passionate fear of death that motivates him.
But the philosopher knows that the rational, calculating, economic man
seeks immortality just as irrationally as, or even more so than, the man
who hopes for eternal fame or for another life, of which the only sign or
guarantee is lodged in his hopes but for which he organizes his life. The
utilitarian behaves sensibly in all that is required for preservation but
never takes account of the fact that he must die. He does everything
reasonable to put off the day of his death—providing for defense, peace,
order, health and wealth—but actively suppresses the fact that the day
must come. His whole life is absorbed in avoiding death, which is

inevitable, and therefore he might be thought to be the most irrational
of men, if rationality has anything to do with understanding ends or
comprehending the human situation as such. He gives way without
reserve to his most powerful passion and the wishes it engenders. The
hero and the pious man are at least taking account of eternity. Although
their wishes may make them mythologize about it, the posture they
assume is somehow more reasonable. The philosopher always thinks
and acts as though he were immortal, while always being fully aware
that he is mortal. He tries to stay alive as long as possible in order to
philosophize, but will not change his way of life or his thought in order
to do so. He is sensible in a way that heroes can never be; he looks at
things under the guise of eternity, as the bourgeois can never do.
Therefore he is at one with neither. Only the life devoted to knowing
can unite these opposites. Socrates is the tragic hero whose mind is full
of the things artisans think about.

The great modern philosophers were as much philosophers as were

the ancients. They were perfectly conscious of what separates them from
all other men, and they knew that the gulf is unbridgeable. They knew
that their connection with other men would always be mediated by
unreason. They took a dare on the peculiar form of reasoning that
comes from the natural inclinations. They seem to have been conﬁdent
that they could beneﬁt from the rational aspect and keep the irrational
one from overwhelming them. The theoretical life remained as distinct
from the practical life in their view as in the ancient one—theory
looking to the universal and unchangeable while understanding its
relation to the particular and changing; practice, totally absorbed by the
latter, seeing the whole only in terms of it, as a theodicy or an
anthropodicy, presented as God or History. Philosophy and philosophers
always see through such hopes for individual salvation and are hence
isolated. The modern philosophers knew that theory is pursued for its
own sake but took an interest in promoting the opinion that, to
paraphrase Clausewitz, theory is just practice pursued by other means.

The philosophers in their closets or their academies have entirely

different ends than the rest of mankind. The vision of the harmony of
theory and practice is only apparent. The moderns did not think, as did
the ancients, that they would lose sight of the distinction between the
two in identifying them. This is the most precise deﬁnition of their
daring. What the ancients almost religiously kept apart, the moderns

thought they could join without risk. The issue is: Does a society based
on reason necessarily make unreasonable demands on reason, or does it
approach more closely to reason and submit to the ministrations of the
reasonable? The difﬁculty is illuminated by the popular contemporary
misuse of a Greek word, praxis. It now means that there is no theory and
no practice, that politics has been theoreticized and philosophy
politicized. It expresses the overcoming of the distinction between the
eternal and the temporal. This is surely a result of Enlightenment,
although it goes counter to the intentions of the Enlighteners. The
question is whether it is a necessary or only an accidental result.

It has long been fashionable in some quarters to treat the thinkers of

the Enlightenment as optimistic and superﬁcial. This was a view
promoted in the wake of the French Revolution by reactionaries and
romantics, the counter-coup of the religious and the poetic, which has
had considerable and enduring success. The modern philosophers are
alleged to have believed in a new dawn in which men would become
reasonable and everything would be for the best. They did not,
according to this popular view, understand the ineradicable character of
evil, nor did they know, or at least take sufﬁcient account of, the power
of the irrational of which our later, profounder age is so fully aware. In
these pages, I have tried to show that this is a skewed and self-serving
interpretation. No one who looks carefully at the project these
philosophers outlined can accuse them of being optimistic in the sense
of expecting a simple triumph of reason or of underestimating the power
of evil. It is not sufﬁciently taken into account how Machiavellian they
were, in all senses of that word, and that they were actually Machiavelli’s
disciples. It was not by forgetting about the evil in man that they hoped
to better his lot but by giving way to it rather than opposing it, by
lowering standards. The very qualiﬁed rationality that they expected
from most men was founded self-consciously on encouraging the
greatest of all irrationalities. Selﬁshness was to be the means to the
common good, and they never thought that the moral or artistic
splendor of past nations was going to be reproduced in the world they
were planning. The combination of hardness and playfulness found in
their writings should dispel all suspicion of unfounded hopefulness.
What they plotted was “realistic,” if anything ever was.

And as to superﬁciality, everything turns on what the deepest human

fulﬁllment of humanity is in the use of reason. Man is the particular
being that can know the universal, the temporal being that is aware of
eternity, the part that can survey the whole, the effect that seeks the
cause. Whether it is wonder at the apprehension of being or just ﬁguring
things out, reason is the end for which the irrational things exist, and all
that seems to be merely brutish in man is informed by his rational
vocation—so 
thought 
the 
philosophers. 
Christopher 
Marlowe

understood both philosophy and Machiavelli very well when he put in
the latter’s mouth the phrase, “I hold there is no sin but ignorance.”
There are other experiences, always the religious, and in modern times
the poetic, which make competing claims. But it is not immediately
evident that their claims are superior to those of philosophy. The issue
comes back again to the relative dignity of reason vs. revelation. The fact
that popularized rationalism is, indeed, superﬁcial is no argument
against the philosophers. They knew it would be that way. (And, even in
this, the democratic citizen, knowing and exercising his rights, is not the
most contemptible of beings.) They were trying to make the central
human good central to society, and Enlightenment was and remains the
only plausible scheme for doing so.

On the face of this, it seems absurd to me to say that Bacon,

Descartes, Hobbes, Leibniz, Locke, Montesquieu and even Voltaire
(who might be considered a mere popularizer of these others) were less
deep than Jacques Maritain or T. S. Eliot—to mention two famous
contemporaries from whose mouths I learned as a young man that the
Enlightenment was shallow. Rousseau, who initiated the profound
school of criticism of Enlightenment’s effects, nevertheless says that
Bacon, Descartes and Newton were very great men, and he speaks of the
“wise Locke.” He knew that these were his theoretical kin, although he
disagreed with them in crucial respects. The vulgarity of modern society,
the object of so many complaints by intellectuals, is something the
philosophers were willing to live with. After all, as Socrates points out,
all societies look pretty much the same from the heights, be they
Periclean Athens or Des Moines, Iowa. A peaceful, wealthy society
where the people look up to science and have enough money to support
it is worth more than splendid imperia where there are slaves and no
philosophy. Locke appears superﬁcial because he was not a snob. There
is no way he could make a parade of the magniﬁcence of what he saw.

There is no doubt that these were serious men and that their

contrivances have had a public effect unlike that of any philosophers or
scientists before or since. The only comparable political events are the
founding of what Machiavelli called new modes and orders by prophets
—by Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, Romulus and (he implies) Jesus—which
he called on the philosophers to imitate. Modernity is largely of these
philosophers’ making, and our self-awareness depends on understanding
what they wanted to do and what they did do, grasping thus why our
situation is different from all other situations. However contrary it may
be to contemporary historical wisdom, the leading thread that runs
through all the accidents of modern history is the philosophical doctrine
of Enlightenment. Modern regimes were conceived by reason and
depend on the reasonableness of their members. And those regimes
required the reason of natural science in every aspect of their activity,
and the requirements of scientiﬁc advance largely determine their
policy. Whether it is called liberal democracy or bourgeois society,
whether the regime of the rights of man or that of acquisitiveness,
whether technology is used in a positive or a negative sense, everyone
knows that these terms describe the central aspects of our world. They
are demonstrably the results of the thought of a small group of men with
deep insight into the nature of things, who collaborated in an enterprise
the success of which is almost beyond belief. It penetrated and informed
every detail of life. These are not men to be dismissed—but they can be
questioned.

Swift’s Doubts

intended and spoke up against it in the name of the ancients and of
poetry. Gulliver’s Travels is to early modern philosophy what
Aristophanes’ The Clouds was to early ancient philosophy. Gulliver’s
Travels is nothing but a comic statement of Swift’s preference for
antiquity, casting his ancients as giants and noble horses, his moderns as
midgets and Yahoos. He addresses the aspect that most concerns us, the
establishment of the academies and universities—the Republic of
Letters, to use Pierre Bayle’s expression—in the chapter entitled “A
Voyage to Laputa.” Gulliver, after observing modern politics in Lilliput,
goes to Laputa to see modern science and its effects on life. Laputa is a

ﬂying island ruled by natural scientists. It is, of course, a parody of the
British Royal Society, in Swift’s time a relatively recent association of the
philosophers and scientists who had been tempted more into public and
public life by modern thought. In this strange new land Gulliver ﬁnds a
theoretical preoccupation abstracted from primary human concerns,
one whose beginning point was not the human dimension, but which
ends up altering it. On the Flying Island the men have one eye turned
inward, the other toward the zenith. They are perfect Cartesians—one
egotistical eye contemplating the self, one cosmological eye surveying
the most distant things. The intermediate range, which previously was
the center of concentration and deﬁned both the ego and the pattern for
the study of the stars, is not within the Laputian purview. The only
studies are astronomy and music, and the world is reduced to these two
sciences. The men have no contact with ordinary sense experiences.
This is what permits them to remain content with their science.
Communication with others outside their circle is unnecessary. Rather
than making their mathematics follow the natural shapes of things, they
change things so as to ﬁt their mathematics. Their food is cut into all
sorts of geometrical ﬁgures. Their admiration for women, such as it is, is
due to the resemblance of women’s various parts to speciﬁc ﬁgures.
Jealousy is unknown to them. Their wives can commit adultery before
their eyes without its being noticed. This absence of eroticism is
connected with an absence of poetic sensibility. These scientists cannot
understand poetry, and hence, in Gulliver’s view, their science cannot
be a science of man.

Another peculiarity of these men is described by Gulliver as follows.

“What I chieﬂy admired, and thought altogether unaccountable, was
the strong disposition I observed in them towards news and politics,
perpetually inquiring into public affairs, giving their judgments in
matters of state and passionately disputing every inch of a party opinion.
I have indeed observed the same disposition among most of the
mathematicians I have known in Europe, although I could never
discover the least analogy between the two sciences.” Gulliver
recognizes the political concern of theoretical science and doubts that it
can comprehend the actual practice of politics. He also thinks the
scientists have a sense of special right to manipulate politics. The
Laputians’ political power rests on the new science. The Flying Island is
built on the principles of physics founded by Gilbert and Newton.

Applied science can open new roads to political power. This island
allows the king and the nobles to live free from conspiracies by the
people—in fact, free from contact with them—while still making use of
them and receiving the tribute that is necessary to the maintenance and
leisure of the rulers. They can crush the terrestrial cities. Their power is
almost unlimited and their responsibilities nil. Power is concentrated in
the hands of the rulers; hence they are not forced even by fear to
develop a truly political intelligence. They require no virtue. Everything
runs itself, so there is no danger that their incompetence, indifference or
vice will harm them. Their island allows their characteristic deformity to
grow to the point of monstrosity. Science, in freeing men, destroys the
natural conditions that make them human. Hence, for the ﬁrst time in
history, there is the possibility of tyranny grounded not on ignorance,
but on science.

Swift objects to Enlightenment because it encourages a hypertrophic

development of mathematics, physics and astronomy, thus returning to
the pre-Socratic philosophy that Aristophanes had criticized for being
unselfconscious or unable to understand man. Enlightenment rejected
that moderate Socratic compromise between society and philosophy,
poetry and science, which had governed intellectual life for so long and
had made possible the foundation of political science. But, unlike pre-
Socratic philosophy, which had no interest in politics at all, this science
wished to rule and could rule. The new science had indeed generated
sufﬁcient power to rule, but in order to do so had had to lose the human
perspective. In other words, Swift denied that modern science had
actually established a human or political science. All to the contrary, it
had destroyed it. Such a political science would, in the ﬁrst place, have
to understand man as man, and not as a geometric ﬁgure with ﬂesh on
it. In the second place, it would have to ensure the harmony between
the good of science or scientists and that of a decent political
community. On the Flying Island, neither condition is met. In
particular, the scientists exploit the nonscientists so as to live their
version of the contemplative life in safety and comfort.

power don’t give a damn about mankind at large. The whole conspiracy
is like any other. The potential tyrant speaks in the name of the
common good but is seeking a private good. Bacon’s House of Solomon
in the New Atlantis is just propaganda for the Flying Island. The

scientists want to live as they please—delighting in numbers, ﬁgures,
and stars—and are no longer obliged to hide their desires. The people
still have means of making themselves felt, but they are essentially
enslaved to what scientists provide for them. The scientists can cut off
the sun’s light to the world below.

There were elements of uncanny prescience in Swift’s misanthropic

and cranky satire on science. Natural science very quickly withdrew
from the Enlightenment project as a whole, leaving the human parts of
it to fend for themselves. The laws of nature were scientiﬁc, but natural
science no longer claimed to be able to legislate human laws, leaving
political science out in the cold, without a rational or scientiﬁc basis.
Instead of being real partners in the business of overthrowing the
antiscientiﬁc regimes of the past, the scientists became fellow travelers.
Once theological supervision was defeated and everyone accepted the
need for scientists instead of priests, science was free and, in principle,
indifferent to the political regimes that need and use them. Early
Enlightenment thinkers appear to have believed that there was a perfect
coincidence between rational consent of the governed and the freedom
of science. But science could not rationalize all men, and turned out
not to have to, inasmuch as it became able to force whatever rulers there
are to support it and leave it alone. When there were still rulers who
would in principle persecute a Galileo if they found out what he was up
to—because his investigations undermined their legitimacy, founded on
sacred texts—scientists were natural allies of all opponents of these
rulers. The fascination of early modern thought with the ecclesiastical
authority as the one great danger to freedom of thought caused the
philosophers to believe that the alliance formed to overthrow it was
permanent. In the event, it turned out that once there were secular
rulers who had no absolute commitment to a nonrational or unscientiﬁc
view of nature, the nonhuman part of the Enlightenment was immune.
Self-interest, the great modern motivating principle, no longer dictated
concern for the other thinkers, and science or reason, which appeared
now to belong utterly to the natural philosopher, no longer gave the
political and moral thinkers any warrant. In short, the common front
presented by human and natural science in the name of democracy
became an ideology.

The condition of natural science in the Soviet Union is the dreadful

culmination of Swift’s prediction. It is a tyranny founded on science.

And natural science, alone among the learned disciplines, and natural
scientists, alone among human beings, have been able to force the
tyrants to leave them alone. A Soviet mathematician is as much a
mathematician as an American mathematician, whereas a historian or a
political scientist must be a sham, a party hack. Natural science can now
ﬂourish in the Soviet Union, because the Soviet tyrants have ﬁnally
recognized their unconditional need of the scientists. They cannot
endure the historians or political scientists, and they do not have to.
These latter are not of the same species as the natural scientists, either in
the eyes of the natural scientists or those of the tyrants.

Most unpleasant of all is that this dreadful regime gets its power to

maintain its rule from the natural sciences. As sciences they are neutral,
except with respect to what concerns their interests, and cannot judge
Roosevelt to be superior to Stalin. This would have probably been true
of pre-Socratics too, but they did not generate political power. They
were indifferent to political regimes and provided aid and comfort to
none. The new scientists are the cause of all. The pre-Socratics lived in
splendid isolation as models of the theoretical life. Natural scientists
now project an ambiguous image. Although they may be truly
theoretical, they do not appear that way to untheoretical men. Their
involvement in human things gives them a public role as curers of
diseases and inventors of nuclear weapons, as bastions of democracy and
bastions of totalitarianism. Andrei Sakharov is humanly most impressive,
but his stand for human rights does not follow from his science and, to
say the least, does not guarantee him the fellowship of other Soviet
scientists. The new dispensation has protected science; it has done
nothing to give scientists control over the uses of the results of science,
or the wherewithal to know how to use those results, if they were indeed
able to gain control over them. Natural science in the long run won out
over the Party when its results clashed with Marxist orthodoxy, but it
could not control the Party’s political action. And no future tyrant is
likely to imitate Hitler’s mad doctrinairism, which caused him to send
Jewish scientists to his enemies to insure his defeat. Science in that
sense moderates potential Hitlers—but only in that sense. In general it
increases man’s power without increasing his virtue, hence increasing
his power to do both good and evil.

The total picture is one of great danger resulting from the political

involvement of science. Some people assert that we have to reinvent

politics in order to meet the danger. Swift tells us that politics was
already reinvented by the founders of Enlightenment, and that is the
problem. It turned out that natural science had nothing to say about
human things, about the uses of science for life or about the scientist.
When a poet writes about a poet, he does so as a poet. When a scientist
talks about scientists, he does not do so as a scientist. If he does so, he
uses none of the tools he uses in his scientiﬁc activity, and his
conclusions have none of the demonstrative character he demands in
his science. Science has broken off from the self-consciousness about
science that was the core of ancient science. This loss of self-
consciousness is somehow connected with the banishment of poetry.

Rouseau’s Radicalization and the German
University

Here Rousseau bursts on the scene, just at the moment of

Enlightenment’s victory and the establishment of the institutions of
learning as the crown of society. An inverse Socrates, he reasserted the
permanent tension between science and society, arguing that scientiﬁc
progress corrupts morals and hence society, and he took the side of
society. Virtue, “the science of simple souls,” is what is most necessary,
and science undermines virtue. It teaches a slack and selﬁsh relation to
other men and to civil society, it calls into question the principles of
virtue, and it requires a luxurious and loose society in which to ﬂourish.

The knowers who inhabit the academies lose sight of this, become

easygoing and self-satisﬁed. The Ciceros and Bacons would not have
been what they were if they had been professors. It was in living life as it
really is, rather than in the artiﬁcially structured and protected
universities, that they were able to grasp the human situation as a whole,
recognize its inner tensions and take responsibility, without the
protective cover of a faith in progress and without the vanity of society’s
ignorantly bestowed honors. Professors had made reason into a public
prejudice and were now among the prejudiced. They represented an
unsatisfactory halfway house between the two harsh disciplines that
make a man serious—community and solitude.

Rousseau insisted on making explicit the ambiguity about the relative

dignity 
of 
theory 
and 
practice 
implicit 
in 
Enlightenment.

Enlightenment presented the thinker not as the best man but as the

most useful one. Happiness is the most important thing; if thinking is
not happiness, it must be judged by its relationship to happiness. It is,
Rousseau argues, more than doubtful that science produces happiness.
Moreover, although Hobbes and Locke teach that man is rational, his
rationality is in the service of passions or sentiments, which are more
fundamental than reason. Thinking through their position that man is
naturally a solitary being results in the recognition that speech, the
condition of reason, is not natural to man. Man’s speciﬁc difference
from the other animals cannot, therefore, be reason. Enlightenment
misunderstands both reason and feeling.

Rousseau’s reasoning and rhetoric were so potent that hardly anyone

who thought, as well as many who did not, could avoid his inﬂuence.
After him, community, virtue, compassion, feeling, enthusiasm, the
beautiful and the sublime, and even imagination, the banished faculty,
had their innings against modern philosophy and science. The fringe
bohemian, the sentimentalist, the artist became at least as much the
teacher and the model as the scientist. Inspired by Rousseau, Kant
undertook a systematic overhauling of Enlightenment’s project in such a
way as to make coherent the relationship between theory and practice,
reason and morality, science and poetry, all of which had been made so
problematic by Rousseau. Kant’s survey of the whole of knowledge can
also be read as a project for the fruitful coexistence of the disciplines in
the universities. Rousseau had pointed out that the ancient tension
between the thinker and society, supposedly resolved by Enlightenment,
had resurfaced in new and very dangerous ways. Kant tried again to
resolve it.

He, too, agreed that natural science had read free, moral, artistic man

out of nature. He did not try to reform natural science, to translate man
back into nature after the fashion of the ancients. What he did was to
demonstrate that nature, as understood by natural science, does not
comprehend the whole of things. There are other realms, not grasped or
graspable by natural science, which are real and leave a place for the
reality of the experience of humanity. Reason does not have to be
abandoned to defend humanity, for reason can demonstrate that science
has limits that it did not know, and reason can demonstrate the
possibility of a freedom illegitimately denied by natural science.
Possibility and ground become the themes in Kant, for much that is
human had begun to appear to be impossible and groundless.

Kant accepted Rousseau’s reasoning that freedom must be what

distinguishes man, that it is denied by the kind of causation accepted in
natural science, and that therefore the practical life, the exercise of
moral freedom, is higher than the theoretical life, the use of scientiﬁc
reason. In one of the most arduous and powerful theoretical efforts
undertaken by man, he tried to demonstrate that nature is not all, that
reason and spontaneity are not contraries. All this is established by
reason, not by passion against reason. That effort lives in the three
Critiques, the last great statement of liberal Enlightenment, the other
strand of rationalism that coexists in the universities with Baconian-
Cartesian-Lockean rationalism. The primary effort is to set limits to pure
reason, to say to “proud reason, ‘this far and no further,’” in such a way
that reason will submit rationally. Kant’s critical philosophy does not
dictate to science what it must discover; it establishes the limits within
which pure reason operates. It does the same for practical reason, thus
turning David Humer’s distinction between the is and the ought from a
humiliation for moral reasoning into the basis for its triumph and its
dignity. It further establishes the faculty of judgment, which can again
allow man to speak about ends and the beautiful.

In this system not only does natural science have a secure place in

the order of the university, but so also do morals and esthetics. However,
the unity of the university is now Kant. These three kinds of knowledge
(the true, the good, the beautiful in new guises) are given their domains
by the three Critiques, but are not uniﬁed by being knowledge of aspects
of a single reality. Aristotle’s human sciences are part of the science of
nature, and his knowledge of man is connected to and in harmony with
his knowledge of the stars, bodies in motion and animals other than
man. This is not the case with the human sciences after Rousseau,
which depend on the existence of a realm entirely different from nature.
Their study is not part of the study of nature, and the two kinds of study
have little to do with one another.

This new condition of the learned disciplines, which found its

earliest expression in the German universities at the beginning of the
nineteenth century and gradually spread throughout the Western
universities, at ﬁrst proved very fertile. The progress of the natural
sciences, now unimpeded by theological or political supervision and
emancipated from philosophy, continued and became even more rapid.
And the human sciences, given a fresh vocation, came to a new

ﬂowering, especially in historical and philological studies. Man
understood as a free, moral individual—as creative, as producer of
cultures, as maker and product of history—provided a ﬁeld for humane
research taking man seriously as man, not reduced to the moved bodies
that now constituted the realm of natural science. The serious goal that
is necessary to make scholarship vital was provided by the sense that
man could be understood by his historical origins; that moral and
political standards could be derived from the historical traditions of the
various nations, to replace the failed standards of natural right and law;
that the study of high culture, particularly that of Greece, would provide
the models for modern achievement; that a proper understanding of
religion might provide a faith proof against critical reason. Scholars, for
that moment, more than at any time since the Renaissance, seemed to
be in the service of life, to be as useful as soldiers, doctors and workers.
The great movements of careful historical research and textual criticism
initiated in this heyday of the nineteenth century gave us nourishment
which we have yet entirely to digest. The humanities took over the
whole burden of instructing us about man, especially in morals and
esthetics (the new science of the beautiful and the sublime).

However, the very condition of this exhilaration in the human

sciences—the dualism nature-freedom—created problems from the
outset and in the long run undermined the conﬁdence of their
practitioners or turned them back into mere erudites again. There was a
haunting doubt as to the reality of the realm of freedom, which seemed
to restore the richness of the phenomenon man. What are the relations
between the two realms? At what point does the natural in man stop and
the free begin? Is it really possible to limit the claims of natural science?
Within Kant’s system, if scientists can, as they claim, in the long run
predict the behavior of all phenomena, can one plausibly postulate a
noumenal freedom, the expressions of which are predictable in the
phenomenal ﬁeld? Does not natural science presuppose mechanical
causation, determinism and the reduction of all higher phenomena to
lower ones, the complex to the simple, and do not the successes of that
science in astronomy, physics, chemistry and biology attest to the truth
of its presuppositions? New discoveries or speculations such as evolution
called into question the independent or nonderivative character of
mind. The very faculty that made it possible to set the limits of science
and reason in the Critique of Pure Reason proved to be just another

accidental effect of evolving matter. The ground of morals and esthetics
disappeared. Natural science continued to seem substantial, while
romanticism and idealism inhabited imaginary cities, sublime hopes but
little more. Pessimism as a philosophical school came onto the scene.
Joined to the health and expansiveness of natural science was the
recognition that humane learning had itself failed to generate moral and
political standards. All the study of the facts of national history and the
invention of “folk-minds” could not provide guidance for the future, or
imperatives for conduct. The learning was impressive, but it looked
more and more to be the product of idle curiosity rather than the quest
for knowledge of what is most needful. Philosophy, no longer a part of,
or required by, natural science, was nudged over toward the humanities
and even became just another historical subject. Its claim to be the ruler
in the university no longer earned respect. There was a condominium
with no higher unity. The humane learning could argue for equal rights
and was to some extent formally accorded them, but that began to be
“academic” and have little to do with the way things looked in the real
world. The natural scientist was both the image of the knower and the
public benefactor; the humanist, a professor.

The problem of the knower in the perspective of the modern

understanding was formulated over and over again from the beginning
of the modern university dispensation by the man, not a member of the
German university, who, along with Kant, most inﬂuenced it—Goethe.
A classic summation of his views is to be found in Faust, the only
modern book that can be said to have made a national heroic model to
rival those of Homer, Virgil, Dante and Shakespeare. The scholar Faust,
meditating in his cell, translates the ﬁrst line of the Gospel According to
John, “In the beginning was the word (logos)”; then, dissatisﬁed with the
description he says “the feeling,” which also does not quite do; ﬁnally
and deﬁnitively he chooses to reinterpret it as “the deed.” Action has
primacy over contemplation, deed over speech. He who understands
must imitate the beginnings. The act of the creator, not preceded and
controlled by thought, is the ﬁrst thing. The scholar with his reason
misunderstands the origin because he lacks the vital force that lies
behind the order of things. He triﬂes, piling up facts from which the
informing principle has been extracted. Faust’s relation to the perpetual
studier Wagner, who says he already knows much but wants to know
everything, is paradigmatic. Only knowledge that serves life is good, and

life is in the ﬁrst place constituted by dark action, by fatal impulse.
Knowledge comes afterward and lightens the world made by the deed.
As painted by Goethe, Wagner looks slight and feeble. His idle love of
knowledge is superﬁcial compared to Faust’s inchoate impulses.
Although the opposition between the vita activa and the vita
contemplativa is as old as philosophy, if not older, Goethe’s moment is
the ﬁrst where the side of action is taken by theory itself, thus
announcing the end of the ancient opposition. The theoretical life is
groundless because the ﬁrst thing is not the intelligible order but the
chaos open to creativity. There can be no contemplation where there is
nothing to see. Goethe took full account of the modern situation of
knower and poet and put a question mark after learning that is not
subordinate to the ends of life enhancement. In antiquity there had also
been mere scholars, studying Homer and Plato without knowing quite
why, and without being interested in the questions the writers raised,
fascinated by meters or the reliability of texts. But the objection to these
scholars was that they lacked the urgent desire to know the most
important things, whereas the modern objection to scholarship is that it
lacks the urgency of commitment to action. Most simply, the historian
—the very model of the modern scholar—chronicles deeds. But if deeds
are the most important thing, then the scholar is by deﬁnition inferior to
the doer. Moreover, such a reasoner is incapable of the leap into
darkness that the deed demands. Finally, if the doer is not a thinker,
then it is doubtful whether the thinker can understand the doer. Does
one not have to be akin to Caesar to understand him? To say that one
does not have to be Caesar to understand him is equivalent to saying
that one does not have to be anything to understand everything. The
hidden premise of the realm of freedom is that action has primacy over
thought. As Goethe saw, the modern scholarly giant has feet of clay. It is
also blind because it is lacking objects of cognition—as do all sciences
—where there is only darkness.

The problem of scholarship is best illustrated in classical scholarship.

The study of ancient Greece and Rome used to be the scholarly
discipline par excellence, at times igniting brilliantly and illuminating
the world, at others ﬂickering and almost being extinguished. The study
of the ancients has followed the ebb and ﬂow of philosophic innovation
in the West. Moments of great transformation have started with
refreshment at the Greek source, its inspiration slaking a burning thirst.

An overwhelming sense that something is missing is the serious motive
for authentic, therefore careful and exhaustive, recovery of what has
been lost. Greece provides the assurance that there was something
better than what is. When the old treasures have been digested and the
innovators are satisﬁed that they can walk on their own, the ancient
seems less necessary and degenerates into habitual learning, a
monument rather than a guiding light. The intoxicating atmosphere of
the Renaissance, the rebirth of Greece, always possible because of its
universality and the permanence of human nature, culminated in a
speciﬁcally modern thought—beginning from Machiavelli’s careful
study and criticism of both Greeks and Romans—which could proudly
assert its superiority to its ancient inspirers, winning the quarrel between
the ancient and the modern.

Rousseau initiated a second Renaissance when he expressed his

dissatisfaction with modernity, made possible by his knowledge of the
Greek and Roman examples. “Ancient statesmen spoke endlessly of
morals and virtue; ours speak only of commerce and money.” Rousseau’s
use of his knowledge of antiquity—which was, although not scholarly,
very profound—is a perfect model of the reason for having ancient
thought available to those great individuals who, as Nietzsche put it, are
untimely and need a vantage point from which to get their bearings and
become the most timely of all. It is the old Greeks who make men both
untimely and timely in crises. Nothing fancy, no inﬁnite searching
outside; the book in itself always intelligible, as long as human nature
remains the same. This is the role played by the Greek authors
throughout the wildly varying ages since they wrote, always Phoenix-like
when they appear to have been consumed and are only ashes conserved
by the scholars.

Rousseau’s fervent appeal for modern man to look back to the

ancient city, because it was whole and a true community, was the source
of the romantic longing to breathe the fresh air of Greece again. Its
moral and esthetic health was what Rousseau conveyed so convincingly.
He gave the impulse to all kinds of attempts at new communitarian
beginnings, from Robespierre to Owen to Tolstoy and the kibbutz, an
impulse still alive in contemporary thought. But most of all, as I have
discussed 
earlier, 
his 
observations 
on 
the 
tension 
between

Enlightenment and decent politics gave birth to the idea of culture. It
was to the study of Greece or Sparta or Athens as models of cultures that

Rousseau’s reﬂection led. The motive for this study—which ﬂourished
particularly in Germany, where Rousseau’s inﬂuence was most strongly
felt, precisely because of Kant’s and Goethe’s predominance there—was
to understand culture, with a view to the founding of a German culture.
It was primarily Greek and Roman poetry and secondarily history to
which the German thinkers turned for inspiration, and the scholars
followed. It was distinctly not Greek philosophy. This was evident in
Rousseau himself. The philosophers whose theoretical reﬂection was
necessary to him were Bacon, Descartes and Newton, not Plato and
Aristotle. The latter two just did not know the truth about nature.
Whatever interest later scholarship had in them was as parts of Greek
culture, as typical expressions of it and less interesting than poets, who
are culture founders. The Greek philosophers were not valid
interlocutors. Rousseau admired Plato and thought he had deep insight
into human things, but rather more as a poet than a philosopher or
scientist. Plato was indeed the philosopher for lovers, but Rousseau,
without consulting Plato, taught that eros is the child of sex and
imagination. Its activity is poetry, the source of what Rousseau
understood to be the life-creating and -enhancing illusions and thereby
the source of the ultimate grounds of the folk-minds that make peoples
possible. In Plato, eros led to philosophy, which in turn led to the
rational quest for the best regime, the one good political order vs. the
plurality of cultures. So the discovery of Greek “culture” was contrary to
Greek philosophy. And this particular difference, concerning the best
regime as opposed to culture, proved fatal to reason. We can recognize
this in a preliminary way in Weber’s assumption that it is values rather
than reasons that found and sustain communities.

Thus from the outset of this second Renaissance, scholars treated

Greek philosophers more as natural scientists treat atoms than as they
treat other natural scientists. They were not invited to join the serious
discussion of the scholars. All things Greek were subjected to our
analysis based on the views of modern philosophy. This procedure alters
radically what one expects to learn from them. Men of the
Enlightenment looked down on Greek thinkers because they thought
them wrong. Romantics respected them because their truth or falsity
became a matter of indifference.

Schiller’s distinction between naive and sentimental poetry is an

example of the kind of categorization that became common. Homer’s

charm is a result of his not having seen what we see, his unawareness of
the abyss. He still walked on enchanted ground, and his poetry lacked
that reﬂectiveness imposed on us who know that the gods can depart.
He was unaware of the death of gods and cultures as children are
unaware of the death of men. He lived in the youth of the world. If we
are to be whole and happy we must recover that direct relation to things
men once had. But we must do it in the company of our awareness of
the vulnerability of things. The artist has a greater responsibility than
Homer knew because he does not merely imitate nature but creates it. A
successful modern artist would be deeper, more fully self-conscious than
was Homer.

The naive Homer belonged to a culture different from that of the

sentimental Schiller, and has to be understood in his own cultural
context. Naiveté consists in large measure in the lack of “historical
consciousness,” the belief that the greats are individuals to be
understood individually and in the same way at all times. Plutarch
believed he was showing forth images of greatness itself, while in fact his
heroes are just Greeks and Romans, high expressions of their culture,
from which they are inseparable. The awareness of this is the peculiarly
modern superiority or insight.

Schiller was, of course, an unusually profound and sensitive reader. It

is doubtful whether his reading of Homer teaches us very much about
Homer, because it is too encumbered by what we now believe to be
Romantic prejudices. But Homer, interpreted and misinterpreted by
Schiller, contributed to his own artistic creation, which was founding a
German literature and a German culture. It is an example of what some
would call “creative misinterpretation.” The faith in one’s own vision,
perhaps fed by the inspiration of others’ visions, is what is important. An
act uninformed by learning is the important thing. Implicit in what I am
saying is that while Schiller’s views are not true but are productive, there
are true views, known presumably to scholars, which are not productive.
This is what Goethe implies. The scholar is an objective reasoner, the
poet a subjective creator.

Here is where Nietzsche enters, arguing with unparalleled clarity and

vigor that if we take “historical consciousness” seriously, there cannot be
objectivity, that scholarship as we know it is simply a delusion, and a
dangerous one, for objectivity undermines subjectivity. All of classical
scholarship in Germany, with its exquisite sense of the historical

determination of the mind, proceeded as though the mind of the
German scholar were not so determined. The discovery of culture and
the folk-mind means that there cannot be universal principles of
understanding. Reason is a myth that makes mythmaking impossible to
comprehend. Creativity and a science of human things cannot coexist,
and since the science of human things admits that man is creative, the
creative man wins the day. But scholars cannot behave creatively.

The discovery of culture as the element in which man becomes

himself produces an imperative: Build and sustain culture. This the
scholar cannot do. Culture is not only the condition of life, it is the
condition of knowing. Without a German culture, the scholar in
Germany cannot confront other cultures.

After the great moment in German thought—of Kant, Goethe,

Schiller and Hegel, in which the rediscovery of Greece played so
important a role—Greek scholarship retired to the universities, where it
was again a dead piece of learning, unable itself to inspire or produce a
compelling vision that could transform men. It became studied by
bourgeois professors who educated bourgeois men for whom, as with
Aschenbach, the Greeks were just “culture.” The Greek splendor,
which had formed such heroic ﬁgures just a half-century earlier,
became a mystery. Nietzsche, acutely aware of this splendor and its
disappearance from the scene, blamed the scholars, or rather blamed
something that informed scholarship. A classical scholar who certainly
would have been among the greatest who ever lived if he had not been
called to philosophy, Nietzsche attempted the last great return to the
Greeks. Like his German predecessors, he returned to Greek poetry in
particular. But he coupled his taste for the tragedies with something very
new—a radical attack on Socrates, the founder of the tradition of
rationalism, which is the essence of the university. This is probably the
ﬁrst attack made by a philosopher on Socrates, and it is a violent one,
continuing throughout Nietzsche’s whole career. What is fascinating for
us in this is that Nietzsche, and Heidegger following him, are the ﬁrst
modern thinkers since the days of Hobbes, Spinoza and Descartes to
take Socrates—or any classical philosopher’s teaching—really seriously
as an opponent, as a living opponent8 rather than as a cultural artifact.
Socrates is alive and must be overcome. It is essential to recognize that
this is the issue in Nietzsche. It is not a historical or cultural question. It
is simply a classic philosophic disputation: Was Socrates right or wrong?

Nietzsche’s indictment of Socrates is that his rationalism, his
utilitarianism, subverted and explained away that great stupidity which is
noble instinct. He destroyed the tragic sense of life, which intuited
man’s true situation amidst things and allowed for creative forming of
life against the terror of existence, unendowed with and unguided by
any pre-existing forms or patterns. Instinct or fatality, prior to reason and
vulnerable to reason, establishes the table of laws or valuations within
which healthy reason works. A darkness on top of a void is the condition
of life and creation, and it is dispelled in the light of rational analysis.
The poet, in his act of creation, knows this. The scientist and the scholar
never do. The act of creation is what forms cultures and folk-minds.
There cannot be, as Socrates believed, the pure mind, which is trans-
historical. This belief is the fundamental premise and error of science,
an error that becomes manifestly fatal in dealing with human things.
The method of the sciences is designed to see only what is everywhere
and always, whereas what is particular and emergent is all that counts
historically and culturally. Homer is not merely one example of an epic,
or the Bible of a revealed text, but that is what science sees them as, and
the only reason it is interested in them. The scholar turns away from
them to comparative religion or comparative literature, i.e., either to
indifference or to a ﬂabby ecumenism compounded out of the lowest
common denominator of a variety of old and incompatible creations.
The scholar cannot understand the texts that he purports to interpret
and explain. Schiller might be able to grasp the essence of the Iliad
because as a creator he is akin to Homer. He could not understand
Homer as Homer understood himself, because his mind was of a
different historical epoch. But he could understand what it means to be
a poet. A scholar can do neither. From the point of view of life, and from
the point of view of truth, modern scholarship is a failure. Hegel
ridicules the typical German gymnasium teacher who explains that
Alexander the Great had a pathological love of power. The teacher
proves the assertion by the fact that Alexander conquered the world. The
teacher’s freedom from this illness is attested to by the fact that he has
not conquered the world. This story encapsulates Nietzsche’s criticism
of the German university and its classical scholarship. The scholar
cannot understand the will to power, not a cause recognized by science,
which made Alexander different from others, because the scholar

neither has it nor does his method permit him to have it or see it. The
scholar could never conquer the mind of man.

drawing of the consequences of what German humane scholarship
really believed, had a stunning effect on German university life and on
the German respect for reason altogether. Artists received a new license,
and even philosophy began to reinterpret itself as a form of art. The
poets won the old war between philosophy and poetry, in which
Socrates had been philosophy’s champion. Nietzsche’s war on the
university led in two directions—either to an abandonment of the
university by serious men, or to its reform to make it play a role in the
creation of culture. The university ruled by Hegel, the modern Aristotle,
had to be reconstituted, as the discredited medieval university had been
made over by the now discredited Enlightenment university.

Nietzsche’s effect was immediately felt by artists in all Western

countries. He was the rage from 1890 on, and hardly any important
painter, poet or novelist was immune to his charm. But his Hellenism
had relatively little effect on that art. They took his characterization of
modern culture and the conclusions of his arguments about the causes
of its decadence and set about either popularizing them or attempting to
found new cultures in various schools. They explored the freshly opened
terrain of the id, seeking new forms. In the universities Nietzsche’s ﬁrst
inﬂuences were to be found in relatively marginal or new disciplines
like sociology or psychology, none of which was deeply inﬂuenced by
Greek or Roman models. Within the study of classics a new generation
of scholars turned more to the study of religion and poetry,
concentrating on Greece prior to Socrates and on the irrational in its
writers. In philosophy Nietzsche was the source of various schools of
phenomenology and existentialism, and he ﬁnally became academically
respectable.

But it was Heidegger, practically alone, for whom the study of Greek

philosophy became truly central, a pressing concern for his meditation
on being. Heidegger, following Nietzsche, had cast the most radical
doubt on the whole enterprise of modern philosophy and science. A
new beginning was imperative, and he turned with open mind to the
ancients. But he did not focus on Plato or Aristotle—although he
reﬂected on them and was a most ingenious interpreter of them—
because Nietzsche had dealt with them by way of Socrates. Heidegger

was drawn instead to the pre-Socratic philosophers, from whom he
hoped to discover another understanding of being to help him replace
the exhausted one inherited from Plato and Aristotle, which he and
Nietzsche thought to be at the root of both Christianity and modern
science.

Strangely, the Hellenism of Heidegger did not give a strong impulse

to the study of Greek philosophy. This may have something to do with
the effects of the war and Heidegger’s disgrace. He, too, had to reenter
respectability by literary backdoors and on the wings of the very
respectable academic Left. Neither carrier was much interested in the
profound reﬂection on the ancients, which gave him his perspective on
the contemporary scene. This popularizing made hay out of his
description of our situation. The intellectuals who admired Heidegger
took for granted, as neither he nor Nietzsche did, that Plato and Aristotle
are not worthy of our serious concern. But that is where the issue lies.
Are Nietzsche and Heidegger right about Plato and Aristotle? They
rightly saw that the question is here, and both returned obsessively to
Socrates. Our rationalism is his rationalism. Perhaps they did not take
seriously enough the changes wrought by the modern rationalists and
hence the possibility that the Socratic way might have avoided the
modern impasse. But certainly all the philosophers, the proponents of
reason, have something in common, and more or less directly reach
back to Aristotle, Socrates’ spiritual grandchild. A serious argument
about what is most profoundly modern leads inevitably to the
conclusion that study of the problem of Socrates is the one thing most
needful.9 It was Socrates who made Nietzsche and Heidegger look to
the pre-Socratics. For the ﬁrst time in four hundred years, it seems
possible and imperative to begin all over again, to try to ﬁgure out what
Plato was talking about, because it might be the best thing available.

The history of classics since the Renaissance has consisted in

momentary glimpses of the importance of Greece for man as man,
everywhere and always, followed by long periods of merely scholarly
study without any sufﬁcient reason for it, living off the gradually dying
energy provided by the original philosophic dynamos. Up to Nietzsche,
the neglect of and contempt for Plato and Aristotle was the result of a
belief that what they tried to do could be done much better. That is why
Socrates was always in good repute. He was the skeptical seeker after the
way to knowledge by means of unaided reason. He was not tied to any

solution or system and thus could be seen as the originator and the
inspirer who did not constrain the freedom of posterity. The current
contempt for Plato and Aristotle is of an entirely different kind, for it is
allied to contempt for Socrates. He corrupted them; they did not pervert
him. We did not progress from Socrates, but he marked the beginning of
the decline. Reason itself is rejected by philosophy itself. Thus the
common thread of the whole tradition has been broken, and with it the
raison d’être of the university as we know it.

Thus it was no accident that Heidegger came forward just after

Hitler’s accession to power to address the university community in
Freiburg as the new rector, and urged commitment to National
Socialism. His argument was not without subtlety and its own special
kind of irony, but in sum the decision to devote wholeheartedly the life
of the mind to an emerging revelation of being, incarnated in a mass
movement, was what Heidegger encouraged. That he did so was not a
result of his political innocence but a corollary of his critique of
rationalism. That is why I have entitled this section “From Socrates’
Apology to Heidegger’s Rektoratsrede.” The university began in spirit
from Socrates’ contemptuous and insolent distancing of himself from
the Athenian people, his refusal to accept any command from them to
cease asking, “What is justice? What is knowledge? What is a god?” and
hence doubting the common opinions about such questions, and in his
serious game (in the Republic) of trying to impose the rule of
philosophers on an unwilling people without respect for their “culture.”
The university may have come near to its death when Heidegger joined
the German people—especially the youngest part of that people, which
he said had already made an irreversible commitment to the future—
and put philosophy at the service of German culture. If I am right in
believing that Heidegger’s teachings are the most powerful intellectual
force in our times, then the crisis of the German university, which
everyone saw, is the crisis of the university everywhere.

It may be thought that I have devoted too much space to this

idiosyncratic history of the university. But the university, of all
institutions, is most dependent on the deepest beliefs of those who
participate in its peculiar life. Our present educational problems cannot
seriously be attributed to bad administrators, weakness of will, lack of
discipline, lack of money, insufﬁcient attention to the three R’s, or any
of the other common explanations that indicate things will be set aright

if we professors would just pull up our socks. All these things are the
result of a deeper lack of belief in the university’s vocation. One cannot
say that we must defend academic freedom when there are grave doubts
about the principles underlying academic freedom. To march out to
battle on behalf of the university may be noble, but it is only a patriotic
gesture. Such gestures are necessary and useful for nations, but they do
little for universities. Thought is all in all for universities. Today there is
precious little thought about universities, and what there is does not
unequivocally support the university’s traditional role. In order to ﬁnd
out why we have fallen on such hard times, we must recognize that the
foundations of the university have become extremely doubtful to the
highest intelligences. Our petty tribulations have great causes. What
happened to the universities in Germany in the thirties is what has
happened and is happening everywhere. The essence of it all is not
social, political, psychological or economic, but philosophic. And, for
those who wish to see, contemplation of Socrates is our most urgent
task. This is properly an academic task.

8 Hegel, of course, studied ancient philosophy very well, but to incorporate it into modernity. It
was not for him an enemy, and as a friend it was incomplete or imperfect.

9 Cf. Werner J. Dannhauser, Nietzsche’s View of Socrates, Cornell, 1974.

THE SIXTIES

“You don’t have to intimidate us,” said the famous professor of
philosophy in April 1969, to ten thousand triumphant students
supporting a group of black students who had just persuaded “us,” the
faculty of Cornell University, to do their will by threatening the use of
ﬁrearms as well as threatening the lives of individual professors. A
member of the ample press corps newly specialized in reporting the
hottest item of the day, the university, muttered, “You said it, brother.”
The reporter had learned a proper contempt for the moral and
intellectual qualities of professors. Servility, vanity and lack of conviction
are not difﬁcult to discern.

The professors, the repositories of our best traditions and highest

intellectual aspirations, were fawning over what was nothing better than
a rabble; publicly confessing their guilt and apologizing for not having
understood the most important moral issues, the proper response to
which they were learning from the mob; expressing their willingness to
change the university’s goals and the content of what they taught. As I
surveyed this spectacle, Marx’s overused dictum kept coming to my
mind against my will: History always repeats itself, the ﬁrst time as
tragedy, the second as farce. The American university in the sixties was
experiencing the same dismantling of the structure of rational inquiry as
had the German university in the thirties. No longer believing in their
higher vocation, both gave way to a highly ideologized student
populace. And the content of the ideology was the same—value
commitment. The university had abandoned all claim to study or
inform about value—undermining the sense of the value of what it
taught, while turning over the decision about values to the folk, the
Zeitgeist, the relevant. Whether it be Nuremberg or Woodstock, the
principle is the same. As Hegel was said to have died in Germany in
1933, Enlightenment in America came close to breathing its last during
the sixties. The fact that the universities are no longer in convulsions
does not mean that they have regained their health. As in Germany, the
value crisis in philosophy made the university prey to whatever intense
passion moved the masses. It went comfortably along until there was a
popular ﬁt of moralism, and then became aware that it had nothing to

contribute and was persuaded by a guilty sense that its distance from the
world made it immoral. Hardly any element in the university believed
seriously that its distance was based on something true and necessary,
the self-conﬁdent possession of the kinds of standpoint outside of public
opinion that made it easy for Socrates to resist the pious fanaticism of
the Athenian people who put their victorious generals to death after
Arginusae, or to refuse to collaborate with the Athenian tyrants. Socrates
thought it more important to discuss justice, to try to know what it is,
than to engage himself in implementing whatever partial perspective on
it happened to be exciting the passions of the day, causing the
contemplative to be called unjust and impious.

Of course anyone who is a professional contemplative holding down

a prestigious and well-paying job, and who also believes there is nothing
to contemplate, ﬁnds himself in a difﬁcult position with respect to
himself and to the community. The imperative to promote equality,
stamp out racism, sexism and elitism (the peculiar crimes of our
democratic society), as well as war, is overriding for a man who can
deﬁne no other interest worthy of defending. The fact that in Germany
the politics were of the Right and in the United States of the Left should
not mislead us. In both places the universities gave way under the
pressure of mass movements, and did so in large measure because they
thought those movements possessed a moral truth superior to any the
university could provide. Commitment was understood to be
profounder than science, passion than reason, history than nature, the
young than the old. In fact, as I have argued, the thought was really the
same. 
The 
New 
Left 
in 
America 
was 
a 
Nietzscheanized-

Heideggerianized Left. The unthinking hatred of “bourgeois society”
was exactly the same in both places. A distinguished professor of
political science proved this when he read to his radical students some
speeches about what was to be done. They were enthusiastic until he
informed them that the speeches were by Mussolini. Heidegger himself,
late in his life, made overtures to the New Left. The most sinister
formula in his Rectoral Address of 1933 was, with only the slightest of
alterations, the slogan of the American professors who collaborated with
the student movements of the sixties: “The time for decision is past. The
decision has already been made by the youngest part of the German
nation.”

At Cornell and elsewhere in the United States, it was farce because—

whatever the long-range future of our polity—the mass of the country
(there really was no mass but a citizenry) was at that moment unusually
respectful of the universities, regarded them as resources for the
improvement of Americans, and accepted the notion that scholarship
should be left undisturbed and was likely to produce a great range of
views that should be treated seriously and with tolerance. The nation
was not ready for great changes and believed about universities the
things professors professed to believe about them. A few students
discovered that pompous teachers who catechized them about academic
freedom could, with a little shove, be made into dancing bears.
Children tend to be rather better observers of adults’ characters than
adults are of children’s, because children are so dependent on adults
that it is very much in their interest to discover the weaknesses of their
elders. These students discerned that their teachers did not really believe
that freedom of thought was necessarily a good and useful thing, that
they suspected all this was ideology protecting the injustices of our
“system,” and that they could be pressured into benevolence toward
violent attempts to change the ideology. Heidegger was fully aware that
the theoretical foundations of academic freedom had been weakened
and, as I have said, treated the mass movement he faced with a certain
irony. The American professors were not aware of what they no longer
believed, and they took ever so seriously the movements they were
entangled with.

I became fully aware of this when I went to see Cornell’s then provost

(who later became president when the unfavorable national publicity
continued and the usually passive trustees asked for the resignation of
the incumbent because the national publicity about the guns appeared
to be damaging the university’s reputation), concerning a black student
whose life had been threatened by a black faculty member when the
student refused to participate in a demonstration. The provost was a
former natural scientist, and he greeted me with a mournful
countenance. He, of course, fully sympathized with the young man’s
plight. However, things were bad, and there was nothing he could do to
stop such behavior in the black student association. He, personally,
hoped there would soon be better communication with the radical black
students (this was a few weeks before the guns emerged and permitted
much clearer communication). But for the time being the

administration had to wait to hear what the blacks wanted,10 in the
expectation that tensions could be reduced. He added that no university
in the country could expel radical black students, or dismiss the faculty
members who incited them, presumably because the students at large
would not permit it.

I saw that this had been a useless undertaking on my part. The

provost had a mixture of cowardice and moralism not uncommon at the
time. He did not want trouble. His president had frequently cited Clark
Kerr’s dismissal at the University of California as the great danger. Kerr
had not known how to conciliate the students. At the same time the
provost thought he was engaged in a great moral work, righting the
historic injustice done to blacks. He could justify to himself the
humiliation he was undergoing as a necessary sacriﬁce. The case of this
particular black student clearly bothered him.11 But he was both more
frightened of the violence-threatening extremists and also more
admiring of them. Obvious questions were no longer obvious: Why
could not a black student be expelled as a white student would be if he
failed his courses or disobeyed the rules that make university community
possible? Why could the president not call the police if order was
threatened? Any man of weight would have ﬁred the professor who
threatened the life of the student. The issue was not complicated. Only
the casuistry of weakness and ideology made it so. Ordinary decency
dictated the proper response. No one who knew or cared about what a
university is would have acquiesced in this travesty. It was no surprise
that a few weeks later—immediately after the faculty had voted
overwhelmingly under the gun to capitulate to outrageous demands that
it had a few days earlier rejected—the leading members of the
administration and many well-known faculty members rushed over to
congratulate the gathered students and tried to win their approval. I saw
exposed before all the world what had long been known, and it was at
last possible without impropriety to tell these pseudo-universitarians
precisely what one thought of them.

It was also no surprise that many of those professors who had been

most eloquent in their sermons about the sanctity of the university, and
who had presented themselves as its consciences, were among those
who reacted, if not favorably, at least weakly to what was happening.
They had made careers out of saying how badly the German professors
had reacted to violations of academic freedom. This was all light talk

and mock heroics, because they had not measured the potential threats
to the university nor assessed the doubtful grounds of academic
freedom. Above all, they did not think that it could be assaulted from
the Left or from within the university, although serious examination of
the events in Germany would have taught them that it was indeed the
university youth, as Heidegger pointed out, who had become
disenchanted on theoretical grounds with the old education, and that
much of the same thing had been going on here. The society at large
had gradually been persuaded of the justice of liberal notions of
intellectual freedom just as the ﬁrst waves of doubt about them from
Europe were smacking against our shores. A conviction of the self-
evidence of Enlightenment principles to all thinking people, combined
with simplistic economic and psychological explanations, permitted
American professors to misinterpret the German experience and to
avoid the fact that the theoretical critique of morality in all its forms had
been the precondition of the acceptability of certain kinds of public
speech in Germany during the twenties. These American professors
were utterly disarmed, as were many German professors, when the
constituency that they took for granted, of which they honestly believed
they were independent, deserted or turned against them. Students and
colleagues wanted to radicalize and politicize the university. To
fulminate against Bible Belt preachers was one thing. In the world that
counted for these professors, this could only bring approval. But to be
isolated in the university, to be called foul names by their students or
their colleagues, all for the sake of an abstract idea, was too much for
them. They were not in general strong men, although their easy rhetoric
had persuaded them that they were—that they alone manned the walls
protecting civilization. Their collapse was merely pitiful, although their
feeble attempts at self-justiﬁcation frequently turned vicious. In
Germany the professors who kept quiet had the very good excuse that
they could not do otherwise. Speaking up would have meant
imprisonment or death. The law not only did not protect them but was
their deadly enemy. At Cornell there was no such danger. A couple of
professors might have been hurt (inasmuch as those who had been
dubbed racists,12 a qualiﬁcation equivalent to heretic in earlier times,
were utterly abandoned by all but a few persons of decent instincts, and
the president was in no way disposed to protect anyone other than
himself), but one shot ﬁred would have brought the civil authorities in.

Those authorities were only restrained by respect for the special
autonomous status of the university, which was being exploited to
protect and encourage violators of academic freedom as well as of the
law that governs ordinary mortals. There was essentially no risk in
defending the integrity of the university, because the danger was entirely
within it. All that was lacking was a professorial corps aware of the
university’s purpose, and dedicated to it. That is what made the
surrender so contemptible. The ofﬁcial ideology became that there had
been no danger to the threatened professors (thus no need for solidarity
with them) and also that there was severe danger of violence and death
(thus a need for capitulation).

One of the pious sermonizers who failed to speak out and who

fancied himself a political philosopher wrote an article for The New York
Times Magazine explaining to the world why capitulation had been
necessary at Cornell. The “social contract,” he averred, was about to be
broken, and we would have returned to “the state of nature,” the war of
all against all, the worst evil, so that anything to keep that from
happening was justiﬁed. He proved therewith that he had never
understood what he had been teaching, for the contract theorists (from
whose teachings the American form of government was derived) all
taught that the law must never be broken, that the strength of the law is
the only thing that keeps us away from the state of nature, therefore that
risks and dangers must be accepted for the sake of the law. Once the law
is broken with impunity, each man regains the right to any means he
deems proper or necessary in order to defend himself against the new
tyrant, the one who can break the law. Such frivolous use, as was made
by this professor, of the teachings that must be understood if there is to
be a reasonable political order is emblematic of the real problem that
lay behind all of this disruption of university life. Serious discussion of
political problems and thought had almost been forgotten; and those to
whom it was entrusted had no abiding concern for such discussion. The
tradition was only a set of slogans or quotations from Bartlett’s.
Reﬂection about civil society and the university’s role within it had
withered away.

There were two results of the campus disruptions. The university was

incorporated much more ﬁrmly into the system of democratic public
opinion, and the condition of cavelike darkness amidst prosperity feared
by Tocqueville was brought painfully near. When the dust settled it

could be seen that the very distinction between educated and
uneducated in America had been leveled, that even the pitiful remnant
of it expressed in the opposition between highbrow and lowbrow had
been annihilated. The real product was the homogenized persons
described in Part One. The very ideas of truly different goals and
motives of action that we can really take seriously, incarnated not only
in systems of thought but in real and poetic models, began to disappear.

Freedom had been restricted in the most effective way—by the

impoverishment of alternatives. Nothing that was not known to or
experienced by those who constitute the enormous majority—which is
ultimately the only authority in America—had any reality. Catering to
democracy’s most dangerous and vulgar temptations was the function of
the famous “critical philosophy.” Thus this fatal progress was
accompanied by all the abstract substitutes for thought I discussed in
Part Two. They provided an artiﬁcial substitute for intellectual
stimulation and conﬁrmed that the way we are is the only way to be.
They were just what the doctor ordered, as their enormous popularity
suggests. All the radicalism of the sixties was intended to hasten our
movement in the directions in which we were already going, and never
really to question these directions. It was an exercise in egalitarian self-
satisfaction that wiped out the elements of the university curriculum
that did not ﬂatter our peculiar passions or tastes of the moment. In
short, the window to Europe, which was always the resource of free and
oppressed spirits in America, was slammed shut, more deﬁnitively
because Europeans were helping us do it while promising that they were
opening it. What at the time appeared to be “elite” opinion current only
among university intellectuals was in reality the next day’s popular
magazine feature. The longing for Europe has been all but extinguished
in the young.

About the sixties it is now fashionable to say that although there were

indeed excesses, many good things resulted. But, so far as universities
are concerned, I know of nothing positive coming from that period; it
was an unmitigated disaster for them. I hear that the good things were
“greater openness,” “less rigidity,” “freedom from authority,” etc.—but
these have no content and express no view of what is wanted from a
university education. During the sixties I sat on various committees at
Cornell and continuously and futilely voted against dropping one
requirement after the next. The old core curriculum—according to

which every student in the college had to take a smattering of courses in
the major divisions of knowledge—was abandoned. One professor of
comparative literature—an assiduous importer of the latest Paris
fashions—explained that these requirements taught little, really did not
introduce students to the various disciplines, and bored them. I admitted
this to be true. He then expressed surprise at my unwillingness to give
them up. It was because they were, I said, a threadbare reminiscence of
the unity of knowledge and provided an obstinate little hint that there
are some things one must know about if one is to be educated. You don’t
replace something with nothing. Of course, that was exactly what the
educational reform of the sixties was doing. The consequences are most
visible now in the declining study of languages, but they are just as
profound, or more so, in all of humane learning. The criticism of the
old is of no value if there is no prospect of the new. It is a way of
removing the impediments to vice presented by decaying virtue. In the
sixties the professors were just hastening to fold up their tents so as to be
off the grounds before the stampede trampled them. The openness was
to “doing your own thing.” It was, and I suppose still is, a sure sign of an
authoritarian personality to believe that the university should try to have
a vision of what an educated person is. “Growth” or “individual
development” was all that was to be permitted, which in America meant
only that the vulgarities present in society at large would overwhelm the
delicate little plants kept in the university greenhouse for those who
need other kinds of nourishment.

The reforms were without content, made for the “inner-directed”

person. They were an acquiescence in a leveling off of the peaks, and
were the source of the collapse of the entire American educational
structure, recognized by all parties when they talk about the need to go
“back to basics.” This collapse is directly traceable to both the teachings
and the deeds of the universities in the sixties. More important than the
bad teachers and the self-indulgent doctrines was the disappearance of
the reasons for and the models of—for example—“the king’s English.”
The awareness of the highest is what points the lower upward. Now, it
may be possible, with a lot of effort and political struggle, to return to
earlier standards of accomplishment in the three R’s, but it will not be
so easy to recover the knowledge of philosophy, history and literature
that was trashed. That was never a native plant. We were dependent on
Europe for it. All of our peaks were derivative, with full self-awareness

and without being ashamed of it. In the meantime, Europe itself, on
which we could count if we faltered, has undergone an evolution
similar to our own, and we cannot go there to train ourselves as once we
could. Short of great new theoretical and artistic impulses rising up on
their own here to replace the West’s legacy to us, there is no way but
tradition to have kept us in contact with such things. And one cannot
jump on and off the tradition like a train. Once broken, our link with it
is hard to renew. The instinctive awareness of meanings, as well as the
stores of authentic learning in the heads of scholars, are lost. Neither
aristocrats nor priests, the natural bearers of high intellectual tradition,
exist in any meaningful sense in America. The greatest of thoughts were
in our political principles but were never embodied, hence not living, in
a class of men. Their home in America was the university, and the
violation of that home was the crime of the sixties. Calming the
universities down, stopping grade inﬂation, making students study, all of
that may be salutary, but it does not go to the heart of the matter. There
is much less in the university to study now.

Around the campus disruptions and the student movement there has

grown up a mythology, an expression of the tastes of those for whom the
atmosphere depicted in Ten Days that Shook the World is more
stimulating than that in Hegel’s Berlin lecture room would have been.
One of the myths is that the ﬁfties were a period of intellectual
conformism and superﬁciality, whereas there was real excitement and
questioning in the sixties. McCarthyism—invoked when Stalinism is
mentioned in order to even the balance of injustice between the two
superpowers—symbolizes those gray, grim years, while the blazing
sixties were the days of “the movement” and, to hear its survivors tell it,
their single-handed liberation of the blacks, the women and the South
Vietnamese. Without entering into the strictly political issues, the
intellectual picture projected is precisely the opposite of the truth. The
sixties were the period of dogmatic answers and trivial tracts. Not a
single book of lasting importance was produced in or around the
movement. It was all Norman O. Brown and Charles Reich. This was
when the real conformism hit the universities, when opinions about
everything from God to the movies became absolutely predictable. The
evidence brought from pop culture to bolster the case for the sixties—
that in the ﬁfties Lana Turner played torchy, insincere adulteresses
while in the sixties we got Jane Fonda as an authentic whore; that before

the sixties we had Paul Anka and after we had the Rolling Stones—is of
no importance. Even if this characterization were true, it would only go
to prove that there is no relation between popular culture and high
culture, and that the former is all that is now inﬂuential on our scene.

The fact is that the ﬁfties were one of the great periods of the

American university, taking into account, of course, the eternal
disproportion between the ideal and the real. Even the ﬁgures most
seminal for “the movement,” like Marcuse, Arendt and Mills, did what
serious work they did prior to 1960. From 1933 on the American
universities proﬁted from the arrival of many of Europe’s greatest
scholars and scientists as well as a number of clever intellectuals of a
sophistication beyond that known to their American counterparts. They
were, for the most part, heirs of the German university tradition, which,
as I have discussed, was the greatest expression of the publicly supported
and approved version of the theoretical life. All were steeped in the
general vision of humane education inspired by Kant and Goethe,
whose thought and talents were of world historical signiﬁcance and who
intransigently and without compromise looked to the highest moral and
artistic fulﬁllments within the new democratic order of things. They
initiated us into a tradition that was living, and that penetrated the tastes
and standards of society at large. Those who received this tradition had
experience of the vast scholarship accumulated since its inception, as
well as the advanced ideas that clustered around its inspiration. For
better or worse, German ideas were where it was at—and where it still is
—whether it be the ideas of Marx, Freud, Weber or Heidegger. In the
chairs of philosophy in the German university there was an amazing
correspondence between real talent and conventional respectability.
Hegel, Husserl and Heidegger were the respected ﬁgures of their day,
whose signiﬁcance did not consist in their merely holding the chairs. An
awareness of all this, and in many cases much more than an awareness,
was brought by the refugees to the United States, which, speaking
relatively, had been a backwater and a consumer. Much of what
Americans previously had gone to seek elsewhere was now here.
Although this was a mixed blessing in many respects, the fact that so
many of the best physicists, mathematicians, historians, sociologists,
classicists and teachers of philosophy were in the United States meant
that we could learn here what one had to learn; or, rather, however
defective what we had here, our quest for learning could no longer be

better satisﬁed by the physical voyage to the Old World. In a word,
before the dam burst, the American university had become largely
independent of the contemporary European university. The refugees’
students here were gradually taking the places of their teachers.

Of course, part of this independence was due to the decline of the

Continental universities, especially the destruction of the German
universities, the break in their intellectual tradition and the loss of inner
conﬁdence and the sense of high vocation they once possessed. But, no
matter what the cause, in 1955 no universities were better than the best
American universities in the things that have to do with a liberal
education and arousing in students the awareness of their intellectual
needs. And this was an extremely important fact for the civilization of
the West. If in 1930 American universities had simply disappeared, the
general store of learning of general signiﬁcance would not have been
seriously damaged, although it would surely not have been a good thing
for us. But in 1960, inasmuch as most of intellectual life had long ago
settled in universities and the American ones were the best, their decay
or collapse was a catastrophe. Much of the great tradition was here, an
alien and weak transplant, perched precariously in enclaves, vulnerable
to native populism and vulgarity. In the mid-sixties the natives, in the
guise of students, attacked.

Another aspect of the mythology is that McCarthyism had an

extremely negative impact on the universities. Actually the McCarthy
period was the last time the university had any sense of community,
deﬁned by a common enemy. McCarthy, those like him, and those who
followed them, were clearly nonacademic and antiacademic, the
barbarians at the gates. In major universities they had no effect
whatsoever on curriculum or appointments. The range of thought and
speech that took place within them was unaffected. Academic freedom
had for that last moment more than an abstract meaning, a content with
respect to research and publication about which there was general
agreement. The rhetoric about the protection of unpopular ideas meant
something, partly because the publicly unpopular ideas were not so
unpopular in universities. Today there are many more things
unthinkable and unspeakable in universities than there were then, and
little disposition to protect those who have earned the ire of the radical
movements. The old liberalism—belief in progress and the free market
of ideas—had its last moment of vigor at that time. In the sixties, when

things seemed to be going in the right direction, the old liberalism was
understood more and more to be a part of bourgeois ideology, favoring
and protecting the voices of reaction as opposed to those of progress. In
the ﬁfties the campuses were calm, most professors were against
McCarthy (although, as one would expect in a democracy, some were
for him; and, as one would also expect, human nature and professors
being what they are, some who were against him were too timid to speak
out). Professors were not ﬁred, and they taught what they pleased in
their classrooms. For that moment at least, there was a heightened
awareness of the university’s special status as a preserve against public
opinion. That was a very healthy thing. In the sixties many professors,
some of whom were notably silent during the McCarthy years, lost that
awareness when the opinions they were attached to became more
popular. The screen of academic freedom was no longer necessary now
that the going was good. The American Association of University
Professors’ Cornell chapter applauded the black activists who infringed
the rights of professors, and the national organization did nothing to
protect academic freedom. Such groups abandoned merely formal
freedom to support substantive causes. In short, in the ﬁfties a goodly
portion of the professors still held the views about freedom of thought
put forward by Bacon, Milton, Locke and John Stuart Mill (this was just
prior to the success in America of the Continental critique of these);
another portion were of the Left, and they had a personal interest in the
protection afforded them by those views. When the former lost their
conﬁdence, and the latter gained theirs, the strength of academic
freedom declined drastically.

A ﬁnal part of the mythology of the sixties is the alleged superior

moral “concern” of the students. Morality became all the rage in the
late sixties, succeeding the hard-nosed realism of the preceding years.
But what was meant by morality has to be made clear. There is a
perennial and unobtrusive view that morality consists in such things as
telling the truth, paying one’s debts, respecting one’s parents and doing
no voluntary harm to anyone. Those are all things easy to say and hard
to do; they do not attract much attention, and win little honor in the
world. The good will, as described by Kant, is a humble notion,
accessible to every child, but its fulﬁllment is the activity of a lifetime of
performing the simple duties prescribed by it. This morality always
requires sacriﬁce. It sometimes entails danger and confrontation, but

they are not of its essence and occur incidentally. Such morality, in
order to be itself, must be for itself and not for some result beyond it. It
requires resistance to the charms of feeling good about it and acclaim
for it. This was not the morality that came into vogue in the sixties,
which was an altogether more histrionic version of moral conduct, the
kind that characterizes heroes in extreme situations. Thomas More’s
resistance to a tyrant’s commands was the daily fare of students’
imagination. Such challenges—which arise rarely, are always
ambiguous in terms of both duty and motive, and require the subtlest
reasoning as well as all the other virtues in the highest degree in order to
be addressed justly—were the moral stuff on which these cubs teethed.
It was not, of course, the complexity of such cases that was attractive but
their brilliance, the noble pose. Somehow it was never the everyday
business of obeying the law that was interesting; more so was breaking it
in the name of the higher law. It was always Achilles and Agamemnon.
Conscience, a faculty thoroughly discredited in modern political and
moral thought and particularly despised by Marx, made a great
comeback, as the all-purpose ungrounded ground of moral
determination, sufﬁcient at its slightest rumbling to discredit all other
obligations or loyalties. Hitler became the regulative principle of the
conscience: “You wouldn’t obey Hitler, would you?” So reﬁned had the
capacity for moral discrimination become, it followed that the elected
American ofﬁcials and the duly approved federal, state and local laws
had no more authority than did Hitler. At Cornell, students were graced
by the preachings of Father Daniel Berrigan, who explained that old
ladies who work as secretaries for draft boards are the equivalent of the
Beast of Belsen and deserve no more respectful treatment than she did.
This was the temper of the moral revival. The models were a mixture of
the makers of revolutions who hawk new moralities and liberate from
prevailing constraint, and the heroes of popular existentialist literature
whose morality consists in self-afﬁrmation. One began to suspect that
the new moralism was just a new dress for the antimorality of the
preceding generation, which thought morality repression.

The content of this morality was derived simply from the leading

notions of modern democratic thought, absolutized and radicalized.
Equality, freedom, peace, cosmopolitanism were the goods, the only
goods, without conﬂict among one another, available to us here and
now. Not to be considered were natural differences in gifts or in habitual

practice of the virtues, the restraints liberty must impose on itself, wars
for the defense of democracy (other than wars of liberation). Devotion
to family or country as a form of morality was the last refuge of reaction.
There were two poles, supposed to be in perfect harmony, the self-
development of the absolute individual and the brotherhood of all
mankind. These goods or, rather, values, came on the winds. They were
not the product of students’ reasoning or study. They were inherent in
our regime, they constituted its horizon. There was nothing new in it.
The newness was in the thoughtlessness, the utter lack of need to argue
or prove. Alternative views had no existence except as scarecrows.

This was an almost inevitable result of generations of teaching that

the most instinctive of all questions—What is good?—has no place in
the university, and that supersophisticated doctrines that dismiss and
ridicule this question and the instinct animating it are the only things
worthy of study. If the university’s teachers cannot teach about the good,
why should the students not teach it? The fact-value distinction admits
that values are essential to life and shape the way facts are seen and
used. Therefore values are primary. And if they do not come from
reason, then they come from passionate commitment, the essence of
morality. Of course, since commitment did not really produce values,
the values adopted were the remnants of old reasoning, values with
fallen arches, reafﬁrmed by claims of passionate commitment. The
teachers were at ﬁrst appalled by this return to old, bad ways of thought.
But since they too were moral persons, and the values asserted were the
ones they privately believed, ﬁnally they gave gay assent. David Easton’s
disgraceful presidential address to the American Political Science
Association in 1966 said all this. Behavioralism (i.e., the social science
founded on the fact-value distinction, devoted to the study of facts and
contemptuous of philosophy) had not, he admitted, been sufﬁciently
sensitive to moral issues. Now he promised a post-behavioralism in
which the great achievements of social science would be put in the
service of the right values. The piper would henceforward play the tune
called by the students, and they were not even paying.

Indignation or rage was the vivid passion characterizing those in the

grip of the new moral experience. Indignation may be a most noble
passion and necessary for ﬁghting wars and righting wrongs. But of all
the experiences of the soul it is the most inimical to reason and hence to
the university. Anger, to sustain itself, requires an unshakable conviction

that one is right. Whether the student wrath against the professorial
Agamemnons was authentically Achillean is open to question. But there
is no doubt that it was the banner under which they fought, the proof of
belonging.

precisely to be painful in order to be moral, but that it could not be itself
if it were fun. However interpreted, it is connected with a self-
overcoming that being wise or beautiful—or any other of the qualities
for which human beings are thought to be enviable—do not require.
That is why it commands special respect and also why there is so great a
temptation to simulate it. The man who sacriﬁces his life for justice
evidently has motives superior to those of most men, or a
disinterestedness incomprehensible to them. They cannot help being
impressed. In an admirable phrase Montesquieu encapsulated the moral
taste that the student leaders represented and on which they played:
“Men, although they are individually rascals, are collectively a most
decent lot: they love morality.” This is the formula for Tartuffe. The
student moralism was a species of the Tartuffe phenomenon, but a
wholly new mutant of it. Unlike other revolutionary movements, which
tended to be austere and chaste—beginning with the ﬁrst revolution,
1688, in England, which was really puritan—this one was
antipuritanical. The slogan was “Make love, not war.” Although the
similarity of language was exploited, this is very different from “Love thy
neighbor,” which is an injunction very difﬁcult to fulﬁll. “To make love”
is a bodily act, very easy to perform and thought to be pleasant. The
word “obscene” was transferred out of sex into politics. Somehow the
students had touched on a whole set of desires previously thought to be
questionable, which had hardly dared to name themselves but which
were ripe for emancipation and legitimation. The ideology for the
revolution was already in place. Moderation of the inﬁnite bodily desires
had become “repression” of nature, one of the forms of domination, the
buzzword of the advanced thinkers and consciousness raisers. All that
was needed were the heroes willing to act out the fantasies the public
was now ready to accept as reality: the hero, as hedonist, who dares to do
in public what the public wants to see. It was épater les bourgeois as a
bourgeois calling. The practices of the late Roman empire were
promoted with the moral fervor of early Christianity and the political
idealism of Robespierre. Such a combination is, of course, impossible. It

is playacting, a role, and the students knew it. But that haunting
sentiment was assuaged by the fact that this was the ﬁrst revolution
made for TV. They were real because they could see themselves on
television. All the world had become a stage, and they were playing
leads. The cure proposed for the bourgeois disease really was its most
advanced symptom.

A partial list of the sacriﬁces made by the students to their morality

will sufﬁce to show its character: they were able to live as they pleased in
the university, as in loco parentis responsibilities were abandoned; drugs
became a regular part of life, with almost no interference from
university authorities, while the civil authority was kept at bay by the
university’s alleged right to police its own precincts; all sexual
restrictions imposed by rule or disapproval were overturned; academic
requirements were relaxed in every imaginable way, and grade inﬂation
made it difﬁcult to ﬂunk; avoidance of military service was a way of life
and a principle. All of these privileges were disguised with edifying
labels 
such 
as 
individual 
responsibility, 
experience, 
growth,

development, self-expression, liberation, concern. Never in history had
there been such a marvelous correspondence between the good and the
pleasant. Richard Nixon, with his unerring instinct for the high moral
ground and the noble motive for consensus, assessed his student
antagonists and ended the draft. Miraculously the student movement
came to an end, although the war continued for almost three years
thereafter.

A ﬁnal note about an aspect of the students’ motivation that has not

received sufﬁcient attention: In addition to the desire to live as they
pleased, a covert elitism was at work among them. A permanent feature
of democracy, always and everywhere, is a tendency to suppress the
claims of any kind of superiority, conventional or natural, essentially by
denying that there is superiority, particularly with respect to ruling. The
Platonic dialogues are full of young men who passionately desire
political glory and believe they have the talent to rule. Plato admits that
he himself was once such a young man. And they lived in a city where
their peculiar right to rule was denied them, where they would ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to get ruling ofﬁce, and where to do so they would have to make
themselves into what the people wanted. They burned with that special
indignation a man reserves for wrongs done to himself, and believed that
their potential could not be fulﬁlled in democratic Athens. They

constituted a subversive group in the city, unfriendly to the maintenance
of its regime. Such were many of the companions of Socrates, and
taming this instinct for rule was an essential part of the education he
gave them. But he began by accepting, at least partially, the legitimacy
of their longing and denying the unadulterated right of the many to rule
over the few. He gave intellectual satisfaction to their complaint. And,
more important, he took very seriously the element in their souls that
made them ambitious. The aspiration to be number one and gain great
fame is both natural in man and, properly trained, one of the soul’s great
strengths. Democracy in itself is hostile to such spiritedness and prevents
its fulﬁllment. This was a problem for all ancient democracies.
Coriolanus represents an extreme example of the man who refuses to
ground his right to rule on any admixture of consent of the people, in
this case a people ready to accept his right to rule. But he is not an
entirely unadmirable man. The strength of his soul is a result of the part
of it that makes him proud and ambitious, that seeks an autonomy not
dependent on others’ opinions or wills.

The problem of ambition in democracy is much aggravated by

modern democracy. Ancient democracies were factually powerful, but
they did not persuade the proud and the ambitious that the rule of the
many is just. Inner conﬁdence was not weakened by the sense that the
master has right on his side, for there was neither a religion nor a
philosophy of equality. The talented young could hope, and sometimes
act, without guilt, to gain ﬁrst place. This has been changed partially,
but only partially, by Christianity. It asserted equality before God and
condemned pride, but it left the inequalities of this world in place.
More important was the work of modern philosophy, which established
a rational teaching, making political equality the only just system of
society. There is no intellectual ground remaining for any regime other
than democracy. The soul cannot ﬁnd encouragement for its longing
anywhere. Moreover, the modern thinkers developed a scheme of things
in which individual ambition would have little hope of success. The
outline of this scheme is presented in Federalist X. The sheer size of this
country, as well as its organization and its stability, has a disheartening
effect on the potential ruler. Even more important have been the efforts
of modern philosophers to root pride and great ambition out of the soul.
At the outset, Hobbes’s psychology treated what he called vainglory as a
pathological condition based on ignorance of man’s vulnerability, on

unjustiﬁed conﬁdence. This condition can, according to him, be cured
by liberal doses of fear. One need only hear what is said today about
competition among educators and in the press, and read Rousseau and
Freud on related issues, to recognize how much of modernity is devoted
to unmanning this disposition. Elitism is the catch-all epithet expressing
our disapproval of the proud and the desire to be ﬁrst.

But, unsupported and excoriated, this part of the soul lives on,

dwelling underground, receiving no sublimating education. As with all
repressed impulses, it has its daily effects on personality and also
occasionally bursts forth in various disguises and monstrous shapes.
Much of modern history can be explained by the search of what Plato
called spiritedness for legitimate self-expression. Certainly compassion
and the idea of the vanguard were essentially democratic covers for
elitist self-assertion. Rousseau, who ﬁrst made compassion the
foundation of democratic sentiment, was fully aware that a sense of
superiority to the sufferer is a component of the human experience of
compassion. He actually was attempting to channel the inegalitarian
impulse into egalitarian channels. Similarly the avant-garde (usually
used in relation to art) and the vanguard (usually used in relation to
politics) are democratic modes of distinguishing oneself, of being ahead,
of leading, without denying the democratic principle. The members of
the vanguard have just a small evanescent advantage. They now know
what everyone will soon know. This posture conciliates instinct with
principle. And it was the one adopted by the students who feared
assimilation to the democratic man. There they were in those few elite
universities, which were being rapidly democratized. And their political
futures were bleak, their educations not advantaging them for elective
ofﬁce, providing only the prospect of having to work their way up in the
dreary fashion of such contemptible persons as Lyndon Johnson and
Richard Nixon. But these universities were respected, looked to by the
democratic press and were the alma maters of much of the powerful
elite. These little places could easily be seized, just as a polis could have
been seized. Using them as a stage, students instantly achieved
notoriety. Young black students I knew at Cornell appeared on the
covers of the national news magazines. How irresistible it all was, an
elite shortcut to political inﬂuence. In the ordinary world, outside the
universities, such youngsters would have had no way of gaining
attention. They took as their models Mao, Castro and Che Guevara,

promoters of equality, if you please, but surely not themselves equal to
anyone. They themselves wanted to be the leaders of a revolution of
compassion. The great objects of their contempt and fury were the
members of the American middle class, professionals, workers, white
collar and blue, farmers—all of those vulgarians who made up the
American majority and who did not need or want either the compassion
or the leadership of the students. They dared to think themselves equal
to the students and to resist having their consciousness raised by them. It
is very difﬁcult to distinguish oneself in America, and in order to do so
the students substituted conspicuous compassion for their parents’
conspicuous consumption. They specialized in being the advocates of
all those in America and the Third World who did not challenge their
sense of superiority and who, they imagined, would accept their
leadership. None of the exquisite thrills of egalitarian vanity were alien
to them.

One could appreciate and even sympathize with the frustrated

inclinations, the love of glory that could not be avowed, the quest for the
recognition of excellence that were revealed in the sixties campus
politics. However, the hypocrisy of it all, and the ignorance of what a
man has to know and to risk in order to be political, made the spectacle
more repulsive than touching. Tyrannical impulses masqueraded as
democratic compassion, and quest for distinction as love of equality.
Self-knowledge was utterly lacking, and their conquest was so easy. The
elite should really be elite, but these elitists were given the distinction
they craved without having earned it. The university provided a kind of
afﬁrmative-action elitism. There had for a long time been a conspiracy
in the universities to deny that there is a problem for the superior
individual, particularly the one with the gift and the passion for ruling,
in democratic society. Suddenly they found themselves confronted by
potential rulers who accused them of complicity in the crime of ruling.
It served them right.

It was with respect to precisely this problem that I had one of my

greatest satisfactions as a teacher. The little Greek Civilization Program
a group of professors set up against the currents had just gotten under
way the year of the crisis. It consisted of about a dozen enthusiastic
freshmen, and we had been reading Plato’s Republic during the entire
year. We had not ﬁnished it when the university became a chaos. Almost
all classes ceased, as students and professors alike turned to the serious

business of making the revolution, hanging about the campus and going
from one crazy meeting to another. I had joined with a group of
professors who announced they would not teach until the guns were off
campus and some kind of legitimate order had been restored. But these
students had become deeply involved with the story of the ambitious
Glaucon, who was founding a city with the help of Socrates. So we
continued to meet informally. They were really more interested in the
book than the revolution, which in itself proved what kind of a counter-
charm the university ought to provide to the siren calls of the
contemporary scene. These students were rather contemptuous of what
was going on, because it got in the way of what they thought it
important to do. They wanted to ﬁnd out what happened to Glaucon
during his wonderful night with Socrates. They really looked down from
the classroom on the frantic activity outside, thinking they were
privileged, hardly a one tempted to join the crowd. I later found out that
some of these students had indeed gone down from the library seminar
room into the agora, where the action was. They had made copies of the
following lines from the Republic and handed them out, competing
with the hawkers of other kinds of tracts:

 
“Do you too believe, as do the many, that certain young men are
corrupted by sophists, and that there are certain sophists who in
a private capacity corrupt to an extent worth mentioning? Isn’t it
rather the very men who say this who are the biggest sophists,
who educate most perfectly and who turn out young and old,
men and women, just the way they want them to be?” “But
when do they do that?” he said. “When,” I said, “many gathered
together sit down in assemblies, courts, theaters, army camps, or
any other common meeting of a multitude, and, with a great
deal of uproar, blame some of the things said or done, and praise
others, both in excess, shouting and clapping; and, besides, the
rocks and the very place surrounding them echo and redouble
the uproar of blame and praise. Now in such circumstances, as
the saying goes, what do you suppose is the state of the young
man’s heart? Or what kind of private education will hold out for
him and not be swept away by such blame and praise and go,
borne by the ﬂood, wherever it tends so that he’ll say the same

things are noble and base as they do, practice what they practice,
and be such as they are?” (Republic 491e-492b)
 

They had learned from this old book what was going on and had gained
real distance on it, had had an experience of liberation. Socrates’ magic
still worked. He had diagnosed the complaint of the ambitious young
and showed how to treat it.

The sixties have now faded from the current student imagination.

What remains is a certain self-promotion by people who took part in it
all, now in their forties, having come to terms with the “establishment”
but dispersing a nostalgic essence in the media, where, of course, many
of them are ﬂourishing, admitting that it was unreal but asserting that it
was the moment of signiﬁcance. They stood for the good things. They
seem to think they were responsible for great progress in relations
between whites and blacks, that they played the key role in the civil
rights movement. Without attempting to discuss what was decisive in
the historic changes that took place in those relations in the years
between 1950 and 1970—whether it was the doings of the courts, or of
elected ofﬁcials, or inspiration of the kind represented by Martin Luther
King from within the black community that was most important—it is
undeniable that the enthusiastic support of these changes by university
students in the North played some role in creating the atmosphere that
promoted the righting of old wrongs. But I believe the students’ role was
marginal and partook not a little of the histrionic morality of which I
have been speaking. It consisted mostly in going off to marches and
demonstrations that were vacationlike, usually during school term, with
the conﬁdent expectation that they would not be penalized by their
professors for missing assignments while they were off doing important
deeds, in places where they had never been and to which they would
never return, and where, therefore, they did not have to pay any price
for their stand, as did those who had to stay and live there. Nor did they
partake in the hard and low-proﬁle labors of those who studied
constitutional law and prepared legal briefs, those who spent lonely and
frustrating years, whose lives were truly dedicated to a cause. I do not
wish to denigrate the students’ efforts, and people should not be blamed
for inclinations that are truly good, although there should not be too
much self-congratulation for what was easy and cost little. My point is,
rather, that the student participation in the civil rights movement

antedated the campus activism, and that the students’ opinions were
formed in the old, bad universities that they returned to destroy. The last
signiﬁcant student participation in the civil rights movement was in the
march on Washington in 1964. After that, Black Power came to the fore,
the system of segregation in the South was dismantled, and white
students had nothing more to contribute other than to egg on Black
Power excesses, the instigators of which did not want their help. The
students were unaware that the teachings of equality, the promise of the
Declaration of Independence, the study of the Constitution, the
knowledge of our history and many more things were the painstakingly
earned and stored-up capital that supported them. Racial justice is an
imperative of our theory and historical practice, without which there
would have been no problem and no solution. From what were claimed
to be absolutely corrupt institutions serving “the system,” students
gained the awareness and learning that made their action possible and
good. The most outrageous pretension of the students was that their
commitments were their autonomous creations. Everything, but
everything, was borrowed from the serious thought and beliefs about
what America is and about good and bad in the university treasury. They
could waste the capital because they did not know they were living off of
it. They returned to the university, declared it bankrupt and thereby
bankrupted it. They abandoned the grand American liberal traditions of
learning. Under pressure from students the Founding was understood to
be racist, and the very instrument that condemned slavery and racism
was broken. The races in the Northern universities have grown more
separate since the sixties. After the theory of the rights of man was no
longer studied or really believed, its practice also suffered. The
American university provided the intellectual inspiration for decent
political deeds. It is very doubtful whether there is a teaching about
justice within it now that could again generate anything like the
movement toward racial equality. The very thing the sixties students
prided themselves on was one of their premier victims.

10 Up to that time there had only been hints of the following kind: the chairman of the
Economics Department had been held hostage for several hours, along with his secretary, in
furtherance of a demand that an assistant professor deemed racist be dismissed; the building
housing a part of the Sociology Department had been forcibly seized, and its inhabitants as well
as furnishings had been ejected; the president had been physically assaulted. In response to
these communications, proofs of the bona ﬁdes of the following kind had been given to the

students: the assistant professor disappeared from campus; and for good measure the black
assistant dean, who had the misfortune of being an integrationist at a time when black power
had come into vogue, was ﬁred; the faculty of the College of Arts and Sciences received a
memorandum from its dean informing the members that, although none were demonstrably
overt racists, all were indeed institutional racists; classes for blacks only were established; the
house that was being held by right of conquest was accorded to its new inhabitants by consent; a
lavishly funded black studies center was established in the faculty appointments to which the
black students were to have a voice. Such signs had not yet succeeded in establishing the kind of
“dialogue” hoped for.

11 The president himself appeared to be interested only in protecting himself and avoiding
having to confront the black student association or any other radical group. He was of the moral
stamp of those who were angry with Poland for resisting Hitler because this precipitated the war.

12 Among those threatened over the university radio was the professor who had probably done
more and risked more in the civil rights movement than anyone else at Cornell.

THE STUDENT AND THE UNIVERSITY

Liberal Education

What image does a ﬁrst-rank college or university present today to a
teen-ager leaving home for the ﬁrst time, off to the adventure of a liberal
education? He has four years of freedom to discover himself—a space
between the intellectual wasteland he has left behind and the inevitable
dreary professional training that awaits him after the baccalaureate. In
this short time he must learn that there is a great world beyond the little
one he knows, experience the exhilaration of it and digest enough of it
to sustain himself in the intellectual deserts he is destined to traverse.
He must do this, that is, if he is to have any hope of a higher life. These
are the charmed years when he can, if he so chooses, become anything
he wishes and when he has the opportunity to survey his alternatives,
not merely those current in his time or provided by careers, but those
available to him as a human being. The importance of these years for an
American cannot be overestimated. They are civilization’s only chance
to get to him.

In looking at him we are forced to reﬂect on what he should learn if

he is to be called educated; we must speculate on what the human
potential to be fulﬁlled is. In the specialties we can avoid such
speculation, and the avoidance of them is one of specialization’s charms.
But here it is a simple duty. What are we to teach this person? The
answer may not be evident, but to attempt to answer the question is
already to philosophize and to begin to educate. Such a concern in itself
poses the question of the unity of man and the unity of the sciences. It is
childishness to say, as some do, that everyone must be allowed to
develop freely, that it is authoritarian to impose a point of view on the
student. In that case, why have a university? If the response is “to
provide an atmosphere for learning,” we come back to our original
questions at the second remove. Which atmosphere? Choices and
reﬂection on the reasons for those choices are unavoidable. The
university has to stand for something. The practical effects of
unwillingness to think positively about the contents of a liberal
education are, on the one hand, to ensure that all the vulgarities of the

world outside the university will ﬂourish within it, and, on the other, to
impose a much harsher and more illiberal necessity on the student—the
one given by the imperial and imperious demands of the specialized
disciplines unﬁltered by unifying thought.

The university now offers no distinctive visage to the young person.

He ﬁnds a democracy of the disciplines—which are there either because
they are autochthonous or because they wandered in recently to
perform some job that was demanded of the university. This democracy
is really an anarchy, because there are no recognized rules for
citizenship and no legitimate titles to rule. In short there is no vision,
nor is there a set of competing visions, of what an educated human
being is. The question has disappeared, for to pose it would be a threat
to the peace. There is no organization of the sciences, no tree of
knowledge. Out of chaos emerges dispiritedness, because it is impossible
to make a reasonable choice. Better to give up on liberal education and
get on with a specialty in which there is at least a prescribed curriculum
and a prospective career. On the way the student can pick up in elective
courses a little of whatever is thought to make one cultured. The student
gets no intimation that great mysteries might be revealed to him, that
new and higher motives of action might be discovered within him, that
a different and more human way of life can be harmoniously
constructed by what he is going to learn.

Simply, the university is not distinctive. Equality for us seems to

culminate in the unwillingness and incapacity to make claims of
superiority, particularly in the domains in which such claims have
always been made—art, religion and philosophy. When Weber found
that he could not choose between certain high opposites—reason vs.
revelation, Buddha vs. Jesus—he did not conclude that all things are
equally good, that the distinction between high and low disappears. As a
matter of fact he intended to revitalize the consideration of these great
alternatives in showing the gravity and danger involved in choosing
among them; they were to be heightened in contrast to the trivial
considerations of modern life that threatened to overgrow and render
indistinguishable the profound problems the confrontation with which
makes the bow of the soul taut. The serious intellectual life was for him
the battleground of the great decisions, all of which are spiritual or
“value” choices. One can no longer present this or that particular view
of the educated or civilized man as authoritative; therefore one must say

that education consists in knowing, really knowing, the small number of
such views in their integrity. This distinction between profound and
superﬁcial—which takes the place of good and bad, true and false—
provided a focus for serious study, but it hardly held out against the
naturally relaxed democratic tendency to say, “Oh, what’s the use?” The
ﬁrst university disruptions at Berkeley were explicitly directed against the
multiversity smorgasbord and, I must confess, momentarily and partially
engaged my sympathies. It may have even been the case that there was
some small element of longing for an education in the motivation of
those students. But nothing was done to guide or inform their energy,
and the result was merely to add multilife-styles to multidisciplines, the
diversity of perversity to the diversity of specialization. What we see so
often happening in general happened here too; the insistent demand for
greater community ended in greater isolation. Old agreements, old
habits, old traditions were not so easily replaced.

Thus, when a student arrives at the university, he ﬁnds a bewildering

variety of departments and a bewildering variety of courses. And there is
no ofﬁcial guidance, no university-wide agreement, about what he
should study. Nor does he usually ﬁnd readily available examples, either
among students or professors, of a uniﬁed use of the university’s
resources. It is easiest simply to make a career choice and go about
getting prepared for that career. The programs designed for those having
made such a choice render their students immune to charms that might
lead them out of the conventionally respectable. The sirens sing sotto
voce these days, and the young already have enough wax in their ears to
pass them by without danger. These specialties can provide enough
courses to take up most of their time for four years in preparation for the
inevitable graduate study. With the few remaining courses they can do
what they please, taking a bit of this and a bit of that. No public career
these days—not doctor nor lawyer nor politician nor journalist nor
businessman nor entertainer—has much to do with humane learning.
An education, other than purely professional or technical, can even
seem to be an impediment. That is why a countervailing atmosphere in
the university would be necessary for the students to gain a taste for
intellectual pleasures and learn that they are viable.

The real problem is those students who come hoping to ﬁnd out

what career they want to have, or are simply looking for an adventure
with themselves. There are plenty of things for them to do—courses and

disciplines enough to spend many a lifetime on. Each department or
great division of the university makes a pitch for itself, and each offers a
course of study that will make the student an initiate. But how to choose
among them? How do they relate to one another? The fact is they do
not address one another. They are competing and contradictory, without
being aware of it. The problem of the whole is urgently indicated by the
very existence of the specialties, but it is never systematically posed. The
net effect of the student’s encounter with the college catalogue is
bewilderment and very often demoralization. It is just a matter of
chance whether he ﬁnds one or two professors who can give him an
insight into one of the great visions of education that have been the
distinguishing part of every civilized nation. Most professors are
specialists, concerned only with their own ﬁelds, interested in the
advancement of those ﬁelds in their own terms, or in their own personal
advancement in a world where all the rewards are on the side of
professional distinction. They have been entirely emancipated from the
old structure of the university, which at least helped to indicate that they
are incomplete, only parts of an unexamined and undiscovered whole.
So the student must navigate among a collection of carnival barkers,
each trying to lure him into a particular sideshow. This undecided
student is an embarrassment to most universities, because he seems to
be saying, “I am a whole human being. Help me to form myself in my
wholeness and let me develop my real potential,” and he is the one to
whom they have nothing to say.

Cornell was, as in so many other things, in advance of its time on this

issue. The six-year Ph.D. program, richly supported by the Ford
Foundation, was directed speciﬁcally to high school students who had
already made “a ﬁrm career choice” and was intended to rush them
through to the start of those careers. A sop was given to desolate
humanists in the form of money to fund seminars that these young
careerists could take on their way through the College of Arts and
Sciences. For the rest, the educators could devote their energies to
arranging and packaging the program without having to provide it with
any substance. That kept them busy enough to avoid thinking about the
nothingness of their endeavor. This has been the preferred mode of not
looking the Beast in the Jungle in the face—structure, not content. The
Cornell plan for dealing with the problem of liberal education was to
suppress the students’ longing for liberal education by encouraging their

professionalism and their avarice, providing money and all the prestige
the university had available to make careerism the centerpiece of the
university.

The Cornell plan dared not state the radical truth, a well-kept secret:

the colleges do not have enough to teach their students, not enough to
justify keeping them four years, probably not even three years. If the
focus is careers, there is hardly one specialty, outside the hardest of the
hard natural sciences, which requires more than two years of preparatory
training prior to graduate studies. The rest is just wasted time, or a
period of ripening until the students are old enough for graduate studies.
For many graduate careers, even less is really necessary. It is amazing
how many undergraduates are poking around for courses to take,
without any plan or question to ask, just ﬁlling up their college years. In
fact, with rare exceptions, the courses are parts of specialties and not
designed for general cultivation, or to investigate questions important for
human beings as such. The so-called knowledge explosion and
increasing specialization have not ﬁlled up the college years but
emptied them. Those years are impediments; one wants to get beyond
them. And in general the persons one ﬁnds in the professions need not
have gone to college, if one is to judge by their tastes, their fund of
learning or their interests. They might as well have spent their college
years in the Peace Corps or the like. These great universities—which
can split the atom, ﬁnd cures for the most terrible diseases, conduct
surveys of whole populations and produce massive dictionaries of lost
languages—cannot generate a modest program of general education for
undergraduate students. This is a parable for our times.

There are attempts to ﬁll the vacuum painlessly with various kinds of

fancy packaging of what is already there—study abroad options,
individualized majors, etc. Then there are Black Studies and Women’s
or Gender Studies, along with Learn Another Culture. Peace Studies
are on their way to a similar prevalence. All this is designed to show that
the university is with it and has something in addition to its traditional
specialties. The latest item is computer literacy, the full cheapness of
which is evident only to those who think a bit about what literacy might
mean. It would make some sense to promote literacy literacy, inasmuch
as most high school graduates nowadays have difﬁculty reading and
writing. And some institutions are quietly undertaking this worthwhile
task. But they do not trumpet the fact, because this is merely a high

school function that our current sad state of educational affairs has
thrust upon them, about which they are not inclined to boast.

education has become more important again (because the graduate
departments, aside from the professional schools, are in trouble due to
the shortage of academic jobs), university ofﬁcials have had somehow to
deal with the undeniable fact that the students who enter are
uncivilized, and that the universities have some responsibility for
civilizing them. If one were to give a base interpretation of the schools’
motives, one could allege that their concern stems from shame and self-
interest. It is becoming all too evident that liberal education—which is
what the small band of prestigious institutions are supposed to provide,
in contrast to the big state schools, which are thought simply to prepare
specialists to meet the practical demands of a complex society—has no
content, that a certain kind of fraud is being perpetrated. For a time the
great moral consciousness alleged to have been fostered in students by
the great universities, especially their vocation as gladiators who ﬁght
war and racism, seemed to fulﬁll the demands of the collective
university conscience. They were doing something other than offering
preliminary training for doctors and lawyers. Concern and compassion
were thought to be the indeﬁnable X that pervaded all the parts of the
Arts and Sciences campus. But when that evanescent mist dissipated
during the seventies, and the faculties found themselves face to face
with ill-educated young people with no intellectual tastes—unaware
that there even are such things, obsessed with getting on with their
careers before having looked at life—and the universities offered no
counterpoise, no alternative goals, a reaction set in.

of the crisp clarity or institutionalized prestige of the professions, but
nevertheless perseveres and has money and respectability connected
with it—has always been a battleground for those who are somewhat
eccentric in relation to the specialties. It is in something like the
condition of churches as opposed to, say, hospitals. Nobody is quite
certain of what the religious institutions are supposed to do anymore,
but they do have some kind of role either responding to a real human
need or as the vestige of what was once a need, and they invite the
exploitation of quacks, adventurers, cranks and fanatics. But they also
solicit the warmest and most valiant efforts of persons of peculiar gravity

and depth. In liberal education, too, the worst and the best ﬁght it out,
fakers vs. authentics, sophists vs. philosophers, for the favor of public
opinion and for control over the study of man in our times. The most
conspicuous participants in the struggle are administrators who are
formally responsible for presenting some kind of public image of the
education their colleges offer, persons with a political agenda or
vulgarizers of what the specialties know, and real teachers of the
humane disciplines who actually see their relation to the whole and
urgently wish to preserve the awareness of it in their students’
consciousness.

So, just as in the sixties universities were devoted to removing

requirements, in the eighties they are busy with attempts to put them
back in, a much more difﬁcult task. The word of the day is “core.” It is
generally agreed that “we went a bit far in the sixties,” and that a little
ﬁne-tuning has now become clearly necessary.

There are two typical responses to the problem. The easiest and most

administratively satisfying solution is to make use of what is already there
in the autonomous departments and simply force the students to cover
the ﬁelds, i.e., take one or more courses in each of the general divisions
of the university: natural science, social science and the humanities.
The reigning ideology here is breadth, as was openness in the age of
laxity. The courses are almost always the already existing introductory
courses, which are of least interest to the major professors and merely
assume the worth and reality of that which is to be studied. It is general
education, in the sense in which a jack-of-all-trades is a generalist. He
knows a bit of everything and is inferior to the specialist in each area.
Students may wish to sample a variety of ﬁelds, and it may be good to
encourage them to look around and see if there is something that
attracts them in one of which they have no experience. But this is not a
liberal education and does not satisfy any longing they have for one. It
just teaches that there is no high-level generalism, and that what they
are doing is preliminary to the real stuff and part of the childhood they
are leaving behind. Thus they desire to get it over with and get on with
what their professors do seriously. Without recognition of important
questions of common concern, there cannot be serious liberal
education, and attempts to establish it will be but failed gestures.

It is a more or less precise awareness of the inadequacy of this

consists of what one might call composite courses. These are
constructions developed especially for general-education purposes and
usually require collaboration of professors drawn from several
departments. These courses have titles like “Man in Nature,” “War and
Moral Responsibility,” “The Arts and Creativity,” “Culture and the
Individual.” Everything, of course, depends upon who plans them and
who teaches them. They have the clear advantage of requiring some
reﬂection on the general needs of students and force specialized
professors to broaden their perspectives, at least for a moment. The
dangers are trendiness, mere popularization and lack of substantive
rigor. In general, the natural scientists do not collaborate in such
endeavors, and hence these courses tend to be unbalanced. In short,
they do not point beyond themselves and do not provide the student
with independent means to pursue permanent questions independently,
as, for example, the study of Aristotle or Kant as wholes once did. They
tend to be bits of this and that. Liberal education should give the
student the sense that learning must and can be both synoptic and
precise. For this, a very small, detailed problem can be the best way, if it
is framed so as to open out on the whole. Unless the course has the
speciﬁc intention to lead to the permanent questions, to make the
student aware of them and give him some competence in the important
works that treat of them, it tends to be a pleasant diversion and a dead
end—because it has nothing to do with any program of further study he
can imagine. If such programs engage the best energies of the best
people in the university, they can be beneﬁcial and provide some of the
missing intellectual excitement for both professors and students. But
they rarely do, and they are too cut off from the top, from what the
various faculties see as their real business. Where the power is
determines the life of the whole body. And the intellectual problems
unresolved at the top cannot be resolved administratively below. The
problem is the lack of any unity of the sciences and the loss of the will or
the means even to discuss the issue. The illness above is the cause of the
illness below, to which all the good-willed efforts of honest liberal
educationists can at best be palliatives.

Of course, the only serious solution is the one that is almost

universally rejected: the good old Great Books approach, in which a
liberal education means reading certain generally recognized classic
texts, just reading them, letting them dictate what the questions are and

the method of approaching them—not forcing them into categories we
make up, not treating them as historical products, but trying to read
them as their authors wished them to be read. I am perfectly well aware
of, and actually agree with, the objections to the Great Books cult. It is
amateurish; it encourages an autodidact’s self-assurance without
competence; one cannot read all of the Great Books carefully; if one
only reads Great Books, one can never know what a great, as opposed to
an ordinary, book is; there is no way of determining who is to decide
what a Great Book or what the canon is; books are made the ends and
not the means; the whole movement has a certain coarse evangelistic
tone that is the opposite of good taste; it engenders a spurious intimacy
with greatness; and so forth. But one thing is certain: wherever the Great
Books make up a central part of the curriculum, the students are excited
and satisﬁed, feel they are doing something that is independent and
fulﬁlling, getting something from the university they cannot get
elsewhere. The very fact of this special experience, which leads nowhere
beyond itself, provides them with a new alternative and a respect for
study itself. The advantage they get is an awareness of the classic—
particularly important for our innocents; an acquaintance with what big
questions were when there were still big questions; models, at the very
least, of how to go about answering them; and, perhaps most important
of all, a fund of shared experiences and thoughts on which to ground
their friendships with one another. Programs based upon judicious use
of great texts provide the royal road to students’ hearts. Their gratitude at
learning of Achilles or the categorical imperative is boundless.
Alexandre Koyré, the late historian of science, told me that his
appreciation for America was great when—in the ﬁrst course he taught
at the University of Chicago, in 1940 at the beginning of his exile—a
student spoke in his paper of Mr. Aristotle, unaware that he was not a
contemporary. Koyré said that only an American could have the naive
profundity to take Aristotle as living thought, unthinkable for most
scholars. A good program of liberal education feeds the student’s love of
truth and passion to live a good life. It is the easiest thing in the world to
devise courses of study, adapted to the particular conditions of each
university, which thrill those who take them. The difﬁculty is in getting
them accepted by the faculty.

None of the three great parts of the contemporary university is

enthusiastic about the Great Books approach to education. The natural

scientists are benevolent toward other ﬁelds and toward liberal
education, if it does not steal away their students and does not take too
much time from their preparatory studies. But they themselves are
interested primarily in the solution of the questions now important in
their disciplines and are not particularly concerned with discussions of
their foundations, inasmuch as they are so evidently successful. They are
indifferent to Newton’s conception of time or his disputes with Leibniz
about 
calculus; 
Aristotle’s 
teleology 
is 
an 
absurdity 
beneath

consideration. Scientiﬁc progress, they believe, no longer depends on
the kind of comprehensive reﬂection given to the nature of science by
men like Bacon, Descartes, Hume, Kant and Marx. This is merely
historical study, and for a long time now, even the greatest scientists
have given up thinking about Galileo and Newton. Progress is
undoubted. The difﬁculties about the truth of science raised by
positivism, and those about the goodness of science raised by Rousseau
and Nietzsche, have not really penetrated to the center of scientiﬁc
consciousness. Hence, no Great Books, but incremental progress, is the
theme for them.

Social scientists are in general hostile, because the classic texts tend

to deal with the human things the social sciences deal with, and they are
very proud of having freed themselves from the shackles of such earlier
thought to become truly scientiﬁc. And, unlike the natural scientists,
they are insecure enough about their achievement to feel threatened by
the works of earlier thinkers, perhaps a bit afraid that students will be
seduced and fall back into the bad old ways. Moreover, with the possible
exception of Weber and Freud, there are no social science books that
can be said to be classic. This may be interpreted favorably to the social
sciences by comparing them to the natural sciences, which can be said
to be a living organism developing by the addition of little cells, a
veritable body of knowledge proving itself to be such by the very fact of
this almost unconscious growth, with thousands of parts oblivious to the
whole, nevertheless contributing to it. This is in opposition to a work of
imagination or of philosophy, where a single creator makes and surveys
an artiﬁcial whole. But whether one interprets the absence of the classic
in the social sciences in ways ﬂattering or unﬂattering to them, the fact
causes social scientists discomfort. I remember the professor who taught
the introductory graduate courses in social science methodology, a

famous historian, responding scornfully and angrily to a question I
naively put to him about Thucydides with “Thucydides was a fool!”

Books education, inasmuch as these books now belong almost
exclusively to what are called the humanities. One would think that
high esteem for the classic would reinforce the spiritual power of the
humanities, at a time when their temporal power is at its lowest. And it is
true that the most active proponents of liberal education and the study
of classic texts are indeed usually humanists. But there is division among
them. Some humanities disciplines are just crusty specialties that,
although they depend on the status of classic books for their existence,
are not really interested in them in their natural state—much philology,
for example, is concerned with the languages but not what is said in
them—and will and can do nothing to support their own infrastructure.
Some humanities disciplines are eager to join the real sciences and
transcend their roots in the now overcome mythic past. Some humanists
make the legitimate complaints about lack of competence in the
teaching and learning of Great Books, although their criticism is
frequently undermined by the fact that they are only defending recent
scholarly interpretation of the classics rather than a vital, authentic
understanding. In their reaction there is a strong element of specialist’s
jealousy and narrowness. Finally, a large part of the story is just the
general debilitation of the humanities, which is both symptom and
cause of our present condition.

To repeat, the crisis of liberal education is a reﬂection of a crisis at

the peaks of learning, an incoherence and incompatibility among the
ﬁrst principles with which we interpret the world, an intellectual crisis
of the greatest magnitude, which constitutes the crisis of our civilization.
But perhaps it would be true to say that the crisis consists not so much in
this incoherence but in our incapacity to discuss or even recognize it.
Liberal education ﬂourished when it prepared the way for the discussion
of a uniﬁed view of nature and man’s place in it, which the best minds
debated on the highest level. It decayed when what lay beyond it were
only specialties, the premises of which do not lead to any such vision.
The highest is the partial intellect; there is no synopsis.

The Decomposition of the University

and I had a chance to learn something about the articulation of the
university as it decomposed. In general, no discipline—only individuals
—reacted very well to the assault on academic freedom and integrity.
But various disciplines reacted in characteristic ways. The professional
schools—engineering, home economics, industrial-labor relations and
agriculture—simply went home and closed the shutters. (Some
professors in the law school did indeed express indignation, and a group
of them ﬁnally spoke out publicly for the dismissal of the president.)
These faculties were supposed, in general, to be conservative, but they
just did not want trouble and did not feel it was their ﬁght. The
complaints of the black students were not about them; and whatever
changes in thought were to take place, they would be untouched. In
spite of the common complaints about the great variety of disciplines
unbalancing the university and causing it to lose its focus, everyone
knows that the arts and sciences faculty is where the action is, that the
other schools are ancillary to it, that it is the center of learning and
prestige. This much of the old order has been preserved. The challenge
at Cornell was issued to the College of Arts and Sciences, as was the
case everywhere throughout the sixties. The problem thus had to be
faced by the natural sciences, the social sciences and the humanities.
They were asked to change their content and their standards, to
eliminate elitism, racism and sexism as “perceived” by students. But the
community of scholars proved to be no community. There was no
solidarity in defense of the pursuit of truth.

The natural scientists were above the battle, an island unto

themselves, and did not feel threatened. I believe that only one natural
scientist at Cornell spoke out against the presence of guns or the
bullying of professors. The university’s most famous professor, a Nobel
prizewinning physicist, became a leading spokesman in defense of the
president without once consulting those professors whose lives had been
threatened or posing the question of what was at stake. He deplored the
violence but took no action or uttered any word indicating where a line
should be drawn. As far as I know, none of the natural scientists was in
cahoots with the thugs, as were some social scientists and humanists. It
was the absolute independence of their work from the rest of the
university’s activity, and their trust that theirs is the important work, that
made them indifferent. They did not share a common good with the rest

of us. Walking to the meeting where the faculty capitulated to the
students—a truly disgraceful event, a microcosm of cowardly
acquiescence to the establishment of tyranny—in the company of a
friend who had had to suffer the humiliation of leaving his home and
hiding out with his family after receiving explicit threats, I heard a
professor of biology loudly asking, perhaps for our beneﬁt, “Do these
social scientists really believe there is any danger?” My friend looked at
me sadly and said, “With colleagues like that, you don’t need enemies.”

Because the student movements were so untheoretical, the natural

sciences were not a target, as they had once been in high-grade fascism
and communism. There were no Lenins thundering against positivism,
relativity or genetics, no Goebbels alert to the falseness of Jewish
science. There had been the beginnings of an offensive against the
scientists’ collaboration with the military-industrial complex, as well as
their role in producing the technology that abets capitalism and pollutes
the environment. But none of this went to the heart of the serious
scientists’ research. They were able to avoid the fury by distancing
themselves from certain unpopular applications of their knowledge, by
insulting the government which supported them, and by declaring
themselves for peace and social justice. Here too the great Cornell
physicist has, predictably, distinguished himself by making a habit of
apologizing for physics’ hand in producing thermonuclear weapons. But
these scientists were not asked to change one thing in their studies, their
classes or their laboratories. So they opted out.

This behavior was not merely selﬁshness and self-protectiveness,

every man for himself, although there was a good deal of that,
accompanied with the usual distasteful moralizing rhetoric. The
atmosphere of crisis caused a not entirely conscious reassessment of
natural science’s relation to the university. Crises in the intellectual
world as well as in the political one tend to bring to the surface tensions
and changes in interest that it is easier not to face as long as things are
calm. To break old alliances and form new ones is always a painful
business, as, for example, when liberals broke with Stalinists at the
beginning of the Cold War. The scientists found themselves confronted
with the fact that they had no real connection with the rest of the
university, and that to cast their lot with it was costly. One cannot
imagine that biologists would have been so callous if chemistry had
somehow become a target for cultural revolution, and young Red

Guards monitored its teachings and terrorized its practitioners.
Chemists are biologists’ blood relations, and their knowledge is
absolutely indispensable for the progress of biology. But it is not now
conceivable that a physicist qua physicist could learn anything
important, or anything at all, from a professor of comparative literature
or of sociology. The natural scientist’s connection with the rest of
humane learning is not familial but abstract, a little like our connection
with humanity as a whole. There may be a formulaic invocation of
rights applicable to all, but nothing that moves with the burning
immediacy of shared convictions and interests. “I can live without you”
is the silent thought that steals into one’s mind when such relations
become painful.

The reality of separateness has existed since Kant, the last

philosopher who was a signiﬁcant natural scientist, and Goethe, the last
great literary ﬁgure who could believe that his contributions to science
might be greater than his contributions to literature. And, it should be
remembered, it was not that they were philosopher and poet who
happened to dabble in science, but that their writings were mirrors of
nature and that their science was guided and informed by meditation on
being, freedom and beauty. They represented the last gasp of the old
unity of the questions before natural science became the Switzerland of
learning, safely neutral to the battles taking place on the darkling plain.
Henry Adams—whose life bridged the last epoch when gentlemen, such
as Jefferson, thought science both attainable and useful for them, and
the one where scientists speak an incomprehensible language that
teaches nothing about life but is necessary to life as information—takes
note of this change in his quirky way. When he was young he had
studied natural science and had given it up; when as an old man he
looked again in that direction, he found that he was in a new world. The
old university traditions and ideals had concealed the fact that the
ancient bonds had decayed and the marriage was washed up. The great
scientists of the nineteenth century and twentieth century were in
general cultivated men who had some experience of, and real
admiration for, the other parts of learning. The increasing specialization
of the natural sciences and the natural scientists gradually caused the
protective fog to lift. Since the sixties the scientists have had less and less
to say to, and to do with, their colleagues in the social sciences and
humanities. The university has lost whatever polis-like character it had

and has become like the ship on which the passengers are just
accidental fellow travelers soon to disembark and go their separate ways.
The relations between natural science, social science and humanities
are purely administrative and have no substantial intellectual content.
They only meet on the level of the ﬁrst two years of undergraduate
education, and there the natural scientists are largely concerned with
protecting their interest in the young who will be coming their way.

A perfect illustration of this situation appeared a few years ago in a

New York Times account of the visit of a professor of music to
Rockefeller University. The life scientists working there brought bag
lunches to the musicologist’s lecture. The project was inspired by C. P.
Snow’s silly conceits about “the two cultures,” the rift between which he
proposed to heal by getting humanists to learn the second law of
thermodynamics and physicists to read Shakespeare. This enterprise
would, of course, be something other than an exercise in spiritual uplift
only if the physicist learned something important for his physics from
Shakespeare, and if the humanist similarly proﬁted from the second law
of thermodynamics. In fact, nothing of the sort ensues. For the scientist
the humanities are recreation (often deeply respected by him, for he
sees that more is needed than what he offers, but is puzzled about where
to ﬁnd it), and for the humanist the natural sciences are at best
indifferent, at worst alien and hostile.

The Times quoted Joshua Lederberg, the president of Rockefeller

University, from which philosophy had recently been banished, as
saying after the lecture that C. P. Snow was on the right track but
“counted wrong”—there are not two but many cultures, one example of
which is that of the Beatles. This represents the ultimate trivialization of
a trivial idea that was just a rest station on a downward slope. Lederberg
saw in the humanities not the human knowledge that complements the
study of nature but merely another expression of what was going on in
the world. In the end, it is all more or less sophisticated show business.
With a kind of wink at his audience Lederberg lets us know that in this
sea of democratic relativism natural science stands out like Gibraltar. All
the rest is a matter of taste.

This disposition affected the natural scientists’ behavior at Cornell

and everywhere else. In the attempt to use the admission of students and
appointment of faculty as means for this or that social goal, which has
lowered university standards and obscured the university’s purpose, they

cooperated with the new agenda, in their own way. They adopted the
rhetoric of anti-elitism, antisexism and antiracism, and quietly resisted
doing anything about the issues in their own domain. They passed the
buck to the social scientists and the humanists, who proved more
accommodating and could be more easily bullied. Natural scientists too
are Americans, in general favorably disposed to the mood of the times.
But they are also pretty sure of what they are doing. They cannot
deceive themselves that they are teaching science when they are not.
They have powerful operational measures of competence. And inwardly
they believe, at least in my experience, that the only real knowledge is
scientiﬁc knowledge. In the dilemma that faced them—mathematicians
wanted, for example, to see more blacks and women hired but could not
ﬁnd nearly enough competent ones—they in effect said that the
humanists and social scientists should hire them. Believing that there
are no real standards outside of the natural sciences, they assumed that
adjustments could easily be made. With the profoundest irresponsibility,
scientists went along with various aspects of afﬁrmative action,
assuming, for example, that any minority students admitted without
proper qualiﬁcations would be taken care of by other departments if
they did not do well in science. The scientists did not anticipate large-
scale failure of such students, with the really terrible consequences that
would entail. They took it for granted that these students would succeed
somewhere else in the university. And they were right. The humanities
and social sciences were debauched and grade inﬂation took off, while
the natural sciences remain largely the preserve of white males. Thus
the true elitists of the university have been able to stay on the good side
of the forces of history without having to suffer any of the consequences.

To ﬁnd hysterical supporters of the revolution one had, not

surprisingly, to go to the humanities. Passion and commitment, as
opposed to coolness, reason and objectivity, found their home there.
The drama included a proclamation from a group of humanities
teachers threatening to take over a building if the university did not
capitulate forthwith. A student told me that one of his humanities
professors, himself a Jew, had said to him that Jews deserved to be put in
concentration camps because of what they had done to blacks. Finally
these men and women were in action instead of idling away their time
in libraries and classrooms. But they worked to their own undoing, for it
is the humanities that have suffered most as a result of the sixties. The

lack of student interest, the near disappearance of language study, the
vanishing of jobs for Ph.D.s, the lack of public sympathy, came from the
overturning of the old order, where their place was assured. They have
gotten what they deserved, but we have unfortunately all lost.

obvious and constitute the theme of this book. Cornell was in the
forefront of certain trends in the humanities as well as in politics. It had
for several years been a laundering operation for radical Left French
ideas in comparative literature. From Sartre, through Goldmann, to
Foucault and Derrida, each successive wave washed over the Cornell
shores. These ideas were intended to give new life to old books. A
technique of reading, a framework for interpretation—Marx, Freud,
structuralism, and on and on—could incorporate these tired old books
and make them a part of revolutionary consciousness. At last there was
an active, progressive role for the humanists, who had been only
antiquarians, eunuchs guarding a harem of aging and now unattractive
courtesans. Moreover, the almost universal historicism prevailing in the
humanities prepared the soul for devotion to the emergent. Added to
this was the expectation that in such changes culture would take
primacy over science. The intellectual anti-university ideology of which
I have spoken found its expression in these conditions, as the university
could be thought to be the stage of history. Lucien Goldmann told me a
few months before his death that he was privileged to have lived to see
his nine-year-old son throw a rock through a store window in the Paris of
’68. His studies of Racine and Pascal culminated in this. Humanitas
redivivas! Students took to the action but not to the books. They could
work on the future without the assistance of the past or its teachers. The
avant-garde’s fond expectation that the revolution would introduce an
age of creativity, that art rather than antiquarianism would ﬂower, that
imagination would ﬁnally have its innings against reason, did not ﬁnd
immediate fulﬁllment.

The professors of humanities are in an impossible situation and do

not believe in themselves or what they do. Like it or not, they are
essentially involved with interpreting and transmitting old books,
preserving what we call tradition, in a democratic order where tradition
is not privileged. They are partisans of the leisured and beautiful in a
place where evident utility is the only passport. Their realm is the always
and the contemplative, in a setting that demands only the here and now

and the active. The justice in which they believe is egalitarian, and they
are the agents of the rare, the reﬁned and the superior. By deﬁnition
they are out of it, and their democratic inclinations and guilt push them
to be with it. After all, what do Shakespeare and Milton have to do with
solving our problems? Particularly when one looks into them and ﬁnds
that they are the repositories of the elitist, sexist, nationalist prejudice we
are trying to overcome.

Not only did the thing in itself require a conviction and dedication

not often really present in the professors, the clientele was disappearing.
The students just were not persuaded that what was being offered them
was important. The loneliness and sense of worthlessness were crushing,
so these humanists jumped on the fastest, most streamlined express to
the future. This meant, of course, that all the tendencies hostile to the
humanities were radicalized, and the humanities, without reservations,
were pitched off the train. Natural and social science found their seats
by demonstrating a usefulness of one kind or another. This the
humanities were unable to do.

The apolitical character of the humanities, the habitual deformation

or suppression of the political content in the classic literature, which
should be part of a political education, left a void in the soul that could
be ﬁlled with any politics, particularly the most vulgar, extreme and
current. The humanities, unlike the natural sciences, had nothing to
lose, or so it was thought, and, unlike the social sciences, they had no
knowledge of the intractableness of the political matter. Humanists ran
like lemmings into the sea, thinking they would refresh and revitalize
themselves in it. They drowned.

This left the social sciences as the battleground, both the point of

attack and the only place where any kind of stand was made. They were
the newest part of the university, the part that could least boast of great
past achievement or contribution to the store of human wisdom, the
part the very legitimacy of which was questionable and where genius
had participated most modestly. But the social sciences were principally
concerned with the human things, were supposed to be in possession of
the facts about social life and had a certain scientiﬁc conscience and
integrity about reporting them. The social sciences were of interest to
everyone who had a program, who might care about prosperity, peace or
war, equality, racial or sexual discrimination. This interest could be to

get the facts—or to make the facts ﬁt their agenda and inﬂuence the
public.

Reward, punishment, money, praise, blame, sense of guilt and desire to
do good, all swirl around them, dizzying their practitioners. Everyone
wants the story told by social science to ﬁt their wishes and their needs.
Hobbes said that if the fact that two and two makes four were to become
a matter of political relevance, there would be a faction to deny it.
Social science has had more than its share of ideologues and charlatans.
But it has also produced scholars of great probity whose works have
made it harder for dishonest policy to triumph.

Thus it was in social science that the radicals ﬁrst struck. A group of

black activists disrupted the class of an economics teacher, then
proceeded to the chairman’s ofﬁce and held him and his secretary (who
suffered from heart disease) hostage for thirteen hours. The charge, of
course, was that the teacher was racist in using a Western standard for
judgment of the efﬁciency of African economic performance. The
students were praised for calling the problem to the attention of the
authorities, the chairman refused to proffer charges against them, and
the teacher disappeared miraculously from campus, never to be seen
again.

This kind of problem-solving was typical, but some professors in the

social sciences did not like it. Historians were being asked to rewrite the
history of the world, and of the United States in particular, to show that
nations were always conspiratorial systems of domination and
exploitation. Psychologists were being pestered to prove the
psychological damage done by inequality and the existence of nuclear
weapons, and to show that American statesmen were paranoid about the
Soviet Union. Political scientists were urged to interpret the North
Vietnamese as nationalists and to remove the stigma of totalitarianism
from the Soviet Union. Every conceivable radical view concerning
domestic or foreign policy demanded support from the social sciences.
In particular, the crimes of elitism, sexism and racism were to be
exorcised from social science, which was to be used as a tool to ﬁght
them and a fourth cardinal sin, anticommunism. Nobody of course
would dare to admit to any of these sins, and serious discussion of the
underlying issue, equality itself, had long been banished from the scene.
As in the Middle Ages, when everyone except for a few intrepid and

foolish souls professed Christianity and the only discussion concerned
what constituted orthodoxy, the major student activity in social science
was to identify heretics. These were scholars who seriously studied
sexual differentiation or who raised questions about the educational
value of busing or who considered the possibility of limited nuclear war.
It became almost impossible to question the radical orthodoxy without
risking viliﬁcation, classroom disruption, loss of the conﬁdence and
respect necessary for teaching, and the hostility of colleagues. Racist and
sexist were, and are, very ugly labels—the equivalents of atheist or
communist in other days with other prevailing prejudices—which can
be pinned on persons promiscuously and which, once attached, are
almost impossible to cast off. Nothing could be said with impunity.
Such an atmosphere made detached, dispassionate study impossible.

This suited many social scientists, but a new, tougher strain emerged

out of the struggle. Some saw that their objectivity was threatened, and
without respect and protection for scholarly inquiry any one of them
might be put at risk. The pressure revived an old liberalism and
awareness of the importance of academic freedom. Pride and self-
respect, unwillingness to give way before menace and insult, asserted
themselves. These social scientists knew that all parties in a democracy
are jeopardized when passion can sweep the facts before it. Most of all,
an instinctive disgust at loudspeakers blaring propaganda was roused in
them. Such social scientists were not necessarily all of the same personal
political persuasion. Their fellow feeling consisted in mutual respect for
the motives of colleagues with whom they did not always agree but from
whose disagreement they might proﬁt, and in attachment to the
institutions that protected their research. At Cornell one found social
scientists of left, right and center—on the admittedly narrow spectrum
that prevails in the American university—joining together to protest the
outrage against academic freedom and against their colleagues that took
place there and continues in more or less subtle forms everywhere. It is
not an accident that the challenge to the university was mounted in its
most political part, and that there it was best understood. The political
perspective is the one in which the moral unity of learning naturally
comes into focus and the goodness of science is tested.

I unfortunately cannot assert that this crisis has caused social science

to broaden its concerns or has induced the other disciplines to reﬂect on
their own situations. But it was inspiring to be momentarily with a band

of scholars who were really willing to make a sacriﬁce for their love of
truth and their studies, to discover that the pieties could be more than
pieties, to sense community founded on conviction. The other
disciplines have, in general, not put their professed attachment to free
inquiry to the test. Their immunity is a large part of the story behind the
fractured structure of our universities.

The Disciplines

How are they today, the big three that rule the academic roost and

determine what is knowledge? Natural science is doing just ﬁne. Living
alone, but happily, running along like a well-wound clock, successful
and useful as ever. There have been great things lately, physicists with
their black holes and biologists with their genetic code. Its objects and
methods are agreed upon. It offers exciting lives to persons of very high
intelligence and provides immeasurable beneﬁts to mankind at large.
Our way of life is utterly dependent on the natural scientists, and they
have more than fulﬁlled their every promise. Only at the margins are
there questions that might threaten their theoretical equanimity—
doubts about whether America produces synoptic scientiﬁc geniuses,
doubts about the use of the results of science, such as nuclear weapons,
doubts that lead to biology’s need for “ethicists” in its experiments and
its applications when, as scientists, they know that there are no such
knowers as ethicists. In general, however, all is well.

But where natural science ends, trouble begins. It ends at man, the

one being outside of its purview, or to be exact, it ends at that part or
aspect of man that is not body, whatever that may be. Scientists as
scientists can be grasped only under that aspect, as is the case with
politicians, artists and prophets. All that is human, all that is of concern
to us, lies outside of natural science. That should be a problem for
natural science, but it is not. It is certainly a problem for us that we do
not know what this thing is, that we cannot even agree on a name for
this irreducible bit of man that is not body. Somehow this fugitive thing
or aspect is the cause of science and society and culture and politics and
economics and poetry and music. We know what these latter are. But
can we really, if we do not know their cause, know what its status is,
whether it even exists?

The difﬁculty is reﬂected in the fact that for the study of this one

theme, man, or this je ne sais quoi pertaining to man, and his activities
and products, there are two great divisions of the university—humanities
and social science—while for bodies there is only natural science. This
would all be very well if the division of labor were founded on an
agreement about the subject matter and reﬂected a natural articulation
within it, as do the divisions between physics, chemistry and biology,
leading to mutual respect and cooperation. It could be believed and is
sometimes actually said, mostly in commencement speeches, that social
science treats man’s social life, and humanities his creative life—the
great works of art, etc. And, although there is something to this kind of
distinction, it really will not do. This fact comes to light in a variety of
ways. While both social science and humanities are more or less
willingly awed by natural science, they have a mutual contempt for one
another, the former looking down on the latter as unscientiﬁc, the latter
regarding the former as philistine. They do not cooperate. And most
important, they occupy much of the same ground. Many of the classic
books now part of the humanities talk about the same things as do social
scientists but use different methods and draw different conclusions; and
each of the social sciences in one way or another attempts to explain the
activities of the various kinds of artists in ways that are contrary to the
way they are treated in the humanities. The difference comes down to
the fact that social science really wants to be predictive, meaning that
man is predictable, while the humanities say that he is not. The
divisions between the two camps resemble truce lines rather than
scientiﬁc distinctions. They disguise old and unresolved struggles about
the being of man.

The social sciences and the humanities represent the two responses

to the crisis caused by the deﬁnitive ejection of man—or of the residue
of man extracted from, or superﬂuous to, body—from nature, and hence
from the purview of natural science or natural philosophy, toward the
end of the eighteenth century. One route led toward valiant efforts to
assimilate man to the new natural sciences, to make the science of man
the next rung in the ladder down from biology. The other took over the
territory newly opened up by Kant, that of freedom as opposed to nature,
separate but equal, not requiring the aping of the methods of natural
science, taking spirituality at least as seriously as body. Neither
challenged the champion, natural science, newly emancipated from

philosophy: social science tried humbly to ﬁnd a place at court,
humanities proudly to set up shop next door. The result has been two
continuous and ill-assorted strands of thought about man, one tending to
treat him essentially as another of the brutes, without spirituality, soul,
self, consciousness, or what have you; the other acting as though he is
not an animal or does not have a body. There is no junction of these two
roads. One must choose between them, and they end up in very
different places, e.g., Walden II, known as Brave New World by the
other side, and The Blessed Isles (a favorite retreat of Zarathustra),
known as The Kingdom of Darkness by its opponents.

Neither of these solutions has fully succeeded. Social science receives

no recognition from natural science.13 It is an imitation, not a part. And
the humanities shop has turned out to be selling diverse and ill-assorted
antiques, decaying and ever dustier, while business gets worse and
worse. Social science has proved more robust, more in harmony with
the world dominated by natural science, and, while losing its inspiration
and evangelical fervor, has proved useful to different aspects of modern
life, as the mere mention of economics and psychology indicates.
Humanities languish, but this proves only that they do not suit the
modern world. It may very well be the indication of what is wrong with
modernity. Moreover the language that in an unscholarly way
inﬂuences life so powerfully today emerged from investigations
undertaken in the realm of freedom. Social science comes more out of
the school founded by Locke; humanities out of that founded by
Rousseau. But social science, while looking to natural science, has
actually received a large part of its impulse in recent times from the
nether world. One need only think of Weber, although Marx and Freud
are similar cases. It cannot be avowed, but man, to be grasped, needs
something the natural sciences cannot provide. Man is the problem,
and we live with various stratagems for not facing it. The strange
relations between the three divisions of knowledge in the present
university tell us all about it.

To look at social science ﬁrst, it might seem that it at least has a

general outline of its ﬁeld and a possible systematic ordering of its parts,
proceeding from psychology to economics to sociology to political
science. Unfortunately there is nothing to this appearance. In the ﬁrst
place, it leaves out anthropology, although I suppose that if I were

desperate to make a case I could ﬁnd a way of squeezing it in; and it also
leaves out history, about which there is dispute as to whether it belongs
to social science or humanities. More important, these various social
sciences do not see themselves in any such order of interdependence.
Largely they work independently, and if they, to use that hopeless
expression, “interface” at all, they frequently turn out to be two-faced.
Within most of the specialties, about half of the practitioners usually do
not believe the other half even belong among them, and something of
the same situation prevails throughout the discipline as a whole.
Economics has its own simple built-in psychology, and that provided by
the science of psychology is either really part of biology, which does not
help much, or ﬂatly contradicts the primacy of the motives alleged by
economics. Similarly, economics tends to undermine the normal
interpretation of political events that political science would make. It is
possible to have an economics-guided or -controlled political science,
but it is not necessary; and it is equally possible to have a psychology-
guided political science, which would not be the same as the former. It
is as though there were a dispute among the various natural sciences
about which is primary. Actually each of the social sciences can, and
does, make a claim to be the beginning point in relation to which the
others can be understood—economics arguing for the economy or the
market, psychology for the individual psyche, sociology for society,
anthropology for culture, and political science for the political order
(although this latter is the least assertive about its claim). The issue is
what is the social science atom, and each specialty can argue that the
others are properly parts of the whole that it represents. Moreover each
can accuse the other of representing an abstraction, or a construct, or a
ﬁgment of the imagination. Is there ever a pure market, one not part of a
society or a culture that forms it? What is a culture or society? Are they
ever more than aspects of some kind of political order? Here political
science is in the strongest position, because the reality of states or
nations is undeniable, although they can in turn be considered
superﬁcial or compound phenomena. The social sciences actually
represent a series of different perspectives on the human world we see
around us, a series that is not harmonious, because there is not even
agreement as to what belongs to that world, let alone as to what kinds of
causes would account for its phenomena.

meant by science. All agree that it must be reasonable, have some
standards of veriﬁcation and be based on systematic research. Moreover,
there is a more or less explicit agreement that the kinds of causes
admitted within natural science should somehow apply within social
science. This means no teleology and no “spiritual” causes. Pursuit of
salvation would, for example, need to be reduced to another kind of
cause, like repressed sexuality, whereas pursuit of money would not.
Search for material causes and reduction of higher or more complex
phenomena to lower or simpler ones are generally accepted procedures.
But to what extent the example of the most successful of the modern
natural sciences, mathematical physics, can or should be followed
within social science is a matter of endless discussion and quarreling.
Prediction is the hallmark of modern natural science, and practically
every social scientist would like to be able to make reliable predictions,
although practically none have. Prediction appears to have been made
possible in natural science by reducing phenomena in such a way as to
be amenable to expression in mathematical formulas, and most social
scientists want the same thing to happen in their discipline. The issue is
whether various efforts in that direction cause distortion of the social
phenomena, or lead to the neglect of some that are not easily
mathematized and the preference for others that are; or whether they
encourage the construction of mathematical models that are ﬁgments of
the imagination and have nothing to do with the real world. A kind of
continuous guerrilla war goes on between those who are primarily
enthusiasts of science and those who are primarily attached to their
particular subject matter.

the most mathematized—both in the sense that its objects can be
counted and that it can construct mathematical models for at least
hypothetically predictive purposes. But some political scientists, for
example, say that the Economic Man may be very nice for playing
games with but that he is an abstraction who does not exist, while Hitler
and Stalin are real and not to be played with. Economic analysis, they
say, not only does not help us to understand such political actors but
makes it more difﬁcult to bring them within the purview of social
science by systematically excluding or deforming their speciﬁc motives.
Economists, seeking mathematical convenience, turn us away from the

consideration of the most important social phenomena, assert the
objectors (including the small, vociferous band of Marxist economists
who are rigorously excluded from the core of the discipline, the only
social science in which this has happened). So it goes between the
various disciplines and within several of them where the adherents of
the different approaches have no common universe of discourse.

Publicity aside, what students actually see today when they ﬁrst

encounter social science are two robust, self-sufﬁcient, self-conﬁdent
social sciences, economics and cultural anthropology, extremes forming
the antipodes, having almost nothing to do with each other—while
political science and sociology, quite heterogenous, not to say chaotic in
their contents, are strung tensely between the two poles.14 It should not
be surprising that these two disciplines are more explicit than are the
other social sciences about their founders: Locke and Adam Smith, on
the one hand, and Rousseau on the other. For these sciences have as
their clear presuppositions one or the other of the two states of nature.
Locke argued that man’s conquest of nature by his work is the only
rational response to his original situation. Locke emancipated greed and
showed the illusory character of the countervailing motives. Life, liberty
and the pursuit of property are the fundamental natural rights, and the
social contract is made to protect these rights. These principles agreed
upon, economics comes into being as the science of man’s proper
activity, and the free market as the natural and rational order (a natural
order unlike other recognized natural orders in that it requires
establishment by men, and they, as economists are constantly telling us,
almost always get it wrong). Economists have in general stuck to this, are
in general old liberals of one kind or another and supporters of liberal
democracy, as the place where the market exists. Rousseau argued that
nature is good and man far away from it. So the quest for those faraway
origins becomes imperative, and anthropology is by that very fact
founded. Lévi-Strauss is unambiguous about this. Civilization,
practically identical to the free market and its results, threatens
happiness and dissolves community. From this follows immediately
admiration for tight old cultures that channel and sublimate the
economic motive and do not permit the emergence of the free market.
What economists believe to be things of the irrational past—known only
as underdeveloped societies15—become the proper study of man, a
diagnosis of our ills and a call to the future. Anthropologists have tended

to be very open to many aspects of the Continental reﬂection, from
culture on down, to which economists were completely closed
(Nietzsche’s inﬂuence was already evident more than ﬁfty years ago in
Ruth Benedict’s distinction between Apollonian and Dionysian
cultures); they have tended to the Left (because the extreme Right,
equally viable in their system, had no roots here) and to be susceptible
to infatuations with experiments tending to correct or replace liberal
democracy. Economists teach that the market is the fundamental social
phenomenon, and its culmination is money. Anthropologists teach that
culture is the fundamental social phenomenon, and its culmination is
the sacred.16 Such is the confrontation—man the producer of
consumption goods vs. man the producer of culture, the maximizing
animal vs. the reverent one—between old philosophic teachings present
here but not addressed. The disciplines simply inhabit different worlds.
They can be of marginal use to one another, but not in a spirit of
community. There are few economists who also think of themselves as
anthropologists, and vice versa, although there are, for example, many
political scientists and sociologists who cross one another’s borders, as
well as those of economics and anthropology. The economists are the
ones most ready to jump the social science ship and go it on their own,
and think themselves closer than the others to having achieved a real
science. They also have substantial inﬂuence on public policy. The
anthropologists have no such inﬂuence beyond the academic world but
have the charms of depth and comprehensiveness, as well as the
possession of the latest ideas.

A few words about political science and its peculiarities might help to

clarify the problems of social science as a whole. To begin with, it is,
along with economics, the only purely academic discipline that, like
medicine, engages a fundamental passion and the study of which could
be understood as undertaken in order to ensure its satisfaction. Political
science involves the love of justice, the love of glory and the love of
ruling. But unlike medicine and economics, which are quite frank about
their relations to health and wealth, and even trumpet them, political
science turns modestly away from such avowals and would even like to
break off these unseemly relations. This has something to do with the
fact that she is a very old lady indeed, who would prefer not to show her
age. Political science goes all the way back to Greek antiquity and has
the dubious parentage of Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, all with bad

reputations in the land of modern science. The other social sciences are
of modern origin and part of the modern project, while political science
persists, trying to modernize and get with it but unable entirely to
control old instincts. Aristotle said that political science is the
architectonic science, a ruling science, concerned with the
comprehensive good or the best regime. But real science does not talk
about good and bad, so that had to be abandoned. However, both
medicine and economics really do talk about good and bad, so the
abandonment of the old political goods had the effect only of leaving
the moral ﬁeld to health and wealth in the absence of the common
good and justice. This accords with Locke’s intention, which was not at
all “value-free,” but was to substitute lower but more solid, more easily
attained goods for those that had been classically proposed. Political
science’s transformation into a modern social science did not further
social science but did further the political intentions of modernity’s
founders. It has tried to reduce the speciﬁcally political motives into
subpolitical ones, like those proposed in economics. Honor is not a real
motive; gain is.

Of course Locke himself was still much more a political scientist

than an economist, for the market (the peaceful competition for the
acquisition of goods) requires the prior existence of the social contract
(the agreement to abide by contracts and the establishment of a judge to
arbitrate and enforce contracts) without which men are in a state of war.
The market presupposes the existence of law and the absence of war.
War was the condition of man prior to the existence of civil society, and
the return to it is always possible. The force and fraud required to end
war have nothing to do with the market and are illegitimate within it.
The rational behavior of men at peace, in which economics specializes,
is not the same as the rational behavior of men at war, as was so tellingly
pointed out by Machiavelli. Political science is more comprehensive
than economics because it studies both peace and war and their
relations. The market cannot be the sole concern of the polity, for the
market depends on the polity, and the establishment and preservation of
the polity continuously requires reasonings and deeds which are
“uneconomic” or “inefﬁcient.” Political action must have primacy over
economic action, no matter what the effect on the market. This is why
economists have had so little reliable to say about foreign policy, for
nations are in the primitive state of war with each other that individuals

were in prior to the social contract—that is, they have no commonly
recognized judge to whom they can turn to settle their disputes. The
policy advice of some economists during the Vietnam war attempted to
set up a kind of market between the United States and North Vietnam,
with the United States making the cost of South Vietnam prohibitive to
North Vietnam; but the North Vietnamese refused to play. Political
science, as opposed to economics, must always contemplate war with its
altogether different risks, horrors, thrills, and gravity. Churchill
formulated the difference between a political perspective and a market
perspective in commenting on Coolidge’s refusal to forgive the British
war debts in the twenties. Coolidge said, “They hired the money, didn’t
they?” To which Churchill responded, “This is true, but not exhaustive.”
Political science must be exhaustive and this makes it a sticky subject for
those who want to reform it so as to accord with the abstract projects of
science. Consciously or unconsciously, economics deals only with the
bourgeois, the man motivated by fear of violent death. The warlike man
is not within its ken. Political science remains the only social science
discipline which looks war in the face.

Political science has always been the least attractive and the least

impressive of the social sciences, spanning as it does old and new views
of man and the human sciences. It has a polyglot character. Part of it has
joined joyfully in the effort to dismantle the political order seen as a
comprehensive order and to understand it as a result of subpolitical
causes. Economics, psychology and sociology as well as all kinds of
methodological diagnosticians have been welcome guests. But there are
irrepressible, putatively unscientiﬁc parts of political science. The
practitioners of these parts of the discipline are unable to overcome their
unexplained and unexplainable political instincts—their awareness that
politics is the authoritative arena of effective good and evil. They
therefore engage in policy studies whose end, whether it is stated or not,
is action. Defense of freedom, avoidance of war, the furthering of
equality—various aspects of justice in action—are hot subjects of study.
The good regime has to be the theme of such political scientists, if only
undercover, and they are informed by the question “What is to be
done?” And, in a real peripety, it turns out that the area of political
science where mathematics has had the greatest success is elections, the
most exciting and decisive part of democratic life, where public opinion
turns into government and policy. The most scientiﬁc element of

political science is one that makes its practitioners friends and allies of
real politicians, enlightening them and learning from them. Science
here parallels the greatest political thrills and has no need of changing
the perceived nature of its object to study it scientiﬁcally.

So political science resembles a rather haphazard bazaar with shops

kept by a mixed population. This has something to do with its hybrid
nature and its dual origins in antiquity and modernity. The reality with
which it deals lends itself less to abstractions and makes more urgent
demands than do any of the other social science disciplines, while the
tension between objectivity and partisanship in it is much more
extreme. Everything in modern natural and social science militates
against the assertion that politics is qualitatively different from other
kinds of human association, but its practice repeatedly afﬁrms the
contrary. Its heterogeneity is perhaps debilitating, and one ﬁnds here
choice theorists of the economic-models school, old-fashioned
behavioralists, Marxists (who are never at home in economics),
historians and policy researchers. Most unusual of all, political science is
the only discipline in the university (with the possible exception of the
philosophy department) that has a philosophic branch. This has long
been an embarrassment to it, and political philosophy was scheduled for
termination in the forties and ﬁfties. “We want to be a real social
science,” cried the terminators with an exasperated stamp of the foot.
But a combination of serious and fervent scholarship on the part of a
few thinkers and the muscle of the rebellious students in the sixties gave
political philosophy a reprieve that now looks permanent. It became, for
the best and the worst of reasons, the bastion of the reaction against
value-free social science and the new social science as a whole. It has,
where its presence is at all serious, proved to be continuously the most
attractive subject in the ﬁeld for both graduate and undergraduate
students. And as the new scientiﬁc persuasion has lost much of its élan
and the ﬁeld has fragmented in various directions dictated at least partly
by ﬁdelity to the political phenomena, many of those who were once
ﬁerce enemies of political philosophy have become its allies. Political
philosophy is far from ruling, but it provides at least a reminiscence of
those old questions about good and evil and the resources for examining
the hidden presuppositions of modern political science and political
life. Aristotle’s Politics is still alive there, as well as Locke’s Treatise on
Civil Government and Rousseau’s Discourse on the Origins of Inequality.

Aristotle asserts that man is by nature a political animal, which means
that he has an impulse toward civil society. Reading Aristotle helps to lay
bare the hidden premise underlying modern social science, that man is
by nature a solitary being, and could provide the basis for making a
debate of it again.17

Obviously, then, the glory days of social science from the point of

view of liberal education are over. Gone is the time when Marx, Freud
and Weber, philosophers and interpreters of the world, were just
precursors of what was to be America’s intellectual coming of age, when
youngsters could join the charms of science and self-knowledge, when
there was the expectation of a universal theory of man that would unite
the university and contribute to progress, harnessing Europe’s
intellectual depth and heritage with our vitality. Natural science was to
culminate in human science; Darwin and Einstein would tell social
science as much as they had told natural science. And modern literature
—Dostoyevski, Joyce, Proust, Kafka—expressed our mood and provided
the insights that social science would systematize and prove.
Psychoanalysis provided the link between private experience and public
intellectual endeavor. So uniﬁed was the experience that personal desire
was intimately connected with intuition of the comprehensive order of
things, a simulacrum of the old understanding of philosophy as a way of
life. On a much less sophisticated level but expressing something of the
same ethos, Margaret Mead had a new science that took one to exotic
places, brought back new understandings of society and also proved the
legitimacy of one’s repressed sexual desires. To young people, the
sociologists and psychologists who trod the university’s grounds could
look like heroes of the life of the mind. They were initiated into the
mysteries and might help us to become initiates too. Old-style
philosophy had been overcome, but names like Hegel, Schopenhauer
and Kierkegaard were thought to offer some of the experience required
for our adventure.

Such an atmosphere as surrounded social science in the forties was

obviously of ambiguous value for both students and professors. But
something akin to it is necessary if American students are to be attracted
to the idea of liberal education and the awareness that the university will
cause them to discover new faculties in themselves and reveal another
level of existence that had been hidden from them. American students,
it must be remembered, if they have learned anything at all in high

school, have learned natural science as a technique, not as a way of life
or a means of discovering life. If anything other than routine specialized
learning is to touch them, they must be given a shock treatment—even
if it is only to make them think about their commitment to natural
science and its meaning, inasmuch as their earlier training has been
more of an indoctrination, more of a conformism, than the discovery of
a vocation. The social science inebriation of the forties was not, I
believe, the genuine article, but it reproduced something of the
intellectual excitement surrounding theoretical new beginnings. It
proved fertile for many students and scholars, generated its own ancillary
bohemia and affected the substance of people’s lives. It was not just a
profession.

The hopes for a unity of social science have faded, and it cannot

present a common front. It is a series of discrete disciplines and
subdisciplines. Most are modest, and although there is a lot of nonsense,
there are also a fair number of really useful parts practiced by highly
competent specialists. The expectations are radically lowered.
Economics is a specialty that has universal pretensions to explain and
encompass everything, but they are not quite believed, and its popularity
does not rest on them. Political science does not even try to make good
its ancestral claim to comprehensiveness and only covertly and partially
makes its special and rightful appeal to the political passion.
Anthropology is the only social science discipline still exercising the
charm of possible wholeness, with its idea of culture, which appears
more really complete than does the economists’ idea of the market. Both
the superpolitical cultural part and the subpolitical economic part claim
to be the whole, while neither sociology nor political science, apart from
certain individuals, really seems to make any claims over the whole
social science enterprise. There is no social science as an architectonic
science. It is parts without a whole.

Similarly, with the possible exceptions of computer science as a

model for man, and sociobiology, the expectation of substantive unity
between natural science and social science has faded, leaving social
science a consumer only of natural science method. Gone is the cosmic
intention of placing man in the universe. In the direction of the
humanities, it is again only anthropology that has maintained a certain
opening, particularly to the merchandise being hawked in comparative
literature, but also to serious studies, e.g., Greek religion. No other

social scientists expect to get much from nineteenth- and twentieth-
century art and literature, which fascinated many signiﬁcant social
scientists a generation ago, and there are fewer and fewer social scientists
who have much familiarity with that sort of thing in a personal way. The
social sciences have become an island in the university ﬂoating
alongside the other two islands, full of signiﬁcant information and
hiding treasures of great questions that could be mined but are not.
Notably, the social science intellectual in the German or French mold,
looked upon as a kind of sage or wise man who could tell all about life,
has all but disappeared.

The students are aware of this and do not turn to the social sciences

in general for the experience of conversion. Particular things or
particular professors may be of interest to them for one reason or
another, but for any who might happen to be looking for the meaning of
life, or who might be able to learn that that is what they should look for,
social science is not now the place to go. Anthropology, to repeat myself,
is something of an exception. The secret of social science’s great early
success with intelligent young Americans was that it was the only place
in the university that seemed, however indirectly, to seek the answer to
the Socratic question of how one should live. Even when it was most
vigorously teaching that values cannot be the subject matter of
knowledge, that very teaching taught about life, as shown by such once
exciting contrivances as Weber’s distinction between the ethics of
intention and the ethics of responsibility. This was not textbook
learning, but the real stuff of life. Nothing like this is to be found there
today.

Moreover, a great disaster has occurred. It is the establishment during

the last decade or so of the MBA as the moral equivalent of the MD or
the law degree, meaning a way of insuring a lucrative living by the mere
fact of a diploma that is not a mark of scholarly achievement. It is a
general rule that the students who have any chance of getting a liberal
education are those who do not have a ﬁxed career goal, or at least those
for whom the university is not merely a training ground for a profession.
Those who do have such a goal go through the university with blinders
on, studying what the chosen discipline imposes on them while
occasionally diverting themselves with an elective course that attracts
them. True liberal education requires that the student’s whole life be
radically changed by it, that what he learns may affect his action, his

tastes, his choices, that no previous attachment be immune to
examination and hence re-evaluation. Liberal education puts everything
at risk and requires students who are able to risk everything.18 Otherwise
it can only touch what is uncommitted in the already essentially
committed. The effect of the MBA is to corral a horde of students who
want to get into business school and to put the blinders on them, to
legislate an illiberal, ofﬁcially approved undergraduate program for
them at the outset, like premeds who usually disappear into their
required courses and are never heard from again. Both the goal and the
way of getting to it are ﬁxed so that nothing can distract them. (Prelaw
students are more visible in a variety of liberal courses because law
schools are less ﬁxed in their prerequisites; they are only seeking bright
students.) Premed, prelaw and prebusiness students are distinctively
tourists in the liberal arts. Getting into those elite professional schools is
an obsessive concern that tethers their minds.

The speciﬁc effect of the MBA has been an explosion of enrollments

in economics, the prebusiness major. In serious universities something
like 20 percent of the undergraduates are now economics majors.
Economics overwhelms the rest of the social sciences and skews the
students’ perception of them—their purpose and their relative weight
with regard to the knowledge of human things. A premed who takes
much biology does not, by contrast, lose sight of the status of physics, for
the latter’s inﬂuence on biology is clear, its position agreed upon, and it
is respected by the biologists. None of this is so for the prebusiness
economics major, who not only does not take an interest in sociology,
anthropology or political science but is also persuaded that what he is
learning can handle all that belongs to those studies. Moreover, he is not
motivated by love of the science of economics but by love of what it is
concerned with—money. Economists’ concern with wealth, an
undeniably real and solid thing, gives them a certain impressive
intellectual solidity not provided by, say, culture. One can be sure that
they are not talking about nothing. But wealth, as opposed to the
science of wealth, is not the noblest of motivations, and there is nothing
else quite like this perfect coincidence between science and cupidity
elsewhere in the university. The only parallel would be if there were a
science of sexology, with earnest and truly scholarly professors, which
would ensure its students lavish sexual satisfactions.

The third island of the university is the almost submerged old

Atlantis, the humanities. In it there is no semblance of order, no serious
account of what should and should not belong, or of what its disciplines
are trying to accomplish or how. It is somehow the repair of man or of
humanity, the place to go to ﬁnd ourselves now that everyone else has
given up. But where to look in this heap or jumble? It is difﬁcult enough
for those who already know what to look for to get any satisfaction here.
For students it requires a powerful instinct and a lot of luck. The
analogies tumble uncontrollably from my pen. The humanities are like
the great old Paris Flea Market where, amidst masses of junk, people
with a good eye found castaway treasures that made them rich. Or they
are like a refugee camp where all the geniuses driven out of their jobs
and countries by unfriendly regimes are idling, either unemployed or
performing menial tasks. The other two divisions of the university have
no use for the past, are forward-looking and not inclined toward ancestor
worship.

The problem of the humanities, and therefore of the unity of

knowledge, is perhaps best represented by the fact that if Galileo, Kepler
and Newton exist anywhere in the university now it is in the humanities,
as part of one kind of history or another—history of science, history of
ideas, history of culture. In order to have a place, they have to be
understood as something other than what they were—great
contemplators of the whole of nature who understood themselves to be
of interest only to the extent that they told the truth about it. If they were
wrong or have been completely surpassed, then they themselves would
say that they are of no interest. To put them in the humanities is the
equivalent of naming a street after them or setting up a statue in a
corner of a park. They are effectively dead. Plato, Bacon, Machiavelli
and Montesquieu are in the same condition, except for that little
enclave in political science. The humanities are the repository for all of
the classics now—but much of the classic literature claimed to be about
the order of the whole of nature and man’s place in it, to legislate for
that whole and to tell the truth about it. If such claims are denied, these
writers and their books cannot be read seriously, and their neglect
elsewhere is justiﬁed. They have been saved only on the condition of
being mummiﬁed. The humanities’ willingness to receive them has
taken them off the backs of the natural and social sciences, where they
constituted a challenge that no longer has to be met. On the portal of

the humanities is written in many ways and many tongues, “There is no
truth—at least here.”

books that are not specialized, that insist upon asking the questions
about the whole that are excluded from the rest of the university, which
is dominated by real specialties, as resistant to self-examination as they
were in Socrates’ day and now rid of the gadﬂy. The humanities have
not had the vigor to ﬁght it out with triumphant natural science, and
want to act as though it were just a specialty. But, as I have said over and
over again, however much the humane disciplines would like to forget
about their essential conﬂict with natural science as now practiced and
understood, they are gradually undermined by it. Whether it is old
philosophic texts that raise now inadmissible questions, or old works of
literature that presuppose the being of the noble and the beautiful,
materialism, determinism, reductionism, homogenization—however
one describes modern natural science—deny their importance and their
very possibility. Natural science asserts that it is metaphysically neutral,
and hence has no need for philosophy, and that imagination is not a
faculty that in any way intuits the real—hence art has nothing to do with
truth. The kinds of questions children ask: Is there a God? Is there
freedom? Is there punishment for evil deeds? Is there certain
knowledge? What is a good society? were once also the questions
addressed by science and philosophy. But now the grownups are too
busy at work, and the children are left in a day-care center called the
humanities, in which the discussions have no echo in the adult world.
Moreover, students whose nature draws them to such questions and to
the books that appear to investigate them are very quickly rebuffed by
the fact that their humanities teachers do not want or are unable to use
the books to respond to their needs.

This problem of the old books is not new. In Swift’s Battle of the

Books one ﬁnds Bentley, the premier Greek scholar of the eighteenth
century, on the side of the moderns. He accepted the superiority of
modern thought to Greek thought. So why study Greek books? This
question remains unanswered in classics departments. There are all sorts
of dodges, ranging from pure philological analysis to using these books
to show the relation between thought and economic conditions. But
practically no one even tries to read them as they were once read—for
the sake of ﬁnding out whether they are true. Aristotle’s Ethics teaches

us not what a good man is but what the Greeks thought about morality.
But who really cares very much about that? Not any normal person who
wants to lead a serious life.

All the things I have said about books in our time help to

characterize the situation of the humanities, which are the really
exposed part of the university. They have been buffeted more severely by
historicism and relativism than the other parts. They suffer most from
democratic society’s lack of respect for tradition and its emphasis on
utility. To the extent that the humanities are supposed to treat of
creativity, professors’ lack of creativity becomes a handicap. The
humanities are embarrassed by the political content of many of the
literary works belonging to them. They have had to alter their contents
for the sake of openness to other cultures. And when the old university
habits were changed, they found themselves least able to answer the
question “Why?,” least able to force students to meet standards, or to
attract them with any clear account of what they would learn. One need
only glance at the situation of the natural sciences in all these respects to
see the gravity of the problem faced by the humanities. Natural science
is sovereignly indifferent to the fact that there were and are other kinds
of explanations of natural phenomena in other ages or cultures. The
relation between Einstein and Buddha is purely for educational TV, in
programs put together by humanists. Whatever its practitioners may say,
they are sure its explanations are true, or truth. They do not have to give
reasons “why,” because the answer seems all too evident.

The natural sciences are able to assert that they are pursuing the

important truth, and the humanities are not able to make any such
assertion. That is always the critical point. Without this, no study can
remain alive. Vague insistence that without the humanities we will no
longer be civilized rings very hollow when no one can say what
“civilized” means, when there are said to be many civilizations that are
all equal. The claim of “the classic” loses all legitimacy when the classic
cannot be believed to tell the truth. The truth question is most pressing
and acutely embarrassing for those who deal with the philosophic texts,
but also creates problems for those treating purely literary works. There
is an enormous difference between saying, as teachers once did, “You
must learn to see the world as Homer or Shakespeare did,” and saying,
as teachers now do, “Homer and Shakespeare had some of the same
concerns you do and can enrich your vision of the world.” In the former

approach students are challenged to discover new experiences and
reassess old; in the latter, they are free to use the books in any way they
please.

I am distinguishing two related but different problems here. The

contents of the classic books have become particularly difﬁcult to
defend in modern times, and the professors who now teach them do not
care to defend them, are not interested in their truth. One can most
clearly see the latter in the case of the Bible. To include it in the
humanities is already a blasphemy, a denial of its own claims. There it is
almost inevitably treated in one of two ways: It is subjected to modern
“scientiﬁc” analysis, called the Higher Criticism, where it is dismantled,
to show how “sacred” books are put together, and that they are not what
they claim to be. It is useful as a mosaic in which one ﬁnds the
footprints of many dead civilizations. Or else the Bible is used in courses
in comparative religion as one expression of the need for the “sacred”
and as a contribution to the very modern, very scientiﬁc study of the
structure of “myths.”(Here one can join up with the anthropologists and
really be alive.) A teacher who treated the Bible naively, taking it at its
word, or Word, would be accused of scientiﬁc incompetence and lack of
sophistication. Moreover, he might rock the boat and start the religious
wars all over again, as well as a quarrel within the university between
reason and revelation, which would upset comfortable arrangements
and wind up by being humiliating to the humanities. Here one sees the
traces of the Enlightenment’s political project, which wanted precisely
to render the Bible, and other old books, undangerous. This project is
one of the underlying causes of the impotence of the humanities. The
best that can be done, it appears, is to teach “The Bible as Literature,” as
opposed to “as Revelation,” which it claims to be. In this way it can be
read somewhat independently of deforming scholarly apparatus, as we
read, for example, Pride and Prejudice. Thus the few professors who feel
that there is something wrong with the other approaches tend to their
consciences.

Professors of the humanities have long been desperate to make their

subjects accord with modernity instead of a challenge to it. One sees this
in a puerile form in the footnotes to Paul Shorey’s edition of Plato’s
Republic, on which I cut my teeth, where he is eager to show that Plato
had already divined this or that discovery made by some American
professor of psychology in 1911, while he remains studiously silent

about Plato’s embarrassing disagreements with current views. Much
study in the humanities is just a more or less sophisticated version of the
same thing. I do not deny that at least some professors love the works
they study and teach. But there is a furious effort to make them up-to-
date, largely by treating them as the matter formed by some
contemporary theory—cultural, historical, economic or psychological.
The effort to read books as their writers intended them to be read has
been made into a crime, ever since “the intentional fallacy” was
instituted. There are endless debates about methods—among Freudian
criticism, Marxist criticism, New Criticism, Structuralism and
Deconstructionism, and many others, all of which have in common the
premise that what Plato or Dante had to say about reality is
unimportant. These schools of criticism make the writers plants in a
garden planned by a modern scholar, while their own garden-planning
vocation is denied them. The writers ought to plant, or even bury, the
scholar. Nietzsche said that after the ministrations of modern
scholarship the Symposium is so far away that it can no longer seduce us;
its immediate charm has utterly vanished. When it comes down to it,
the humanities scholar is not motivated by inner necessity, by any
urgency, certainly not one dictated by old books. The scholar who
chooses to study Sophocles could just as well have chosen Euripides.
And why a poet, and not a philosopher or a historian; or why, after all, a
Greek, and not a Turk?

There are a few humanities departments in universities that have

been able to escape respectably into the sciences, such as archeology
and some aspects of the languages and linguistics. They have almost
entirely broken off relations with the contents of books. Fine art and
music are, of course, in large measure independent of the meanings of
books, although the way of treating them does, at least to some extent,
depend on the prevailing views about what art is and what is important
in it. There is in humanities a great deal of purely scholarly work that is
neutral, useful and intended to be used by those who have something to
say, such as the making of dictionaries and the establishment of texts.

various departments of language and literature, usually one for each of
the Western languages, and conglomerates for the others. Except for
English, they all are responsible for teaching foreign languages. The
teachers have had to learn a difﬁcult language well and must teach it to

a population of students who do not really want to learn languages very
much. Now, in addition to the language, there are books written in that
language, and the learning of the language entails reading those books.
Hence, having learned the language in effect qualiﬁes the teacher to
teach the contents of the books, particularly since the books do not now
belong anywhere else. However, the teachers’ real knowledge of and
afﬁnity with those books is not ensured by their mastery of the language.
The books are the important thing, but the language tail tends to wag
the literature dog. These departments are the primary guardians of the
classic literature and protect their dominion over their works ferociously.
University convention submerges nature. It issues licenses, and hunting
without one is forbidden. Moreover, because of these conventions the
professors also listen to one another more attentively than to outsiders,
and are listened to more attentively than others by outsiders, as doctors
are more impressive to laymen in matters of health than are other
laymen. A cozy self-satisfaction of specialists easily results (until there
are rude jolts from the outside, such as occurred during the sixties).
Professors of Greek forget or are unaware that Thomas Aquinas, who did
not know Greek, was a better interpreter of Aristotle than any of them
have proved to be, not only because he was smarter but because he took
Aristotle more seriously.

This arrangement of the language and literature departments entails

other structural difﬁculties. Do Greek poetry, history and philosophy
belong together, or again, is not the secondary fact of the Greek
language determining the articulation of the substance? And is it not
possible that the proper connections go beyond Greece altogether,
constituting such pairs as Plato and Farabi or Aristotle and Hobbes?
Willy-nilly these departments are forced to adopt historical premises.
Greek philosophers are of a piece and, more likely, the whole of Greek
culture or civilization is a tightly woven tapestry of which the Greek
scholar, not the philosopher or the poet, is the master. From the outset
this arrangement answers the crucial questions about the relation
between the mind and history before they are raised, and does so in a
way contrary to the way Plato or Aristotle would answer them.

Most interesting of all, lost amidst this collection of disciplines,

modestly sits philosophy. It has been dethroned by political and
theoretical democracy, bereft of the passion or the capacity to rule. Its
story deﬁnes in itself our whole problem. Philosophy once proudly

proclaimed that it was the best way of life, and it dared to survey the
whole, to seek the ﬁrst causes of all things, and not only dictated its rules
to the special sciences but constituted and ordered them. The classic
philosophic books are philosophy in action, doing precisely these things.
But this was all impossible, hybris, say their impoverished heirs. Real
science did not need them, and the rest is ideology or myth. Now they
are just books on a shelf. Democracy took away philosophy’s privileges,
and philosophy could not decide whether to fade away or to take a job.
Philosophy was architectonic, had the plans for the whole building, and
the carpenters, masons and plumbers were its subordinates and had no
meaning without its plan. Philosophy founded the university, but it
could no longer do so. We live off its legacy. When people speak vaguely
about generalists vs. specialists, they must mean by the generalist the
philosopher, for he is the only kind of knower who embraces, or once
embraced, all the specialties, possessing a subject matter, necessary to
the specialties, which was real—being or the good—and not just a
collection of the matters of the specialties. Philosophy is no longer a way
of life, and it is no longer a sovereign science. Its situation in our
universities has something to do with the desperate condition of
philosophy in the world today, and something to do with its peculiar
history as a discipline in America. With respect to the former, although
reason is gravely threatened, Nietzsche and Heidegger were genuine
philosophers and able to face up to and face down both natural science
and historicism, the two great contemporary opponents of philosophy.
Philosophy is still possible. And on the Continent even now,
schoolchildren are taught philosophy, and it seems to be something
real. An American high school student knows only the word
“philosophy,” and it does not appear to be any more serious a life choice
than yoga. In America, anyhow, everybody has a philosophy. Philosophy
was not ever a very powerful presence in universities, although there
were important exceptions. We began with a public philosophy that
sufﬁced for us, and we thought that it was common sense. In America,
Tocqueville said, everyone is a Cartesian although no one has read
Descartes. We were almost entirely importers of philosophy, with the
exception of Pragmatism. One need not have read a line of philosophy
to be considered educated in this country. It is easily equated with hot
air, much more so than any of the other humane disciplines. So it

always had an uphill ﬁght. Students who did seek it could, however, ﬁnd
some refreshment at its source.

But it has succumbed and probably could disappear without being

much noticed. It has a scientiﬁc component, logic, which is attached to
the sciences and could easily be detached from philosophy. This is
serious, practiced by competent specialists, and responds to none of the
permanent 
philosophic 
questions. 
History 
of 
philosophy, 
the

compendium of dead philosophies that was always most lively for the
students, has been neglected, and students ﬁnd it better treated in a
variety of other disciplines. Positivism and ordinary language analysis
have long dominated, although they are on the decline and evidently
being replaced by nothing. These are simply methods of a sort, and they
repel students who come with the humanizing questions. Professors of
these schools simply would not and could not talk about anything
important, and they themselves do not represent a philosophic life for
the students. In some places existentialism and phenomenology have
gained a foothold, and they are much more attractive to students than
positivism or ordinary language analysis. Catholic universities have
always kept some contact with medieval philosophy, and hence,
Aristotle. But, in sum, the philosophy landscape is largely bleak. That is
why so much of the philosophic instinct in America used to lead toward
the new social sciences and is now veering off toward certain branches
of literature and literary criticism. As it stands, philosophy is just another
humanities subject, rather contentless, without a thought of trying to
take command in the crisis of the university. Actually it contains less of
the exhilarating presence of the tradition in philosophy than do the
other humanities disciplines, and one ﬁnds its professors least active of
the humanists in attempts to revitalize liberal education. Although there
was a certain modesty about ordinary language analysis—“We just help
to give you clarity about what you are already doing”—there was also
smugness: “We know what was wrong with the whole tradition, and we
don’t need it anymore.” Therefore the tradition disappeared from
philosophy’s conﬁnes.

All the language catalogued in Part Two was produced by philosophy

and was in Europe known to have been produced by philosophy, so that
it paved a road to philosophy. In America its antecedents remain
unknown. We took over the results without having had any of the
intellectual experiences leading to them. But the ignorance of the

origins and the fact that American philosophy departments do not lay
claim to them—are in fact just as ignorant of them as is the general
public—means that the philosophic content of our language and lives
does not direct us to philosophy. This is a real difference between the
Continent and us. Here the philosophic language is nothing but jargon.

The evident weakness of the division of literature on the basis of the

language in which it was written led, a half-century ago, to the sensible
project of trying to reunite it. Thus comparative literature was founded.
But as is the case with all such undertakings in our times, there was
considerable perplexity about what the new discipline was trying to do,
and it tended to generate systems of comparison that dominated the
literary works, tributes to the ingenuity of their founders rather than
openings through which the works could reveal themselves freed from
arbitrary constraints. Comparative literature has now fallen largely into
the hands of a group of professors who are inﬂuenced by the post-
Sartrean generation of Parisian Heideggerians, in particular Derrida,
Foucault and Barthes. The school is called Deconstructionism, and it is
the last, predictable, stage in the suppression of reason and the denial of
the possibility of truth in the name of philosophy. The interpreter’s
creative activity is more important than the text; there is no text, only
interpretation. Thus the one thing most necessary for us, the knowledge
of what these texts have to tell us, is turned over to the subjective,
creative selves of these interpreters, who say that there is both no text
and no reality to which the texts refer. A cheapened interpretation of
Nietzsche liberates us from the objective imperatives of the texts that
might have liberated us from our increasingly low and narrow horizon.
Everything has tended to soften the demands made on us by the
tradition; this simply dissolves it.

This fad will pass, as it has already in Paris. But it appeals to our worst

instincts and shows where our temptations lie. It is the literary
complement to the “life-styles” science I discussed in Part Two. Fancy
German philosophic talk fascinates us and takes the place of the really
serious things. This will not be the last attempt of its kind coming from
the dispossessed humanities in their search for an imaginary empire, one
that ﬂatters popular democratic tastes.

Conclusion

entering undergraduate. Together they represent what the university has
to say about man and his education, and they do not project a coherent
image. The differences and the indifferences are too great. It is difﬁcult
to imagine that there is either the wherewithal or the energy within the
university to constitute or reconstitute the idea of an educated human
being and establish a liberal education again.

However, the contemplation of this scene is in itself a proper

philosophic activity. The university’s evident lack of wholeness in an
enterprise that clearly demands it cannot help troubling some of its
members. The questions are all there. They only need to be addressed
continuously and seriously for liberal learning to exist; for it does not
consist so much in answers as in the permanent dialogue. It is in such
perplexed professors that at least the idea might persevere and help to
guide some of the needy young persons at our doorstep. The matter is
still present in the university; it is the form that has vanished. One
cannot and should not hope for a general reform. The hope is that the
embers do not die out.

Men may live more truly and fully in reading Plato and Shakespeare

than at any other time, because then they are participating in essential
being and are forgetting their accidental lives. The fact that this kind of
humanity exists or existed, and that we can somehow still touch it with
the tips of our outstretched ﬁngers, makes our imperfect humanity,
which we can no longer bear, tolerable. The books in their objective
beauty are still there, and we must help protect and cultivate the
delicate tendrils reaching out toward them through the unfriendly soil
of students’ souls. Human nature, it seems, remains the same in our very
altered circumstances because we still face the same problems, if in
different guises, and have the distinctively human need to solve them,
even though our awareness and forces have become enfeebled.

After a reading of the Symposium a serious student came with deep

melancholy and said it was impossible to imagine that magic Athenian
atmosphere reproduced, in which friendly men, educated, lively, on a
footing of equality, civilized but natural, came together and told
wonderful stories about the meaning of their longing. But such
experiences are always accessible. Actually, this playful discussion took
place in the midst of a terrible war that Athens was destined to lose, and
Aristophanes and Socrates at least could foresee that this meant the

decline of Greek civilization. But they were not given to culture despair,
and in these terrible political circumstances, their abandon to the joy of
nature proved the viability of what is best in man, independent of
accidents, of circumstance. We feel ourselves too dependent on history
and culture. This student did not have Socrates, but he had Plato’s book
about him, which might even be better; he had brains, friends and a
country happily free enough to let them gather and speak as they will.
What is essential about that dialogue, or any of the Platonic dialogues, is
reproducible in almost all times and places. He and his friends can
think together. It requires much thought to learn that this thinking
might be what it is all for. That’s where we are beginning to fail. But it is
right under our noses, improbable but always present.

Throughout this book I have referred to Plato’s Republic, which is for

me the book on education, because it really explains to me what I
experience as a man and a teacher, and I have almost always used it to
point out what we should not hope for, as a teaching of moderation and
resignation. But all its impossibilities act as a ﬁlter to leave the residue of
the highest and non-illusory possibility. The real community of man, in
the midst of all the self-contradictory simulacra of community, is the
community of those who seek the truth, of the potential knowers, that is,
in principle, of all men to the extent they desire to know. But in fact this
includes only a few, the true friends, as Plato was to Aristotle at the very
moment they were disagreeing about the nature of the good. Their
common concern for the good linked them; their disagreement about it
proved they needed one another to understand it. They were absolutely
one soul as they looked at the problem. This, according to Plato, is the
only real friendship, the only real common good. It is here that the
contact people so desperately seek is to be found. The other kinds of
relatedness are only imperfect reﬂections of this one trying to be self-
subsisting, gaining their only justiﬁcation from their ultimate relation to
this one. This is the meaning of the riddle of the improbable
philosopher-kings. They have a true community that is exemplary for all
other communities.

radical time, in which proximate attachments have become so
questionable and we know of no others. This age is not utterly
insalubrious for philosophy. Our problems are so great and their sources
so deep that to understand them we need philosophy more than ever, if

we do not despair of it, and it faces the challenges on which it
ﬂourishes. I still believe that universities, rightly understood, are where
community and friendship can exist in our times. Our thought and our
politics have become inextricably bound up with the universities, and
they have served us well, human things being what they are. But for all
that, and even though they deserve our strenuous efforts, one should
never forget that Socrates was not a professor, that he was put to death,
and that the love of wisdom survived, partly because of his individual
example. This is what really counts, and we must remember it in order
to know how to defend the university.

This is the American moment in world history, the one for which we

shall forever be judged. Just as in politics the responsibility for the fate of
freedom in the world has devolved upon our regime, so the fate of
philosophy in the world has devolved upon our universities, and the two
are related as they have never been before. The gravity of our given task
is great, and it is very much in doubt how the future will judge our
stewardship.

13 Natural science simply does not care. There is no hostility (unless it is attacked) to anything
that is going on elsewhere. It is really self-sufﬁcient, or almost so. If some other discipline proved
itself, satisﬁed natural science’s standards of rigor and proof, it would be automatically admitted.
Natural science does not boast, is not snobbish. It is genuine. As Swift pointed out, its only
habitual and apparently necessary sortie from its own proper domain is into politics. This is
where it itself, if only in confused fashion, recognizes that it is a part of a larger project, and that
it is dependent on that project, which is not a product of its methods. Lowly, despised politics
points toward the need for philosophy, as Socrates originally said, in such a way that even
scientists have to admit it. Natural scientists have no respect for political science as a science, but
they have a passionate concern for politics. This is a beginning point for rethinking everything. Is
the danger of nuclear war or the imprisonment of Sakharov just an accident?

14 Psychology is mysteriously disappearing from the social sciences. Its unheard-of success in the
real world may have tempted it to give up the theoretical life. As the psychotherapist has taken
his place alongside the family doctor, perhaps his education now belongs to something more
akin to the medical school than to the sciences, and the research relevant for him is more
directed to treatment of speciﬁc problems of patients than to the founding of a theory of the
psyche. The Freudian theories have been incorporated into some aspects of sociology, political
science and anthropology, and it appears that the self alone had nothing more to tell the social
sciences. This leaves open the question of what the solid ground is on which therapy stands, and
where its newer ideas come from. Serious academic psychology is left with the segment that has
to all intents and purposes fused with physiology.

15 Undeveloped, bad; developing, better; developed, good—for man and for the science of
economics.

16 I am tempted to say that psychology teaches that sex is the primary phenomenon. It is closer
to economics when understood as stimulus-response, closer to anthropology when understood as
a hang-up. If one wants something more from psychology, one meets a road sign saying “To the
Humanities.”

17 History, sharing Greek origins with political science, also has elements of the ancients-
moderns identity crisis, in addition to the other problems of the strictly modern social sciences.
As already mentioned, both participants and observers are unsure whether it is a social science or
one of the humanities. Its matter is resistant to the techniques of the behavioral sciences, since it
is particular, and therefore not easily generalizable, deals with the past, and is therefore beyond
controlled experiments; but it does not want to be merely literature. I believe that none of the
other social sciences includes history as part of the social science schema, with the exception of
that part of political science which is concerned with political practice as opposed to social
science, e.g., some aspects of American politics and of international relations. History until the
nineteenth century meant primarily political history; and it, unlike political science, was not
refounded in early modernity. Its traditional role was enhanced during the new foundings
because it told what happened, as opposed to old political science, which told what ought to
have happened. Therefore history was understood to be closer to the truth of things. History had
to wait until the nineteenth century for its modernization by historicism, which argued, as it
were, that being, certainly man’s being, is essentially historical. Historicism appears to have been
a great boon for history, a radical step upward in status. But the appearance is somewhat
deceptive. Historicism is a philosophical, not a historical, teaching, one not discovered by
history. Rather than the prestige of philosophy adhering to history, the reverse occurred. All
humanities disciplines are now historical—not philosophy, but history of philosophy, not art, but
history of art, not science, but history of science, not literature, but history of literature. Thus
history is all of these, but also none of them, because they are discrete disciplines in the
humanities. History became the empty, universal category encompassing all the humanities,
except insofar as it remained its modest, narrow political self. But because it does not have an
anchor in political passion as does political science, it could ﬂoat easily away from that dock
under the inﬂuence of the prevailing winds, as politics was depreciated by so many other things,
especially historicism. So, history, a wonderful, useful study, full of most learned individuals, is
as a whole a medley of methods and goals, six disciplines in search of a self-deﬁnition.

18 It is to be noted that many students who come to the university intending to go into natural
science change their intention while in college. It never, or almost never, happens that a student
who was not interested in natural science before college discovers it there. This is an interesting
reﬂection on the character of our high school education in general and science education in
particular.

Afterword

Andrew Ferguson

He had gone public with his ideas. He had written a book—
difﬁcult but popular—a spirited, intelligent, warlike book, and it
had sold and was still selling in both hemispheres and on both
sides of the equator. The thing had been done quickly but in real
earnest: no cheap concessions, no popularizing, no mental monkey
business, no apologetics, no patrician airs. . . . His intellect had
made a millionaire of him. It’s no small matter to become rich and
famous by saying exactly what you think—to say it in your own
words, without compromise.

—Ravelstein, by Saul Bellow, 1996

Bellow’s Ravelstein is a thinly ﬁctionalized Allan Bloom, caught at the
peak of life and rendered, so I’m told by Bloom’s friends and students,
with uncanny precision and ingenuity. We ﬁrst see him dressed in a
blue-and-white kimono, sashaying around the penthouse he’s rented at
the Hotel Crillon in the heart of Paris. His lover, a young man from
Singapore named Nikki, lies asleep in bed. Bellow wants to impress
upon the reader his subject’s physicality. Abe Ravelstein’s frame is long
and angled and ungainly, but it’s usually adorned in $5,000 suits. When
he eats, you sense the pleasure with which he undertakes the task: “he
was stoking his system,” Bellow says, “and nourishing his ideas”; at
dinner parties, hostesses are advised to place newspapers under his chair
to gather the debris from his enthusiastic feeding. His baldness is
“geological.” He smokes constantly, twin spouts of tobacco smoke
ﬂowing dragonlike from his nostrils. Bellow stresses the physicality at the
beginning of the novel because it lends poignancy to the wasting at the
end, when Ravelstein endures a tortured death from AIDS, as did
Bloom. He was carried off in 1992, only four years before Bellow

immortalized him as Ravelstein and ﬁve after he published the book
you hold in your hands.

Among much else, Bellow dramatizes the suddenness and

unexpectedness of the wealth and fame that rained down on Bloom in
the late 1980s. The course that Bloom’s classic took on its way to boffo
box ofﬁce is singular even among the endless eruptions and craterings of
the American book business. The proposal for the book was bought by
one editor and midwived into print by another, with no more than
modest expectations. The original title, Souls Without Longing, was
lovely but uncommercial, so it was changed. The ﬁrst print run, in
February of 1987, was ten thousand copies. By spring it was selling
twenty-ﬁve thousand copies a week. It hit the bestseller list in April,
reached number one by summertime, and stayed there for two and a
half months. It became beach reading! From the top of the list it beat
back waves of challengers, including multiple celebrity memoirs, self-
help books, and a particularly gloomy book-length warning about the
“coming depression of the nineties.” In March of the following year, The
Closing of the American Mind was still a bestseller. By then nearly a
million copies had been sold in the United States. Foreign sales were
just as prodigious. The best minds in American publishing were
boggled. Never in their experience had a book about Jean-Jacques
Rousseau, Friedrich Nietzsche, and Martin Heidegger outsold books by
Patty Duke, Shirley MacLaine, and Sam Donaldson.

Various attempts were made at the time to account for the runaway

success. The nearest cause was a handful of spectacular early reviews.
The book “hits with the approximate force and effect of what electric-
shock therapy must be like,” wrote the daily reviewer in the New York
Times, rather awkwardly. “It commands one’s attention and concentrates
one’s mind more effectively than any other book I can think of in the
past ﬁve years.” (Cut, print, and blurb.) The Times’s Sunday reviewer, a
college president, was similarly overwhelmed, calling the book “rich
and absorbing.” Ditto the Washington Post’s reviewer, likewise from the
Chronicle of Higher Education, and still more from Time and Newsweek.

But good reviews, even ecstatic reviews, aren’t sufﬁcient to sell a

book, as any number of highly praised authors you’ve never heard of
would be happy to tell you. Something else was happening here, but we
didn’t know what it was. James Atlas, in the New York Times Magazine,
conjectured that the book acted as a kind of adult continuing education

class: “It appeals to the student in us all.” Bloom’s editor at Simon &
Schuster said the book tapped a large reservoir of underserved book
buyers eager for intelligent discussion of profound issues. Louis
Menand, a literature professor at Princeton and CUNY, was rather more
sardonic in the New Republic: “It gratiﬁes our wish to think ill of our
culture (a wish that is a permanent feature of modernity) without
thinking ill of ourselves.”

Menand’s review was part of a second surge of notices, far more

critical than the ﬁrst. It was the Revenge of the Eggheads, and when at
last it came you couldn’t help but wonder what took them so long. The
Wall Street Journal’s rapturous review arrived late enough to note how
odd the early praise had been, sociologically and politically, coming as it
did from the “cultural establishment” that had been squarely in Bloom’s
crosshairs: “Many of the reviewers who have praised Mr. Bloom’s book
have not faced up to the consequences of Mr. Bloom’s ideas.” The
college president in the Sunday Times was singled out as an especially
unlikely booster. His rave review for the book “shows no indication that
the institution over which he presides stands fundamentally indicted by
it.” And not only this or that institution: Bloom was accusing an entire
generation of humanities professors of academic dereliction.

They took the book as a personal affront and reacted accordingly.

“Bad reviews are one thing,” James Atlas wrote. “The responses to
Bloom’s book have been charged with a hostility that transcends the
usual mean-spiritedness of reviewers.” Tactics differed. There were
attacks on Bloom’s scholarship, his philosophical skill, and the
empirical support for his broader claims. There were also sarcasm,
invective, caricature, shaming, and, inevitably then as now, accusations
of elitism, racism, sexism, and homophobia. Perhaps the most
celebrated rebuttal to Closing, considered by many of Bloom’s critics to
be deﬁnitive, was one of the calmest and most measured. Written by the
Harvard classicist Martha Nussbaum, it was a lengthy piece even by the
standards of the magazine in which it appeared, the New York Review of
Books. Her disputes with Bloom over the the ancient texts were too
obscure for a layman to adjudicate, but to my mind her characterization
of his general argument wasn’t quite accurate and in places discredited
itself. She tells us, for example, that in Closing “Bloom presents himself
to us as a profoundly religious man.” You could have fooled me. His
preeminent teacher, the philosopher Leo Strauss, liked to make the

distinction between Athens and Jerusalem—a life of philosophy versus a
life of faith. After a few approving nods toward the Bible, The Closing of
the American Mind shows Bloom to have been an Athens man all the
way (not to mention a Jew, a homosexual, and a Hoosier. Truly, they
broke the mold . . .).

The most subtle of Nussbaum’s arguments poked at a contradiction

lying half-buried in the book. Bloom opens with a patriotic celebration
of America’s foundation in natural rights, the guarantee of equality; by
the end of the book he seems to argue that the only way to save America
from its present course is for universities to recommit to promoting the
philosophical life, a life accessible, he frankly acknowledges, only to a
chosen few. The contradiction, if that’s what it is, doesn’t cripple his
other arguments, but Nussbaum and the other second-wave academics
thought it exposed an elitist, antidemocratic agenda that could easily
darken into something much spookier—autocracy or worse, a new (or
very old) kind of authoritarian rule.

One observer estimated that more than two hundred reviews of

Closing were eventually published, and scores of these, in obscure
quarterlies and highbrow opinion magazines alike, elaborated the theme
of Bloom as authoritarian menace. In Harpers, the political scientist
Benjamin Barber called the book “a most enticing, a most subtle, a most
learned, a most dangerous tract.” Americans were too susceptible to a
“Philosopher Despot” like Bloom, Barber wrote. “Anxious about the loss
of ﬁxed points, wishing for simpler, more orderly times,” they found in
his work “a new Book of Truth for an era after God.” This was a
common assertion but a weak one, even on its own terms. In accusing
Bloom of authoritarian tendencies, Barber and the others exposed their
own horror at the common folk and made you wonder about their own
faith in democracy. Who knew Americans were so easily duped? Toss
them a few quotes from Herodotus and bitch about their college kids
and they’ll think you’ve given them the Book of Truth. Even Franco had
to work harder than that! Maybe this whole idea of “government by the
people” needs to be rethought . . .

In time the academic establishment’s horror of Bloom grew too vast

for mere paper and ink to contain. Conferences were held to declare
him anathema. At one of these, in Manhattan, the associate headmaster
of the Dalton School called the book “Hitleresque.” Richard Bernstein,
then a reporter for the Times, chronicled a gathering sponsored by Duke

and the University of North Carolina, where Bloom, though not in
attendance, was “derided, scorned and laughed at” by a large group of
humanities professors. “In some respects,” Bernstein wrote, “the scene in
North Carolina last weekend recalled the daily ‘minute of hatred’ in
George Orwell’s 1984, when citizens are required to rise and hurl
invective at pictures of a man known only as Goldstein, the Great
Enemy of the state.”

It’s worth noting that Duke’s conference was held nearly a year and a

half after Bloom’s book was published. Some hatreds need more than a
minute to burn themselves out. And among the establishment—deans
and department chairs, the grim-faced apparatchiks at the American
Council on Education and the American Association of University
Professors—Bloom remained a pariah for the rest of what was left of his
life. But he was a jaunty and cheerful pariah, as Bellow shows, for there
were compensations: appearing endlessly on TV, accepting invitations
to Chequers from Mrs. Thatcher and to the White House from
President Reagan, and laughing in his kimono all the way to la banque.

I wonder whether all this fuss will seem bizarre to new and younger
readers of The Closing of the American Mind. It’s useful to recall the
world Bloom and his book broke into and riled so. In material ways, the
United States of America of 1987 seems as remote as Republican Rome.
Our national wealth has more than tripled in the last twenty-ﬁve years.
The digital revolution, with its upending of the habits and patterns of
everyday life, was just getting underway. Music lovers delighted in the
portability and convenience of their brick-sized Walkmans, never
imagining the tiny wonders they would be slipping into their
shirtpockets a decade hence. Cars, on the other hand, seem to have
been roughly half their present size. You couldn’t carry around a
telephone unless you yanked it off the wall. Nintendo was as
sophisticated as gaming systems came. And nobody used the word
“gaming system.”

Culturally, the country fretted. Culturally, of course, all countries, or

some segments of them, are always fretting, and have been doing so
since Cicero grieved over O tempora, O mores, up to and beyond Yeats’s
insistence that the center cannot hold. But by the end of the 1980s in
the United States, there were numbers to underscore the worry. In the
previous thirty years, violent crime had increased 500 percent, the

divorce rate had doubled, the teen suicide rate had tripled, and the
number of “illegitimate births” (this was the last era when you could use
the term) had increased 400 percent.

Beyond the numbers, the worriers readily found signs of the culture’s

degradation, if not its imminent collapse. On TV, Geraldo Rivera, Jerry
Springer, and Sally Jesse Raphael had introduced a new kind of freak
show that proved enormously popular, banishing modesty and discretion
and making exhibitionism a virtue, qualifying adulterers and wifebeaters
and cross dressers to strut their hour upon the stage set. (Eerie fact:
exactly nine months after Closing’s publication date, Snooki Polizzi was
born.) Popular ﬁction chronicled a generation of pampered youth lost to
anomie and cocaine. As the Iran-Contra scandal shook the executive
branch, pundits discovered among the people a loss of faith in their
institutions. A devastating crash on Wall Street was credited to greed
unchecked by law or moral obligation.

And as if all that weren’t sufﬁcient cause for alarm, one ﬁnal word:

Madonna.

The skittish American public in 1987 was well-prepped soil for a

message like Bloom’s. It helped that his subject, colleges and
universities, shared in the general unease and were in fact one cause of
it. Test scores at all levels of schooling, but particularly college entrance
exams, had been falling since the late 1960s. Two generations earlier the
GI Bill had begun to democratize higher education by making it
available to cohorts that in earlier times would have never thought it
necessary for a fulﬁlling life. To accommodate the swells of new
students, and to absorb the subsidies that followed them, schools vastly
expanded their housing stock, increased the number of classrooms, and,
crucially, widened the range of their ﬁelds of study.

The purpose of a four-year liberal arts program—defended by Bloom

as an exploration of the big questions that life presents to the fully
conscious human being—became confused. What was the point of a
bachelor of arts degree? Was it to plumb the depths and origins of
Western civilization, which had after all invented the university, and to
develop the student spiritually and morally? Or was the point to set the
kid up to get a cushy job? Humanists in our universities lost conﬁdence
in the traditional answer. And their departments, the seat of liberal arts,
suffered in the confusion, losing students to the social sciences and
programs devoted to professional training, such as pre-law or business.

The humanities responded by either aping the professional curriculum
or shrinking still further into the theory and abstraction that Bloom
devastatingly describes. Core courses were dropped. Teachers of
literature or philosophy had difﬁculty describing what they did for a
living, or why.

By the time Bloom’s book was released the crisis in the humanities

was acknowledged by everyone except the people who worked in the
humanities. Parents in particular began to wonder why their college-age
children were taking classes called “Hip-Hop Eshu: Queen Bitch 101”
(at Syracuse University) or coming home after four years with degrees in
“Peace Studies” that cost $100,000. Phrases that were used without irony
by many profs in the humanities—“politically correct” (good) and
“Dead White Males” (bad)—were captured by their critics and turned
into shorthand for the leftwing orthodoxy that ﬁlled the vacuum in the
liberal arts.

The crisis was made political fodder. The Reagan administration took

a special interest and an especially acerbic tone. Lynne Cheney,
chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the
Secretary of Education, William Bennett, led the dyspeptic chorus.
Both held doctorates in the humanities, which enhanced their
inﬂuence with the higher-ed establishment not at all. When Cheney
echoed Bloom in a widely publicized report—criticizing efforts by
humanities departments to make themselves “relevant” by treating
“great books as little more than the political rationalizations of dominant
groups”—she earned many multiple minutes of hate all on her own.

With the publication of Closing, Bloom was placed alongside Bellow,

Bennett, and later the jurist and Jeremiah, Robert Bork, in a convenient
journalistic category: the Doom and Gloomers, or the Killer B’s, or the
Grumpy Old Men. (Cheney, alphabetically disqualiﬁed to serve with
the Killer B’s, was nevertheless an honorary Grump.) But this grouping
wasn’t fair to Bloom, not entirely—and it wasn’t fair to the arguments
developed in the book, which had a subtlety and depth that journalism
and partisan politics can seldom capture.

Bloom was never a movement conservative. In electoral politics he

was a moderately liberal Democrat, and more liberal still in personal
and social matters. Unlike Bennett or Cheney, who considered
themselves champions of ordinary American bourgeois life, Bloom
viewed it with a disdain that runs just below the book’s surface. He was

no fan of the free market or the ceaseless getting and striving that it
encourages. He worried that the life that awaited students after college
would be just as enervating as their dismal and purposeless education.
And he wasn’t above invoking a brand-name cliché to drive the point
home. In their “Brooks Brothers suits,” he writes, “they will want to get
ahead and live comfortably. But this life is as empty and false as the one
they left behind.” Elsewhere he speaks of the “intellectual deserts” of
middle-class living and “the dreary professional training that awaits
[liberal arts students] after the baccalaureate.”

There is no element of moral uplift in his brief against modern life.

Discussing the collapse of the traditional family, which has only
accelerated since his time, he writes: “I am not arguing here that the old
family arrangements were good or that we should or could go back to
them.” Bloom’s discussion of rock music (see pages 68–81 if you’ve
forgotten, though how could you?) was always adduced as Exhibit A in
the charge of fuddy-duddyism—to most people under the age of thirty-
ﬁve, his complaints sounded no more informed or intelligent than the
bellowing of the old crank next door: “Turn it down!” But his case
against rock was entirely his own; he worried that it deadened the
passion required for real education. “My concern here,” he wrote, “is
not the moral effects of this music—whether it leads to sex, violence, or
drugs.” This placed Allan Bloom to the left of Tipper Gore, at the time
an energetic crusader against the depredations of Mötley Crüe and Def
Leppard.

In the last quarter-century, the reader will notice, Bloom’s book has

grown a few whiskers. Anachronisms are unavoidable. He wrote before
the population of modernity’s Holy Trinity—Marx, Freud, and Darwin
—reduced by two-thirds. Marx lost his allure, at least nominally, after
the collapse of the murderous regimes that claimed to have been built
from his ideas. Freud was demoted from scientist to cultural observer,
and an unreliable one besides. Some of Bloom’s language is outdated:
no professor today could use the word “Oriental” for “Asian” and long
survive. He objects to squishy nonce words, but the examples he uses
—“commitment,” “values,” “life-style”—are now so deeply embedded in
everyday speech that no amount of ridicule will dislodge them. He’s
lucky he didn’t live to see the inﬁnitely elastic use of the now-
meaningless word “issues.” I was touched by his quaint mention of
“Mack the Knife” as an example of American life’s homogenizing

effects: mass marketed by Louis Armstrong (I assume he couldn’t bring
himself to mention Bobby Darin), Brecht’s leftist agitprop “becomes less
dangerous, though no less corrupt.” What would Bloom have made of
the taming of the Village People’s “YMCA”—a tribute to the joys of
shower-room sodomy transformed into a sureﬁre crowd-pleaser at
middle-school pep rallies? The controversy over “afﬁrmative action,”
which he treats at length, was settled by the subtler logic of “diversity.”
And the book gives little notice to the arrival on campus of gay rights,
easily the most consequential social movement of the last three decades.

But I’m surprised by how few the anachronisms are. Most of Bloom’s

criticisms still apply. I can think of lots of reasons why The Closing of the
American Mind deserves as many readers as it earned in the eighties—
Bloom’s sly wit and the torrential energy of his prose are worth the price
of admission, in my opinion—but one carries a special urgency. The
trends he tagged in higher education in 1987 have only intensiﬁed:
toward 
weaker 
academic 
requirements 
for 
students, 
greater

specialization in the departments, a rigid orthodoxy in the university’s
politics and cultural life. The university we face today is still the one he
described, only more so.

At a minimum, what Bloom demands of us in response is awareness

—thoughtfulness. He hated unthinking conformity above all. The
contemporary university appalled him because it had conformed to the
frivolous culture that surrounds it and from which it was meant to stand
apart. The cheap relativism it absorbed led inevitably to the undoing of
the liberal arts. The humanities retreated from the traditional ways of
teaching and learning when humanists stopped believing the effort
could reveal any truths about the perplexities of life. In liberal
education, relativism is a universal corrosive.1 No discipline can survive
it. If there’s no truth, ﬁnally, why study the work of dead people who
were deluded enough to think there was? And without the pursuit of
what’s ﬁnally true, higher education becomes post-secondary
professional training—that’s if we’re lucky; a four-year booze cruise if
we’re not.

If I had reread The Closing of the American Mind ten years ago, when

my own children were themselves under ten, I confess I would have
thought Bloom’s portrait of educational decline was overwrought. But
then they grew up and went off to school.

Recall the passage on page 337. A freshman arrives on campus. “He

ﬁnds a democracy of disciplines,” Bloom wrote. “This democracy is
really an anarchy because there are no recognized rules and no
legitimate titles to rule. In short, there is no vision, nor is there a set of
competing visions, of what an educated human being is.” In the end the
freshman will likely give up on a liberal education, opting for a major
that will get him hired when he graduates and “picking up in elective
courses a little of whatever is thought to make one cultured.”

This observation from twenty-ﬁve years ago describes what a

freshman encounters at a moderately selective university today, and with
modest adjustments, even at smaller colleges that say they specialize in
the liberal arts. It is what my own family found. Poring over the catalog
of courses in the weeks before my son enrolled at our big state university
(which I have come to think of, for reasons soon to become clear, as
BSU), we discovered that no survey classes were available to him in
American history, English literature, the history of science, ancient or
modern philosophy. His “general education” requirements could be
satisﬁed by a scattering of electives, none related to any other. He was
required to enroll in a writing class, which was good. The writing classes
offered were “Mad Men and American Society,” “A History of the
Sixties,” and “Intro to Queer Theory.” Which was not.

Last year, the Association of College Trustees and Alumni surveyed

the catalogs of more than one thousand colleges and universities. Fewer
than 20 percent of the schools required courses in American
government, only a third required a literature survey class, and 15
percent required anything more than a beginner’s level class in a foreign
language. The “core curriculum,” as at BSU, is largely a sham: a math
class may be offered, a science class may be offered, but seldom are both
required, and often the content of each has only a glancing relation to
the study of math or science. The results have been predictable. The
authors of Academically Adrift—the most devastating book about higher
education since Closing—found that nearly half of undergraduates show
no measurable improvement in learning or “critical thinking” after two
years of college.

Perhaps the most famous image in Closing—certainly the least

appetizing—is a cartoonish word picture of an MTV-watching,
Walkman-wearing thirteen-year-old boy, the ﬂower of American
civilization, the human culmination of centuries of learning and

sacriﬁce, nonetheless brought low by a degraded popular culture: “a
pubescent child whose body throbs with orgasmic rhythms; whose
feelings are made articulate in hymns to the joys of onanism or the
killing of parents,” and so on and so on, whose “life is made into a
nonstop, commercially prepackaged masturbation fantasy.”

I thought of that boy of thirteen when I ﬁnished rereading The

Closing of the American Mind not long ago. He is now thirty-eight. His
parents, I hope, survived his childhood unscathed; I won’t speculate
about the onanism. He likely has children of his own by now. And I
hope by the time his own daughter is ready for college, he and all the
youngsters he was meant to symbolize will have forgiven the author of
this scandalous but all too realistic caricature. And when he disgorges
tens of thousands of dollars to send his daughter to a school that has
itself become a caricature of higher education, I am consoled to think
that he will be able to consult Allan Bloom as to how such a thing could
come to pass, thanks to a new edition of his maddening, haunting,
towering book.

1 I’m aware that defenders of relativism defend it by denying it exists: no one, they say, truly
believes that one idea is ultimately as good as any other. And of course they’re right that none of
us act in our own lives as though we believed this. But most of us profess it nonetheless. In a
genial but harrowing review of Closing, a teacher named Michael Zuckert told how he
canvassed the students in his American Political Thought class at Carleton College. He asked
whether they agreed that the truths in the ﬁrst lines of the Declaration of Independence were
indeed “self-evident.” Seven percent voted “yes.” On further conversation, he wrote, it turned
out “that they were convinced there is no such thing as ‘truth,’ self-evident or otherwise, in the
sphere of claims of the sort raised in the Declaration.” He would have gotten much the same
response in a classroom today.

Index of

Proper Names

Achilles, 66, 274, 280, 281, 285
Adams, Henry, 55
Adler, Mortimer, 54
Adorno, Theodore, 146, 224, 225
Alcibiades, 268, 282
Alembert, Jean d’, 257
Alexander the Great, 281, 309
Allen, Woody, 125, 144–46, 154, 155, 173
American Association of University Professors, 325
Anna Karenina (Tolstoy), 64, 108, 229
Apology (Plato), 265–67, 274, 276, 278, 281
Aquinas, Saint Thomas, 376
Arendt, Hannah, 152
Aristophanes, 381
Aristotle, 305

Aquinas on, 376
family relations and, 112
friendship viewed by, 75, 125
gentlemen educated by, 279–81
Great Books education and, 344–45
great-souled man of, 250
Heidegger and, 310
Hobbes vs., 255
Marsilius of Padua and, 283
medieval scholasticism and, 252–53, 264, 378
modern contempt for, 311, 363
musical education viewed by, 72–73
pity viewed by, 108
Plato and, 381
pleasure viewed by, 137
political distaste for, 253
political science of, 178, 262–63, 363, 366
science and, 300
slavery viewed by, 248
soul viewed by, 176

Armstrong, Louis, 151, 152
Assembly of Women, The (Aristophanes), 97, 99
Augustine, Saint, 249
Austen, Jane, 375
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 72
Bacon, Francis, 263, 265, 286, 292, 305
Bardot, Brigitte, 77
Barthes, Roland, 379
Battle of the Books, The (Swift), 373

Baudelaire, Charles, 205
Bauhaus movement, 152n
Bayle, Pierre, 294
Beard, Charles, 29, 56
Beatles, 350
Becker, Carl, 29, 55–56
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 72
Bellow, Saul, 11–18, 85, 237–38
Benedict, Ruth, 362
Bentham, Jeremy, 116
Bergson, Henri, 221
Berrigan, Daniel, 326
Bertolucci, Bernardo, 146n
Bettelheim, Bruno, 145
Bible:

American education and, 54, 56–57, 58, 60
humanities and, 374–75
inﬂuence of, 252
sexism and, 65–66
student knowledge of, 62

Birth of Tragedy, The (Nietzsche), 71
Black, Hugo, 62
Blue Angel, The, 151
Blum, Léon, 239
Bolero (Ravel), 73
Brecht, Bertolt, 151
British Royal Society, 294
Brown, Norman O., 322
Brown University, 84
Buddha, 211
Burke, Edmund, 85
Caesar, Julius, 281
Calvin, John, 208–11
Camus, Albert, 88
Capital (Marx), 217, 220
Carlyle, Thomas, 181
Carter, Jimmy, 119
Castro, Fidel, 331
Catcher in the Rye, The (Salinger), 63
Céline, Louis-Ferdinand, 239
Churchill, Sir Winston, 123, 256, 364–65
Cicero, 154
City of God, The (Augustine), 249
Clausewitz, Karl von, 290
Clouds, The (Aristophanes), 269–70, 281, 293
Cold War, 349
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 181
Coolidge, Calvin, 364–65
Coriolanus (Shakespeare), 110–11, 329
Cornell University:

afﬁrmative action at, 94

curriculum reform at, 320, 339–40, 352
faculty reaction at, 347–48, 351–52, 354, 355
six-year Ph.D. program at, 339–40
student demands at, 95, 316n, 318–19, 325, 354
student rebellion at, 313, 315–18, 354

Critique of Pure Reason (Kant), 300, 302
Crito, 283
Dahl, Robert, 32
Dante Alighieri, 40, 52
Danton, Georges-Jacques, 286
Darwin, Charles, 367
Day After, The, 85
Death in Venice (Mann), 137, 230–32, 234
Declaration of Independence (1776), 54–56, 193, 248
Declaration of Independence, The (Becker), 55–56
de Gaulle, Charles, 77, 159, 187, 214
Democracy in America (Tocqueville), 115, 246
Derrida, Jacques, 379
Descartes, René:

doubt and, 42–43
ego viewed by, 177–78
French education and, 52
Gulliver’s Travels and, 294
reason and, 265
Rousseau on, 292, 305
science espoused by, 286

Dewey, John, 29, 56, 195
Dickens, Charles, 63–64
Dietrich, Marlene, 151
Discourse on the Arts and Sciences (Rousseau), 258
Discourse on the Origins of Inequality (Rousseau), 366
Dostoyevski, Fyodor, 206, 367
Dumont, Margaret, 70
Easton, David, 327
Economic Interpretation of the Constitution, An (Beard), 56
Eichmann in Jerusalem (Arendt), 214
Einstein, Albert, 264, 367
Eliot, T. S., 292
Emile (Rousseau), 66, 117, 167–68
Engels, Friedrich, 230
Epicureanism, 262
Eros and Civilization (Marcuse), 78
Escape from Freedom (Fromm), 146
Ethics (Aristotle), 125, 279–80, 373
Faust (Goethe), 302–3
Fear of Flying (Jong), 229
Federalist, The, 261, 330
Fichte, Johann, 149
Field, Marshall, III, 155
Flaubert, Gustave, 134–35, 205
Foucault, Michel, 379

Founding Fathers:

debunking of, 29, 56
democratic principles and, 28–29
minorities viewed by, 31–32
racism and, 335
religious freedom and, 28, 261

Fountainhead, The (Rand), 62
Franco, Francisco, 159
Freud, Sigmund:

American success of, 137, 155, 232–33
darker side of, 150
Hobbes and, 174, 330
Mann and, 230–31, 234, 237
Marcuse on, 78
Marxism and, 223
nature/society distinction and, 170
Oedipus complex and, 156
intellectual difﬁculty of, 203–4
popularization of, 107, 134, 136–37
reality principle and, 81
science vs. unconscious in, 193, 199–200
social science and, 361n
university view of, 148, 345, 367
women viewed by, 100

Fromm, Erich, 144, 146, 152
Galileo, 296, 345, 371
George, Stefan, 222
Ghosts (Ibsen), 108
Gide, André, 222, 232
Gilbert, William, 295
Glaucon, 61, 332–33
Glorious Revolution, 158, 328
Goebbels, Joseph, 348
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von:

German mind and, 52, 305, 323
scholarship viewed by, 302–4, 307
science and, 349

Goldmann, Lucien, 352
Goodman, Benny, 69
Gorgias (Plato), 263
Guevara, Che, 331
Gulliver’s Travels (Swift), 293–96
Hassner, Pierre, 155
Hegel, G. W. F.:

academic importance of, 314, 323, 368
Aristotle and, 253
fascism and, 149, 259
Marcuse and, 226
Marx and, 222, 222n
modern scholarship ridiculed by, 309
rational God of, 204

Rousseau and, 181

Heidegger, Martin, 152, 323, 377

American reconstruction of, 226, 310
antiliberalism and, 149
bourgeois and, 159
Hellenism of, 308, 309–10
leftists and, 222, 310, 315
Nazism and, 154, 311
Nietzsche and, 144, 207
translation viewed by, 54, 153
university youth viewed by, 315, 317

Herodotus, 36, 40, 204
Hitler, Adolf:

as bourgeois, 159
charismatic leadership and, 213–14
German thinkers and, 148–49, 259, 311
moral authority and, 326
natural science and, 297–98
psychological appeal of, 146
Rhineland occupation by, 239
rock videos and, 74
social science view of, 154
student attitudes on, 67

Hobbes, Thomas:

Aristotle vs., 255
faction viewed by, 286
feeling viewed by, 174
idea of rights from, 165
indiscriminate freedom and, 28
inﬂuence of language of, 141–42
political order viewed by, 110, 111, 286
rationalism of, 73, 251
Rousseau vs., 167–70, 190, 299
state of nature viewed by, 162–63, 218
vainglory viewed by, 330

Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 28
Homer:

heroes and, 188
inspiration of, 252, 280
modern education and, 374
Schiller on, 41, 306, 308

Humboldt, Wilhelm von, 161
Hume, David, 300
Husserl, Edmund, 323
Ibsen, Henrik, 108
Iliad (Homer), 308
Isocrates, 274
Jackson, Michael, 76
Jagger, Mick 78-79
Jefferson, Thomas, 349
Johnson, Lyndon, 331

Johnson, Virginia, 99
Jong, Erica, 229
Journey to the End of the Night (Céline), 239
Joyce, James, 367
Kafka, Franz, 146, 367
Kant, Immanuel:

culture viewed by, 185–87, 190–91, 305
Enlightenment viewed by, 299–300
freedom viewed by, 193, 358
French Revolution viewed by, 158
humanities and, 301–2, 323
liberal democracy viewed by, 162
moral choice views of, 229, 325
natural science and, 349
rational principles and, 53

Kepler, Johannes, 371
Kerr, Clark, 316
Khomeini, Ayatollah Ruhollah, 131
Kierkegaard, Søren, 368
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 333
Kojève, Alexandre, 222n
Kolakowski, Leszek, 224
Koyré, Alexandre, 344–45
Kramer vs. Kramer, 64
Kuhn, Thomas, 200
Lacan, Jacques, 193
Lawrence, D. H., 107
Lederberg, Joshua, 350–51
Lenin, V. I., 219, 348
Lenya, Lotte, 151, 152
Lessing, Gotthold, 80
Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 40–41, 362
Lincoln, Abraham, 29, 59
Locke, John:

apparent superﬁciality of, 293
capitalism and, 208
Enlightenment and, 163–64, 167
family relationships viewed by, 114–15
indiscriminate freedom and, 28
modern economics developed from, 361–62, 364
property deﬁned by, 161
rationalism of, 73
rights viewed by, 165, 190
Rousseau vs., 167–70, 172, 190, 292, 299
rulership viewed by, 110
self-preservation and, 175–76, 178
self viewed by, 173, 177
social science and, 358, 363–64, 366
state of nature viewed by, 162–63, 171, 232

Lonely Crowd, The (Riesman), 125, 144
Lukacs, Georg, 222

McCarthy, Mary, 152
McCarthyism, 322, 324
Machiavelli, Niccolò:

classical scholarship and, 34–35, 285–86, 304
Enlightenment realism and, 259, 291
Italian mind and, 52
Marlowe on, 292
political effectiveness advocated by, 263, 293
soul viewed by, 173–74
travel and, 63
war and peace viewed by, 364

“Mack the Knife,” 151
Madame Bovary (Flaubert), 134–35, 205
Maimonides, Moses, 271
Mann, Thomas:

American inﬂuence of, 230–32
man’s desires viewed by, 137, 234
Plato viewed by, 236–37

Mansﬁeld, Harvey, 287
Mao Zedong, 221, 331
Marcuse, Herbert:

American popularity of, 147
Marx and Freud combined by, 78, 223
scholarship of, 226, 322

Maritain, Jacques, 292
Marlborough, John Churchill, 1st Duke of, 256
Marlowe, Christopher, 292
Marsilius of Padua, 283
Marx, Groucho, 70
Marx, Karl:

atheism of, 195–96
dialectic of, 229
Hegel and, 222, 222n
historical necessity of, 208–9, 313
Nietzsche vs., 143
university view of, 148, 367

Masters, William, 99
May, Elaine, 125
Mead, Margaret, 33, 367
Mencken, H. L., 55
Merchant of Venice, The (Shakespeare), 69
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 222n 224
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig, 152n
Mill, John Stuart, 29, 116, 161
Molière, 328
Montesquieu, Baron de:

French consciousness and, 160n
morality viewed by, 327–28
selﬁshness viewed by, 178

More, Sir Thomas, 325
Moses, 199, 211

Mussolini, Benito, 221, 315
Napoleon I, Emperor of France, 79, 211, 281
National Council of the Churches of Christ, 65
Newton, Sir Isaac, 264, 292, 295, 305, 345, 371
New York Times, The, 350
New York Times Magazine, The, 318
Nichols, Mike, 125
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 377

ancient gentlemen viewed by, 279
anthropology inﬂuenced by, 362
artists viewed by, 204–7
atheism of, 195–96
bourgeois viewed by, 157
classical scholarship and, 304, 305, 307, 309, 375
cultural decay and, 51
cultural relativism of, 202–4
egalitarianism attacked by, 201
extremism and, 214
fascism and, 149
id concept of, 200
modern study of, 345
music viewed by, 71, 72, 73
newspapers and, 59
passions viewed by, 156
popularization of, 148, 151–52, 225–26, 379
radical historicism of, 153–54, 219
religiosity of, 197–99
sex viewed by, 231, 232
social sciences inﬂuenced by, 148
Socratic rationalism attacked by, 267–68, 307–8, 310
value revolution of, 143, 146, 153–54, 228–29
war viewed by, 220–21
Weber on, 194–95

Nietzsche (Heidegger), 207
Night at the Opera, A, 70
Nixon, Richard M., 67, 329, 331
Odysseus, 40
One Dimensional Man (Marcuse), 78, 226
Ono, Yoko, 77
Parsons, Talcott, 151
Partisan Review, 224
Pascal, Blaise:

egalitarian denigration of, 251
French mind and, 52, 352
revelation chosen by, 37, 227–28
social science and, 215

Pericles, 188
Phaedrus (Plato), 133, 236–37
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 180
Plato, 380

ambition viewed by, 329, 330

cave image of, 38, 264–65
city vs. philosophy in, 274
democratic youth viewed by, 87–88, 329
equality and, 161
eroticism viewed by, 61, 236–38, 305
gods viewed by, 197
Heidegger and, 310
modern contempt for, 311, 363
music viewed by, 70–72, 73
Nietzsche vs., 207, 310
political philosophy of, 218, 262–63, 286
psychological interpretation of, 375
real vs. ideal in, 67, 130, 381
Rousseau vs., 169, 305
sexual equality and, 97, 100, 102–3
Socrates viewed by, 265, 268–69, 281–82
student discussions and, 83, 332–33

Plutarch, 66, 256, 306
Poetics (Aristotle), 72–73, 280–81
Politics (Aristotle), 72–73, 112, 366
Pound, Ezra, 149
Preface to Democratic Theory, A (Dahl), 32
pre-Socratics, 297, 309, 310
Pride and Prejudice (Austen), 375
Profession of Faith of the Savoyard Vicar (Rousseau), 196–97
Proust, Marcel, 367
Racine, Jean, 352
Rand, Ayn, 62
Ravel, Maurice, 73
Rawls, John, 30, 229
Reagan, Ronald, 76, 120, 141, 142
Red and the Black, The (Stendhal), 64
Reﬂections on Violence (Sorel), 221
Reich, Charles, 322
Republic (Plato), 381

cave image of, 38, 264
democratic youth described in, 61, 87–88, 275, 332–33
heroism in, 66
poetry discussed in, 207, 267
music discussed in, 70–71
psychological teaching of, 375
sexual equality in, 97, 100, 102–3
unity of power and wisdom described in, 266, 284

Riesman, David, 144, 146, 152, 155
Robespierre, Maximilien de, 190, 196, 328
Rogers, Will, 225
Roman Catholic Church, 264
Romantic dilemma, 40–41
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 30
Roosevelt, Theodore, 229
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 179

bourgeois viewed by, 185
civil religion advocated by, 196–97
classical knowledge of, 304–5
compassion and, 330
Enlightenment criticism of, 167–70, 181–83, 258, 267, 292, 298–300
French dualism and, 52
German inﬂuence of, 305
humanities and, 358–59
individual viewed by, 115–16, 117
modern social sciences developed from, 361–62, 366
music and, 73
property viewed by, 161
sex and, 66, 100, 107–8, 233
societal disintegration and, 118
statecraft vs. culture viewed by, 189–92
state of nature viewed by, 162–63, 167–70, 171, 172, 176–77, 178
Symposium viewed by, 133

Sakharov, Andrei, 297, 358n
Salinger, J. D., 63
Sartre, Jean-Paul:

bourgeois and, 159, 224
language of, 211
Nietzschean inﬂuence on, 219, 222n

Schiller, Friedrich von, 41, 306, 308
Schmitt, Karl, 259
Scholastic Aptitude Test, 50
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 368
Science as a Vocation (Weber), 194
Shakespeare, William:

egalitarianism and, 65
English mind and, 52, 256
modern education and, 374, 380
music viewed by, 69
natural scientists and, 350
rulership viewed by, 110–11, 329
sex roles in, 126

Shorey, Paul, 375
Sierra Club, 172
Skinner, B. F, 193
Smith, Adam, 73, 208, 259, 361
Snow, C. P., 182, 350
Social Contract, The (Rousseau), 189–90
Socrates:

ambition viewed by, 329
Aristophanes’ view of, 269–70, 273, 274–75
cave image and, 264–65
charges against, 275–76
Cicero vs. Nietzsche on, 154
death of, 71, 173, 268, 285
defense by, 265–66, 267, 276–77
dialectic of, 38, 229

eroticism viewed by, 132–33
goal sought by, 163
heroism and, 66
modern contempt for, 311, 363
modern philosophy vs., 264–68
music viewed by, 72
Nietzsche’s indictment of, 207–8, 307–8
philosopher-kings or, 266
philosophic task deﬁned by, 277
Plato’s presentation of, 265, 268–69, 281–82
poetry viewed by, 280–81
politics of, 278, 314, 358n
power viewed by, 285
Rousseau and, 298
self-knowledge and, 43, 143, 174, 179, 279–80
sexual equality views of, 102–3
society viewed by, 292–93, 381
university and, 267, 268, 272, 332–33
value of, 312, 382 see also Plato

Solzhenitsyn, Alexander, 187
Sorel, Georges, 221
Soviet Union:

cultural criticism and, 225, 226
democratic openness and, 32–33
malaise of, 197
natural science in, 297
Reagan on, 141
social science teaching on, 354

Spinoza, Benedict, 276
Stalin, Joseph, 67, 146, 214
Stranger, The (Camus), 88
Strauss, Leo, 167

Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, The (Kuhn), 200

Swift, Jonathan:

classics viewed by, 373
Enlightenment questioned by, 293–98
natural science viewed by, 270, 358n

Symposium (Plato), 133, 169, 375, 381
Tartuffe (Molière), 328
Thales, 270–71, 288
Theory of Justice, A (Rawls), 30, 229
Thoreau, Henry David, 171, 279
Thrasymachus, 283
Threepenny Opera, The (Brecht and Weill), 151
Thucydides, 188, 197, 346
Thus Spake Zarathustra (Nietzsche), 151, 194
Tocqueville, Alexis de:

American Indian and, 171
American religion viewed by, 196
art and, 74
democratic family described by, 115, 116

democratic man viewed by, 225
democratic mind viewed by, 149, 235, 252, 254, 255, 378
democratic tradition and, 58
Descartes/Pascal opposition and, 51–52
doubts of, 160, 319
equality chosen by, 227–28, 248
freedom vs. equality in, 98
individualism viewed by, 84, 85–86
intergenerational relationships viewed by, 82
on Pascal, 251

Tolstoy, Leo, 64, 66, 173
Tonio Kröger (Mann), 231
Treatise on Civil Government (Locke), 366
Trotsky, Leon, 221
University of Chicago:

in ﬁfties, 125
German inﬂuence at, 148–50, 156
Koyré at, 344
pseudo-Gothic buildings of, 243–44

Vietnam War, 364
Voltaire, 292
Wagner, Richard, 54, 68, 206
War and Peace (Tolstoy), 66
Washington, George, 29
Watson, Thomas, 167
Wealth of Nations, The (Smith), 259
Weber, Max:

atheistic religiosity of, 210–11
ethical distinctions of, 369
language of, 208, 209, 210–11, 212, 214
legitimate violence categories of, 212–13, 219, 225
Lukacs and, 222
Nietzsche viewed by, 194–95
pariah category of, 145
politics of, 213–14
popularization of, 147, 367
Protestant ethic of, 208–9
university view of, 148, 345
value relativism of, 150–51, 337–38

Weill, Kurt, 151
Weimar Republic:

nostalgia for, 151–52
popular culture of, 151
Right vs. Left in, 154–55

Xenophon, 268, 269, 274
Zelig, 144–46
Zilboorg, Gregory, 155

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Allan Bloom was Professor in the Committee on Social Thought and
the College and co-director of the John M. Olin Center for Inquiry into
the Theory and Practice of Democracy at the University of Chicago. He
taught at Yale, University of Paris, University of Toronto, Tel Aviv
University, and Cornell, where he was the recipient of the Clark
Teaching Award in 1967. His other books are Plato’s Republic (translator
and editor), Politics and the Arts: Letter to M. d’Alembert on the Theatre
(translator and editor), Rousseau’s Emile (translator and editor), and
Shakespeare’s Politics (with Harry V. Jaffa). He died in 1992.

We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster eBook.

Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other great books

from Simon & Schuster.

CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP

or visit us online to sign up at

eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

Simon & Schuster Paperbacks
Rockefeller Center
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com

Copyright © 1987 by Allan Bloom
Foreword copyright © 1987 by Saul Bellow

All rights reserved,
including the right of reproduction
in whole or in part in any form.

SIMON & SCHUSTER PAPERBACKS and colophon are
registered trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

Designed by Eve Kirch
Manufactured in the United States of America

The Library of Congress has cataloged the hardcover edition as follows:
Bloom, Allan David, date.

The closing of the American mind.
Includes index.
1. United States—Intellectual life—20th century.

2. Education, Higher—United States—Philosophy.
I. Title.
LA227.3.B584  1987
378'.012'0973—dc20                        86-24768

To My Students

ISBN 0-671-47990-3
ISBN: 978-0-6716-5715-4
eISBN: 978-1-4391-2626-4

