Jerry eBooks

No copyright 
 2019 by Jerry eBooks

No rights reserved.  All parts of this book may be reproduced in any form and by any means
for any purpose without any prior written consent of anyone.

THE
SENTINEL
MASTERWORKS OF
SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY

Berkley books by Arthur C. Clarke

AGAINST THE FALL OF NIGHT

DOLPHIN ISLAND

THE SENTINEL

THE SENTINEL

Masterworks of Science Fiction and Fantasy

A Berkley Book/published by arrangement with the author

PRINTING HISTORY

Berkley trade paperback edition/November 1983

All rights reserved.

THE SENTINEL copyright © 1983

by Byron Preiss Visual Publications, Inc.

All stories copyright © 1983 by Arthur C. Clarke.

All illustrations copyright © 1983 by Byron Preiss Visual

Publications, Inc.

Of Sand and Stars © 1983 Arthur C. Clarke. Rescue Party appeared in
Astounding Science Fiction © 1946 Street and Smith Publications, Inc., © 1956
Arthur C. Clarke. Guardian Angel appeared in New Worlds, © 1950 Arthur C.
Clarke. Breaking Strain appeared in Thrilling Wonder Stories under the title
Thirty Seconds—Thirty Days © 1949 Standard Magazines, Inc., © 1953 Arthur
C. Clarke. The Sentinel appeared in The Avon Science Fiction and Fantasy
Reader © 1951 Avon Periodicals, Inc., © 1953 Arthur C. Clarke. Jupiter V
appeared in If Magazine © 1953 Quinn Publishing Company, © 1956 Arthur C.
Clarke. Refugee appeared under the title Royal Prerogative © 1955 Arthur C.
Clarke. The Wind From the Sun appeared in Boy’s Life under the title
Sunjammer © 1963 Arthur C. Clarke. A Meeting with Medusa appeared in
Playboy Magazine © 1972 Arthur C. Clarke. The Songs of Distant Earth
appeared in Omni Magazine © 1979 Arthur C. Clarke.

Book design by Alex Jay/Studio J.
Cover painting by Lebbeus Woods.

Special thanks to Russ Galen, Roger Cooper, Rena Wolner, Susan Allison,
Victoria Schochet, Melissa Ann Singer, Joan Brandt, Ony Ryzuk, Olive Bridget
Brown and Arthur Byron Cover.

This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part,

by mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
For information address: The Berkley Publishing Group,

200 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016.

ISBN: 0-425-06183-3

Masterworks of Science Fiction and Fantasy

and the symbol of a ﬂoating “M” are trademarks

of Byron Preiss Visual Publications, Inc.

A BERKLEY BOOK Ⓡ TM 757,375

The name “BERKLEY” and the stylized “B”

with design are trademarks belonging to

Berkley Publishing Corporation.

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Contents

Introduction: Of Sand and Stars

Rescue Party

Guardian Angel

Breaking Strain

The Sentinel

Jupiter V

Refugee

The Wind From the Sun

A Meeting with Medusa

The Songs of Distant Earth

Contributors

ARTHUR C.
CLARKE
THE
SENTINEL
MASTERWORKS OF
SCIENCE FICTION AND FANTASY

F

Introduction:
OF SAND
AND STARS

orty miles to the east, the sun has just climbed
above the Sacred Mountain, which for so long has
haunted my imagination. Another quarter turn of

the planet, and it will bring a cold winter dawn to the
English seaside town where I was born sixty-ﬁve years ago
this morning.

So it is already a little late in the day to consider why I

became an author, or to wonder if there was ever any real
alternative; that may have been as genetically determined
as the color of my eyes or the shape of my head. But the
kind of author I became is another matter: here, I suspect,
both chance and environment played decisive roles.

The fact that I was born half a mile from the sea—or at

least an arm of the Bristol Channel, which to a child
seemed positively oceanic—has certainly colored all my life.
As usual, A.E. Housman expressed it perfectly, in the poem
from which I took the title of my ﬁrst novel:

Smooth between sea and land
Is laid the yellow sand,
And here through summer days
The seed of Adam plays.

Much of my youth was spent on the Minehead beach,

exploring 
rock-pools 
and 
building 
wave-defying

battlements. Even now, I feel completely relaxed only by
the edge of the sea—or, better still, hovering weightless

beneath it, over the populous and polychromatic landscape
of my favorite reef.

stories about the sea. However, I was born at the time
when men were ﬁrst thinking seriously of escaping from
their planetary cradle, and so my imagination was deﬂected
into space.

great importance because it involves virtually the only
memory I have of my father—a shadowy ﬁgure who has left
no other mark, even though I was over thirteen when he
died.

The date would have been around 1925; we were riding

together in a small pony-cart near the Somerset farm into
which First Lieutenant Charles Wright Clarke had sunk
what was left of his army gratuity, after an earlier and still
more disastrous adventure as a gentleman farmer. As he
opened a pack of cigarettes, he handed me the card inside;
it was one of a series illustrating prehistoric animals. From
that moment, I became hooked on dinosaurs, collected all
the cards I could on the subject, and used them in class to
illustrate little adventure stories I told the other children in
the village school. These must have been my ﬁrst ventures
into ﬁction—and the schoolmistress who encouraged them
celebrated her birthday a week ago. Sorry I forgot to send
a card, Maud Hanks—I’ll make a special point of it for your
95th . . .

There is a certain irony in the fact that the tobacco trade

(one of the few professions where I consider the mandatory
death penalty is justiﬁed) had such a decisive and indeed
beneﬁcial impact on my career. To this day I retain my
fascination with dinosaurs, and eagerly look forward to the
time 
when 
the 
genetic 
engineers 
will 
re-create

Tyrannosaurus rex.

For a couple of years I collected fossils, and at one time

my interest shifted rather abruptly from the past to the
future. Once again—signiﬁcantly—I can recall exactly how
this happened, though almost all the other events of my
childhood seem irretrievably lost.

There were three separate crucial incidents, all of equal

importance, and I can even date them with some precision.
The earliest must have been in 1929, when at the age of
twelve I saw my ﬁrst science ﬁction magazine, the
November 1928 Amazing Stories.

The cover is in front of me at the moment—and it really is

amazing, for a reason which neither editor Hugo Gernsback
nor artist Frank Paul could ever have guessed.

A spaceship looking like a farm silo with picture windows

is disgorging its exuberant passengers onto a tropical
beach, above which ﬂoats the orange ball of Jupiter, ﬁlling
half the sky. The foreground is, alas, improbable, because
the temperature of the Jovian satellites is around minus a
hundred and ﬁfty degrees centigrade. But the giant planet
is painted with such stunning accuracy that one could use
this cover to make a very good case for precognition; Paul
has shown turbulent cloud formations, cyclonic patterns
and enigmatic white structures like earth-sized amoebae
which were not revealed until the Voyager missions over
ﬁfty years later. How did he know?

ﬁction magazines, books and movies are part of everyday
life, cannot possibly imagine the impact of such garish
pulps as that old Amazing and its colleagues Astounding
and Wonder. Of course, the literary standards were usually
abysmal—but the stories brimmed with ideas, and amply
evoked that “sense of wonder” which is (or should be) one
of the goals of the best ﬁction. No less a critic than C.S.
Lewis has described the ravenous addiction that these
magazines inspired; the same phenomenon has led me to
call science ﬁction the only genuine consciousness-
expanding drug.

local Woolworth’s in search of my ﬁx, which cost
threepence a shot—roughly a quarter, at today’s prices.
Much of the hard-earned money my widowed mother had
saved for my food went on these magazines, and I set
myself the goal of acquiring complete runs. By 1940 I had
almost 
succeeded—but, 
alas, 
all 
my 
beloved 
pulps

disappeared during the war years. That collection would
now be worth thousands of dollars.

In 1930 I came under the spell of a considerably more

literate inﬂuence, when I discovered W. Olaf Stapledon’s
just-published Last and First Men in the Minehead Public
Library. No book before or since ever had such an impact
on my imagination; the Stapledonian vistas of millions and
hundreds of millions of years, the rise and fall of
civilizations and entire races of men, changed my whole
outlook on the universe and has inﬂuenced much of my
writing ever since. Twenty years later, as Chairman of the
British Interplanetary Society, I persuaded Stapledon to
give us an address on the social and biological aspects of
space exploration, which he entitled “Interplanetary Man.”
His was the noblest and most civilized mind I have ever
encountered; I am delighted to see a revival of interest in
his work, and have just contributed a preface to a new
collection of his writings.

By the time I encountered Stapledon I had begun my

secondary (U.S.: high school) education in the nearby town
of Taunton, making the ten-mile round trip by bicycle every
day after sorting the local mail in the small hours of the
morning and then delivering it (another ﬁve or so miles). It
was at Huish’s Grammar School— now Richard Huish
College—that I began to write sketches and short stories
for the school magazine.

I can still recall those editorial sessions, ﬁfty years ago.

About once a week, after class, our English master, Captain
E.B. Mitford (who was actually a ﬁery Welshman), would

gather his schoolboy staﬀ together, and we would all sit
around a table on which there was a large bag of assorted
toﬀees. Bright ideas were rewarded instantly; “Mitty”
invented positive reinforcement years before B.F. Skinner.
He also employed a heavy meter rule for negative
reinforcement, but this was used only in class—never, so
far as I recall, at editorial conferences.

Magazine and from the beginning my science-ﬁctional
tendencies were obvious. Although this Christmas 1933
message purports to come from “Ex-Sixth Former”
stationed at a torrid and high-altitude Outpost of Empire
(Frying Pan, British Malaria) its true locale is at least a
quarter of a million miles further away:

The precautions we have to take to preserve our lives are

extraordinary. Our houses are built on the principle of the
Dewar vacuum ﬂask, to keep out the heat, and the outsides
are silvered to reﬂect the sunlight . . . We have to take
great care to avoid cutting ourselves in any way, for if this
happens our blood soon boils and evaporates.

Such attention to technical detail shows that even at

sixteen I was already a hard-core science ﬁction (as
opposed to fantasy) writer. Credit for this must go to the
book which had almost as great an impact on me as
Stapledon’s epic—and which illustrates rather well the
fundamental distinction between art and science. No one
else could ever have created Last and First Men— but if
David Lasser had not written The Conquest of Space in
1931, someone similar would certainly have appeared in a
very few years. The time was ripe.

Although there was already considerable German and

Russian literature on the subject, The Conquest of Space
was the very ﬁrst book in the English language to discuss
the possibility of ﬂight to the Moon and planets, and to

describe the experiments and dreams (mostly the latter) of
the early rocket pioneers. Only a few hundred copies of the
British edition were sold, but chance brought one of them
to a bookstore a few yards from my birthplace. I saw it in
the window, knew instinctively that I had to read it, and
persuaded my good-natured Aunt Nellie—who was looking
after me while Mother struggled to run the farm and raise
my three siblings—to buy it on the spot. And so I learned,
for the ﬁrst time, that space travel was not merely
delightful ﬁction. One day it could really happen. Soon
afterwards I discovered the existence of the British
Interplanetary Society, and my fate was sealed.

year-old David Lasser was editor of a whole group of
Gernsback magazines, including Wonder Stories. Later he
became a labor organizer and was denounced in Congress
—not only as a dangerous radical but also as a madman,
because he believed that we would one day ﬂy to the Moon
. . .When I met him in Los Angeles just a couple of weeks
ago, he told me he was working on a new book; a good title
might be Lasser’s Last Laugh.

Despite all these inﬂuences, I was well over thirty before

writing graduated from a pleasant and occasionally
proﬁtable hobby to a profession. The Civil Service, the
Royal Air Force and editorship of a scientiﬁc abstracting
journal provided my bread-and-butter until 1950. By that
time I had published numerous stories and articles, and a
slim technical book, Interplanetary Flight. The modest
success of this volume led me to seek a wider public with
The Exploration of Space, which the Book of the Month
Club, in a moment of wild abandon, made a dual selection
in 1952. To allay the alarm of its anxious readership, Clifton
Fadiman explained in the BoM newsletter that The
Exploration of Space was no crazy fantasy but a serious
and level-headed work because “Mr. Clarke does not
appear to be a very imaginative man.” I’ve never quite

forgiven him, and my agent, Scott Meredith, has never
forgotten my plaintive query: “What is the Book-of-the-
Month Club?”

This stroke of luck—repeated exactly thirty years later

with 2010: Odyssey Two, so I can claim it wasn’t a ﬂuke—
encouraged me to give up my editorial job and become a
full-time writer. It was not a very daring or heroic decision:
if all else failed, I could always go back to the farm.

I was lucky; unlike most of the writers I know, I had very

few setbacks or disappointments, and my rare rejection
slips were doubtless thoroughly justiﬁed. And because
every author is unique, the only advice I have ever been
able to pass on to would-be writers is incorporated in a few
lines on the notorious form letter which Archie, my word-
processor, spits out at all hopeful correspondents at the
drop of a ﬂoppy disk: “Read at least one book a day, and
write as much as you can. Study the memoirs of authors
who interest you. (Somerset Maugham’s A Writer s
Notebooks is a good example.) Correspondence courses,
writer’s schools, etc., are probably useful—but all the
authors I know were self-taught. There is no substitute for
living; as Hemingway wisely remarked, “Writing is not a
full-time occupation.”

keep up with the avalanche of science ﬁction now being
published. I estimate that almost as much is printed each
day as appeared every year when I was a boy.

Golden Age of science ﬁction. There are dozens of authors
at work today who can match all but the giants of the past.
(And probably one who can do even that, despite the
handicap of being translated from Polish . . .)Yet I do not
really envy the young men and women who ﬁrst encounter
science ﬁction as the days shorten towards 1984, for we
old-timers were able to accomplish something that was
unique.

everything. No one will ever do that again.

to do so, in deference to Theodore Sturgeon’s much-quoted
Law: “Ninety percent of everything is crud.” It is—to say
the least—a sobering thought that this might apply even to
my writing.

the other ten percent.

Colombo, Sri Lanka
16 December 1982

RESCUE
PARTY

“Rescue Party,” written in March 1945, while I was still in
the Royal Air Force, was the ﬁrst story I sold to the
legendary John W. Campbell, Jr., editor of Astounding
Science-Fiction. It was not, however, the ﬁrst of my stories
he published; “Loophole” (April 1946) beat it by a month.

I 
don’t 
believe 
I’ve 
reread 
it 
since 
its 
original

appearance, and I refuse to do so now—for fear of
discovering how little I have improved in almost four
decades. Those who claim that it’s their favorite story get a
cooler and cooler reception over the passing years.

However, I cannot resist tantalizing any readers who may

be new to this tale with a quotation from a recent paper by
Gregory Benford, “Aliens and Knowability: A Scientist’s
Perspective”:

“Aliens as a mirror for our own experiences abound in sf.

Arthur Clarkes “Rescue Party” has humans as the true
focus, though the action follows aliens who are a dumber
version of ourselves. The ﬁnal lines give us a human-
chauvinist thrill, telling us more about ourselves than we
may nowadays wish to know.”

I must admit that I’d never thought of it that way; but Dr.

Benford may be right. You have been warned.

W

ho was to blame? For three days Alveron’s
thoughts had come back to that question,
and still he had found no answer. A creature

of a less civilized or a less sensitive race would never have
let it torture his mind, and would have satisﬁed himself
with the assurance that no one could be responsible for the
working of fate. But Alveron and his kind had been lords of
the Universe since the dawn of history, since that far
distant age when the Time Barrier had been folded round
the cosmos by the unknown powers that lay beyond the
Beginning. To them had been given all knowledge—and
with inﬁnite knowledge went inﬁnite responsibility. If there
were mistakes and errors in the administration of the
galaxy, the fault lay on the heads of Alveron and his people.
And this was no mere mistake: it was one of the greatest
tragedies in history.

The crew still knew nothing. Even Rugon, his closest

friend and the ship’s deputy captain, had been told only
part of the truth. But now the doomed worlds lay less than
a billion miles ahead. In a few hours, they would be landing
on the third planet.

Once again Alveron read the message from Base; then,

with a ﬂick of a tentacle that no human eye could have
followed, he pressed the ‘General Attention’ button.
Throughout the mile-long cylinder that was the Galactic
Survey Ship S9000, creatures of many races laid down
their work to listen to the words of their captain.

“I know you have all been wondering,” began Alveron,

“why we were ordered to abandon our survey and to
proceed at such an acceleration to this region of space.
Some of you may realize what this acceleration means. Our
ship is on its last voyage: the generators have already been

running for sixty hours at Ultimate Overload. We will be
very lucky if we return to Base under our own power.

Nova. Detonation will occur in seven hours, with an
uncertainty of one hour, leaving us a maximum of only four
hours of exploration. There are ten planets in the system
about to be destroyed—and there is a civilization on the
third. That fact was discovered only a few days ago. It is
our tragic mission to contact that doomed race and if
possible to save some of its members. I know that there is
little we can do in so short a time with this single ship. No
other machine can possibly reach the system before
detonation occurs.”

There was a long pause during which there could have

been no sound or movement in the whole of the mighty ship
as it sped silently toward the worlds ahead. Alveron knew
what his companions were thinking and he tried to answer
their unspoken question.

which we have any record, has been allowed to occur. On
one point I can assure you. The fault does not lie with the
Survey.

thousand ships, it is possible to re-examine each of the
eight thousand million solar systems in the Galaxy at
intervals of about a million years. Most worlds change very
little in so short a time as that.

“Less than four hundred thousand years ago, the survey

ship S5060 examined the planets of the system we are
approaching. It found intelligence on none of them, though
the third planet was teeming with animal life and two other
worlds had once been inhabited. The usual report was
submitted and the system is due for its next examination in
six hundred thousand years.

“It now appears that in the incredibily short period since

the last survey, intelligent life has appeared in the system.

The ﬁrst intimation of this occurred when unknown radio
signals were detected on the planet Kulath in the system
X29.35, Y34.76, Z27.93. Bearings were taken on them; they
were coming from the system ahead.

radio waves had been on their way for two centuries. Thus
for at least that period of time a civilization has existed on
one of these worlds—a civilization that can generate
electromagnetic waves and all that that implies.

made and it was then found that the sun was in the
unstable pre-nova stage. Detonation might occur at any
moment, and indeed might have done so while the light
waves were on their way to Kulath.

“There was a slight delay while the supervelocity

scanners on Kulath II were focused on to the system. They
showed that the explosion had not yet occurred but was
only a few hours away. If Kulath had been a fraction of a
light-year further from this sun, we should never have
known of its civilization until it had ceased to exist.

“The Administrator of Kulath contacted Sector Base

immediately, and I was ordered to proceed to the system at
once. Our object is to save what members we can of the
doomed race, if indeed there are any left. But we have
assumed that a civilization possessing radio could have
protected itself against any rise of temperature that may
have already occurred.

the planet. Commander Torkalee will take Number One,
Comander Orostron Number Two. They will have just under
four hours in which to explore this world. At the end of that
time, they must be back in the ship. It will be leaving then,
with or without them. I will give the two commanders
detailed instructions in the control room immediately.

“That is all. We enter atmosphere in two hours.”

out: there was nothing left to burn. The great forests that
had swept across the planet like a tidal wave with the
passing of the cities were now no more than glowing
charcoal and the smoke of their funeral pyres still stained
the sky. But the last hours were still to come, for the
surface rocks had not yet begun to ﬂow. The continents
were dimly visible through the haze, but their outlines
meant nothing to the watchers in the approaching ship. The
charts they possessed were out of date by a dozen Ice Ages
and more deluges than one.

no life could exist in those half-gaseous oceans of
compressed hydrocarbons, now erupting furiously under
the sun’s abnormal heat. Mars and the outer planets they
had missed, and Alveron realized that the worlds nearer
the sun than Earth would be already melting. It was more
than likely, he thought sadly, that the tragedy of this
unknown race was already ﬁnished. Deep in his heart, he
thought it might be better so. The ship could only have
carried a few hundred survivors, and the problem of
selection had been haunting his mind.

came into the control room. For the last hour he had been
striving to detect radiation from Earth, but in vain.

the whole spectrum and the ether’s dead except for our
own stations and some two-hundred-year-old programs
from Kulath. Nothing in this system is radiating any more.”

ﬂowing motion that no mere biped could ever hope to
imitate. Alveron said nothing; he had been expecting this
news.

screen, a great black rectangle that gave an impression of
almost inﬁnite depth. Three of Rugon’s slender control

tentacles, useless for heavy work but incredibly swift at all
manipulation, ﬂickered over the selector dials and the
screen lit up with a thousand points of light. The star ﬁeld
ﬂowed swiftly past as Rugon adjusted the controls, bringing
the projector to bear upon the sun itself.

No man of Earth would have recognized the monstrous

shape that ﬁlled the screen. The sun’s light was white no
longer: great violet-blue clouds covered half its surface and
from them long streamers of ﬂame were erupting into
space. At one point an enormous prominence had reared
itself out of the photosphere, far out even into the
ﬂickering veils of the corona. It was as though a tree of ﬁre
had taken root in the surface of the sun—a tree that stood
half a million miles high and whose branches were rivers of
ﬂame sweeping through space at hundreds of miles a
second.

satisﬁed about the astronomers’ calculations. After all—”

“Oh, we’re perfectly safe,” said Alveron conﬁdently. “I’ve

spoken to Kulath Observatory and they have been making
some additional checks through our own instruments. That
uncertainty of an hour includes a private safety margin
which they won’t tell me in case I feel tempted to stay any
longer.”

He glanced at the instrument board.
“The pilot should have brought us to the atmosphere

now. Switch the screen back to the planet, please. Ah, there
they go!”

There was a sudden tremor underfoot and a raucous

clanging of alarms, instantly stilled. Across the vision
screen two slim projectiles dived toward the looming mass
of Earth. For a few miles they travelled together, then they
separated, one vanishing abruptly as it entered the shadow
of the planet.

Slowly the huge mother ship, with its thousand times

that already were tearing down the deserted cities of Man.

It was night in the hemisphere over which Orostron

drove his tiny command. Like Torkalee, his mission was to
photograph and record, and to report progress to the
mother ship. The little scout had no room for specimens or
passengers. If contact was made with the inhabitants of
this world, the S9000 would come at once. There would be
no time for parleying. If there was any trouble the rescue
would be by force and the explanations could come later.

The ruined land beneath was bathed with an eerie,

ﬂickering light, for a great auroral display was raging over
half the world. But the image on the vision screen was
independent of external light, and it showed clearly a waste
of barren rock that seemed never to have known any form
of life. Presumably this desert land must come to an end
somewhere. Orostron increased his speed to the highest
value he dared risk in so dense an atmosphere.

The machine ﬂed on through the storm, and presently

the desert of rock began to climb toward the sky. A great
mountain range lay ahead, its peaks lost in the smoke-laden
clouds. Orostron directed the scanners toward the horizon,
and on the vision screen the line of mountains seemed
suddenly very close and menacing. He started to climb
rapidly. It was diﬀicult to imagine a more unpromising land
in which to ﬁnd civilization and he wondered if it would be
wise to change course. He decided against it. Five minutes
later, he had his reward.

Miles below lay a decapitated mountain, the whole of its

summit sheared away by some tremendous feat of
engineering. Rising out of the rock and straddling the
artiﬁcial plateau was an intricate structure of metal
girders, supporting masses of machinery. Orostron brought
his ship to a halt and spiralled down toward the mountain.

picture on the screen was clear-cut. The latticework was
supporting some scores of great metal mirrors, pointing
skyward at an angle of forty-ﬁve degrees to the horizontal.
They 
were 
slightly 
concave, 
and 
each 
had 
some

complicated mechanism at its focus. There seemed
something impressive and purposeful about the great
array; every mirror was aimed at precisely the same spot in
the sky—or beyond.

Orostron turned to his colleagues.
“It looks like some kind of observatory to me,” he said.

“Have you ever seen anything like it before?”

globular cluster at the edge of the Milky Way, had a
diﬀerent theory.

for focusing electromagnetic beams. I’ve seen the same
kind of installation on a hundred worlds before. It may even
be the station that Kulath picked up—though that’s rather
unlikely, for the beams would be very narrow from mirrors
that size.”

before we landed,” added Hansur II, one of the twin beings
from the planet Thargon.

Orostron did not agree at all.
“If that is a radio station, it must be built for

interplanetary communication. Look at the way the mirrors
are pointed. I don’t believe that a race which has only had
radio for two centuries can have crossed space. It took my
people six thousand years to do it.”

“We managed it in three,” said Hansur II mildly, speaking

a few seconds ahead of his twin. Before the inevitable
argument could develop, Klarten began to wave his
tentacles with excitement. While the others had been
talking, he had started the automatic monitor.

“Here it is! Listen!”

raucous whining sound, continually changing in pitch but
nevertheless retaining certain characteristics that were
diﬀicult to deﬁne.

Orostron said, “Surely that can’t be any form of speech! No
creature could produce sounds as quickly as that!”

television program. Don’t you think so, Klarten?”

The other agreed.
“Yes, and each of those mirrors seems to be radiating a

diﬀerent program. I wonder where they’re going? If I’m
correct, one of the other planets in the system must lie
along those beams. We can soon check that.”

Both Rugon and Alveron were greatly excited, and made a
quick check of the astronomical records.

the other nine planets lay anywhere near the line of
transmission. The great mirrors appeared to be pointing
blindly into space.

There seemed only one conclusion to be drawn, and

Klarten was the ﬁrst to voice it.

the station must be deserted now, and the transmitters no
longer controlled. They haven’t been switched oﬀ, and are
just pointing where they were left.”

land.”

He brought the machine slowly down to the level of the

great metal mirrors, and past them until it came to rest on
the mountain rock. A hundred yards away, a white stone
building crouched beneath the maze of steel girders. It was
windowless, but there were several doors in the wall facing
them.

Orostron watched his companions climb into their

protective suits and wished he could follow. But someone
had to stay in the machine to keep in touch with the mother
ship. Those were Alveron’s instructions, and they were very
wise. One never knew what would happen on a world that
was being explored for the ﬁrst time, especially under
conditions such as these.

airlock and adjusted the antigravity ﬁeld of their suits.
Then, each with the mode of locomotion peculiar to his
race, the little party went toward the building, the Hansur
twins leading and Klarten following close behind. His
gravity control was apparently giving trouble, for he
suddenly fell to the ground, rather to the amusement of his
colleagues. Orostron saw them pause for a moment at the
nearest door—then it opened slowly and they disappeared
from sight.

So Orostron waited, with what patience he could, while

the storm rose around him and the light of the aurora grew
even brighter in the sky. At the agreed times he called the
mother ship and received brief acknowledgements from
Rugon. He wondered how Torkalee was faring, halfway
round the planet, but he could not contact him through the
crash and thunder of solar interference.

It did not take Klarten and the Hansurs long to discover

that their theories were largely correct. The building was a
radio station, and it was utterly deserted. It consisted of
one tremendous room with a few small oﬀices leading from
it. In the main chamber, row after row of electrical
equipment stretched into the distance; lights ﬂickered and
winked on hundreds of control panels, and a dull glow
came from the elements in a great avenue of vacuum tubes.

But Klarten was not impressed. The ﬁrst radio set his

race had built were now fossilized in strata a thousand
million years old. Man, who had possessed electrical
machines for only a few centuries, could not compete with

those who had known them for half the lifetime of the
Earth.

they explored the building. There was still one problem to
be solved. The deserted station was broadcasting programs
but where were they coming from? The central switchboard
had been quickly located. It was designed to handle scores
of programs simultaneously, but the source of those
programs was lost in a maze of cables that vanished
underground. Back in the S9000, Rugon was trying to
analyze the broadcasts and perhaps his researches would
reveal their origin. It was impossible to trace cables that
might lead across continents.

The party wasted little time at the deserted station.

There was nothing they could learn from it, and they were
seeking life rather than scientiﬁc information. A few
minutes later the little ship rose swiftly from the plateau
and headed toward the plains that must lie beyond the
mountains. Less than three hours were still left to them.

Orostron was struck by a sudden thought. Was it
imagination, or had they all moved through a small angle
while he had been waiting, as if they were still
compensating for the rotation of the Earth? He could not be
sure, and he dismissed the matter as unimportant. It would
only mean that the directing mechanism was still working,
after a fashion.

They discovered the city ﬁfteen minutes later. It was a

great, sprawling metropolis, built around a river that had
disappeared leaving an ugly scar winding its way among
the great buildings and beneath bridges that looked very
incongruous now.

Even from the air, the city looked deserted. But only two

and a half hours were left—there was no time for further
exploration. Orostron made his decision, and landed near
the largest structure he could see. It seemed reasonable to

suppose that some creatures would have sought shelter in
the strongest buildings, where they would be safe until the
very end.

give no protection when the ﬁnal cataclysm came. Even if
this race had reached the outer planets, its doom would
only be delayed by the few hours it would take for the
ravening wavefronts to cross the Solar System.

Orostron could not know that the city had been deserted

not for a few days or weeks, but for over a century. For the
culture of cities, which had outlasted so many civilizations
had been doomed at last when the helicopter brought
universal transportation. Within a few generations the
great masses of mankind, knowing that they could reach
any part of the globe in a matter of hours, had gone back to
the ﬁelds and forests for which they had always longed.
The new civilization had machines and resources of which
earlier ages had never dreamed, but it was essentially rural
and no longer bound to the steel and concrete warrens that
had dominated the centuries before. Such cities as still
remained 
were 
specialized 
centers 
of 
research,

administration or entertainment; the others had been
allowed to decay, where it was too much trouble to destroy
them. The dozen or so greatest of all cities, and the ancient
university towns, had scarcely changed and would have
lasted for many generations to come. But the cities that
had been founded on steam and iron and surface
transportation had passed with the industries that had
nourished them.

And so while Orostron waited in the tender, his

colleagues raced through endless empty corridors and
deserted 
halls, 
taking 
innumerable 
photographs 
but

learning nothing of the creatures who had used these
buildings. There were libraries, meeting places, council
rooms, thousands of oﬀices—all were empty and deep with
dust. If they had not seen the radio station on its mountain

eyrie, the explorers could well have believed that this world
had known no life for centuries.

imagine where this race could have vanished. Perhaps they
had killed themselves knowing that escape was impossible;
perhaps they had built great shelters in the bowels of the
planet, and even now were cowering in their millions
beneath his feet, waiting for the end. He began to fear that
he would never know.

order for the return. Soon he would know if Torkalee’s
party had been more fortunate. And he was anxious to get
back to the mother ship, for as the minutes passed the
suspense had become more and more acute. There had
always been the thought in his mind: What if the
astronomers of Kulath have made a mistake? He would
begin to feel happy when the walls of the S9000 were
around him. He would be happier still when they were out
in space and this ominous sun was shrinking far astern.

As soon as his colleagues had entered the airlock,

Orostron hurled his tiny machine into the sky and set the
controls to home on S9000. Then he turned to his friends.

“Well, what have you found?” he asked.
Klarten produced a large roll of canvas and spread it out

on the ﬂoor.

with only two arms. They seem to have managed well, in
spite of that handicap. Only two eyes as well, unless there
are others in the back. We were lucky to ﬁnd this; it’s about
the only thing they left behind.”

The ancient oil paintings stared stonily back at the three

creatures regarding it so intently. By the irony of fate, its
complete worthlessness had saved it from oblivion. When
the city had been evacuated, no one had bothered to move
Alderman John Richards, 1909–1974. For a century and a
half he had been gathering dust while far away from the

old cities the new civilization had been rising to heights no
earlier culture had ever known.

must have been deserted for years. I’m afraid our
expedition has been a failure. If there are any living beings
on this world, they’ve hidden themselves too well for us to
ﬁnd them.”

His commander was forced to agree.
“It was an almost impossible task,” he said. “If we’d had

weeks instead of hours we might have succeeded. For all
we know, they may even have built shelters under the sea.
No one seems to have thought of that.”

course.

moving rather quickly. I wonder if Torkalee has found
anything.”

of a blazing continent when Orostron homed upon it. The
danger line was thirty minutes away and there was no time
to lose. Skilfully, he maneuvered the little ship into its
launching tube and the party stepped out of the airlock.

There was a small crowd waiting for them. That was to

be expected, but Orostron could see at once that something
more than curiosity had brought his friends here. Even
before a word was spoken, he knew that something was
wrong.

going to the rescue. Come along to the control room at
once.”

From the beginning, Torkalee had been luckier than

Orostron. He had followed the zone of twilight, keeping
away from the intolerable glare of the sun, until he came to

the shores of an inland sea. It was a very recent sea, one of
the latest of Man’s works, for the land it covered had been
desert less than a century before. In a few hours it would
be desert again, for the water was boiling and clouds of
steam were rising to the skies. But they could not veil the
loveliness of the great white city that overlooked the
tideless sea.

Flying machines were still parked neatly round the

square 
in 
which 
Torkalee 
landed. 
They 
were

disappointingly primitive, though beautifully ﬁnished, and
depended on rotating airfoils for support. Nowhere was
there any sign of life, but the place gave the impression
that its inhabitants were not very far away. Lights were still
shining from some of the windows.

machine. Leader of the party, by seniority of rank and race
was T’sinadree, who like Alveron himself had been born on
one of the ancient planets of the Central Suns. Next came
Alarkane, from a race which was one of the youngest in the
Universe and took a perverse pride in the fact. Last came
one of the strange beings from the system of Palador. It was
nameless, like all its kind, for it possessed no identity of its
own, being merely a mobile but still dependent cell in the
consciousness of its race. Though it and its fellows had long
been scattered over the galaxy in the exploration of
countless worlds, some unknown link still bound them
together as inexorably as the living cells in a human body.

was always ‘We’. There was not, nor could there ever be,
any ﬁrst person singular in the language of Palador.

The great doors of the splendid building baﬄed the

explorers, though any human child would have known their
secret. T’sinadree wasted no time on them but called
Torkalee on his personal transmitter. Then the three
hurried aside while their commander maneuvered his
machine into the best position. There was a brief burst of

intolerable ﬂame: the massive steelwork ﬂickered once at
the edge of the visible spectrum and was gone. The stones
were still glowing when the eager party hurried into the
building, the beams of their light projectors fanning before
them.

The torches were not needed. Before them lay a great

hall, glowing with light from lines of tubes along the
ceiling. On either side, the hall opened out into long
corridors, while straight ahead a massive stairway swept
majestically toward the upper ﬂoors.

was as good as another, he led his companions down the
ﬁrst corridor.

The feeling that life was near had now become very

strong. At any moment, it seemed, they might be
confronted by the creatures of this world. If they showed
hostility—and they could scarcely be blamed if they did—
the paralyzers would be used at once.

The tension was very great as the party entered the ﬁrst

room, and only relaxed when they saw that it held nothing
but machines—row after row of them, now stilled and
silent. Lining the enormous room were thousands of metal
ﬁling cabinets, forming a continuous wall as far as the eye
could reach. And that was all; there was no furniture,
nothing but the cabinets and the mysterious machines.

Alarkane, always the quickest of the three, was already

examining the cabinets. Each held many thousand sheets of
tough, thin material, perforated with innumerable holes
and slots. The Paladorian appropriated one of the cards and
Alarkane recorded the scene together with some close-ups
of the machines. Then they left. The great room, which had
been one of the marvels of the world, meant nothing to
them. No living eye would ever again see that wonderful
battery of almost human Hollerith analyzers and the ﬁve
thousand million punched cards holding all that could be
recorded of each man, woman and child on the planet.

recently. With growing excitement, the explorers hurried on
to the next room. This they found to be an enormous
library, for million of books lay all around them on miles
and miles of shelving. Here, though the explorers could not
know it, were the records of all the laws that Man had ever
passed, and all the speeches that had ever been made in
his council chambers.

T’sinadree was deciding his plan of action, when

Alarkane drew his attention to one of the racks a hundred
yards away. It was half empty, unlike all the others. Around
it books lay in a tumbled heap on the ﬂoor, as if knocked
down by someone in frantic haste. The signs were
unmistakable. Not long ago, other creatures had been this
way. Faint wheel marks were clearly visible on the ﬂoor to
the acute sense of Alarkane, though the others could see
nothing. Alarkane could even detect footprints, but
knowing nothing of the creatures that had formed them he
could not say which way they led.

was nearness in time, not in space. Alarkane voiced the
thoughts of the party.

“Those books must have been valuable, and someone has

come to rescue them—rather as an afterthought, I should
say. That means there must be a place of refuge, possibly
not very far away. Perhaps we may be able to ﬁnd some
other clues that will lead us to it.”

T’sinadree agreed; the Paladorian wasn’t enthusiastic.
“That may be so,” it said, “but the refuge may be

anywhere on the planet, and we have just two hours left.
Let us waste no more time if we hope to rescue these
people.”

collect a few books that might be useful to the scientists at
Base—though it was doubtful if they could ever be
translated. They soon found that the great building was

composed largely of small rooms, all showing signs of
recent occupation. Most of them were in a neat and tidy
condition, but one or two were very much the reverse. The
explorers were particularly puzzled by one room—clearly
an oﬀice of some kind—that appeared to have been
completely wrecked. The ﬂoor was littered with papers, the
furniture had been smashed, and smoke was pouring
through the broken windows from the ﬁres outside.

T’sinadree was rather alarmed.
“Surely no dangerous animal could have got into a place

like this!” he exclaimed, ﬁngering his paralyzer nervously.

Alarkane did not answer. He began to make that

annoying sound which his race called ‘laughter’. It was
several minutes before he would explain what had amused
him.

“I don’t think any animal has done it,” he said. “In fact,

the explanation is very simple. Suppose you had been
working all your life in this room, dealing with endless
papers, year after year. And suddenly, you are told that you
will never see it again, that your work is ﬁnished, and that
you can leave it forever. More than that—no one will come
after you. Everything is ﬁnished. How would you make your
exit, T’sinadree?”

The other thought for a moment.
“Well, I suppose I’d just tidy things up and leave. That’s

what seems to have happened in all the other rooms.”

Alarkane laughed again.
“I’m quite sure you would. But some individuals have a

diﬀerent psychology. I think I should have liked the
creature that used this room.”

He did not explain himself further, and his two colleagues

puzzled over his words for quite a while before they gave it
up.

It came as something of a shock when Torkalee gave the

order to return. They had gathered a great deal of
information, but had found no clue that might lead them to

the missing inhabitants of this world. That problem was as
baﬄing as ever, and now it seemed that it would never be
solved. There were only forty minutes left before the S9000
would be departing.

semicircular passage leading down into the depths of the
building. Its architectural style was quite diﬀerent from
that used elsewhere, and the gently sloping ﬂoor was an
irresistible attraction to creatures whose many legs had
grown weary of the marble staircases which only bipeds
could have built in such profusion. T’sinadree had been the
worst suﬀerer, for he normally employed twelve legs and
could use twenty when he was in a hurry, though no one
had ever seen him perform this feat.

with a single thought. A tunnel, leading down into the
depths of Earth! At its end, they might yet ﬁnd the people
of this world and rescue some of them from their fate. For
there was still time to call the mother ship if the need
arose.

T’sinadree signalled to his commander and Torkalee

brought the little machine immediately overhead. There
might not be time for the party to retrace its footsteps
through the maze of passages, so meticulously recorded in
the Paladorian mind that there was no possibility of going
astray. If speed was necessary, Torkalee could blast his way
through the dozen ﬂoors above their head. In any case, it
should not take long to ﬁnd what lay at the end of the
passage.

It took only thirty seconds. The tunnel ended quite

abruptly 
in 
a 
very 
curious 
cylindrical 
room 
with

magniﬁcently padded seats along the walls. There was no
way out save that by which they had come and it was
several seconds before the purpose of the chamber dawned
on Alarkane’s mind. It was a pity, he thought, that they
would never have time to use this. The thought was

suddenly interrupted by a cry from T’sinadree. Alarkane
wheeled around, and saw that the entrance had closed
silently behind them.

Even in that ﬁrst moment of panic, Alarkane found

himself thinking with some admiration: Whoever they were,
they knew how to build automatic machinery!

tentacles toward the seats.

multiplex mind of Palador had already analyzed the
situation and knew what was coming.

came from a grill overhead, and for the very last time in
history a human, even if lifeless, voice was heard on Earth.
The words were meaningless, though the trapped explorers
could guess their message clearly enough.

“Choose your stations, please, and be seated.”
Simultaneously, a wall panel at one end of the

compartment glowed with light. On it was a simple map,
consisting of a series of a dozen circles connected by a line.
Each of the circles had writing alongside it, and beside the
writing were two buttons of diﬀerent colors.

Alarkane looked questioningly at his leader.
“Don’t touch them,” said T’sinadree. “If we leave the

controls alone, the doors may open again.”

He was wrong. The engineers who had designed the

automatic subway had assumed that anyone who entered it
would naturally wish to go somewhere. If they selected no
intermediate station, their destination could only be the
end of the line.

There was another pause while the relays and thyratrons

waited for their orders. In those thirty seconds, if they had
known what to do, the party could have opened the doors
and left the subway. But they did not know, and the
machines geared to a human psychology acted for them.

upholstery was a luxury, not a necessity. Only an almost
imperceptible vibration told of the speed at which they
were travelling through the bowels of the earth, on a
journey the duration of which they could not even guess.
And in thirty minutes, the S9000 would be leaving the Solar
System.

T’sinadree and Alarkane were thinking rapidly. So was the
Paladorian, though in a diﬀerent fashion. The conception of
personal death was meaningless to it, for the destruction of
a single unit meant no more to the group mind that the loss
of a nail-paring to a man. But it could, though with great
diﬀiculty, appreciate the plight of individual intelligences
such as Alarkane and T’sinadree, and it was anxious to help
them if it could.

Alarkane had managed to contact Torkalee with his

personal transmitter, though the signal was very weak and
seemed to be fading quickly. Rapidly he explained the
situation, and almost at once the signals became clearer.
Torkalee was following the path of the machine, ﬂying
above the ground under which they were speeding to their
unknown destination. That was the ﬁrst indicator they had
of the fact that they were travelling at nearly a thousand
miles an hour, and very soon after that Torkalee was able to
give the still more disturbing news that they were rapidly
approaching the sea. While they were beneath the land,
there was a hope, though a slender one that they might
stop the machine and escape. But under the ocean—not all
the brains and the machinery in the great mother ship
could save them. No one could have devised a more perfect
trap.

T’sinadree had been examining the wall map with great

attention. Its meaning was obvious, and along the line
connecting the circles a tiny spot of light was crawling. It
was already halfway to the ﬁrst of the stations marked.

“I’m going to press one of those buttons,” said T’sinadree

at last. “It won’t do any harm, and we may learn
something.”

“I agree. Which will you try ﬁrst?”
“There are only two kinds, and it won’t matter if we try

the wrong one ﬁrst. I suppose one is to start the machine
and the other is to stop it.”

Alarkane was not very hopeful.
“It started without any button pressing,” he said. “I think

it’s completely automatic and we can’t control it from here
at all.”

T’sinadree could not agree.
“These buttons are clearly associated with the stations,

and there’s no point in having them unless you can use
them to stop yourself. The only question is, which is the
right one?”

His analysis was perfectly correct. The machine could be

stopped at any intermediate station. They had only been on
their way ten minutes, and if they could leave now, no harm
would have been done. It was just bad luck that
T’sinadree’s ﬁrst choice was the wrong button.

illuminated circle without checking its speed. And at the
same time Torkalee called from the ship overhead.

out to sea. There cannot be another stop for nearly a
thousand miles.”

Alveron had given up all hope of ﬁnding life on this

world. The S9000 had roamed over half the planet, never
staying long in one place, descending ever and again in an
eﬀort to attract attention. There had been no response;
Earth seemed utterly dead. If any of its inhabitants were
still alive, thought Alveron, they must have hidden

themselves in its depths where no help could reach them,
though their doom would be nonetheless certain.

Rugon brought news of the disaster. The great ship

ceased its fruitless searching and ﬂed back through the
storm to the ocean above which Torkalee’s little tender was
still following the track of the buried machine.

Earth was born had there been such seas as this.
Mountains of water were racing before the storm which
had now reached velocities of many hundred miles an hour.
Even at this distance from the mainland the air was full of
ﬂying debris—trees, fragments of houses, sheets of metal,
anything that had not been anchored to the ground. No
airborne machine could have lived for a moment in such a
gale. And ever and again even the roar of the wind was
drowned as the vast water-mountains met head-on with a
crash that seemed to shake the sky.

Fortunately, there had been no serious earthquakes yet.

Far beneath the bed of the ocean, the wonderful piece of
engineering which had been the World President’s private
vacuum-subway was still working perfectly, unaﬀected by
the tumult and destruction above. It would continue to
work until the last minute of the Earth’s existence, which, if
the astronomers were right, was not much more than
ﬁfteen minutes away—though precisely how much more
Alveron would have given a great deal to know. It would be
nearly an hour before the trapped party could reach land
and even the slightest hope of rescue.

without them he would never have dreamed of taking any
risks with the great machine that had been entrusted to his
care. Had he been human, the decision to abandon the
trapped members of his crew would have been desperately
hard to make. But he came of a race far more sensitive
than Man, a race that so loved the things of the spirit that
long ago, and with inﬁnite reluctance, it had taken over

control of the Universe since only thus could it be sure that
justice was being done. Alveron would need all his
superhuman gifts to carry him through the next few hours.

Meanwhile, a mile below the bed of the ocean Alarkane

and T’sinadree were very busy indeed with their private
communicators. Fifteen minutes is not a long time in which
to wind up the aﬀairs of a lifetime. It is indeed, scarcely
long enough to dictate more than a few of those farewell
messages which at such moments are so much more
important than all other matters.

All the while the Paladorian had remained silent and

motionless, saying not a word. The other two, resigned to
their fate and engrossed in their personal aﬀairs, had given
it no thought. They were startled when suddenly it began to
address them in its peculiarly passionless voice.

concerning your anticipated destruction. That will probably
be unnecessary. Captain Alveron hopes to rescue us if we
can stop this machine when we reach land again.”

anything for a moment. Then the latter gasped, “How do
you know?”

It was a foolish question, for he remembered at once that

there were several Paladorians—if one could use the phrase
—in the S9000, and consequently their companion knew
everything that was happening in the mother ship. So he
did not wait for an answer but continued, “Alveron can’t do
that! He daren’t take such a risk!”

“There will be no risk,” said the Paladorian. “We have

told him what to do. It is really very simple.”

Alarkane and T’sinadree looked at their companion with

something approaching awe, realizing now what must have
happened. In moments of crisis, the single units comprising
the Paladorian mind could link together in an organization
no less close than that of any physical brain. At such
moments they formed an intellect more powerful than any

other in the Universe. All ordinary problems could be
solved by a few hundred or thousand units. Very rarely
millions would be needed, and on two historic occasions the
billions of cells of the entire Paladorian consciousness had
been welded together to deal with emergencies that
threatened the race. The mind of Palador was one of the
greatest mental resources of the Universe; its full force was
seldom required, but the knowledge that it was available
was supremely comforting to other races. Alarkane
wondered how many cells had co-ordinated to deal with
this particular emergency. He also wondered how so trivial
an incident had ever come to its attention.

To that question he was never to know the answer,

though he might have guessed it had he known that the
chillingly remote Paladorian mind possessed an almost
human streak of vanity. Long ago, Alarkane had written a
book trying to prove that eventually all intelligent races
would sacriﬁce individual consciousness and that one day
only group-minds would remain in the Universe. Palador, he
had said, was the ﬁrst of those ultimate intellects, and the
vast, dispersed mind had not been displeased.

Alveron 
himself 
began 
to 
speak 
through 
their

communicators.

“Alveron calling! We’re staying on this planet until the

detonation waves reach it, so we may be able to rescue
you. You’re heading toward a city on the coast which you’ll
reach in forty minutes at your present speed. If you cannot
stop yourselves then, we’re going to blast the tunnel behind
and ahead of you to cut oﬀ your power. Then we’ll sink a
shaft to get you out—the chief engineer says he can do it in
ﬁve minutes with the main projectors. So you should be
safe within an hour, unless the sun blows up before.”

“And if that happens, you’ll be destroyed as well! You

mustn’t take such a risk!”

sun detonates, the explosion wave will take several minutes
to rise to its maximum. But apart from that, we’re on the
night side of the planet, behind an eight-thousand-mile
screen of rock. When the ﬁrst warning of the explosion
comes, we will accelerate out of the Solar System, keeping
in the shadow of the planet. Under our maximum drive, we
will reach the velocity of light before leaving the cone of
shadow, and the sun cannot harm us then.”

came at once into his mind.

“Yes, but how will you get any warning, here on the night

side of the planet?”

“Very easily,” replied Alveron. “This world has a moon

which is now visible from this hemisphere. We have
telescopes trained on it. If it shows any sudden increase in
brilliance, our main drive goes on automatically and we’ll
be thrown out of the system.”

taking no chances. It would be many minutes before the
eight-thousand-mile shield of rock and metal could be
destroyed by the ﬁres of the exploding sun. In that time,
the S9000 could have reached the safety of the velocity of
light.

several miles from the coast. He did not expect anything to
happen then, assuming that the machine could not stop
between stations. It seemed too good to be true when, a
few minutes later, the machine’s slight vibration died away
and they came to a halt.

The doors slid silently apart. Even before they were fully

open, the three had left the compartment. They were taking
no more chances. Before them a long tunnel stretched into
the distance, rising slowly out of sight. They were starting
along it when suddenly Alveron’s voice called from the
communicators.

“Stay where you are! We’re going to blast!”
The ground shuddered once, and far ahead there came

the rumble of falling rock. Again the earth shook—and a
hundred yards ahead the passageway vanished abruptly. A
tremendous vertical shaft had been cut clean through it.

end of the corridor and stood waiting on its lip. The shaft in
which it ended was a full thousand feet across and
descended into the earth as far as the torches could throw
their beams. Overhead, the storm clouds ﬂed beneath a
moon that no man would have recognized, so luridly
brilliant was its disc. And, most glorious of all sights, the
S9000 ﬂoated high above, the great projectors that had
drilled this enormous pit still glowing cherry red.

dropped 
swiftly 
towards 
the 
ground. 
Torkalee 
was

returning to collect his friends. A little later, Alveron
greeted them in the control room. He waved to the great
vision screen and said quietly, “See, we were barely in
time.”

The continent below them was slowly settling beneath

the mile-high waves that were attacking its coasts. The last
that anyone was ever to see of Earth was a great plain,
bathed with the silver light of the abnormally brilliant
moon. Across its face the waters were pouring in a
glittering ﬂood toward a distant range of mountains. The
sea had won its ﬁnal victory, but its triumph would be
short-lived for soon sea and land would be no more. Even
as the silent party in the control room watched the
destruction below, the inﬁnitely greater catastrophe to
which this was only the prelude came swiftly upon them.

It was as though dawn had broken suddenly over this

moonlit landscape. But it was not dawn: it was only the
moon, shining with the brilliance of a second sun. For
perhaps thirty seconds that awesome, unnatural light burnt
ﬁercely on the doomed land beneath. Then there came a

sudden ﬂashing of indicator lights across the control board.
The main drive was on. For a second Alveron glanced at the
indicators and checked their information. When he looked
again at the screen, Earth was gone.

The magniﬁcent, desperately overstrained generators

quietly died when the S9000 was passing the orbit of
Persephone. It did not matter, the sun could never harm
them now, and although the ship was speeding helplessly
out into the lonely night of intersellar space, it would only
be a matter of days before rescue came.

rescuers, going to the aid of a race that now no longer
existed. Not for the ﬁrst time Alveron wondered about the
world that had just perished. He tried, in vain, to picture it
as it had been in its glory, the streets of its cities thronged
with life. Primitive though its people had been, they might
have oﬀered much to the Universe. If only they could have
made contact! Regret was useless; long before their
coming, the people of this world must have buried
themselves in its iron heart. And now they and their
civilization would remain a mystery for the rest of time.

Rugon’s entrance. The chief of communications had been
very busy ever since the take-oﬀ, trying to analyze the
programs radiated by the transmitter Orostron had
discovered. The problem was not a diﬀicult one, but it
demanded the construction of special equipment, and that
had taken time.

“Well, what have you found?” asked Alveron.
“Quite a lot,” replied his friend. “There’s something

mysterious here, and I don’t understand it.

“It didn’t take long to ﬁnd how the vision transmissions

were built up, and we’ve been able to convert them to suit
our own equipment. It seems that there were cameras all
over the planet, surveying points of interest. Some of them
were apparently in cities, on the tops of very high

buildings. The cameras were rotating continuously to give
panoramic views. In the programs we’ve recorded there
are about twenty diﬀerent scenes.

diﬀerent kind, neither sound nor vision. They seem to be
purely 
scientiﬁc—possibly 
instrument 
readings 
or

something of that sort. All these programs were going out
simultaneously on diﬀerent frequency bands.

thinks that the station simply wasn’t switched oﬀ when it
was deserted. But these aren’t the sort of programs such a
station would normally radiate at all. It was certainly used
for interplanetary relaying—Klarten was quite right there.
So these people must have crossed space, since none of the
other planets had any life at the time of the last survey.
Don’t you agree?”

Alveron was following intently.
“Yes, that seems reasonable enough. But it’s also certain

that the beam was pointing to none of the other planets. I
checked that myself.”

giant interplanetary relay station is busily transmitting
pictures of a world about to be destroyed—pictures that
would 
be 
of 
immense 
interest 
to 
scientists 
and

astronomers. Someone had gone to a lot of trouble to
arrange all those panoramic cameras. I am convinced that
those beams were going somewhere.”

Alveron started up.
“Do you imagine that there might be an outer planet that

hasn’t been reported?” he asked. “If so, your theory’s
certainly wrong. The beam wasn’t even pointing in the
plane of the Solar System. And even if it were—just look at
this.”

He switched on the vision screen and adjusted the

controls. Against the velvet curtain of space was hanging a
blue-white 
sphere, 
apparently 
composed 
of 
many

concentric shells of incandescent gas. Even though its
immense distance made all movement invisible, it was
clearly expanding at an enormous rate. At its center was a
blinding point of light—the white dwarf star that the sun
had now become.

said Alveron. “Look at this.”

portion of the nova was visible. Close to its heart were two
minute condensations, one on either side of the nucleus.

“Those are the two giant planets of the system. They

have still managed to retain their existence—after a
fashion. And they were several hundred million miles from
the sun. The nova is still expanding—but it’s already twice
the size of the Solar System.”

Rugon was silent for a moment.
“Perhaps you’re right,” he said, rather grudgingly.

“You’ve disposed of my ﬁrst theory. But you still haven’t
satisﬁed me.”

He made several swift circuits of the room before

speaking again. Alveron waited patiently. He knew the
almost intuitive powers of his friend, who could often solve
a problem when mere logic seemed insuﬀicient.

Then, rather slowly, Rugon began to speak again.
“What do you think of this?” he said. “Suppose we’ve

completely underestimated this people? Orostron did it
once—he thought they could never have crossed space,
since they’d only known radio for two centuries. Hansur II
told me that. Well, Orostron was quite wrong. Perhaps
we’re all wrong. I’ve had a look at the material that Klarten
brought back from the transmitter. He wasn’t impressed by
what he found, but it’s a marvelous achievement for so
short a time. There were devices in that station that
belonged to civilizations thousands of years older. Alveron,
can we follow that beam to see where it leads?”

than half expecting the question, but it was not an easy one
to answer. The main generators had gone completely. There
was no point in trying to repair them. But there was still
power available, and while there was power, anything could
be done in time. It would mean a lot of improvisation, and
some diﬀicult maneuvers, for the ship still had its
enormous initial velocity. Yes, it could be done, and the
activity would keep the crew from becoming further
depressed, now that the reaction caused by the mission’s
failure had started to set in. The news that the nearest
heavy repair ship could not reach them for three weeks had
also caused a slump in morale.

The engineers, as usual, made a tremendous fuss. Again

as usual, they did the job in half the time they had
dismissed as being absolutely impossible. Very slowly, over
many hours, the great ship began to discard the speed its
main drive had given it in as many minutes. In a
tremendous curve, millions of miles in radius, the S9000
changed its course and the star ﬁelds shifted round it.

The maneuver took three days, but at the end of that

time the ship was limping along a course parallel to the
beam that had once come from Earth. They were heading
out into emptiness, the blazing sphere that had been the
sun dwindling slowly behind them. By the standards of
intersellar ﬂight, they were almost stationary.

For hours Rugon strained over his instruments, driving

his detector beams far ahead into space. There were
certainly no planets within many light-years; there was no
doubt of that. From time to time Alveron came to see him
and always he had to give the same reply: ‘Nothing to
report.’ About a ﬁfth of the time Rugon’s intuition let him
down badly; he began to wonder if this was such an
occasion.

Not until a week later did the needles of the mass-

Rugon said nothing, not even to his captain. He waited
until he was sure, and he went on waiting until even the
short-range scanners began to react, and to build up the
ﬁrst faint pictures on the vision screen. Still he waited
patiently until he could interpret the images. Then, when
he knew that his wildest fancy was even less than the truth,
he called his colleagues into the control room.

endless star ﬁelds, sun beyond sun to the very limits of the
Universe. Near the center of the screen a distant nebula
made a patch of haze that was diﬀicult for the eye to grasp.

Rugon increased the magniﬁcation. The stars ﬂowed out

of the ﬁeld; the little nebula expanded until it ﬁlled the
screen and then—it was a nebula no longer. A simultaneous
gasp of amazement came from all the company at the sight
that lay before them.

vast three-dimensional array of rows and columns with the
precision of a marching army, were thousands of tiny
pencils of light. They were moving swiftly; the whole
immense lattice holding its shape as a single unit. Even as
Alveron and his comrades watched, the formation began to
drift oﬀ the screen and Rugon had to recenter the controls.

After a long pause, Rugon started to speak.
“This is the race,” he said softly, “that has known radio

for only two centuries—the race that we believed had crept
to die in the heart of its planet. I have examined those
images under the highest possible magniﬁcation.

“That is the greatest ﬂeet of which there has ever been a

record. Each of those points of light represents a ship
larger than our own. Of course, they are very primitive—
what you see on the screen are the jets of their rockets.
Yes, they dared to use rockets to bridge interstellar space!
You realize what that means. It would take them centuries
to reach the nearest star. The whole race must have

embarked on this journey in the hope that its descendants
would complete it, generations later.

the ages it took us to conquer space, and the longer ages
still before we attempted to reach the stars. Even if we
were threatened with annihilation, could we have done so
much in so short a time? Remember, this is the youngest
civilization in the Universe. Four hundred thousand years
ago it did not even exist. What will it be a million years
from now?”

make contact with the great ﬂeet ahead. As the little
torpedo disappeared among the stars, Alveron turned to his
friend and made a remark that Rugon was often to
remember in the years ahead.

nothing 
but 
wonderful 
engineers, 
with 
no 
art 
or

philosophy? They’re going to have such a surprise when
Orostron reaches them—I expect it will be rather a blow to
their pride. It’s funny how all isolated races think they’re
the only people in the Universe. But they should be grateful
to us; we’re going to save them a good many hundred years
of travel.”

silver mist across the vision screen. He waved toward it
with a sweep of a tentacle that embraced the whole circle
of the galaxy, from the Central Planets to the lonely suns of
the Rim.

“You know,” he said to Rugon, “I feel rather afraid of

these 
people. 
Suppose 
they 
don’t 
like 
our 
little

Federation?” He waved once more toward the star-clouds
that lay massed across the screen, glowing with the light of
their countless suns.

he added. “We had better be polite to them. After all, we
only outnumber them about a thousand million to one.”

Rugon laughed at his captain’s little joke.
Twenty years afterward, the remark didn’t seem funny.

GUARDIAN
ANGEL

“Guardian Angel” was written in July 1946, and when I
submitted it to Astounding it was promptly rejected by John
W. Campbell, Jr.—with, I am sure, a fascinating and
sympathetic letter, which I hope may one day be located in
the lower Cambrian strata of my correspondence ﬁles. (All
previous searches have failed, so it’s a race against
petriﬁcation.) I like to ﬁnd that letter, because I wonder if
John asked whether I had borrowed my aliens from his own
story, “The Mightiest Machine.” (In a word, Yes . . .)

The next year I rewrote it, and submitted it to my new

agent—Scott Meredith, then at the beginning of his career.
At that time, James Blish was working with Scott—and he
did a major rewrite, tacking on a new ending. That version
duly appeared in Famous Fantastic Mysteries for April
1950, where it might have remained to this day had I not
decided to develop it further.

“Guardian Angel,” a couple of years later, began to

metamorphose into Childhood’s End, and became the ﬁrst
part of that novel (“Earth and the Overlords”). But that, to
coin a phrase, is another story . . .

P

I

ieter van Ryberg shivered, as he always did, when
he came into Stormgren’s room. He looked at the
thermostat and shrugged his shoulders in mock

resignation.

“You know, Chief,” he said, “although we’ll be sorry to

lose you, it’s nice to feel that the pneumonia death-rate will
soon be falling.”

“How do you know?” smiled Stormgren. “The next

Secretary-General may be an Eskimo. The fuss some people
make over a few degrees centigrade!”

Van Ryberg laughed and walked over to the curving

double window. He stood in silence for a moment, staring
along the avenue of great white buildings, still only partly
ﬁnished.

“Well,” he said, with a sudden change of tone, “are you

going to see them?”

“Yes, I think so. It usually saves trouble in the long run.”
Van Ryberg suddenly stiﬀened and pressed his face

against the glass.

“Here they are!” he said. “They’re coming up Wilson

Avenue. Not as many as I expected, though—about two
thousand, I’d say.”

Stormgren walked over to the Assistant-Secretary’s side.

Half a mile away, a small but determined crowd carried
banners along the avenue towards Headquarters Building.
Presently he could hear, even through the insulation, the
ominous sound of chanting voices. He felt a sudden wave of
disgust sweep over him. Surely the world had had enough
of marching mobs and angry slogans!

know that he was watching, for here and there ﬁsts were
being shaken in the air. They were not defying him, though
the gesture was meant for him to see. As pygmies may
threaten a giant, those angry ﬁsts were directed against
the sky some ﬁfty miles above his head.

And as likely as not, thought Stormgren, Karellen was

looking down at the whole thing and enjoying himself
hugely.

head of the Freedom League. He still wondered if the
action was wise: in the ﬁnal analysis he had only taken it
because 
the 
League 
would 
employ 
any 
refusal 
as

ammunition against him. He knew that the gulf was far too
wide for any agreement to come from this meeting.

man in the late ﬁfties. He seemed inclined to apologize for
his more boisterous followers, and Stormgren was rather
taken aback by his obvious sincerity and also by his
considerable personal charm.

visit is to register a formal protest against the Federation
Scheme. Am I correct?”

the last ﬁve years we have tried to awaken the human race
to the danger that confronts it. I must admit that, from our
point of view, the response has been disappointing. The
great majority of people seem content to let the Overlords
run the world as they please. But this European Federation
is as intolerable as it will be unworkable. Even Karellen
can’t wipe out two thousand years of the world’s history at
the stroke of a pen.”

Europe, and the whole world, must continue indeﬁnitely to
be divided into scores of sovereign states, each with its

own currency, armed forces, customs, frontiers, and all the
rest of that—that medieval paraphernalia?”

though some of my supporters might not agree. My point is
that it must come from within, not be superimposed from
without. We must work out our own destiny—we have a
right to independence. There must be no more interference
in human aﬀairs!”

Stormgren sighed. All this he had heard a hundred times

before, and he knew that he could only give the old
answers that the Freedom League had refused to accept.
He had faith in Karellen, and they had not. That was the
fundamental diﬀerence, and there was nothing he could do
about it. Luckily, there was nothing that the Freedom
League could do either.

“Let me ask you a few questions,” he said. “Can you deny

that the Overlords have brought security, peace and
prosperity to the world?”

“That is true. But they have taken our freedom. Man does

not live—”

“By bread alone. Yes, I know—but this is the ﬁrst age in

which every man was sure of getting even that. In any case,
what freedom have we lost compared with that which the
Overlords have given us for the ﬁrst time in human
history?”

“Freedom to control our own lives, under God’s

guidance.”

Stormgren shook his head.
“Last month, ﬁve hundred bishops, cardinals and rabbis

signed a joint declaration pledging support for the
Supervisor’s policy. The world’s religions are against you.”

“Because so few people realize the danger. When they

do, it may be too late. Humanity will have lost its initiative
and will have become a subject race.”

crowd below, milling aimlessly, now that it had lost its
leader. How long, he wondered, would it be before men
ceased to abandon their reason and identity when more
than a few of them were gathered together? Wainwright
might be a sincere and honest man, but the same could not
be said of many of his followers.

Stormgren turned back to his visitor.
“In three days I shall be meeting the Supervisor again. I

shall explain your objections to him, since it is my duty to
represent the views of the world. But it will alter nothing.”

Rather slowly, Wainwright began again.
“That brings me to another point. One of our main

objections to the Overlords, as you know, is their
secretiveness. You are the only human being who has ever
spoken with Karellen—and even you have never seen him.
Is it surprising that many of us are suspicious of his
motives?”

“You have heard his speeches. Aren’t they convincing

enough?”

“Frankly, words are not suﬀicient. I do not know which

we resent more—Karellen’s omnipotence, or his secrecy.”

Stormgren was silent. There was nothing he could say to

this—nothing at any rate, that would convince the other. He
sometimes wondered if he had really convinced himself.

It was, of course, only a very small operation from their

point of view, but to Earth it was the biggest thing that had
ever happened. There had been no warning, but a sudden
shadow had fallen across a score of the world’s greatest
cities. Looking up from their work, a million men saw in
that heart-freezing instant that the human race was no
longer alone.

The twenty great ships were unmistakable symbols of a

science Man could not hope to match for centuries. For

seven days they ﬂoated motionless above his cities, giving
no hint that they knew of his existence. But none was
needed—not by chance alone could those mighty ships have
come to rest so precisely over New York, London, Moscow,
Canberra, Rome, Capetown, Tokyo . . .

men had guessed the truth. This was not a ﬁrst tentative
contact by a race which knew nothing of Man. Within those
silent, unmoving ships, master psychologists were studying
humanity’s reactions. When the curve of tension had
reached its peak, they would reveal themselves.

made himself known to the world; in perfect English. But
the content of the speech was more staggering even than
its delivery. By any standards, it was a work of superlative
genius, showing a complete and absolute mastery of human
aﬀairs.

There was little doubt but that its scholarship and

virtuosity, its tantalizing glimpses of knowledge still
untapped, were deliberately designed to convince Mankind
that it was in the presence of overwhelming intellectual
power. When Karellen had ﬁnished, the nations of Earth
knew that their days of precarious sovereignty were
ending. Local, internal governments would still retain their
powers, but in the wider ﬁeld of international aﬀairs the
supreme decisions had passed out of human hands.
Arguments, protests—all were futile. No weapon could
touch those brooding giants, and even if it could, their
downfall 
would 
utterly 
destroy 
the 
cities 
beneath.

Overnight, Earth had become a protectorate in some
shadowy, star-strewn empire beyond the knowledge of
Man.

In a little while the tumult had subsided, and the world

went about its business again. The only change a suddenly
awakened Rip Van Winkle would have noticed was a hushed
expectancy, 
a 
mental 
glancing-over-the-shoulder, 
as

Mankind waited for the Overlords to show themselves and
to step down from their gleaming ships.

Five years later, it was still waiting.

The room was small and, save for the single chair and the

table beneath the vision-screen, unfurnished. As was
intended, it told nothing of the creatures who had built it.
There was only the one entrance, and that led directly to
the airlock in the curving ﬂank of the great ship. Through
that lock only Stormgren, alone of living men, had ever
come to meet Karellen, Supervisor for Earth.

The vision screen was empty now, as it had always been.

Behind that rectangle of darkness lay utter mystery—but
there too lay aﬀection and an immense and tolerant
understanding of mankind. An understanding which,
Stormgren knew, could only have been acquired through
centuries of study.

From the hidden grille came that calm, never-hurried

voice with its undercurrent of humor—the voice which
Stormgren knew so well though the world had heard it only
thrice in history.

“Yes, Rikki, I was listening. What did you make of Mr

Wainwright?”

“He’s an honest man, whatever his supporters may be.

What are we going to do about him? The League itself isn’t
dangerous, but some of its more extreme supporters are
openly advocating violence. I’ve been wondering for some
time if I should put a guard on my house. But I hope it isn’t
necessary.”

Karellen evaded the point in the annoying way he

sometimes had.

“The details of the European Federation have been out

for a month now. Has there been a substantial increase in
the seven per cent who disapprove of me, or the nine per
cent who Don’t Know?”

about is a general feeling, even among your supporters,
that it’s time this secrecy came to an end.”

Karellen’s sigh was technically perfect, yet somehow

lacked conviction.

“That’s your feeling, too, isn’t it?”
The question was so rhetorical that Stormgren didn’t

bother to answer it.

diﬀicult this state of aﬀairs makes my job?”

some spirit. “I wish people would stop thinking of me as a
world dictator and remember that I’m only a civil servant
trying to administer a somewhat idealistic colonial policy.”

concealment? Because we don’t understand it; it annoys us
and gives rise to all sorts of rumors.”

musical to be altogether human.

“What am I supposed to be now? Does the robot theory

still hold the ﬁeld? I’d rather be a mass of cogwheels than
crawl around the ﬂoor like a centipede, as some of the
tabloids seem to imagine.”

Stormgren let out a Finnish oath he was fairly sure

Karellen wouldn’t know—though one could never be quite
certain in these matters.

“Can’t you ever be serious?”
“My dear Rikki,” said Karellen, “it’s only by not taking

the human race seriously that I retain those fragments of
my once considerable mental powers that I still possess.”

Despite himself, Stormgren smiled.
“That doesn’t help me a great deal, does it? I have to go

down there and convince my fellow men that although you
won’t show yourself, you’ve got nothing to hide. It’s not an
easy job. Curiosity is one of the most dominant human
characteristics. You can’t defy it forever.”

Earth, this was the most diﬀicult,” admitted Karellen. “You
have trusted our wisdom in other things—surely you can
trust us in this!”

nor do his supporters. Can you really blame them if they
put a bad interpretation upon your unwillingness to show
yourself?”

matters are beyond my control. Believe me, I regret the
need for this concealment, but the reasons are—suﬀicient.
However, I will try to get a statement from my superior
which may satisfy you and perhaps placate the Freedom
League. Now, please, can we return to the agenda and start
recording again? We’ve only reached Item 23, and I want to
make a better job of settling the middle question than my
predecessors for the last few thousand years . . .”

II

“Any luck, Chief?” asked van Ryberg anxiously.

“I don’t know,” Stormgren replied wearily as he threw

the ﬁles down on his desk and collapsed into the seat.
“Karellen’s consulting his superior now, whoever or
whatever he may be. He won’t make any promises.”

“Listen,” said Pieter abruptly. “I’ve just thought of

something. What reason have we for believing that there is
anyone beyond Karellen? The Overlords may be a myth—
you know how he hates the word.”

Tired though he was, Stormgren sat up with a start.
“It’s an ingenious theory. But it clashes with what little I

do know about Karellen’s background.”

“And how much is that?”

calls Skyrondel, and he put up a terriﬁc ﬁght before they
made him take this job. He pretends to hate it, but he’s
really enjoying himself.”

Stormgren paused for a moment, and a smile of

amusement softened his rugged features.

is rather good fun.”

“H’m-m—a 
somewhat 
dubious 
compliment. 
He’s

immortal, isn’t he?”

thousands of years ahead of him which he seems to fear: I
can’t imagine what it is. And that’s really all I know.”

little ﬂeet’s lost in space and looking for a new home. He
doesn’t want us to know how few he and his comrades are.
Perhaps all those other ships are automatic, and there’s no
one in any of them. They’re just an imposing facade.”

reading science ﬁction in oﬀice hours.”

Van Ryberg grinned.
““The Invasion from Space” didn’t turn out quite as

expected, did it? My theory would certainly explain why
Karellen never shows himself. He doesn’t want us to learn
that there are no Overlords.”

Stormgren shook his head in amused disagreement.
“Your explanation, as usual, is much too ingenious to be

true. Though we can only infer its existence, there must be
a great civilization behind the Supervisor—and one that’s
known about Man for a very long time. Karellen himself
must have been studying us for centuries. Look at his
command of English, for example. He taught me how to
speak it idiomatically!”

“I sometimes think he went a little too far,” laughed van

Ryberg. “Have you ever discovered anything he doesn’t
know?”

taken one at a time, I don’t think his mental gifts are quite
outside the range of human achievement. But no man could
possibly do all the things he does.”

van Ryberg. “We can argue around Karellen forever, but in
the end we always come back to the same question—why
the devil won’t he show himself? Until he does, I’ll go on
theorizing and the Freedom League will go on fulminating.”

He cocked a rebellious eye at the ceiling.
“One dark night, Mr Supervisor, I’m going to take a

rocket up to your ship and climb in through the back door
with my camera. What a scoop that would be!”

If Karellen was listening, he gave no sign of it. But, of

course, he never did.

of the morning rose from his bed and wandered restlessly
out on to the veranda. It was warm, almost oppressive, but
the sky was clear and a brilliant moon hung low in the
southwest. In the far distance the lights of London glowed
on the skyline like a frozen dawn.

Stormgren raised his eyes above the sleeping city,

climbing again the ﬁfty miles of space he alone of living
men had crossed. Far away though it was, the beautiful
lines of Karellen’s ship were clearly visible in the
moonlight. He wondered what the Supervisor was doing,
for he did not believe that the Overlords ever slept.

the dome of the sky. The luminous trail glowed faintly for a
while: then only the stars were left. The reminder was
brutal: in a hundred years Karellen would still be leading
mankind towards the goal that he alone could see, but four
months from now another man would be Secretary-
General. That in itself Stormgren was far from minding—
but there was little time left if he ever hoped to learn what
lay behind that darkened screen.

Karellen’s behavior had never worried Stormgren once its
initial strangeness had worn oﬀ. But now he knew that the
mystery which tormented so many minds was beginning to
obsess his own: he could understand—in time he might
even share—the psychological outlook which had driven
many to support the Freedom League. The propaganda
about Man’s enslavement was just—propaganda. Few
people seriously believed it, or really wished for a return to
the old days of national rivalries. Men had grown
accustomed to Karellen’s imperceptible rule; but they were
becoming impatient to know who ruled them.

There was a faint “click” from the teletype in the

adjoining room as it ejected the hourly summary from
Central News. Stormgren wandered indoors and ruﬄed
half-heartedly through the sheets. On the other side of the
world, the Freedom League had thought of a new headline.
“IS MAN RULED BY MONSTERS?” asked the teletype, and
went on to quote: “Addressing a meeting in Madras today,
Dr. C. V. Krishnan, President of the Indian Division of the
Freedom League, said: ‘The explanation of the Overlords’
behavior is quite simple. Their physical form is so alien and
so repulsive that they dare not show themselves to
humanity. I challenge the Supervisor to deny this.’ ”

were true, did it really matter? The idea was an old one,
but it had never worried him. He did not believe that there
was any biological form, however strange, which he could
not accept in time and, perhaps, even ﬁnd beautiful. If he
could convince Karellen of this, the Overlords might change
their policy. Certainly they could not be half as hideous as
the imaginative drawings that had ﬁlled the papers soon
after their coming to Earth!

bedroom. He was honest enough to admit that, in the ﬁnal
analysis, his real motive was ordinary human curiosity.

van Ryberg was surprised and a little annoyed. Though the
Secretary-General often made a number of calls before
reaching his own oﬀice, he invariably left word that he was
doing so. This morning, to make matters worse, there had
been several urgent messages for Stormgren. Van Ryberg
rang half a dozen departments to try and locate him, then
gave it up in disgust.

By noon he had become alarmed and sent a car to

Stormgren’s house. Ten minutes later he was startled by
the scream of a siren, and a police patrol came racing up
Wilson Avenue. The news agencies must have had friends
in that machine, for even as van Ryberg watched it
approach, the radio was telling the world that he was no
longer Assistant, but Acting-Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

If van Ryberg had not had so many other matters on his

hands, he would have found it very interesting to study the
press reactions to Stormgren’s disappearance. For the past
month, the world’s papers had divided themselves into two
sharply deﬁned groups. The American press, on the whole,
thought that the Federation of Europe was long overdue,
but had a nervous feeling that this was only the beginning.
The Europeans, on the other hand, were undergoing violent
but largely synthetic spasms of national pride. Criticism of
the Overlords was widespread and energetic: after an
initial period of caution the press had discovered that it
could be as rude to Karellen as it liked and nothing would
happen. Now it was excelling itself.

Most of these attacks, though very vocal, were not

representative of the great mass of the public. Along the
frontiers that would soon be gone forever the guards had
been doubled—but the soldiers eyed each other with a still
inarticulate friendliness. The politicians and the generals

might storm and rave, but the silently waiting millions felt
that, none too soon, a long and bloody chapter of history
was coming to an end.

And now Stormgren had gone, no one knew where or

how. The tumult suddenly subsided as the world realized
that it had lost the only man through whom the Overlords,
for their own strange reasons, would speak to Earth. A
paralysis seemed to descend upon press and radio, but in
the silence could be heard the voice of the Freedom
League, anxiously protesting its innocence.

It was completely dark when Stormgren awoke. How

strange that was, he was for a moment too sleepy to
realize. Then, as full consciousness dawned, he sat up with
a start and felt for the light switch beside his bed.

In the darkness his hand encountered a bare stone wall,

cold to the touch. He froze instantly, mind and body
paralyzed by the impact of the unexpected. Then, scarcely
believing his senses, he kneeled on the bed and began to
explore with his ﬁnger tips that shockingly unfamiliar wall.

He had been doing this for only a moment when there

was a sudden “click” and a section of the darkness slid
aside. He caught a glimpse of a man silhouetted against a
dimly lit background: then the door closed again and the
darkness returned. It happened so swiftly that he saw
nothing of the room in which he was lying.

An instant later, he was dazzled by the light of a powerful

electric torch. The beam ﬂickered across his face, held him
steadily for a moment, then dipped to illuminate the whole
bed—which was, he now saw, nothing more than a mattress
supported on rough planks.

Out of the darkness a soft voice spoke to him in excellent

English but with an accent which at ﬁrst Stormgren could
not identify.

you feel all right.”

Stormgren’s attention, so that the angry questions he was
about to ask died upon his lips. He stared back into the
darkness, then replied calmly: “How long have I been
unconscious?”

The other chuckled.
“Several days. We were promised that there would be no

aftereﬀects. I’m glad to see it’s true.”

Stormgren swung his legs over the side of the bed. He was
still wearing his nightclothes, but they were badly
crumpled and seemed to have gathered considerable dirt.
As he moved he felt a slight dizziness—not enough to be
troublesome, but suﬀicient to convince him that he had
indeed been drugged.

He turned towards the light.
“Where am I?” he said sharply. “Does Wainwright know

about this?”

won’t talk about that now. I guess you’ll be pretty hungry.
Get dressed and come along to dinner.”

The oval of light slipped across the room and for the ﬁrst

time Stormgren had an idea of its dimensions. It was not
really correct to call it a room at all, for the walls seemed
bare rock, roughly smoothed into shape. He realized that
he was underground, possibly at a great depth. He realized
too that if he had been unconscious for several days he
might be anywhere on Earth.

The torchlight illuminated a pile of clothes draped over a

packing case.

“This should be enough for you,” said the voice from the

darkness. “Laundry’s rather a problem here, so we grabbed

a couple of your suits and half a dozen shirts.”

“That,” said Stormgren without humor, “was very

considerate of you.”

“We’re sorry about the absence of furniture and electric

light. This place is convenient in some ways, but it rather
lacks amenities.”

into a shirt. The feel of the familiar cloth beneath his
ﬁngers was strangely reassuring.

we’re likely to spend a good deal of time together, you’d
better call me Joe.”

“Despite your nationality,” retorted Stormgren, “I think I

could pronounce your real name. It won’t be worse than
many Finnish ones.”

There was a slight pause and the light ﬂickered for an

instant.

“Well, I should have expected it,” said Joe resignedly.

“You must have plenty of practice at this sort of thing.”

you were born in Poland, and picked up your English in
Britain during the War? I should think you were stationed
quite a while in Scotland, from your r’s.”

“That,” said the other very ﬁrmly, “is quite enough. As

you seem to have ﬁnished dressing—thank you.”

The door opened as Stormgren walked towards it, and

the other stood aside to let him pass. Stormgren wondered
if Joe was armed and decided that he probably was. In any
case, he would certainly have friends around.

for the ﬁrst time Stormgren could see his captor. He was a
man of about ﬁfty, and must have weighed well over two
hundred pounds. Everything about him was outsize, from
the stained battledress that might have come from any of
half a dozen armed forces, to the startlingly large signet
ring on his left hand. It should not be diﬀicult to trace him,

thought Stormgren, if he ever got out of this place. He was
a little depressed to think that the other must be perfectly
well aware of this.

The walls around them, though occasionally faced with

concrete, were mostly bare rock. It was clear to Stormgren
that he was in some disused mine, and he could think of
few more eﬀective prisons. Until now the thought that he
had been kidnapped had somehow failed to worry him
greatly. He felt that, whatever happened, the immense
resources of the Supervisor would soon locate and rescue
him. Now he was not so sure: there must be a limit even to
Karellen’s powers, and if he was indeed buried in some
remote continent all the science of the Overlords might be
unable to trace him.

III

There were three other men round the table in the bare

but brightly lit room. They looked up with interest and
more than a little awe as Stormgren entered, and a
substantial pile of meat sandwiches was quickly placed
before him. He could have done with a more interesting
meal, for he felt extremely hungry, but it was very obvious
that his captors had dined no better.

As he ate, he glanced quickly at the four men around

him. Joe was by far the most outstanding character— not
merely in physical bulk. The others were nondescript
individuals, probably Europeans also. He would be able to
place them when he heard them talk.

He pushed away the plate, and ignoring the other men

spoke directly to the huge Pole.

“Well,” he said evenly, “now perhaps you’ll tell me what

this is all about, and what you hope to get out of it.” ”

Joe cleared his throat.

nothing to do with Wainwright. He’ll be as surprised as
anyone.”

Stormgren had rather expected this. It gave him

relatively little satisfaction to conﬁrm the existence of an
extremist movement inside the Freedom League.

me?”

other’s readiness—even eagerness—to answer. Only slowly
did he guess the reason.

“It was all rather like one of those old Fritz Lang ﬁlms,”

said Joe cheerfully. “We weren’t sure if Karellen had a
watch on you, so we took somewhat elaborate precautions.
You were knocked out by gas in the air conditioner: that
was easy. Then we carried you out into the car and drove
oﬀ—no trouble at all. All this, I might say, wasn’t done by
any of our people. We hired—er, professionals for the job.
Karellen may get them—in fact, he’s supposed to—but he’ll
be no wiser. When it left your house the car drove into a
long road tunnel not many miles from the center of London.
It came out again on schedule at the other end, still
carrying a drugged man extraordinarily like the Secretary-
General. About the same time a large truck loaded with
metal cases emerged in the opposite direction and drove to
a certain airﬁeld where one of the cases was loaded aboard
a freighter. Meanwhile the car that had done the job
continued elaborate evasive action in the general direction
of Scotland. Perhaps Karellen’s caught it by now: I don’t
know. As you’ll see—I do hope you appreciate my frankness
—our whole plan depended on one thing. We’re pretty sure
that Karellen can see and hear everything that happens on
the surface of the Earth— but unless he uses magic, not
science, he can’t see underneath it. So he won’t know
about that transfer in the tunnel. Naturally we’ve taken a
risk, but there were also one or two other stages in your

removal which I won’t go into now. We may have to use
them again one day, and it would be a pity to give them
away.”

Joe had related the whole story with such obvious gusto

that Stormgren found it diﬀicult to be appropriately
furious. Yet he felt very disturbed. The plan was an
ingenious one, and it seemed more than likely that
whatever watch Karellen kept on him, he would have been
tricked by this ruse.

The Pole was watching Stormgren’s reactions closely. He

would have to appear conﬁdent, whatever his real feelings.

“You must be a lot of fools,” said Stormgren scornfully, “if

you think you can trick the Overlords like this. In any case,
what conceivable good would it do?”

Joe oﬀered him a cigarette, which Stormgren refused,

then lit one himself and sat on the edge of the table. There
was an ominous creaking and he jumped oﬀ hastily.

“Our motives,” he began, “should be pretty obvious.

We’ve found that argument’s useless, so we have to take
other measures. There have been underground movements
before, and even Karellen, whatever powers he’s got, won’t
ﬁnd it easy to deal with us. We’re out to ﬁght for our
independence. 
Don’t 
misunderstand 
me. 
There’ll 
be

nothing violent—at ﬁrst, anyway. But the Overlords have to
use 
human 
agents, 
and 
we 
can 
make 
it 
mighty

uncomfortable for them.”

Starting with me, I suppose, thought Stormgren. He

wondered if the other had given him more than a fraction
of the whole story. Did they really think that these gangster
methods would inﬂuence Karellen in the slightest? On the
other hand, it was quite true that a well-organized
resistance movement could make things very diﬀicult.

“What do you intend to do with me?” asked Stormgren at

length. “Am I a hostage, or what?”

visitors in a day or two, and until then we’ll entertain you
as well as we can.”

He added some words in his own language, and one of

the others produced a brand-new pack of cards.

“We got these especially for you,” explained Joe. His

voice suddenly became grave. “I hope you’ve got plenty of
cash,” he said anxiously. “After all, we can hardly accept
checks.”

Quite overcome, Stormgren stared blankly at his captors.

Then, as the true humor of the situation sank into his mind,
it suddenly seemed to him that all the cares and worries of
oﬀice had lifted from his shoulders. Whatever happened,
there was absolutely nothing he could do about it—and now
these fantastic criminals wanted to play cards with him.

Abruptly, he threw back his head and laughed as he had

not done for years.

There was no doubt, thought van Ryberg morosely, that

Wainwright was telling the truth. He might have his
suspicions, but he did not know who had kidnapped
Stormgren. Nor did he approve of the kidnapping itself. Van
Ryberg had a shrewd idea that for some time extremists in
the Freedom League had been putting pressure on
Wainwright to make him adopt a more active policy. Now
they were taking things into their own hands.

The kidnapping had been beautifully organized, there

was no doubt of that. Stormgren might be anywhere on
earth and there seemed little hope of tracing him. Yet
something would have to be done, decided van Ryberg, and
done quickly. Despite the jests he had so often made, his
real feeling towards Karellen was one of overwhelming
awe. The thought of approaching the Supervisor directly
ﬁlled him with dismay, but there seemed no alternative.

Karellen’s ship. Most of them were operating continuously,
handling endless streams of statistics— production ﬁgures,
census returns and all the bookkeeping of a world
economic system. One channel, van Ryberg knew, was
reserved for Karellen’s personal messages to Stormgren.
No one but the Secretary-General himself had ever used it.

Van Ryberg sat down at the keyboard and, after a

moment’s hesitation, began to tap out his message with
unpracticed ﬁngers. The machine clicked away contentedly
and the words gleamed for a few seconds on the darkened
screen. Then he waited; he would give the Supervisor ten
minutes and after that someone else could bring him any
reply.

started to whirr again. Not for the ﬁrst time, van Ryberg
wondered if the Supervisor ever slept.

The message was as brief as it was unhelpful.

NO INFORMATION. LEAVE MATTERS

ENTIRELY TO YOUR DISCRETION.

Rather bitterly, and without any satisfaction at all, van

Ryberg realized how much greatness had been thrust upon
him.

During the last three days Stormgren had analyzed his

captors with some thoroughness. Joe was the only one of
any importance: the others were nonentities— the riﬀraﬀ
one would expect any illegal movement to gather round
itself. The ideals of the Freedom League meant nothing to
them: their only concern was earning a living with the
minimum of work. They were the gangster types from
which civilization might never be wholly free.

sometimes he reminded Stormgren of an overgrown baby.
Their interminable canasta games were punctuated with
violent political arguments, but it became obvious to
Stormgren that the big Pole had never thought seriously
about the cause for which he was ﬁghting. Emotion and
extreme conservatism clouded all his judgments. His
country’s long struggle for independence had conditioned
him so completely that he still lived in the past. He was a
picturesque survival, one of those who had no use for an
ordered way of life. When his type had vanished, if it ever
did, the world would be a safer but less interesting place.

There was little doubt, as far as Stormgren was

concerned, that Karellen had failed to locate him. He had
tried to bluﬀ, but his captors were unconvinced. He was
fairly certain that they had been holding him here to see if
Karellen would act, and now that nothing had happened
they could proceed with the next part of their plan.

Stormgren was not surprised when, ﬁve or six days after

his capture, Joe told him to expect visitors. For some time
the little group had shown increasing nervousness, and the
prisoner guessed that the leaders of the movement, having
seen that the coast was clear, were at last coming to collect
him.

They were already waiting, gathered round the rickety

table, when Joe waved him politely into the living room.
The three thugs had vanished, and even Joe seemed
somewhat restrained. Stormgren could see at once that he
was now confronted by men of a much higher caliber, and
the group opposite reminded him strongly of a picture he
had once seen of Lenin and his colleagues in the ﬁrst days
of the Russian Revolution. There was the same intellectual
force, iron determination, and ruthlessness in these six
men. Joe and his like were harmless: here were the real
brains behind the organization.

tried to look self-possessed. As he approached, the elderly,
thickset man on the far side of the table leaned forward
and stared at him with piercing gray eyes. They made
Stormgren 
so 
uncomfortable 
that 
he 
spoke 
ﬁrst—

something he had not intended to do.

“I suppose you’ve come to discuss terms. What’s my

ransom?”

down his words in a shorthand notebook. It was all very
businesslike.

The leader replied in a muscial Welsh accent.
“You could put it that way, Mr. Secretary-General. But

we’re interested in information, not cash.”

war, and this was his interrogation.

his softly lilting voice. “Call us a resistance movement, if
you like. We believe that sooner or later Earth will have to
ﬁght for its independence—but we realize that the struggle
can only be by indirect methods such as sabotage and
disobedience. We kidnapped you partly to show Karellen
that we mean business and are well organized, but largely
because you are the only man who can tell us anything of
the Overlords. You’re a reasonable man, Mr. Stormgren.
Give us your cooperation, and you can have your freedom.”

“Exactly what do you wish to know?” asked Stormgren

cautiously.

Those extraordinary eyes seemed to search his mind to

its depths: they were unlike any that Stormgren had ever
seen in his life. Then the singsong voice replied:

“Do you know who, or what, the Overlords really are?”
Stormgren almost smiled.
“Believe me,” he said, “I’m quite as anxious as you to

discover that.”

“Then you’ll answer our questions?”

“I make no promises. But I may.”
There was a slight sigh of relief from Joe and a rustle of

anticipation went round the room.

circumstances in which you meet Karellen. Would you go
through them carefully, leaving out nothing of importance.”

That was harmless enough, thought Stormgren. He had

done it scores of times before, and it would give the
appearance of cooperation.

envelope. Sketching rapidly while he spoke, he began:

“You know, of course, that a small ﬂying machine, with no

obvious means of propulsion, calls for me at regular
intervals and takes me up to Karellen’s ship. There is only
one small room in that machine, and it’s quite bare apart
from a couch and table. The layout is something like this.”

strange eyes never turned towards it. They were still ﬁxed
on Stormgren’s face, and as he watched them something
seemed to change in their depths. The room had become
completely silent, but behind him he heard Joe take a
sudden indrawn breath.

Puzzled and annoyed, Stormgren stared back at the

other, and as he did so, understanding slowly dawned. In
his confusion, he crumpled the envelope into a ball of paper
and ground it underfoot.

For the man opposite him was blind.

IV

Van Ryberg had made no more attempts to contact

Karellen. Much of his department’s work—the forwarding
of statistical information, the abstracting of the world’s
press, and the like—had continued automatically. In Paris

the lawyers were still wrangling over the European
Constitution, but that was none of his business for the
moment. It was three weeks before the Supervisor wanted
the ﬁnal draft: if it was not ready by then, no doubt
Karellen would act accordingly.

And there was still no news of Stormgren.
Van Ryberg was dictating when the “Emergency Only”

telephone started to ring. He grabbed the receiver and
listened with mounting astonishment, then threw it down
and rushed to the open window. In the distance faint cries
of amazement were rising from the street and the traﬀic
had already come to a halt.

It was true: Karellen’s ship, that never-changing symbol

of the Overlords, was no longer in the sky. He searched the
heavens as far as he could see, but found no trace of it.
Even as he was doing so, it seemed that night had suddenly
fallen. Coming down from the north, its shadowed
underbelly black as a thundercloud, the great ship was
racing low above the towers of London. Involuntarily, van
Ryberg shrank away from the on-rushing monster. He had
always known how huge the ships of the Overlords really
were—but it was one thing to see them far away in space,
and quite another to watch them passing overhead, almost
close enough to touch.

the ship and its monstrous shadow had moved to the south.
There was no sound, not even the whisper of air; van
Ryberg realized that, for all its apparent nearness, the ship
was still a thousand feet or more above his head. He
watched it vanish over the horizon, still large even when it
dropped below the curve of the Earth.

In the oﬀice behind him all the telephones had started to

ring, but van Ryberg did not move. He leaned against the
balcony, still staring into the south, paralyzed by the
presence of illimitable power.

operating on two levels simultaneously. On the one hand he
was trying to defy the men who had captured him, yet on
the other he was hoping that they might help him to
unravel Karellen’s secret. He did not feel that he was
betraying the Supervisor, for there was nothing here that
he had not told many times before. Moreover, the thought
that these men could harm Karellen in any way was
fantastic.

The blind Welshman had conducted most of the

interrogation. It was fascinating to watch that agile mind
trying one opening after another, testing and rejecting all
the theories that Stormgren himself had abandoned long
ago. Presently he leaned back with a sigh and the
shorthand writer laid down his stylus.

more facts, and that means action—not argument.” The
sightless eyes seemed to stare thoughtfully at Stormgren.
For a moment he tapped nervously on the table— the ﬁrst
sign of uncertainty that Stormgren had noticed. Then he
continued:

“I’m a little surprised, Mr. Secretary, that you’ve never

made an eﬀort to learn more about the Overlords.”

“What do you suggest?” asked Stormgren coldly. “I’ve

told you that there’s only one way out of the room in which
I’ve had my talks with Karellen—and that leads straight to
the airlock.”

“It might be possible,” mused the other, “to devise

instruments which could teach us something. I’m no
scientist, but we can look into the matter. If we give you
your freedom, would you be willing to assist with such a
plan?”

“Once and for all,” said Stormgren angrily, “let me make

my position perfectly clear. Karellen is working for a united
world, and I’ll do nothing to help his enemies. What his
ultimate plans may be, I don’t know, but I believe that they

are good. You may annoy him, you may even delay the
achievement of his aims, but it will make no diﬀerence in
the end. You may be sincere in believing as you do: I can
understand your fear that the traditions and cultures of
little countries will be overwhelmed when the World State
arrives. But you are wrong: it is useless to cling to the past.
Even before the Overlords came to Earth, the sovereign
state was dying. No one can save it now, and no one should
try.”

spoke. He sat with lips half open, his eyes now lifeless as
well as blind. Around him the others were equally
motionless, frozen in strained, unnatural attitudes. With a
little gasp of pure horror, Stormgren rose to his feet and
backed away towards the door. As he did so the silence was
suddenly broken.

“That was a nice speech, Rikki. Now I think we can go.”
“Karellen! Thank God—but what have you done?”
“Don’t worry. They’re all right. You can call it a paralysis,

but it’s much subtler than that. They’re simply living a few
thousand times more slowly than normal. When we’ve gone
they’ll never know what happened.”

“You’ll leave them here until the police come?”
“No, I’ve a much better plan. I’m letting them go.”
Stormgren felt an illogical sense of relief which he did

not care to analyze. He gave a last valedictory glance at the
little room and its frozen occupants. Joe was standing on
one foot, staring very stupidly at nothing. Suddenly
Stormgren laughed and fumbled in his pockets.

leave a souvenir.”

ﬁgures he wanted. Then, on a reasonably clean sheet, he
wrote carefully:

LOMBARD BANK, LONDON

Pay “Joe” the sum of One Pound Seventeen Shillings
and Six Pence (£1-17-6).

R. Stormgren.

As he laid the strip of paper beside the Pole, Karellen’s

voice inquired: “Exactly what are you up to?”

“Paying a debt of honor,” explained Stormgren. “The

other two cheated, but I think Joe played fair. At least, I
never caught him out.”

He felt very gay and lightheaded as he walked to the

door. Hanging just outside it was a large, featureless metal
sphere that moved aside to let him pass. He guessed that it
was some kind of robot, and it explained how Karellen had
been able to reach him through the unknown layers of rock
overhead.

“Carry on for a hundred yards,” said the sphere,

speaking in Karellen’s voice. “Then turn to the left until I
give you further instructions.”

He ran forward eagerly, though he realized that there

was no need for hurry. The sphere remained hanging in the
corridor, and Stormgren guessed that it was the generator
of the paralysis ﬁeld.

A minute later he came across a second sphere, waiting

for him at a fork in the corridor.

“You’ve half a mile to go,” it said. “Keep to the left until

we meet again.”

Six times he encountered the spheres on his way to the

open. At ﬁrst he wondered if somehow the ﬁrst robot had
slipped ahead of him; then he guessed that there must be a
chain of them maintaining a complete circuit down into the
depths of the mine. At the entrance a group of guards
formed a piece of improbable still life, watched over by yet
another of the ubiquitous spheres. On the hillside a few
yards away lay the little ﬂying machine in which Stormgren
had made all his journeys to Karellen.

He stood for a moment blinking in the ﬁerce sunlight.

and beyond that a derelict railway stretching down a
mountainside. Several miles away dense forest lapped at
the base of the mountain, and very far oﬀ Stormgren could
see the gleam of a great river. He guessed that he was
somewhere in southern France, probably in the Cevennes
mountains.

As he climbed into the little ship, he had a last glimpse of

the mine entrance and the men frozen round it. Quite
suddenly a line of metal spheres raced out of the opening
like silver cannon balls. Then the door closed behind him
and with a sigh of relief he sank back upon the familiar
couch.

breath; then he uttered a single, heartfelt syllable:

“Well?”
“I’m sorry I couldn’t rescue you before. But you’ll see

how very important it was to wait until all the leaders had
gathered here.”

“Do you mean to say,” spluttered Stormgren, “that you

knew where I was all the time? If I thought—”

“Don’t be so hasty,” answered Karellen, “or at any rate,

let me ﬁnish explaining.”

beginning to suspect that he had been no more than the
bait in an elaborate trap.

“I’ve had a tracer on you for some time,” began Karellen,

“and though your late friends were correct in thinking that
I couldn’t follow you underground, I was able to keep track
until they brought you to the mine. That transfer in the
tunnel was ingenious, but when the ﬁrst car ceased to react
it gave the show away and I soon located you again. Then it
was merely a matter of waiting. I knew that once they were
certain I’d lost you, the leaders would come here and I’d be
able to trap them all.”

“But you’re letting them go!”

two billion men on this planet were the heads of the
organization. Now that they’re located, I can trace their
movements anywhere on Earth, and can probably watch
most of their actions in detail if I want to. That’s far better
than locking them up. They’re eﬀectively neutralized, and
they know it. Your rescue will be completely inexplicable to
them, for you must have vanished before their eyes.”

That rich laugh echoed round the tiny room.
“In some ways the whole aﬀair was a comedy, but it had

a serious purpose. It will be a valuable object lesson for any
other plotters. I’m not concerned merely with the few score
men of this organization—I have to think of the moral eﬀect
on other groups which may exist elsewhere.”

satisﬁed, but he could see Karellen’s point of view and
some of his anger had evaporated.

“It’s a pity to do it in my last few weeks of oﬀice,” he

said, “but from now on I’m going to have a guard on my
house. Pieter can be kidnapped next time. How has he
managed, by the way? Are things in as big a mess as I
expect?”

absence has mattered. I’ve watched Pieter carefully this
past week, and have deliberately avoided helping him. On
the whole he’s done very well—but he’s not the man to take
your place.”

aggrieved. “And have you had any word from your
superiors about—about showing yourself to us? I’m sure
now that it’s the strongest argument your enemies have.
Again and again they told me: ‘We’ll never trust the
Overlords until we can see them.’ ”

Karellen sighed.
“No, I have heard nothing. But I know what the answer

must be.”

done so, but now for the ﬁrst time the faint shadow of a
plan had come into his mind. What he had refused to do
under duress, he might yet attempt of his own free will.

Pierre Duval showed no surprise when Stormgren walked

unannounced into his oﬀice. They were old friends, and
there was nothing unusual in the Secretary-General paying
a personal visit to the chief of the Science Bureau.
Certainly Karellen would not think it odd, even if by any
remote chance he turned his attention to this corner of the
world.

For a while the two men talked business and exchanged

political gossip; then, rather hesitantly, Stormgren came to
the point. As his visitor talked, the old Frenchman leaned
back in his chair and his eyebrows rose steadily millimeter
by millimeter until they were almost entangled in his
forelock. Once or twice he seemed about to speak but each
time thought better of it.

When Stormgren had ﬁnished, the scientist looked

nervously around the room.

“Do you think he was listening?” he said.
“I don’t believe he can. This place is supposed to be

shielded from everything, isn’t it? Karellen’s not a
magician. He knows where I am, but that’s all.”

“I hope you’re right. Apart from that, won’t there be

trouble when he discovers what you’re trying to do?
Because he will, you know.”

“I’ll take that risk. Besides, we understand each other

rather well.”

The physicist toyed with his pencil and stared into space

for a while.

“It’s a very pretty problem. I like it,” he said simply. Then

he dived into a drawer and produced an enormous writing
pad, quite the biggest that Stormgren had ever seen.

sure I have all the facts. Tell me everything you can about
the room in which you have your interviews. Don’t omit any
detail, however trivial it seems.”

“There isn’t much to describe. It’s made of metal, and is

about eight yards square and four high. The vision screen is
about a yard on a side and there’s a desk immediately
beneath it—here, it will be quicker if I draw it for you.”

well, and pushed the drawing over to Duval. As he did so,
he remembered with a slight shiver the last time he had
done this sort of thing.

The Frenchman studied the drawing with puckered brow.
“And that’s all you can tell me?”
“Yes.”
He snorted in disgust.
“What about lighting? Do you sit in total darkness? And

how about heating, ventilation . . .”

Stormgren smiled at the characteristic outburst.
“The whole ceiling is luminous, and as far as I can tell

the air comes through the speaker grille. I don’t know how
it leaves; perhaps the stream reverses at intervals, but I
haven’t noticed it. There’s no sign of any heaters, but the
room is always at normal temperature.”

“By that I take it that the carbon dioxide has frozen out,

but not the oxygen.”

Stormgren did his best to smile at the well-worn joke.
“I think I’ve told everything,” he concluded. “As for the

machine that takes me up to Karellen’s ship, the room in
which I travel is as featureless as an elevator cage. Apart
from the couch and table, it might very well be one.”

There was silence for several minutes while the physicist

embroidered 
his 
writing 
pad 
with 
meticulous 
and

microscopic doodles. No one could have guessed that
behind that still almost unfurrowed brow the world’s ﬁnest

technical brain was working with the icy precision that had
made it famous.

forward and pointed his pencil at Stormgren.

“What makes you think, Rikki,” he asked, “that Karellen’s

vision-screen, as you call it, really is what it pretends to
be?”

What else would it be, anyway?”

the obvious always saddens me. You know that Karellen can
watch your movements, but a television system must have
some sort of camera. Where is it?”

“I’d thought of that,” said Stormgren with asperity.
“Couldn’t the screen do both jobs? I know our televisors

don’t, but still—”

Duval didn’t like the idea.
“It would be possible,” he admitted. “But why on earth go

to all that trouble? The simplest solution is always best.
Doesn’t it seem far more probable that your ‘vision-screen’
is really nothing more complicated than a sheet of one-way
glass?”

Stormgren was so annoyed with himself that for a

moment he sat in silence, retracing the past. From the
beginning, he had never challenged Karellen’s story— yet
now he came to look back, when had the Supervisor ever
told him that he was using a television system? He had just
taken it for granted; the whole thing had been a piece of
psychological trickery, and he had been completely
deceived. He tried to console himself with the thought that
in the same circumstances even Duval would have fallen
into the trap.

anything yet.

“If you’re right,” he said, “all I have to do is smash the

glass—”

Duval sighed.
“These nontechnical laymen! Do you think it’s likely to be

made of anything you could smash without explosives? And
if you succeeded, do you imagine that Karellen is likely to
breathe the same air as we do? Won’t it be nice for both of
you if he ﬂourishes in an atmosphere of chlorine?”

Stormgren turned rather pale.
“Well, what do you suggest?” he asked with some

exasperation.

“I want to think it over. First of all we’ve got to ﬁnd if my

theory is correct, and if so learn something about the
material of the screen. I’ll put some of my best men on the
job—by the way, I suppose you carry a briefcase when you
visit the Supervisor? Is it the one you’ve got there?”

“Yes.”
“It’s rather small. Will you get one at least ten inches

deep, and use it from now on so that he becomes used to
seeing it?”

“Very well,” said Stormgren doubtfully. “Do you want me

to carry a concealed X-ray set?”

The physicist grinned.
“I don’t know yet, but we’ll think of something. I’ll let you

know what it is in about a month’s time.”

He gave a little laugh.
“Do you know what all this reminds me of?”
“Yes,” said Stormgren promptly, “the time you were

building illegal radio sets during the German occupation.”

Duval looked disappointed.
“Well, I suppose I have mentioned that once or twice

before. But there’s one other thing—”

“Yes?”
“When you’re caught, / didn’t know what you wanted the

gear for.”

“What, after all the fuss you once made about the

scientist’s social responsibility for his inventions? Really,
Pierre, I’m ashamed of you!”

sigh of relief.

strange to think that those few hundred pages hold the
future of Europe.”

“They hold a good deal more than that,” said Karellen

quietly.

and most of the constitution itself, won’t need many
alterations when it’s time for the rest of the world to join.
But the ﬁrst step will be quite enough to get on with.”

Stormgren dropped the ﬁle into his briefcase, the back of

which was now only six inches from the dark rectangle of
the screen. From time to time his ﬁngers played across the
locks in a half-conscious nervous reaction, but he had no
intention of pressing the concealed switch until the
meeting was over. There was a chance that something
might go wrong: though Duval had sworn that Karellen
would detect nothing, one could never be sure.

“Now, you said you’d some news for me,” Stormgren

continued, with scarcely concealed eagerness. “Is it about
—”

“Yes,” said Karellen. “I received the Policy Board’s

decision a few hours ago, and am authorized to make an
important statement. I don’t think that the Freedom
League will be very satisﬁed, but it should help to reduce
the tension. We won’t record this, by the way.

“You’ve often told me, Rikki, that no matter how unlike

you we are physically, the human race will soon grow
accustomed to us. That shows a lack of imagination on your
part. It would probably be true in your case, but you must
remember that most of the world is still uneducated by any
reasonable standards, and is riddled with prejudices and
superstitions that may take another hundred years to
eradicate.

psychology. We know rather accurately what would happen
if we revealed ourselves to the world in its present state of
development. I can’t go into details, even with you, so you
must accept my analysis on trust. We can, however, make
this deﬁnite promise, which should give you some
satisfaction. In ﬁfty years—two generations from now—we
shall come down from our ships and humanity will at last
see us as we are.”

Stormgren was silent for a while. He felt little of the

satisfaction that Karellen’s statement would have once
given him. Indeed, he was somewhat confused by his
partial success and for a moment his resolution faltered.
The truth would come with the passage of time, and all his
plotting was unnecessary and perhaps unwise. If he still
went ahead, it would only be for the selﬁsh reason that he
would not be alive ﬁfty years from now.

Karellen must have seen his irresolution, for he

continued:

“I’m sorry if this disappoints you, but at least the political

problems of the near future won’t be your responsibility.
Perhaps you still think that our fears are unfounded, but
believe me we’ve had convincing proof of the dangers of
any other course.”

Stormgren leaned forward, breathing heavily.
“I always thought so! You have been seen by Man!”
“I didn’t say that,” Karellen answered after a short

pause. “Your world isn’t the only planet we’ve supervised.”

Stormgren was not to be shaken oﬀ so easily.
“There have been many legends suggesting that Earth

has been visited in the past by other races.”

“I know: I’ve read the Historical Research Section’s

report. It makes Earth look like the crossroads of the
Universe.”

“There may have been visits about which you know

nothing,” said Stormgren, still angling hopefully. “Though
since you must have been observing us for thousands of
years, I suppose that’s rather unlikely.”

manner. And at that moment Stormgren made up his mind.

“Karellen,” he said abruptly, “I’ll draft out the statement

and send it up to you for approval. But I reserve the right
to continue pestering you, and if I see any opportunity, I’ll
do my best to learn your secret.”

“I’m perfectly well aware of that,” replied the Supervisor,

with a slight chuckle.

“And you don’t mind?”
“Not in the slightest—though I draw the line at atomic

bombs, poison gas, or anything else that might strain our
friendship.”

Stormgren wondered what, if anything, Karellen had

guessed. Behind the Supervisor’s banter he had recognized
the note of understanding, perhaps—who could tell?—even
of encouragement.

“I’m glad to know it,” Stormgren replied in as level a

voice as he could manage. He rose to his feet, bringing
down the cover of his case as he did so. His thumb slid
along the catch.

send it up on the teletype later today.”

While he was speaking, he pressed the button—and knew

that all his fears had been groundless. Karellen’s senses
were no ﬁner than Man’s. The Supervisor could have
detected nothing, for there was no change in his voice as
he said goodbye and spoke the familiar code words that
opened the door of the chamber.

department store under the eyes of the house detective,
and breathed a sigh of relief when the airlock doors had
ﬁnally closed behind him.

V

“I admit,” said van Ryberg, “that some of my theories
haven’t been very bright. But tell me what you think of this
one.”

“Must I?”
Pieter didn’t seem to notice.
“It isn’t really my idea,” he said modestly. “I got it from a

story of Chesterton’s. Suppose that the Overlords are
hiding the fact that they’ve got nothing to hide?”

“That sounds a little complicated to me,” said Stormgren,

beginning to take slight interest.

“What I mean is this,” van Ryberg continued eagerly. “I

think that physically they’re human beings like us. They
realize that we’ll tolerate being ruled by creatures we
imagine to be—well, alien and super-intelligent. But the
human race being what it is, it just won’t be bossed around
by creatures of the same species.”

“Very ingenious, like all your theories,” said Stormgren.

“I wish you’d give them Opus numbers so that I could keep
up with them. The objections to this one—”

But at that moment Alexander Wainwright was ushered

in.

Stormgren 
wondered 
what 
he 
was 
thinking. 
He

wondered, too, if Wainwright had made any contact with
the men who had kidnapped him. He doubted it, for he
believed Wainwright’s disapproval of violent methods to be
perfectly genuine. The extremists in his movement had
discredited themselves thoroughly, and it would be a long
time before the world heard of them again.

The head of the Freedom League listened in silence while

the draft was read to him. Stormgren hoped that he
appreciated this gesture, which had been Karellen’s idea.
Not for another twelve hours would the rest of the world
know of the promise that had been made to its
grandchildren.

long time to wait.”

answered. Only now was he beginning to realize the
neatness of the Overlords’ solution. It had given them the
breathing space they believed they needed, and it had cut
the ground from beneath the Freedom League’s feet. He
did not imagine that the League would capitulate, but its
position would be seriously weakened.

also have realized that Karellen would be watching him.
For he said very little and left as quickly as he could:
Stormgren knew that he would not see him again in his
term of oﬀice. The Freedom League might still be a
nuisance, but that was a problem for his successor.

There were some things that only time could cure. Evil

men could be destroyed, but nothing could be done about
good men who were deluded.

“Here’s your case,” said Duval. “It’s as good as new.”
“Thanks,” Stormgren answered, inspecting it carefully

nonetheless. “Now perhaps you can tell me what it was all
about—and what we are going to do next.”

The physicist seemed more interested in his own

thoughts.

“What I can’t understand,” he said, “is the ease with

which we’ve got away with it. Now if I’d been Kar—”

“But you’re not. Get to the point, man. What did we

discover?”

“Ah me, these excitable, highly strung Nordic races!”

sighed Duval. “Well, it’s rather a long story, but the ﬁrst
piece of equipment you carried was a tiny echo sounder
using supersonic waves. We went right up the audio
spectrum, so high that I was sure no possible sense organs
could detect us. When you pressed the button, a rather

complicated set of sound pulses went out in various
directions. I won’t bother about the details, but the main
idea was to measure the thickness of the screen and to ﬁnd
the dimensions of the room, if any, behind it.

space behind it is at least ten yards across. We couldn’t
detect any echo from the further wall, but we hardly
expected to. However, we did get this.”

He pushed forward a photographic record which to

Stormgren looked rather like the autograph of a mild
earthquake.

“See that little kink?”
“Yes: what is it?”
“Only Karellen.”
“Good Lord! Are you sure?”
“It’s a pretty safe guess. He’s sitting, or standing, or

whatever he does, about two yards on the other side of the
screen. If the resolution had been better, we might even
have calculated his size.”

scarcely visible deﬂection of the trace. Until now, there had
been no proof that Karellen even had a material body. The
evidence was still indirect, but he accepted it with little
question.

Duval’s voice cut into his reverie.
“The piece of equipment you carried on your second visit

was similar,” he said, “but used light instead of sound. We
had to measure the transmission characteristics of the
screen, 
and 
that 
presented 
considerable 
diﬀiculties.

Obviously we dared not use visible light, so once again we
chose frequencies so high that we couldn’t imagine any eye
focusing them—or any atmosphere transmitting them very
far. And again we managed to carry it oﬀ.

“You’ll realize,” he continued, “that there’s no such thing

as a truly one-way glass. Karellen’s screen, we found when
we analyzed our results, transmits about a hundred times

as easily in one direction as the other. We’ve no particular
reason to assume that the ﬁgure is very diﬀerent in the
visible spectrum—but we’re giving you an enormous safety
margin.”

rabbits, Duval reached into his desk and pulled out a pistol-
like object with a ﬂexible bell mouth. It reminded
Stormgren of a rubber blunderbuss, and he couldn’t
imagine what it was supposed to be.

Duval grinned at his perplexity.
“It isn’t as dangerous as it looks. All you have to do is to

ram the muzzle against the screen and press the trigger. It
gives out a very powerful ﬂash lasting ﬁve seconds, and in
that time you’ll be able to swing it round the room. Enough
light will come back to give you a good view.”

“It won’t hurt Karellen?”
“Not if you aim low and sweep it upwards. That will give

him time to accommodate—I suppose he has reﬂexes like
ours, and we don’t want to blind him.”

in his hand. For the last few weeks his conscience had been
pricking him. Karellen had always treated him with
unmistakable aﬀection, despite his occasional devastating
frankness, and now that their time together was drawing to
its close he did not wish to do anything that might spoil
that relationship. But the Supervisor had received due
warning, and Stormgren had the conviction that if the
choice had been his Karellen would long ago have shown
himself. Now the decision would be made for him: when
their last meeting came to its end, Stormgren would gaze
upon Karellen’s face.

If, of course, Karellen had a face.

The nervousness that Stormgren had ﬁrst felt had long

since passed away. Karellen was doing almost all the

talking, weaving the long, intricate sentences of which he
was so fond. Once this had seemed to Stormgren the most
wonderful and certainly the most unexpected of all
Karellen’s gifts. Now it no longer appeared quite so
marvelous, for he knew that like most of the Supervisor’s
abilities it was the result of sheer intellectual power and
not of any special talent.

when he slowed his thoughts down to the pace of human
speech.

has been very quiet for the past month, and though it will
revive again it is no longer a real danger. Indeed, since it’s
always valuable to know what your opponents are doing,
the League is a very useful institution. Should it ever get
into ﬁnancial diﬀiculties I might even subsidize it.”

Stormgren had often found it diﬀicult to tell when

Karellen was joking. He kept his face impassive and
continued to listen.

arguments. There’s been a good deal of criticism, mostly
rather childish, of the special position you have held for the
past few years. I found it very valuable in the early days of
my administration, but now that the world is moving along
the line that I planned, it can cease. In the future, all my
dealings with Earth will be indirect and the oﬀice of
Secretary-General can once again become what it was
originally intended to be.

“During the next ﬁfty years there will be many crises, but

they will pass. Almost a generation from now, I shall reach
the nadir of my popularity, for plans must be put into
operation which cannot be fully explained at the time.
Attempts may even be made to destroy me. But the pattern
of the future is clear enough, and one day all these
diﬀiculties will be forgotten—even to a race with memories
as long as yours.”

The last words were spoken with such a peculiar

emphasis that Stormgren immediately froze in his seat.
Karellen never made accidental slips and even his
indiscretions were calculated to many decimal places. But
there was no time to ask questions—which certainly would
not be answered—before the Supervisor had changed the
subject again.

continued. “The foundation of the World State is, of course,
only the ﬁrst step. You will live to see its completion—but
the change will be so imperceptible that few will notice it
when it comes. After that there will be a pause for thirty
years while the next generation reaches maturity. And then
will come the day which we have promised. I am sorry that
you will not be there.”

beyond the dark barrier of the screen. He was looking into
the future, imagining the day he would never see, when the
great ships of the Overlords came down at last to Earth and
were thrown open to the waiting world.

experience 
one 
of 
its 
very 
rare 
psychological

discontinuities. But no permanent harm will be done: the
men of that age will be more stable than their
grandfathers. We will always have been part of their lives,
and when they meet us we will not seem so—strange— as
we would do to you.”

Stormgren had never known Karellen in so contemplative

a mood, but this gave him no surprise. He did not believe
that he had ever seen more than a few facets of the
Supervisor’s personality: the real Karellen was unknown
and perhaps unknowable to human beings. And once again
Stormgren had the feeling that the Supervisor’s real
interests were elsewhere, and that he ruled Earth with only
a fraction of his mind, as eﬀortlessly as a master of three-
dimensional chess may play a game of checkers.

were not there.

time, for the world will be growing impatient. Men will
wish to go out to the stars, to see the other worlds of the
Universe and to join us in our work. For it is only
beginning: not a thousandth of the suns in the Galaxy have
ever been visited by the races of which we know. One day,
Rikki, your descendants in their own ships will be bringing
civilization to the worlds that are ripe to receive it—just as
we are doing now.”

Faintly across the gulf of centuries Stormgren could

glimpse the future of which Karellen dreamed, the future
towards which he was leading mankind. How far ahead? He
could not even guess: there was no way in which he could
measure Man’s present stature against the standards of the
Overlords.

Karellen had fallen silent and Stormgren had the

impression that the Supervisor was watching him intently.

“It is a great vision,” he said softly. “Do you bring it to all

your worlds?”

“Yes,” said Karellen, “all that can understand it.”
Out of nowhere, a strangely disturbing thought came into

Stormgren’s mind.

have known such things in our own dealings with other
races. Surely you have had your failures too?”

scarcely hear him. “We have had our failures.”

“And what do you do then?”
“We wait—and try again.”
There was a pause lasting perhaps ten seconds. When

Karellen spoke again, his words were muﬄed and so
unexpected that for a moment Stormgren did not react.

“Goodbye, Rikki!”

late. Stormgren’s paralysis lasted only for a moment. Then
in a single swift, well-practiced movement, he whipped out
the ﬂash-gun and jammed it against the screen.

The pine trees came almost to the edge of the lake,

leaving along its border only a narrow strip of grass a few
yards wide. Every evening when it was warm enough
Stormgren would walk slowly along this strip to the
landing-stage, watch the sunlight die upon the water, and
then return to the house before the chill evening wind
came up from the forest. The simple ritual gave him much
contentment, and he would continue it as long as he had
the strength.

Far away over the lake something was coming in from

the west, ﬂying low and fast. Aircraft were uncommon in
these parts, unless one counted the transpolar liners which
must be passing overhead every hour of the day and night.
But there was never any sign of their presence, save an
occasional vapor trail high against the blue of the
stratosphere. This machine was a small helicopter, and it
was coming towards him with ominous determination.
Stormgren glanced along the beach and saw that there was
no chance of escape. Then he shrugged his shoulders and
sat down on the wooden bench at the end of the jetty.

The reporter was so deferential that Stormgren found it

surprising. He had almost forgotten that he was not only an
elder statesman but, outside his own country, almost a
mythical ﬁgure.

“Mr. Stormgren,” the intruder began, “I’m very sorry to

bother you, but I wonder if you would mind answering a
few questions about the Overlords?”

Stormgren frowned slightly. After all these years, he still

shared Karellen’s dislike for the word.

“I do not think,” he said, “that I can add a great deal to

what has already been written elsewhere.”

The reporter was watching him with a curious intentness.
“I thought that you might,” he answered. “A rather

strange story has just come to our notice. It seems that,
nearly thirty years ago, one of the Science Bureau’s
technicians made some remarkable pieces of equipment for
you. We wondered if you could tell us anything about it.”

into the past. He was not surprised that the secret had
been discovered: indeed it was amazing that it had taken so
long. He wondered how it had happened, not that it
mattered now.

He rose to his feet and began to walk back along the

jetty, the reporter following a few paces behind.

“The story,” he said, “contains a certain amount of truth.

On my last visit to Karellen’s ship I took some apparatus
with me, in the hope that I might see the Supervisor. It was
rather a foolish thing to do but— well, I was only sixty at
the time.”

He chuckled to himself and then continued.
“It’s not much of a story to have brought you all this way.

You see, it didn’t work.”

“You saw nothing?”
“No, nothing at all. I’m afraid you’ll have to wait—”

Twenty years to go. Yes, Karellen had been right. By then

the world would be ready, as it had not been when he had
spoken that same lie to Duval thirty years before.

Yet was it a lie? What had he really seen? No more, he

was certain, than Karellen had intended. He was as sure as
he could be of anything that the Supervisor had known his
plan from the beginning, and had foreseen every moment
of its ﬁnal act.

when the circle of light blazed upon it? In the same
moment he had started to swing the beam, but he was too
late. The metal door, twice as high as a man, was closing
swiftly when he ﬁrst caught sight of it—closing swiftly, yet
not quite swiftly enough.

into the long evening of his life still haunted by a mystery
he could never solve. Karellen dared not defy the unknown
powers above him (were they of that same race too?) but
he had done all that he could. If he had disobeyed Them,
They could never prove it.

“We have had our failures.”
Yes, Karellen, that was true: and were you the one who

failed, before the dawn of human history? It must have
been a failure indeed, for its echoes to roll down all the
ages, to haunt the childhood of every race of man. Even in
ﬁfty years, could you overcome the power of all the myths
and legends of the world?

Yet Stormgren knew there would be no second failure.

When the two races met again, the Overlords would have
won the trust and friendship of Mankind, and not even the
shock of recognition could undo that work. They would go
together into the future, and the unknown tragedy that had
darkened the past would be lost forever down the dim
corridors of prehistoric time.

And Stormgren knew also that the last thing he would

ever see as he closed his eyes on life would be that swiftly
turning door, and the long black tail disappearing behind it.

A very famous and unexpectedly beautiful tail.
A barbed tail.

BREAKING
STRAIN

“Breaking Strain” was written in the summer of1948, and
although its deliberately low-key treatment was neither
thrilling nor wondrous, it appeared in Thrilling Wonder
Stories for December 1949. (To justify his existence, the
editor 
changed 
the 
title 
to 
the 
unexciting 
and

unimaginative “Thirty Seconds—Thirty Days” And to make
matters even more confused, he later republished it in The
Best From Startling Stories.)

The story caused one friendly critic to remark that I was

apparently aspiring to the “Kipling of the spaceways”—a
noble 
but 
(at 
least 
in 
1948)—somewhat 
premature

ambition. And on going through my records I am Thrilled
and Startled to see that it was sold to CBS in 1955. I
wonder if it was ever used . . .

G

rant was writing up the Star Queen’s log when he
heard the cabin door opening behind him. He
didn’t bother to look round—it was hardly

necessary, for there was only one other man aboard the
ship. But when nothing happened, and when McNeil
neither spoke nor came into the room, the long silence
ﬁnally roused Grant’s curiosity and he swung the seat
round in its gimbals.

McNeil was just standing in the doorway, looking as if he

had seen a ghost. The trite metaphor ﬂashed into Grant’s
mind instantly. He did not know for a moment how near the
truth it was. In a sense McNeil had seen a ghost—the most
terrifying of all ghosts—his own.

“What’s the matter?” said Grant angrily. “You sick or

something?”

The engineer shook his head. Grant noticed the little

beads of sweat that broke away from his forehead and went
glittering across the room on their perfectly straight
trajectories. His throat muscles moved, but for a while no
sound came. It looked as if he were going to cry.

“We’re done for,” he whispered at last. “Oxygen reserve’s

gone.”

Then he did cry. He looked like a ﬂabby doll, slowly

collapsing on itself. He couldn’t fall for there was no
gravity, so he just folded up in mid-air.

Grant said nothing. Quite unconsciously he rammed his

smouldering cigarette into the ash-tray, grinding it viciously
until the last tiny spark had died. Already the air seemed to
be thickening around him as the oldest terror of the
spaceways gripped him by the throat.

He slowly loosed the elastic straps, which, while he was

seated, gave some illusion of weight and with an automatic

skill launched himself towards the doorway. McNeil did not
oﬀer to follow. Even making every allowance for the shock
he had undergone, Grant felt he was behaving very badly.
He gave the engineer an angry cuﬀ as he passed and told
him to snap out of it.

The hold was a large hemispherical room with a thick

central column which carried the controls and cabling to
the other half of the dumb-bell-shaped spaceship a hundred
meters away. It was packed with crates and boxes arranged
in a surrealistic three-dimensional array that made very
few concessions to gravity.

scarcely have noticed. He had eyes only for the big oxygen-
tank, taller than himself, which was bolted against the wall
near the inner door of the airlock.

It was just as he had last seen it, gleaming with

aluminum paint, and the metal sides still held the faint
touch of coldness that gave the only hint of their contents.
All the piping seemed in perfect condition. There was no
sign of anything wrong apart from one minor detail. The
needle of the contents gauge lay mutely against the zero
stop.

Grant gazed at that silent symbol as a man in ancient

London returning home one evening at the time of the
Plague might have stared at a rough cross newly scrawled
upon his door. Then he banged half a dozen times on the
glass in the futile hope that the needle had stuck—though
he never really doubted its message. News that is
suﬀiciently bad somehow carries its own guarantee of
truth. Only good reports need conﬁrmation.

himself again. A glance at the opened medicine chest
showed the reason for the engineer’s rapid recovery. He
even essayed a faint attempt at humor.

“It was a meteor,” he said. “They tell us a ship this size

gun with ninety-ﬁve years still to go.”

“But what about the alarms? The air pressure’s normal—

how could we have been holed?”

circulates night-side through the refrigerating coils to keep
it liquid? The meteor must have smashed them and the
stuﬀ simply boiled away.”

happened was serious—deadly serious—but it need not be
fatal. After all, the voyage was more than three-quarters
over.

“Surely the regenerator can keep the air breathable,

even if it does get pretty thick?” he asked hopefully.

McNeil shook his head. “I’ve not worked it out in detail,

but I know the answer. When the carbon dioxide is broken
down and the free oxygen gets cycled back, there’s a loss
of about ten per cent. That’s why we have to carry a
reserve.”

“The spacesuits!” cried Grant in sudden excitement.

“What about their tanks?”

He had spoken without thinking, and the immediate

realization of his mistake left him feeling worse than
before.

“We can’t keep oxygen in them—it would boil oﬀ in a few

days. There’s enough compressed gas there for about thirty
minutes—merely long enough for you to get to the main
tank in an emergency.”

cargo and run for it. Let’s stop guessing and work out
exactly where we are.”

with McNeil for breaking down. He was angry with the
designers of the ship for not having seen this God-knew-
how-many-million-to-one chance. The deadline might be a
couple of weeks away and a lot could happen before then.

The thought helped for a moment to keep his fears at arm’s
length.

those peculiarly protracted emergencies that seem to
happen only in space. There was plenty of time to think—
perhaps too much time.

Grant strapped himself in the pilot’s seat and pulled out a

writing-pad.

“Let’s get the facts right,” he said with artiﬁcial

calmness. “We’ve got the air that’s still circulating in the
ship and we lose ten per cent of the oxygen every time it
goes through the regenerator. Chuck me over the Manual,
will you? I never remember how many cubic meters we use
a day.”

In saying that the Star Queen might expect to be hit by a

meteor once every century, McNeil had grossly but
unavoidably over-simpliﬁed the problem. For the answer
depended on so many factors that three generations of
statisticians had done little but lay down rules so vague
that 
the 
insurance 
companies 
still 
shivered 
with

apprehension when the great meteor showers went
sweeping like a gale through the orbits of the inner worlds.

the word meteor. Each lump of cosmic slag that reaches the
surface of the Earth has a million smaller brethren who
perish utterly in the no-man’s-land where the atmosphere
has not quite ended and space has yet to begin—that
ghostly region where the weird Aurora sometimes walks by
night.

a pin’s head, and these in turn are outnumbered a million-
fold again by particles too small to leave any visible trace of
their dying as they drift down from the sky. All of them, the
countless specks of dust, the rare boulders and even the
wandering mountains that Earth encounters perhaps once
every million years—all of them are meteors.

interest if, on penetrating the hull of a ship, it leaves a hole
large enough to be dangerous. This is a matter of relative
speeds as well as size. Tables have been prepared showing
approximate collision times for various parts of the Solar
System—and for various sizes of meteors down to masses
of a few milligrams.

nearly a centimeter across and weighing all of ten grams.
According to the tables the waiting time for collision with
such a monster was of the order of ten to the ninth days—
say three million years. The virtual certainty that such an
occurrence would not happen again in the course of human
history gave Grant and McNeil very little consolation.

was 115 days on her orbit and had only thirty still to go.
She was travelling, as did all freighters, on the long
tangential ellipse kissing the orbits of Earth and Venus on
opposite sides of the Sun. The fast liners could cut across
from planet to planet at three times her speed—and ten
times her fuel consumption—but she must plod along her
predetermined track like a street-car, taking 145 days,
more or less, for each journey.

a spaceship than the Star Queen would be hard to imagine.
She consisted of two spheres, one ﬁfty and the other
twenty meters in diameter, joined by a cylinder about a
hundred meters long. The whole structure looked like a
matchstick-and-plasticine model of a hydrogen atom. Crew,
cargo and controls were in the larger sphere, while the
smaller one held the atomic motors and was—to put it
mildly—out of bounds to living matter.

The Star Queen had been built in space and could never

have lifted herself even from the surface of the Moon.
Under full power her ion drive could produce an
acceleration of a twentieth of a gravity, which in an hour

would give her all the velocity she needed to change from a
satellite of the Earth to one of Venus.

powerful little chemical rockets. In a month the tugs would
be climbing up from Venus to meet her, but the Star Queen
would not be stopping for there would be no one at the
controls. She would continue blindly on her orbit, speeding
past Venus at miles per second—and ﬁve months later she
would be back at the orbit of the Earth, though Earth
herself would then be far away.

It is surprising how long it takes to do a simple addition

when your life depends on the answer. Grant ran down the
short column of ﬁgures half a dozen times before he ﬁnally
gave up hope that the total would change. Then he sat
doodling nervously on the white plastic of the pilot’s desk.

“With all possible economies,” he said, “we can last

about twenty days. That means we’ll be ten days out of
Venus when—” His voice trailed oﬀ into silence.

Ten days didn’t sound much—but it might just as well

have been ten years. Grant thought sardonically of all the
hack adventure writers who had used just this situation in
their stories and radio serials. In these circumstances,
according to the carbon-copy experts—few of whom had
ever gone beyond the Moon—there were three things that
could happen.

The proper solution—which had become almost a cliché

—was to turn the ship into a gloriﬁed greenhouse or a
hydroponics farm and let photosynthesis do the rest.
Alternatively one could perform prodigies of chemical or
atom engineering—explained in tedious technical detail—
and build an oxygen-manufacturing plant which would not
only save your life—and of course the heroine’s—but would
also make you the owner of fabulously valuable patents.

The third or deus ex machina solution was the arrival of a
convenient spaceship which happened to be matching your
course and velocity exactly.

But that was ﬁction and things were diﬀerent in real life.

Although the ﬁrst idea was sound in theory there wasn’t
even a packet of grass-seed aboard the Star Queen. As for
feats of inventive engineering, two men—however brilliant
and however desperate—were not likely to improve in a few
days on the work of scores of great industrial research
organizations over a full century.

The spaceship that ‘happened to be passing’ was, almost

by deﬁnition, impossible. Even if other freighters had been
coasting on the same elliptic path—and Grant knew there
were none—then by the very laws that governed their
movements 
they 
would 
always 
keep 
their 
original

separations. It was not quite impossible that a liner, racing
on its hyperbolic orbit, might pass within a few hundred
thousand kilometers of them—but at a speed so great that
it would be as inaccessible as Pluto.

we have a chance of changing our orbit?”

Grant shook his head.
“I’d hoped so,” he replied, “but it won’t work. We could

reach Venus in a week if we wished—but we’d have no fuel
for braking and nothing from the planet could catch us as
we went past.”

“Not even a liner?”
“According to Lloyd’s Register Venus has only a couple of

freighters at the moment. In any case it would be a
practically impossible maneuver. Even if it could match our
speed, how would the rescue ship get back? It would need
about ﬁfty kilometers a second for the whole job!”

“If we can’t ﬁgure a way out,” said McNeil, “maybe

someone on Venus can. We’d better talk to them.”

what to say. Go and get the transmitter aligned, will you?”

engineer was probably going to give trouble in the days
that lay ahead. Until now they had got on well enough—like
most stout men McNeil was good-natured and easygoing.
But now Grant realized that he lacked ﬁber. He had become
too ﬂabby—physically and mentally—through living too
long in space.

A buzzer sounded on the transmitter switchboard. The

parabolic mirror out on the hull was aimed at the gleaming
arc-lamp of Venus, only ten million kilometers away and
moving on an almost parallel path. The three-millimetre
waves from the ship’s transmitter would make the trip in
little more than half a minute. There was bitterness in the
knowledge that they were only thirty seconds from safety.

The automatic monitor on Venus gave its impersonal Go

ahead signal and Grant began to talk steadily and, he
hoped, quite dispassionately. He gave a careful analysis of
the situation and ended with a request for advice. His fears
concerning McNeil he left unspoken. For one thing he knew
that the engineer would be monitoring him at the
transmitter.

As yet no one on Venus would have heard the message,

even though the transmitter time lag was over. It would still
be coiled up in the recorder spools, but in a few minutes an
unsuspecting signals oﬀicer would arrive to play it over.

He would have no idea of the bomb-shell that was about

to burst, triggering trains of sympathetic ripples on all the
inhabited worlds as television and news-sheet took up the
refrain. An accident in space has a dramatic quality that
crowds all other items from the headlines.

Until now Grant had been too preoccupied with his own

safety to give much thought to the cargo in his charge. A
sea-captain of ancient times, whose ﬁrst thought was for

his ship, might have been shocked by this attitude. Grant,
however, had reason on his side.

upon uncharted rocks or pass silently, as many ships have
passed, for ever from the knowledge of man. She was safe,
whatever might befall her crew. If she was undisturbed she
would continue to retrace her orbit with such precision that
men might set their calendars by her for centuries to come.

over twenty million dollars. There were not many goods
valuable enough to be shipped from world to world and
most of the crates in the hold were worth more than their
weight—or rather their mass—in gold. Perhaps some items
might be useful in this emergency and Grant went to the
safe to ﬁnd the loading schedule.

He was sorting the thin, tough sheets when McNeil came

back into the cabin.

“I’ve been reducing the air pressure,” he said. “The hull

shows some leaks that wouldn’t have mattered in the usual
way.”

Grant nodded absently as he passed a bundle of sheets

over to McNeil.

through it in case there’s anything in the cargo that may
help.”

least give them something to occupy their minds.

As he ran down the long columns of numbered items—a

complete cross-section of interplanetary commerce—Grant
found himself wondering what lay behind these inanimate
symbols. Item 347—1 book—4 kilos gross.

He whistled as he noticed that it was a starred item,

insured for a hundred thousand dollars, and he suddenly
remembered hearing on the radio that the Hesperian
Museum had just bought a ﬁrst edition Seven Pillars of
Wisdom.

A few sheets later was a very contrasting item,

Miscellaneous books—25 kilos—no intrinsic value.

yet they were of ‘no intrinsic value’. Grant let his
imagination loose on the problem. Perhaps someone who
was leaving Earth for ever was taking with him to a new
world his most cherished treasures—the dozen or so
volumes that above all others had most shaped his mind.

Item 564—12 reels ﬁlm.
That, of course, would be the Neronian super-epic, While

Rome Burns, which had left Earth just one jump ahead of
the censor. Venus was waiting for it with considerable
impatience.

Medical supplies—50 kilos. Case of cigars—1 kilo.

Precision instruments—75 kilos. So the list went on. Each
item was something rare or something which the industry
and science of a younger civilization could not yet produce.

The cargo was sharply divided into two classes—blatant

luxury or sheer necessity. There was little in between. And
there was nothing, nothing at all, which gave Grant the
slightest hope. He did not see how it could have been
otherwise, but that did not prevent him from feeling a quite
unreasonable disappointment.

The reply from Venus, when it came at last, took nearly

an hour to run through the recorder. It was a questionnaire
so detailed that Grant wondered morosely it he’d live long
enough to answer it. Most of the queries were technical
ones concerning the ship. The experts on two planets were
pooling their brains in the attempt to save the Star Queen
and her cargo.

when the other had ﬁnished running through the message.
He was watching the engineer carefully for any further sign
of strain.

There was a long pause before McNeil spoke. Then he

Grant’s own thoughts.

“It will certainly keep us busy. I won’t be able to do all

these tests in under a day. I can see what they’re driving at
most of the time, but some of the questions are just crazy.”

continued.

“Rate of hull leakage—that’s sensible enough, but why

should anyone want to know the eﬀiciency of our radiation
screening? I think they’re trying to keep up our morale by
pretending they have some bright ideas—or else they want
to keep us too busy to worry.”

Grant was relieved and yet annoyed by McNeil’s

calmness—relieved because he had been afraid of another
scene and annoyed because McNeil was not ﬁtting at all
neatly into the mental category he had prepared for him.
Was that ﬁrst momentary lapse typical of the man or might
it have happened to anyone?

blacks and whites, felt angry at being unable to decide
whether McNeil was cowardly or courageous. That he
might be both was a possibility that never occurred to him.

There is a timelessness about space-ﬂight that is

unmatched by any other experience of man. Even on the
Moon there are shadows that creep sluggishly from crag to
crag as the sun makes his slow march across the sky.
Earthwards there is always the great clock of the spinning
globe, marking the hours with continents for hands. But on
a long voyage in a gyro-stabilized ship the same patterns of
sunlight lie unmoving on wall or ﬂoor as the chronometer
ticks oﬀ its meaningless hours and days.

Grant and McNeil had long since learned to regulate

their lives accordingly. In deep space they moved and
thought with a leisureliness that would vanish quickly

enough when a voyage was nearing its end and the time for
braking maneuvers had arrived. Though they were now
under sentence of death they continued along the well-
worn grooves of habit.

ship’s position and carried out his various routine duties.
McNeil was also behaving normally as far as could be told,
though Grant suspected that some of the technical
maintenance was being carried out with a very light hand.

the last twenty-four hours Earth and Venus had been in
conference and Grant wondered when he would hear the
result of their deliberations. He did not believe that even
the ﬁnest technical brains in the Solar System could save
them now, but it was hard to abandon hope when
everything still seemed so normal and the air was still
clean and fresh.

On the fourth day Venus spoke again. Shorn of its

technicalities, the message was nothing more nor less than
a funeral oration. Grant and McNeil had been written oﬀ,
but they were given elaborate instructions concerning the
safety of the cargo.

Back on Earth the astronomers were computing all the

possible rescue orbits that might make contact with the
Star Queen in the next few years. There was even a chance
that she might be reached from Earth six or seven months
later, when she was back at aphelion, but the maneuver
could only be carried out by a fast liner with no payload
and would cost a fortune in fuel.

McNeil vanished soon after this message came through.

At ﬁrst Grant was a little relieved. If McNeil chose to look
after himself that was his own aﬀair. Besides there were

various letters to write—though the last-will-and-testament
business could come later.

duty he enjoyed for he took good care of his stomach. When
the usual sounds from the gallery were not forthcoming
Grant went in search of his crew.

He found McNeil lying in his bunk, very much at peace

with the Universe. Hanging in the air beside him was a
large metal crate which had been roughly forced open.
Grant had no need to examine it closely to guess its
contents. A glance at McNeil was enough.

“It’s a dirty shame,” said the engineer without a trace of

embarrassment, “to suck this stuﬀ up through a tube. Can’t
you put on some “go” so that we can drink it properly?”

returned his gaze unabashed.

“Oh, don’t be a sourpuss! Have some yourself—what

does it matter now?”

He pushed across a bottle and Grant ﬁelded it deftly as it

ﬂoated 
by. 
It 
was 
a 
fabulously 
valuable 
wine—he

remembered the consignment now—and the contents of
that small crate must be worth thousands.

“I don’t think there’s any need,” said Grant severely, “to

behave like a pig—even in these circumstances.”

McNeil wasn’t drunk yet. He had only reached the

brightly lit anteroom of intoxication and not lost all contact
with the drab outer world.

to any good argument against my present course of action
—a course which seems eminently sensible to me. But
you’d better convince me quickly while I’m still amenable
to reason.”

into his mouth.

“Apart from the fact that you’re stealing Company

property which will certainly be salvaged sooner or later—

you can hardly stay drunk for several weeks.”

“That,” said McNeil thoughtfully, “remains to be seen.”
“I don’t think so,” retorted Grant. Bracing himself

against the wall he gave the crate a vicious shove that sent
it ﬂying through the open doorway.

As he dived after it and slammed the door he heard

McNeil shout, “Well, of all the dirty tricks!”

present condition—to unbuckle himself and follow. Grant
steered the crate back to the hold and locked the door. As
there was never any need to lock the hold when the ship
was in space McNeil wouldn’t have a key for it himself and
Grant could hide the duplicate that was kept in the control
cabin.

McNeil was singing when, some time later, Grant went

back past his room. He still had a couple of bottles for
company and was shouting:

“We don’t care where the oxygen goes
If it doesn’t get into the wine . . .”

Grant, whose education had been severely technical,

couldn’t place the quotation. As he paused to listen he
suddenly found himself shaken by an emotion which, to do
him justice, he did not for a moment recognize.

It passed as swiftly as it had come, leaving him sick and

trembling. For the ﬁrst time, he realized that his dislike of
McNeil was slowly turning to hatred.

It is a fundamental rule of space-ﬂight that, for sound

psychological reasons, the minimum crew on a long journey
shall consist of not less than three men.

But rules are made to be broken and the Star Queen’s

owners had obtained full authority from the Board of Space

Control and the insurance companies when the freighter
set oﬀ for Venus without her regular captain.

no replacement. Since the planets are disinclined to wait
upon man and his aﬀairs, if she did not sail on time she
would not sail at all.

Millions of dollars were involved—so she sailed. Grant

and McNeil were both highly capable men and they had no
objection at all to earning double their normal pay for very
little extra work. Despite fundamental diﬀerences in
temperament, they got on well enough in ordinary
circumstances. It was nobody’s fault that circumstances
were now very far from ordinary.

Three days without food, it is said, is long enough to

remove most of the subtle diﬀerences between a civilized
man and a savage. Grant and McNeil were still in no
physical discomfort. But their imaginations had been only
too active and they now had more in common with two
hungry Paciﬁc Islanders in a lost canoe than either would
have cared to admit.

most important of all, which had never been mentioned.
When the last ﬁgures on Grant’s writing-pad had been
checked and rechecked, the calculation was still not quite
complete. Instantly each man had made the one further
step, each had arrived simultaneously at the same
unspoken result.

It was terribly simple—a macabre parody of those

problems in ﬁrst-year arithmetic that begin, “If six men
take two days to assemble ﬁve helicopters, how long . . .”

The oxygen would last two men for about twenty days,

and Venus was thirty days away. One did not have to be a
calculating prodigy to see at once that one man, and one
man only, might yet live to walk the metal streets of Port
Hesperus.

the unmentioned one was only ten days oﬀ. Until that time
there would still be enough air for two men—and thereafter
for one man only for the rest of the voyage. To a suﬀiciently
detached observer the situation would have been very
entertaining.

last much longer. But it is not easy, even at the best of
times, for two people to decide amicably which one of them
shall commit suicide. It is still more diﬀicult when they are
no longer on speaking terms.

Grant wished to be perfectly fair. Therefore the only

thing to do was to wait until McNeil sobered up and then to
put the question to him frankly. He could think best at his
desk, so he went to the control cabin and strapped himself
down in the pilot’s chair.

would be better, he decided, to broach the matter by
correspondence, especially while diplomatic relations were
in their present state. He clipped a sheet of note-paper on
the writing-pad and began, “Dear McNeil—”Then he tore it
out and started again, “McNeil—”

It took him the best part of three hours and even then he

wasn’t wholly satisﬁed. There were some things it was so
darned diﬀicult to put down on paper. But at last he
managed to ﬁnish.

could wait for a day or two.

Few of the waiting millions on Earth and Venus could

have had any idea of the tensions that were slowly building
up aboard the Star Queen. For days press and radio had
been full of fantastic rescue schemes. On three worlds
there was hardly any other topic of conversation. But only

the faintest echo of the planet-wide tumult reached the two
men who were its cause.

Queen, but there was so little that could be said. One could
not with any decency give words of encouragement to men
in the condemned cell, even when there was some slight
uncertainty about the actual date of execution.

every day and blocked the steady scream of exhortations
and newspaper oﬀers that came pouring in from Earth. As
a result private radio companies on Earth made frantic
attempts to contact the Star Queen directly. They failed,
simply because it never occurred to Grant and McNeil to
focus their receiver anywhere except on Venus, now so
tantalizingly near at hand.

emerged from his cabin, but though relations were not
particularly cordial, life aboard the Star Queen continued
much as before.

Grant spent most of his waking hours in the pilot’s

position, calculating approach maneuvers and writing
interminable letters to his wife. He could have spoken to
her had he wished, but the thought of all those millions of
waiting 
ears 
had 
prevented 
him 
from 
doing 
so.

Interplanetary speech circuits were supposed to be private
—but too many people would be interested in this one.

In a couple of days, Grant assured himself, he would

hand his letter to McNeil and they could decide what was
to be done. Such a delay would also give McNeil a chance
of raising the subject himself. That he might have other
reasons for his hesitation was something Grant’s conscious
mind still refused to admit.

He often wondered how McNeil was spending his time.

The engineer had a large library of microﬁlm books, for he
read widely and his range of interests was unusual. His
favorite book, Grant knew, was Jurgen, and perhaps even

now he was trying to forget his doom by losing himself in
its strange magic. Others of McNeil’s books were less
respectable and not a few were of the class curiously
described as ‘curious’.

The truth of the matter was that McNeil was far too

subtle and complicated a personality for Grant to
understand. He was a hedonist and enjoyed the pleasures
of life all the more for being cut oﬀ from them for months
at a time. But he was by no means the moral weakling that
the unimaginative and somewhat puritanical Grant had
supposed.

initial shock and that his behavior over the wine was—by
Grant’s standards—reprehensible. But McNeil had had his
breakdown and had recovered. Therein lay the diﬀerence
between him and the hard but brittle Grant.

Though the normal routine of duties had been resumed

by tacit consent, it did little to reduce the sense of strain.
Grant and McNeil avoided each other as far as possible
except when mealtimes brought them together. When they
did meet, they behaved with an exaggerated politeness as if
each were striving to be perfectly normal—and inexplicably
failing.

Grant had hoped that McNeil would himself broach the

subject of suicide, thus sparing him a very awkward duty.
When the engineer stubbornly refused to do anything of the
sort it added to Grant’s resentment and contempt. To make
matters worse he was now suﬀering from nightmares and
sleeping very badly.

The nightmare was always the same. When he was a

child it had often happened that at bedtime he had been
reading a story far too exciting to be left until morning. To
avoid detection he had continued reading under the
bedclothes by ﬂashlight, curled up in a snug white-walled
cocoon. Every ten minutes or so the air had become too

stiﬂing to breathe and his emergence into the delicious cool
air had been a major part of the fun.

returned to haunt him. He was dreaming that he could not
escape from the suﬀocating sheets while the air was
steadily and remorselessly thickening around him.

yet somehow he put it oﬀ again. This procrastination was
very unlike Grant, but he managed to persuade himself that
it was a perfectly reasonable thing to do.

He was giving McNeil a chance to redeem himself—to

prove that he wasn’t a coward by raising the matter
himself. That McNeil might be waiting for him to do exactly
the same thing somehow never occurred to Grant.

for the ﬁrst time, Grant’s mind brushed lightly against the
thought of murder. He had been sitting after the ‘evening’
meal trying to relax as McNeil clattered around in the
galley with, he considered, quite unnecessary noise.

What use, he asked himself, was the engineer to the

world? He had no responsibilities and no family—no one
would be any the worse oﬀ for his death. Grant, on the
other hand, had a wife and three children of whom he was
moderately fond, though for some obscure reason they
responded with little more than dutiful aﬀection.

Any impartial judge would have no diﬀiculty in deciding

which of them should survive. If McNeil had a spark of
decency in him he would have come to the same conclusion
already. Since he appeared to have done nothing of the sort
he had forfeited all further claims to consideration.

Such was the elemental logic of Grant’s subconscious

mind, which had arrived at its answer days before but had
only now succeeded in attracting the attention for which it
had been clamoring. To Grant’s credit he at once rejected
the thought with horror.

strict code of behavior. Even the vagrant homicidal
impulses of what is misleadingly called ‘normal’ man had
seldom ruﬄed his mind. But in the days—the very few days
—left to him, they would come more and more often.

was still no real diﬀiculty in breathing, it was a constant
reminder of what lay ahead, and Grant found that it was
keeping him from sleep. This was not pure loss, as it helped
to break the power of his nightmares, but he was becoming
physically run down.

His nerve was also rapidly deteriorating, a state of aﬀairs

accentuated by the fact that McNeil seemed to be behaving
with unexpected and annoying calmness. Grant realized
that he had come to the stage when it would be dangerous
to delay the showdown any longer.

McNeil was in his room as usual when Grant went up to

the control cabin to collect the letter he had locked away in
the safe—it seemed a lifetime ago. He wondered if he need
add anything more to it. Then he realized that this was only
another excuse for delay. Resolutely he made his way
towards McNeil’s cabin.

A single neutron begins the chain-reaction that in an

instant can destroy a million lives and the toil of
generations. Equally insigniﬁcant and unimportant are the
trigger-events which can sometimes change a man’s course
of action and so alter the whole pattern of his future.

made Grant pause in the corridor outside McNeil’s room. In
the ordinary way he would not even have noticed it. It was
the smell of smoke—tobacco smoke.

The thought that the sybaritic engineer had so little self-

control that he was squandering the last precious liters of
oxygen in such a manner ﬁlled Grant with blinding fury. He
stood for a moment quite paralyzed with the intensity of his
emotion.

thought which had ﬁrst been an unwelcomed intruder, then
a casual speculation, was at last fully accepted. McNeil had
had his chance and had proved, by his unbelievable
selﬁshness, unworthy of it. Very well—he should die.

The speed with which Grant had arrived at this

conclusion would not have deceived the most amateurish of
psychologists. It was relief as much as hatred that drove
him away from McNeil’s room. He had wanted to convince
himself that there would be no need to do the honorable
thing, to suggest some game of chance that would give
them each an equal probability of life.

This was the excuse he needed, and he had seized upon it

to salve his conscience. For though he might plan and even
carry out a murder, Grant was the sort of person who would
have to do it according to his own particular moral code.

As it happened he was—not for the ﬁrst time—badly

misjudging McNeil. The engineer was a heavy smoker and
tobacco was quite essential to his mental well-being even in
normal circumstances. How much more essential it was
now, Grant, who only smoked occasionally and without
much enjoyment, could never have appreciated.

McNeil had satisﬁed himself by careful calculation that

four cigarettes a day would make no measurable diﬀerence
whatsoever to the ship’s oxygen endurance whereas they
would make all the diﬀerence in the world to his own
nerves and hence indirectly to Grant’s.

smoked in private and with a self-control he found
agreeably, almost voluptuously, surprising. It was sheer bad
luck that Grant had detected one of the day’s four
cigarettes.

into murder, Grant’s actions were remarkably methodical.
Without hesitation, he hurried back to the control room and
opened the medicine chest with its neatly labelled

compartments, designed for almost every emergency that
could occur in space.

there behind its retaining elastic bands was the tiny bottle
he had been seeking, the image of which through all these
days had been lying hidden far down in the unknown
depths of his mind. It wore a white label carrying a skull-
and-cross-bones, and beneath them the words: Approx.
one-half gram will cause painless and almost instantaneous
death.

The poison was painless and instantaneous—that was

good. But even more important was a fact unmentioned on
the label. It was also tasteless.

The contrast between the meals prepared by Grant and

those organized with considerable skill and care by McNeil
was striking. Anyone who was fond of food and who spent a
good deal of his life in space usually learned the art of
cooking in self-defense. McNeil had done this long ago.

To Grant, on the other hand, eating was one of those

necessary but annoying jobs which had to be got through
as quickly as possible. His cooking reﬂected this opinion.
McNeil had ceased to grumble about it, but he would have
been very interested in the trouble Grant was taking over
this particular meal.

If he noticed any increasing nervousness on Grant’s part

as the meal progressed, he said nothing. They ate almost in
silence but that was not unusual for they had long since
exhausted most of the possibilities of light conversation.
When the last dishes—deep bowls with inturned rims to
prevent the contents drifting out—had been cleared away,
Grant went into the galley to prepare the coﬀee.

He took rather a long time, for at the last moment

something quite maddening and quite ridiculous happened.

He suddenly recalled one of the ﬁlm classics of the last
century in which the fabulous Charlie Chaplin tried to
poison an unwanted wife—and then accidentally changed
the glasses.

him shaken with a gust of silent hysteria. Poe’s Imp of the
Perverse, that demon who delights in defying the careful
canons of self-preservation, was at work and it was a good
minute before Grant could regain his self-control.

as he carried in the two plastic containers and their
drinking-tubes. There was no danger of confusing them, for
the engineer’s had the letters MAC painted boldly across it.

At the thought Grant nearly relapsed into those

psychopathic giggles again, but just managed to regain
control with the sombre reﬂection that his nerves must be
in even worse condition than he had imagined.

He watched, fascinated, though without appearing to do

so, as McNeil toyed with his cup. The engineer seemed in
no great hurry and was staring moodily into space. Then he
put his lips to the drinking tube and sipped.

A moment later he spluttered slightly—and an icy hand

seemed to seize Grant’s heart and hold it tight. Then
McNeil turned to him and said evenly, “You’ve made it
properly for once. It’s quite hot.”

Slowly, Grant’s heart resumed its interrupted work. He

did not trust himself to speak, but managed a noncommittal
nod. McNeil parked the cup carefully in the air, a few
inches away from his face.

some important remark. Grant cursed himself for having
made the drink so hot—that was just the sort of detail that
hanged murderers. If McNeil waited much longer he would
probably betray himself through nervousness.

“I suppose,” said McNeil in a quietly conversational sort

of way, “it has occurred to you that there’s still enough air

to last one of us to Venus.”

Grant forced his jangling nerves under control and tore

his eyes away from that hypnotic cup. His throat seemed
very dry as he answered, “It—it had crossed my mind.”

McNeil touched his cup, found it still too hot and

continued thoughtfully, “Then wouldn’t it be more sensible
if one of us decided to walk out of the airlock, say—or to
take some of the poison in there?” He jerked his thumb
towards the medicine chest, just visible from where they
were sitting.

Grant nodded.
“The only trouble, of course,” added the engineer, “is to

decide which of us is to be the unlucky one. I suppose it
would have to be by picking a card or in some other quite
arbitrary way.”

outweighed his mounting nervousness. He had never
believed that the engineer could discuss the subject so
calmly. Grant was sure he suspected nothing. Obviously
McNeil’s thoughts had been running on parallel lines to his
own and it was scarcely even a coincidence that he had
chosen this time, of all times, to raise the matter.

reactions.

over.”

“Yes,” said McNeil quite impassively. “We must.” Then he

reached for his cup again, put the drinking-tube to his lips
and sucked slowly.

Grant could not wait until he had ﬁnished. To his surprise

the relief he had been expecting did not come. He even felt
a stab of regret, though it was not quite remorse. It was a
little late to think of it now, but he suddenly remembered
that he would be alone in the Star Queen, haunted by his
thoughts, for more than three weeks before rescue came.

sick. Without another glance at his victim he launched
himself towards the exit.

Immovably ﬁxed, the ﬁerce Sun and the unwinking stars

looked down upon the Star Queen, which seemed as
motionless as they. There was no way of telling that the tiny
dumb-bell of the ship had now almost reached her
maximum speed and that millions of horse-power were
chained within the smaller sphere waiting the moment of
its release. There was no way of telling, indeed, that she
carried any life at all.

An airlock on the night-side of the ship slowly opened,

letting a blaze of light escape from the interior. The
brilliant circle looked very strange hanging there in the
darkness. Then it was abruptly eclipsed as two ﬁgures
ﬂoated out of the ship.

One was much bulkier than the other, and for a rather

important reason—it was wearing a spacesuit. Now there
are some forms of apparel that may be worn or discarded
as the fancy pleases with no other ill eﬀects than a possible
loss of social prestige. But spacesuits are not among them.

Something not easy to follow was happening in the

darkness. Then the smaller ﬁgure began to move, slowly at
ﬁrst but with rapidly mounting speed. It swept out of the
shadow of the ship into the full blast of the Sun, and now
one could see that strapped to its back was a small gas-
cylinder from which a ﬁne mist was jetting to vanish almost
instantly into space.

It was a crude but eﬀective rocket. There was no danger

that the ship’s minute gravitational pull would drag the
body back to it again.

Rotating slightly, the corpse dwindled against the stars

and vanished from sight in less than a minute. Quite

motionless, the ﬁgure in the airlock watched it go. Then the
outer door swung shut, the circle of brilliance vanished and
only the pale Earthlight still glinted on the shadowed wall
of the ship.

Nothing else whatsoever happened for twenty-three

days.

The captain of the Hercules turned to his mate with a

sigh of relief.

“I was afraid he couldn’t do it. It must have been a

colossal job to break his orbit single-handed—and with the
air as thick as it must be by now. How soon can we get to
him?”

“It will take about an hour. He’s still got quite a bit of

eccentricity but we can correct that.”

“Good. Signal the Leviathan and Titan that we can make

contact and ask them to take oﬀ, will you? But I wouldn’t
drop any tips to your news-commentator friends until we’re
safely locked.”

The mate had the grace to blush. “I don’t intend to,” he

said in a slightly hurt voice as he pecked delicately at the
keys of his calculator. The answer that ﬂashed instantly on
the screen seemed to displease him.

“We’d better board and bring the Queen down to circular

speed ourselves before we call the other tugs,” he said,
“otherwise we’ll be wasting a lot of fuel. She’s still got a
velocity of nearly a kilometer a second.”

“Good idea—tell Leviathan and Titan to stand by but not

to blast until we give them the new orbit.”

While the message was on its way down through the

unbroken cloud-banks that covered half the sky below, the
mate remarked thoughtfully, “I wonder what he’s feeling
like now?”

“I can tell you. He’s so pleased to be alive that he doesn’t

give a hoot about anything else.”

space so that I could get home.”

“It’s not the sort of thing that anyone would like to do.

But you heard the broadcast—they’d talked it over calmly
and the loser went out of the airlock. It was the only
sensible way.”

“Sensible, perhaps—but it’s pretty horrible to let

someone else sacriﬁce himself in such a cold-blooded way
so that you can live.”

“Don’t be a ruddy sentimentalist. I’ll bet that if it

happened to us you’d push me out before I could even say
my prayers.”

“Unless you did it to me ﬁrst. Still, I don’t think it’s ever

likely to happen to the Hercules. Five days out of port’s the
longest we’ve ever been, isn’t it? Talk about the romance of
the spaceways!”

The captain didn’t reply. He was peering into the

eyepiece of the navigating telescope, for the Star Queen
should now be within optical range. There was a long pause
while he adjusted the vernier controls. Then he gave a little
sigh of satisfaction.

“There she is—about nine-ﬁfty kilometers away. Tell the

crew to stand by—and send a message to cheer him up. Say
we’ll be there in thirty minutes even if it isn’t quite true.”

Slowly the thousand-metre nylon ropes yielded beneath

the strain as they absorbed the relative momentum of the
ships, then slackened again as the Star Queen and the
Hercules rebounded towards each other. The electric
winches began to turn and, like a spider crawling up its
thread, the Hercules drew alongside the freighter.

tricky work, this—until the airlocks had registered and
could be coupled together. The outer doors slid aside and
the air in the locks mingled, fresh with the foul. As the
mate of the Hercules waited, oxygen cylinder in hand, he
wondered what condition the survivor would be in. Then
the Star Queen’s inner door slid open.

across the short corridor that now connected the two
airlocks. The mate was surprised and a little disappointed
to ﬁnd that he felt no particular sense of drama.

So much had happened to make this moment possible

that its actual achievement was almost an anticlimax even
in the instant when it was slipping into the past. He wished
—for he was an incurable romantic—that he could think of
something memorable to say, some “Doctor Livingstone, I
presume?” phrase that would pass into history.

But all he actually said was, “Well, McNeil, I’m pleased to

see you.”

Though he was considerably thinner and somewhat

haggard, McNeil had stood the ordeal well. He breathed
gratefully the blast of raw oxygen and rejected the idea
that he might like to lie down and sleep. As he explained,
he had done very little but sleep for the last week to
conserve air. The ﬁrst mate looked relieved. He had been
afraid he might have to wait for the story.

The cargo was being trans-shipped and the other two

tugs were climbing up from the great blinding crescent of
Venus while McNeil retraced the events of the last few
weeks and the mate made surreptitious notes.

He spoke quite calmly and impersonally, as if he were

relating some adventure that had happened to another
person, or indeed had never happened at all. Which was, of
course, to some extent the case, though it would be unfair
to suggest that McNeil was telling any lies.

had three weeks in which to prepare his narrative and he
did not think it had any ﬂaws—

Grant had already reached the door when McNeil called

softly after him, “What’s the hurry? I thought we had
something to discuss.”

Grant grabbed at the doorway to halt his headlong ﬂight.

He turned slowly and stared unbelievingly at the engineer.
McNeil should be already dead—but he was sitting quite
comfortably, 
looking 
at 
him 
with 
a 
most 
peculiar

expression.

“Sit down,” he said sharply—and in that moment it

suddenly seemed that all authority had passed to him.
Grant did so, quite without volition. Something had gone
wrong, though what it was he could not imagine.

The silence in the control-room seemed to last for ages.

Then McNeil said rather sadly, “I’d hoped better of you,
Grant.”

At last Grant found his voice, though he could barely

recognize it.

“What do you mean?” he whispered.
“What do you think I mean?” replied McNeil, with what

seemed no more than a mild irritation. “This little attempt
of yours to poison me, of course.”

Grant’s tottering world collapsed at last, but he no longer

cared greatly one way or the other. McNeil began to
examine 
his 
beautifully 
kept 
ﬁngernails 
with 
some

attention.

“As a matter of interest,” he said, in the way that one

might ask the time, “when did you decide to kill me?”

The sense of unreality was so overwhelming that Grant

felt he was acting a part, that this had nothing to do with
real life at all.

“Only this morning,” he said, and believed it.
“Hmm,” remarked McNeil, obviously without much

conviction. He rose to his feet and moved over to the
medicine chest. Grant’s eyes followed him as he fumbled in
the compartment and came back with the little poison
bottle. It still appeared to be full. Grant had been careful
about that.

business,” McNeil continued conversationally, holding the
bottle between thumb and foreﬁnger. “But somehow I’m
not. Maybe it’s because I never had many illusions about
human nature. And, of course, I saw it coming a long time
ago.”

Only 
the 
last 
phrase 
really 
reached 
Grant’s

consciousness.

“You—saw it coming?”
“Heavens, yes! You’re too transparent to make a good

criminal, I’m afraid. And now that your little plot’s failed it
leaves us both in an embarrassing position, doesn’t it?”

To this masterly understatement there seemed no

possible reply.

should now work myself up into a temper, call Venus
Central, and renounce you to the authorities. But it would
be a rather pointless thing to do, and I’ve never been much
good at losing my temper anyway. Of course, you’ll say
that’s because I’m too lazy—but I don’t think so.”

He gave Grant a twisted smile.
“Oh, I know what you think about me—you’ve got me

neatly classiﬁed in that orderly mind of yours, haven’t you?
I’m soft and self-indulgent, I haven’t any moral courage—or
any morals for that matter—and I don’t give a damn for
anyone but myself. Well, I’m not denying it. Maybe it’s
ninety per cent true. But the odd ten per cent is mighty
important, Grant!”

analysis, and this seemed hardly the time for anything of
the sort. Besides, he was still obsessed with the problem of
his failure and the mystery of McNeil’s continued
existence. McNeil, who knew this perfectly well, seemed in
no hurry to satisfy his curiosity.

“Well, what do you intend to do now?” Grant asked,

anxious to get it over.

discussion where it was interrupted by the coﬀee.”

“You don’t mean—”
“But I do. Just as if nothing had happened.”
“That doesn’t make sense. You’ve got something up your

sleeve!” cried Grant.

ﬁrmly at Grant.

“You’re in no position to accuse me of plotting anything.

To repeat my earlier remarks, I am suggesting that we
decide which one of us shall take poison—only we don’t
want any more unilateral decisions. Also’—he picked up the
bottle again—“it will be the real thing this time. The stuﬀ in
here merely leaves a bad taste in the mouth.”

changed the poison!”

frankly—from the stalls—I thought the performance stank. I
could tell you were plotting something, probably before you
knew it yourself. In the last few days I’ve deloused the ship
pretty thoroughly. Thinking of all the ways you might have
done me in was quite amusing and helped to pass the time.
The poison was so obvious that it was the ﬁrst thing I ﬁxed.
But I rather overdid the danger signals and nearly gave
myself away when I took the ﬁrst sip. Salt doesn’t go at all
well with coﬀee.”

He gave that wry grin again. “Also, I’d hoped for

something more subtle. So far I’ve found ﬁfteen infallible

ways of murdering anyone aboard a spaceship. But I don’t
propose to describe them now.”

not like a criminal, but like a rather stupid schoolboy who
hadn’t done his homework properly.

start all over again? And you’d take the poison yourself if
you lost?”

“I can see that you still don’t believe me. It doesn’t ﬁt at all
nicely into your tidy little picture, does it? But perhaps I
can make you understand. It’s really quite simple.

regrets—but the better part of it’s over now and I don’t
cling to what’s left as desperately as you might imagine.
Yet while I am alive I’m rather particular about some
things.

“It may surprise you to know that I’ve got any ideals at

all. But I have, Grant—I’ve always tried to act like a
civilized rational being. I’ve not always succeeded. When
I’ve failed I’ve tried to redeem myself.”

He paused, and when he resumed it was as though he,

and not Grant, was on the defensive. “I’ve never exactly
liked you, Grant, but I’ve often admired you and that’s why
I’m sorry it’s come to this. I admired you most of all the day
the ship was holed.”

in choosing his words. When he spoke again he avoided
Grant’s eyes.

I thought was impossible. I’ve always been quite sure that
I’d never lose my nerve but—well—it was so sudden it
knocked me over.”

He attempted to hide his embarrassment by humor. “The

same sort of thing happened on my very ﬁrst trip. I was
sure I’d never be spacesick—and as a result I was much

worse than if I had not been over-conﬁdent. But I got over
it then—and again this time. It was one of the biggest
surprises of my life, Grant, when I saw that you of all
people were beginning to crack.

“Oh, yes—the business of wines! I can see you’re

thinking about that. Well, that’s one thing I don’t regret. I
said I’ve always tried to act like a civilized man—and a
civilized man should always know when to get drunk. But
perhaps you wouldn’t understand.”

do. He had caught his ﬁrst real glimpse of McNeil’s
intricate and tortuous personality and realized how utterly
he had misjudged him. No—misjudged was not the right
word. In many ways his judgement had been correct. But it
had only touched the surface—he had never suspected the
depths that lay beneath.

from the nature of things could never come again, Grant
understood the reasons behind McNeil’s action. This was
nothing so simple as a coward trying to reinstate himself in
the eyes of the world, for no one need ever know what
happened aboard the Star Queen.

world’s opinion, thanks to the sleek self-suﬀiciency that had
so often annoyed Grant. But that very self-suﬀiciency meant
that at all costs he must preserve his own good opinion of
himself. Without it life would not be worth living—and
McNeil had never accepted life save on his own terms.

guessed that Grant was coming near the truth, for he
suddenly changed his tone as though he was sorry he had
revealed so much of his character.

other cheek,” he said. “Just consider it from the point of
view of pure logic. After all, we’ve got to come to some
agreement.

without a covering message from the other, he’ll have a
very uncomfortable time explaining just what happened?”

In his blind fury, Grant had completely forgotten this. But

he did not believe it bulked at all important in McNeil’s
own thoughts.

“Yes,” he said, “I suppose you’re right.”
He felt far better now. All the hate drained out of him and

he was at peace. The truth was known and he had accepted
it. That it was so diﬀerent from what he had imagined did
not seem to matter now.

“Well, let’s get it over,” he said unemotionally. “There’s a

new pack of cards lying around somewhere.”

“I think we’d better speak to Venus ﬁrst—both of us,”

replied McNeil, with peculiar emphasis. “We want a
complete agreement on record in case anyone asks
awkward questions later.”

one way or the other. He even smiled, ten minutes later, as
he drew his card from the pack and laid it, face upwards,
beside McNeil’s.

“So that’s the whole story, is it?” said the ﬁrst mate,

wondering how soon he could decently get to the
transmitter.

“Yes,” said McNeil evenly, “that’s all there was to it.”
The mate bit his pencil, trying to frame the next question.

“And I suppose Grant took it all quite calmly?”

The captain gave him a glare, which he avoided, and

McNeil looked at him coldly as if he could see through the
sensation-mongering headlines ranged behind. He got to
his feet and moved over to the observation port.

“You heard his broadcast, didn’t you? Wasn’t that calm

enough?”

such circumstances two men could have behaved in so
reasonable, so unemotional a manner. He could have
pictured 
all 
sorts 
of 
dramatic 
possibilities—sudden

outbursts of insanity, even attempts at murder. Yet
according to McNeil nothing at all had happened. It was
too bad.

behaved very well—very well indeed. It was a great pity—”

Then he seemed to lose himself in the ever-fresh,

incomparable glory of the approaching planet. Not far
beneath, and coming closer by kilometers every second, the
snow-white crescent arms of Venus spanned more than half
the sky. Down there were life and warmth and civilization—
and air.

The future, which not long ago had seemed contracted to

a point, had opened out again into all its unknown
possibilities and wonders. But behind him McNeil could
sense the eyes of his rescuers, probing, questioning—yes,
and condemning too.

All his life he would hear whispers. Voices would be

saying behind his back, “Isn’t that the man who—?”

He did not care. For once in his life at least, he had done

something of which he could feel unashamed. Perhaps one
day his own pitiless self-analysis would strip bare the
motives behind his actions, would whisper in his ear.
“Altruism? Don’t be a fool! You did it to bolster up your own
good opinion of yourself—so much more important than
anyone else’s!”

But the perverse maddening voices, which all his life had

made nothing seem worth while, were silent for the
moment and he felt content. He had reached the calm at

the center of the hurricane. While it lasted he would enjoy
it to the full.

THE SENTINEL

Next to “The Star” and “The Nine Billion Names of God,” I
suppose “The Sentinel” is my best-known short story—
though not for itself, but as the seed from which 2001: A
Space Odyssey sprang, twenty years after it was written in
1948. I wonder if I even noticed Christmas that year; Opus
62 bears the date 23-26 December . . .

Unlike most of my short stories, this one was aimed at a

speciﬁc target—which it missed completely. The BBC had
just announced a Short Story Competition; I submitted
“The Sentinel” hot from the typewriter, and got it back a
month later.

Somehow, I’ve never had any luck with such contests. A

few years later I wrote “The Star” speciﬁcally for a London
Observer competition on the subject “2500 A.D.” It too was
bounced—though the judges were perceptive enough to
give an award to one Brian Aldiss.

I am continually annoyed by careless references to “The

Sentinel” as “the story on which 2001 is based”; it bears
about as much relation to the movie as an acorn to the
resultant full-grown oak. (Considerably less, in fact,
because ideas from several other stories were also
incorporated.) Even the elements that Stanley Kubrick and
I did actually use were considerably modiﬁed. Thus the
“glittering, roughly pyramidal structure . . .set in the rock
like a gigantic, many-faceted jewel” became—after several
modiﬁcations—the famous black monolith. And the locale
was moved from the Mare Crisium to the most spectacular
of all lunar craters, Tycho—easily visible to the naked eye
from Earth at Full Moon.

Some time after “The Sentinel” was published, I was

asked if I had ever read Jack London’s “The Red One”
(1918). As I’d never even heard of it, I hastened to do so,
and was deeply impressed by his thirty-year-earlier tale of
the “Star-Born,” an enormous sphere lying for ages in the
jungles of Guadalcanal. I wonder if this is the ﬁrst

treatment of a theme which has suddenly become topical,
now that the focus of the SETI debate has changed from
“Where’s Everyone?” to the even more puzzling “Where
Are Their Artifacts?”

T

he next time you see the full Moon high in the
south, look carefully at its right-hand edge and let
your eye travel upwards along the curve of the

disc. Round about two o’clock, you will notice a small, dark
oval: anyone with normal eyesight can ﬁnd it quite easily. It
is the great walled plain, one of the ﬁnest on the Moon,
known as the Mare Crisium—the Sea of Crises. Three
hundred 
miles 
in 
diameter—and 
almost 
completely

surrounded by a ring of magniﬁcent mountains, it had
never been explored until we entered it in the late summer
of 1996.

Our expedition was a large one. We had two heavy

freighters which had ﬂown our supplies and equipment
from the main lunar base in the Mare Serenitatis, ﬁve
hundred miles away. There were also three small rockets
which were intended for short-range transport over regions
which our surface vehicles could not cross. Luckily, most of
the Mare Crisium is very ﬂat. There are none of the great
crevasses so common and so dangerous elsewhere, and
very few craters or mountains of any size. As far as we
could tell, our powerful caterpillar tractors would have no
diﬀiculty in taking us wherever we wished.

I was geologist—or selenologist, if you want to be

pedantic—in charge of the group exploring the southern
region of the Mare. We had crossed a hundred miles of it in
a week, skirting the foothills of the mountains along the
shore of what was once the ancient sea, some thousand
million years before. When life was beginning on Earth, it
was already dying here. The waters were retreating down
the ﬂanks of those stupendous cliﬀs, retreating into the
empty heart of the Moon. Over the land which we were
crossing, the tideless ocean had once been half a mile deep

and now the only trace of moisture was the hoar frost one
could sometimes ﬁnd in caves which the searing sunlight
never penetrated.

and still had almost a week of Earth-time before nightfall.
Half a dozen times a day we would leave our vehicle and go
outside in the spacesuits to hunt for interesting minerals,
or to place markers for the guidance of future travellers. It
was an uneventful routine. There is nothing hazardous or
even particularly exciting about lunar exploration. We could
live comfortably for a month in our pressurized tractors,
and if we ran into trouble we could always radio for help
and sit tight until one of the spaceships came to our rescue.
When that happened there was always a frightful outcry
about the waste of rocket fuel, so a tractor sent out an SOS
only in a real emergency.

I said just now that there was nothing exciting about

lunar exploration, but of course that is not true. One could
never grow tired of those incredible mountains, so much
more rugged than the gentle hills of Earth. We never knew,
as we rounded the capes and promontories of that vanished
sea, what new splendors would be revealed to us. The
whole southern curve of the Mare Crisium is a vast delta
where a score of rivers had once found their way into the
ocean, fed perhaps by the torrential rains that must have
lashed the mountains in the brief volcanic age when the
moon was young. Each of these ancient valleys was an
invitation, challenging us to climb into the unknown
uplands beyond. But we had a hundred miles still to cover,
and could only look longingly at the heights which others
must scale.

22.00 hours the ﬁnal radio message would be sent out to
base and we could close down for the day. Outside, the
rocks would still be burning beneath the almost vertical
sun, but to us it was night until we awoke again eight hours

later. Then one of us would prepare breakfast, there would
be a great buzzing of electric shavers and someone would
switch on the short-wave radio from Earth. Indeed, when
the smell of frying bacon began to ﬁll the cabin, it was
sometimes hard to believe that we were not back on our
own world—everything was so normal and homely, apart
from the feeling of decreased weight and the unnatural
slowness with which objects fell.

main cabin that served as a galley. I can remember that
moment quite vividly after all these years, for the radio had
just played one of my favorite melodies, the old Welsh air,
“David of the White Rock’. Our driver was already outside
in his spacesuit, inspecting our caterpillar treads. My
assistant, Louis Garnett, was up forward in the control
position, making some belated entries in yesterday’s log.

As I stood by the frying-pan, waiting, like any terrestrial

housewife, for the sausages to brown, I let my gaze wander
idly over the mountain walls which covered the whole of
the southern horizon, marching out of sight to the east and
west below the curve of the Moon. They seemed only a mile
or two from the tractor, but I knew that the nearest was
twenty miles away. On the Moon, of course, there is no loss
of detail with distance—none of that almost imperceptible
haziness which softens and sometimes transﬁgures all far-
oﬀ things on Earth.

Those mountains were ten thousand feet high, and they

climbed steeply out of the plain as if ages ago some
subterranean 
eruption 
had 
smashed 
them 
skywards

through the molten crust. The base of even the nearest was
hidden from sight by the steeply curving surface of the
plain, for the Moon is a very little world, and from where I
was standing the horizon was only two miles away.

I lifted my eyes towards the peaks which no man had

ever climbed, the peaks which, before the coming of
terrestrial life, had watched the retreating oceans sink

sullenly into their graves, taking with them the hope and
the morning promise of a world. The sunlight was beating
against those ramparts with a glare that hurt the eyes, yet
only a little way above them the stars were shining steadily
in a sky blacker than a winter midnight on Earth.

high on the ridge of a great promontory thrusting out into
the sea thirty miles to the west. It was a dimensionless
point of light as if a star had been clawed from the sky by
one of those cruel peaks, and I imagined that some smooth
rock-surface was catching the sunlight and heliographing it
straight into my eyes. Such things were not uncommon.
When the Moon is in her second quarter, observers on
Earth can sometimes see the great ranges in the Oceanus
Procellarum burning with a blue-white iridescence as the
sunlight ﬂashes from their slopes and leaps again from
world to world. But I was curious to know what kind of rock
could be shining so brightly up there, and I climbed into
the observation turret and swung our four-inch telescope
round to the west.

I could see just enough to tantalize me. Clear and sharp

in the ﬁeld of vision, the mountain peaks seemed only half a
mile away, but whatever was catching the sunlight was still
too small to be resolved. Yet it seemed to have an elusive
symmetry, and the summit upon which it rested was
curiously ﬂat. I stared for a long time at that glittering
enigma, straining my eyes into space, until presently a
smell of burning from the galley told me that our breakfast
sausages had made their quarter-million-mile journey in
vain.

All that morning we argued our way across the Mare

Crisium while the western mountains reared higher in the
sky. Even when we were out prospecting in the spacesuits,
the discussion would continue over the radio. It was
absolutely certain, my companions argued, that there had
never been any form of intelligent life on the Moon. The

only living things that had ever existed there were a few
primitive 
plants 
and 
their 
slightly 
less 
degenerate

ancestors. I knew that as well as anyone, but there are
times when a scientist must not be afraid to make a fool of
himself.

“Listen,” I said at last, “I’m going up there, if only for my

own peace of mind. That mountain’s less than twelve
thousand feet high—that’s only two thousand under Earth
gravity—and I can make the trip in twenty hours at the
outside. I’ve always wanted to go up into those hills,
anyway, and this gives me an excellent excuse.”

“If you don’t break your neck,” said Garnett, “you’ll be

the laughing-stock of the expedition when we get back to
Base. That mountain will probably be called Wilson’s Folly
from now on.”

man to climb Pico and Helicon?”

“But weren’t you rather younger in those days?” asked

Louis gently.

“That,” I said with great dignity, “is as good a reason as

any for going.”

We went to bed early that night, after driving the tractor

to within half a mile of the promontory. Garnett was coming
with me in the morning; he was a good climber, and had
often been with me on such exploits before. Our driver was
only too glad to be left in charge of the machine.

At ﬁrst sight, those cliﬀs seemed completely unscalable,

but to anyone with a good head for heights, climbing is
easy on a world where all weights are only a sixth of their
normal value. The real danger in lunar mountaineering lies
in over-conﬁdence; a six-hundred-foot drop on the Moon
can kill you just as thoroughly as a hundred-foot fall on
Earth.

We made our ﬁrst halt on a wide ledge about four

thousand feet above the plain. Climbing had not been very
diﬀicult but my limbs were stiﬀ with the unaccustomed

eﬀort, and I was glad of the rest. We could still see the
tractor as a tiny metal insect far down at the foot of the
cliﬀ, and we reported our progress to the driver before
starting on the next ascent.

the great plain came into sight. Now we could look for ﬁfty
miles out across the Mare, and could even see the peaks of
the mountains on the opposite coast more than a hundred
miles away. Few of the great lunar plains are as smooth as
the Mare Crisium, and we could almost imagine that a sea
of water and not of rock was lying there two miles below.
Only a group of crater pits low down on the skyline spoiled
the illusion.

Our goal was still invisible over the crest of the mountain

and we were steering by maps, using the Earth as a guide.
Almost due east of us, that great silver crescent hung low
over the plain, already well into its ﬁrst quarter. The Sun
and the stars would make their slow march across the sky
and would sink presently from sight, but Earth would
always be there, never moving from her appointed place,
waxing and waning as the years and seasons passed. In ten
days’ time she would be a blinding disc bathing these rocks
with her midnight radiance, ﬁfty-fold brighter than the full
moon. But we must be out of the mountains long before
night, or else we would remain among them for ever.

Inside our suits it was comfortably cool, for the

refrigeration units were ﬁghting the ﬁerce Sun and
carrying away the body-heat of our exertions. We seldom
spoke to each other, except to pass climbing instructions
and to discuss our best plan of ascent. I do not know what
Garnett was thinking, probably that this was the craziest
goose chase he had ever embarked upon. I more than half
agreed with him, but the joy of climbing, the knowledge
that no man had ever gone this way before and the
exhilaration of the steadily widening landscape gave me all
the reward I needed.

front of us the wall of rock I had ﬁrst inspected through the
telescope from thirty miles away. It would level oﬀ about
ﬁfty feet above our heads, and there on the plateau would
be the thing that had lured me over these barren wastes. It
was, almost certainly, nothing more than a boulder
splintered ages ago by a falling meteor, and with its
cleavage planes still fresh and bright in this incorruptible,
unchanging silence.

use a grapnel. My tired arms seemed to gain new strength
as I swung the three-pronged metal anchor round my head
and sent it sailing up towards the stars. The ﬁrst time it
broke loose and came falling slowly back when we pulled
the rope. On the third attempt, the prongs gripped ﬁrmly
and our combined weights could not shift it.

Garnett looked at me anxiously. I could tell that he

wanted to go ﬁrst, but I smiled back at him through the
glass of my helmet and shook my head. Slowly, taking my
time, I began the ﬁnal ascent.

Even with my spacesuit, I weighed only forty pounds

here, so I pulled myself up hand over hand without
bothering to use my feet. At the rim I paused and waved to
my companion, then I scrambled over the edge and stood
upright, staring ahead of me.

You must understand that until this very moment I had

been almost completely convinced that there could be
nothing strange or unusual for me to ﬁnd here. Almost, but
not quite; it was that haunting doubt that had driven me
forwards. Well, it was a doubt no longer, but the haunting
had scarcely begun.

I was standing on a plateau perhaps a hundred feet

across. It had once been smooth—too smooth to be natural
—but falling meteors had pitted and scored its surface
through immeasurable aeons. It had been levelled to
support a glittering roughly pyramidal structure, twice as

high as a man, that was set in the rock like a gigantic
many-faceted jewel.

few seconds. Then I felt a great lifting of my heart, and a
strange inexpressible joy. For I loved the Moon, and now I
knew 
that 
the 
creeping 
moss 
of 
Aristarchus 
and

Eratosthenes was not the only life she had brought forth in
her youth. The old, discredited dream of the ﬁrst explorers
was true. There had, after all, been a lunar civilization—
and I was the ﬁrst to ﬁnd it. That I had come perhaps a
hundred million years too late did not distress me; it was
enough to have come at all.

and to ask questions. Was this a building, a shrine—or
something for which my language had no name? If a
building, then why was it erected in so uniquely
inaccessible a spot? I wondered if it might be a temple, and
I could picture the adepts of some strange priesthood
calling on their gods to preserve them as the life of the
Moon ebbed with the dying oceans, and calling on their
gods in vain.

closely, but some sense of caution kept me from going too
near. I knew a little of archeology, and tried to guess the
cultural level of the civilization that must have smoothed
this mountain and raised the glittering mirror surfaces that
still dazzled my eyes.

workmen had possessed whatever strange materials these
far more ancient architects had used. Because of the
thing’s smallness, it did not occur to me that I might be
looking at the handiwork of a race more advanced than my
own. The idea that the Moon had possessed intelligence at
all was still almost too tremendous to grasp and my pride
would not let me take the ﬁnal, humiliating plunge.

at the back of my neck—something so trivial and so
innocent that many would never have noticed it at all. I
have said that the plateau was scarred by meteors; it was
also coated inches deep with the cosmic dust that is always
ﬁltering down upon the surface of any world where there
are no winds to disturb it. Yet the dust and the meteor
scratches ended quite abruptly in a wide circle enclosing
the little pyramid, as though an invisible wall was
protecting it from the ravages of time and the slow but
ceaseless bombardment from space.

There was someone shouting in my earphones, and I

realized that Garnett had been calling me for some time. I
walked unsteadily to the edge of the cliﬀ and signalled him
to join me, not trusting myself to speak. Then I went back
towards that circle in the dust. I picked up a fragment of
splintered rock and tossed it gently toward the shining
enigma. If the pebble had vanished at that invisible barrier
I should not have been surprised, but it seemed to hit a
smooth, hemispherical surface and slide gently to the
ground.

matched in the antiquity of my own race. This was not a
building, but a machine, protecting itself with forces that
had challenged Eternity. Those forces, whatever they might
be, were still operating, and perhaps I had already come
too close. I thought of all the radiations man had trapped
and tamed in the past century. For all I knew, I might be as
irrevocably doomed as if I had stepped into the deadly,
silent aura of an unshielded atomic pile.

I remember turning then towards Garnett, who had

joined me and was now standing motionless at my side. He
seemed quite oblivious of me, so I did not disturb him but
walked to the edge of the cliﬀ in an eﬀort to marshal my
thoughts. There below me lay the Mare Crisium—Sea of
Crises, indeed—strange and weird to most men, but

reassuringly familiar to me. I lifted my eyes towards the
crescent Earth, lying in her cradle of stars, and I wondered
what her clouds had covered when these unknown builders
had ﬁnished their work. Was it the steaming jungle of the
Carboniferous, the bleak shoreline over which the ﬁrst
amphibians must crawl to conquer the land—or, earlier
still, the long loneliness before the coming of life?

Do not ask me why I did not guess the truth sooner—the

truth that seems so obvious now. In the ﬁrst excitement of
my discovery, I had assumed without question that this
crystalline apparition had been built by some race
belonging to the Moon’s remote past, but suddenly, and
with overwhelming force, the belief came to me that it was
as alien to the Moon as I myself.

degenerate plants. No lunar civilization, whatever its doom,
could have left but a single token of its existence.

I looked at the shining pyramid again, and the more

remote it seemed from anything that had to do with the
Moon. And suddenly I felt myself shaking with a foolish,
hysterical laughter, brought on by excitement and over-
exertion: for I had imagined that the little pyramid was
speaking to me and was saying: “Sorry, I’m a stranger here
myself.”

It has taken us twenty years to crack that invisible shield

and to reach the machine inside those crystal walls. What
we could not understand, we broke at last with the savage
might of atomic power and now I have seen the fragments
of the lovely, glittering thing I found up there on the
mountain.

are mechanisms—of the pyramid belong to a technology
that lies far beyond our horizon, perhaps to the technology
of paraphysical forces.

The mystery haunts us all the more now that the other

planets have been reached and we know that only Earth

has ever been the home of intelligent life. Nor could any
lost civilization of our own world have built that machine,
for the thickness of the meteoric dust on the plateau has
enabled us to measure its age. It was set there upon its
mountain before life had emerged from the seas of Earth.

When our world was half its present age, something from

the stars swept through the Solar System, left this token of
its passage, and went again upon its way. Until we
destroyed it, that machine was still fulﬁlling the purpose of
its builders; and as to that purpose, here is my guess.

the circle of the Milky Way, and long ago other races on the
worlds of other suns must have scaled and passed the
heights that we have reached. Think of such civilizations,
far back in time against the fading afterglow of Creation,
masters of a universe so young that life as yet had come
only to a handful of worlds. Theirs would have been a
loneliness we cannot imagine, the loneliness of gods
looking out across inﬁnity and ﬁnding none to share their
thoughts.

They must have searched the star-clusters as we have

searched the planets. Everywhere there would be worlds,
but they would be empty or peopled with crawling,
mindless things. Such was our own Earth, the smoke of the
great volcanoes still staining the skies, when that ﬁrst ship
of the peoples of the dawn came sliding in from the abyss
beyond Pluto. It passed the frozen outer worlds, knowing
that life could play no part in their destinies. It came to rest
among the inner planets, warming themselves around the
ﬁre of the Sun and waiting for their stories to begin.

safely in the narrow zone between ﬁre and ice, and must
have guessed that it was the favorite of the Sun’s children.
Here, in the distant future, would be intelligence; but there
were countless stars before them still, and they might
never come this way again.

scattered throughout the universe, watching over all
worlds with the promise of life. It was a beacon that down
the ages has been patiently signalling the fact that no one
had discovered it.

Perhaps you understand now why that crystal pyramid

was set upon the Moon instead of on the Earth. Its builders
were not concerned with races still struggling up from
savagery. They would be interested in our civilization only if
we proved our ﬁtness to survive—by crossing space and so
escaping from the Earth, our cradle. That is the challenge
that all intelligent races must meet, sooner or later. It is a
double challenge, for it depends in turn upon the conquest
of atomic energy and the last choice between life and
death.

Once we had passed that crisis, it was only a matter of

time before we found the pyramid and forced it open. Now
its signals have ceased, and those whose duty it is will be
turning their minds upon Earth. Perhaps they wish to help
our infant civilization. But they must be very, very old, and
the old are often insanely jealous of the young.

from which of those banked clouds of stars the emissaries
are coming. If you will pardon so commonplace a simile, we
have broken the glass of the ﬁre-alarm and have nothing to
do but to wait.

I do not think we will have to wait for long.

JUPITER V

“Jupiter V,” written in June 1951, belongs to that typical
and. often despised category of science ﬁction, the
“gimmick” story, in which some little-known fact or natural
law forms an essential part of the plot. The genre may well
have originated (like much else) with Edgar Allan Poe; his
“A Descent into the Maelstrom” is a classic example.

As I wrote on its ﬁrst appearance in volume form (Reach

for Tomorrow, 1956): “I am by no means sure that I could
write ‘Jupiter V’ today; it involved twenty or thirty pages of
orbital calculations and should by rights be dedicated to
Professor G.C. McVittie, my erstwhile tutor in applied
mathematics.” Twenty-seven years later I’m completely
sure on this point.

But during those years something has happened that,

when I wrote the story, I would have dismissed as
completely incredible. The photographer covering the
satellites of Jupiter for a 2044 issue of Life magazine
(presumably a holographic, satellite-delivered edition) was
sixty-ﬁve years too late. The Voyager spacecraft had
already done the job, back in 1979 . . .

Or at least the ﬁrst part of it, for we will never ﬁnish

unravelling the complexities of the mini-solar-system
formed by Jupiter and his moons. And dated though this
story has been by the astonishing speed of space
exploration (it was written, please remember, when Sputnik
I was still six years in the future!), it may yet contain some
elements of truth.

Those fuzzy, long-range shots of little Jupiter V (now

oﬀicially christened Amalthea) look very, very odd indeed . .
.

P

rofessor Forster is such a small man that a special
space-suit had to be made for him. But what he
lacked in physical size he more than made up—as

is so often the case—in sheer drive and determination.
When I met him, he’d spent twenty years pursuing a dream.
What is more to the point, he had persuaded a whole
succession of hard-headed business men, World Council
Delegates and administrators of scientiﬁc trusts to
underwrite his expenses and to ﬁt out a ship for him.
Despite everything that happened later, I still think that
was his most remarkable achievement . . .

The Arnold Toynbee had a crew of six aboard when we

left Earth. Besides the Professor and Charles Ashton, his
chief assistant, there was the usual pilot-navigator-
engineer triumvirate and two graduate students—Bill
Hawkins and myself. Neither of us had ever gone into
space before, and we were still so excited over the whole
thing that we didn’t care in the least whether we got back
to Earth before the next term started. We had a strong
suspicion that our tutor had very similar views. The
reference he had produced for us was a masterpiece of
ambiguity, but as the number of people who could even
begin to read Martian script could be counted, if I may coin
a phrase, on the ﬁngers of one hand, we’d got the job.

As we were going to Jupiter, and not to Mars, the

purpose of this particular qualiﬁcation seemed a little
obscure, though knowing something about the Professor’s
theories we had some pretty shrewd suspicions. They were
partly conﬁrmed when we were ten days out from Earth.

The Professor looked at us very thoughtfully when we

answered his summons. Even under zero g he always
managed to preserve his dignity, while the best we could do

was to cling to the nearest handhold and ﬂoat around like
drifting seaweed. I got the impression—though I may of
course be wrong—that he was thinking: What have I done
to deserve this? as he looked from Bill to me and back
again. Then he gave a sort of ‘It’s too late to do anything
about it now’ sigh and began to speak in that slow, patient
way he always does when he has something to explain. At
least, he always uses it when he’s speaking to us, but it’s
just occurred to me—oh, never mind.

of telling you the purpose of this expedition. Perhaps you’ve
guessed it already.”

“I think I have,” said Bill.
“Well, go on,” replied the Professor, a peculiar gleam in

his eye. I did my best to stop Bill, but have you ever tried to
kick anyone when you’re in free fall?

“You want to ﬁnd some proof—I mean, some more proof

—of your diﬀusion theory of extraterrestrial culture.”

“And have you any idea why I’m going to Jupiter to look

for it?”

on one of the moons.”

“Brilliant, 
Bill, 
brilliant. 
There 
are 
ﬁfteen 
known

satellites, and their total area is about half that of Earth.
Where would you start looking if you had a couple of weeks
to spare? I’d rather like to know.”

Bill glanced doubtfully at the Professor, as if he almost

suspected him of sarcasm.

“I don’t know much about astronomy,” he said. “But

there are four big moons, aren’t there? I’d start on those.”

are each about as big as Africa. Would you work through
them in alphabetical order?”

“No,” Bill replied promptly. “I’d start on the one nearest

Jupiter, and go outward.”

logical processes,” sighed the Professor. He was obviously
impatient to begin his set speech. “Anyway, you’re quite
wrong. We’re not going to the big moons at all. They’ve
been photographically surveyed from space and large areas
have been explored on the surface. They’ve got nothing of
archaeological interest. We’re going to a place that’s never
been visited before.”

“Not to Jupiter!” I gasped.
“Heavens no, nothing as drastic as that! But we’re going

nearer to him than anyone else has ever been.”

He paused thoughtfully.
“It’s a curious thing, you know—or you probably don’t—

that it’s nearly as diﬀicult to travel between Jupiter’s
satellites as it is to go between the planets, although the
distances are so much smaller. This is because Jupiter’s got
such a terriﬁc gravitational ﬁeld and his moons are
travelling so quickly. The innermost moon’s moving almost
as fast as Earth, and the journey to it from Ganymede costs
almost as much fuel as the trip from Earth to Venus, even
though it takes only a day and a half.

one’s ever done it before because nobody could think of
any good reason for the expense. Jupiter Five is only thirty
kilometers in diameter, so it couldn’t possibly be of much
interest. Even some of the outer satellites, which are far
easier to reach, haven’t been visited because it hardly
seemed worth while to waste the rocket fuel.”

“Then why are we going to waste it?” I asked impatiently.

The whole thing sounded like a complete wild-goose chase,
though as long as it proved interesting, and involved no
actual danger, I didn’t greatly mind.

nothing, as a good many others have done—that at this
time I didn’t believe a word of Professor Forster’s theories.
Of course I realized that he was a very brilliant man in his

ﬁeld, but I did draw the line at some of his more fantastic
ideas. After all, the evidence was so slight and the
conclusions so revolutionary that one could hardly help
being sceptical.

the ﬁrst Martian expedition found the remains not of one
ancient civilization, but of two. Both had been highly
advanced, but both had perished more than ﬁve million
years ago. The reason was unknown (and still is). It did not
seem to be warfare, as the two cultures appear to have
lived amicably together. One of the races had been insect-
like, the other vaguely reptilian. The insects seem to have
been the genuine, original Martians. The reptile-people—
usually referred to as ‘Culture X’—had arrived on the scene
later.

certainly possessed the secret of space travel, because the
ruins of their peculiar cruciform cities had been found on—
of all places—Mercury. Forster believed that they had tried
to colonize all the smaller planets—Earth and Venus having
been ruled out because of their excessive gravity. It was a
source of some disappointment to the Professor that no
traces of Culture X had ever been found on the Moon,
though he was certain that such a discovery was only a
matter of time.

The ‘conventional’ theory of Culture X was that it had

originally come from one of the smaller planets or
satellites, had made peaceful contact with the Martians—
the only other intelligent race in the known history of the
System—and had died out at the same time as the Martian
civilization. But Professor Forster had more ambitious
ideas: he was convinced that Culture X had entered the
Solar System from intersteller space. The fact that no one
else believed this annoyed him, though not very much, for
he is one of those people who are happy only when in a
minority.

cabin porthole as Professor Forster unfolded his plan. It
was a beautiful sight: I could just make out the equatorial
cloud belts, and three of the satellites were visible as little
stars close to the planet. I wondered which was Ganymede,
our ﬁrst port of call.

continued, “I’ll tell you why we’re going such a long way
from home. You know that last year I spent a good deal of
time poking among the ruins in the twilight belt of Mercury.
Perhaps you read the paper I gave on the subject at the
London School of Economics. You may even have been
there—I do remember a disturbance at the back of the hall.

Mercury I discovered an important clue to the origin of
Culture X. I’ve kept quiet about it, although I’ve been
sorely tempted when fools like Dr Haughton have tried to
be funny at my expense. But I wasn’t going to risk letting
someone else get here before I could organize this
expedition.

preserved bas-relief of the Solar System. It’s not the ﬁrst
that’s been discovered—as you know, astronomical motifs
are common in true Martian and Culture X art. But there
were certain peculiar symbols against various planets,
including Mars and Mercury. I think the pattern had some
historic signiﬁcance, and the most curious thing about it is
that little Jupiter Five—one of the least important of all the
satellites—seemed to have the most attention drawn to it.
I’m convinced that there’s something on Five which is the
key to the whole problem of Culture X, and I’m going there
to discover what it is.”

particularly impressed by the Professor’s story. Maybe the
people of Culture X had left some artifacts on Five for
obscure reasons of their own. It would be interesting to

unearth them, but hardly likely that they would be as
important as the Professor thought. I guess he was rather
disappointed at our lack of enthusiasm. If so it was his fault
since, as we discovered later, he was still holding out on us.

later. Ganymede is the only one of the satellites with a
permanent base on it; there’s an observatory and a
geophysical station with a staﬀ of about ﬁfty scientists.
They were rather glad to see visitors, but we didn’t stay
long as the Professor was anxious to refuel and set oﬀ
again. The fact that we were heading for Five naturally
aroused a good deal of interest, but the Professor wouldn’t
talk and we couldn’t; he kept too close an eye on us.

we managed to see rather more of it on the return journey.
But as I’ve promised to write an article for another
magazine about that, I’d better not say anything else here.
(You might like to keep your eyes on the National
Astrographic Magazine next Spring.)

a half, and it gave us an uncomfortable feeling to see
Jupiter expanding hour by hour until it seemed as if he was
going to ﬁll the sky. I don’t know much about astronomy,
but I couldn’t help thinking of the tremendous gravity ﬁeld
into which we were falling. All sorts of things could go
wrong so easily. If we ran out of fuel we’d never be able to
get back to Ganymede, and we might even drop into Jupiter
himself.

colossal globe, with its raging storm belts spinning in the
sky ahead of us. As a matter of fact I did make the attempt,
but some literary friends who have read this MS advised
me to cut out the result. (They also gave me a lot of other
advice which I don’t think they could have meant seriously,
because if I’d followed it there would have been no story at
all.)

Jupiter published by now that you’re bound to have seen
some of them. You may even have seen the one which, as
I’ll explain later, was the cause of all our trouble.

orbit of Five and would soon catch up with the tiny moon as
it raced around the planet. We were all squeezed in the
control room waiting for our ﬁrst glimpse of our target. At
least, all of us who could get in were doing so. Bill and I
were crowded out into the corridor and could only crane
over the other people’s shoulders. Kingsley Searle, our
pilot, was in the control seat looking as unruﬄed as ever:
Eric Fulton, the engineer, was thoughtfully chewing his
moustache and watching the fuel gauges, and Tony Groves
was doing complicated things with his navigation tables.

eyepiece of the teleperiscope. Suddenly he gave a start and
we heard a whistle of indrawn breath. After a minute,
without a word, he beckoned to Searle, who took his place
at the eyepiece. Exactly the same thing happened, and then
Searle handed over to Fulton. It got a bit monotonous by
the time Groves had reacted identically, so we wormed our
way in and took over after a bit of opposition.

probably why I was disappointed. Hanging there in space
was a tiny gibbous moon, its ‘night’ sector lit up faintly by
the reﬂected glory of Jupiter. And that seemed to be all.

that you do if you look through a telescope for long enough.
There were faint crisscrossing lines on the surface of the
satellite, and suddenly my eye grasped their full pattern.
For it was a pattern: those lines covered Five with the same
geometrical accuracy as the lines of latitude and longitude
divide up a globe of the Earth. I suppose I gave my whistle
of amazement, for then Bill pushed me out of the way and
had his turn to look.

very smug while we bombarded him with questions.

to me as it it to you. Besides the evidence I’d found on
Mercury, there were other clues. I’ve a friend at the
Ganymede Observatory whom I’ve sworn to secrecy and
who’s been under quite a strain this last few weeks. It’s
rather surprising to anyone who’s not an astronomer that
the Observatory has never bothered much about the
satellites. The big instruments are used on extra-galactic
nebulae, and the little ones spend all their time looking at
Jupiter.

“The only thing the Observatory had ever done to Five

was to measure its diameter and take a few photographs.
They weren’t quite good enough to show the markings
we’ve just observed, otherwise there would have been an
investigation before. But my friend Lawton detected them
through the hundred-centimeter reﬂector when I asked him
to look, and he also noticed something else that should
have been spotted before. Five is only thirty kilometers in
diameter, but it’s much brighter than it should be for its
size. When you compare its reﬂecting power—its aldeb—its
—”

“Its albedo.”
“Thanks, Tony—its albedo with that of the other Moons,

you ﬁnd that it’s a much better reﬂector than it should be.
In fact, it behaves more like polished metal than rock.”

“So that explains it!” I said. “The people of Culture X

must have covered Five with an outer shell—like the domes
they built on Mercury, but on a bigger scale.”

The Professor looked at me rather pityingly.
“So you still haven’t guessed!” he said.
I don’t think this was quite fair. Frankly, would you have

done any better in the same circumstances?

As I looked through the portholes, I felt completely dwarfed

by my surroundings. An ant crawling on the top of an oil-
storage tank might have had much the same feelings—and
the looming bulk of Jupiter up there in the sky didn’t help.
Even the Professor’s usual cockiness now seemed to be
overlaid by a kind of reverent awe.

it in various directions were broad bands where the
stupendous metal plates had been joined together. These
bands, or the crisscross pattern they formed, were what we
had seen from space.

least, what would have been a hill on a natural world. We
had spotted it on our way in after making a careful survey
of the little satellite from space. It was one of six such
projections, four arranged equidistantly around the equator
and the other two at the Poles. The assumption was pretty
obvious that they would be entrances to the world below
the metal shell.

I know that some people think it must be very

entertaining to walk around on an airless, low-gravity
planet in spacesuits. Well, it isn’t. There are so many points
to think about, so many checks to make and precautions to
observe, that the mental strain outweighs the glamor—at
least as far as I’m concerned. But I must admit that this
time, as we climbed out of the airlock, I was so excited that
for once these things didn’t worry me.

completely out of the question. We were all roped together
like mountaineers and blew ourselves across the metal
plain with gentle bursts from our recoil pistols. The
experienced astronauts, Fulton and Groves, were at the two
ends of the chain so that any unwise eagerness on the part
of the people in the middle was restrained.

It took us only a few minutes to reach our objective,

which we discovered to be a broad, low dome at least a
kilometer in circumference. I wondered if it was a gigantic

airlock, large enough to permit the entrance of whole
spaceships. Unless we were very lucky, we might be unable
to ﬁnd a way in, since the controlling mechanisms would no
longer be functioning, and even if they were, we would not
know how to operate them. It would be diﬀicult to imagine
anything more tantalizing than being locked out, unable to
get at the greatest archaeological ﬁnd in all history.

found an opening in the metal shell. It was quite small—
only about two meters across—and it was so nearly circular
that for a moment we did not realize what it was. Then
Tony’s voice came over the radio.

“That’s not artiﬁcial. We’ve got a meteor to thank for it.”
“Impossible!” protested Professor Forster. “It’s much too

regular.”

Tony was stubborn.
“Big meteors always produce circular holes, unless they

strike very glancing blows. And look at the edges; you can
see there’s been an explosion of some kind. Probably the
meteor and the shell were vaporized; we won’t ﬁnd any
fragments.”

“You’d expect this sort of thing to happen,” put in

Kingsley. “How long has this been here? Five million years?
I’m surprised we haven’t found any other craters.”

“Maybe you’re right,” said the Professor, too pleased to

argue. “Anyway, I’m going in ﬁrst.”

“Right,” said Kingsley, who as captain has the last say in

all such matters. “I’ll give you twenty meters of rope and
will sit in the hole so that we can keep radio contact.
Otherwise this shell will blanket your signals.”

So Professor Forster was the ﬁrst man to enter Five, as

he deserved to be. We crowded close to Kingsley so that he
could relay news of the Professor’s progress.

He didn’t get very far. There was another shell just inside

the outer one, as we might have expected. The Professor
had room to stand upright between them, and as far as his

torch could throw its beam he could see avenues of
supporting struts and girders, but that was about all.

we got any further. Near the end of that time I remember
asking the Professor why he hadn’t thought of bringing any
explosives. He gave me a very hurt look.

he said. “But I’m not going to risk doing any damage if I
can ﬁnd another way.”

view. After all, what was another few days in a search that
had already taken him twenty years?

It was Bill Hawkins, of all people, who found the way in

when we had abandoned our ﬁrst line of approach. Near
the North Pole of the little world he discovered a really
giant meteor hole—about a hundred meters across and
cutting through both the outer shells surrounding Five. It
had revealed still another shell below those, and by one of
those chances that must happen if one waits enough eons,
a second, smaller, meteor had come down inside the crater
and penetrated the innermost skin. The hole was just big
enough to allow entrance for a man in a spacesuit. We went
through head ﬁrst, one at a time.

hanging from that tremendous vault, like a spider
suspended beneath the dome of St Peter’s. We only knew
that the space in which we ﬂoated was vast. Just how big it
was we could not tell, for our torches gave us no sense of
distance. In this airless, dustless cavern the beams were, of
course, totally invisible and when we shone them on the
roof above, we could see the ovals of light dancing away
into the distance until they were too diﬀuse to be visible. If
we pointed them ‘downward’ we could see a pale smudge
of illumination so far below that it revealed nothing.

Very slowly, under the minute gravity of this tiny world,

we fell downward until checked by our safety ropes.

Overhead I could see the tiny glimmering patch through
which we had entered; it was remote but reassuring.

pendulum motion at the end of my cable, with the lights of
my companions glimmering like ﬁtful stars in the darkness
around me, the truth suddenly crashed into my brain.
Forgetting that we were all on open circuit, I cried out
involuntarily:

“Professor—I don’t believe this is a planet at all! It’s a

spaceship!”

Then I stopped, feeling that I had made a fool of myself.

There was a brief, tense silence, then a babble of noise as
everyone else started arguing at once. Professor Forster’s
voice cut across the confusion and I could tell that he was
both pleased and surprised.

Culture X to the Solar System.”

gasp of incredulity.

“It’s fantastic! A ship thirty kilometers across!”
“You ought to know better than that,” replied the

Professor with surprising mildness. “Suppose a civilization
wanted to cross interstellar space—how else would it
attack the problem? It would build a mobile planetoid out
in space, taking perhaps centuries over the task. Since the
ship would have to be a self-contained world, which could
support its inhabitants for generations, it would need to be
as large as this. I wonder how many suns they visited
before they found ours and knew that their search was
ended? They must have had smaller ships that could take
them down to the planets, and of course they had to leave
the parent vessel somewhere in space. So they parked it
here, in a close orbit near the largest planet, where it
would remain safely forever—or until they needed it again.
It was the logical place: if they had set it circling the Sun,
in time the pulls of the planets would have disturbed its

orbit so much that it might have been lost. That could never
happen to it here.”

this before we started?”

There’s always been something anomalous about Satellite
Five, though no one seems to have noticed it. Why this
single tiny moon so close to Jupiter, when all the other
small 
satellites 
are 
seventy 
times 
further 
away?

Astronomically speaking, it didn’t make sense. But enough
of this chattering. We’ve got work to do.”

century. There were seven of us faced with the greatest
archaeological discovery of all time. Almost a whole world
—a small world, an artiﬁcial one, but still a world—was
waiting for us to explore. All we could perform was a swift
and superﬁcial reconnaissance: there might be material
here for generations of research workers.

The ﬁrst step was to lower a powerful ﬂoodlight on a

power line running from the ship. This would act as a
beacon and prevent us getting lost, as well as giving local
illumination on the inner surface of the satellite. (Even now,
I still ﬁnd it hard to call Five a ship.) Then we dropped
down the line to the surface below. It was a fall of about a
kilometer, and in this low gravity it was quite safe to make
the drop unretarded. The gentle shock of the impact could
be absorbed easily enough by the spring-loaded staﬀs we
carried for that purpose.

description of all the wonders of Satellite Five; there have
already been enough pictures, maps and books on the
subject. (My own, by the way is being published by
Sidgwick and Jackson next summer.) What I would like to
give you instead is some impression of what it was actually
like to be the ﬁrst men ever to enter that strange metal
world. Yet I’m sorry to say—I know this sounds hard to

believe—I simply can’t remember what I was feeling when
we came across the ﬁrst of the great mushroom-capped
entrance shafts. I suppose I was so excited and so
overwhelmed by the wonder of it all that I’ve forgotten
everything else. But I can recall the impression of sheer
size, something which mere photographs can never give.
The builders of this world, coming as they did from a planet
of low gravity, were giants—about four times as tall as men.
We were pigmies crawling among their works.

we met few of the scientiﬁc marvels which later expeditions
discovered. That was just as well; the residential areas
provided enough to keep us busy for several lifetimes. The
globe we were exploring must once have been lit by
artiﬁcial sunlight pouring down from the triple shell that
surrounded it and kept its atmosphere from leaking into
space. Here on the surface the Jovians (I suppose I cannot
avoid adopting the popular name for the people of Culture
X) had reproduced, as accurately as they could, conditions
on the world they had left unknown ages ago. Perhaps they
still had day and night, changing seasons, rain and mist.
They had even taken a tiny sea with them into exile. The
water was still there, forming a frozen lake three
kilometers across. I hear that there is a plan afoot to
electrolize 
it 
and 
provide 
Five 
with 
a 
breathable

atmosphere again, as

soon as the meteor holes in the outer shell have been
plugged.

the race whose possessions we were disturbing for the ﬁrst
time in ﬁve million years. Even if they were giants from
another sun, they had much in common with man, and it is
a great tragedy that our races missed each other by what
is, on the cosmic scale, such a narrow margin.

We 
were, 
I 
suppose, 
more 
fortunate 
than 
any

archaeologists in history. The vacuum of space had
preserved everything from decay and—this was something
which could not have been expected—the Jovians had not
emptied their mighty ship of all its treasures when they had
set out to colonies the Solar System. Here on the inner
surface of Five everything still seemed intact, as it had
been at the end of the ship’s long journey. Perhaps the
travellers had preserved it as a shrine in memory of their
lost home, or perhaps they had thought that one day they
might have to use these things again.

had left it. Sometimes it frightened me. I might be
photographing, with Bill’s help, some great wall carving
when the sheer timelessness of the place would strike into
my heart. I would look round nervously, half expecting to
see giant shapes come stalking in through the pointed
doorways, to continue the tasks that had been momentarily
interrupted.

the only name for it; there was no mistaking its purpose.
When Groves and Searle, who had been doing rapid sweeps
over the southern hemisphere, reported the discovery we
decided to concentrate all our forces there. For, as
somebody or other has said, the art of a people reveals its
soul, and here we might ﬁnd the key to Culture X.

The building was huge, even by the standards of this

made of metal, yet there was nothing cold or mechanical
about it. The topmost peak climbed half way to the remote
roof of the world, and from a distance—before the details
were visible—the building looked not unlike a Gothic
cathedral. Misled by this chance resemblance, some later
writers have called it a temple; but we have never found
any trace of what might be called a religion among the
Jovians. Yet there seems something appropriate about the
name. “The Temple of Art’, and it’s stuck so thoroughly that
no one can change it now.

It has been estimated that there are between ten and

twenty million individual exhibits in this single building—
the harvest garnered during the whole history of a race
that may have been much older than Man. And it was here
that I found a small, circular room which at ﬁrst sight
seemed to be no more than the meeting place of six
radiating corridors. I was by myself (and thus, I’m afraid,
disobeying the Professor’s orders) and taking what I
thought would be a short-cut back to my companions. The
dark walls were drifting silently past me as I glided along,
the light of my torch dancing over the ceiling ahead. It was
covered with deeply cut lettering, and I was so busy
looking for familiar character groupings that for some time
I paid no attention to the chamber’s ﬂoor. Then I saw the
statue and focused my beam upon it.

The moment when one ﬁrst meets a great work of art has

an impact that can never again be recaptured. In this case
the 
subject 
matter 
made 
the 
eﬀect 
all 
the 
more

overwhelming. I was the ﬁrst man ever to know what the
Jovians had looked like, for here, carved with superb skill
and authority, was one obviously modelled from life.

me, the sightless eyes staring into mine. Two of the hands
were clasped upon the breast as if in resignation; the other
two were holding an instrument whose purpose is still
unknown. The long, powerful tail—which, like a kangaroo’s,

probably balanced the rest of the body—was stretched out
along the ground, adding to the impression of rest or
repose.

There was nothing human about the face or the body.

There 
were, 
for 
example, 
no 
nostrils—only 
gill-like

openings in the neck. Yet the ﬁgure moved me profoundly;
the artist had spanned the barriers of time and culture in a
way I should never have believed possible. “Not human—
but humane” was the verdict Professor Forster gave. There
were many things we could not have shared with the
builders of this world, but all that was really important we
would have felt in common.

face of a dog or a horse, so it seemed that I knew the
feelings of the being confronting me. Here was wisdom and
authority—the calm, conﬁdent power that is shown, for
example, in Bellini’s famous portrait of the Doge Loredano.
Yet there was sadness also—the sadness of a race which
had made some stupendous eﬀort, and made it in vain.

representation the Jovians have ever made of themselves in
their art. One would hardly expect to ﬁnd taboos of this
nature among such an advanced race; perhaps we will
know the answer when we have deciphered the writing
carved on the chamber walls.

set here to bridge time and to greet whatever beings might
one day stand in the footsteps of its makers. That, perhaps,
is why they shaped it so much smaller than life. Even then
they must have guessed that the future belonged to Earth
or Venus, and hence to beings whom they would have
dwarfed. They knew that size could be a barrier as well as
time.

A few minutes later I was on my way back to the ship

with my companions, eager to tell the Professor about the
discovery. He had been reluctantly snatching some rest,

though I don’t believe he averaged more than four hours
sleep a day all the time we were on Five. The golden light
of Jupiter was ﬂooding the great metal plain as we emerged
through the shell and stood beneath the stars once more.

moved the ship.”

“Nonsense,” I retorted. “It’s exactly where we left it.”
Then I turned my head and saw the reason for Bill’s

mistake. We had visitors.

The second ship had come down a couple of kilometers

away, and as far as my non-expert eyes could tell it might
have been a duplicate of ours. When we hurried through
the airlock, we found that the Professor, a little bleary-
eyed, was already entertaining. To our surprise, though not
exactly to our displeasure, one of the three visitors was an
extremely attractive brunette.

“This,” said Professor Forster, a little wearily, “is Mr

Randolph Mays, the science writer. I imagine you’ve heard
of him. And this is—” He turned to Mays. “I’m afraid I
didn’t quite catch the names.”

“My pilot, Donald Hopkins—my secretary, Marianne

Mitchell.”

There was just the slighest pause before the word

‘secretary,’ but it was long enough to set a little signal light
ﬂashing in my brain. I kept my eyebrows from going up, but
I caught a glance from Bill that said, without any need for
words: If you’re thinking what I’m thinking, I’m ashamed of
you.

hair and an attitude of bonhomie which one felt was only
skin-deep—the protective coloration of a man who has to be
friendly with too many people.

“I expect this is as big a surprise to you as it is to me,” he

said with unnecessary heartiness. “I certainly never
expected to ﬁnd anyone here before me, and I certainly
didn’t expect to ﬁnd all this.”

not too suspiciously inquisitive.

that folder please, Marianne? Thanks.”

and passed them round. They showed the planets from
their satellites—a common-enough subject, of course.

continued. “But there’s a diﬀerence here. These pictures
are nearly a hundred years old. They were painted by an
artist named Chesley Bonestell and appeared in Life back
in 1944—long before space-travel began, of course. Now
what’s happened is that Life has commissioned me to go
round the Solar System and see how well I can match these
imaginative paintings against the reality. In the centenary
issue, they’ll be published side by side with photographs of
the real thing. Good idea, eh?”

matters rather complicated, and I wondered what the
Professor thought about it. Then I glanced again at Miss
Mitchell, standing demurely in the corner, and decided that
there would be compensations.

In any other circumstances, we would have been glad to

meet another party of explorers, but here there was the
question of priority to be considered. Mays would certainly
be hurrying back to Earth as quickly as he could, his
original mission abandoned and all his ﬁlm used up here
and now. It was diﬀicult to see how we could stop him, and
not even certain that we desired to do so. We wanted all the
publicity and support we could get, but we would prefer to
do things in our own time, after our own fashion. I
wondered how strong the Professor was on tact, and feared
the worst.

Professor had hit upon the bright idea of pairing each of us
with one of May’s team, so that we acted simultaneously as

guides 
and 
supervisors. 
Doubling 
the 
number 
of

investigating groups also greatly increased the rate at
which we could work. It was unsafe for anyone to operate
by 
himself 
under 
these 
conditions, 
and 
this 
had

handicapped us a great deal.

arrival of Mays’s party.

anxiously. “As far as I’m concerned they can go where they
like and photograph what they like, as long as they don’t
take anything, and as long as they don’t get back to Earth
with their records before we do.”

“I don’t see how we can stop them,” protested Ashton.
“Well, I hadn’t intended to do this, but I’ve now

registered a claim to Five. I radioed it to Ganymede last
night, and it will be at The Hague by now.”

That was settled in the case of the Moon, back in the last
century.”

The Professor gave a rather crooked smile.
“I’m not annexing an astronomical body, remember. I’ve

put in a claim for salvage, and I’ve done it in the name of
the World Science Organisation. If Mays takes anything out
of Five, he’ll be stealing it from them. Tomorrow I’m going
to explain the situation gently to him, just in case he gets
any bright ideas.”

It certainly seemed peculiar to think of Satellite Five as

salvage, and I could imagine some pretty legal quarrels
developing when we got home. But for the present the
Professor’s move should have given us some safeguards
and might discourage Mays from collecting souvenirs—so
we were optimistic enough to hope.

It took rather a lot of organizing, but I managed to get

paired oﬀ with Marianne for several trips round the interior
of Five. Mays didn’t seem to mind: there was no particular

reason why he should. A spacesuit is the most perfect
chaperon ever devised, confound it.

opportunity, and showed her my ﬁnd. She stood looking at
the statue for a long time while I held my torch beam upon
it.

“It’s very wonderful,” she breathed at last. “Just think of

it waiting here in the darkness all those millions of years!
But you’ll have to give it a name.”

“I have. I’ve christened it “The Ambassador”.”
“Why?”
“Well, because I think it’s a kind of envoy, if you like,

carrying a greeting to us. The people who made it knew
that one day someone else was bound to come here and
ﬁnd this place.”

clever of you. There’s something noble about it, and
something very sad, too. Don’t you feel it?”

I could tell that Marianne was a very intelligent woman.

It was quite remarkable the way she saw my point of view,
and the interest she took in everything I showed her. But
‘The Ambassador’ fascinated her most of all, and she kept
on coming back to it.

“You know, Jack,” she said (I think this was sometime the

next day, when Mays had been to see it as well), “you must
take that statue back to Earth. Think of the sensation it
would cause.”

I sighed.
“The Professor would like to, but it must weigh a ton. We

can’t aﬀord the fuel. It will have to wait for a later trip.”

She looked puzzled.
“But things hardly weigh anything here,” she protested.
“That’s diﬀerent,” I explained. “There’s weight, and

there’s inertia—two quite diﬀerent things. Now inertia—oh,
never mind. We can’t take it back, anyway. Captain Searle’s
told us that, deﬁnitely.”

“What a pity,” said Marianne.
I forgot all about this conversation until the night before

we left. We had had a busy and exhausting day packing our
equipment (a good deal, of course, we left behind for future
use). All our photographic material had been used up. As
Charlie Ashton remarked, if we met a live Jovian now we’d
be unable to record the fact. I think we were all wanting a
breathing space, an opportunity to relax and sort out our
impressions and to recover from our head-on collision with
an alien culture.

take-oﬀ. We would leave at the same time, an arrangement
which suited the Professor admirably as he did not trust
Mays alone on Five.

Everything had been settled when, while checking

through our records, I suddenly found that six rolls of
exposed ﬁlm were missing. They were photographs of a
complete set of transcriptions in the Temple of Art. After a
certain amount of thought I recalled that they had been
entrusted to my charge, and I had put them very carefully
on a ledge in the Temple, intending to collect them later.

Ashton were cancelling some arrears of sleep, and there
seemed no reason why I should not slip back to collect the
missing material. I knew there would be a row if it was left
behind, and as I remembered exactly where it was I need
be gone only thirty minutes. So I went, explaining my
mission to Bill just in case of accidents.

darkness inside the shell of Five was somewhat oppressive.
But I left a portable beacon at the entrance, and dropped
freely until my hand torch told me it was time to break the
fall. Ten minutes later, with a sigh of relief, I gathered up
the missing ﬁlms.

It was a natural enough thing to pay my last respects to

and that calmly enigmatic ﬁgure had begun to exercise an
extraordinary fascination over me.

me alone. For the chamber was empty and the statue gone.

I suppose I could have crept back and said nothing, thus

avoiding awkward explanations. But I was too furious to
think of discretion, and as soon as I returned we woke the
Professor and told him what had happened.

He sat on his bunk rubbing the sleep out of his eyes, then

uttered a few harsh words about Mr Mays and his
companions which it would do no good at all to repeat here.

“What I don’t understand,” said Searle, “is how they got

the thing out—if they have, in fact. We should have spotted
it.”

waited until there was no one around before they took it up
through the hull. It must have been quite a job, even under
this gravity,” remarked Eric Fulton, in tones of admiration.

“There’s no time for post-mortems,” said the Professor

savagely. “We’ve got ﬁve hours to think of something. They
can’t take oﬀ before then, because we’re only just past
opposition 
with 
Ganymede. 
That’s 
correct, 
isn’t 
it,

Kingsley?”

Searle nodded agreement.
“Yes. We must move round to the other side of Jupiter

before we can enter a transfer orbit—at least, a reasonably
economical one.”

any ideas?”

me that our subsequent behavior was, shall I say, a little
peculiar and slightly uncivilized. It was not the sort of thing
we could have imagined ourselves doing a few months
before. But we were annoyed and overwrought, and our
remoteness from all other human beings somehow made

everything seem diﬀerent. Since there were no other laws
here, we had to make our own . . .

Could we sabotage their rockets, for instance?” asked Bill.

Searle didn’t like this idea at all.
“We mustn’t do anything drastic,” he said. “Besides, Don

Hopkins is a good friend of mine. He’d never forgive me if I
damaged his ship. There’d be the danger, too, that we
might do something that couldn’t be repaired.”

“Then pinch their fuel,” said Groves laconically.
“Of course! They’re probably all asleep, there’s no light

in the cabin. All we’ve got to do is to connect up and
pump.”

“A very nice idea,” I pointed out, “but we’re two

kilometers apart. How much pipeline have we got? Is it as
much as a hundred meters?”

The others ignored this interruption as though it was

beneath contempt and went on making their plans. Five
minutes later the technicians had settled everything: we
only had to climb into our spacesuits and do the work.

I never thought, when I joined the Professor’s expedition,

that I should end up like an African porter in one of those
old adventure stories, carrying a load on my head.
Especially when the load was a sixth of a spaceship (being
so short, Professor Forster wasn’t able to provide very
eﬀective help). Now that its fuel tanks were half empty, the
weight of the ship in this gravity was about two hundred
kilograms. We squeezed beneath, heaved, and up she went
—very slowly, of course, because her inertia was still
unchanged. Then we started marching.

It took us quite a while to make the journey, and it wasn’t

quite as easy as we’d thought it would be. But presently the
two ships were lying side by side, and nobody had noticed
us. Everyone in the Henry Luce was fast asleep, as they
had every reason to expect us to be.

certain schoolboy amusement in the whole adventure as
Searle and Fulton drew the refuelling pipeline out of our
airlock and quietly coupled up to the other ship.

stood watching, “is that they can’t do anything to stop us,
unless they come outside and uncouple our line. We can
drain them dry in ﬁve minutes, and it will take them half
that time to wake up and get into their spacesuits.”

A sudden horrid fear smote me.
“Suppose they turned on their rockets and tried to get

away?”

come outside and see what’s going on. Ah, there go the
pumps.”

The pipeline had stiﬀened like a ﬁre-hose under

pressure, and I knew that the fuel was pouring into our
tanks. Any moment now the lights would go on in the Henry
Luce and her startled occupants would come scuttling out.

must have been sleeping very soundly not to have felt the
vibration from the pumps, but when it was all over nothing
had happened and we just stood round looking rather
foolish. Searle and Fulton carefully uncoupled the pipeline
and put it back into the airlock.

“Well?” we asked the Professor.
He thought things over for a minute.
“Let’s get back into the ship,” he said.
When we had climbed out of our suits and were gathered

together in the control room, or as far in as we could get,
the Professor sat down at the radio and punched out the
‘Emergency’ signal. Our sleeping neighbors would be
awake in a couple of seconds as their automatic receiver
sounded the alarm.

The TV screen glimmered into life. There, looking rather

frightened, was Randolph Mays.

“Hello, Forster,” he snapped. “What’s the trouble?”
“Nothing wrong here,” replied the Professor in his best

deadpan manner, “but you’ve lost something important.
Look at your fuel gauges.”

The screen emptied, and for a moment there was a

confused mumbling and shouting from the speaker. Then
Mays was back, annoyance and alarm competing for
possession of his features.

anything about this?”

The Prof. let him sizzle for a moment before he replied.
“I think you’d better come across and talk things over,”

he said. “You won’t have far to walk.”

Mays glared back at him uncertainly, then retorted, “You

bet I will!” The screen went blank.

“There’s nothing else he can do!”

“It’s not so simple as you think,” warned Fulton. “If he

really wanted to be awkward, he could just sit tight and
radio Ganymede for a tanker.”

“What good would that do him? It would waste days and

cost a fortune.”

“Yes, but he’d still have the statue, if he wanted it that

badly. And he’d get his money back when he sued us.”

The airlock light ﬂashed on and Mays stumped into the

room. He was in a surprisingly conciliatory mood; on the
way over, he must have had second thoughts.

“Well, well,” he said aﬀably. “What’s all this nonsense in

aid of?”

“I made it quite clear that nothing was to be taken oﬀ Five.
You’ve been stealing property that doesn’t belong to you.”

“Now, let’s be reasonable. Who does it belong to? You

can’t claim everything on this planet as your personal
property.”

operate.”

you should wait until you get a ruling from the lawyers?”

The Professor was being icily polite, but I could see that

the strain was terriﬁc and an explosion might occur at any
moment.

you’ve taken is the most important single ﬁnd we’ve made
here. I will make allowances for the fact that you don’t
appreciate what you’ve done, and don’t understand the
viewpoint of an archaeologist like myself. Return that
statue, and we’ll pump your fuel back and say no more.”

Mays rubbed his chin thoughtfully.
“I really don’t see why you should make such a fuss

about one statue, when you consider all the stuﬀ that’s still
here.”

It was then that the Professor made one of his rare

mistakes.

Louvre and argues that nobody will miss it because of all
the other paintings. This statue’s unique in a way that no
terrestrial work of art can ever be. That’s why I’m
determined to get it back.”

You should never, when you’re bargaining, make it

obvious that you want something really badly. I saw the
greedy glint in Mays’s eye and said to myself, “Uh-huh!
He’s going to be tough.” And I remembered Fulton’s
remark about calling Ganymede for a tanker.

“Give me half an hour to think it over,” said Mays,

turning to the airlock.

“Very well,” replied the Professor stiﬄy. “Half an hour—

no more.”

I must give Mays credit for brains. Within ﬁve minutes

we saw his communications aerial start slewing round until
it locked on Ganymede. Naturally we tried to listen in, but

he had a scrambler. These newspaper men must trust each
other.

The reply came back a few minutes later; that was

scrambled too. While we were waiting for the next
development, we had another council of war. The Professor
was now entering the stubborn, stop-at-nothing stage. He
realized he’d miscalculated and that had made him ﬁghting
mad.

I think Mays must have been a little apprehensive,

because he had reinforcements when he returned. Donald
Hopkins, 
his 
pilot, came 
with him, looking rather

uncomfortable.

“I’ve been able to ﬁx things up, Professor,” he said

smugly. “It will take me a little longer, but I can get back
without your help if I have to. Still, I must admit that it will
save a good deal of time and money if we can come to an
agreement. I’ll tell you what. Give me back my fuel and I’ll
return the other—er—souvenirs I’ve collected. But I insist
on keeping Mona Lisa, even if it means I won’t get back to
Ganymede until the middle of next week.”

called deep-space oaths, though I can assure you they’re
much the same as any other oaths. That seemed to relieve
his feelings a lot and he became ﬁendishly friendly.

“My dear Mr Mays,” he said, “you’re an unmitigated

crook, and accordingly I’ve no compunction left in dealing
with you. I’m prepared to use force, knowing that the law
will justify me.”

Mays looked slightly alarmed, though not unduly so. We

had moved to strategic positions round the door.

“Please don’t be so melodramatic,” he said haughtily.

“This is the twenty-ﬁrst century, not the Wild West back in
1800.”

“1880,” said Bill, who is a stickler for accuracy.
“I must ask you,” the Professor continued, “to consider

yourself under detention while we decide what is to be

done. Mr Searle, take him to Cabin B.”

Mays sidled along the wall with a nervous laugh.
“Really, Professor, this is too childish! You can’t detain

me against my will.” He glanced for support at the Captain
of the Henry Luce.

Donald Hopkins dusted an imaginary speck of ﬂuﬀ from

his uniform.

“to get involved in vulgar brawls.”

grace. We saw that he had a good supply of reading matter,
and locked him in.

Hopkins, who was looking enviously at our fuel gauges.

“Can I take it, Captain,” he said politely, “that you don’t

wish to get mixed up in any of your employer’s dirty
business?”

“I’m neutral. My job is to ﬂy the ship here and take her

home. You can ﬁght this out among yourselves.”

Perhaps it would be best if you returned to your ship and
explained the situation. We’ll be calling you in a few
minutes.”

he was about to leave he turned to Searle.

torture? Do call me if you get round to it—I’ve some jolly
interesting ideas.” Then he was gone, leaving us with our
hostage.

I think the Professor had hoped he could do a direct

exchange. If so, he had not bargained on Marianne’s
stubborness.

“It serves Randolph right,” she said. “But I don’t really

see that it makes any diﬀerence. He’ll be just as
comfortable in your ship as in ours, and you can’t do

anything to him. Let me know when you’re fed up with
having him around.”

half, and it had got us exactly nowhere. We’d captured
Mays, but he wasn’t any use to us.

The Professor was standing with his back to us, staring

morosely out of the window. Seemingly balanced on the
horizon, the immense bulk of Jupiter nearly ﬁlled the sky.

“We’ve got to convince her that we really do mean

business,” he said. Then he turned abruptly to me.

“Do you think she’s actually fond of this blackguard?”
“Er—I shouldn’t be surprised. Yes, I really believe so.”
The Professor looked very thoughtful. Then he said to

Searle, “Come into my room. I want to talk something
over.”

both had an indeﬁnable air of gleeful anticipation, and the
Professor was carrying a piece of paper covered with
ﬁgures. He went to the radio, and called the Henry Luce.

obviously been waiting for us. “Have you decided to call it
oﬀ? I’m getting so bored.”

The Professor looked at her gravely.
“Miss Mitchell,” he replied. “It’s apparent that you have

not been taking us seriously. I’m therefore arranging a
somewhat—er—drastic 
little 
demonstration 
for 
your

beneﬁt. I’m going to place your employer in a position from
which he’ll be only too anxious for you to retrieve him as
quickly as possible.”

“Indeed?” replied Marianne noncommittally—though I

thought I could detect a trace of apprehension in her voice.

“I don’t suppose,” continued the Professor smoothly,

“that you know anything about celestial mechanics. No?
Too bad, but your pilot will conﬁrm everything I tell you.
Won’t you, Hopkins?”

background.

you of our curious—indeed our precarious—position on this
satellite. You’ve only got to look out of the window to see
how close to Jupiter we are, and I need hardly remind you
that Jupiter has by far the most intense gravitational ﬁeld
of all the planets. You follow me?”

“Yes,” replied Marianne, no longer quite so self-

possessed. “Go on.”

“Very well. This little world of ours goes round Jupiter in

almost exactly twelve hours. Now there’s a well-known
theorem stating that if a body falls from an orbit to the
center of attraction, it will take point one seven seven of a
period to make the drop. In other words, anything falling
from here to Jupiter would reach the center of the planet in
about two hours seven minutes. I’m sure Captain Hopkins
can conﬁrm this.”

There was a long pause. Then we heard Hopkins say,

“Well, of course I can’t conﬁrm the exact ﬁgures, but
they’re probably correct. It would be something like that,
anyway.”

realize,” he went on with a hearty chuckle, “that a fall to
the center of the planet is a very theoretical case. If
anything really was dropped from here, it would reach the
upper atmosphere of Jupiter in a considerably shorter time.
I hope I’m not boring you?”

“No,” said Marianne, rather faintly.
“I’m so glad to hear it. Anyway, Captain Searle has

worked out the actual time for me, and it’s one hour thirty-
ﬁve minutes—with a few minutes either way. We can’t
guarantee complete accuracy, ha, ha!

satellite of ours has an extremely weak gravitational ﬁeld.
Its escape velocity is only about ten meters a second, and

anything thrown away from it at that speed would never
come back. Correct, Mr Hopkins?”

“Perfectly correct.”
“Then, if I may come to the point, we propose to take Mr

Mays for a walk until he’s immediately under Jupiter,
remove the reaction pistols from his suit, and—ah—launch
him forth. We will be prepared to retrieve him with our ship
as soon as you’ve handed over the property you’ve stolen.
After what I’ve told you, I’m sure you’ll appreciate that
time will be rather vital. An hour and thirty-ﬁve minutes is
remarkably short, isn’t it?”

“Professor!” I gasped. “You can’t possibly do this!”
“Shut up!” he barked. “Well, Miss Mitchell, what about

it?”

disbelief.

“You’re simply bluﬀing!” she cried. “I don’t believe you’d

do anything of the kind! Your crew won’t let you!”

The Professor sighed.
“Too bad,” he said. “Captain Searle—Mr Groves—will you

take the prisoner and proceed as instructed.”

“Aye-aye, sir,” replied Searle with great solemnity.
Mays looked frightened but stubborn.
“What are you going to do now?” he said, as his suit was

handed back to him.

Searle unholstered his reaction pistols. “Just climb in,”

he said. “We’re going for a walk.”

I realized then what the Professor hoped to do. The

whole thing was a colossal bluﬀ: of course he wouldn’t
really have Mays thrown into Jupiter; and in any case
Searle and Groves wouldn’t do it. Yet surely Marianne
would see through the bluﬀ, and then we’d be left looking
mighty foolish.

was quite helpless. Grasping his arms and towing him

along like a captive balloon, his escorts set oﬀ toward the
horizon—and towards Jupiter.

that Marianne was staring out through the observation
windows at the departing trio. Professor Forster noticed it
too.

aren’t carrying along an empty spacesuit. Might I suggest
that you follow the proceedings with a telescope? They’ll be
over the horizon in minute, but you’ll be able to see Mr
Mays when he starts to—er—ascend.”

period of suspense seemed to last for a very long time. Was
Marianne waiting to see how far the Professor really would
go?

By this time I had got hold of a pair of binoculars and

was sweeping the sky beyond the ridiculously close
horizon. Suddenly I saw it—a tiny ﬂare of light against the
vast yellow back-cloth of Jupiter. I focused quickly, and
could just make out the three ﬁgures rising into space. As I
watched, they separated: two of them decelerated with
their pistols and started to fall back toward Five. The other
went on ascending helplessly toward the ominous bulk of
Jupiter.

I turned on the Professor in horror and disbelief.
“They’ve really done it!” I cried. “I thought you were only

bluﬀing!”

calmly, for the beneﬁt of the listening microphone. “I hope I
don’t need to impress upon you the urgency of the
situation. As I’ve remarked once or twice before, the time
of fall from our orbit to Jupiter’s surface is ninety-ﬁve
minutes. But, of course, if one waited even half that time, it
would be much too late . . .”

He let that sink in. There was no reply from the other

ship.

receiver so we can’t have any more arguments. We’ll wait
until you’ve unloaded that statue— and the other items Mr
Mays was careless enough to mention—before we’ll talk to
you again. Goodbye.”

It was a very uncomfortable ten minutes. I’d lost track of

Mays, and was seriously wondering if we’d better
overpower the Professor and go after him before we had a
murder on our hands. But the people who could ﬂy the ship
were the ones who had actually carried out the crime. I
didn’t know what to think.

Then the airlock of the Henry Luce slowly opened. A

couple of space-suited ﬁgures emerged, ﬂoating the cause
of all the trouble between them.

a sigh of satisfaction. “Get it into our ship,” he called over
the radio. “I’ll open up the airlock for you.”

He seemed in no hurry at all. I kept looking anxiously at

the clock; ﬁfteen minutes had already gone by. Presently
there was a clanking and banging in the airlock, the inner
door opened, and Captain Hopkins entered. He was
followed by Marianne, who only needed a bloodstained axe
to make her look like Clytaemnestra. I did my best to avoid
her eye, but the Professor seemed to be quite without
shame. He walked into the airlock, checked that his
property was back, and emerged rubbing his hands.

“Well, that’s that,” he said cheerfully. “Now let’s sit down

and have a drink to forget all this unpleasantness, shall
we?”

I pointed indignantly at the clock.
“Have you gone crazy!” I yelled. “He’s already halfway to

Jupiter!”

Professor Forster looked at me disapprovingly.
“Impatience,” he said, “is a common failing in the young.

I see no cause at all for hasty action.”

scared.

“But you promised,” she whispered.
The Professor suddenly capitulated. He had had his little

joke, and didn’t want to prolong the agony.

that Mays is in no more danger than we are. We can go and
collect him whenever we like.”

“Do you mean that you lied to me?”
“Certainly not. Everything I told you was perfectly true.

You simply jumped to the wrong conclusions. When I said
that a body would take ninety-ﬁve minutes to fall from here
to Jupiter, I omitted—not, I must confess, accidentally—a
rather important phrase. I should have added “a body at
rest with respect to Jupiter.” Your friend Mr Mays was
sharing the orbital speed of his satellite, and he’s still got
it. A little matter of twenty-six kilometers a second, Miss
Mitchell.

“Oh yes, we threw him completely oﬀ Five and toward

Jupiter. But the velocity we gave him then was trivial. He’s
still moving in practically the same orbit as before. The
most he can do—I’ve got Captain Searle to work out the
ﬁgures—is to drift about a hundred kilometers inward. And
in one revolution—twelve hours— he’ll be right back where
he started, without us bothering to do anything at all.”

There was a long, long silence. Marianne’s face was a

study in frustration, relief, and annoyance at having been
fooled. Then she turned on Captain Hopkins.

“You must have known all the time! Why didn’t you tell

me?”

Hopkins gave her a wounded expression.
“You didn’t ask me,” he said.

twenty kilometers up, and we located him quickly enough
by the ﬂashing light on his suit. His radio had been
disconnected, for a reason that hadn’t occurred to me. He
was intelligent enough to realize that he was in no danger,
and if his set had been working he could have called his
ship and exposed our bluﬀ. That is, if he wanted to.
Personally, I think I’d have been glad enough to call the
whole thing oﬀ even if I had known that I was perfectly
safe. It must have been awfully lonely up there.

To my great surprise, Mays wasn’t as mad as I’d

expected. Perhaps he was too relieved to be back in our
snug little cabin when we drifted up to him on the merest
ﬁzzle of rockets and yanked him in. Or perhaps he felt that
he’d been worsted in fair ﬁght and didn’t bear any grudge.
I really think it was the latter.

There isn’t must more to tell, except that we did play one

other trick on him before we left Five. He had a good deal
more fuel in his tanks than he really needed, now that his
payload was substantially reduced. By keeping the excess
ourselves, we were able to carry The Ambassador back to
Ganymede after all. Oh, yes, the Professor gave him a
check for the fuel we’d borrowed. Everything was perfectly
legal.

day after the new gallery was opened at the British
Museum I went along to see The Ambassador, partly to
discover if his impact was still as great in these changed
surroundings. (For the record, it wasn’t—though it’s still
considerable and Bloosmbury will never be quite the same
to me again.) A huge crowd was milling around the gallery,
and there in the middle of it was Mays and Marianne.

It ended up with us having a very pleasant lunch

together in Holborn. I’ll say this about Mays—he doesn’t
bear any grudges. But I’m still rather sore about Marianne.

And, frankly, I can’t imagine what she sees in him.

REFUGEE

Doubtless to the great confusion of anthologists, this story
has been published under three other titles: “Royal
Prerogative” “This Earth of Majesty” and “?”. (Now, how do
you index that?)

It was written in 1954, and I cannot pretend that no

resemblance was intended to any living character. Indeed, I
have since met the prototype of “Prince Henry” on three
occasions, and on the last—here in Colombo, only a few
months ago—we had a conversation uncannily appropriate
to this story.

Our ﬁrst meeting, I mentioned, had been at an exhibition

circa 1958 optimistically called “Britain Enters The Space
Age.” His Royal Highness laughed and answered wryly:
“We never did, did we?”

Not quite true, of course, since there are many British

satellites in orbit, and there will soon be a few Britons
(courtesy the U.S. Space Shuttle) as well. But that isn’t
exactly what I had in mind.

Well, Sir Isaac Newton invented gravity. Perhaps one day

we British may be lucky enough to disinvent it.

"When he comes aboard,” said Captain Saunders, as he
waited for the landing ramp to extrude itself, “what the
devil shall I call him?”

There was a thoughtful silence while the navigation

oﬀicer and the assistant pilot considered this problem in
etiquette. Then Mitchell locked the main control panel, and
the 
ship’s 
multitudinous 
mechanisms 
lapsed 
into

unconsciousness as power was withdrawn from them.

“The correct address,” he drawled slowly, “is “Your Royal

Highness”.”

“Huh!” snorted the captain. “I’ll be damned if I’ll call

anyone that!”

“In these progressive days,” put in Chambers helpfully, “I

believe that “Sir” is quite suﬀicient. But there’s no need to
worry if you forget: it’s been a long time since anyone went
to the Tower. Besides, this Henry isn’t as tough a
proposition as the one who had all the wives.”

“From all accounts,” added Mitchell, “he’s a very

pleasant young man. Quite intelligent, too. He’s often been
known to ask people technical questions that they couldn’t
answer.”

Captain Saunders ignored the implications of this

remark, beyond resolving that if Prince Henry wanted to
know how a ﬁeld Compensation Drive Generator worked,
then Mitchell could do the explaining. He got gingerly to
his feet—they’d been operating on half a gravity during
ﬂight, and now they were on Earth, he felt like a ton of
bricks—and started to make his way along the corridors
that led to the lower air lock. With an oily purring, the
great curving door side-stepped out of his way. Adjusting
his smile, he walked out to meet the television cameras and
the heir to the British throne.

England was still in his early twenties. He was slightly
below average height, and had ﬁne-drawn, regular features
that really lived up to all the genealogical clichés. Captain
Saunders, who came from Dallas and had no intention of
being impressed by any prince, found himself unexpectedly
moved by the wide, sad eyes. They were eyes that had seen
too many receptions and parades, that had had to watch
countless totally uninteresting things, that had never been
allowed to stray far from the carefully planned oﬀicial
routes. Looking at that proud but weary face, Captain
Saunders glimpsed for the ﬁrst time the ultimate loneliness
of royalty. All his dislike of that institution became suddenly
trivial against its real defect: what was wrong with the
Crown was the unfairness of inﬂicting such a burden on
any human being . . .

The passageways of the Centaurus were too narrow to

allow for general sight-seeing, and it was soon clear that it
suited Prince Henry very well to leave his entourage
behind. Once they had begun moving through the ship,
Saunders lost all his stiﬀness and reserve, and within a few
minutes was treating the prince exactly like any other
visitor. He did not realize that one of the earliest lessons
royalty has to learn is that of putting people at their ease.

“You know, Captain,” said the prince wistfully, “this is a

big day for us. I’ve always hoped that one day it would be
possible for spaceships to operate from England. But it still
seems strange to have a port of our own here, after all
these years. Tell me—did you ever have much to do with
rockets?”

“Well, I had some training on them, but they were

already on the way out before I graduated. I was lucky:
some older men had to go back to school and start all over
again—or else abandon space completely if they couldn’t
convert to the new ships.”

“It made as much diﬀerence as that?”

change from sail to steam. That’s an analogy you’ll often
hear, by the way. There was a glamor about the old rockets,
just as there was about the old windjammers, which these
modern ships haven’t got. When the Centaurus takes oﬀ,
she goes up as quietly as a balloon—and as slowly, if she
wants to. But a rocket blastoﬀ shook the ground for miles,
and you’d be deaf for days if you were too near the
launching apron. Still, you know all that from the old news
recordings.”

The prince smiled.
“Yes,” he said. “I’ve often run through them at the

Palace. I think I’ve watched every incident in all the
pioneering expeditions. I was sorry to see the end of the
rockets, too. But we could never have had a spaceport here
on Salisbury Plain—the vibration would have shaken down
Stonehenge!”

“Stonehenge?” queried Saunders as he held open a hatch

and let the prince through into Hold Number 3.

“Ancient monument—one of the most famous stone

circles in the world. It’s really impressive, and about three
thousand years old. See it if you can—it’s only ten miles
from here.”

Captain Saunders had some diﬀiculty in suppressing a

smile. What an odd country this was: where else, he
wondered, would you ﬁnd contrasts like this? It made him
feel very young and raw when he remembered that back
home Billy the Kid was ancient history, and there was
hardly anything in the whole of Texas as much as ﬁve
hundred years old. For the ﬁrst time he began to realize
what tradition meant: it gave Prince Henry something that
he could never possess. Poise—self-conﬁdence, yes, that
was it. And a pride that was somehow free from arrogance
because it took itself so much for granted that it never had
to be asserted.

managed to ask in the thirty minutes that had been allotted
for his tour of the freighter. They were not the routine
questions that people asked out of politeness, quite
uninterested in the answers. H.R.H. Prince Henry knew a
lot about spaceships, and Captain Saunders felt completely
exhausted when he handed his distinguished guest back to
the reception committee, which had been waiting outside
the Centaurus with well-simulated patience.

shook hands in the air lock. “I’ve not enjoyed myself so
much for ages. I hope you have a pleasant stay in England,
and a successful voyage.” Then his retinue whisked him
away, and the port oﬀicials, frustrated until now, came
aboard to check the ship’s papers.

“Well,” said Mitchell when it was all over, “what did you

think of our Prince of Wales?”

never have guessed he was a prince. I always thought they
were rather dumb. But heck, he knew the principles of the
Field Drive! Has he ever been up in space?”

Space Force ship. It didn’t even reach orbit before it came
back again—but the Prime Minister nearly had a ﬁt. There
were questions in the House and editorials in the Times.
Everyone decided that the heir to the throne was too
valuable to risk in these newfangled inventions. So, though
he has the rank of commodore in the Royal Space Force,
he’s never even been to the moon.”

“The poor guy,” said Captain Saunders.

He had three days to burn, since it was not the captain’s

job to supervise the loading of the ship or the preﬂight
maintenance. Saunders knew skippers who hung around

breathing heavily on the necks of the servicing engineers,
but he wasn’t that type. Besides, he wanted to see London.
He had been to Mars and Venus and the moon, but this was
his ﬁrst visit to England. Mitchell and Chambers ﬁlled him
with useful information and put him on the monorail to
London before dashing oﬀ to see their own families. They
would be returning to the spaceport a day before he did, to
see that everything was in order. It was a great relief
having oﬀicers one could rely on so implicitly: they were
unimaginative and cautious, but thoroughgoing almost to a
fault. If they said that everything was shipshape, Saunders
knew he could take oﬀ without qualms.

carefully tailored landscape. It was so close to the ground,
and travelling so swiftly, that one could only gather ﬂeeting
impressions of the towns and ﬁelds that ﬂashed by.
Everything, thought Saunders, was so incredibly compact,
and on such a Lilliputian scale. There were no open spaces,
no ﬁelds more than a mile long in any direction. It was
enough to give a Texan claustrophobia—particularly a
Texan who also happened to be a space pilot.

The sharply deﬁned edge of London appeared like the

bulwark of some walled city on the horizon. With few
exceptions, the buildings were quite low—perhaps ﬁfteen
or twenty storeys in height. The monorail shot through a
narrow canyon, over a very attractive park, across a river
that was presumably the Thames, and then came to rest
with a steady, powerful surge of deceleration. A loud-
speaker announced, in a modest voice that seemed afraid
of being overheard: ‘This is Paddington. Passengers for the
North please remain seated.’ Saunders pulled his baggage
down from the rack and headed out into the station.

As he made for the entrance to the Underground, he

passed a bookstall and glanced at the magazines on display.
About half of them, it seemed, carried photographs of
Prince Henry or other members of the royal family. This,

thought Saunders, was altogether too much of a good
thing. He also noticed that all the evening papers showed
the prince entering or leaving the Centaurus, and bought
copies to read in the subway—he begged its pardon, the
‘Tube’.

last, they rejoiced, England need no longer take a back seat
among the space-going nations. Now it was possible to
operate a space ﬂeet without having a million square miles
of desert: the silent, gravity-defying ships of today could
land, if need be, in Hyde Park, without even disturbing the
ducks on the Serpentine. Saunders found it odd that this
sort of patriotism had managed to survive into the age of
space, but he guessed that the British had felt it pretty
badly when they’d had to borrow launching sites from the
Australians, the Americans, and the Russians.

half, the best transport system in the world, and it
deposited Saunders safely at his destination less than ten
minutes after he had left Paddington. In ten minutes the
Centaurus could have covered ﬁfty thousand miles; but
space, after all, was not quite so crowded as this. Nor were
the orbits of space craft so tortuous as the streets Saunders
had to negotiate to reach his hotel. All attempts to
straighten out London had failed dismally, and it was ﬁfteen
minutes before he completed the last hundred yards of his
journey.

bed. Three quiet, carefree days all to himself: it seemed too
good to be true.

It was. He had barely taken a deep breath when the

phone rang.

“Captain Saunders? I’m so glad we found you. This is the

BBC. We have a program called “In Town Tonight” and we
were wondering . . .”

Saunders had heard for days. Now he was safe: nobody
could get at him here in his armored fortress, which would
soon be far out in the freedom of space. It was not that he
had been treated badly: on the contrary, he had been
treated altogether too well. He had made four (or was it
ﬁve?) appearances on various TV programs; he had been to
more parties than he could remember; he had acquired
several hundred new friends and (the way his head felt
now) forgotten all his old ones.

at the port, “that the British were reserved and stand-
oﬀish? Heaven help me if I ever meet a demonstrative
Englishman.”

“I take it,” replied Mitchell, “that you had a good time.”
“Ask me tomorrow,” Saunders replied. “I may have

reintegrated my psyche by then.”

“I saw you on that quiz program last night,” remarked

Chambers. “You looked pretty ghastly.”

encouragement I need at the moment. I’d like to see you
think of a synonym of “jejune” after you’d been up until
three in the morning.”

“Vapid,” replied Chambers promptly.
“Insipid,” said Mitchell, not to be outdone.
“You win. Let’s have those overhaul schedules and see

what the engineers have been up to.”

Once seated at the control desk, Captain Saunders

quickly became his usual eﬀicient self. He was home again,
and his training took over. He knew exactly what to do, and
would do it with automatic precision. To right and left of
him, 
Mitchell 
and 
Chambers 
were 
checking 
their

instruments and calling the control tower.

It took them an hour to carry out the elaborate pre-ﬂight

routine. When the last signature had been attached to the
last sheet of instructions, and the last red light on the

monitor panel had turned to green, Saunders ﬂopped back
in his seat and lit a cigarette. They had ten minutes to
spare before take-oﬀ.

incognito to ﬁnd what makes the place tick. I don’t
understand how you can crowd so many people onto one
little island without it sinking.”

“Huh,” snorted Chambers. “You should see Holland. That

makes England look as wide open as Texas.”

“And then there’s this royal family business. Do you

know, wherever I went everybody kept asking me how I got
on with Prince Henry—what we’d talked about—didn’t I
think he was a ﬁne guy, and so on. Frankly, I got fed up
with it. I can’t imagine how you’ve managed to stand it for
a thousand years.”

“Don’t think that the royal family’s been popular all the

time,” replied Mitchell. “Remember what happened to
Charles the First? And some of the things we said about the
early Georges were quite as rude as the remarks your
people made later.”

“We just happen to like tradition,” said Chambers. “We’re

not afraid to change when the time comes, but as far as the
royal family is concerned—well, it’s unique and we’re
rather fond of it. Just the way you feel about the Statue of
Liberty.”

“Not a fair example. I don’t think it’s right to put human

beings up on a pedestal and treat them as if they’re—well,
minor deities. Look at Prince Henry, for instance. Do you
think he’ll ever have a chance of doing the things he really
wants to do? I saw him three times on TV when I was in
London. The ﬁrst time he was opening a new school
somewhere; then he was giving a speech to the Worshipful
Company of Fishmongers at the Guildhall (I swear I’m not
making that up), and ﬁnally he was receiving an address of
welcome from the mayor of Podunk, or whatever your
equivalent is.” (“Wigan,” interjected Mitchell.) “I think I’d

rather be in jail than live that sort of life. Why can’t you
leave the poor guy alone?”

challenge. Indeed, they maintained a somewhat frigid
silence. That’s torn it, thought Saunders. I should have kept
my big mouth shut; now I’ve hurt their feelings. I should
have remembered that advice I read somewhere: “The
British have two religions—cricket and the royal family.
Never attempt to criticism either.”

The awkward pause was broken by the radio and the

voice of the spaceport controller.

“Control to Centaurus. Your ﬂight lane clear. OK to lift.”
“Take-oﬀ program starting— now!” replied Saunders,

throwing the master switch. Then he leaned back, his eyes
taking in the entire control panel, his hands clear of the
board but ready for instant action.

He was tense but completely conﬁdent. Better brains

than his—brains of metal and crystal and ﬂashing electron
streams—were in charge of the Centaurus now. If
necessary, he could take command, but he had never yet
lifted a ship manually and never expected to do so. If the
automatics failed, he would cancel the take-oﬀ and sit here
on Earth until the fault had been cleared up.

The main ﬁeld went on, and weight ebbed from the

Centaurus. There were protesting groans from the ship’s
hull and structure as the strains redistributed themselves.
The curved arms of the landing cradle were carrying no
load now; the slightest breath of wind would carry the
freighter away into the sky.

Control called from the tower: “Your weight now zero:

check calibration.”

would now exactly equal the weight of the ship, and the
meter readings should agree with the totals on the loading
schedules. In at least one instance this check had revealed

the presence of a stowaway on board a spaceship—the
gauges were as sensitive as that.

“One million, ﬁve hundred and sixty thousand, four

hundred and twenty kilograms,” Saunders read oﬀ from the
thrust indicators. “Pretty good—it checks to within ﬁfteen
kilos. The ﬁrst time I’ve been underweight, though. You
could have taken on some more candy for that plump girl
friend of yours in Port Lowell, Mitch.”

never quite lived down a blind date on Mars which had
given him a completely unwarranted reputation for
preferring statuesque blondes.

now falling up into the summer sky as her weight was not
only neutralized but reversed. To the watchers below, she
would be a swiftly mounting star, a silver globule climbing
through and beyond the clouds. Around her, the blue of the
atmosphere was deepening into the eternal darkness of
space. Like a bead moving along an invisible wire, the
freighter was following the pattern of radio waves that
would lead her from world to world.

take-oﬀ from Earth. But the wonder would never die, nor
would he ever outgrow the feeling of power it gave him to
sit here at the control panel, the master of forces beyond
even the dreams of mankind’s ancient gods. No two
departures were ever the same: some were into the dawn,
some toward the sunset, some above a cloud-veiled Earth,
some through clear and sparkling skies. Space itself might
be unchanging, but on Earth the same pattern never
recurred, and no man ever looked twice at the same
landscape or the same sky. Down there the Atlantic waves
were marching eternally toward Europe, and high above
them—but so far below the Centaurus!—the glittering
bands of cloud were advancing before the same winds.
England began to merge into the continent, and the

European coast line became foreshortened and misty as it
sank hull down beyond the curve of the world. At the
frontier of the west, a fugitive stain on the horizon was the
ﬁrst hint of America. With a single glance, Captain
Saunders could span all the leagues across which
Columbus had labored half a thousand years ago.

With the silence of limitless power, the ship shook itself

free from the last bonds of Earth. To an outside observer,
the only sign of the energies it was expending would have
been the dull red glow from the radiation ﬁns around the
vessel’s equator, as the heat loss from the mass-converters
was dissipated into space.

“14:03:45,” wrote Captain Saunders neatly in the log.

“Escape velocity attained. Course deviation negligible.”

25,000 miles an hour that had been the almost unattainable
goal of the ﬁrst astronauts had no practical signiﬁcance
now, since the Centaurus was still accelerating and would
continue to gain speed for hours. But it had a profound
psychological meaning. Until this moment, if power had
failed, they would have fallen back to Earth. But now
gravity could never recapture them: they had achieved the
freedom of space, and could take their pick of the planets.
In practice, of course, there would be several kinds of hell
to pay if they did not pick Mars and deliver their cargo
according to plan. But Captain Saunders, like all spacemen,
was fundamentally a romantic. Even on a milk run like this
he would sometimes dream of the ringed glory of Saturn or
the sombre Neptunian wastes, lit by the distant ﬁres of the
shrunken sun.

Chambers left the course computer to its own devices and
produced the three glasses that lived beneath the chart
table. As he drank the traditional toast to Newton, Oberth,
and Einstein, Saunders wondered how this little ceremony
had originated. Space crews had certainly been doing it for

at least sixty years: perhaps it could be traced back to the
legendary rocket engineer who made the remark, “I’ve
burned more alcohol in sixty seconds than you’ve ever sold
across this lousy bar.”

tracking stations on Earth could give them had been fed
into the computer. From now on, until Mars came sweeping
up ahead, they were on their own. It was a lonely thought,
yet a curiously exhilarating one. Saunders savoured it in his
mind. There were just the three of them here—and no one
else within a million miles.

could hardly have been more shattering than the modest
knock on the cabin door . . .

Captain Saunders had never been so startled in his life.

With a yelp that had already left him before he had a
chance to suppress it, he shot out of his seat and rose a full
yard before the ship’s residual gravity ﬁeld dragged him
back. Chambers and Mitchell, on the other hand, behaved
with traditional British phlegm. They swivelled in their
bucket seats, stared at the door, and then waited for their
captain to take action.

It took Saunders several seconds to recover. Had he been

confronted with what might be called a normal emergency,
he would already have been halfway into a space suit. But a
diﬀident knock on the door of the control cabin, when
everybody else in the ship was sitting beside him, was not a
fair test.

A stowaway was simply impossible. The danger had been

so obvious, right from the beginning of commercial space
ﬂight, that the most stringent precautions had been taken
against it. One of his oﬀicers, Saunders knew, would always
have been on duty during loading; no one could possibly
have crept in unobserved. Then there had been the detailed
preﬂight inspection, carried out by both Mitchell and
Chambers. Finally, there was the weight check at the

moment before take-oﬀ; that was conclusive. No, a
stowaway was totally . . .

clenched his ﬁsts and squared his jaw. In a few minutes, he
thought, some romantic idiot was going to be very, very
sorry.

single long stride, the assistant pilot crossed the cabin and
jerked open the hatch.

wavering slightly in the low gravity, came into the cabin.
He was completely self-possessed, and looked very pleased
with himself.

“Good afternoon, Captain Saunders,” he said, “I must

apologize for this sudden intrusion.”

Saunders swallowed hard. Then, as the pieces of the

jigsaw fell into place, he looked ﬁrst at Mitchell, then at
Chambers. Both of his oﬀicers stared guilelessly back at
him with expressions of ineﬀable innocence. “So that’s it,”
he said bitterly. There was no need for any explanations:
everything was perfectly clear. It was easy to picture the
complicated negotiations, the midnight meetings, the
falsiﬁcation of records, the oﬀ-loading of nonessential
cargoes that his trusted colleagues had been conducting
behind his back. He was sure it was a most interesting
story, but he didn’t want to hear about it now. He was too
busy wondering what the Manual of Space Law would have
to say about a situation like this, though he was already
gloomily certain that it would be of no use to him at all.

wouldn’t have made an elementary miscalculation like that.
He would just have to make the best of what looked to be
the trickiest voyage in his career.

He was still trying to think of something to say when the

PRIORITY signal started ﬂashing on the radio board. The
stowaway looked at his watch.

Minister. I think I’d better speak to the poor man.”

Saunders thought so too.
“Very well, Your Royal Highness,” he said sulkily, and

with such emphasis that the title sounded almost like an
insult. Then, feeling much put upon, he retired into a
corner.

upset. Several times he used the phrase ‘your duty to your
people’ and once there was a distinct catch in his throat as
he said something about ‘devotion of your subjects to the
Crown’. Saunders realized, with some surprise, that he
really meant it.

leaned over to Saunders and whispered in his ear:

“The old boy’s on a sticky wicket, and he knows it. The

people will be behind the prince when they hear what’s
happened. Everybody knows he’s been trying to get into
space for years.”

I’m not sure that this doesn’t count as mutiny.”

you’ll be the only Texan to have the Order of the Garter.
Won’t that be nice for you?”

“Shush!” said Chambers. The prince was speaking, his

words winging back across the abyss that now sundered
him from the island he would one day rule.

you any alarm. I will return as soon as it is convenient.
Someone has to do everything for the ﬁrst time, and I felt
the moment had come for a member of my family to leave
Earth. It will be a valuable part of my education, and will
make me more ﬁtted to carry out my duty. Goodbye.”

He dropped the microphone and walked over to the

observation window—the only spaceward-looking port on
the entire ship. Saunders watched him standing there,

proud and lonely—but contented now. And as he saw the
prince staring out at the stars which he had at last
attained, 
all 
his 
annoyance 
and 
indignation 
slowly

evaporated.

No one spoke for a long time. Then Prince Henry tore his

gaze away from the blinding splendor beyond the port,
looked at Captain Saunders, and smiled.

“Where’s the galley, Captain?” he asked. “I may be out of

practice, but when I used to go scouting I was the best
cook in my patrol.”

seemed to lift from the control room. Mars was still a long
way oﬀ, but he knew now that this wasn’t going to be such
a bad trip after all . . .

THE WIND
FROM THE SUN

“The Wind From the Sun” was written just twenty years
ago, but is far more topical now than it was in 1963. I have
in front of me at the moment a folder full of technical
papers assembled by the World Space Foundation in
support of its Solar Sail Project—conducted in cooperation
with the University of Utah, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
and the Radio Amateur Satellite Corporation, with the
assistance of the Charles A. Lindbergh Fund.

Let me quote from the Foundation s leaﬂet, so that you

will better appreciate the background of the story that
follows:

“In 1924, Fridrikh Tsander, perhaps as a result of

suggestion by Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, noted that in the
vacuum of space, a large thin sheet of reﬂective material
illuminated by the Sun and controlled in orientation could
be used as a propulsion device requiring no propellant.
This propulsion device is now called a solar sail. In 1973,
NASA sponsored a design study which led to a full-scale
evaluation of solar sailing for the proposed Hailey’s Comet
rendezvous mission. Plans for this mission were suspended
in 1977, but not before solar sailing had received a
thorough technical review conﬁrming its feasibility and
unique advantages.”

The World Space Foundation hopes to launch a small

solar-sailer, either from the U.S. Shuttle or the European
Space Association “Ariane” rocket, in connection with
Vancouver’s EXPO ’86. Anyone wishing to support this
project can contact the WSF at P.O. Box Y, South Pasadena,
Calif 91030.

There is also an enthusiastic French group (U3P—Union

pour la Promotion de la Promotion Photonique, 6 rue des
Ramparts Coligny, Venerque 31120, Portet-sur-Garonne)
planning a solar race around the Moon, hopefully by 1985—
6. (Unmanned, of course—again the ESA Ariane would be
used as a launcher.)

Dr. V. Beletsky, of the Keldysh Institute of Applied
Mathematics, Moscow, enclosing his book Essays on the
Motions of Space Bodies. One whole chapter is devoted to
an analysis of “The Wind From the Sun,” with a detailed
integration of the trajectories of “Diana” and “Sunbeam.”

To my pleased surprise, Dr. Beletsky wrote: “The data

mentioned in your story has proved to be quite suﬀicient to
integrate the diﬀerential equations of yacht motions.
Integration results almost completely agree with situation
in your story!! Have you also integrated the equations of
yachts’ motions? If not, why such close agreement of such
unobvious 
details. 
If 
yes, 
why 
is 
such 
important

characteristic as the total ﬂight time not in agreement?—2
days in your story and 5 in mine

I had to confess that any agreement must have been

more luck than integration. Though I had done some back-
of-the-envelope 
calculations 
to 
make 
sure 
that 
the

velocities and accelerations were not ridiculous, I had
certainly not computed the orbit in any detail.

Incidentally, the story’s original title, under which it ﬁrst

appeared in Boy’s Life (March 1964) was the rather
obvious “Sunjammer. ” However, Poul Anderson had the
same idea almost simultaneously, so I had to make a quick
change of name . . .

T

he enormous disc of sail strained at its rigging,
already ﬁlled with the wind that blew between the
worlds. In three minutes the race would begin, yet

now John Merton felt more relaxed, more at peace, than at
any time for the past year. Whatever happened when the
Commodore gave the starting signal, whether Diana
carried him to victory or defeat, he had achieved his
ambition. After a lifetime spent designing ships for others,
now he would sail his own.

“T minus two minutes,” said the cabin radio. “Please

conﬁrm your readiness.”

One by one, the other skippers answered. Merton

recognized all the voices—some tense, some calm—for they
were the voices of his friends and rivals. On the four
inhabited worlds, there were scarcely twenty men who
could sail a Sun yacht; and they were all here, on the
starting line or aboard the escort vessels, orbiting twenty-
two thousand miles above the equator.

“Number One— Gossamer —ready to go.”
“Number Two— Santa Maria —all OK.”
“Number Three— Sunbeam —OK.”
“Number Four— Woomera —all systems GO.”
Merton smiled at that last echo from the early, primitive

days of astronautics. But it had become part of the tradition
of space; and there were times when a man needed to
evoke the shades of those who had gone before him to the
stars.

“Number Five— Lebedev —we’re ready.”
“Number Six— Arachne —OK.”
Now it was his turn, at the end of the line; strange to

think that the words he was speaking in this tiny cabin
were being heard by at least ﬁve billion people.

“Number Seven— Diana —ready to start.”
“One through Seven acknowledged,” answered that

impersonal voice from the judge’s launch. “Now T minus
one minute.”

Merton scarcely heard it. For the last time, he was

checking the tension in the rigging. The needles of all the
dynamometers were steady; the immense sail was taut, its
mirror surface sparkling and glittering gloriously in the
Sun.

To Merton, ﬂoating weightless at the periscope, it

seemed to ﬁll the sky. As well it might—for out there were
ﬁfty million square feet of sail, linked to his capsule by
almost a hundred miles of rigging. All the canvas of all the
tea clippers that had once raced like clouds across the
China seas, sewn into one gigantic sheet, could not match
the single sail that Diana had spread beneath the Sun. Yet
it was little more substantial than a soap bubble; that two
square miles of aluminized plastic was only a few millionths
of an inch thick.

“T minus ten seconds. All recording cameras ON.”
Something so huge, yet so frail, was hard for the mind to

grasp. And it was harder still to realize that this fragile
mirror could tow him free of Earth merely by the power of
the sunlight it would trap.

“. . . ﬁve, four, three, two, one, CUT!”
Seven knife blades sliced through seven thin lines

tethering the yachts to the mother ships that had
assembled and serviced them. Until this moment, all had
been circling Earth together in a rigidly held formation, but
now the yachts would begin to disperse, like dandelion
seeds drifting before the breeze. And the winner would be
the one that ﬁrst drifted past the Moon.

Aboard Diana, nothing seemed to be happening. But

Merton knew better. Though his body could feel no thrust,
the 
instrument 
board 
told 
him 
that 
he 
was 
now

rocket, that ﬁgure would have been ludicrous—but this was
the ﬁrst time any solar yacht had ever attained it. Diana’s
design was sound; the vast sail was living up to his
calculations. At this rate, two circuits of the Earth would
build up his speed to escape velocity, and then he could
head out for the Moon, with the full force of the Sun behind
him.

The full force of the Sun . . . He smiled wryly,

remembering all his attempts to explain solar sailing to
those lecture audiences back on Earth. That had been the
only way he could raise money, in those early days. He
might be Chief Designer of Cosmodyne Corporation, with a
whole string of successful spaceships to his credit, but his
ﬁrm had not been exactly enthusiastic about his hobby.

you feel? Heat, of course. But there’s pressure as well—
though you’ve never noticed it, because it’s so tiny. Over
the area of your hands, it comes to only about a millionth of
an ounce.

“But out in space, even a pressure as small as that can be

important, for it’s acting all the time, hour after hour, day
after day. Unlike rocket fuel, it’s free and unlimited. If we
want to, we can use it. We can build sails to catch the
radiation blowing from the Sun.”

At that point, he would pull out a few square yards of sail

material and toss it toward the audience. The silvery ﬁlm
would coil and twist like smoke, then drift slowly to the
ceiling in the hot-air currents.

mile weighs only a ton, and can collect ﬁve pounds of
radiation pressure. So it will start moving—and we can let
it tow us along, if we attach rigging to it.

“Of course, its acceleration will be tiny—about a

thousandth of a g. That doesn’t seem much, but let’s see
what it means.

“It means that in the ﬁrst second, we’ll move about a ﬁfth

of an inch. I suppose a healthy snail could do better than
that. But after a minute, we’ve covered sixty feet, and will
be doing just over a mile an hour. That’s not bad, for
something driven by pure sunlight! After an hour, we’re
forty miles from our starting point, and will be moving at
eighty miles an hour. Please remember that in space there’s
no friction; so once you start anything moving, it will keep
going forever. You’ll be surprised when I tell you what our
thousandth-of-a-g sailboat will be doing at the end of a
day’s run: almost two thousand miles an hour! If it starts
from orbit—as it has to, of course—it can reach escape
velocity in a couple of days. And all without burning a
single drop of fuel!”

convinced Cosmodyne. Over the last twenty years, a new
sport had come into being. It had been called the sport of
billionaires, and that was true. But it was beginning to pay
for itself in terms of publicity and TV coverage. The
prestige of four continents and two worlds was riding on
this race, and it had the biggest audience in history.

opposition. Moving very gently—though there were shock
absorbers between the control capsule and the delicate
rigging, he was determined to run no risks—Merton
stationed himself at the periscope.

There they were, looking like strange silver ﬂowers

planted in the dark ﬁelds of space. The nearest, South
America’s Santa Maria, was only ﬁfty miles away; it bore a
close resemblance to a boy’s kite, but a kite more than a
mile on a side. Farther away, the University of Astrograd’s
Lebedev looked like a Maltese cross; the sails that formed
the four arms could apparently be tilted for steering
purposes. In contrast, the Federation of Australasia’s
Woomera 
was 
a 
simple 
parachute, 
four 
miles 
in

suggested, looked like a spider web, and had been built on
the same principles, by robot shuttles spiralling out from a
central point. Eurospace Corporation’s Gossamer was an
identical design, on a slightly smaller scale. And the
Republic of Mars’s Sunbeam was a ﬂat ring, with a half-
mile-wide hole in the center, spinning slowly, so that
centrifugal force gave it stiﬀness. That was an old idea, but
no one had ever made it work; and Merton was fairly sure
that the colonials would be in trouble when they started to
turn.

had moved along the ﬁrst quarter of their slow and stately
twenty-four-hour orbit. Here at the beginning of the race,
they were all heading directly away from the Sun—running,
as it were, before the solar wind. One had to make the most
of this lap, before the boats swung around to the other side
of Earth and then started to head back into the Sun.

Time, Merton told himself, for the ﬁrst check, while he

had no navigational worries. With the periscope, he made a
careful examination of the sail, concentrating on the points
where the rigging was attached to it. The shroud lines—
narrow bands of unsilvered plastic ﬁlm—would have been
completely invisible had they not been coated with
ﬂuorescent paint. Now they were taut lines of colored light,
dwindling away for hundreds of yards toward that gigantic
sail. Each had its own electric windlass, not much bigger
than a game ﬁsherman’s reel. The little windlasses were
continually turning, playing lines in or out as the autopilot
kept the sail trimmed at the correct angle to the Sun.

The play of sunlight on the great ﬂexible mirror was

beautiful to watch. The sail was undulating in slow, stately
oscillations, sending multiple images of the Sun marching
across it, until they faded away at its edges. Such leisurely
vibrations were to be expected in this vast and ﬂimsy
structure. They were usually quite harmless, but Merton
watched them carefully. Sometimes they could build up to

the catastrophic undulations known as the ‘wriggles’,
which could tear a sail to pieces.

swept the periscope around the sky, rechecking the
positions of his rivals. It was as he had hoped: the weeding-
out process had begun, as the less eﬀicient boats fell
astern. But the real test would come when they passed into
the shadow of Earth. Then, maneuverability would count as
much as speed.

It seemed a strange thing to do, what with the race

having just started, but he thought it might be a good idea
to get some sleep. The two-man crews on the other boats
could take it in turns, but Merton had no one to relieve
him. He must rely on his own physical resources, like that
other solitary seaman, Joshua Slocum, in his tiny Spray.
The American skipper had sailed Spray singlehanded
around the world; he could never have dreamed that, two
centuries later, a man would be sailing singlehanded from
Earth to Moon—inspired, at least partly, by his example.

Merton snapped the elastic bands of the cabin seat

around his waist and legs, then placed the electrodes of the
sleep-inducer on his forehead. He set the timer for three
hours, and relaxed. Very gently, hypnotically, the electronic
pulses throbbed in the frontal lobes of his brain. Colored
spirals of light expanded beneath his closed eyelids,
widening outward to inﬁnity. Then nothing . . .

The brazen clamor of the alarm dragged him back from

his dreamless sleep. He was instantly awake, his eyes
scanning the instrument panel. Only two hours had passed
—but above the accelerometer, a red light was ﬂashing.
Thrust was falling; Diana was losing power.

Merton’s ﬁrst thought was that something had happened

to the sail; perhaps the antispin devices had failed, and the
rigging had become twisted. Swiftly, he checked the meters
that showed the tension of the shroud lines. Strange—on

one side of the sail they were reading normally, but on the
other the pull was dropping slowly, even as he watched.

switched to wide-angle vision, and started to scan the edge
of the sail. Yes—there was the trouble, and it could have
only one cause.

the gleaming silver of the sail. Darkness was falling upon
Diana, as if a cloud had passed between her and the Sun.
And in the dark, robbed of the rays that drove her, she
would lose all thrust and drift helplessly through space.

But, of course, there were no clouds here, more than

twenty thousand miles above the Earth. If there was a
shadow, it must be made by man.

Sun, switching in the ﬁlters that would allow him to look
full into its blazing face without being blinded.

“Maneuver 4a,” he muttered to himself. “We’ll see who

can play best at that game.”

It looked as if a giant planet was crossing the face of the

Sun; a great black disc had bitten deep into its edge.
Twenty miles astern, Gossamer was trying to arrange an
artiﬁcial eclipse, specially for Diana’s beneﬁt.

days of ocean racing, skippers had often tried to rob each
other of the wind. With any luck, you could leave your rival
becalmed, with his sails collapsing around him—and be
well ahead before he could undo the damage.

Merton had no intention of being caught so easily. There

was plenty of time to take evasive action; things happened
very slowly when you were running a solar sailboat. It
would be at least twenty minutes before Gossamer could
slide completely across the face of the Sun, and leave him
in darkness.

Diana’s tiny computer—the size of a matchbox, but the

equivalent 
of 
a 
thousand 
human 
mathematicians—

considered the problem for a full second and then ﬂashed
the answer. He’d have to open control panels three and
four, until the sail had developed an extra twenty degrees
of tilt; then the radiation pressure would blow him out of
Gossamer’s dangerous shadow, back into the full blast of
the Sun. It was a pity to interfere with the autopilot, which
had been carefully programmed to give the fastest possible
run—but that, after all, was why he was here. This was
what made solar yachting a sport, rather than a battle
between computers.

Out went control lines one and six, slowly undulating like

sleepy snakes as they momentarily lost their tension. Two
miles away, the triangular panels began to open lazily,
spilling sunlight through the sail. Yet, for a long time,
nothing seemed to happen. It was hard to grow accustomed
to this slow-motion world, where it took minutes for the
eﬀects of any action to become visible to the eye. Then
Merton saw that the sail was indeed tipping toward the Sun
—and that Gossamer’s shadow was sliding harmlessly away,
its cone of darkness lost in the deeper night of space.

Long before the shadow had vanished, and the disc of the

Sun had cleared again, he reversed the tilt and brought
Diana back on course. Her new momentum would carry her
clear of the danger; no need to overdo it, and upset his
calculations by side-stepping too far. That was another rule
that was hard to learn: the very moment you had started
something happening in space, it was already time to think
about stopping it.

He reset the alarm, ready for the next natural or

manmade emergency. Perhaps Gossamer, or one of the
other contestants, would try the same trick again.
Meanwhile, it was time to eat, though he did not feel
particularly hungry. One used little physical energy in
space, and it was easy to forget about food. Easy—and
dangerous; for when an emergency arose, you might not
have the reserves needed to deal with it.

He broke open the ﬁrst of the meal packets, and

inspected it without enthusiasm. The name on the label—
SPACETASTIES—was enough to put him oﬀ. And he had
grave doubts about the promise printed underneath:
‘Guaranteed crumbless’. It had been said that crumbs were
a greater danger to space vehicles than meteorites; they
could drift into the most unlikely places, causing short
circuits, blocking vital jets, and getting into instruments
that were supposed to be hermetically sealed.

the chocolate and the pineapple puree. The plastic coﬀee
bulb was warming on the electric heater when the outside
world broke in upon his solitude, as the radio operator on
the Commodore’s launch routed a call to him.

would like a few words with you.” Blair was one of the
more responsible news commentators, and Merton had
been on his program many times. He could refuse to be
interviewed, of course, but he liked Blair, and at the
moment he could certainly not claim to be too busy. “I’ll
take it,” he answered.

“Hello, Dr Merton,” said the commentator immediately.

“Glad you can spare a few minutes. And congratulations—
you seem to be ahead of the ﬁeld.”

“Too early in the game to be sure of that,” Merton

answered cautiously.

“Tell me, Doctor, why did you decide to sail Diana by

yourself? Just because it’s never been done before?”

one, of course.” He paused, choosing his words carefully.
“You know how critically the performance of a Sun yacht
depends on its mass. A second man, with all his supplies,
would mean another ﬁve hundred pounds. That could easily
be the diﬀerence between winning and losing.”

“And you’re quite certain that you can handle Diana

alone?”

designed. My main job is to supervise and make decisions.”

possible for one man to cope with all that,”

Merton laughed. “Why not? Those two square miles

produce a maximum pull of just ten pounds. I can exert
more force with my little ﬁnger.”

you again.”

As the commentator signed oﬀ, Merton felt a little

ashamed of himself. For his answer had been only part of
the truth; and he was sure that Blair was shrewd enough to
know it.

There was just one reason why he was here, alone in

space. For almost forty years he had worked with teams of
hundreds or even thousands of men, helping to design the
most complex vehicles that the world had ever seen. For
the last twenty years he had led one of those teams, and
watched his creations go soaring to the stars. (Sometimes .
. . There were failures, which he could never forget, even
though the fault had not been his.) He was famous, with a
successful career behind him. Yet he had never done
anything by himself; always he had been one of an army.

achievement, and he would share it with no one. There
would be no more solar yachting for at least ﬁve years, as
the period of the Quiet Sun ended and the cycle of bad
weather began, with radiation storms bursting through the
solar system. When it was safe again for these frail,
unshielded craft to venture aloft, he would be too old. If,
indeed, he was not too old already . . .

He dropped the empty food containers into the waste

disposal and turned once more to the periscope. At ﬁrst he
could ﬁnd only ﬁve of the other yachts; there was no sign of
Woomera. It took him several minutes to locate her—a dim,
star-eclipsing phantom, neatly caught in the shadow of

Lebedev. He could imagine the frantic eﬀorts the
Australasians were making to extricate themselves, and
wondered how they had fallen into the trap. It suggested
that Lebedev was unusually maneuverable. She would bear
watching, though she was too far away to menace Diana at
the moment.

narrow, brilliant bow of light that was moving steadily
toward the Sun. Dimly outlined within that burning bow
was the night side of the planet, with the phosphorescent
gleams of great cities showing here and there through gaps
in the clouds. The disc of darkness had already blanked out
a huge section of the Milky Way. In a few minutes, it would
start to encroach upon the Sun.

The light was fading; a purple, twilight hue—the glow of

many sunsets, thousands of miles below—was falling across
the sail as Diana slipped silently into the shadow of Earth.
The Sun plummeted below that invisible horizon; within
minutes, it was night.

quarter of the way around the world. One by one he saw
the brilliant stars of the other yachts wink out, as they
joined him in the brief night. It would be an hour before the
Sun emerged from that enormous black shield, and through
all that time they would be completely helpless, coasting
without power.

He switched on the external spotlight, and started to

search the now-darkened sail with its beam. Already the
thousands of acres of ﬁlm were beginning to wrinkle and
become ﬂaccid. The shroud lines were slackening, and
must be wound in lest they become entangled. But all this
was expected; everything was going as planned.

lucky. Merton learned of their troubles when the radio
burst into life on the emergency circuit.

on a collision course; your orbits will intersect in sixty-ﬁve
minutes! Do you require assistance?”

this bad news. Merton wondered who was to blame.
Perhaps one yacht had been trying to shadow the other,
and had not completed the maneuver before they were
both caught in darkness. Now there was nothing that either
could do. They were slowly but inexorably converging,
unable to change course by a fraction of a degree.

into sunlight again, as they emerged from the shadow of
the Earth. They had a slim chance, if their sails could
snatch enough power to avoid a crash. There must be some
frantic calculations going on aboard Arachne and Santa
Maria.

Arachne answered ﬁrst. Her reply was just what Merton

had expected.

“Number Six calling Control. We don’t need assistance,

thank you. We’ll work this out for ourselves.”

I wonder, thought Merton; but at least it will be

interesting to watch. The ﬁrst real drama of the race was
approaching, exactly above the line of midnight on the
sleeping Earth.

worry about Arachne and Santa Maria. It was hard to keep
a good watch on that ﬁfty million square feet of dim plastic
out there in the darkness, illuminated only by his narrow
spotlight and the rays of the still-distant Moon. From now
on, for almost half his orbit around the Earth, he must keep
the whole of this immense area edge-on to the Sun. During
the next twelve or fourteen hours, the sail would be a
useless encumbrance; for he would be heading into the
Sun, and its rays could only drive him backward along his
orbit. It was a pity that he could not furl the sail completely,

until he was ready to use it again; but no one had yet found
a practical way of doing this.

of the Earth. In ten minutes the Sun would emerge from its
eclipse. The coasting yachts would come to life again as the
blast of radiation struck their sails. That would be the
moment of crisis for Arachne and Santa Maria —and,
indeed, for all of them.

shadows drifting against the stars. They were very close
together—perhaps less than three miles apart. They might,
he decided, just be able to make it . . .

the Sun rose out of the Paciﬁc. The sail and shroud lines
glowed a brief crimson, then gold, then blazed with the
pure white light of day. The needles of the dynamometers
began to lift from their zeroes—but only just. Diana was
still almost completely weightless, for with the sail pointing
toward the Sun, her acceleration was now only a few
millionths of a gravity.

But Arachne and Santa Maria were crowding on all the

sail that they could manage, in their desperate attempt to
keep apart. Now, while there was less than two miles
between them, their glittering plastic clouds were unfurling
and expanding with agonizing slowness as they felt the ﬁrst
delicate push of the Sun’s rays. Almost every TV screen on
Earth would be mirroring this protracted drama; and even
now, at this last minute, it was impossible to tell what the
outcome would be.

The two skippers were stubborn men. Either could have

cut his sail and fallen back to give the other a chance; but
neither would do so. Too much prestige, too many millions,
too many reputations were at stake. And so, silently and
softly as snowﬂakes falling on a winter night, Arachne and
Santa Maria collided.

circular spider web. The long ribbons of the shroud lines
twisted and tangled together with dreamlike slowness.
Even aboard Diana, Merton, busy with his own rigging,
could scarcely tear his eyes away from this silent, long-
drawn-out disaster.

continued to merge into one inextricable mass. Then the
crew capsules tore loose and went their separate ways,
missing each other by hundreds of yards. With a ﬂare of
rockets, the safety launches hurried to pick them up.

That leaves ﬁve of us, thought Merton. He felt sorry for

the skippers who had so thoroughly eliminated each other,
only a few hours after the start of the race, but they were
young men and would have another chance.

beginning. Merton had had doubts about the slowly
rotating Sunbeam; now he saw them justiﬁed.

The Martian ship had failed to tack properly. Her spin

had given her too much stability. Her great ring of a sail
was turning to face the Sun, instead of being edge-on to it.
She was being blown back along her course at almost her
maximum acceleration.

That was about the most maddening thing that could

happen to a skipper—even worse than a collision, for he
could blame only himself. But no one would feel much
sympathy for the frustrated colonials, as they dwindled
slowly astern. They had made too many brash boasts before
the race, and what had happened to them was poetic
justice.

almost half a million miles still to go, she might yet pull
ahead. Indeed, if there were a few more casualties, she
might be the only one to complete the race. It had
happened before.

waxed in the sky from new to full. There was little to do
while the ﬂeet drifted around the unpowered half of its
orbit, but Merton did not ﬁnd the time hanging heavily on
his hands. He caught a few hours of sleep, ate two meals,
wrote his log, and became involved in several more radio
interviews. Sometimes, though rarely, he talked to the
other skippers, exchanging greetings and friendly taunts.
But most of the time he was content to ﬂoat in weightless
relaxation, beyond all the cares of Earth, happier than he
had been for many years. He was—as far as any man could
be in space—master of his own fate, sailing the ship upon
which he had lavished so much skill, so much love, that it
had become part of his very being.

between Earth and Sun, and were just beginning the
powered half of the orbit. Aboard Diana, Merton saw the
great sail stiﬀen as it tilted to catch the rays that drove it.
The 
acceleration 
began 
to 
climb 
up 
from 
the

microgravities, though it would be hours yet before it
would reach its maximum value.

It would never reach it for Gossamer. The moment when

power came on again was always critical, and she failed to
survive it.

at low volume, alerted him with the news: “Hello, Gossamer
has the wriggles!” He hurried to the periscope, but at ﬁrst
could see nothing wrong with the great circular disc of
Gossamer’s sail. It was diﬀicult to study it because it was
almost edge-on to him and so appeared as a thin ellipse;
but presently he saw that it was twisting back and forth in
slow, irresistible oscillations. Unless the crew could damp
out these waves, by properly timed but gentle tugs on the
shroud lines, the sail would tear itself to pieces.

of the sail, the plastic hem began to rip. It was slowly
driven outward by the radiation pressure, like smoke
coiling upward from a ﬁre. Within a quarter of an hour,
nothing was left but the delicate tracery of the radial spars
that had supported the great web. Once again there was a
ﬂare of rockets, as a launch moved in to retrieve the
Gossamer’s capsule and her dejected crew.

conversational voice over the ship-to-ship radio.

“Not for you, Dimitri,” retorted Merton. “You’ve still got

company back there at the end of the ﬁeld. I’m the one
who’s lonely, up here in front.” It was not an idle boast; by
this time Diana was three hundred miles ahead of the next
competitor, and her lead should increase still more rapidly
in the hours to come.

Aboard Lebedev, Dimitri Markoﬀ gave a good-natured

chuckle. He did not sound, Merton thought, at all like a
man who had resigned himself to defeat.

“Remember the legend of the tortoise and the hare,”

answered the Russian. “A lot can happen in the next
quarter-million miles.”

It happened much sooner than that, when they had

completed their ﬁrst orbit of Earth and were passing the
starting line again—though thousands of miles higher,
thanks to the extra energy the Sun’s rays had given them.
Merton had taken careful sights on the other yachts, and
had fed the ﬁgures into the computer. The answer it gave
for Woomera was so absurd that he immediately did a
recheck.

There was no doubt of it—the Australasians were

catching up at a completely fantastic rate. No solar yacht
could possibly have such an acceleration, unless . . .

A swift look through the periscope gave the answer.

Woomera’s rigging, pared back to the very minimum of
mass, had given way. It was her sail alone, still maintaining
its shape, that was racing up behind him like a

handkerchief blown before the wind. Two hours later it
ﬂuttered past, less than twenty miles away; but long before
that, the Australasians had joined the growing crowd
aboard the Commodore’s launch.

So now it was a straight ﬁght between Diana and

Lebedev —for though the Martians had not given up, they
were a thousand miles astern and no longer counted as a
serious threat. For that matter, it was hard to see what
Lebedev could do to overtake Diana’s lead; but all the way
around the second lap, through eclipse again and the long,
slow drift against the Sun, Merton felt a growing unease.

trying to win this race for twenty years—and, after all, it
was only fair that they should, for had not Pyotr
Nikolaevich Lebedev been the ﬁrst man to detect the
pressure of sunlight, back at the very beginning of the
twentieth century? But they had never succeeded.

And they would never stop trying. Dimitri was up to

something—and it would be spectacular.

Aboard the oﬀicial launch, a thousand miles behind the

racing yachts, Commodore van Stratten looked at the
radiogram with angry dismay. It had travelled more than a
hundred million miles, from the chain of solar observatories
swinging high above the blazing surface of the Sun; and it
brought the worst possible news.

The Commodore—his title was purely honorary, of

course; back on Earth he was Professor of Astrophysics at
Harvard—had been half expecting it. Never before had the
race been arranged so late in the season. There had been
many delays; they had gambled—and now, it seemed, they
might all lose.

Deep beneath the surface of the Sun, enormous forces

were gathering. At any moment the energies of a million

hydrogen bombs might burst forth in the awesome
explosion known as a solar ﬂare. Climbing at millions of
miles an hour, an invisible ﬁreball many times the size of
Earth would leap from the Sun and head out across space.

The cloud of electriﬁed gas would probably miss the

Earth completely. But if it did not, it would arrive in just
over a day. Spaceships could protect themselves, with their
shielding and their powerful magnetic screens; but the
lightly built solar yachts, with their paper-thin walls, were
defenseless against such a menace. The crews would have
to be taken oﬀ, and the race abandoned.

John Merton knew nothing of this as he brought Diana

around the Earth for the second time. If all went well, this
would be the last circuit, both for him and for the Russians.
They had spiralled upward by thousands of miles, gaining
energy from the Sun’s rays. On this lap, they should escape
from Earth completely, and head outward on the long run
to the Moon. It was a straight race now; Sunbeam’s crew
had ﬁnally withdrawn exhausted, after battling valiantly
with their spinning sail for more than a hundred thousand
miles.

and Diana was behaving herself admirably. The autopilot,
tensioning the rigging like a busy little spider, kept the
great sail trimmed to the Sun more accurately than any
human skipper could have. Though by this time the two
square miles of plastic sheet must have been riddled by
hundreds of micrometeorites, the pinhead-sized punctures
had produced no falling oﬀ of thrust.

He had only two worries. The ﬁrst was shroud line

number eight, which could no longer be adjusted properly.
Without any warning, the reel had jammed; even after all
these 
years 
of 
astronautical 
engineering, 
bearings

sometimes seized up in vacuum. He could neither lengthen
nor shorten the line, and would have to navigate as best he
could with the others. Luckily, the most diﬀicult maneuvers

were over; from now on, Diana would have the Sun behind
her as she sailed straight down the solar wind. And as the
old-time sailors had often said, it was easy to handle a boat
when the wind was blowing over your shoulder.

three hundred miles astern. The Russian yacht had shown
remarkable maneuverability, thanks to the four great
panels that could be tilted around the central sail. Her
ﬂipovers as she rounded the Earth had been carried out
with superb precision. But to gain maneuverability she
must have sacriﬁced speed. You could not have it both
ways; in the long, straight haul ahead, Merton should be
able to hold his own. Yet he could not be certain of victory
until, three or four days from now, Diana went ﬂashing past
the far side of the Moon.

And then, in the ﬁftieth hour of the race, just after the

end of the second orbit around Earth, Markoﬀ sprang his
little surprise.

circuit. “I’d like you to watch this. It should be interesting.”

Merton drew himself across to the periscope and turned

up the magniﬁcation to the limit. There in the ﬁeld of view,
a most improbable sight against the background of the
stars, was the glittering Maltese cross of Lebedev, very
small but very clear. As he watched, the four arms of the
cross slowly detached themselves from the central square,
and went drifting away, with all their spars and rigging into
space.

was coming up to escape velocity and need no longer plod
patiently around the Earth, gaining momentum on each
circuit. From now on, Lebedev would be almost unsteerable
—but that did not matter; all the tricky navigation lay
behind her. It was as if an old-time yachtsman had
deliberately thrown away his rudder and heavy keel,

knowing that the rest of the race would be straight
downwind over a calm sea.

trick. But it’s not good enough. You can’t catch up with me
now.”

old winter’s tale in my country about a sleigh being chased
by wolves. To save himself, the driver has to throw oﬀ the
passengers one by one. Do you see the analogy?”

Merton did, all too well. On this ﬁnal straight lap, Dimitri

no longer needed his copilot. Lebedev could really be
stripped down for action.

“Alexis won’t be very happy about this,” Merton replied.

“Besides, it’s against the rules.”

“Alexis isn’t happy, but I’m the captain. He’ll just have to

wait around for ten minutes until the Commodore picks him
up. And the regulations say nothing about the size of the
crew— you should know that.”

Merton did not answer; he was too busy doing some

hurried calculations, based on what he knew of Lebedev’s
design. By the time he had ﬁnished, he knew that the race
was still in doubt. Lebedev would be catching up with him
at just about the time he hoped to pass the Moon.

ninety-two million miles away.

On Solar Observatory Three, far inside the orbit of

Mercury, the automatic instruments recorded the whole
history of the ﬂare. A hundred million square miles of the
Sun’s surface exploded in such blue-white fury that, by
comparison, the rest of the disc paled to a dull glow. Out of
that seething inferno, twisting and turning like a living
creature in the magnetic ﬁelds of its own creation, soared
the electriﬁed plasma of the great ﬂare. Ahead of it, moving

at the speed of light, went the warning ﬂash of ultraviolet
and X rays. That would reach Earth in eight minutes, and
was relatively harmless. Not so the charged atoms that
were following behind at their leisurely four million miles
an hour—and which, in just over a day, would engulf Diana,
Lebedev, and their accompanying little ﬂeet in a cloud of
lethal radiation.

minute. Even when the jet of plasma had been tracked past
the orbit of Venus, there was a chance that it might miss
the Earth. But when it was less than four hours away, and
had already been picked up by the Moon-based radar
network, he knew that there was no hope. All solar sailing
was over, for the next ﬁve or six years—until the Sun was
quiet again.

system. Diana and Lebedev were halfway between Earth
and Moon, running neck and neck—and now no one would
ever know which was the better boat. The enthusiasts
would argue the result for years; history would merely
record: “Race cancelled owing to solar storm.”

When John Merton received the order, he felt a bitterness

he had not known since childhood. Across the years, sharp
and clear, came the memory of his tenth birthday. He had
been promised an exact scale model of the famous
spaceship Morning Star, and for weeks had been planning
how he would assemble it, where he would hang it in his
bedroom. And then, at the last moment, his father had
broken the news. “I’m sorry, John—it cost too much money.
Maybe next year . . .”

heartbroken boy again.

For a moment, he thought of disobeying the Commodore.

Suppose he sailed on, ignoring the warning? Even if the
race was abandoned, he could make a crossing to the Moon
that would stand in the record books for generations.

suicide—and a very unpleasant form of suicide. He had
seen men die of radiation poisoning, when the magnetic
shielding of their ships had failed in deep space. No—
nothing was worth that . . .

had both deserved to win, and now victory would go to
neither. No man could argue with the Sun in one of its
rages, even though he might ride upon its beams to the
edge of space.

drawing alongside Lebedev, preparing to take oﬀ her
skipper. There went the silver sail, as Dimitri—with feelings
that he would share—cut the rigging. The tiny capsule
would be taken back to Earth, perhaps to be used again;
but a sail was spread for one voyage only.

He could press the jettison button now, and save his

rescuers a few minutes of time. But he could not do it; he
wanted to stay aboard to the very end, on the little boat
that had been for so long a part of his dreams and his life.
The great sail was spread now at right angles to the Sun,
exerting its utmost thrust. Long ago it had torn him clear of
Earth, and Diana was still gaining speed.

knew what must be done. For the last time, he sat down
before the computer that had navigated him halfway to the
Moon.

When he had ﬁnished, he packed the log and his few

personal belongings. Clumsily, for he was out of practice,
and it was not an easy job to do by oneself, he climbed into
the emergency survival suit. He was just sealing the helmet
when the Commodore’s voice called over the radio.

your sail, so we won’t foul it.”

John Merton, ﬁrst and last skipper of the Sun yacht

Diana, hesitated a moment. He looked for the last time

around the tiny cabin, with its shining instruments and its
neatly arranged controls, now all locked in their ﬁnal
positions. Then he said into the microphone: “I’m
abandoning ship. Take your time to pick me up. Diana can
look after herself.”

was grateful. Professor van Stratten would have guessed
what was happening—and would know that, in these ﬁnal
moments, he wished to be left alone.

He did not bother to exhaust the air lock, and the rush of

escaping gas blew him gently out into space. The thrust he
gave her then was his last gift to Diana. She dwindled away
from him, sail glittering splendidly in the sunlight that
would be hers for centuries to come. Two days from now
she would ﬂash past the Moon; but the Moon, like the
Earth, could never catch her. Without his mass to slow her
down, she would gain two thousand miles an hour in every
day of sailing. In a month, she would be travelling faster
than any ship that man had ever built.

As the Sun’s rays weakened with distance, so her

acceleration would fall. But even at the orbit of Mars, she
would be gaining a thousand miles an hour in every day.
Long before then, she would be moving too swiftly for the
Sun itself to hold her. Faster than a comet had ever
streaked in from the stars, she would be heading out into
the abyss.

The glare of rockets, only a few miles away, caught

Merton’s eye. The launch was approaching to pick him up—
at thousands of times the acceleration that Diana could
ever attain. But its engines could burn for a few minutes
only, before they exhausted their fuel—while Diana would
still be gaining speed, driven outward by the Sun’s eternal
ﬁres, for ages yet to come.

eyes will see you next, how many thousand years from
now?”

At last he felt at peace, as the blunt torpedo of the launch

nosed up beside him. He would never win the race to the
Moon; but his would be the ﬁrst of all man’s ships to set
sail on the long journey to the stars.

A MEETING
WITH MEDUSA

“A Meeting with Medusa” was written in January 1971 for
one speciﬁc purpose. Over the previous decade I had
accumulated some 50,000 words of short stories, and
needed another 15,000 to make up a complete volume. So I
sat down at the typewriter (I still have one gathering dust
somewhere, but if this word processor breaks down I’m
going back to pen and paper . . .) and “Medusa” was the
result. It was as simple as that.

Well, not really. I had been thinking about Jupiter for a

long time; witness the ﬁnal sequence in the movie 2001: A
Space Odyssey. And in some ways the sequel 2010:
Odyssey Two is also a sequel to this story; I had room there
to develop in more detail some of the concepts I had ﬁrst
worked out in “Medusa.”

And by then, of course, our knowledge of Jupiter had

been enormously increased, thanks to the marvelous
Pioneer 
and 
Voyager 
missions. 
None 
of 
this 
new

information, I am happy to say, has invalidated any of these
earlier ideas. On the contrary: there are some very
suspicious, sharp-edged blobs ﬂoating around in the Jovian
atmosphere . . .

“A Meeting with Medusa” was the last story I ever wrote,

before concentrating entirely on novels. It won a Playboy
editorial award and the Science Fiction Writers of
America’s annual Nebula, so I am proud to have made it my
swan song . . .for the present, at any rate.

And here’s a very strange coincidence. Until I started to

write this note, I’d completely forgotten that I used the
name “Kon-Tiki” for the exploring vehicle. And so I was
able to autograph a copy of “Medusa” for Thor Heyerdahl—
when I met him this morning, right here in Colombo . . .

T

1. A Day to Remember

he Queen Elizabeth was over three miles above the
Grand Canyon, dawdling along at a comfortable
hundred and eighty, when Howard Falcon spotted

the camera platform closing in from the right. He had been
expecting it—nothing else was cleared to ﬂy at this altitude
—but he was not too happy to have company. Although he
welcomed any signs of public interest, he also wanted as
much empty sky as he could get. After all, he was the ﬁrst
man in history to navigate a ship three-tenths of a mile long
. . .

So far, this ﬁrst test ﬂight had gone perfectly; ironically

enough, the only problem had been the century-old aircraft
carrier Chairman Mao, borrowed from the San Diego Naval
Museum for support operations. Only one of Mao’s four
nuclear reactors was still operating, and the old battle-
wagon’s top speed was barely thirty knots. Luckily, wind
speed at sea level had been less than half this, so it had not
been too diﬀicult to maintain still air on the ﬂight deck.
Though there had been a few anxious moments during
gusts, when the mooring lines had been dropped, the great
dirigible had risen smoothly, straight up into the sky, as if
on an invisible elevator. If all went well, Queen Elizabeth IV
would not meet Chairman Mao again for another week.

Everything was under control; all test instruments gave

normal readings. Commander Falcon decided to go upstairs
and watch the rendezvous. He handed over to his second
oﬀicer, and walked out into the transparent tubeway that
led through the heart of the ship. There, as always, he was
overwhelmed by the spectacle of the largest single space
ever enclosed by man.

feet across, were ranged one behind the other like a line of
gigantic soap bubbles. The tough plastic was so clear that
he could see through the whole length of the array, and
make out details of the elevator mechanism, more than a
third of a mile from his vantage point. All around him, like a
three-dimensional maze, was the structural framework of
the ship—the great longitudinal girders running from nose
to tail, the ﬁfteen hoops that were the circular ribs of this
sky-borne colossus, and whose varying sizes deﬁned its
graceful, streamlined proﬁle.

At this low speed, there was little sound—merely the soft

rush of wind over the envelope and an occasional creak of
metal as the pattern of stresses changed. The shadowless
light from the rows of lamps far overhead gave the whole
scene a curiously submarine quality, and to Falcon this was
enhanced by the spectacle of the translucent gasbags. He
had once encountered a squadron of large but harmless
jellyﬁsh, pulsing their mindless way above a shallow
tropical reef, and the plastic bubbles that gave Queen
Elizabeth her lift often reminded him of these—especially
when changing pressures made them crinkle and scatter
new patterns of reﬂected light.

forward elevator, between gas cells one and two. Riding up
to 
the 
Observation 
Deck, 
he 
noticed 
that 
it 
was

uncomfortably hot, and dictated a brief memo to himself on
his pocket recorder. The Queen obtained almost a quarter
of her buoyancy from the unlimited amounts of waste heat
produced by her fusion power plant. On this lightly loaded
ﬂight, indeed, only six of the ten gas cells contained
helium; the remaining four were full of air. Yet she still
carried two hundred tons of water as ballast. However,
running the cells at high temperatures did produce
problems in refrigerating the access ways; it was obvious
that a little more work would have to be done there.

he stepped out onto the Observation Deck and into the
dazzling sunlight streaming through the plexiglass roof.
Half a dozen workmen, with an equal number of
superchimp assistants, were busily laying the partly
completed dance ﬂoor, while others were installing electric
wiring and ﬁxing furniture. It was a scene of controlled
chaos, and Falcon found it hard to believe that everything
would be ready for the maiden voyage, only four weeks
ahead. Well, that was not his problem, thank goodness. He
was merely the Captain, not the Cruise Director.

The human workers waved to him, and the ‘simps’

ﬂashed toothy smiles, as he walked through the confusion,
into the already completed Skylounge. This was his favorite
place in the whole ship, and he knew that once she was
operating he would never again have it all to himself. He
would allow himself just ﬁve minutes of private enjoyment.

He called the bridge, checked that everything was still in

order, and relaxed into one of the comfortable swivel
chairs. Below, in a curve that delighted the eye, was the
unbroken silver sweep of the ship’s envelope. He was
perched at the highest point, surveying the whole
immensity of the largest vehicle ever built. And when he
had tired of that—all the way out to the horizon was the
fantastic wilderness carved by the Colorado River in half a
billion years of time.

Apart from the camera platform (it had now fallen back

and was ﬁlming from amidships), he had the sky to himself.
It was blue and empty, clear down to the horizon. In his
grandfather’s day, Falcon knew, it would have been
streaked with vapor trails and stained with smoke. Both
had gone: the aerial garbage had vanished with the
primitive technologies that spawned it, and the long-
distance transportation of this age arced too far beyond the
stratosphere for any sight or sound of it to reach Earth.

Once again, the lower atmosphere belonged to the birds
and the clouds—and now to Queen Elizabeth IV.

of the twentieth century: this was the only way to travel—in
silence and luxury, breathing the air around you and not
cut oﬀ from it, near enough to the surface to watch the
ever-changing beauty of land and sea. The subsonic jets of
the 1980s, packed with hundreds of passengers seated ten
abreast, could not even begin to match such comfort and
spaciousness.

Of course, the Queen would never be an economic

proposition, and even if her projected sister ships were
built, only a few of the world’s quarter of a billion
inhabitants would ever enjoy this silent gliding through the
sky. But a secure and prosperous global society could aﬀord
such follies and indeed needed them for their novelty and
entertainment. There were at least a million men on Earth
whose discretionary income exceeded a thousand new
dollars a year, so the Queen would not lack for passengers.

Falcon’s pocket communicator beeped. The copilot was

calling from the bridge.

need from this run, and the TV people are getting
impatient.”

speed a tenth of a mile away.

here.”

He walked back through the busy chaos of the

Observation Deck so that he could have a better view
amidships. As he did so, he could feel the change of
vibration underfoot; by the time he had reached the rear of
the lounge, the ship had come to rest. Using his master key,
he let himself out onto the small external platform ﬂaring
from the end of the deck; half a dozen people could stand
here, with only low guardrails separating them from the

vast sweep of the envelope—and from the ground,
thousands of feet below. It was an exciting place to be, and
perfectly safe even when the ship was travelling at speed,
for it was in the dead air behind the huge dorsal blister of
the Observation Deck. Nevertheless, it was not intended
that the passengers would have access to it; the view was a
little too vertiginous.

opened like giant trap doors, and the camera platform was
hovering above them, preparing to descend. Along this
route, in the years to come, would travel thousands of
passengers and tons of supplies. Only on rare occasions
would the Queen drop down to sea level and dock with her
ﬂoating base.

he tightened his grip on the guardrail. The Grand Canyon
was a bad place for turbulence, though he did not expect
much at this altitude. Without any real anxiety, he focused
his attention on the descending platform, now about a
hundred and ﬁfty feet above the ship. He knew that the
highly skilled operator who was ﬂying the remotely
controlled vehicle had performed this simple maneuver a
dozen times already; it was inconceivable that he would
have any diﬀiculties.

gust had drifted the platform almost to the edge of the
open hatchway. Surely the pilot could have corrected
before this . . . Did he have a control problem? It was very
unlikely; these remotes had multiple-redundancy, fail-safe
takeovers, and any number of backup systems. Accidents
were almost unheard of.

But there he went again, oﬀ to the left. Could the pilot be

drunk? Improbable though that seemed, Falcon considered
it seriously for a moment. Then he reached for his
microphone switch.

the face. He hardly felt it, for he was staring in horror at
the camera platform. The distant operator was ﬁghting for
control, trying to balance the craft on its jets—but he was
only making matters worse. The oscillations increased
twenty degrees, forty, sixty, ninety . . .

into his microphone. “Your manual control’s not working!”

supported it, but drove it swiftly downward. They had
suddenly become allies of the gravity they had fought until
this moment.

already inside the Observation Deck, racing for the elevator
that would take him down to the bridge. Workmen shouted
at him anxiously, asking what had happened. It would be
many months before he knew the answer to that question.

changed his mind. What if there was a power failure?
Better be on the safe side, even if it took longer and time
was the essence. He began to run down the spiral stairway
enclosing the shaft.

damage. That damned platform had gone clear through the
ship, rupturing two of the gas cells as it did so. They were
still collapsing slowly, in great falling veils of plastic. He
was not worried about the loss of lift—the ballast could
easily take care of that, as long as eight cells remained
intact. Far more serious was the possibility of structural
damage. Already he could hear the great latticework
around him groaning and protesting under its abnormal
loads. It was not enough to have suﬀicient lift; unless it was
properly distributed, the ship would break her back.

He was just resuming his descent when a superchimp,

shrieking with fright, came racing down the elevator shaft,
moving with incredible speed, hand over hand, along the

outside of the latticework. In its terror, the poor beast had
torn oﬀ its company uniform, perhaps in an unconscious
attempt to regain the freedom of its ancestors.

Falcon, still descending as swiftly as he could, watched

its approach with some alarm. A distraught simp was a
powerful and potentially dangerous animal, especially if
fear overcame its conditioning As it overtook him, it started
to call out a string of words, but they were all jumbled
together, and the only one he could recognize was a
plaintive, frequently repeated ‘boss’. Even now, Falcon
realized, it looked toward humans for guidance. He felt
sorry for the creature, involved in a man-made disaster
beyond its comprehension, and for which it bore no
responsibility.

It stopped opposite him, on the other side of the lattice;

there was nothing to prevent it from coming through the
open framework if it wished. Now its face was only inches
from his, and he was looking straight into the terriﬁed
eyes. Never before had he been so close to a simp, and able
to study its features in such detail. He felt that strange
mingling of kinship and discomfort that all men experience
when they gaze thus into the mirror of time.

His presence seemed to have calmed the creature.

Falcon pointed up the shaft, back toward the Observation
Deck, and said very clearly and precisely: ‘Boss—boss—go.’
To his relief, the simp understood; it gave him a grimace
that might have been a smile, and at once started to race
back the way it had come. Falcon had given it the best
advice he could. If any safety remained aboard the Queen,
it was in that direction. But his duty lay in the other.

He had almost completed his descent when, with a sound

of rending metal, the vessel pitched nose down, and the
lights went out. But he could still see quite well, for a shaft
of sunlight streamed through the open hatch and the huge
tear in the envelope. Many years ago he had stood in a
great cathedral nave watching the light pouring through

the stained-glass windows and forming pools of multi-
colored radiance on the ancient ﬂagstones. The dazzling
shaft of sunlight through the ruined fabric high above
reminded him of that moment. He was in a cathedral of
metal, falling down the sky.

When he reached the bridge, and was able for the ﬁrst

time to look outside, he was horriﬁed to see how close the
ship was to the ground. Only three thousand feet below
were the beautiful and deadly pinnacles of rock and the red
rivers of mud that were still carving their way down into
the past. There was no level area anywhere in sight where
a ship as large as the Queen could come to rest on an even
keel.

A glance at the display board told him that all the ballast

had gone. However, rate of descent had been reduced to a
few yards a second; they still had a ﬁghting chance.

Without a word, Falcon eased himself into the pilot’s seat

and took over such control as still remained. The
instrument board showed him everything he wished to
know; speech was superﬂuous. In the background, he could
hear the Communications Oﬀicer giving a running report
over the radio. By this time, all the news channels of Earth
would have been preempted, and he could imagine the
utter frustration of the program controllers. One of the
most spectacular wrecks in history was occurring—without
a single camera to record it. The last moments of the
Queen would never ﬁll millions with awe and terror, as had
those of the Hindenburg, a century and a half before.

away, still coming up slowly. Though he had full thrust, he
had not dared to use it, lest the weakened structure
collapse; but now he realized that he had no choice. The
wind was taking them toward a fork in the canyon, where
the river was split by a wedge of rock like the prow of some
gigantic, fossilized ship of stone. If she continued on her
present course, the Queen would straddle that triangular

plateau and come to rest with at least a third of her length
jutting out over nothingness; she would snap like a rotten
stick.

Far away, above the sound of straining metal and

escaping gas, came the familiar whistle of the jets as
Falcon opened up the lateral thrusters. The ship staggered,
and began to slew to port. The shriek of tearing metal was
now almost continuous—and the rate of descent had
started to increase ominously. A glance at the damage-
control board showed that cell number ﬁve had just gone.

tell whether his maneuver would succeed or fail. He
switched the thrust vectors over to vertical, giving
maximum lift to reduce the force of impact.

merely prolonged, and irresistible. It seemed that the
whole universe was falling about them.

great beast were eating its way through the dying ship.

Then ﬂoor and ceiling closed upon him like a vice.

2. “Because it’s there”

“Why do you want to go to Jupiter?”

“As Springer said when he lifted for Pluto—“because it’s

there”.”

“Thanks. Now we’ve got that out of the way—the real

reason.”

Howard Falcon smiled, though only those who knew him

well could have interpreted the slight, leathery grimace.
Webster was one of them; for more than twenty years they
had been involved in each other’s projects. They had
shared triumphs and disasters—including the greatest
disaster of all.

“Well, Springer’s cliché is still valid. We’ve landed on all

the terrestrial planets, but none of the gas giants. They are
the only real challenge left in the solar system.”

“An expensive one. Have you worked out the cost?”
“As well as I can; here are the estimates. Remember,

though—this isn’t a one-shot mission, but a transportation
system. Once it’s proved out, it can be used over and over
again. And it will open up not merely Jupiter, but all the
giants.”

Webster looked at the ﬁgures, and whistled.
“Why not start with an easier planet—Uranus, for

example? Half the gravity, and less than half the escape
velocity. Quieter weather, too—if that’s the right word for
it.”

course, was why he was head of Long-Range Planning.

“There’s very little saving—when you allow for the extra

distance and the logistics problems. For Jupiter, we can use
the facilities of Ganymede. Beyond Saturn, we’d have to
establish a new supply base.”

Logical, thought Webster; but he was sure that it was not

the important reason. Jupiter was lord of the solar system;
Falcon would be interested in no lesser challenge.

“Besides,” Falcon continued, “Jupiter is a major scientiﬁc

scandal. It’s more than a hundred years since its radio
storms were discovered, but we still don’t know what
causes them—and the Great Red Spot is as big a mystery as
ever. That’s why I can get matching funds from the Bureau
of Astronautics. Do you know how many probes they have
dropped into that atmosphere?”

“A couple of hundred, I believe.”
“Three hundred and twenty-six, over the last ﬁfty years—

about a quarter of them total failures. Of course, they’ve
learned a hell of a lot, but they’ve barely scratched the
planet. Do you realize how big it is?”

“More than ten times the size of Earth.”

“Yes, yes—but do you know what that really means?”
Falcon pointed to the large globe in the corner of

Webster’s oﬀice.

“Look at India—how small it seems. Well, if you skinned

Earth and spread it out on the surface of Jupiter, it would
look about as big as India does here.”

equation: Jupiter is to Earth as Earth is to India. Falcon had
—deliberately, of course—chosen the best possible example
. . .

Was it already ten years ago? Yes, it must have been. The

crash lay seven years in the past (that date was engraved
on his heart), and those initial tests had taken place three
years before the ﬁrst and last ﬂight of the Queen Elizabeth.

had invited him to a preview—a three-day drift across the
northern plains of India, within sight of the Himalayas.
“Perfectly safe,” he had promised. “It will get you away
from the oﬀice—and will teach you what this whole thing is
about.”

Webster had not been disappointed. Next to his ﬁrst

journey to the Moon, it had been the most memorable
experience of his life. And yet, as Falcon had assured him,
it had been perfectly safe, and quite uneventful.

the huge silver bubble of the balloon already catching the
ﬁrst light of the Sun. The ascent had been made in total
silence; there were none of the roaring propane burners
that had lifted the hot-air balloons of an earlier age. All the
heat they needed came from the little pulsed-fusion reactor,
weighing only about two hundred and twenty pounds,
hanging in the open mouth of the envelope. While they
were climbing, its laser was zapping ten times a second,
igniting the merest whiﬀ of deuterium fuel. Once they had
reached altitude, it would ﬁre only a few times a minute,

making up for the heat lost through the great gasbag
overhead.

ground, they could hear dogs barking, people shouting,
bells ringing. Slowly the vast, Sun-smitten landscape
expanded around them. Two hours later, they had levelled
out at three miles and were taking frequent draughts of
oxygen. They could relax and admire the scenery; the on-
board instrumentation was doing all the work—gathering
the information that would be required by the designers of
the still-unnamed liner of the skies.

It was a perfect day. The southwest monsoon would not

break for another month, and there was hardly a cloud in
the sky. Time seemed to have come to a stop; they resented
the hourly radio reports which interrupted their reverie.
And all around, to the horizon and far beyond, was that
inﬁnite, ancient landscape, drenched with history—a
patchwork of villages, ﬁelds, temples, lakes, irrigation
canals . . .

that ten-year-old memory. It had converted him to lighter-
than-air ﬂight—and it had made him realize the enormous
size of India, even in a world that could be circled within
ninety minutes. And yet, he repeated to himself, Jupiter is
to Earth as Earth is to India . . .

“Granted your argument,” he said, “and supposing the

funds are available, there’s another question you have to
answer. Why should you do better than the—what is it—
three hundred and twenty-six robot probes that have
already made the trip?”

“I am better qualiﬁed than they were—as an observer,

and as a pilot. Especially as a pilot. Don’t forget—I’ve more
experience of lighter-than-air ﬂight than anyone in the
world.”

Ganymede.”

Don’t you remember what killed the Queen?”

“Go on.”

thought he was using a local radio circuit. But he’d been
accidentally switched through a satellite—oh, maybe it
wasn’t his fault, but he should have noticed. That’s a half-
second time lag for the round trip. Even then it wouldn’t
have mattered ﬂying in calm air. It was the turbulence over
the Grand Canyon that did it. When the platform tipped,
and he corrected for that—it had already tipped the other
way. Ever tried to drive a car over a bumpy road with a
half-second delay in the steering?”

“No, and I don’t intend to try. But I can imagine it.”
“Well, Ganymede is a million kilometers from Jupiter.

That means a round-trip delay of six seconds. No, you need
a controller on the spot—to handle emergencies in real
time. Let me show you something. Mind if I use this?”

“Go ahead.”
Falcon picked up a postcard that was lying on Webster’s

desk; they were almost obsolete on Earth, but this one
showed a 3-D view of a Martian landscape, and was
decorated with exotic and expensive stamps. He held it so
that it dangled vertically.

your thumb and ﬁnger on either side, not quite touching.
That’s right.”

the card.

“Now catch it.”
Falcon waited for a few seconds; then, without warning,

he let go of the card. Webster’s thumb and ﬁnger closed on
empty air.

“I’ll do it again, just to show there’s no deception. You

see?”

Once again, the falling card had slipped through

Webster’s ﬁngers.

“Now you try it on me.”
This time, Webster grasped the card and dropped it

without warning. It had scarcely moved before Falcon had
caught it. Webster almost imagined he could hear a click,
so swift was the other’s reaction.

an 
expressionless voice, “the surgeons 
made 
some

improvements. This is one of them—and there are others. I
want to make the most of them. Jupiter is the place where I
can do it.”

absorbing the improbable colors of the Trivium Charontis
Escarpment. Then he said quietly: “I understand. How long
do you think it will take?”

foundations we can drag in—oh, three years. Then a year
for trials—we’ll have to send in at least two test models. So,
with luck—ﬁve years.”

you’ve earned it. But there’s one thing I won’t do.”

“What’s that?”
“Next time you go ballooning, don’t expect me as

passenger.”

3. The World of the Gods

The fall from Jupiter V to Jupiter itself takes only three and
a half hours. Few men could have slept on so awesome a
journey. Sleep was a weakness that Howard Falcon hated,
and the little he still required brought dreams that time
had not yet been able to exorcise. But he could expect no
rest in the three days that lay ahead, and must seize what

he could during the long fall down into that ocean of
clouds, some sixty thousand miles below.

the computer checks were satisfactory, he prepared for the
last sleep he might ever know. It seemed appropriate that
at almost the same moment Jupiter eclipsed the bright and
tiny Sun as he swept into the monstrous shadow of the
planet. For a few minutes a strange golden twilight
enveloped the ship; then a quarter of the sky became an
utterly black hole in space, while the rest was a blaze of
stars. No matter how far one travelled across the solar
system, they never changed; these same constellations now
shone on Earth, millions of miles away. The only novelties
here were the small, pale crescents of Callisto and
Ganymede; doubtless there were a dozen other moons up
there in the sky, but they were all much too tiny, and too
distant, for the unaided eye to pick them out.

“Closing down for two hours,” he reported to the mother

ship, hanging almost a thousand miles above the desolate
rocks of Jupiter V, in the radiation shadow of the tiny
satellite. If it never served any other useful purpose, Jupiter
V was a cosmic bulldozer perpetually sweeping up the
charged particles that made it unhealthy to linger close to
Jupiter. Its wake was almost free of radiation, and there a
ship could park in perfect safety, while death sleeted
invisibly all around.

faded swiftly out as the electric pulses surged gently
through his brain. While Kon-Tiki fell toward Jupiter,
gaining speed second by second in that enormous
gravitational ﬁeld, he slept without dreams. They always
came when he awoke; and he had brought his nightmares
with him from Earth.

Yet he never dreamed of the crash itself, though he often

found himself again face to face with that terriﬁed
superchimp, as he descended the spiral stairway between

the collapsing gasbags. None of the simps had survived;
those that were not killed outright were so badly injured
that they had been painlessly ‘euthed’. He sometimes
wondered why he dreamed only of this doomed creature—
which he had never met before the last minutes of its life—
and not of the friends and colleagues he had lost aboard
the dying Queen.

return to consciousness. There had been little physical
pain; in fact, there had been no sensation of any kind. He
was in darkness and silence, and did not even seem to be
breathing. And—strangest of all—he could not locate his
limbs. He could move neither his hands nor his feet,
because he did not know where they were.

days, he had become aware of a faint throbbing, and
eventually, after long thought, he deduced that this was the
beating of his own heart. That was the ﬁrst of his many
mistakes.

ghosts of pressures upon still-unresponsive limbs. One by
one his senses had returned, and pain had come with them.
He had had to learn everything anew, recapitulating
infancy and babyhood. Though his memory was unaﬀected,
and he could understand words that were spoken to him, it
was months before he was able to answer except by the
ﬂicker of an eyelid. He could remember the moments of
triumph when he had spoken the ﬁrst word, turned the
page of a book—and, ﬁnally, learned to move under his own
power. That was a victory indeed, and it had taken him
almost two years to prepare for it. A hundred times he had
envied that dead superchimp, but he had been given no
choice. The doctors had made their decision—and now,
twelve years later, he was where no human being had ever
travelled before, and moving faster than any man in history.

dawn bridged the sky ahead in a titanic bow of light, when
the persistent buzz of the alarm dragged Falcon up from
sleep. The inevitable nightmares (he had been trying to
summon a nurse, but did not even have the strength to
push the button) swiftly faded from consciousness. The
greatest—and perhaps last—adventure of his life was
before him.

miles away and falling swiftly below the curve of Jupiter, to
report that everything was in order. His velocity had just
passed thirty-one miles a second (that was one for the
books) and in half an hour Kon-Tiki would hit the outer
fringes of the atmosphere, as he started on the most
diﬀicult re-entry in the entire solar system. Although scores
of probes had survived this ﬂaming ordeal, they had been
tough, solidly packed masses of instrumentation, able to
withstand several hundred gravities of drag. Kon-Tiki would
hit peaks of thirty g’s, and would average more than ten,
before she came to rest in the upper reaches of the Jovian
atmosphere. Very carefully and thoroughly, Falcon began to
attach the elaborate system of restraints that would anchor
him to the walls of the cabin. When he had ﬁnished, he was
virtually a part of the ship’s structure.

The clock was counting backward; one hundred seconds

to re-entry. For better or worse, he was committed. In a
minute and a half, he would graze the Jovian atmosphere,
and would be caught irrevocably in the grip of the giant.

considering the unknowns involved. From beyond the walls
of the capsule came a ghostly sighing, which rose steadily
to a high-pitched, screaming roar. The noise was quite
diﬀerent from that of a re-entry on Earth or Mars; in this
thin atmosphere of hydrogen and helium, all sounds were
transformed a couple of octaves upward. On Jupiter, even
thunder would have falsetto overtones.

seconds, he was completely immobilized. His ﬁeld of vision
contracted until it embraced only the clock and the
accelerometer; ﬁfteen g, and four hundred and eighty
seconds to go . . .

He never lost consciousness; but then, he had not

expected to. Kon-Tiki’s trail through the Jovian atmosphere
must be really spectacular—by this time, thousands of
miles long. Five hundred seconds after entry, the drag
began to taper oﬀ: ten g, ﬁve g, two . . . Then weight
vanished almost completely. He was falling free, all his
enormous orbital velocity destroyed.

the heat shield were jettisoned. It had done its work and
would not be needed again; Jupiter could have it now. He
released all but two of the restraining buckles, and waited
for the automatic sequencer to start the next, and most
critical, series of events.

He did not see the ﬁrst drogue parachute pop out, but he

could feel the slight jerk, and the rate of fall diminished
immediately. Kon-Tiki had lost all her horizontal speed and
was going straight down at almost a thousand miles an
hour. Everything depended on what happened in the next
sixty seconds.

overhead window and saw, to his immense relief, that
clouds of glittering foil were billowing out behind the
falling ship. Like a great ﬂower unfurling, the thousands of
cubic yards of the balloon spread out across the sky,
scooping up the thin gas until it was fully inﬂated. Kon-
Tiki’s rate of fall dropped to a few miles an hour and
remained constant. Now there was plenty of time; it would
take him days to fall all the way down to the surface of
Jupiter.

But he would get there eventually, even if he did nothing

about it. The balloon overhead was merely acting as an

eﬀicient parachute. It was providing no lift; nor could it do
so, while the gas inside and out was the same.

fusion reactor started up, pouring torrents of heat into the
envelope overhead. Within ﬁve minutes, the rate of fall had
become zero; within six, the ship had started to rise.
According to the radar altimeter, it had levelled out at
about two hundred and sixty-seven miles above the surface
—or whatever passed for a surface on Jupiter.

hydrogen, which is the lightest of all gases—and that is a
hot-hydrogen balloon. As long as the fuser kept ticking
over, Falcon could remain aloft, drifting across a world that
could hold a hundred Paciﬁcs. After travelling over three
hundred million miles, Kon-Tiki had at last begun to justify
her name. She was an aerial raft, adrift upon the currents
of the Jovian atmosphere.

Though a whole new world was lying around him, it was

more than an hour before Falcon could examine the view.
First he had to check all the capsule’s systems and test its
response to the controls. He had to learn how much extra
heat was necessary to produce a desired rate of ascent, and
how much gas he must vent in order to descend. Above all,
there was the question of stability. He must adjust the
length of the cables attaching his capsule to the huge, pear-
shaped balloon, to damp out vibrations and get the
smoothest possible ride. Thus far, he was lucky; at this
level, the wind was steady, and the Doppler reading on the
invisible surface gave him a ground speed of two hundred
and seventeen and a half miles an hour. For Jupiter, that
was modest; winds of up to a thousand had been observed.
But mere speed was, of course, unimportant; the real
danger was turbulence. If he ran into that, only skill and
experience and swift reaction could save him—and these

were not matters that could yet be programmed into a
computer.

strange craft did Falcon pay any attention to Mission
Control’s pleadings. Then he deployed the booms carrying
the instrumentation and the atmospheric samplers. The
capsule now resembled a rather untidy Christmas tree, but
still rode smoothly down the Jovian winds while it radioed
its torrents of information to the recorders on the ship
miles above. And now, at last, he could look around . . .

disappointing. As far as the scale of things was concerned,
he might have been ballooning over an ordinary cloudscape
on Earth. The horizon seemed at a normal distance; there
was no feeling at all that he was on a world eleven times
the diameter of his own. Then he looked at the infrared
radar, sounding the layers of atmosphere beneath him—and
knew how badly his eyes had been deceived.

That layer of clouds apparently about three miles away

was really more than thirty-seven miles below. And the
horizon, whose distance he would have guessed at about
one hundred and twenty-ﬁve, was actually eighteen
hundred miles from the ship.

The crystalline clarity of the hydrohelium atmosphere

and the enormous curvature of the planet had fooled him
completely. It was even harder to judge distances here than
on the Moon; everything he saw must be multiplied by at
least ten.

It was a simple matter, and he should have been

prepared for it. Yet somehow, it disturbed him profoundly.
He did not feel that Jupiter was huge, but that he had
shrunk—to a tenth of his normal size. Perhaps, with time,
he would grow accustomed to the inhuman scale of this
world; yet as he stared toward that unbelievably distant
horizon, he felt as if a wind colder than the atmosphere
around him was blowing through his soul. Despite all his

arguments, this might never be a place for man. He could
well be both the ﬁrst and the last to descend through the
clouds of Jupiter.

of ammonia cirrus perhaps twelve miles overhead. It was
cold up there, on the fringes of space, but both pressure
and temperature increased rapidly with depth. At the level
where Kon-Tiki was drifting now, it was ﬁfty below zero,
and the pressure was ﬁve atmospheres. Sixty-ﬁve miles
farther down, it would be as warm as equatorial Earth, and
the pressure about the same as at the bottom of one of the
shallower seas. Ideal conditions for life . . .

sun was halfway up the sky, but the light on the unbroken
cloudscape below had a curious mellow quality. That extra
three hundred million miles had robbed the Sun of all its
power. Though the sky was clear, Falcon found himself
continually thinking that it was a heavily overcast day.
When night fell, the onset of darkness would be swift
indeed; though it was still morning, there was a sense of
autumnal twilight in the air. But autumn, of course, was
something that never came to Jupiter. There were no
seasons here.

Kon-Tiki had come down in the exact center of the

equatorial zone—the least colorful part of the planet. The
sea of clouds that stretched out to the horizon was tinted a
pale salmon; there were none of the yellows and pinks and
even reds that banded Jupiter at higher altitudes. The
Great Red Spot itself—most spectacular of all of the
planet’s features—lay thousands of miles to the south. It
had been a temptation to descend there, but the south
tropical disturbance was unsually active, with currents
reaching over nine hundred miles an hour. It would have
been asking for trouble to head into that maelstrom of
unknown forces. The Great Red Spot and its mysteries
would have to wait for future expeditions.

on Earth, was now nearing the zenith and had become
eclipsed by the great silver canopy of the balloon. Kon-Tiki
was still drifting swiftly and smoothly westward at a steady
two hundred and seventeen and a half, but only the radar
gave any indication of this. Was it always as calm here?
Falcon asked himself. The scientists who had talked
learnedly of the Jovian doldrums, and had predicted that
the equator would be the quietest place, seemed to know
what they were talking about, after all. He had been
profoundly sceptical of all such forecasts, and had agreed
with one unusually modest researcher who had told him
bluntly: ‘There are no experts on Jupiter.’ Well, there would
be at least one by the end of this day.

If he managed to survive until then.

4. The Voices of the Deep

That ﬁrst day, the Father of the Gods smiled upon him. It
was as calm and peaceful here on Jupiter as it had been,
years ago, when he was drifting with Webster across the
plains of northern India. Falcon had time to master his new
skills, until Kon-Tiki seemed an extension of his own body.
Such luck was more than he had dared to hope for, and he
began to wonder what price he might have to pay for it.

The ﬁve hours of daylight were almost over; the clouds

below were full of shadows, which gave them a massive
solidity they had not possessed when the Sun was higher.
Color was swiftly draining from the sky, except in the west
itself, where a band of deepening purple lay along the
horizon. Above this band was the thin crescent of a closer
moon, pale and bleached against the utter blackness
beyond.

straight down over the edge of Jupiter, over eighteen
hundred miles away. The stars came out in their legions—
and there was the beautiful evening star of Earth, on the
very frontier of twilight, reminding him how far he was
from home. It followed the Sun down into the west. Man’s
ﬁrst night on Jupiter had begun.

With the onset of darkness, Kon-Tiki started to sink. The

balloon was no longer heated by the feeble sunlight and
was losing a small part of its buoyancy. Falcon did nothing
to increase lift; he had expected this and was planning to
descend.

The invisible cloud deck was still over thirty miles below,

and he would reach it about midnight. It showed up clearly
on the infrared radar, which also reported that it contained
a vast array of complex carbon compounds, as well as the
usual hydrogen, helium, and ammonia. The chemists were
dying for samples of that ﬂuﬀy, pinkish stuﬀ; though some
atmospheric probes had already gathered a few grams, that
had only whetted their appetites. Half the basic molecules
of life were here, ﬂoating high above the surface of Jupiter.
And where there was food, could life be far away? That was
the question that, after more than a hundred years, no one
had been able to answer.

The infrared was blocked by the clouds, but the

microwave radar sliced right through and showed layer
after layer, all the way down to the hidden surface almost
two hundred and ﬁfty miles below. That was barred to him
by enormous pressures and temperatures; not even robot
probes had ever reached it intact. It lay in tantalizing
inaccessibility at the bottom of the radar screen, slightly
fuzzy, and showing a curious granular structure that his
equipment could not resolve.

swiftly for about sixty miles, then began to ﬂoat in the
denser atmosphere, sending back torrents of radio signals,

which he relayed to Mission Control. Then there was
nothing else to do until sunrise, except to keep an eye on
the rate of descent, monitor the instruments, and answer
occasional queries. While she was drifting in this steady
current, Kon-Tiki could look after herself.

and introduced herself with the usual pleasantries. Ten
minutes later she called again, her voice at once serious
and excited.

“Howard! Listen in on channel forty-six—high gain.”
Channel forty-six? There were so many telemetering

circuits that he knew the numbers of only those that were
critical; but as soon as he threw the switch, he recognized
this one. He was plugged in to the microphone on the
probe, ﬂoating more than eighty miles below him in an
atmosphere now almost as dense as water.

winds stirred down in the darkness of that unimaginable
world. And then, out of the background noise, there slowly
emerged a booming vibration that grew louder and louder,
like the beating of a gigantic drum. It was so low that it
was felt as much as heard, and the beats steadily increased
their tempo though the pitch never changed. Now it was a
swift, almost infrasonic throbbing. Then, suddenly, in mid-
vibration, it stopped—so abruptly that the mind could not
accept the silence, but memory continued to manufacture a
ghostly echo in the deepest caverns of the brain.

heard, even among the multitudinous noises of Earth. He
could think of no natural phenomenon that could have
caused it; nor was it like the cry of any animal, not even
one of the great whales . . .

It came again, following exactly the same pattern. Now

that he was prepared for it, he estimated the length of the
sequence; from ﬁrst faint throb to ﬁnal crescendo, it lasted
just over ten seconds.

away. Perhaps it came from one of the many reﬂecting
layers, deeper in this stratiﬁed atmosphere; perhaps it was
another, more distant source. Falcon waited for a second
echo, but it never came.

Mission Control reacted quickly and asked him to drop

another probe at once. With two microphones operating, it
would be possible to ﬁnd the approximate location of the
sources. Oddly enough, none of Kon-Tiki’s own external
mikes could detect anything except wind noises. The
boomings, whatever they were, must have been trapped
and channelled beneath an atmospheric reﬂecting layer far
below.

They were coming, it was soon discovered, from a cluster

of sources about twelve hundred miles away. The distance
gave no indication of their power; in Earth’s oceans, quite
feeble sounds could travel equally far. And as for the
obvious assumption that living creatures were responsible,
the Chief Exobiologist quickly ruled that out.

“I’ll be very disappointed,” said Dr Brenner, “if there are

no microorganisms or plants there. But nothing like
animals, because there’s no free oxygen. All biochemical
reactions on Jupiter must be low-energy ones—there’s just
no way an active creature could generate enough power to
function.”

Falcon wondered if this was true; he had heard the

argument before, and reserved judgment.

“In any case,” continued Brenner, “some of those sound

waves are a hundred yards long! Even an animal as big as a
whale couldn’t produce them. They must have a natural
origin.”

would be able to come up with an explanation. What would
a blind alien make, Falcon wondered, of the sounds he
might hear when standing beside a stormy sea, or a geyser,

or a volcano, or a waterfall? He might well attribute them
to some huge beast.

away, and Falcon began to busy himself with preparation
for the dawn of his second day. Kon-Tiki was now only three
miles above the nearest cloud layer; the external pressure
had risen to ten atmospheres, and the temperature was a
tropical thirty degrees. A man could be comfortable here
with no more equipment than a breathing mask and the
right grade of heliox mixture.

“We’ve some good news for you,” Mission Control

reported, soon after dawn. “The cloud layer’s breaking up.
You’ll have partial clearing in an hour—but watch out for
turbulence.”

down will I be able to see?”

That cloud deck is solid—it never breaks.”

And it’s out of my reach, Falcon told himself; the

temperature down there must be over a hundred degrees.
This was the ﬁrst time that any balloonist had ever had to
worry, not about his ceiling, but about his basement!

Ten minutes later he could see what Mission Control had

already observed from its superior vantage point. There
was a change in color near the horizon, and the cloud layer
had become ragged and humpy, as if something had torn it
open. He turned up his little nuclear furnace and gave Kon-
Tiki another three miles of altitude, so that he could get a
better view.

The sky below was clearing rapidly, completely, as if

something was dissolving the solid overcast. An abyss was
opening before his eyes. A moment later he sailed out over
the edge of a cloud canyon about twelve miles deep and six
hundred miles wide.

A new world lay spread beneath him; Jupiter had

clouds, unattainably far below, was much darker in color
than the ﬁrst. It was almost salmon pink, and curiously
mottled with little islands of brick red. They were all oval-
shaped, with their long axes pointing east-west, in the
direction of the prevailing wind. There were hundreds of
them, all about the same size, and they reminded Falcon of
puﬀy little cumulus clouds in the terrestrial sky.

the face of the dissolving cliﬀ. It was then that he noticed
the snow.

White ﬂakes were forming in the air and drifting slowly

downward. Yet it was much too warm for snow—and, in any
event, there was scarcely a trace of water at this altitude.
Moreover, there was no glitter or sparkle about these ﬂakes
as they went cascading down into the depths. When,
presently, a few landed on an instrument boom outside the
main viewing port, he saw that they were a dull, opaque
white—not crystalline at all—and quite large—several
inches across. They looked like wax, and Falcon guessed
that this was precisely what they were. Some chemical
reaction was taking place in the atmosphere around him,
condensing out the hydrocarbons ﬂoating in the Jovian air.

About sixty miles ahead, a disturbance was taking place

in the cloud layer. The little red ovals were being jostled
around, and were beginning to form a spiral—the familiar
cyclonic pattern so common in the meteorology of Earth.
The vortex was emerging with astonishing speed; if that
was a storm ahead, Falcon told himself, he was in big
trouble.

And then his concern changed to wonder—and to fear.

What was developing in his line of ﬂight was not a storm at
all. Something enormous—something scores of miles across
—was rising through the clouds.

thunderhead boiling up from the lower levels of the
atmosphere—lasted only a few seconds. No; this was solid.

It shouldered its way through the pink-and-salmon overcast
like an iceberg rising from the deeps.

course; but perhaps it was not too remote an analogy. As
soon as he focused the telescope upon the enigma, Falcon
saw that it was a whitish, crystalline mass, threaded with
streaks of red and brown. It must be, he decided, the same
stuﬀ as the ‘snowﬂakes’ falling around him—a mountain
range of wax. And it was not, he soon realized, as solid as
he had thought; around the edges it was continually
crumbling and re-forming . . .

“I know what it is,” he radioed Mission Control, which for

the last few minutes had been asking anxious questions.
“It’s a mass of bubbles—some kind of foam. Hydrocarbon
froth. Get the chemists working on . . . Just a minute!”

“What is it?” called Mission Control. “What is it?”
He 
ignored 
the 
frantic 
pleas 
from 
space 
and

concentrated all his mind upon the image in the telescope
ﬁeld. He had to be sure; if he made a mistake, he would be
the laughingstock of the solar system.

Then he relaxed, glanced at the clock, and switched oﬀ

the nagging voice from Jupiter V.

“Hello, Mission Control,” he said, very formally. “This is

Howard Falcon aboard Kon-Tiki. Ephemeris Time nineteen
hours twenty-one minutes ﬁfteen seconds. Latitude zero
degrees ﬁve minutes North. Longitude one hundred ﬁve
degrees forty-two minutes, System One.

“Tell Dr Brenner that there is life on Jupiter. And it’s big .

. .”

5. The Wheels of Poseidon

“I’m very happy to be proved wrong,” Dr Brenner radioed
back cheerfully. “Nature always has something up her

sleeve. Keep the long-focus camera on target and give us
the steadiest pictures you can.”

still too far away for Falcon to make out many details, and
they must have been very large to be visible at all at such a
distance. Almost black, and shaped like arrowheads, they
maneuvered by slow undulations of their entire bodies, so
that they looked rather like giant manta rays, swimming
above some tropical reef.

Perhaps they were sky-borne cattle, browsing on the

cloud pastures of Jupiter, for they seemed to be feeding
along the dark, red-brown streaks that ran like dried-up
river 
beds 
down 
the 
ﬂanks 
of 
the 
ﬂoating 
cliﬀs.

Occasionally, one of them would dive headlong into the
mountain of foam and disappear completely from sight.

Kon-Tiki was moving only slowly with respect to the

cloud layer below; it would be at least three hours before
she was above those ephemeral hills. She was in a race
with the Sun. Falcon hoped that darkness would not fall
before he could get a good view of the mantas, as he had
christened them, as well as the fragile landscape over
which they ﬂapped their way.

It was a long three hours. During the whole time, he kept

the external microphones on full gain, wondering if here
was the source of that booming in the night. The mantas
were certainly large enough to have produced it; when he
could get an accurate measurement, he discovered that
they were almost a hundred yards across the wings. That
was three times the length of the largest whale—though he
doubted if they could weigh more than a few tons.

Half an hour before sunset, Kon-Tiki was almost above

the ‘mountains’.

questions about the mantas, “they’re still showing no
reaction to me. I don’t think they’re intelligent—they look

like harmless vegetarians. And even if they try to chase me,
I’m sure they can’t reach my altitude.”

not the slightest interest in him as he sailed high above
their feeding ground. Perhaps they had no way of detecting
his presence. When he examined and photographed them
through the telescope, he could see no signs of any sense
organs. The creatures were simply huge black deltas,
rippling over hills and valleys that, in reality, were little
more substantial than the clouds of Earth. Though they
looked solid, Falcon knew that anyone who stepped on
those white mountains would go crashing through them as
if they were made of tissue paper.

At close quarters he could see the myriads of cellules or

bubbles from which they were formed. Some of these were
quite large—a yard or so in diameter—and Falcon
wondered in what witches’ cauldron of hydrocarbons they
had been brewed. There must be enough petrochemicals
deep down in the atmosphere of Jupiter to supply all
Earth’s needs for a million years.

The short day had almost gone when he passed over the

crest of the waxen hills, and the light was fading rapidly
along their lower slopes. There were no mantas on this
western side, and for some reason the topography was very
diﬀerent. The foam was sculptured into long, level terraces,
like the interior of a lunar crater. He could almost imagine
that they were gigantic steps leading down to the hidden
surface of the planet.

And on the lowest of those steps, just clear of the

swirling clouds that the mountain had displaced when it
came surging skyward, was a roughly oval mass, one or two
miles across. It was diﬀicult to see, since it was only a little
darker than the grey-white foam on which it rested.
Falcon’s ﬁrst thought was that he was looking at a forest of
pallid trees, like giant mushrooms that had never seen the
Sun.

trunks, springing from the white waxy froth in which they
were rooted. But the trees were packed astonishingly close
together; there was scarcely any space between them.
Perhaps it was not a forest, after all, but a single enormous
tree—like one of the giant multi-trunked banyans of the
East. Once he had seen a banyan tree in Java that was over
six hundred and ﬁfty yards across; this monster was at
least ten times that size.

The light had almost gone. The cloudscape had turned

purple with refracted sunlight, and in a few seconds that,
too, would have vanished. In the last light of his second day
on Jupiter, Howard Falcon saw—or thought he saw—
something 
that 
cast 
the 
gravest 
doubts 
on 
his

interpretation of the white oval.

hundreds of thin trunks were beating back and forth, in
perfect synchronizm, like fronds of kelp rocking in the
surge.

And the tree was no longer in the place where he had

ﬁrst seen it.

“Sorry about this,” said Mission Control, soon after

sunset, “but we think Source Beta is going to blow within
the next hour. Probability seventy per cent.”

Falcon glanced quickly at the chart. Beta—Jupiter

latitude one hundred and forty degrees—was over eighteen
thousand six hundred miles away and well below his
horizon. Even though major eruptions ran as high as ten
megatons, he was much too far away for the shock wave to
be a serious danger. The radio storm that it would trigger
was, however, quite a diﬀerent matter.

The decameter outbursts that sometimes made Jupiter

the most powerful radio source in the whole sky had been
discovered back in the 1950s, to the utter astonishment of

the astronomers. Now, more than a century later, their real
cause was still a mystery. Only the symptoms were
understood; the explanation was completely unknown.

The ‘volcano’ theory had best stood the test of time,

although no one imagined that this word had the same
meaning on Jupiter as on Earth. At frequent intervals—
often several times a day—titanic eruptions occurred in the
lower depths of the atmosphere, probably on the hidden
surface of the planet itself. A great column of gas, more
than six hundred miles high, would start boiling upward as
if determined to escape into space.

planets, it had no chance. Yet some traces—a mere few
million 
tons—usually 
managed 
to 
reach 
the 
Jovian

ionosphere; and when they did, all hell broke loose.

the feeble Van Allen belts of Earth. When they are short-
circuited by an ascending column of gas, the result is an
electrical discharge millions of times more powerful than
any terrestrial ﬂash of lightning; it sends a colossal
thunderclap of radio noise ﬂooding across the entire solar
system and on out to the stars.

It had been discovered that these radio outbursts came

from four main areas of the planet. Perhaps there were
weaknesses there that allowed the ﬁres of the interior to
break out from time to time. The scientists on Ganymede,
largest of Jupiter’s many moons, now thought that they
could predict the onset of a decameter storm; their
accuracy was about as good as a weather forecaster’s of
the early 1900s.

radio storm; it would certainly add to the value of the
mission—if he survived it. His course had been planned to
keep as far as possible from the main centers of
disturbance, especially the most active one, Source Alpha.
As luck would have it, the threatening Beta was the closest

to him. He hoped that the distance, almost three-fourths
the circumference of Earth, was safe enough.

distinct note of urgency. “And forget that hour. Ganymede
says it may be any moment.”

the magnetic ﬁeld-strength meter started to shoot upward.
Before it could go oﬀ scale, it reversed and began to drop
as rapidly as it had risen. Far away and thousands of miles
below, something had given the planet’s molten core a
titanic jolt.

“There she blows!” called Mission Control.
“Thanks, I already know. When will the storm hit me?”
“You can expect onset in ﬁve minutes. Peak in ten.”
Far around the curve of Jupiter, a funnel of gas as wide as

the Paciﬁc Ocean was climbing spaceward at thousands of
miles an hour. Already, the thunderstorms of the lower
atmosphere would be raging around it—but they were
nothing compared with the fury that would explode when
the radiation belt was reached and began dumping its
surplus electrons onto the planet. Falcon began to retract
all the instrument booms that were extended out from the
capsule. There were no other precautions he could take. It
would be four hours before the atmospheric shock wave
reached him—but the radio blast, travelling at the speed of
light, would be here in a tenth of a second, once the
discharge had been triggered.

spectrum, still showed nothing unusual, just the normal
mush of background static. Then Falcon noticed that the
noise level was slowly creeping upward. The explosion was
gathering its strength.

At such a distance he had never expected to see

anything. But suddenly a ﬂicker as of far-oﬀ heat lightning
danced along the eastern horizon. Simultaneously, half the

circuit breakers jumped out of the main switchboard, the
lights failed, and all communications channels went dead.

The 
paralysis 
that 
gripped 
him 
was 
not 
merely

psychological; he seemed to have lost all control of his
limbs and could feel a painful tingling sensation over his
entire body. It was impossible that the electric ﬁeld could
have penetrated this shielded cabin. Yet there was a
ﬂickering glow over the instrument board, and he could
hear the unmistakable crackle of a brush discharge.

With a series of sharp bangs, the emergency systems

went into operation, and the overloads reset themselves.
The lights ﬂickered on again. And Falcon’s paralysis
disappeared as swiftly as it had come.

After glancing at the board to make sure that all circuits

were back to normal, he moved quickly to the viewing
ports.

the cables supporting the capsule seemed to be on ﬁre.
Lines of light glowing an electric blue against the darkness
stretched upward from the main lift ring to the equator of
the giant balloon; and rolling slowly along several of them
were dazzling balls of ﬁre.

The sight was so strange and so beautiful that it was

hard to read any menace in it. Few people, Falcon knew,
had ever seen ball lightning from such close quarters—and
certainly none had survived if they were riding a hydrogen-
ﬁlled balloon back in the atmosphere of Earth. He
remembered the ﬂaming death of the Hindenburg,
destroyed by a stray spark when she docked at Lakehurst
in 1937; as it had done so often in the past, the horrifying
old newsreel ﬁlm ﬂashed through his mind. But at least
that could not happen here, though there was more
hydrogen above his head than had ever ﬁlled the last of the
Zeppelins. It would be a few billion years yet, before
anyone could light a ﬁre in the atmosphere of Jupiter.

With a sound like briskly frying bacon, the speech circuit

came back to life.

“Hello, Kon-Tiki —are you receiving? Are you receiving?”
The words were chopped and badly distorted, but

intelligible. Falcon’s spirits lifted; he had resumed contact
with the world of men.

“I receive you,” he said. “Quite an electrical display, but

no damage—so far.”

channels three, seven, twenty-six. Also gain on camera two.
And we don’t quite believe the readings on the external
ionization probes . . .”

Reluctantly Falcon tore his gaze away from the

fascinating pyrotechnic display around Kon-Tiki, though
from time to time he kept glancing out of the windows. The
ball lightning disappeared ﬁrst, the ﬁery globes slowly
expanding until they reached a critical size, at which they
vanished in a gentle explosion. But even an hour later,
there were still faint glows around all the exposed metal on
the outside of the capsule; and the radio circuits remained
noisy until well after midnight.

The remaining hours of darkness were completely

uneventful—until just before dawn. Because it came from
the east, Falcon assumed that he was seeing the ﬁrst faint
hint of sunrise. Then he realized that it was twenty minutes
too early for this—and the glow that had appeared along
the horizon was moving toward him even as he watched. It
swiftly detached itself from the arch of stars that marked
the invisible edge of the planet, and he saw that it was a
relatively narrow band, quite sharply deﬁned. The beam of
an enormous searchlight appeared to be swinging beneath
the clouds.

came another, parallel to it and moving at the same speed.
And beyond that another, and another—until all the sky
ﬂickered with alternating sheets of light and darkness.

wonders, and it seemed impossible that this display of
pure, soundless luminosity could present the slightest
danger. But it was so astonishing, and so inexplicable, that
he felt cold, naked fear gnawing at his self-control. No man
could look upon such a sight without feeling like a helpless
pygmy in the presence of forces beyond his comprehension.
Was it possible that, after all, Jupiter carried not only life
but also intelligence? And, perhaps, an intelligence that
only now was beginning to react to his alien presence?

“Yes, we see it,” said Mission Control, in a voice that

echoed his own awe. “We’ve no idea what it is. Stand by,
we’re calling Ganymede.”

the far horizon were much fainter, as if the energies that
powered them were becoming exhausted. In ﬁve minutes it
was all over; the last faint pulse of light ﬂickered along the
western sky and then was gone. Its passing left Falcon with
an overwhelming sense of relief. The sight was so hypnotic,
and so disturbing, that it was not good for any man’s peace
of mind to contemplate it too long.

He was more shaken than he cared to admit. The

electrical storm was something that he could understand;
but this was totally incomprehensible.

Mission Control was still silent. He knew that the

information banks up on Ganymede were now being
searched as men and computers turned their minds to the
problem. If no answer could be found there, it would be
necessary to call Earth; that would mean a delay of almost
an hour. The possibility that even Earth might be unable to
help was one that Falcon did not care to contemplate.

He had never before been so glad to hear the voice of

Mission Control as when Dr Brenner ﬁnally came on the
circuit. The biologist sounded relieved, yet subdued—like a
man who has just come through some great intellectual
crisis.

still hardly believe it.

“What you’ve been seeing is bioluminescence, very

similar to that produced by microorganisms in the tropical
seas of Earth. Here they’re in the atmosphere, not the
ocean, but the principle is the same.”

artiﬁcial. And it was hundreds of miles across!”

“It was even larger than you imagine; you observed only

a small part of it. The whole pattern was over three
thousand miles wide and looked like a revolving wheel. You
merely saw the spokes, sweeping past you at about six-
tenths of a mile a second . . .”

“A second!” Falcon could not help interjecting. “No

animals could move that fast!”

“Of course not. Let me explain. What you saw was

triggered by the shock wave from Source Beta, moving at
the speed of sound.”

“But what about the pattern?” Falcon insisted.
“That’s the surprising part. It’s a very rare phenomenon,

but identical wheels of light—except that they’re a
thousand times smaller—have been observed in the Persian
Gulf and the Indian Ocean. Listen to this: British India
Company’s Patna, Persian Gulf, May 1880, 11:30 P.M..—“an
enormous luminous wheel, whirling round, the spokes of
which appeared to brush the ship along. The spokes were
200 or 300 yards long . . . each wheel contained about
sixteen spokes . . .” And here’s one from the Gulf of Omar,
dated May 23, 1906: “The intensely bright luminescence
approached us rapidly, shooting sharply deﬁned light rays
to the west in rapid succession, like the beam from the
searchlight of a warship . . . To the left of us, a gigantic
ﬁery wheel formed itself, with spokes that reached as far as
one could see. The whole wheel whirled around for two or
three minutes . . .” The archive computer on Ganymede dug

up about ﬁve hundred cases. It would have printed out the
lot if we hadn’t stopped it in time.”

“I’m convinced—but still baﬄed.”
“I don’t blame you. The full explanation wasn’t worked

out until late in the twentieth century. It seems that these
luminous wheels are the results of submarine earthquakes,
and always occur in shallow waters where the shock waves
can be reﬂected and cause standing wave patterns.
Sometimes bars, sometimes rotating wheels—the “Wheels
of Poseidon”, they’ve been called. The theory was ﬁnally
proved 
by 
making 
underwater 
explosions 
and

photographing the results from a satellite. No wonder
sailors used to be superstitious. Who would have believed a
thing like this?”

blew its top, it must have sent shock waves in all directions
—through the compressed gas of the lower atmosphere,
through the solid body of Jupiter itself. Meeting and
crisscrossing, those waves must have cancelled here,
reinforced there; the whole planet must have rung like a
bell.

and awe; he would never be able to forget those ﬂickering
bands of light, racing through the unattainable depths of
the Jovian atmosphere. He felt that he was not merely on a
strange planet, but in some magical realm between myth
and reality.

This was a world where absolutely anything could

happen, and no man could possibly guess what the future
would bring.

And he still had a whole day to go.

6. Medusa

When the true dawn ﬁnally arrived, it brought a sudden
change of weather. Kon-Tiki was moving through a blizzard;
waxen snowﬂakes were falling so thickly that visibility was
reduced to zero. Falcon began to worry about the weight
that might be accumulating on the envelope. Then he
noticed that any ﬂakes settling outside the windows quickly
disappeared; Kon-Tiki’s continual outpouring of heat was
evaporating them as swiftly as they arrived.

worried about the possibility of collision. At least that was
no danger here; any Jovian mountains were several
hundred miles below him. And as for the ﬂoating islands of
foam, hitting them would probably be like ploughing into
slightly hardened soap bubbles.

Nevertheless, he switched on the horizontal radar, which

until now had been completely useless; only the vertical
beam, giving his distance from the invisible surface, had
thus far been of any value. Then he had another surprise.

Scattered across a huge sector of the sky ahead were

dozens of large and brilliant echoes. They were completely
isolated 
from 
one 
another 
and 
apparently 
hung

unsupported in space. Falcon remembered a phrase the
earliest aviators had used to describe one of the hazards of
their profession: ‘clouds stuﬀed with rocks’. That was a
perfect description of what seemed to lie in the track of
Kon-Tiki.

It was a disconcerting sight; then Falcon again reminded

himself that nothing really solid could possibly hover in this
atmosphere. Perhaps it was some strange meteorological
phenomenon. In any case, the nearest echo was about a
hundred and twenty-ﬁve miles.

He reported to Mission Control, which could provide no

explanation. But it gave the welcome news that he would
be clear of the blizzard in another thirty minutes.

that abruptly grabbed Kon-Tiki and swept it almost at right

angles to its previous track. Falcon needed all his skill and
the maximum use of what little control he had over his
ungainly vehicle to prevent it from being capsized. Within
minutes he was racing northward at over three hundred
miles an hour. Then, as suddenly as it had started, the
turbulence ceased; he was still moving at high speed, but in
smooth air. He wondered if he had been caught in the
Jovian equivalent of a jet stream.

been preparing for him.

some six hundred miles across. The balloon was being
swept along a curving wall of cloud. Overhead, the Sun was
shining in a clear sky; but far beneath, this great hole in
the atmosphere drilled down to unknown depths until it
reached a misty ﬂoor where lightning ﬂickered almost
continuously.

Though the vessel was being dragged downward so

slowly that it was in no immediate danger, Falcon increased
the ﬂow of heat into the envelope until Kon-Tiki hovered at
a constant altitude. Not until then did he abandon the
fantastic spectacle outside and consider again the problem
of the radar.

The nearest echo was now only about twenty-ﬁve miles

away. All of them, he quickly realized, were distributed
along the wall of the vortex, and were moving with it,
apparently caught in the whirlpool like Kon-Tiki itself. He
aimed the telescope along the radar bearing and found
himself looking at a curious mottled cloud that almost ﬁlled
the ﬁeld of view.

It was not easy to see, being only a little darker than the

whirling wall of mist that formed its background. Not until
he had been staring for several minutes did Falcon realize
that he had met it once before.

The ﬁrst time it had been crawling across the drifting

mountains of foam, and he had mistaken it for a giant,

many-trunked tree. Now at last he could appreciate its real
size and complexity and could give it a better name to ﬁx
its image in his mind. It did not resemble a tree at all, but a
jellyﬁsh—a medusa, such as might be met trailing its
tentacles as it drifted along the warm eddies of the Gulf
Stream.

This medusa was more than a mile across and its scores

of dangling tentacles were hundreds of feet long. They
swayed slowly back and forth in perfect unison, taking
more than a minute for each complete undulation—almost
as if the creature was clumsily rowing itself through the
sky.

The other echoes were more distant medusae. Falcon

focused the telescope on half a dozen and could see no
variations in shape or size. They all seemed to be of the
same species, and he wondered just why they were drifting
lazily around in this six-hundred-mile orbit. Perhaps they
were feeding upon the aerial plankton sucked in by the
whirlpool, as Kon-Tiki itself had been.

recovered from his initial astonishment, “that this thing is
about a hundred thousand times as large as the biggest
whale? And even if it’s only a gasbag, it must still weigh a
million tons! I can’t even guess at its metabolism. It must
generate megawatts of heat to maintain its buoyancy.”

“But if it’s just a gasbag, why is it such a damn good

radar reﬂector?”

“I haven’t the faintest idea. Can you get any closer?”
Brenner’s question was not an idle one. If he changed

altitude to take advantage of the diﬀering wind velocities,
Falcon could approach the medusa as closely as he wished.
At the moment, however, he preferred his present twenty-
ﬁve miles and said so, ﬁrmly.

“I see what you mean,” Brenner answered, a little

reluctantly. “Let’s stay where we are for the present.” That
‘we’ gave Falcon a certain wry amusement; an extra sixty

thousand miles made a considerable diﬀerence in one’s
point of view.

the gyre of the great whirlpool, while Falcon experimented
with ﬁlters and camera contrast, trying to get a clear view
of the medusa. He began to wonder if its elusive coloration
was some kind of camouﬂage; perhaps, like many animals
of Earth, it was trying to lose itself against its background.
That was a trick used by both hunters and hunted.

In which category was the medusa? That was a question

he could hardly expect to have answered in the short time
that was left to him. Yet just before noon, without the
slightest warning, the answer came . . .

sweeping through the wall of mist that formed the funnel of
the vortex. They were ﬂying in a V formation directly
toward the pallid grey cloud of the medusa; and there was
no doubt, in Falcon’s mind, that they were on the attack.
He had been quite wrong to assume that they were
harmless vegetarians.

Yet everything happened at such a leisurely pace that it

was like watching a slow-motion ﬁlm. The mantas
undulated along at perhaps thirty miles an hour; it seemed
ages before they reached the medusa, which continued to
paddle imperturbably along at an even slower speed. Huge
though they were, the mantas looked tiny beside the
monster they were approaching When they ﬂapped down
on its back, they appeared about as large as birds landing
on a whale.

not see how the attacking mantas could be in danger as
long as they avoided those huge clumsy tentacles. And
perhaps their host was not even aware of them; they could
be insigniﬁcant parasites, tolerated as are ﬂeas upon a dog.

With agonizing slowness, it began to tip over like a

capsising ship. After ten minutes it had tilted forty-ﬁve
degrees; it was also rapidly losing altitude. It was
impossible not to feel a sense of pity for the beleaguered
monster, and to Falcon the sight brought bitter memories.
In a grotesque way, the fall of the medusa was almost a
parody of the dying Queen’s last moments.

High intelligence could develop only among predators—not
among the drifting browsers of either sea or air. The
mantas were far closer to him than was this monstrous bag
of gas. And anyway, who could really sympathize with a
creature a hundred thousand times larger than a whale?

having some eﬀect. The mantas had been disturbed by its
slow roll and were ﬂapping heavily away from its back—like
gorged vultures interrupted at mealtime. But they did not
move very far, continuing to hover a few yards from the
still-capsizing monster.

There was a sudden, blinding ﬂash of light synchronized

with a crash of static over the radio. One of the mantas,
slowly twisting end over end, was plummeting straight
downward. As it fell, a plume of black smoke trailed behind
it. The resemblance to an aircraft going down in ﬂames was
quite uncanny.

the medusa, gaining speed by losing altitude. They had,
within minutes, vanished back into the wall of cloud from
which they had emerged. And the medusa, no longer
falling, began to roll back toward the horizontal. Soon it
was sailing along once more on an even keel, as if nothing
had happened.

silence. “It’s developed electric defenses, like some of our
eels and rays. But that must have been about a million
volts! Can you see any organs that might produce the
discharge? Anything looking like electrodes?”

power of the telescope. “But here’s something odd. Do you
see this pattern? Check back on the earlier images. I’m
sure it wasn’t there before.”

A broad, mottled band had appeared along the side of the

medusa. It formed a startlingly regular checkerboard, each
square of which was itself speckled in a complex
subpattern of short horizontal lines. They were spaced at
equal distances in a geometrically perfect array of rows
and columns.

“You’re right,” said Dr Brenner, with something very

much like awe in his voice. “That’s just appeared. And I’m
afraid to tell you what I think it is.”

“Well, I have no reputation to lose—at least as a biologist.

Shall I give my guess?”

“Go ahead.”
“That’s a large meter-band radio array. The sort of thing

they used back at the beginning of the twentieth century.”

such a massive echo.”

“But why has it just appeared?”
“Probably an aftereﬀect of the discharge.”
“I’ve just had another thought,” said Falcon, rather

slowly. “Do you suppose it’s listening to us?”

“On this frequency? I doubt it. Those are meter—no,

decameter antennas—judging by their size. Hmm . . . that a
an idea!”

line of thought. Presently he continued: “I bet they’re tuned
to the radio outbursts! That’s something nature never got
around to doing on Earth . . . We have animals with sonar
and even electric senses, but nothing ever developed a
radio sense. Why bother where there was so much light?

energy. It’s worth while using it—maybe even tapping it.
That thing could be a ﬂoating power plant!”

A new voice cut into the conversation.
“Mission Commander here. This is all very interesting,

but there’s a much more important matter to settle. Is it
intelligent? If so, we’ve got to consider the First Contact
directives.”

“I would have sworn that anything that could make a
shortwave antenna system must be intelligent. Now, I’m
not sure. This could have evolved naturally. I suppose it’s
no more fantastic than the human eye.”

“Then we have to play safe and assume intelligence. For

the present, therefore, this expedition comes under all the
clauses of the Prime directive.”

There was a long silence while everyone on the radio

circuit absorbed the implications of this. For the ﬁrst time
in the history of space ﬂight, the rules that had been
established through more than a century of argument
might have to be applied. Man had—it was hoped—proﬁted
from his mistakes on Earth. Not only moral considerations,
but also his own self-interest demanded that he should not
repeat them among the planets. It could be disastrous to
treat a superior intelligence as the American settlers had
treated the Indians, or as almost everyone had treated the
Africans . . .

to approach, or even to communicate, until ‘they’ have had
plenty of time to study you. Exactly what was meant by
‘plenty of time’, no one had ever been able to decide. It was
left to the discretion of the man on the spot.

A responsibility of which he had never dreamed had

descended upon Howard Falcon. In the few hours that
remained to him on Jupiter, he might become the ﬁrst
ambassador of the human race.

the surgeons had restored to him the power of laughter.

7. Prime Directive

It was growing darker, but Falcon scarcely noticed as he
strained his eyes toward that living cloud in the ﬁeld of the
telescope. The wind that was steadily sweeping Kon-Tiki
around the funnel of the great whirlpool had now brought
him within twelve miles of the creature. If he got much
closer than six, he would take evasive action. Though he
felt certain that the medusa’s electric weapons were short
ranged, he did not wish to put the matter to the test. That
would be a problem for future explorers, and he wished
them luck.

Now it was quite dark in the capsule. That was strange,

because sunset was still hours away. Automatically, he
glanced at the horizontally scanning radar, as he had done
every few minutes. Apart from the medusa he was
studying, there was no other object within about sixty miles
of him.

Suddenly, with startling power, he heard the sound that

had come booming out of the Jovian night—the throbbing
beat that grew more and more rapid, then stopped in mid-
crescendo. The whole capsule vibrated with it like a pea in
a kettledrum.

Falcon realized two things almost simultaneously during

the sudden, aching silence. This time the sound was not
coming from thousands of miles away, over a radio circuit.
It was in the very atmosphere around him.

The second thought was even more disturbing. He had

quite forgotten—it was inexcusable, but there had been
other apparently more important things on his mind—that
most of the sky above him was completely blanked out by
Kon-Tiki’s gasbag. Being lightly silvered to conserve its
heat, the great balloon was an eﬀective shield both to radar
and to vision.

He had known this, of course; it had been a minor defect

of the design, tolerated because it did not appear

important. It seemed very important to Howard Falcon now
—as he saw that fence of gigantic tentacles, thicker than
the trunks of any tree, descending all around the capsule.

He heard Brenner yelling: “Remember the Prime

directive! Don’t alarm it!” Before he could make an
appropriate answer that overwhelming drumbeat started
again and drowned all other sounds.

The sign of a really skilled test pilot is how he reacts not

to foreseeable emergencies, but to ones that nobody could
have anticipated. Falcon did not hesitate for more than a
second to analyze the situation. In a lightning-swift
movement, he pulled the rip cord.

ﬁrst hydrogen balloons; on Kon-Tiki, the rip cord did not
tear open the gasbag, but merely operated a set of louvers
around the upper curve of the envelope. At once the hot
gas started to rush out; Kon-Tiki, deprived of her lift, began
to fall swiftly in this gravity ﬁeld two and a half times as
strong as Earth’s.

Falcon had a momentary glimpse of great tentacles

whipping upward and away. He had just time to note that
they were studded with large bladders or sacs, presumably
to give them buoyancy, and that they ended in multitudes of
thin feelers like the roots of a plant. He half expected a bolt
of lightning—but nothing happened.

His precipitous rate of descent was slackening as the

atmosphere thickened and the deﬂated envelope acted as a
parachute. When Kon-Tiki had dropped about two miles, he
felt that it was safe to close the louvers again. By the time
he had restored buoyancy and was in equilibrium once
more, he had lost another mile of altitude and was getting
dangerously near his safety limit.

He peered anxiously through the overhead windows,

though he did not expect to see anything except the
obscuring bulk of the balloon. But he had sideslipped
during his descent, and part of the medusa was just visible

a couple of miles above him. It was much closer than he
expected—and it was still coming down, faster than he
would have believed possible.

Mission Control was calling anxiously. He shouted: “I’m

OK—but it’s still coming after me. I can’t go any deeper.”

That was not quite true. He could go a lot deeper—about

one hundred and eighty miles. But it would be a one-way
trip, and most of the journey would be of little interest to
him.

Then, to his great relief, he saw that the medusa was

levelling oﬀ, not quite a mile above him. Perhaps it had
decided to approach this strange intruder with caution; or
perhaps it, too, found this deeper layer uncomfortably hot.
The temperature was over ﬁfty degrees centigrade, and
Falcon wondered how much longer his life-support system
could handle matters.

Dr Brenner was back on the circuit, still worrying about

the Prime directive.

“Remember—it may only be inquisitive!” he cried,

without much conviction. “Try not to frighten it!”

Falcon was getting rather tired of this advice and

recalled a TV discussion he had once seen between a space
lawyer and an astronaut. After the full implications of the
Prime directive had been carefully spelled out, the
incredulous spacer had exclaimed: “Then if there was no
alternative, I must sit still and let myself be eaten?” The
lawyer had not even cracked a smile when he answered:
“That’s an excellent summing up.”

It had seemed funny at the time; it was not at all amusing

now.

And then Falcon saw something that made him even

more unhappy. The medusa was still hovering about a mile
above him—but one of its tentacles was becoming
incredibly elongated, and was stretching down toward Kon-
Tiki, thinning out at the same time. As a boy he had once
seen the funnel of a tornado descending from a storm cloud

over the Kansas plains. The thing coming toward him now
evoked vivid memories of that black, twisting snake in the
sky.

“I’m rapidly running out of options,” he reported to

Mission Control. “I now have only a choice between
frightening it—and giving it a bad stomach-ache. I don’t
think it will ﬁnd Kon-Tiki very digestible, if that’s what it
has in mind.”

remained silent.

I’m starting the ignition sequencer. I hope I’ll have enough
reserve to correct my orbit later.”

He could no longer see the medusa; once more it was

directly overhead. But he knew that the descending
tentacle must now be very close to the balloon. It would
take almost ﬁve minutes to bring the reactor up to full
thrust . . .

The fuser was primed. The orbit computer had not

rejected the situation as wholly impossible. The air scoops
were open, ready to gulp in tons of the surrounding
hydrohelium on demand. Even under optimum conditions,
this would have been the moment of truth—for there had
been no way of testing how a nuclear ramjet would really
work in the strange atmosphere of Jupiter.

Very gently something rocked Kon-Tiki. Falcon tried to

ignore it.

atmosphere of less than a quarter of the density and thirty
degrees cooler. Too bad.

the air scoops to work? When the ram ignited, he’d be
heading toward Jupiter with two and a half g’s to help him
get there. Could he possibly pull out in time?

A large, heavy hand patted the balloon. The whole vessel

become the craze on Earth.

Of course, Brenner might be perfectly right. Perhaps it

was just trying to be friendly. Maybe he should try to talk to
it over the radio. Which should it be: ‘Pretty pussy’? ‘Down,
Fido’? Or ‘Take me to your leader’?

light the candle, with a hundred-million-degree match.

edge of the balloon some sixty yards away. It was about the
size of an elephant’s trunk, and by the delicate way it was
moving appeared to be almost as sensitive. There were
little palps at its end, like questing mouths. He was sure
that Dr Brenner would be fascinated.

This seemed about as good a time as any. He gave a swift

scan of the entire control board, started the ﬁnal four-
second ignition count, broke the safety seal, and pressed
the JETTISON switch.

weight. Kon-Tiki was falling freely, nose down. Overhead,
the discarded balloon was racing upward, dragging the
inquisitive tentacle with it. Falcon had no time to see if the
gasbag actually hit the medusa, because at that moment
the ramjet ﬁred and he had other matters to think about.

the reactor nozzles, swiftly building up thrust—but toward
Jupiter, not away from it. He could not pull out yet, for
vector control was too sluggish. Unless he could gain
complete control and achieve horizontal ﬂight within the
next ﬁve seconds, the vehicle would dive too deeply into
the atmosphere and would be destroyed.

With agonizing slowness—those ﬁve seconds seemed like

ﬁfty—he managed to ﬂatten out, then pull the nose upward.
He glanced back only once and caught a ﬁnal glimpse of
the medusa, many miles away. Kon-Tiki’s discarded gasbag
had apparently escaped from its grasp, for he could see no
sign of it.

Now he was master once more—no longer drifting

helplessly on the winds of Jupiter, but riding his own
column of atomic ﬁre back to the stars. He was conﬁdent
that the ramjet would steadily give him velocity and
altitude until he had reached near-orbital speed at the
fringes of the atmosphere. Then, with a brief burst of pure
rocket power, he would regain the freedom of space.

Halfway to orbit, he looked south and saw the

tremendous enigma of the Great Red Spot—that ﬂoating
island twice the size of Earth—coming up over the horizon.
He stared into its mysterious beauty until the computer
warned him that conversion to rocket thrust was only sixty
seconds ahead. He tore his gaze reluctantly away.

“Some other time,” he murmured.
“What’s that?” said Mission Control. “What did you say?”
“It doesn’t matter,” he replied.

8. Between Two Worlds

“You’re a hero now, Howard,” said Webster, “not just a
celebrity. You’ve given them something to think about—
injected some excitement into their lives. Not one in a
million will actually travel to the Outer Giants, but the
whole human race will go in imagination. And that’s what
counts.”

’I’m glad to have made your job a little easier.”
Webster was too old a friend to take oﬀense at the note

of irony. Yet it surprised him. And this was not the ﬁrst
change in Howard that he had noticed since the return
from Jupiter.

The Administrator pointed to the famous sign on his

desk, borrowed from an impresario of an earlier age:
ASTONISH ME!

“I’m not ashamed of my job. New knowledge, new

resources—they’re all very well. But men also need novelty
and excitement. Space travel has become routine; you’ve
made it a great adventure once more. It will be a long, long
time before we get Jupiter pigeonholed. And maybe longer
still before we understand those medusae. I still think that
one knew where your blind spot was. Anyway, have you
decided on your next move? Saturn, Uranus, Neptune—you
name it.”

“I don’t know. I’ve thought about Saturn, but I’m not

really needed there. It’s only one gravity, not two and a half
like Jupiter. So men can handle it.”

Men, thought Webster. He said ‘men’.
He’s never done that before. And when did I last hear

him use the word ‘we’? He’s changing, slipping away from
us . . .

“Well,” he said aloud, rising from his chair to conceal his

slight uneasiness, “let’s get the conference started. The
cameras are all set up and everyone’s waiting. You’ll meet a
lot of old friends.”

He stressed the last word, but Howard showed no

response. The leathery mask of his face was becoming
more and more diﬀicult to read. Instead, he rolled back
from the Administrator’s desk, unlocked his undercarriage
so that it no longer formed a chair, and rose on his
hydraulics to his full seven feet of height. It had been good
psychology on the part of the surgeons to give him that
extra twelve inches, to compensate somewhat for all that
he had lost when the Queen had crashed.

Falcon waited until Webster had opened the door, then

pivoted neatly on his balloon tires and headed for it at a
smooth and silent twenty miles an hour. The display of
speed and precision was not ﬂaunted arrogantly; rather, it
had become quite unconscious.

Howard Falcon, who had once been a man and could still

pass for one over a voice circuit, felt a calm sense of

achievement—and, for the ﬁrst time in years, something
like peace of mind. Since his return from Jupiter, the
nightmares had ceased. He had found his role at last.

He now knew why he had dreamed about that

superchimp aboard the doomed Queen Elizabeth. Neither
man nor beast, it was between two worlds; and so was he.

The life-support system inside the metal cylinder that had
replaced his fragile body functioned equally well in space
or under water. Gravity ﬁelds ten times that of Earth were
an inconvenience, but nothing more. And no gravity was
best of all . . .

The human race was becoming more remote, the ties of

kinship 
more 
tenuous. 
Perhaps 
these 
air-breathing,

radiation-sensitive bundles of unstable carbon compounds
had no right beyond the atmosphere; they should stick to
their natural homes—Earth, Moon, Mars.

Some day the real masters of space would be machines,

not men—and he was neither. Already conscious of his
destiny, he took a sombre pride in his unique loneliness—
the ﬁrst immortal midway between two orders of creation.

and the new—between the creatures of carbon and the
creatures of metal who must one day supersede them.

Both would have need of him in the troubled centuries

that lay ahead.

THE SONGS OF
DISTANT EARTH

This is a little complicated, so we had better start at the
beginning . . .

And that, incredibly, is in February 1957, half a year

before Sputnik I heralded the dawn of the Space Age. I
would have sworn it was a decade later, but the evidence in
my notebooks is indisputable.

For some reason, at the beginning of that momentous

year a phrase lodged in my mind and wouldn’t go away; it
echoed round and round my skull as persistently as the
theme from the last movement of Sibelius’ 2nd Symphony.
It was obviously the title of a story, which I eventually had
to write: you’ll ﬁnd it in The Other Side of the Sky.

Call that Mark I. What follows here is Mark II. The

exorcism was incomplete, for in 1979, a mere twenty-two
years later, the title started bugging me again.

And that was not the only thing bugging me. I had just

seen two spectacular and highly successful space movies—
Star Wars, Close Encounters of the Third Kind—and Star
Trek was still doing reruns all over the planet. They were
well done and I greatly enjoyed them, but they all had one
thing in common. They were not, in the strictest sense,
science ﬁction, but fantasy.

Now, I like fantasy every bit as much as science-ﬁction—

its literary standards are usually higher, too—but I
recognize the distinction between the genres. Critics have
been trying for decades to deﬁne both categories, without
much success. Here is my working deﬁnition: Fantasy is
something that couldn’t happen in the real world (though
often you wish it would); Science Fiction is something that
really could happen (though often you’d be sorry if it did).

Today, we are 99.99 percent certain that it will always be

impossible to travel faster than light, which means that
journeys to even the nearest star systems will take
decades. This is no problem to the fantasy writer, who can
happily cling to the 0.01 percent chance that there may be

a loophole that Einstein didn’t notice—and go racing round
the galaxy, saving civilization once a week in prime time.

England, I decided to accept the Universe as it really is. (As
Dr. Johnson once said: “You’d better . . .”) Was it possible, I
asked myself, to write a completely realistic story using an
interstellar—as opposed to a “merely” interplanetary—
background?

I also decided to kill two birds with one typewriter. Ever

since 2001, Stanley Kubrick had been saying wistfully,
“What sort of movie should we have made?”, or words to
that eﬀect. So I decided to write Mk II in the form of a
movie outline.

This would have two advantages. The ﬁrst, and most

important, was the saving of time and energy. An outline
compresses, in a few pages, all the basic elements of a
complete novel—locale, characters, plot. Though the act of
creation may take months, the actual typing can be done in
a couple of hours; you can have all the fun and none of the
drudgery. (Of course, you sacriﬁce emotion, atmosphere,
“ﬁne writing.” But they can be added later, and perhaps on
a ﬁrmer foundation.)

quiet, at least for a while. In the event, he returned the
outline with an unenthusiastic “Interesting . . .”—which
was exactly what I’d expected. (If he’d said, “O.K.—when
can we get started?”, I would have been in a real dilemma.
I owe Stanley so much that I would have felt morally
obliged to cooperate—even if it killed me. Which it
probably would . . .)

who promptly sold it to Omni magazine. (Vol. Ill, No. 12). As
soon as it appeared, wouldn’t you know, a leading movie
producer wanted to buy it—but only if I wrote the
screenplay. This is a complicated, highly skilled yet
essentially noncreative job I wouldn’t touch with a

bargepole, so the deal was oﬀ. (I am prepared to spend two
or even three days—depending on the weather—going
through other people s screenplays of my own novels. But
that would be the maximum extent of my involvement.)

Earth”—which, 
incidentally, 
contains 
elements 
from

another story, “The Shining Ones” (published in the
collection The Wind From the Sun). I still think it would
make a damn good movie, even though it doesn’t contain a
single space-warp or black hole.

Perhaps more important is the fact that “S.D.E.” acted as

a stepping stone to something much bigger. It got me
interested in writing again, and also focussed my attention
on the fact that there was another unaccepted challenge
still lying around. For years I’d said it would be impossible
to write a sequel to 2001. But just suppose . . .

So in March 1980, I started to write an outline for “Space

Odyssey Two.” It wouldn’t be too much work—just a few
typed pages.

Nine, actually. But one thing led to another . . .

T

he locale is Oceana (“Shaana”), an Earth-type
planet 50 light-years, and 500 years of voyage
time, from the solar system, colonized 2,000 years

earlier in the ﬁrst wave of interstellar exploration. There is
very little land; continents still lie 100 million years in the
future, and there is still much tectonic activity. The largest
island is about the size of Hawaii, and very similar to
Hawaii in climate and culture.

Over the centuries the islanders—attractive, slightly

feckless—have developed a stable, conservative society,
largely based on intermediate technology. They still have
access to all man’s accumulated knowledge, but they have
added little to it. Their boats, aircraft, and cars are built to
last a lifetime, and they never throw anything away they
can use again. Since there is no other habitable planet in
the system, they have no spaceships, but they can still
launch the (rather primitive) satellites essential for their
scattered islands’ communications and meteorological
services.

Though they have had no physical contact with outsiders

for centuries, they still inject their records and news, such
as it is, into the local stellar network. The current update is
long overdue, partly because of a mounting power crisis.

The Shaanans get most of their electrical power from

OTEC (Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion), which employs
the temperature diﬀerence between the warm surface
water and the very cold water several kilometers down.
(The ﬁrst Earth-based OTEC factory began operating in
Hawaii in 1979.) For some unknown reason, several of the
factories have failed, apparently owing to damage at the
deep 
end. 
Typically 
the 
Shaanans 
don’t 
have 
the

submersibles needed to investigate at such depths; they
are still arguing about what to do next.

marine engineer; marine engineering on Shaana is one of
the most important professions) and Marissa. Their placid
lives are disrupted by the arrival of the ﬁrst ship from
Earth in many centuries—and the last one that will ever be.

just suﬀicient warning to seek out the population and
evacuate the survivors in hyperships, each carrying one
million sleepers, along with records of all mankind’s
treasures and knowledge, as well as gene banks of the
main plants and animals.

Argo barely escaped in time. She left before preparations

for the centuries-long journey were quite complete. She
carries spectacular views of the destruction of the solar
system, recorded by cameras on Earth and some other
planets: Jupiter boiling, Saturn’s rings collapsing, the sun
ﬁnally devouring its children, but, most poignant of all,
unbearably moving scenes of the last moments of beloved
earthscapes and artifacts (e.g., the Taj Mahal, St. Peter’s,
the Pyramids, etc., melting down).

Because there is appreciable erosion from interstellar

dust at one tenth the speed of light, Argo travels behind a
huge ablation shield, formed of ice. This is now too thin for
the voyage to continue; hence the stop at Oceana to build a
new shield. About 100 of the ship’s engineers have been
revived for this task, among them Falcon.

During the decades of deceleration Argo has been

studying the Shaanans’ radio transmissions and has a very
good idea of the local culture. But so far there has been no
attempt at contact, because of the long-established policy
of noninterference. There is much debate aboard Argo
about this, especially now that it is in orbit and the beauty
of the planet below is clearly visible. Falcon spends hours

scanning the islands through the ship’s telescopes, vividly
reminded of the world he has lost forever.

and frictions. The voyagers have power, knowledge,
determination, but they are slowly seduced by the beauty of
Oceana—such a contrast to Argo’s sterile corridors—and
become appalled by the lonely centuries of travel that still
lie ahead. The Shaanans are happy and perfectly adjusted
(though getting worried about the power situation). Yet
they become envious of Argo’s wonders and a little guilty
about their past indolence.

infects the other with nasty head colds.

It is agreed that Argo can siphon (by means of a space

elevator at the equator) several million tons of water to
build a new shield. It is frozen in the shadow of a giant
sunshade; then it is assembled by robots in a slow-motion
ice ballet, lit by the cold light of Oceana’s three moons.

love with them both. Despite their cultural diﬀerences the
two societies are equally civilized and sexual jealousy is
(almost) extinct. But, ironically, another problem arises:
Falcon is deeply attracted to Oceana, while Loren and
Marissa feel the lure of the great, unknown universe
beyond.

During the weeks of shield building, there is a

catastrophic power failure in another OTEC grid. The
Shaanans appeal to Argo. After some debate (they don’t
want to make the islanders even less self-reliant) the
voyagers re-create a deep-diving submersible from the
ship’s information banks. Falcon plugs in temporarily to the
recorded skills and personality of a long-dead deep-sea
explorer and he dives with Loren. They discover that the
installation had been damaged deliberately.

Diving deeper, they encounter the Shining Ones, giant

squidlike creatures, which communicate in the total

darkness of the abyss by beautiful displays of multicolored
luminescence. They can even produce pictures the way
giant TV screens do.

Falcon and Loren are also astonished to see that the

squids are using tools fashioned from whalebone. They are
on the verge of developing technology, and the OTEC
conductors are their source of metal.

want to destroy the squids, but this horriﬁes the voyagers,
who have already seen too much death.

With the help of special equipment and the ship’s

computers, they reach a limited understanding with the
squids, which are bought oﬀ with a gift of metal. But one
day the Shaanans may be faced with a more serious threat
from these beautiful and magniﬁcent beasts: the future of
the planet will belong to the more energetic race. In this
coming conﬂict Argo cannot, and should not, interfere. The
threat from the deep may be exactly what is needed to
revitalize the Shaanans.

Argo’s shield is complete; the ship is ready to depart.
To help the Shaanans understand, Falcon takes Marissa

(now bearing his child) and Loren up to orbit.

They enter the hibernaculum. At its portal stands one of

the greatest works of art ever produced by mankind, the
golden mask of the young Pharaoh Tutankhamun, one of
the last treasures saved from Earth. Now it guards the
sleeping as once it guarded the dead.

cells until they ﬁnd Falcon’s wife, who is in the last stages
of pregnancy. Falcon explains that they had intended the
child to be born on Earth but time ran out. Soon he will join
them both in their long sleep and will awaken in time to
greet them when Argo reaches its goal 500 years later.

On the beach where they ﬁrst met, beneath the light of

the three moons, Marissa and Loren await the moment of
departure. Thousands of kilometers overhead the plasma

drive ignites brighter than 100 suns, as Argo draws away
from Oceana and heads out to the stars.

will cherish all their lives. Yet always there will be the
phantom image of another child conceived 500 years
before, to be born 500 years hence.

A child whose father will remember them when he

awakens, centuries after they have turned to dust.

ARTHUR C. CLARKE was born at Minehead, Somerset,
England, in 1917. He is a graduate of King’s College,
London, where he earned First Class Honors in Physics and
Mathematics. During World War II, he served as an oﬀicer
in the Royal Air Force in charge of the ﬁrst radar “talk
down” equipment (“G.C.A.”) during its test period. His
novel, Glide Path, is based on this experience.
In 1962 he was honored by the Franklin Institute for having
originated the concept of communications satellites in a
technical paper published in 1945. That same year, he
received the Kalinga Prize for science writing from the
Director-General of UNESCO.

In 1969, he shared an Oscar nomination with Stanley

Kubrick for 2001: A Space Odyssey, the ground-breaking
science ﬁction ﬁlm. He has also covered the missions of
Apollo 11, 12 and 15 with Walter Cronkite and N.A.S.A.’s
Wally Schirra. In 1968 Mr. Clarke was selected to write the
epilogue to the astronauts’ own account of the Apollo
mission, First on the Moon.

For thirty years, Mr. Clarke’s hobby has been undersea

exploration along the Great Barrier Reef of Australia and
oﬀ the coast of Sri Lanka, where he has resided since 1956.
This interest has been the subject of nine of his works,
including Indian Ocean Treasure, a ﬁrst-hand account of
the discovery of a man-of-war which sank in 1702 oﬀ the
coast of Sri Lanka with at least a ton of silver aboard.

His popular science articles have appeared in such

publications as Time, The Reader s Digest, The New York
Times, The London Observer and many others.

As one of the preeminent science ﬁction authors of the

twentieth century, he has been awarded all of the ﬁeld’s
highest awards; his novel, Rendezvous with Rama, won the
Hugo, Nebula and John W. Campbell Awards of 1974.

Among Mr. Clarke’s other well-known works are 2001: A

Space Odyssey and its best-selling sequel, 2010: Odyssey

Two; The Fountains of Paradise; Childhood’s End; and a
television series, Arthur C. Clarke s Mysterious World.

in print, including numerous anthologies of his short
ﬁction.

In 
1982, 
he 
received 
the 
Marconi 
International

Fellowship and was nominated for the position of
Chancellor of the University of Moratuwa by the President
of Sri Lanka. From his home on that island, he continues to
write, consult and travel internationally for scientiﬁc
lectures and conferences.

LEBBEUS WOODS was born in East Lansing, Michigan, on
May 31, 1940. Receiving his technical training at the
Purdue University School of Engineering and the University
of Illinois School of Architecture, he worked in the late
1960s for the distinguished architectural ﬁrm of Kevin
Roche, John Dinkeloo and Associates on the design,
development and construction of the Ford Foundation
Headquarters Building in New York City. As Director of
Design for his own ﬁrm, he won a Progressive Architecture
citation for applied research in design in 1974. Returning
to New York City in 1978, he has continued the
development of his ideas in drawings and writings that
have been widely published and exhibited.
Architecture-Sculpture-Painting 
(1979) 
depicts 
an

architecture integrated with sculpture and painting as a
paradigm for an integrated, holistic society. Einstein Tomb
(1980) is a proposal for a monument to be constructed in
orbit and sent into deep space commemorating the kinship
of 
Einstein’s 
thought 
with 
ancient 
philosophies 
of

dialectical continuity and unity. Aeon: The Architecture of
Time (1982) is a vision of four cities that form a cycle of the
evolution of civilization in harmony with cycles of natural
evolution on Earth and beyond.

throughout 
the 
United 
States. 
In 
addition 
he 
has

undertaken the illustration of Wagner’s Ring of the
Niebelung, for which he has completed The Rheingold. His
ﬁrst drawings for a book of science ﬁction are these for
Arthur C. Clarke’s The Sentinel.

BYRON PREISS VISUAL PUBLICATIONS, INC. is the
award-winning producer of numerous illustrated volumes of
science ﬁction and fantasy literature, including editions by
Ray Bradbury, Samuel R. Delany, Harlan Ellison and Roger
Zelazny. Their monograph on the work of Leo and Diane
Dillon, the two-time Caldecott Award-winning artists, was
displayed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1981. They
recently produced the book, The Words of Gandhi, in
collaboration with Richard Attenborough, director of the
Oscar award-winning ﬁlm. This Masterworks Edition is the
ﬁrst in a series of volumes to be produced by them for
Berkley Books.

