Chapter IV

THE GHOST ROAD

The Ghost Road is the third in a trilogy of novels by Pat Barker, 

about the First World War, having been preceded by Regeneration and 

The Eye in the Door. The Ghost Road is a novel published in 1995 and 

winner of the prestigious Bocker Prize. It is the third volume of the 

trilogy that follows the fortunes of shell-shocked British army officers 

towards the end of the First World War.

A. Plot:

Like Regeneration, The Ghost Road is, for the most part, set back 

of the front lines, primarily in the Scottish mental hospital, Craiglockhart, 

where officers suffering from shell-shock are patched together to be sent 

back to the trenches of France again. Also like the first volume of the 

trilogy, its characters are both fictional figures, principally Billy Prior, a 

bisexual lieutenant of working-class origins, and real life ones, such as 

the poet-soldiers like Wilfred Owen, Siegfried Sassoon and Dr. W. H. R. 

Rivers, an anthropologist and psychiatrist.

The novel moves even further from the front lines, all the way to 

Melanesia in the Pacific,, where Dr. Rivers went ten years before in 1908. 

Dr. Rivers, the psychologist who treats Billy and others, remembers the 

anthropological research he did in Melanesia among the tribes that once 

were head-hunters until that practice was outlawed by colonial 

administrators. This allows him to make some nicely understated

•• 66

comparisons between the two war-obsessed societies, i.e. European and 

Melanesian. Each in its way, Europe and Melanesia, worships the dead. 

Each finds its own rationale for killing. It seems that Dr. Rivers dealing 

with the Melanesians is in a position similar to that of Billy Prior facing 

the prospect of combat for the fourth time.

Britons and Europeans, on the other hand, are the people detesting 

the horrific, immediate presence of war. On the other hand Billy, Owen 

and Sassoon are dying to get back into it. Back in France, Billy thinks, 

“What an utter bloody fool I would have been not to come back.” 

(Pat Barker, The Ghost Road, Viking, Penguin, London, 1995, p. 258) 

Little wonder they all, Europeans and Melanesians alike, see ghosts. Only 

their reasons for seeing them differ.

The Ghost Road is a story of war and struggle, both internal and 

external. It is set against the backdrop of the First World War, reflecting 

the lives of Billy Prior and Dr. Rivers, While Billy may be the first 

character introduced, it is Dr. Rivers who is truly the protagonist.

The Ghost Road completes Pat Barker’s powerful, prize-winning 

First World War Regeneration Trilogy. The novel features Dr. Rivers 

whose job is to rehabilitate the shell-shocked officers assigned to his care, 

with a goal returning them to active, front-line duty. In this novel, 

Dr. Rivers experiences a bout of influenza which triggers vivid 

fever-induced memories of his early anthropological work in Melanesia 

where he lived with a tribe of former head-hunters. These memories now 

colour the doctor’s analysis of the so-called “civilized” warfare.

In The Ghost Road, as it is the story of war and struggle, Billy 

Prior meets Dr. Rivers when he is a mental patient at Craiglockhart War

67
• •

Hospital, following his third tour of duty in the Royal Army. Their 

friendship continues even after he is discharged through ongoing 

outpatient treatment. This treatment is more for Billy to cure his 

emotional wounds rather than any specific mental problem he is 

experiencing.

Billy wants to return to the Front for the fourth time. The fact is 

that he does not know what else to do with his life. Fighting is the only 

thing he knows. His inner struggle comes from his inability to determine 

who he is as a man. He continually cheats on his fiancee with both men 

and women. It is his fourth trip to war that causes his ultimate demise, as 

he is finally killed in the battle.

Dr. Rivers struggles daily with his own demons. His most 

significant problem is a perceived lack of effectiveness. In the novel, 

Dr. Rivers is shown through flashbacks of his mission trip to Eddystone, 

a Melanesian island. There he compiles research on the villagers and 

plans to write a significant treatise, but his own ghost haunts. The treatise 

is never completed or published. The title of the book speaks of the 

ghosts, both seen and unseen in all of us.

Ghosts are portrayed, in The Ghost Road, in many different ways. 

This novel was titled The Ghost Road because we are taken back to a 

time in Dr. Rivers’s past where he lives through a tribal experience with 

new customs and ways of dealing with death. In this novel, a lot of the 

tribal language is used, which makes Dr. Rivers’s experiences life-like.

The Washington Post Book World observes that in Barker’s 

trilogy’s final volume “her shell-shocked lieutenant returns to France and 

her noble psychologist to his part - both perilous terrains” and concludes

•• 68 ••

that The Ghost Road mixes “the single-bullet understatement of the best 

war fiction with a bottomless grasp of its tragic ironies”. (Linda Lesher, 

The Best Novels of the Nineties : A Reader’s Guide, McFarland, 2000, 

pp. 187-188). The New Yorker notes that Barker has rescued Dr. Rivers 

from historical obscurity by inventing “a consciousness for him - a deep 
- flowing and somewhat turbulent one. And she also invents a patient for 

him; tough, libidinous Billy prior. His energy is what makes this trilogy 

more than mere historical fiction. Through him, Pat Barker presents the 

First World War as the test tube of the modem spirit”. {The Best Novels 

of the Nineties : A Reader’s Guide, p. 188)

Publisher Weekly, in its stained review, concludes that “The whole 

trilogy, which in its entirely is only equivalent to one blockbuster serial 

killer frenzy, is a triumph of an imagination at once poetic and practical.” 

{The Best Novels of the Nineties: A Reader’s Guide, p. 188) The Times 

Literary Supplement calls The Ghost Road “a startlingly good novel in its 

own right” and concludes that with “the other two volumes of the trilogy, 

it forms one of the richest and most rewarding works of fiction of recent 

times. Intricately plotted, beautifully written, skillfully assembled, tender, 

horrifying and funny, it lives on the imagination, like the war it so 

imaginatively and so intelligently explores. {The Best Novels of the 

Nineties : A Reader’s Guide, p. 188)

B. Themes:

Pat Barker’s prize-winning novel The Ghost Road explores various 

themes. Apparently, it becomes the story of Prior as he prepares to return 

for his fourth stint in the trenches, with Dr. Rivers eager to know how he

•• 69 ••

will react. Refusing the chance of staying home on medical grounds, 

Prior is himself no less curious about his own reactions. And he passes 

the new test of nerves.

Perhaps surprisingly, Prior’s recovery from shell-shock was not 

unusual. Using analysis, neurological surgery and electric shock 

treatment, Dr. Rivers and other doctors were often able to eliminate such 

common symptoms as mutism, paralysis and hysteria. In 1917, when 

Owen had his breakdown, 80 percent of shell-shock cases were dealt with 

within sound of gunfire and 80 percent were back in the line within 

fourteen days.

The Ghost Road consists the themes like war, sex, exploitation, 

marginalization as well as the past memories. Accompanying Prior’s 

story, Barker shows Dr. Rivers reliving memories of his pre-war work 

among the headhunters of Melanesia in the Pacific. Based on River’s 

writings, these stories of ritual death and psychological enslavement to 

evil spirits in turn serve as mirrors of the physical carnage and mental 

devastation caused by the set-piece battles of the First World War.

At the first sight The Ghost Road is an anti-war novel, but in many 

ways it tells more about the strange nature of British society. And in that 

sense. Barker’s fascination with Prior is ununderstandable. Like the 

author, who raises a rare northern working-class voice in London, Prior is 

an outsider. He is an officer who does not belong to the officer class; he is 

engaged to be married but is actively bisexual.

Pat Barker’s The Ghost Road is a masterful literary integration of 

sex and war. The novel’s protagonist, the lascivious, bisexual Billy Prior 

once remarks : “whole bloody western front’s a wanker’s paradise”,

70
• •
• •

{The Ghost Road, p. 177) a statement with far-reaching implications 

concerning aggression and eroticism. Winner of the prestigious Booker 

Prize Award in 1995, The Ghost Road delves into many standard Booker 

motifs, such as war, the British class system, memory and childhood, but 

Barker revitalize these worn out subjects. With prostitutes, lecherous 

priests, and the naked body, she intersects the motifs of sex and 

dominance. “Homoeroticism, pedophilia, and prostitution deepen the dark 

hues of her narrative, fleshing out what might otherwise have been a tired 

war novel. It is at the intersection of sex, dominance, and gender that 

The Ghost Road earns its place among the Booker greats.”

123helpme.com/search. asp? text=The+Ghost+Road-15k>

War is a theme of The Ghost Road, both overt and hidden. 

Although the most obvious theme is the war between nations, The Ghost 

Road also details war between individuals and war within oneself. The 

novel is written against a background of the end of the First World War in 

1918, but it is also filled with flashbacks to a pre-World War 1 time on a 

South Pacific island. While the Melanesian island of Eddvstone is not 

caught up in the world’s woes, it constantly fights for its own existence.

The war between individuals is seen both in present day and m 

flashback. Billy Prior is fighting with the military so he can be sent back 

to the Front in France for the fourth tour of duty. Dr. Rivers battles 

against his patients and his memories.

The Ghost Road details the theme of exploitation and 

marginalization : the exploitation of young soldiers, the working class, 

children and women. The most obvious example of exploitation is the 

waste of the lives of the young men. They are sacrificed in millions on

•• 71

both sides for the old ruling elite. Regardless of the reasons, it can be 

viewed simply as the old exploiting the young. So many young men died 

in France. Six months of war made them old. Prior notes, in “trenchtime” 

he was Hallet’s great-grandfather. {The Ghost Road, p. 46) Hallet is an 

obvious example of exploitation of youth. Barker purposely makes him a 

likeable, good-looking young man, and then signals the sacrificed youth 

symbolism with the riderless rocking horse in Amiens. When Hallet 

finally dies, surrounded by his grief-stricken family, his own idealism 

shattered by the sense of exploitation is very strongly evident - his young 

life was used to prolong a meaningless conflict.

The exploitation of the working-class is also one of the allied 

themes. Prior, being from the working-class himself, finds class 

inequalities distasteful. The ruling people see the working-class as a 

commodity, something to be used. Birtwhistle calls his working-class 

lovers :

“Working-classes. Water-closets. The men who’re getting 

their ballocks shot off so he can go on being the lily on the 

dung heap. God, they make me sick.” {The Ghost Road,

p. 100)

Another example of the exploitation inherent in such a distorted 

society is sexual exploitation. There are several examples of this in 

The Ghost Road, many involving children, another marginalized group. 

Prior was abused by a Catholic priest, Father Mackenzie, who tried to 

include young Billy in his guilt. This exploitative introduction to sex 

leads Prior into a lifelong search for sexual control. He views sex as a 

way to gain power and control over his partners. Instead of linking sex

.. 72
••

with love - as he starts to do with Sarah - Prior generally links sex with 

power and control. Barker is using the theme of exploitation to point out 

the sickness of early 20 century European society. It is a society of 

inequality and exploitation made worse by the false idea that Europe is a 

civilized and caring society.

C. Characterization:

The prize-winning novel, The Ghost Road by Pat Barker, is a 

fascinating story of the First World War, told through the eyes of several 

characters : a doctor, an officer, and several enlisted men. It mixes history 

and fiction : real historical characters appear along with totally fictional 

men. It examines class issues in Britain and provides an unflinching 

portrait of the horrors and futility of war. The book is more masculine as 

the protagonists are male, and the sex and violence are graphic. The 

female characters are not plentiful, but are well done.

The Ghost Road contributes to follow the two main characters from 

the earlier volume, The Eye in the Door : Dr. Rivers, a psychiatrist, and 

Billy Prior, a soldier who has suffered both mental and physical 

breakdown. In the first two novels most of the action takes place in 

England, away from the war front. Concentrating on the home front 

Barker presents experiences of the war through the eyes not only of 

soldiers but also of the women, conscientious objectors, essential workers 

and older men who were back in England during the World War 1.

Among the characters in this astonishing novel is Dr. Rivers, a 

physician, struggling to help shell-shocked British soldiers recover their 

sanity. Overwhelmed by their suffering, he finds himself fearing that the

.. 73 ••

tales they tell him would become one story. The voices blend into a single 

cry of pain. Dr. Rivers’s character is entertaining and interesting. The 

important thing of this character is his thought process as he treats and 

reflects on the treatment of his patients. Also interesting is his retelling 

his experience as an anthropologist on Eddystone Island, a place occupied 

by people who are culturally different from him and who teach him 

lasting lessons about all manner of things - especially love and death. 

Throughout The Ghost Road there are interludes of Dr. Rivers’s trip to 

Melanesia with Hocart. These things from Dr. Rivers’s past show the 

development between two different cultures, as Dr. Rivers becomes 

friend with Njiru, a witch-doctor.

The novel also depicts Dr. Rivers’s childhood experiences. 

Dr. Rivers explains how Mr. Dodgson was the first adult he had met as a 

child who stammered as badly as he did himself. He was therefore hurt 

when Mr. Dodgson stated :

“I 1-1-1-love all ch-ch-ch—” “children, M-Mrs. R-Rivers, as

1-1-1-long as they’re g-g-g-girls.” “Boys are a mistake.”

{The Ghost Road, p. 26)

Dr. Rivers’s view on Prior’s returning to France has not changed. 

He tries to prevent Prior from going to the Front giving reason of his 

ill-health due to his asthma. Dr. Rivers always fears how the trauma of 

the war won’t finish with the war.

Another central figure in the novel is Billy Prior. The Ghost Road 

follows the efforts of several characters to come to terms with the horrific 

effects of the war on their lives and their souls. Lt. Billy Prior is a 

temporary gentleman elevated from the ranks of the working-class by his

•• 74 ••

battlefield commission. He discovers that the only place he feels alive or 

at home is the war front. In the hospital, he fights stubbornly to get back 

to his troops.

Billy Prior is fatalistic, intelligent, isolated from everything and a 

remarkable creation of Pat Barker. His experience of war is also 

remarkable. In her portraits of Billy Prior and his fellow soldiers, Barker 

has recreated the singular experiences of individuals who reveal, in their 

particular stories of grief and horror, the war’s true cost and tragedy. In 

the battlefield he leads his troop bravely. When he sees Wilfred Owen 

dying in the battlefield, he takes the charge of his troop and shows his 

brave instincts.

Like Dr. Rivers, Billy Prior is exploited in his childhood. He 

prostituted himself as a child. His bisexual nature is also presented in 

The Ghost Road. But, with his lady love, Sarah, he is moderate and 

passionate. He becomes upset to see that Sarah still had a picture of her 

dead fiance. In The Ghost Road, Prior keeps a diary of his time in France. 

His diary describes both the lead up to the battle and Prior’s experience of 

battles.

As Barker reveals in the Author’s Note at the end of The Ghost 

Road, Njiru as well as other Melanesian characters, are based on actual 

people. In the course of healing his patients, Dr. Rivers becomes the 

victim of influenza and in the spell of his illness he recalls his visit to 

Melanesian Island, Eddystone in Pacific in 1908 with Arthur Hoeart. He 

narrates his experiences that he had got there. There he befriends with 

Njiru, the witch-doctor and head-hunter. He, like Dr. Rivers, cures his 

patients but his way is different. The language, customs of the islanders,

•• 75 ••

give a different touch to the novel.

There are many other minor characters supporting the protagonists 

of the novel. There, Melanesian people as well as the shell-shocked 

soldiers glorify the character of Dr. Rivers. Billy Prior becomes favourite 

among the soldiers and fellow-patients. Wilfred Owen has a bit access in 

this novel. He is portrayed engaged in war-fare. Manning, Birtwhistle, 

and others are representatives of the upper class English society. They 

convey the class-instincts.

The Regeneration Trilogy> involves the war novels, and the 

characters are mainly males. Barker is effectively perfect in using 

moderate female roles in her novels in trilogy. Sarah Lumb, her mother, 

Ada and sister Cynthia and other minor females have a place in the novel, 

The Ghost Road.

Dr. Rivers’s real experiences of Melanesia include several tribal 

folk who represent their tribal culture. Barker’s skill of characterization is 

praiseworthy. She combines historical figures and fictional ones together. 

Her fictional character like Billy Prior achieves the sympathy of the 

reader due to the life-like portrayal.

D. Symbolism and Imagery :

The trench imagery is significant in The Ghost Road. The trenches 

are themselves named after London Streets, and Britain’s urban 

landscapes, devastated by poverty and deprivation. Prior describes the 

trench experience as ‘a sort of morose disgust’ with one’s surroundings 

(The Ghost Road, p. 174). In The Ghost Road, Barker turns to the 

trenches that have been silently lying beneath the surface of her

examination of the Home Front. The last novel in the series, The Ghost 

Road, ends on the Sombre-Oise canal, where Wilfred Owen met his end a 

week before the end of the war. Billy Prior, shadowing Owen, leads his 

men to their death : the angry young man of Regeneration has changed 

into a leader over the three novels, dying as he watches Owen die, 

ironically feeling his own life ebb away. For Barker, the last days of the 

war were the most poignant and prolonged, when men were ‘sacrificed to 

the sub clauses and the small print of the Peace Treaty’. {The Ghost Road, 

p. 249) Barker expresses her utter disturbance on the waste of human life. 

“Barker’s most persistent character is dispatched by a single bullet and 

his death is juxtaposed with the long and painful death of a fellow officer, 

Hallet, in a London hospital under Dr. Rivers’s care.” (Sharon Montieth; 

Pat Barker, 2002 Northcote, Devon, UK, p. 60) The effect on memory 

and consciousness of the war is so great as to induce a re-imagination of 

the experience of time and space. The landscape of Barker’s trilogy, set 

around Craiglockhart and London, is pervaded with the haunting imagery 

of the trenches. Her characters are constantly visualizing and hearing the 

effects of trench warfare in the surrounding.

Barker’s allusions in the opening chapter to Lewis Carroli’s Alice 

books, both of which blur the distinction between dream and reality, 

underscore the significance of dreams in the novel. Only through 

Dr. Rivers’s dreams of Njiru and his Melanesian experience, Dr. Rivers is 

able to work through his increasingly conflicted feelings about the war 

and his efforts to support it. Through his dreams, Dr. Rivers is able to 

recognize in his own idealized British culture what his surrogate son, 

Billy Prior, already knows that “behind every alter is blood, torture, 

death”. {The Ghost Road, p. 176)

77
• •
• •

Barker invokes the Abraham and Isaas story of sacrifice to 

foreground Dr. Rivers’s emerging consciousness of his complicity in the 

slaughter of World War I. In the final scene between Dr. Rivers and Prior, 

after Dr. Rivers has reluctantly certified that Prior is fit to go back to the 

western front, Dr. Rivers detaches himself from the emotion of the 

moment to ask Prior if he serves as a test case to assess whether 

Dr. Rivers’s therapy can withstand the stress endured by soldiers 

re-entering the war zone. Prior agrees, saying that he will send Dr. Rivers 

“the half-time score”. (The Ghost Road, p. 102) As Dr. Rivers watches 

Prior leave, he remembers that in Melanesia when a bastard boy is born a 

leading man on the island adopts him. He is loved and cared for and when 

he reaches adolescence he is bestowed the honour of leading in the 

sacrificial pig.

In one of the overt parallels between Melanesian and British 

societies provided in the novel, Dr. Rivers associates this Melanesian 

memory with the following account from his youth :

“In one of his father’s churches, St. Faith’s at Maidstone, the 

window to the left of the altar shows Abraham with the knife 

raised to slay his son, and below the human figures a ram 

caught in the thicket by his horns. The two events 

represented the difference between savagery and 

civilization, for in the second scenario the voice of God is 

about to forbid the sacrifice, and will be heeded. He had 

knelt at that altar rail for years, Sunday after Sunday, 

receiving the chalice from his father’s hands.” {The Ghost 

Road, p. 104)

•• 78

On the eve of Prior’s return to the western front, Dr. Rivers 

remembers these two stories, setting them side by side so that within a 

Western perspective the savagery of the sacrifice of a bastard by his 

surrogate Melanesian father is actually overwhelmed by Dr. Rivers’s less 

physical but no less savage sacrifice of his surrogate sons - his patients, 

Prior being one of them. Dr. Rivers is the misguided surrogate father who 

sends patient after patient, son after son to slaughter. Dr. Rivers’s 

conscious juxtaposition of the Melanesian and British sacrifice stories 

indicate that he is beginning to understand that ‘he’ is the Father who 

holds the power to stop the killing. (Jennifer Shaddoc, Dreams of 

Melanesia : Masculinity and the Exorcism of War in Pat Barker’s The 

Ghost Road, Modern Fiction Studies. 52.3, 2006, p. 663)

E. Attitude to Sex :

In all three volumes of trilogy, Barker’s attitude to sex is 

consistent. The trilogy explains the soldiers’ lonely life seeking for 

physical pleasure. It is the full description of warfare, and the people 

engaged in it are all males. The trilogy' rarely depicts any female 

character, for instance, Sarah Lumb, the only female figure entered in all 

three novels. The soldiers admitted in the Craiglockhart War Hospital and 

engaged in battlefield both deal much or less with the physical pleasure. 

Among them the major is Billy Prior, the prominent character in all three 

volumes, who is bisexual. In his childhood he was exploited by a church 

priest. Father Mackenzie, who tried to include young Billy in his guilt. 

Billy narrates how he was victimized sexually and that affected the entire 

life of Billy. The early age sex experience leads Prior into a lifelong

•• «§

search for sexual control. To him, sex is the way to gain power and 

control over his partners. His view is visual in his sexual dealing with 

Birtwhistle, Manning and the French peasant boy. Prior generally links 

sex with power and control.

Billy is an extremely complicated character, full of conflicting 

drives and desires. On the one hand, he gets pleasure from sexually 

humiliating other men, and on the other hand, he has a passionate and 

caring sex life with his fiancee, Sarah. He at once feels compassion for 

his troops as they struggle not to panic when they have to put on their gas 

masks, but he also secretly wishes to engage in what he knows are 

inappropriate sexual relations with them.

The graphic sensuality and physicality in Manning and Prior’s 

encounter is also quite visible. This is compounded by class relations. 

Both men know that they are officers but Manning hesitates at this level 

for a sexual encounter, as if it is not something officers should do 

together. Sensing this, Prior plays up his working-class identity by 

exaggerating his accent and offering himself as “a sort of seminal 

spittoon”. (Peter Hitchcock, What is Prior? Working-class Masculinity in 

Pat Barker’s Trilogy, Gender's, Vol. 35, Paragraphs, 2002, p. 28) 

Birtwhistle regards the working-class as a WC. The Cambridge don in 

The Ghost Road is significant to state the status of working-class in 

contemporary English society.

Barker is well aware that the war conjures much more than Prior’s 

experiences, but her particular skill is in weaving elements of Prior’s 

identity into the structure of war relations as a whole. There is an element 

of danger in such narration because, by including some of the historically

$0
••
• •

specific paranoia of the period in her trilogy, the Regeneration trilogy 

risks trivializing the conditions of emergence - implying that, for 

instance, “bisexuality or homosexuality are of a piece with hysteria, and 

that they do not have a relevant history outside or before the moment of 

war”. (Genders, p. 28)

The representation of sexuality is complicated in Barker’s 

The Ghost Road. Prior’s engagement to Sarah seems like an exercise in 

appropriateness, as if, according to the codes of class control in his 

community, it was expected that a person like him would marry a person 

like Sarah. It is a wonder whether Barker might appreciate too warmly 

the psychoanalytic situation of the early twentieth century which held that 

homosexuality should be cured. Clearly she is intrigued by the incidence 

and treatment of war neurosis precisely because it provides a deeper 

questioning about the strictures of sexuality that attend the structures of 

war. In The Ghost Road, Barker faces an aesthetic and political challenge. 

She knows that Prior must die. It is a part of the texture of the trilogy’s 

anti-war statement that he is regenerated only to be decimated.

It is important to note that the ghosts, unsettled shades of memory 

are not outside the machinery of therapeutic treatment. In the third 

volume, The Ghost Road, Barker sets up a series of parallels in Prior’s 

and Dr. Rivers’s lives in which the juxtaposition of Prior’s letters with 

Dr. Rivers’s experiences in Melanesia underlines the important part in 

memory. In the novel, Dr. Rivers reveals his own experiences of trauma. 

It is because of his stammer and his inability to visualize memories. 

Dr. Rivers’s eventual self-consciousness of such trauma is not an 

endorsement of psychoanalysis but a set of questions about the 

relationship of traumas to social rituals and the capacity to remember

•• 81 ••

them in a concrete and autocritical way. (Genders, p. 28) In The Ghost 

Road, Owen says, “You say we kill the Beast. I say we fight because men 

lost their bearings in the night.” (The Ghost Road, p. 144) At the end of 

the trilogy, Prior dies not because he is a rogue male, a working-class 

officer who has lost his bearings in the night and become amoral to the 

point of bisexuality and promiscuity. He dies as a part of an ethical 

statement about what war denies our species’ capacity to be.

F. Psycho-Analysis:

The novel The Ghost Road shifts between Prior’s account of his 

fateful return to the war in France, and Dr. Rivers’s own psychological 

crisis, as he struggles with his own demons and ghosts. Prior’s diary in 

this novel takes us directly, for the first time in the trilogy, to the familiar 

iconic terrain of the First World War representations - the trench, 

no-man’s land, and the futile charge ‘over the top’. In the novel, Barker 

turns to Dr. Rivers’s accounts of his experiences as an anthropologist in 

Melanesia to engage a cross-cultural dimensions to the meanings of war.

Like Freud, Dr. Rivers seems certain that the ghosts who haunt his 

patients are not ‘real’, but he is nevertheless compelled to acknowledge 

that his patients are haunted. (John Brannigan, Pat Barker’s Regeneration 

Trilogy : History and the Hauntological Imagination, Contemporary 

British Fiction, eds. Lane, Mengham and Tew, P, Polity 4, Cambridge, 

2000, p. 15) In Regeneration, Sassoon and Bums see corpses. So too, in 

The Ghost Road, Wansbeck is visited in hospital by the ghost of the 

German prisoner he murdered, who becomes, more and more 

decomposed with every visit.

• • 82
• •

“....... he’d started to suffer from hypnagogic hallucinations

in which he would wake suddenly to find the dead German 

standing by his bed. Always, accompanying the visual 

hallucination, would be the reek of decomposition. After a

few weeks the olfactory hallucination began to occur......”

{The Ghost Road, p. 26)

Dr. Rivers solves the mysterious appearance of a psychic double, 

or a troublesome ghost with skilful rational examination. Prior turns out 

not to have a monstrous alter-ego, after all, just a rather mischievous 

coping mechanism. Prior is cured of his split personality and, in 

The Ghost Road, he is sufficiently stable to return to the front line, where, 

with tragic but inevitable irony, he joins the ranks of the dead in one last 

senseless assault. Dr. Rivers, in the same novel, is forced to confront his 

own ghosts. He can explain the ghosts of his patients away, but his own 

ghosts return to haunt him. In Regeneration, in order to soften Sassoon’s 

anxieties about confessing of seeing apparitions, Dr. Rivers confesses to 

his own encounter with ghosts on an anthropological mission in the 

Melanesian islands. At a wake, at which the mourners await the sound of 

the spirits coming in canoes to collect the soul of the dead, Dr. Rivers 

does not hear the paddles which he has been told he might hear, but 

instead a sudden gust of whistling sounds. In The Ghost Road, Dr. Rivers 

becomes obsessed by this scene, and the events surrounding it, and the 

novel concludes with Dr. Rivers being visited in hospital by the ‘not in 

any way ghostly’ apparition of Njiru, the witch doctor in Melanesia. 

{The Ghost Road, p. 276) Dr. Rivers must distinguish between the 

irrational visions and healthy realities of his patients constantly and 

unequivocally. Yet his own experiences of the hauntological in Melanesia

.. 83 ••

defy his attempts at rational explanation, and serve to disturb the stability 

of his distinctions between appearance and reality, illness and sanity, 

superstition and reason. If he deals with the effects of his patients’ 

haunted memories routinely, Dr. Rivers cannot finally dismiss the reality 

of ghosts either.

The nightmares, the stammerings, the mutism and paralysis, are all 

registering protest against Abraham’s bargain. In the climatic final scenes 

of The Ghost Road, the rosy-pink dawn-light which passes over the dead 

in French fields is the same light which begins to flow slowly through the 

tall windows of Dr. Rivers’s ward, appearing perhaps as a new 

stained-glass icon of sacrifice. But Dr. Rivers’s ward still echoes the 

garbled dying shouts of Hallet, “Shotvarfet. Shotvarfet”, murmured also 

from the ‘damaged brains and dropping mouths’ of either patients, and 

translated by Dr. Rivers as ‘It’s not worth it’. {The Ghost Road, p. 274)

Dr. Rivers is sufficiently self-conscious to realize that he has his 

own psychological problems and repressed memories, but that, he might 

be the victim of what Prior suggests was a monstrous rape or beating 

when he was five. The realization that his own lack of visual memory 

may conceal as dark a depressed past as he has encountered in his 

patients triggers a crisis of authority in Dr. Rivers and in the final novel 

of the trilogy. He is immersed in his own anamnestic efforts to trace the 

source of his ghosts. Dr. Rivers, in one sense, himself becomes a patient 

in The Ghost Road, as haunted by specters. Here, his own divisions are 

especially manifest, since his rational self - what he calls the ‘epicritic’ 

mind - must analyze and exorcise the demons of his, emotional self - 

what he calls the ‘protopathic’. (Contemporary British Fiction, p. 20) 

This division between the epicritic and protopathic occupies much of

•• 84 ••

Dr. Rivers’s thinking throughout the trilogy, but it becomes especially 

significant in the final volume, in which it appears to take the form of a 

split personality. Dr. Rivers in The Ghost Road, then, is both the capable 

analyst, who unravels his patients’ anxieties and repressions and the 

haunted, frightened patient, vulnerable to his own nightmares and 

hallucinations.

The trilogy closes in The Ghost Road with Dr. Rivers encountering 

the ghost of a witch-doctor, Njiru, he knows in Melanesia. The recurrent 

figures of haunting in the trilogy serve to underline the potency of history 

experienced as traumatic event. Haunting signifies the repetition of time, 

the refusal of the past to stay in its place. This is what, in many respects, 

Dr. Rivers must confront to each of his patients - an excess of memory, 

of history, the disturbing break out of the past into the present. The excess 

of memory and history experienced by Dr. Rivers’s patients is also the 

basic temporal condition of the twentieth century. Here, Barker traces the 

contemporary concerns with recovered memory, hidden subjectivities, 

forgotten stories - the exclusions and elisions of history - to the ‘Great 

War’. The effect on memory and consciousness of the war is so great as 

to induce a re-imagination of the experience of time and space.

By the second year of the Great War, there grew up in Britain a 

soldier’s literature obsessed with the divided between available language 

and actual experience. Countless letters and poems and diaries 

condemned their own habits of eloquence as a betrayal of truth. In 

The Ghost Road, Lieutenant Billy Prior sits listening to the sounds of 

pens scratching and pages turning. In his own diary, Prior tells jokingly 

why these men write : “I think it’s a way of claiming immunity. First 

person narrators can’t die.” (The Ghost Road, p. 115)

• • 85
• •

Basically, the memory is the technique used in The Regeneration 

Trilogy. In both, Regeneration, and The Eye in the Door, the major 

narrative concern is memory and remembering, and there is no exception 

in The Ghost Road. Unlike earlier two volumes, in The Ghost Road, 

memory and remembering have much place. Dr. Rivers, after ten years, 

recalls his trip to Melanesia and explains his experiences at length.

Barker has used a different kind of narrative technique in this 

novel. Half of the novel contains the third person narration and the 

remaining part is the first person narration. Billy Prior, during his fourth 

trip to France battlefield, writes diaries. In his diaries, he explains all the 

details of the battlefield and his own war experiences in those days.

While Barker is carefully true to both the military and personal 

aspects of her history, she is never constrained by her sources. “With 

earlier Regeneration and The Eye in the Door, The Ghost Road is too 

imaginatively free-ranging and immediate to seem quite historical novel, 

too concerned with moral and sexual battles to seem quite war novel to 

striking as hybrids of fact and possibility, easy humour and passionate 

social argument to be classified as anything but the masterwork to date of 

a singular and ever-evolving novelist, who has consistently made up her 

own rules.” <http://www. ny times, com/books/99/05/16/specials/bar ker- 

2host. html>

The Ghost Road is a marvelous novel, not least for its tough, unself 

important prose which nevertheless flexes effortlessly to include the 

narrative’s many moods and voices. In the novel, facts and figures are 

kept at the minimum, necessary to remind us that homosexuality is 

punishable by imprisonment. Through the streetwise eyes of Billy Prior,

.. 86 ••

the author presents a surprisingly unsentimental view of war. The 

sensationalist possibilities for violence are not over-exploited, yet there 

are harrowing moments.

